AN EPILOGUE TO THE TRAGEDY OF THE Church of England, BEING A Necessary
Consideration and brief Resolution of the chief Controversies in Religion that
divide the Western Church: Occasioned by the present Calamity of the CHURCH of
ENGLAND;

In three BOOKS: viz. Of
I. The Principles of Christian Truth. II. The Covenant of Grace. III. The
Laws of the Church.
By HERBERT THORNDIKE.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. and T. R. for J. Martin, J. Allestry, and T. Dicas,
and are to be sold at the sign of the BELL in St PAUL's Churchyard. M.DC.LIX.

A PREFACE To all Christian Readers.
IT cannot seem strange, that a man in my case, removed by the force of the
War, from the Service of the Church, should dedicate his time to the
consideration of those Controversies which cause division in the Church. For,
what could I do more to the satisfaction of mine own judgment, than to seek a
solution, what truth it is, the oversight whereof has divided the Church; and
therefore, the sight whereof ought to unite it? But, that I should publish the
result of my thoughts to the world, this, even to them that cannot but allow my
conversing with those thoughts, may seem to fall under the Historians censure;
S^ipsum fatigan^o nihil aliud quam odium quaerere, extremae esse dementiae.
That, to take pains to get nothing but displeasure, is the extremity of
madness. Socrates (if we believe his Apology in Plato) could never rest for
his Genius, always putting him upon disputes, tending to convict men, that
they knew not what they thought they knew. The displeasure which this got him,
he makes the true cause of his death. The opinion which I publish, being
indeed the fruit of more time and leisure, of less engagement to the world,
than others are under, will seem a charge upon those who engage otherwise. And
when, besides, so much interest of this world depends upon the divisions of the
Church; what am I to expect, but; Great is Diana of the Ephesians? My Apology
is this.

The title of Reformation which the late War pretended, mentioned only
Episcopacy and the Service. The effect of it was a new Confession of Faith, a
new Catechism, a new Directory, all new; With chapter and verse indeed, quoted
in the margin, but, as well over against their own new inventions, as over
against the Old Faith of the Church. This burden was as easily kicked off by
the Congregations, as laid on by the Presbyteries; As carrying, indeed, no
conviction with it, but the Sword, and what penalties the Sword should enforce
it with. Which failing, what is come in stead of it, to warrant the salvation
of Christians, but that the Bible is preached, (which, what Heresy disowneth?)
and, by them whom the Tryers count godly men; Make they what they can of it. I,
from my non age, had embraced the Church of England, and attained the Order of
Priesthood in it, upon supposition that it was a true Church, and salvation to
be had in it, and by it; Owning nevertheless (as the Church of England did own)
the Church of Rome for a Church, in which, salvation, though more difficult,
yet might be had and obtained. That there is no such thing as a Church by Gods
Law, in the nature of a Body, (which this state of Religion requires) is
opposite to an Article of my Creed, who always thought my self a member of
such a Body, by being of the Church of England. The issue of that which I have
published, concerning that title of Reformation which the War pretended, was
this; That they are Schismatics, that concur to the breaking or destroying of
the Church of England, for those causes. And, the objection there necessarily
starting; Why the Church of England no Schismatics, in Reforming without the
Church of Rome; My answer was, that the cause of Reforming must justify the
change which it makes, without consent of the Whole Church. For, the pretense
of Infallibility in the Church on the one side, the pretense of the Word and
Sacraments, for marks of the Church, on the other side, I hold equally
frivolous; As, equally declaring a resolution, never to be tried by reason, in
that which we always dispute. For, what dispute remains, i^ the Decrees of
the Council of Trent be Infallible? If, that form of Doctrine and ministering
the Sacraments, which the Reformation may pretend, be marks to distinguish a
Church from no Church? If they were, where there is no such form, there are no
such marks; And therefore, no such thing as a Church. Nor is it so easy to
destroy these doubts in men's judgments, as the Laws by which the Church of
England stood. And, if the salvation of a Christian consist in professing the
common Christianity, as I show you at large; shall not the salvation of a
Divine consist in professing what he has attained to believe, when, he
thinks, the exigent of the time renders it necessary to the salvation of Gods
people? How shall he, otherwise, be ministerial to the work of Gods Grace, in
strengthening them that stand, in comforting and helping the weak, in raising
them that are fallen, in resolving the doubtful, without searching the bottom
of the cause? Nay, how shall he make reparation for the offenses he may have
given, by not knowing that, which now, he thinks he knows? The causes of
division have a certain dependence upon common principles, a certain
correspondence one with another, which, when it cannot be declared, the
satisfaction which a man intends is quite defeated; when it is declared, that
dissatisfaction, which the consideration of particulars of less weight causes,
must needs cease. Whether it were the distrust of my own ability, or the love
of other employment, or, whatsoever it were, that diverted me from considering
the consequence of those principles which I always had, till I might come to
that resolution, which now I declare; Neither was I satisfied till I had it,
nor, having it, till I had declared it: And, if I be like a man with an arrow
in his thigh, or like a woman ready to bring forth, that is, as Ecclesiasticus
says, like a fool, that cannot hold what is in his heart; I am in this, I
hope, no fool of Solomon's, but, with S. Paul, a fool for Christ's sake.

Now, the mischiefs which division in the Church creates being invaluable; all
the benefit that I can perceive it yield is this, that the offenses which it
causes seem to drown, and swallow up as it were, that offense, which,
declaring the truth, in another time, would produce. For, Unity in the Church
is of so great advantage to the service of God, and that Christianity from
whence it proceeds, that it ought to overshadow, and cover very great
imperfections, in the Laws of the Church; All Laws being subject to the like.
Especially, seeing I maintain, that the Church, by divine institution, is, in
point of right, one visible Body, consisting in the communion of all
Christians, in the offices of Gods service; and ought, by humane
administration, in point of fact, to be the same. For, the Unity of so great a
Body will not allow, that the terms should be strict, or nice, upon which the
communion thereof stands; But obliges all, that love the general good of it,
to pass by, even those imperfections in the Laws of it, which are visible, if
not pernicious. But, where this Unity is once broken in pieces and destroye^,
and palliating cures are out of date, the offense which is taken, at showing
the true cure, is imputable to them that cause the fraction, not to him that
would ^ee it restored. For, what disease was ever cured, without offending the
body that had it? The cause of Episcopacy, and of the Service, is the cause of
the whole Church, and the maintenance thereof infers the maintenance of
whatsoever is Catholic. Owning, therefore, my obligation to the Whole Church,
notwithstanding my obligation to the Church of England; I have prescribed the
consent thereof, for a boundary to all interpretation of Scripture, all
Reformation in the Church. Referring my ^pinion, ^n point of Fact, what is
Catholic, to them, who, by their Title, are bound to acknowledge, that,
whatsoever is Catholic ought to take place. While all English people, by the
Laws of the Church of England, had suffi^i^n^ and probable means of salvation
ministered to them; it had been a fault to acknowledge a fault, which, it was
more mischief to m^nd than to bear with. But, when the Unity that is lost may
as well be obtained, by the primitive Truth and Order of the Catholic Church,
as by that which served the turn in the Church of England, because it served to
the salvation of more; I should offend good Christians, to think that they will
stand offended at it.

In fine, all variety of Religion, in England, seems to be comprised in three
parties; Papists, Prelatical, and Puritanes; comprehending under that, all
parties, into which the once common name stands divided. All of them are
originally, as I conceive, terms of disgrace; which therefore, I have not been
delighted with using. This last, I have found some cause to frequent, when I
would signify some thing common to all parties of it. If with eagerness at any
time; the English Proverb says; Loosers may have leave to speak. I find my
self disobliged by the Papists, in that, desiring to serve God with all
Christians, they bar me their Communion, by clogging it with conditions
inconsistent with our common Christianity. I find my self disobliged by the
Puritanes, in that, desiring to serve God with all Christians, but
acknowledging the Catholic Church; I stand obliged by the Rule of it, not to
communicate with Heretics or Schismatics. I complain for no Benefice, or
other advantage. That, desiring to communicate with all Christians, I am
confined, for opportunity of serving God with his Church, to the scartered
remains of the Church of England; is that for which I complain. If, owning this
offense, I suffer mine indignation, at the pretense of In^allibility, or of
Reformation, to escape from me; I do not therefore intend to revenge my self
by words of disgrace. Let him that thinks so call me Prelatical, let him use
me with no more moderation than I use. In the mean time, I remain secured,
that the offense which my opinion may give is imputable, in the sight of God,
to those that cause the division. One offense I acknowledge, and cannot help;
That I undertake a design of this consequence, and am not able to go through
with it as it deserves. I should not have set Pen to paper, till my materials
had been prepared in writing, that no term might have escaped me unexamined.
Till the quotations of mine Authors had been all before me, so as to need no
recourse to the Copies. A labor, which, I have not been able every where to
undergo. In fine, till I had cleared all pretense of obscurity or ambiguity in
my language. For, the obscurity of my matter I am not sorry for. If, writing in
English, (because here the occasion commences) the reasons, by which I
determine the sense of the Scriptures in the Original, if, the consequence* o^
it, in some matters, seem obscure; I conceive it ought to teach the World, that
the people are made parties to those disputes, whereof they are not able to be
judges. And, I am willing to bear the blame of obscure, if that lesson may be
learned by the people. The desire of easing my thoughts, by giving them vent,
has resolved me to put them into the world ^ough-baked, on purpose to provoke
the judgments of all parties, ^or the furnishing of a second Edition, (if God
grant me life) with that which shall be missing in this. I am therefore
content, to confine my self to the model of an abridgment, and referr my self,
for the consent of the Church, to those books which I am best sati^fied with,
in each point. When that could not be done, I have alleged authorities, which I
may call translatitias, because I lay them down as I find them alleged; Not
doubting, that I justify my opinion, so far as I desire to do here, that
there is no consent of the Church against it. What the sense of the Church is
positively, and has been, (into which, I conceive, that which here I say has
made me a fair entrance) I shall, upon examination of particulars, endeavor to
give satisfaction, in that which may be found missing here. In the mean time,
it shall suffice to have advanced thus much, toward the common interest of
Christianity, in the reunion of the Church.

But let no man therefore bar me the lot of Reconcilers; To be contradicted
on all sides. I profess no such thing. It is enough for the greatest Powers in
Christendom to undertake. If it be an offense, for a man of my years, equally
concerned with all Christians in our common Christianity, to say his opinion,
upon what terms the parties ought to reconcile themselves; it remains, that
offenses remain unreconcileable. But, contradiction, from all parties, I shall
not be displeased with. He that will tell me alone, in writing, what he
finds fault with, and why, shall do a work of charity to me alone. He that
will tell the world the same, shall do me the same charity that he does the
world, in it. He who can delight in that barbarous course, which Controversies
in Religion have been managed with among Christians, by casting personal
aspersions; Let him rather do it than be silent, provided the stuff he brings
be considerable, to bear out such inhumanity among civil people. But, let him
consider the dependences, and concernments, of the point he speaks to; let him
not say, for answer, that these things are answered by our Divines. It is easy
to make ^bjections, but not easy to clear difficulties. And, whether or no
these difficulties were clear already, I must referr it to the Reader to judge.
In the mean time, though no arbitrator, to choose a middle opinion for parti^s
to agree in; I take upon me the person of a Div^ne, in delivering mine
opinion, what is true, not in confining the parties to a mean. We have seen
two men of repute now amongst us cen^ure Grotius his labors upon the
Scriptures; (from which, I acknowledge to have received much advantage) The one
of them has made him a Socinian, the other a Papist. Both could have given us
no better argument that he was neither, than this, that he cannot be both. It
is not my intent, to bring men's persons into consideration, with the common
concernment of Christianity, and of Gods Church. To his own Master he stands
or falls. I do but instance in an eminent person, that must needs be a Papist,
though never reconciled to the Church of Rome; That must needs be a Socinian,
though appealing to the Original consent of the whole Church; Upon which terms,
how should there be any such thing as Papists or Socinians? I remember an
admonition of his bitter adversary Doctor Rivet* That the Sea of Rome will
never thank him for what he writ. And from thence I inferred, as charity
obliged me to infer; That the common good of Christianity, and of Gods
Church, obliged him to that, for which he was to expect thanks on no side.
This for certain; Grotius never lived by maintaining division in the Church.
Whether any body does so or not, I say not. Their Master will judge them for it
if they do.

Now, to show the world, that I am in a capacity to recall any thing that I
have said, upon due information; I will here pass a Review upon that which I
have said, to the hardest point that I have spoke to; the agreement of Gods
fore-knowledg and providence with contingence. For I conceive it had need be
limited a little further, to be free from offen^e. That the consideration of
the object, which providence presents a man with, determines the Will to every
choice that it makes; (which I argue at large II. 24.) may be understood two
ways; in the nature of an object, (which belongs to the formal cause, when we
speak of faculties, habits, and acts, which are specified by their objects, as
the Schools speak) or in the nature of an effective cause. Not as if the object
were not the eff^ctive cause, in respect to the act of deliberation: But
because, in respect to the act of resolution, or choice, it determines only
as an object, without consideration whereof, the choice could not be made; not
as a motive, effectively producing the choice. For I acknowledge, in point of
reason, that there may be such contingencies as the School calls ad utrumlibet;
where a man is no more inclined to this side than to that. And, in point of
Faith, I acknowledge, that, setting aside the temptations, by which, the Angels
and our first parents that ^ell might be said to incline, rather to fall than
to stand; as they were created by God, they were not inclined to fall, but to
stand. Besides, should I say, that the object ^ff^ctively determines the
choice, how should I say, that which I take express notice of page 200. that
those contingenci^s, wherein the will inclines to the one side, as balanced by
a propensity of disposition toward it, (not as every faculty is inclined to
the object, to which it naturally tends) remain uncertain, as nevertheless
contingencies, whatsoever probability that propensi^y may create? And indeed,
though it is a perfection in man's knowledge, rising from the consideration of
the object, to say what is like to come to pass, though it fail; yet to Gods,
which ^^^^th from God alone, it were blasplemy to suppose it to fail, because
then God should fail. The infallib^lity, therefore, of it, no* being de^ivable
from the object; must necessarily be resolved into the infinity, eternity,
immensity of that perfection which is his nature, comprehending the future
inclination and resolution of that will (moved with a consideration capable to
determine it) which, nothing but the native freedom thereof effectively
determines. And, if it be further demanded, how that reason can stand, which
resolves into that which no man understands; The answer is necessary, that, it
is an argument of infidelity to demand how, in ^^^^rs of Faith. It is, and
ought to be sufficient, that it involveth no manner of contradiction, that the
thing which may not be, shall certainly be; and therefore, may be known and
revealed by God, that it shall come to pass. For, if it be a point of
perfection, rather to know this than not to know it, of necessity God must have
it, how little soever we understand how. And therefore, what appearance soever
there may be, in the motives which the object pre^enteth, agreeing with the
present disposition of the Will, that choice will follow; yet, so long as it
continues undetermined, though not indifferent, (by reason of the agreement,
between the inclination thereof and the motives tendered) it is always able to
determine it self to the contrary of that which it is moved to; though, not
without appearance of a motive determining it otherwise. And the tender of that
motive is that act of providence, in which, I say page 201. that Gods
determining of future contingencies ends; consisting with another, whereby he
maintains the will in that ability of taking or refusing, which the creation
thereof constituteth. In which case, he who maintains, that it is not
impossible for the infinite wisdom of God, comprehending all things, to see
what man will do; shall not derive his foresight from the object, but from his
very Godhead; Only supposing, that it has proceeded to the work of
providence, in purposing to place every man in an estate so circumstanced, as
at each moment he comprehends. For, as man cannot proc^ed to choose this and
not that, not supposing the consideration upon which the choice proceeds;
(which also must make it a good or a bad choice) so neither does God fore see
his choice, not foreseeing the motive which the object presents him with.
Which, seeing he fore-seeth in the purpose of his providence, supposing that
perfection of his Godhead, which his proceeding to the same requires; It is
manifest, that, according to this saying, that which he sees, he sees in
himself, and not in his creature.

Wherefore, I confess, it may be said, that, seeing a Divine, when he is come
thus far, must stay here, and resolve the rest of his inquiries into the vast
and bottomless chaos of Gods infinite perfections; it had been better to have
said so at the first, and never have troubled the Reader with a discourse, to
prove by the Scriptures, that God considers the state wherein his providence
places men, for the ground upon which he fore-seeth what they will do (which
that XXIV. Chapter contains) For, why should not our ignorance be as learned
at the first, as at the last? But, that which has been said, will serve to
make the discourse no way superfluous. For* contingencies that shall be, though
they be nothing before they come to pass; yet is God something, and the purpose
of his p^^^^^ence ^omething, for the placing of every man, every mom^n^, ^^
(...) estate, which thereby he fore-seeth* And the possibility o^ foreseeing
what will follow, being something, (because no con^r^^iction destroys the
consistence of the terms, in^errs, by the infi^^^^ perfection of God, the
actual foresight of what will come to p^^^* though not in it self, which is
nothing, yet in God, who is all things. And, all this involving no
predetermination of man's will by God; the discourse cannot be superfluous,
which resolves the foresight of future contingencies into the decree, which
supposes the knowledge of things conditionally future, not which infers the
fore knowledge of things absolutely future. For, by this means, nothing that is
found in the Scripture will contradict the substance of Faith, which
predetermination destroys; though disclaiming all possibility of making
evidence to common sense, how it may come to pass. And, though Gods decree to
permit sin, can be no sufficient ground of his fore sight, that, what he
hinders not shall come to pass; as I have argued, page 209. yet, if we
consider withal, that there is no question of Gods permitting any man to sin,
but only him that is prevented with temptation to sin; it may not untruly be
said, that God fore-sees sin in his own deccee of permitting it, including the
state of him that is tempted, in that case, wherein God decrees to permit sin.
In which case, God fore-seeth it properly, in his decree of placing the man in
that estate, not of suffering himto sin; which, the opinion that I contradict,
in that place, absolutely refuses. And upon these terms, when it is resolved
Chap. XXVI. that predestination to the first Grace is absolute, you must not
understand predestination to the act of conversio^; but to the helps which
effect it. For, whatsoever be the motives upon which a man actually resolves
it, in whatsoever circumstance he meets them; nothing but his own freedom
determines his conversion, though, without those helps, he had not, or could
not have determined it. And therefore, if it be said, that it is a bar to the
prayers and endeavors of those that are moved to be Christians, to tell them,
that their resolution depends upon something which is not in their Power; To
wit, that congruity, wherein the efficacy of Grace consists; The answer is;
That, absolutely, whatsoever is requisite to the conversion of him who is
called to be a Christian, is in his Power; Though, upon supposition of Gods
fore-knowledg, that may be said to be requisite, without which, God fore-sees
he will not be converted, when absolutely, if he would, he might have been
converted, and when, supposing he had been otherwise moved, he would have
been converted. In which case, it is absolutely enough to the charging of any
man with his duty, that, absolutely, he wanted nothing requisite to enable him
for a right choice; Though, upon supposition of Gods fore-knowledg, the doing
of his duty requires whatsoever God fore-sees that it will not be done without
it.

I have no more to say, but, that the Contents of the Chapters are premised
instead of a Table, for which they may well serve, in books of this nature. And
that, in regard to the difficulty of the Copy, and the ordinary faileurs of the
Press, the Reader is desired to correct the faults that are marked, before he
begin, and to serve himself in the rest.

THE CONTENTS OF THE First Book.
CHAP. I. ALL agree, that Reason is to decide controversies of Faith. The
objection, tha^ Faith is taught by Gods Spirit, answered. What Reason decideth
questions of Faith. The resolution of Faith ends not in the light of Reason,
but in that which Reason evidenceth to come from Gods messengers. Page 1 CHAP.
II. The question between the Scripture and the Church, which of them is Judge
in matters of Faith. Whether opinion, the Tradition of the Church stands better
with. Those that hold the Scripture to be clear in all things necessary to
salvation, have no reason to exclude the Tradition of the Church. What opinions
they are, that deny the Church to be a Society or Corporation by Gods Law. 3
CHAP. III. That neither the sentence of the Church, nor the dictate of Gods
Spirit, can be the reason why the Scrip^ures are to be received. No man can
know that he has Gods Spirit, without knowing that he is a true Christian;
Which supposes the truth of the Scriptures. The motives of Faith are the
reason why the Scriptures are to be believed. And the consent of Gods people
the reason that evidences those motives to be infallibly true. How the
Scriptures are believed for themselves. How a circl^ is made in rendering a
reason of the Faith. The Scriptures are Gods Law to all, to whom they are
published, by Gods act of publishing them; But Civil Law, by the act of
Sovereign Powers, in acting Christianity upon their Subjects. 7 CHAP. IV.
Neither the Dictate of Gods Spirit, nor the a^thority of the Church, is the
reason of believing any thing in Christianity* Whether the Church be before the
Scripture, or the Scripture before the Church. The Scriptures contain not the
Infallibility of the Church. Nor the consent of all Christians. 18 CHAP. V. All
things necessary to salvation are not clear in the Scriptures to all
understandings. Not in the old Testament. Not in the Gospel. Not in the
Writings of the Apostles. It is necessary to salvation to believe more then
this; that our Lord is the Christ. Time causes obscurity in the Scriptures,
as well as in other Records. That it is no where said in the Scriptures, that
all things necessary to salvation are clear in the Scriptures. Neither is there
any consent of all Christians to evidence the same. 25 CHAP. VI. All
interpretation of Scripture is to be consined within the Tradition of the
Church. This supposes that the Church is a Communion instituted by God* What
means there is to make evidence of Gods Charter, upon which the corporation of
the Church subsisteth. The name of the Church, in the Scriptures, often
signifies the Whole or Catholic Church. CHAP. VII. That the Apostles
delivered to the Church a Summary of Christianity, which, all that should be
baptized were to profess. Evidence out of the Scriptures. Evidence out of the
Scriptures for Tradition regulating the Communion of the Church, and the Order
of it. Evidence for the Rule of Faith, out of the records of the Church. For
the Canons of the Church, and the pedigree of them from the order established
in the Church by the Apostles. That the profession of Christianity, and that by
being baptized, is necessary to the salvation of a Christian CHAP. VIII. That
the power of Governing the whole Church was in the Apostles and Disciples of
Christ, and those whom they took to assist them in the part of it. The power
of their Successors must needs be derived from those. Why that succession which
appears in one Church, necessarily holds all Churches. The holding of
Councils evidenceth the Unity of the Church. CHAP. IX The Keys of the Church
given to the Apostles, and exercised by excommunication under the Apostles. The
ground thereof is that profession, which, all that are baptized are to make.
That Penance and abat^ment of Penance has been in force ever since and under
the Apostles. In particular, of excluding Heretics. CHAP. X. Evidence of the
Apostles act from the effect of it, in preserving the Unity of the Church. Of
the business of Marcion and Montanus. That about keeping Easter. That of the
Novatians, of rebaptizing Heretics, of Paulus Samosatenus, of Dionysius
Alexandrinus, and Arius. Of communicatory leters, and the intercourse of the
Church under and after the Apostles, CHAP. XI. Upon what grounds the first book
de Synedriis holds that the Church cannot excommunicate. Before the law there
was no such Power, nor by it. Christians went for Jews under the Apostles. His
sense of some Scriptures. What the Leviathan says in general concerning the
Power of the Church. Both suppose that Ecclesiastical Power includes
Temporal, which is not true. Of the Oxford Doctors Paraenesis. CHAP. XII. That
the Law expressly covenanted for the Land of Promise. A great Objection against
this, from the Great precept of the Law. The hope of the world to come under
the Law, and the obedience which it required, was grounded upon reason from the
true God, the tradition of the Fathers, and the Doctrine of the Prophets. The
Love of God above all by the Law extends no further than he precepts of the
Law; the l^ve of our Neighbor only to Jews. Of the Ceremonial, Judicial and
Moral Law. CHAP. XIII That the Law tendereth no other promise but that of the
Land of Canaan. How the Resurrection is signified by the Prophets. Express
texts of the Apostles. Their Arguments, and the Arguments of our Lord do
suppose the mystical sense of the Scriptures. That this sense is to be made
good throughout the Scripture, wheresoever the ground of it takes place;
Christianity well grounded supposing this. What parts of Scripture may be
questionable, whether they have a mystical sense or not. The sayings and
doings of our Lord have it; As also those passages of the Old Testament, which
are fulfilled by the same. The sense of the Fathers. CHAP. XIV. The Leviathans
opinion, that Christ came to restore that Kingdom of God which the Jews cast
off when they rejected S^muel: It overthrows the foundation of Christianity.
The true Government of Gods ancient people. The name of the Church in the New
Testament cannot signify the Synagogue. Nor any Christian State. CHAP. XV. How
the Power of the Church is founded upon the Law. The Power of the Kingdom,
Priesthood, Prophets, and Rulers of that people all of divine right. How far
these qualities and the powers of them are to continue in the Church. The sense
of the Fathers in this point. That the acts of S. Paul and the rest of the
Apostles, were not of force by virtue of the Law. What Ecclesiastical Power
should have been among the Jews, in case they had received the Gospel, and so
the state had stood. CHAP. XVI. The Church founded upon the Power given the
Apostles. What is the subject matter of Church Laws. The Right of the Church to
Tithes and Oblations is not grounded upon the Law, though evidenced by it, and
by practice of the Patriarchs. Evidence of the Apostles Order in the
Scriptures. The Church of Jerusalem held not community of Goods. The original
practice of the Church. CHAP. XVII. The Power of Excommunication in the Church
is not founded in the Law. What argument there is of it in the Old Testament.
The allegorical sense thereof is argumentative. It was not necessary that the
Christians should incur persecution for using the Power of the Keys, and not
by virtue of the Law. CHAP. XVIII. The difference between S. Paul's anathema and
that of the Jews. It is not necessary that the Christians anathema should
signify cursing. That the incestuous person at Corinth was Excommunicated by
S. Paul. Jurisdiction of the Church. Telling the Church, binding and loosing,
holding him that is bound for a Heathen or a Publican^, signify the same. The
coherence of our Lords discourse. Of Excommunication and Indulgence by private
persons in the Ancient Church. That Excommunication and the Power of the Church
could not come in force by the voluntary consent of the first Christians. How
it may be said to be voluntary. Of the confederacy of the primitive Christians.
CHAP XIX. That Power which was in Churches under the Apostles, can never be in
any Christian Sovereign. The d^fference between the Church and the Synagogue in
that regard. The interest of Secul^r Power in determining matters of faith
presupp^se^h the Socie^y of the Church, and the act of it. No man can be bound
to prof^sse the contrary of that which he believes. Every man is bound to
profess that Christianity which he believes. The Church is the chief
Teacher of Christianity through Christendom, as the Sovereign of Civil Peace,
thorough his Dominions. Why the Church is to decide matters of Faith rather then
the State, neither being infallible. 146 CHAP. XX. The rest of the Oxford
Doctors pretense. The Power of binding and loosing supposes not only the
Preaching of the Gospel, but the outward act of Faith. Christians are not at
liberty to cast themselves in what forms of Churches; the Law of Nature
allows. They are Judges in chief for themselvss in matter of Religion,
supposing the Catholic Church: not otherwise. Secular Power cann^t punish for
Religion, but supposing the act of the Church nor do any act to enforce
Religion, unl^sse* the Church determine the matter of it. 151 CHAP. XXI. How the
Tradition of the Church limits the interpretation of Scriptures. How the
declaration of the Church becomes a reasonable mark of Heresy. That which is
not found in the Scriptures may have been delivered by the Apostles. Some
things delivered by the Apostles, and recorded in the Scriptures, may not
oblige. S. Austines Rule of Apostolical Traditions. 159 CHAP. XXII. The
Authority of the Fathers is not grounded upon any presumption of their Learning
or Holiness. How far they challenge the credit of Historical truth. The
pre-eminence of the Primitive. The presumption that is grounded upon their
ranks and qualities in the Church. Of Arnobius, Lactantius, Tertulli^n, Origin,
Clemens and the approbation of Posterity. 165 CHAP. XXIII. Two i^stances
against the premises; besides the ob^ection concerning the beginning of
Antichrist under the Apostles. The General answer to it. The seven Trumpe^s in
the Apocalypse foretell the destruction of the Jews. The seven Vials, the
plagues inflicted upon the Empire for the ten persecutions. The correspondence
of Daniels Prophecy infers the same. Neither S. Paul's Prophecy nor S.
John's concerns any Christian. Neither the opinion of the Chiliasts, nor the
the giving of the Eucharist to Infants new Baptized, Catholic. 169 CHAP. XXIV.
Two sorts of means to resolve whatsoever is resolvable conce^rning the
Scripture. Upon what terms the Church may, or is to determine controversies of
Faith. And what obligation that determination produces. Traditions of the
Apostles oblige the present Church, as the reasons of them continue or not.
Instances in our Lords Passover and Eucharist. Penance under the Apostles, and
afterward. S. Paul's vail, ea^ing blood, and things offered to Idols. The power
of the Church in limiting these Traditions. 178 CHAP. XXV. The power of the
Church in limiting even the Traditions of the Apostles. Not every abuse of this
power, a s^fficient warrant for particular Churches to reform themselves.
Heresy consists in denying something necessary to salvation to be believed.
Schism, in departing from the unity of the Church, whether upon that, or any
other cause. Implicit Faith no virtue; but the effect of it may be the work of
Christian charity. p. 163 CHAP. XXVI. What is to add to Gods Law; What to add
to the Apocalypse. S. Paul's Anathema. The Beraeans. S. John's Gospel sufficient
to make one believe; and the Scriptures; the man of God perfect. How the Law
gives light, and Christians are taught by God. How Idolatry is said, not to be
commanded by God. 168 CHAP. XXVII. Why it was death to transgress the
determinations of the Jews Consistory, and what power this argues in the
Church. A difference between the authority of the Apostles, and that of the
Church. The being of the Church to the worlds end, with power of the Keys,
makes it not infallible. Obedience to Superiors, and the Pillar of truth
infer it not. 175 CHAP. XXXI. The Fathers acknowledge the sufficiency (...)
^^^^rnesse of the Scriptures, as, the Traditions of the Church* They are to be
reconciled, by limiting the terms which they use. The limitations of those
sayings which make all Christian truth to be contained in the Scriptures. Of
those which make the authority of the Church the ground of Faith. 181 CHAP.
XXXII. Answer to an Objection, that choice of Religion becomes difficult upon
these terms. This resolution is for the Interest of the Reformation. Those that
make the Church Infallible cannot, those that make the Scriptures ^^ear and
sufficient may own Tradition for evidence to determine the meaning of the
Scriptures, and controversies of Faith. The Interest of the Church of England.
The pretense of Rushworthes Dialogues, that we have no unquestionable
Scripture; and, that the Tradition of the Church never changes. 192 CHAP. XXXI.
That the Scriptures which we have are unquestionable. That mistakes in Copying
are not considerable to the sense and effect of them. The meaning of the Hebrew
and Greek* even of the Prophets, determinable, to the deciding of
Controversies. How Religion delivered by Tradition becomes subject to be
corrupted. 198 CHAP. XXXIV. The dispute concerning the Canon of Scripture, and
the translations thereof, in two Questions. There can be no Tradition for those
books that were written since Prophecy ceased. Wherein the excellence of them
above other books lies. The chi^fe objections against them are question^ble. In
those parcels of the New Testament that have been questioned, the case is not
the same. The sense of the Church. 207 CHAP. XXXIII. Only the Original Copy
can be Authentic. But, the truth thereof may as well be found in the
translations of the Old Testament, as in the Jews Copies. The Jews have not
falsified them of malice. The points come neither from Moses, nor Esdras, but
from the Talmud Jews. 218 CHAP. XXXIV. Of the ancientest Translations of the
Bible into Greek first; With the Authors and authority of the same; Then into
the Chaldee, Syriack, and Latin. Exceptions against the Greek, and the
Samaritane Pentateuch. They are helps never thelesse to assure the true reading
of the Scriptures, though with other Copies; whether Jewish or Christian.
Though the Vulgar Latin were better than the present Greek, yet must both
depend upon the Original Greek of the New Testament. No danger to Christianity
by the differences remaining in the Bible. 224
The CONTENTS of the second Book.
CHAP. I. TWo parts of that which remains. How the dispute concerning the Holy
Trinity with Socinus belongs to the first. The Question of justification by
Faith alone. The Opinion of Socinus concerning the whole Covenant of Grace. The
opinion of those who make justifying Faith the knowledge of a man's
Predestination, opposite to it in the other extreme. The difference between it
and that of the Antinomians. That there are mean Opinions. p. 1 CHAP. II.
Evidence what is the condition of the Covenant of Grace. The contract of
Baptism. The promise of the Holy Ghost annexed to Christ's, not to John's
Baptism. Those are made Christ's Disciples as Christians, that take up his Cross
in Baptism. The effects of Baptism according to the Apostles. 5 CHAP. III. The
exhortations of the Apostles, that are drawn from the patterns of the Old
Testament, suppose the same. How the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament
are the same, how not the same. How the new Testament and the New Covenant are
both one. The free will of man acts the same part in dealing about the
New Covenant, as about the Old. The Gospel a Law. 12 CHAP. IV. The consent of
the whole Church evidenced by the custom of catechizing. By the opinion
thereof concerning the salvation of those that delayed their Baptism. By the
rites and Ceremonies of Baptism. Why no Penance for sins before, but after
Baptism. The doctrine of the Church of England evident in this case. 17 CHAP.
V. The Preaching of our Lord and his Apostles evidenceth, that some act of Man's
free choice is the condition which it requires. The correspondence between the
Old and New Testament infers the same. So do the errors of Socinians and
Antinomians concerning the necessity of Baptism. Objections deferred. 23 CHAP.
VI. Justifying faith sometimes consists in believing the truth. Sometimes, in
trust in God grounded upon the truth. Sometimes in Christianity, that is, in
embracing and professing it. And that in the Fathers as well as in the
Scriptures. Of the informed and formed Faith of the Schools. 30 CHAP. VII. The
last signification of Faith is properly justifying Faith. The first by a
Metonymy of the cause; The second of the effect. Those that are not justified
do truly believe. The trust of a Christian presupposes him to be justified.
All the promises of the Gospel become due at once by the Covenant of Grace.
That, to believe that we are Elect or justified, is not justifying faith. 37
CHAP. VIII. The objection from S. Paul; We are not justified by the Law nor by
Works, but by Grace and by Faith. Not meant of the Gospel, and the works that
suppose it. The question that S. Paul speaks to, is of the Law of Moses and
the works of it. He sets those works in the same rank with the works of the
Gentiles by the light of nature. The civil and outward works of the Law may be
done by Gentiles. How the Law is a Pedagogue to Christ. 43 CHAP. IX. Of the
Faith and Justification of Abraham and the Patriarchs, according to the
Apostles. Of the Prophets and righteous men under the Law. Abraham and Rahab
the harlot justified by Works, if justified by Faith. The promises of the
Gospel depend upon works which the Gospel injoyneth. The Tradition of the
Church. 52 CHAP. X. What Pelagius questioneth concerning the Grace of Christ,
what Socinus, further of the state of Christ before his birth. The opposition
between the first and second Adam in S. Paul, evidenceth original sin.
Concupisence in the unregenerate, and the inability of the Law, to subdue it,
evict the same. The second birth by the holy Ghost evidenceth that the first
birth propagateth sin. 66 CHAP. XI. The old Testament charge all men as well
as the wicked to be sinful from the womb. David complains of himself as born
in sin, no less then the Wise man of the children of the Gentiles. How
Leviticall Laws argue the same. And temporal death under the Old Testament. The
book of Wisdom and the Greek Bible. 76 CHAP. XII. The Heresy of Simon Magus
the beginning of the Gnostics. That they were in being during the Apostles
time. Where and when the Heresy of Cerint^us prevailed, and, that they were
Gnostics. The beginning of the Encratites under the Apostles. It is evident
that one God in Trinity was then glorified among the Christians, by the
Fullness of the Godhead which they introduced in stead of it. 80 CHAP. XIII.
The Word was at the beginning of all things. The apparition of the old
Testament Prefaces to the Incarnation of Christ. Ambassadors are not honored
with the honor due to their Masters. The word of God that was afterward
incarnate was in those Angels, that spoke in Gods Name. No Angel honored as
God under the New Testament. The Word was with God at the beginning of all
things, as after his return. 89 CHAP. XIV. The Name of God not ascribed to
Christ for the like reason as to creatures. The reasons why the Socinians
worship Christ as God do confute their limitations. Christ not God by virtue of
his rising again. He is the Great God with S. Paul, the true God with S. John,
the only Lord, with S. Jude. Other Scriptures. Of the form of God, and of a
servant in S. Paul. 94 CHAP. XV. Not only the Church but the World was made by
Christ. The Word was made flesh in opposition to the Spirit. How the Prophets,
how Christians, by receiving the Word of God, are possessed by his Spirit. How
the title of Son of God imports the Godhead. How Christ is the brightness
and Image of God. 100 CHAP. XVI. The testimonies of Christ's Godhead in the Old
Testament are first understood of the figures of Christ. Of the Wisdom of God
in Solomon and elsewhere. Of the writings of the Jews as well before as after
Christ. 112 CHAP. XVII. Answer to those texts of Scripture that seem to abate
the true Godhead in Christ. Of that creature whereof Christ is the firstborn,
and that which the Wisdom of God made. That this belief is the original
Tradition of the Church. What means this dispute furnishes us with against the
Arians. That it is reason to submit to revelation concerning the nature of God.
The use of reason is no way renounced by holding this Faith. 116 CHAP. XVIII.
The necessity of the grace of Christ, is the evidence of Original sin. How
the exaltation of our Lord depends upon his humiliation, and the grace of
Christ upon that. All the work of Christianity is ascribed to the grace of
Christ. Gods predestination manifests the same. 133 CHAP. XIX. Evidences of
the same in the Old Testament; Of Gods help in getting the Land of Promise, and
renewing the Covenant: And that for Christ's sake. That Christianity cannot
stand without acknowledging the grace of Christ. The Tradition of the Church;
In the Baptism of Infants: In the Prayers of the Church: In the decrees against
Pelagius, and other records of the Church. 140 CHAP. XX. Wherein Original sin
consists; What opinions are on foot. That it is not Adams sin imputed to
his posterity. Whether man were at the first created to a supernatural end, or
not. An estate of mere nature, but innocent, possible. Original sin is
concupisence. How Baptism voids it. Concerning the late novelty in the Church
of England about Original sin. 151 CHAP. XXI. The opinion that makes the
Predestination of man's will by God the sourse of his freedom. And wherein
Jansenius differs from it. Of necessity upon suppositiou and absolute. The
necessity of the Will following the last dictate of the understanding is only
upon supposition. As also that which Gods foresight creates. The difference
between indifferent and undetermined. 163 CHAP. XXII. The Gospel finds man
free from necessity, though not from bondage. Of the Antecedent and consequent
Will of God. Praedetermination is not the root, but the rooting up of Freedom
and Christianity. Against the opinion of Jansenius: 170 CHAP. XXIII. A man is
able to do things truly honest under Original sin. But not to make God the
end of all his doing. How all the actions of the Gentiles are sins. They are
accountable only for the Law of nature. How all men have or have not Grace
sufficient to save. 181 CHAP. XXIV. Though God determines not the will
immediately, yet he determines the effect thereof by the means of his
providence, presenting the object so as he foresees it will choose. The cases of
Pharaoh, of Solomon, of Ahab, and of the Jews that crucified Christ. Of Gods
foreknowledge of future conditionalls that come not to pass. The ground of
foreknowledge of future contingencies. Difficult objections answered. 189 CHAP.
XXV. The grounds of the difference between sufficient and effectual. How
natural occasions, conduce to supernatural actions. The insufficience of
^ansenius his doctrine. Of sufficient grace under the Law of Moses and Nature.
202 CHAP. XXVI. Predestination to grace absolute, to glory respective. Purpose
of denying effectual Grace absolute, of punishing respective. The end, to
which God predestinates, is not the end for which he predestinates. Grace the
reward of the right use of Grace. How much of the question the Gospel
determines not. That our endeavors are engaged no l^sse, then if
predestination were not, it determines. Of the Tradition of the Church, and of
Semipelagians, Predestinatians and Arminians. 212 CHAP. XXVII. The question
concerning the satisfaction of Christ with Socinus. The reason why Sacrifices
are figures of Christ, common to all sacrifices. Why, and what Sacrifices the
Fathers had, what the Law added. Of our ransom by the price of Christ's
propitiatory Sacrifice. 233 CHAP. XXVIII. Christ took away our sin by bearing
the punishment of it. The Prophecy of Esaias LIII. We are reconciled to God by
the Gospel, inconsid^cation of Christ's obedience. The reconcilement of Jews and
Gentiles, Men and Angels, consequent to the sa^e. Of purging and expiating
sin by Christ, and making propitiation for it. Of Christ's dying for us. 238
CHAP. XXIX. The grant of Grace, in consideration of Christ, supposes
satisfaction made by him for sin. Neither our sins imputable to Christ, nor
his sufferings to us, formally and personally, but, as the meritorious causes
which satisfaction answer^^h. The effect of it, the Covenant of Grace, as well
as help to perform it. The Fathers saved by the Faith of Christ to come. The
Gospel a new Law. The pr^per^y of satisfaction and punishment in Christ's
sufferings. Of the sense of the Catholic Church. 245 CHAP. XXX. God might have
reconciled man to himself without the coming of Christ. The promise of ^^^
G^spel d^pend as well upon his active as passive obedience. Christ need (...)
p^i^^s that we might not. The opinion that makes justi^^^g (...) ^rust in God
not true; Yet not prejudicial to the Faith. The d^c^^^ of the Council of Trent,
and the doctrine of the School; how it is not pre^udicial to the Faith. As
also that of Socinus. 254 CHAP. XXXI. The state of the question concerning the
perseverance of those that are once justified. Of three senses, one true, one
inconsistent wi^h the faith, the third neither true nor yet destructive to the
Faith. Evidence from ^^^ writings of the Apostles. From the Old Testament. The
grace of Pro^he^^e when it presupposes sanctifying grace. Answer to some
texts. and of S. Paul's m^a^^ng in the VII. of the Romans. Of the Polygamy of
the Fathers. What assurance of Grace Christians may have. The Tradition of the
Church. 266 CHAP. XXXII. How the fulfilling of Gods Law is possible, how
impossible, for a Christian. Of the difference between mortal and venial
sin. What love of God and of our neighbor was necessary under the Old
Testament. Whether the Sermon in the Mount correct the false interpretation of
the ^ewes, or inhanse the obligatin of the Law. Of the difference between
matter of Precept and matter of Counsel; and the Perfection of Christians. 285
CHAP. XXXIII. Whether any works of Christians be satisfactory for sin, and
meritorious of heaven, or not. The recovery of Gods grace for a Christian
fallen from it, a work of labor and time. The necessity and essicacy of
Penance to that purpose, according to the Scriptures, and the practice of the
Church. Merit by virtue of Gods promise, necessary. The Catholic Church agrees
in it, the present Church of Rome allows merit of justice. 300
The CONTENTS of the third Book.
CHAP. I. THe Society of the Church founded upon the duty of communicating in
the Offices of Gods service. The Sacrament of the Eucharist, among those
Offices, proper to Christianity. What opinions, concerning the presence of
Christ's body and Blood in the Eucharist, are on foot. page 1 CHAP. II. That the
Natural substance of the Elements remains in the Sacrament. That the Body and
Blood of Christ is neverth^l^sse present in the same, when it is received, no^
by the receiving of it. The eating of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the C^^s^
necessarily requires the same. This causes no contrad^ction nor improperty ^^
the words of our Lord. 3 CHAP. III. That the presence of Christ's body in the
Eucharist depends not upon the living (...) of him that receives, but upon the
true profession of Christianity in the (...) th^^ c^l^brates. The Sc^i^ture^
that are alleged for the dependence of (...) the communication of the
properties. They conclude not the sense of them b^ (...) ^^ey are alleged. How
the Scripture confineth the flesh of Christ to the (...). 16 CHAP. IV. The
opinion which makes the Consecration to be done by rehearsing the operative
words. That our Lord consecrated by Thanksgiving. The Form of it in all
L^^urgies, together with the consent of the Fathers. Evidence, that there is ^o
Tradition of the Church for the abolishing of the Elements. 23 CHAP. V. It
cannot be proved by the Old Testament that the Eucharist is a Sacrifice. How,
by the New Testament it may be so accounted. Four reasons thereof, depending
upon the nature of Justifying Faith premised. The consent of the Catholic
Church. The concurrence of the Church of England to the premises. 38 CHAP. VI.
The reason of the Order by which I proceed, brings me to the Baptism of Infants
in the next place. The power of the Keys seen in granting Baptism, as well as
in communicating the Eucharist. Why Socinians make Baptism indifferent: Why
Antinomians make it a mistake to Baptize. The grounds upon which I shake off
both: With answer to some objections. 53 CHAP. VII. The ground of Baptizing
Infants Original sin, though not instituted till Christ rose again. No other
cure for it. Infants of Christians may be Discipl^^, are holy. The effect of
Circumcision under the Law, infers the effect of Baptism under the Gospel.
58 CHAP. VIII. What is alleged to impeach Tradition for Baptizing Infants;
Proves not, that any could be saved regularly, who dyed unbaptized; but, that,
baptizing at years was a strong means to make good Christians. Why the Church
now Baptize. What becomes of Infants dying unbaptized, unanswerable. What those
Infants get who dye baptized. ^5 CHAP. IX. What controversy the Reformation
has with the Church of Rome about Penance. Inward repentance that is sincere,
obtains pardon alone. Remission of (...)* by the Gospel only: The condition
of it by the Ministry of the Church. What the power of binding and loosing
contains more then Preaching, or taking away offenses. Sin may be pardoned
without the use of it. Wherein the necessity of using it lies. 73 CHAP. X. The
S^cts of the Montanists, Novatians, Donatists, and Meletians, evidence the cure
of sin by Penance, to be a Tradition of the Apostles. So does the agreement
of primitive practice with their writings. Indulgence of regular Penance from
the Apostles. Confession of secret sins in the primitive Church. That no
sin can be cured without the Keys of the Church, there is no Tradition from
the Apostles. The necessity of confessing secret sins, whereupon it stands.
86 CHAP. IX. Penance is not required to redeem the debt of temporal punishment
when the sin is pardoned. What assurance of forgiveness, the law of
auricular Confession, as it is used in the Church of Rome, procures. Of
injoyning Penance, after absolution performed. Setting aside abuses, the Law is
agreeable to Gods. Of the order taken by the Church of England. 98 CHAP. XI.
The Unction of the sick pretends only boaily health, upon supposition of the
cure of sin by the Keys of the Church. Objections answered. The Tradition of
the Church evidenceth the same. 106 CHAP. XII. The ground of the Right of the
Church in Matrimonial causes. Marriage of one with one i^solubly is a Law of
Christianity; The Law of Moses not injoyning it. The Law of the Empire not
aiming at the ground of it. Evidence from the primitive practice of the Church.
114 CHAP. XIV. Scripture alleged to prove the bond of Marriage insoluble in
case of adultery, uneffectual. S. Paul and our Lord speak both to one purpose,
according to S. Jerome, and S. Austine. The contrary opinion more reasonable,
and more general in the Church. Why the Church may restrain the innocent party
from marying again. The Imperial Laws could never be of force to void the
Power of the Church. Evidence for it. 125 CHAP. XV. Another opinion, admi^ting
the ground of Lawful Impediments. What Impediments arise upon the Constitution
of the Church, generally as a Society, or particularly, as of Christians. By
what Law some degrees are prohibited Christians. And, of the Polygamy of the
Patriarchs. Marriage with the deceased wives Sister, and with a Cousin Germane,
by what Law prohibited. Of the Profession of Continence, and the validity of
clandestine Marriages. The bound of Ecclesiastical Power in Marriage upon these
grounds. 134 CHAP. XVI. Of the Power of making Governors and Ministers of the
Church. Upon what ground the Hierarchy of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons
standath, in opposition to Presbyteries and Congregations. Of the Power of
Confirming, and the evidence for the Hierarchy which it yields. Of those
Scriptures which seem ^o speak of Presbyteries or Congregations. 145 CHAP.
XVII. The power given the XII. under the Title of Apostles, and the LXX.
Disciples. That the VII were Deacons: Of the first Presbyters at Jerusalem, and
the interest of the People. Presbyters appropriated to Churches under the
Apostles. S. Paul's Deacons no Presbyters. No ground for Lay Elders. 152 CHAP.
XVIII. The Apostlet all of equal power; S. Peter only chief in managing it.
The ground for the pre-eminence of Churches, before and over Churches. Of
Alexandria, Antiochia, Jerusalem and Rome. Ground for the pre-eminence of the
Church of Rome, before all Churches. The consequence of that Ground. A summary
of the evidence for it. 161 CHAP. XIX. Of the proceedings about Marcion and
Montanus at Rome. The business of Pope Victor about keeping Easter; a
peremptory instance. The business of the Novatians evidenceth the same. Of the
businesses concerning the rebaptizing of Heretics, Dionysius of Alexandria,
Paulus Samosatenus, S. Cypriane, and, of the Donatists under Constantine. 168
CHAP. XX. Of the constitution and authority of Councils. The ground of the
pre-eminence of Churches in the Roman Empire. The VI. Canon of the Council of
Ni^aea* The pre-eminence of the Church of Rome, and that of Constantinople.
Some instances against the Superiority of Bishops, out of the records of the
Church; what offices every Order by Gods Law, or by Canon Law, ministers. 175
CHAP. XXI. Of the times of Gods service; By what Title of his Law the first day
of the week is kept Holy. How the Sabbath is to be sanctified by Moses Law. The
fourth Commandment, the ground upon which the Apostles inacted it. Upon what
ground the Church limiteth the times of Gods service. Of Easter, and the Lent
Fast before it. Of the difference of m^ats, and measure of Fasting. Of keeping
of our Lords Birthday, and other Festivals, and the regular hours of the day
for Gods service. 190 CHAP. XXII. The people of God tied to build Syn^gogues,
though not by the leter of the Law. The Church to provide Churches, though the
Scripture command it not. Prescribing the form of Gods public service, is not
quenching the Spirit. The Psalter is prescribed the Church for Gods Praises.
The Scriptures prescribed to be read in the Church; The order of reading them
to be prescribed by the Church. 203 CHAP. XXIII. The consecration of the
Eucharist prescribed by Tradition, for the matter of it. The Lords Prayer
prescribed in all Services. The matter of Prayers for all estates prescribed.
The form of Baptism necessary to be prescribed. The same reason holds in the
forms of other Offices. 211 CHAP. XXIV. The service of God prescribed to be in
a known Language. No pretense that the Latin is now understood. The means to
preserve Unity in the Church, notwithstanding. The true reason of a Sacrifice
inforceth Communion in the Eucharist. What occasions may dispense in it.
Communion in both kinds commanded the People. Objections answered. Who is
chargeable with the abuse. 217 CHAP. XXV. Prayer the more principal Office of
Gods service then Preaching. Preaching, neither Gods word, nor the means of
salvation, unless limited to the Faith of Gods Church. What, the edification
of the Church by preaching further requires. The Order for divine service
according to the course of the Church of England; According to the custom of
the universal Church. 273 CHAP. XXV. Idolatry presupposes an im^gination that
there is more Gods then one. Objections out of the Scripture, that it is the
worship of the true God under an Image. the Original of worshipping the
elements of the world: The Devil: And Images. Of the Idolatry of Magicians,
and of the Gnostics. What Idolatry the cases of Aaron and Jeroboam involve. Of
the Idolatries practiced under the Kings and Judges, in answer to objections.
282 CHAP. XXVI. The place, or rather the State of happy and miserable Souls,
otherwise understood by Gods people before Christ's ascension, then after it.
What the Apocalypse, what the rest of the Apostles declare. Only Martyrs
before Gods Throne. Of the sight of God. 302 CHAP. XXVII. The Souls of the
Fathers were not in the Devils Power till Christ; Though the Old Testament
declare not their estate. Of Samuels soul. The soul of our Lord Christ, parting
from his body, went with the Thief to Paradise. Of his triumph over the powers
of darkness. Prayer for the dead signifies ^o delivering of souls out of
Purgatory. The Covenant of Grace requires imperfect happiness before the
general judgment. Of forgiveness in the world to come, and, paying the
utmost farthing. 310 CHAP. XXVIII. Ancient opinions in the Church, of the place
of souls before the day of judgment. No Tradition that the Fathers were in the
V^rge of Hell, under the Earth. The reason of the difference in the expressions
of the Fathers of the Church. What Tradition of the Church for the place of
Christ's soul, during his death. The Saints souls in secret mansions, according
to the Tradition of the Church. Prayer for the dead supposes the same. No
Purgatory according to the Tradition of the Church. 325 CHAP. XXIX. The ground
upon which Ceremonies are to be used in the service of the Church; Instances
out of the Scriptures and Tradition of the Apostles. Of the equivocation of the
word Sacrament, in the Fathers. The reason of a Sacrament in Baptism and the
Eucharist. In extreme Unction. In Marriage. In Confirmation, Ordination, and
Penance. 340 CHAP. XXX. To worship Christ in the Eucharist, though believing
transubstantiation, is not Idolatry. Ground for the honor of Saints and
Martyrs* The Saints and the Angels pray for us. Three sorts of Prayers to
Saints. The first, agreeable with Christianity: The last may be Idolatry: The
second a step to it. Of the Relics of the Saints Bodies. What the second
Commandment prohibiteth or allows. The second Council of Nicaea does not
decree Idolatry; And yet there is no decree in the Church for the worshipping
of Images. 350 CHAP. XXXI. The ground for Monastical life in the Scriptures;
And in the practice of the primitive Church. The Church gets no peculiar
interest in them who profess it, by their professing of it. The nature and
intent of it renders it subordinate to the Clergy. How far the single life of
the Clergy has been a Law to the Church. Inexecution of the Canons for it.
Nullity of the proceedings of the Church of Rome in it. The interest of the
People in the acts ^f the Church; And in the use of the Scriptures. 368 CHAP.
XXXII. How great the Power of the Church, and the offect of it is. The right of
judging the causes of Christians cease, when it is protected by the State. An
Objection; If Ecclesiastical Power were from God, Secular Power could not limit
the use of it. Ground for the Interest of the State in Church matters. The
inconsequence of the argument. The concurrence of both Interests to the Law of
the Church. The In^erest of the state in the indowment of the Church.
Concurrence of both in matrimonial causes, and Ordinations. Temporal penalties
upon Excommunication from the State. No Sovereign subject to the greater
Excommunication, but to the less. The Rights of the Jews State and of
Christian Powers, in Religion, partly the same, partly not. The infinite Power
of the Pope not founded upon Episcopacy, but upon acts of the Secular Powers of
Christendom. 381
OF THE PRINCIPLES OF Christian Truth.
The First BOOK.
CHAP. I. All agree, that Reason is to decide controversies of Faith. The
objection, that Faith is taught by Gods Spirit, answered. What Reason decideth
questions of Faith. The resolution of Faith ends not in the light of Reason,
but in that which Reason evidenceth to come from Gods messengers.
THe first thing that we are to question in the beginning is, Whether there be
any means to resolve, by the use of reason, those controver^^es which cause
division in the Church? Which is all one, as if we undertook to enquire,
whether there be any such skill or knowledge, as that for which men call
themselves Divines: For if there be, it must be the same in England as at Rome.
And if it have no principles, (as no principles it can have, unless it can be
resolved what those principles are) then is it a bare name, signifying nothing.
But if there be certain principles which all parties are obliged to admit, that
discourse which admits no other will certainly produce that resolution, in
which all shall be obliged to agree. And truly this hope there is left, that
all parties do necessarily suppose, that there is means to resolve by reason
all differences of Faith: Inasmuch as all undertake to persuade all, by reason,
to be of the judgment of each one, and would be thought to have reason on their
side, when so they do; and, that reason is not done them when they are not
believed.

There are indeed many passages of Scripture, which say, that Faith is only
taught by the Spirit of God: Mat. XVI. 17. Blessed art thou Peter son of Jonas,
for flesh and blood revealed not this to thee, but my Father which is in the
heavens. II. 25. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes.
1 Cor. I. 26, 27, 28. For, Brethren, you see your calling, that not many wise
according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble. But, the foolish
things of the world has God chosen to shame the wise: The weak things of the
world has God chosen to shame the strong: The ignoble and despicable things of
the world has God chosen, and the things that are not, to confound the things
that are. John VI. 45. It is written in the Prophets; And they shall be all
taught of God. Heb. VIII. 10. Jer. XXXI. 33. This is the Covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel in those days, says the Lord; I will put my
Laws in their minds, and write them in their hearts. These and the like
Scriptures then, as^ribing the reason why we believe, to the work of Gods
Spirit, seem to leave no room for any other reason, why we should believe.

But this difficulty is easy for him to resolve, that di^^inguishes between
the reason that moves in the nature of an object, and that motion which the
active cause produces. For, the motion of an object supposes that
consideration, which discovers the reason, why we are to believe. But the
motion of the Holy Ghost, in the nature of an active cause, proceeds without
any notice that we take of it: According to the saying of our Lord to
Nicodemus, John 111. 8. The wind blows where it lists, and a man hears the
noise of it, but cannot tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes: So is
every one that is born of the spirit. For, we must know, that there may be
sufficient reason to evict the truth of Christianity, and yet prove ineffectual
to induce the most part, either inwardly to believe, or outwardly to profess
it. The reason consists in two things: For, neither is the matter of Faith
evident to the light of reason, which we bring into the world with us; And,
the Cross of Christ, which this profession draws after it, necessarily calls
in question that estate, which every man is settled upon in the world. So that
no marvel, if the reasons of believing fail of that effect, which, for their
part, they are sufficient to produce; Interest diverting the consideration, or
intercepting the consequence of such troublesome truth, and the motives that
enforce it. The same is the reason, why the Christian world is now to barren of
the fruits of Christianity: For, the profession of it, which is all, the Laws
of the world can enjoin, is the common privilege, by which men hold their
estates: Which, it is no marvel those men should make use of, that have neither
resolved to embrace Christ with his Cross, nor considered the reason they have
to do it: who, if they should stick to that which they profess, and when the
protection of the Law fails; or act according to it, when it would be
disadvantage to them in the world so to do, should do a thing inconsequent to
their own principles; which carried them no further than that profession, which
the Law, whereby they hold their estates protecteth. The true reason of all
Apostasy in all trials.

As for the truth of Christianity; Can they that believe a God above, refuse to
believe his messengers, because that which they report stands not in the light
of any reason to evidence it? Matter of Faith is evidently credible, but cannot
be evidently true. Christianity supposes sufficient reason to believe; but, not
standing upon evidence in the thing, but upon credit of report, the temptation
of the Cross may easily defeat the effect of it, if the Grace of Christ and
the operation of the Holy Ghost interpose not. Upon this account, the knowledge
of Gods truth revealed by Christ may be the work of his Grace, according to the
Scriptures; (for, that so it is, I am not obliged, neither have I any reason
here to suppose, being to come in question hereafter, for the Principles, which
here we seek, to decide) but supposing sufficient reason propounded, to make
it evidently credible. And he that alleges Gods Spirit, for what he cannot
show sufficient reason to believe otherwise, may thank himself, if he perish
by believing that, which he cannot oblige another man to believe.

Here we must make a difference between those men, whom God imployes to deal
with other men in his name, and those which come to God by their means. For, of
the first, it is enough to demand, how it appears that they come from God. To
demand, by what means he makes his will known to them, (supposing they come
from him) is more than needs, at least in this place. For, if it be granted
me, that the Apostles and Prophets were the messengers of God, suppose I
cannot tell, how Prophesies are made evident to the souls of them, to whom the
Spirit of God reveals them; No body will question; Whether or no he ought to
believe these, whom he acknowledges Gods messengers. And therefore it will be
no prejudice to my purpose, to set aside all curious dispute, how, and by what
means, God reveals his messages to those, whom, by such revelations, he makes
Prophets. But, those that derive their knowledge from the report of such as are
believed to come from God, must as well give account, how they know, that which
they believe to come from such report, as, why such report is to be believed.
For, if we believe, that God furnished those whom he employed, with
sufficient means, to make it appear that they came on his message, we can
dispute no further, why their report is to be believed. If we believe it not,
there will be no cause, why those, who pretend themselves to be Gods
messengers, should not be neglected as fools, or rejected as impostors; Nay,
there will be no cause, why we should be Christians, upon the report of those,
that show us not sufficient reason to receive them for Gods messengers. But
this being admitted and believed, unless evidence can be made what was
delivered by them that came on Gods message, it is in vain to impose any thing
on the Faith of them, that are ready to receive, whatsoever comes upon that
score. The resolution then of all controversies in Religion, which the Church
is divided about, consists in making evidence, what has been delivered by
them, whom, all Christians believe, that God sent to man on his message.

And therefore there will remain no great difficulty about the force and use of
reason in matters of Faith, if we consider, that it is one thing to resolve
them by such principles as the light of reason evidenceth; another, to do it by
the use of reason, evidencing what Gods messengers have delivered to us. For,
all dispute, in point of Faith, tends only to evidence what we have received
from the authors of our Faith. Till that evidence come, doubt remains; when
it is come, it vanishes. Without the use of reason this evidence is not made,
though not by that which the light of nature discovers, yet by those helps
which reason imployeth, to make it appear, what we have received from those,
from whom we received our Christianity; Which, without those helps, did not
appear. But, if competition fall out, between that which is thus evidenced to
come from God, on the one side, and, on the other side, the light of reason,
seeming evidently to contradict the truth of it: First, we are certain that
this competition or contradiction is only in appearance, because both reason
and revelation is from God, who cannot oblige us to make contradictory
resolutions: Then, there is no help, without the use of reason, to unmask this
appearance. I will not here go about to control that which may be alleged on
either side, in any particular point, by any general prejudice; choosing rather,
to refer the debate to that particular question, in which, cause of
competition may appear, then to presume upon any thing, which the truth of
Christianity (the only supposition which hitherto I premise) appears not so
contain. Only this I will prescribe; It is not the exception of a Christian to
say; That which the light of reason evidenceth not to be possible is not true,
though commended to us by the same reasons which move us to be Christians. For,
the nature of God, the counsails of God, the works of God, being such things,
as man's understanding has no skill of, till it be enlightened by God from
above, That sense of Gods oracles, which the motives of Faith do enforce, is no
less undisputable, then it is undisputable, whether that which God says be
true or not, who inacts his revelations by those motives.

CHAP. II. The question between the Scripture and the Church, which of them is
Judge in matters of Faith. Whether opinion, the Tradition of the Church stands
better with. Those that hold the Scripture to be clear in all things necessary
to salvation, have no reason to exclude the Tradition of the Church. What
opinions they are, that deny the Church to be a Society or Corporation by Gods
Law.
THe cure of all diseases comes from the sound ingredients of nature, when they
get the upper hand, and restore nature, by expelling that which was against it.
Neither can the divisions and distempers of the Church be cured, but by the
common truth which the parties acknowledge, when the right understanding of it
clears the mistakes, which man's weakness tainteth it with. There is a
sufficient stock of sound Principles left all the parties, which I mean, when
all of them acknowledge the Scriptures, that is, so much of them, as all agree
to contain the word of God. But, supposing the truth of them to come from God;
First it remains in difference, how the meaning of them may be determined,
when doubt is made of it? And then, because nothing but the true meaning of the
Scripture can be counted Scripture, (if there be a way to determine that)
Whether any thing over and above it, is to be received for the word of God with
it? Concerning which point, it is well enough known what opinions there are on
foot. When Luther first disputed against the Indulgences of Leo X Pope, those
that appeared in defense of them, (the Master of the Popes Palace, and Eckius)
finding themselves scanted of matter to allege out of the Scriptures, betook
themselves to the common place of the Church, and the Power of it; the force
whereof stood upon this consequence; That, whatsoever the Church shall decree,
is to be received for unquestionable. Afterward, certain Articles extracted
out of Luthers Writings being condemned by a Bull of the Pope, Luther
interposes his appeal to a Council, that should decree according to the
Scripture alone. This is the rise of the great Controversy still on foot,
between the Church and the Scripture; between Scripture, and the Tradition of
the Church; of what force each of them is, in deciding controversies of Faith.
They that hold the Church to be the only infallible Judge of all Controversies
of Faith, necessarily suppose, that the Church is, by Gods appointment, that
is, Jure divino, a Corporation, Society, or Body of men, visible though not
Civil; because standing upon Gods will, revealed in order to the happiness of
the world to come: In which Society, (because, in no Society, all that are
Interessed can act for themselves) it behooveth, that there be a public
Authority vested in some persons or Bodies, the Act whereof may oblige the
whole. And, thus it may and must be understood, that the Church is maintained
to be Judge in Controversies of Faith, by the definitive sentence of those,
that have authority to oblige the Body; Whether Pope or Council, we dispute
not here, or what else may be imagined: For that, as all other Controversies in
Religion, is to be decided by the resolution of the point now in hand, what is
the means to determine by reason all such differences. Which, if it could not
be decided without supposing whose authority is to tie the Church, there could
be no end of differences in the Church, whatsoever there will be. Here is then
an opinion famous enough, that the Church is endowed with a gift of
Infallability; by virtue whereof, whatsoever sentence is passed by them that
are authorized on behalf of the Church, becomes matter of Faith, and obliges
all men to receive it, by the same reason, for which they receive the Christian
Faith.

Now they, who, in opposition to this opinion do maintain the Scriptures to be
the only Judge in Controversies of Faith, do involve, in this opposition, an
equivocation manifest enough: For it is manifest, that their intent is to
render a reason, by this position, why they submit not to that sentence, which
condemns their positions in the name of the Church; To wit, because it is
contrary to the Scriptures: And further, why they withdraw themselves from the
communion of that Church which condemns them, and join in communion grounded
upon the profession of the positions condemned, maintaining themselves
thereupon to be the true Church of God, and those that condemn them the
corrupt and counterfeit. Whereby it appears, that, in effect, they do
maintain, that there is no Judge provided by God, to be visible in his Church,
with the gift of Infallible: But, that they are themselves, and ought to be
Judges, to condemn all sentences given against the Scripture, by any authority
established in the Church. By which means, the Scripture becomes no more the
Judge, but the Rule, or the Law, by which men are to judge; Whether they are to
stand to such sentences, as are given in the name of the Church, or not: Now,
if the Scripture be the Law, or the Rule, by which Controversies of Faith are
to be judged, there will be no pretense to exclude any means, that may serve as
evidence, to clear the meaning of it. And therefore, there will be no cause,
why the Tradition of the Church should not be joined with the Scripture, in
deciding Controversies of Faith; Not disputing hitherto, whether or no it
contain any thing that the Scripture contains not, to clear and to determine
the sense of the Scripture. Whereas, they that maintain the sentence of the
present Church to be the reason of believing, can no way resolve their belief
into the Tradition of the Catholic Church: Because, that supposes only the act
of our Lord and his Apostles, delivering to the Church that which it holds;
Which who so supposes, can allege no other reason why he believes: And
therefore, the sentence of the present Church cannot be the reason, why any man
should believe that, which, there was reason from the beginning, to believe,
without it.

They, who, to exclude the Tradition of the Church, state this position upon
these terms; That all things necessary to salvation are clearly contained in
the Scriptures; pretending to limit the generality of the question, put it upon
an issue not to be tried, till we have resolved, what means there is to
determine the meaning of the Scripture. For, to be necessary to salvation, is,
to be true, and something more: So that, nothing can appear necessary to
salvation, till it can appear to be true: Nor appear to be true, until it can
be resolved, what means there is, to distinguish between true and false.
Besides, how unlimited this limitation is, may appear by this; Because,
whatsoever is clear, is said to be clear in relation to some sight; And there
is so much difference between the sight of several Christians, that nothing can
be said to be clear to all, because it is clear to some. And, that which is not
clear to all whose salvation is concerned in it, what availes it those to whom
it is not clear? Now, I suppose, those that advance these terms, will not
grant, that nothing is necessary to salvation, that may be questioned, by an
argument out of the Scripture, which all Christians cannot answer; Knowing,
that such things, as themselves hold necessary to salvation, may be assalted by
such reasons out of the Scripture, as they do not think all Christians fit to
resolve. Besides, they do not pretend that all things necessary to salvation
are clear in the Scripture of themselves, but, by consequence of reason, which
may make them clear. Now he that would draw true consequences from the
Scripture, had need be well informed of the matter of that Scripture, which he
draws into consequence. And, to that information, how can it appear, that any
thing is more necessary, than the Tradition of the Church? Therefore though I
say not yet, whether it be true or false, that all things necessary to
salvation are clearly contained in the Scriptures; yet, at the present I say,
that this is not the prime truth, which must give a reason of all that follows
upon it, but demands a reason to be given for it, by those principles, upon
which, the resolution of all matters of Faith depends.

All this while we agree upon the supposition, that the Church is a Society of
men subsisting by Gods revealed will, distinct from all other Societies.
Because, as I said, those that have departed from the Church of Rome, have
hitherto pretended, their own communion to be the true Church. For if it be
said, that they do not, or scarce ever did agree in communion one with another,
so that they can pretend to constitute all one Church; That is not, because
they do not think, that they ought all to constitute one Church, but because
they agree not upon the conditions; Each part thinking, that the other does not
believe, as those whom they may communicate with ought to believe. But this is
now manifestly contradicted by two opinions among us, though the one can be no
^ect, the other as yet appears not to be one. The first is that of them that
think themselves above Ordinances; the Communion of the Church only obliging
proficients, and every perfect Christian being to himself a Church. Of these, I
said, there can be no sect, as communicating in nothing visible, as Christians.
But, I need not have recourse to such an obscure Sect as this: For, the same is
necessarily the opinion of all the sect that makes every Congregation
Independent and Sovereign in Church matters. For, if particular Congregations be
not obliged, to join in communion to the constitution of one Church, we may
perhaps understand, the collection of all Congregations to be signified at
once, by the name of the Church; but we cannot imagine, that the Church, so
understood, can be obliged by any sentence that can pass in it. And if this
opinion be true, it must be acknowledged, as of late years it has been
disputed amongst us, that there is no crime of Schism, in violating the unity
of the Church; but, when a breach is made in a Congregation, obliged to
communicate one with another in Church matters. For, where there is no bond of
unity, what crime can there be in dissolving it? This is then the ground of all
Independent Congregations, that there is no such thing as the Church,
understanding by the name of the Church, a Society or Corporation founded upon
a Charter of Gods; which signification, the addition of Catholic and
Apostolic in our Creed has hitherto been thought to determine.

But there is a second opinion in the Leviathan, who allows all points of
Ecclesiastical Power, in Excommunicating, Ordaining, and the rest, to the
Sovereign Powers that are Christian; Though, before the Empire was Christian,
he grants, that the Churches, (that is to say, the several Bodies of
Christians that were dwelling in several Cities) had and exercised some parts
of the same right, by virtue of the Scriptures. As you may see page 274-279.
287-292. Making that right, which the Scriptures give them for the time, to
eschete to the Civil Power, when it is Christian, and dissolving the said
Churches into the State or Commonwealth, which, once Christian, is, from
thenceforth, the Church. And this, I suppose, upon this ground; (though he
does not expressly allege it to that purpose) Because the Scripture has not the
force of a Law, obliging any man in justice to receive it, till Sovereign
Powers make it such to their subjects, but only contains good advice, which,
he that will, may embrace for his souls health, and, he that will not, at his
peril may refuse. Thus he teaches, page 205. 281-287. If therefore the act of
Sovereign Power give the Scripture the force of Law, then has it a just claim
to all rights and Powers founded upon the Scripture, as derived from it, and
therefore vested originally in it. Hence follows that desperate inference,
concerning the right of Civil Power in matter of Religion, (not for a Christian
but for an Apostate to publish) that, if the Sovereign command a Christian to
renounce Christ, and the faith of Christ, he is bound to do it with his mouth,
but to believe with his heart. And therefore, much more, to obey whatsoever he
commands in Religion besides, whether to believe, or to do. The Reason;
Because, in things not necessary to salvation, the obedience due by Gods and
man's Law to the Sovereign, must take place. Now there is nothing necessary to
salvation, says he; but to believe that our Lord Jesus is the Christ. All
that the Scripture commands besides this, is but the Law of Nature, which,
when the Civil Law of every Land has limited; whosoever observes that Law,
cannot fail of fulfilling the Law of Nature. These things you have page 321-330.

The late learned Seldom in his first book de Synedriis Judaeorum, maintaining
Erastus his opinion, that there is no power of Excommunicating in the Church by
Gods Law, grants, (that which could not be denied) that the Church did exercise
such a Power before Constantine, but, not by any charter of Gods, but by free
consent of Christians among themselves. page 243, 244. Which, if he will
follow the grain of his own reason, he is consequently to extend to the power
of Ordaining, and, to all other rights which the Church, as a Corporation
founded by God, can claim by Gods Law. And upon this ground, he may dissolve
the Church into the Commonwealth, and make the power of it an eschere to the
Civil Power that is Christian, with less violence than the Leviathan does:
Because, whatsoever Corporations or Fraternities are bodied by sufferance of
the State, dissolve of themselves at the will of it, and resolve the powers
which they have created into the disposition of it. And that this was his
intent, whosoever considers what he has written; of the indowment of the Church
in his History of Tithes; of Ordinations; in the second book de Synedriis of
the right of the Civil Power in limiting causes of divorce; in his Vxor
Ebraica; has reason to judge, as well as I, who have heard him say, that all
pretense of Ecclesiastical Power is an imposture. I say not that he, or the
rest of Erastus his followers make themselves, by the same consequence, liable
to those horrible consequences which the Leviathan admits; But I say, that they
are to bethink themselves, what right they will assign the Civil Power, in
determining controversies in Religion that may arise; And, what assurance they
can give their subjects, that their salvation is well provided for, standing to
their decrees. Besides, I was to mention these opinions here, that those, who
take the sentence of the Church to be the first ground of Faith, into which it
is lastly resolved, may see, that they are to prove the Church to be a
Corporation by divine Right, before they can challenge any such power for it.
For, that which is once denied, it will be ridiculous to take for granted,
without proving it. And, whatsoever may be the right of the Church, in deciding
controversies of Faith, it cannot be proved, without evidence for this charter
of the Church, as you shall see by and by more at large.

CHAP. III. That neither the sentence of the Church, nor the dictate of Gods
Spirit, can be the reason why the Scriptures are to be received. No man can
know that he has Gods Spirit, without knowing that he is a true Christian;
Which supposes the truth of the Scripture. The motives of Faith are the reason
why the Scriptures are to be believed: And the consent of Gods people the
reason that evidences those motives to be infallibly true. How the Scriptures
are believed for themselves. How a Circle is made in rendering a reason of the
Faith. The Scriptures are Gods Law to all, to whom they are published, by Gods
act of publishing them; But Civil Law, by the act of Sovereign Powers, in
acting Christianity upon their Subjects.
IT would not be easy to find an entrance into such a perplexed Question, had
not the dispute of it started another, concerning the reason why we believe
the Scriptures, whether upon the credit of the Church, or for themselves, or
whether nothing but the Spirit of God speaking to each man's heart, is
sufficient to evidence, that it is the word of God which they contain. This if
we can resolve in our way, perhaps we may discover ground to stand upon, when
we come to the main. He that says the Scriptures are to be believed for
themselves, exposes them to the scorn of unbelievers, by tying himself to use
no other reason for them, least for that reason, they should find that credit,
which, the seeking of it shows, they had not of themselves. He that says
they are to be believed for the authority of the Church, is bound to give
account how we shall know, both that there is a Church which some persons may
oblige; And who is the Church, that is, who be the men whose act obliges the
Church; And that, without alleging Scripture, because hitherto we have no
reason to receive it: And being but men, how their Act obliges the Church,
which cannot be showed, without showing, that God has founded a Corporation of
his Church, and given power to some men, or some qualities or ranks of men in
it, to oblige the whole: Which, how it will be showed, without means to
determine the sense of the Scriptures, the parties agreeing in nothing but the
truth of Christianity, and of the Scriptures, is impossible to be said. This
position then induces that stop to all proceeding by reason, which Logicians
call a Circle: When a man disputes in a round, as a mill-horse grindes, arguing
this power to be in the Church by the Scriptures, (without which he can say
nothing to it) and arguing the truth of the Scriptures back again, by alleging
the authority of the Church. Which destroys that supposition upon which all
dispute of reason proceeds, that nothing can be proved, but by that which is
better known than that which it proves. But, are those that allege the spirit
for the evidence upon which they receive the Scripture less subject to this
inconvenience? For, is it not manifest, that men may and do delude themselves,
with an imagination, that Gods Spirit tells them that, which their own Spirit,
without Gods Spirit conceives? How then shall it discerned, what comes from
Gods Spirit, what does not, without supposing the Scriptures, by which the
matter thereof is discernable? And is not this the same Circle, to prove the
truth of the Scriptures by the dictate of Gods Spirit, and that by alleging the
Scriptures?

To make the ground of this inconvenience still more evident, I will here
insist upon this presumption; That the gift of the Holy Ghost presupposes
Christianity, that is, the belief and profession of the Christian Faith; And
therefore, that no man can know that he has the Holy Ghost, but he must
first know the truth of Christianity, and of the Scriptures. Not that it is my
meaning, either to suppose or prove in this place, that, whosoever has the Spirit
of God, does or may know that he has it; For, that is one of those
controversies, which we are seeking principles to resolve. But, that no man
can know that he has the Spirit of God, unless, first he know himself to be
a true Christian. That is to say, that, supposing for the present, but not
granting, that a man can know that he has Gods Spirit, and that it is Gods
Spirit which moves him to believe this or that; he must first know what is
true Christianity, and by consequence, the means to discern between true and
false. And this I propose for an assumption necessary to the evidencing of that
which follows, but not questioned by any party in the Church, because it is a
principle in Christianity, that the Grace of the Holy Ghost is a promise
peculiar to those that undertake it. Who were they on whom the Holy Ghost was
first bestowed? Was it not the Apostles and the rest of Disciples assembled to
serve God with the Offices of the Church, that is to say, already Christians?
When Philip had converted the Samaritanes, came S. Peter and S. John to give
them the Holy Ghost by laying on their hands, till they were baptized?
Concerning the Disciples at Ephesus, Acts XIX. 1-6. there is some dispute,
whether they received the Holy Ghost by the imposition of S. Paul's hands, (by
virtue of the Baptism of John, which they had received before they met with S.
Paul) or whether they were baptized over and above with the baptism of Christ,
and thereupon received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of S. Paul's hands. But
of this, they that will have them to have been baptized only with S. John's
baptism, make no dispute, that they were fully made Christians by it. Can any
thing be clearer than S. Paul's words, Gal. II. 2-5. That, by the hearing of
Faith, (that is, obeying it) they had received the Holy Ghost, which by the
works of the Law they could not receive? And 2 Cor. XI. 4. If he that comes
preach another Jesus whom we preached not, or ye receive another Spirit,
which ye received not, or another Gospel which ye admitted not; Another
Jesus, another Gospel, infers another Spirit. So Gal. III. 14. That the
blessing of Abraham may come upon the Gentiles through Christ Jesus, that ye
may receive the promise of the Holy Ghost by Faith. The promise of the Holy
Ghost then, supposes the condition of Faith. And Gal. IV. 6. Because ye are
sons, therefore God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts
crying, Abba, Father. Heb. VI. 6. It is impossible for those that were once
enlightened, and tasted the heavenly gift, and became partakers of the Holy
Ghost; Upon inlightening, that is, baptism, follows the participation of the
H. Ghost. And, seeing the resurrection of the flesh unto glory is ascribed by
S. Paul, to the Spirit of God that dwelt in it, while it lived upon earth Romans
VIII. 10, 11. as the resurrection of our Lord Christ is ascribed to the Spirit
of holiness that dwelt in him without measure Romans I. 4. John III. 34. of
necessity the Holy Ghost dwells in all them that shall rise to glory. But
Baptism assures resurrection to glory; Therefore it assures the Holy Ghost
by which they rise. Nor can it be understood how we are the Temple of God,
because the Spirit of God dwells in us, 1 Cor. III. 16. but because the
promise of the Holy Ghost depends upon that which distinguishes Christians
from other people. In fine, when our Savior promises, John XIV. 23. If any
man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will
come to him and abide with him; Seeing the Father and the Son do dwell in those
that love God, by the grace of the Holy Ghost, the gift of the Holy Ghost, of
necessity supposes the love of God in them that have it. And yet his discourse
is more effectual Romans VIII. 1-9. That, there is now no condemnation for those
that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit.
For, as he infers, that, if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is
none of Christ's: So he had premised Romans V. 1-5. Being justified by Faith, we
have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ, together with the joy of
hope, by the love of God, poured out in our hearts through the Spirit of God
which is in us. The Kingdom of God consisting in righteousness and peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans XIV. 17. If it be here objected, that the Grace of
the Holy Ghost is necessary to bring a man to Christianity, and therefore
cannot suppose it; Supposing this for the present, but not granting it, because
it is in controversy, and must be resolved by the grounds which we seek; It
will be easy to distinguish between the grace of the Holy Ghost, and the gift
of the Holy Ghost. For, he that is converted to believe the truth of
Christianity, may acknowledge it to be of Grace, but must not presume of the
gift of the Holy Ghost, that it is bestowed on him for his own, till his
conversion be complete, by undertaking the profession of Christianity. If it be
further alleged, that Cornelius and his company received the Holy Ghost before
they were baptized: The answer is ready, from that maxim of Law; That, every
exception against a Rule, establishes the Rule in cases not excepted.
Cornelius, no Jew, but converted from Idols to worship the true God, under the
promises which the Jews expected, with his company of the same Faith, being in
the state of Gods grace upon that account, receives the Holy Ghost before
Baptism, because God knew him ready to undertake the profession of
Christianity, so soon as it could appear to be commanded by God. And this, for
the satisfaction of S. Peter and the Jews, in that secret, which hereby beg^n
to be declared, that the Gentiles, as well as the Jews, belonged to the Church.

It is true, the graces of the Holy Ghost are of two kinds: For, some of them
are given for the benefit and salvation of those in whom they are: Some for the
benefit and edification of the Church. And it is true, that, both kinds are
meant and expressed by these Scriptures. But it is no less true, that neither
of them is to be had, but, supposing the truth of Christianity, and of the
Scriptures. For, the first kind is granted to none, but those that embrace
Christianity, with a sincere intention of living according to that which they
profess: Being indeed, the help that God, by his Gospel, promises and allows
them, to go thorough with that high and difficult profession which they
undertake. We see the Apostles forsake their Lord, and make a doubt of his
resurrection, before the coming of the Holy Ghost; Whom having received, they
are ready to profess Christ, in the midst of utmost dangers. And S. John, as
he gives the reason why the righteous sin not, because their ^eed abides in
them, that is, the word of the Gospel by which they were engendered anew to be
Christians; 1 John III. 9. So he gives the reason, why they were not to be
seduced by the Heresies of that time, because the unction which they had
received from the Holy One taught them to know all things. 1 John II. 20, 27.
Thus the Unction of the Spirit supposes the seed of the Word, and the seed of
the Word inferres the Unction of the Spirit. And as, when the Word of God came
to the Prophets, they were withal possessed by Gods Spirit, moving them to
deliver it to the people: So, when the word of Faith is established in the
heart of a Christian, (as David says) the Spirit of God possesses him with an
inclination, both to profess it, and to live according to it. As for the
second kind, it is true, they are granted to those that are not heirs of Gods
promises, as it appears by the instances of Saul, surprised with the Spirit of
Prophecy, when he intended the death of David, 1 Samuel XIX. 23, 24. Of those
that have prophesied and cast out Devils and done miracles in our Lords name,
to whom he shall say; I know you not: Mat. VII. 22, 23. Of Caiaphas, who
prophesied of our Lords death, when he was compassing of it, John XI. 49,-52.
And of Balaam in the last place, as all know. But, as the former kind
supposes true Christianity in him that has it, so does this, correspondently,
suppose the profession of it, as, under the old Law, the profession of the true
God. The trial of a Prophet under the Law was, not the doing of a miracle
alone; If he seduced from God, in stead of taking him for Gods messenger, they
were to put him to death, Deuteronomy. XIII. 1-5. So, the trial was, the doing of a
miracle, under the profession of the true God. Under the Gospel; No man
speaking by the Spirit of God calls Jesus anathema, nor can any man call
Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. XII. 3. Supposing, that a man
speaks such things as must come, either from Gods Spirit, or from evil
Spirits, the trial is, whether he profess Christ or not. And 1 John IV. 2, 3.
Every Spirit, that confesses Jesus come in the flesh to be Christ, is of God.
And every Spirit that confesses not Jesus Christ, that is come in the flesh,
is not of God. Every Spirit, that is, every inspiration which a man of himself
cannot have. God will not have his people so tempted, that, under the
profession of the true Religion, the Devils instruments should have power to
work miracles, to seduce them from it. Upon these terms prophesied Saul under
the Law, and upon the same terms prophesied those under the Gospel, whom our
Lord will not own, having done miracles in his name. As for Caiaphas, it does
not appear that he spoke those words, whereby S. John says he prophened of
our Lords death, by revelation, or inspiration from God: For, the reason is
given why he prophened, because he was High Priest that year. Now, when the
High Priests declared Gods orders to his ancient people, there is no appearance
that they were inspired by revelation with that which they declared: But that,
putting on the Pontifical robes, Gods will appeared by the breast plate of Urim
and Tummim, though now we know not how. Accordingly, to were Caiaphas his
words ordered, (this gift being ceased many ages before) as to contain a
Prophecy of our Lords death by Gods intent, but without his. But Balaams case
is far otherwise. Arnobius advers. Gent. I. tells us, that Magicians, in
their operations, met with contrary Gods, whom he calls Antitheos, that would
not suffer them to proceed. Balaam met with the true God, and knew him to be
so, and all his Enchantments controlable by him, and yet sacrifices to false
Gods, that, by their help, he might curse Gods people. In this case, Balaam,
though commanded as a subject, is not, as a friend, inspired by God, when God
forces him to speak what he would not.

If any man, then, resolve the credit of the Scripture into the inward witness
of Gods Spirit, dictating to his Spirit, that they are the word of God, it will
be utterly impertinent to our purpose. For, seeking, as we do, the means to
resolve one another, it will be impertinent to allege that, which, though a man
is inwardly satisfied with, yet outwardly to another cannot appear. And
certainly, if there be no reason to satisfy another man, of the truth of the
whole, that is, of Christianity, or of the Scriptures; It cannot be expected,
that there should be satisfaction, why this or that should belong to the truth
of Christianity, or the intent and meaning of the Scriptures. For, of
necessity, whatsoever evidence can be made, for this or that truth contained in
the Scriptures, must depend upon the reason, for which Christianity is received
as Gods truth. In fine, the reason why controversies in Religion may, and are
to be ended by dispute of reason is this, as has been premised, because that
the Holy Ghost, which effectually moves us to believe, supposes sufficient
reason, moving, in the nature of an object proposed, to believe. Therefore,
neither the truth of Christianity, nor the Scripture is admitted upon the
dictate of Gods Spirit, but, supposing the reasons which convict us that they
are to be admitted. And correspondently, the gift of the Holy Ghost, that
inableth to continue in the profession and exercise of Christianity, supposes
the belief of that Christianity, which a man from his heart professes; And, by
consequence, the reason why he is to believe, which will not fail to infer
the truth of the Scriptures. But if it be said; That any person or persons, as
Rulers of the Church, have the promise of inspiration or revelation from God,
for a ground, upon which others are to believe; It has been showed, that all
such grace supposes the profession of Christianity, and the truth of the
Scriptures, and therefore the grounds of the same. If any man should say, as, I
perceive some have a mind to say, that the gift of Infallibility in the
Church, supposes no such inspiration or revelation, but only the qualities of
such persons as have power to conclude the Church, and that they do visibly
proceed to determine; It will be evident, that they can no more challenge this
right, not supposing Christianity, and the foundation of the Church, than the
High Priest of the Jews could proceed to give answer by U^im and Tummim, not
supposing, that God had given the Law, and appointed the Priest so to do.

The resolution of this Question may make it appear, that Christians, falling
out among themselves, maintain themselves upon such grounds, as would leave no
room for the truth of that Christianity which both suppose. Had we to do with
the enemies of it, it would easily appear, we must allege such reasons, for
the truth of Gods Word, as might convince the enemies of it, and not suppose
the truth of it, when the question is, how it may appear to be true. It were
therefore fit to consider, whether a man can reasonably be a Christian, and yet
question the truth of the Scriptures; or rather, not fit to consider that,
which there can be no doubt in. The whole content of the Scripture is, either
the motives, or the matter of Christianity. They that profess Christianity,
suppose the motives of it true, which they admit to be sufficient. Supposing
them true, they cannot question the Scriptures that record them: Supposing
those Scriptures, they cannot question those motives for true; Whether
sufficient, is resolved, by admitting Christianity. Always, the same reason
that moves a man to be a Christian, resolves him to believe the Scripture;
neither would he allege any other, had he to do with the enemies of
Christianity. What those motives are concerns not us, proceeding upon
supposition of common Christianity, to determine differences within it. Yet,
that I may be the better understood, my meaning is; That the miracles, done by
those from whom we have the Scriptures, is the only motive to show that they
came from God, and therefore, that we are obliged to receive what they
preached, and, by consequence, the Scriptures that contain it. Not intending
hereby to quit the advantage which the Law has of Heathenism, and the Gospel
of the Law, in regard of the reasonableness and holiness of the matter of each
above other respectively, justified by the light of nature. But because the
business is, at present, only to show the evidence we have, that God did
send, (whatsoever reason may be given why he would send) which, without other
evidence, had remained unknown, though never so probable or reasonable. Not
intending hereby to balk that witness, which the Scriptures of the Old
Testament yield to the truth of the New. But because that witness depends upon
the miracles done by Moses and the Prophets, to evidence their Commission from
God: And so, the credit which the New Testament has from the Old, is resolved
into those miracles, which evidenced the sending of Moses and the Prophets, and
consists in the miracle of foretelling those things, by the one, which, by the
other are fullfilled. I know the Jews expressly deny the credit of the Law to
depend upon any miracles done by Moses and the Prophets, but only upon the
appearance of God at giving the Law, to all that people, and speaking to them
mouth to mouth: The like whereof not having been done, nor to be done, in
giving Christianity, (belonging to all nations, who could not meet at once to
receive it) they think themselves grounded thereupon, that the Law is not, nor
could be reversed by it. Thus are they content, that God, sending Moses on his
ambussage, with the miracles which he gave him for his letters of credit,
shall be thought, not to have convicted Pharao: That the Law provided no legal
trial, God no evidence to the conscience of his servants, distinguishing true
and false Prophets, which cannot be imagined, but by their sayings and doings,
predictions and other miracles. Well may the delivering of the Law have
circumstances which no other miraculous action recorded in the Scriptures can
compare with; Shall that obscure the glory of Christ's resurrection, foretold
by him express, to witness the truth of his message? Shall it make an Ocean
of miracles, done by him and his Apostles, to stand for nothing? Shall it
disable God himself, to do any thing competent to make faith of a message, the
nature whereof bore not those circumstances, which he had used before?

Now, if the reason why we believe the Scriptures to come from God, as they
pretend, be the motives of Christianity, strange it is that a man should be
troubled how to answer the difficulty that may be made, how we know the truth
of those motives, speaking only to Christians, which have admitted them to be
true. But I am sure, neither the witness of the Church, nor the dictate of the
Spirit, can be alleged to Infidels, but by them that would have themselves and
this Gospel laughed at both at once. Seeing therefore that Christians do believe
for the same reasons, for the which Infidels ought to believe, I shall yield,
that it is only the credit of Gods ancient people, and of Christ's Church, that
ma^^^ evidence, that those miracles were truly done, which I affirm to be the
only motive to believe, being done at such distance of time and place from us.
But, let not those that would learn, mistake what is meant by the name of the
Church. For, if you suppose the Church to be a Society of men, whereof some, by
Gods appointment, have power to oblige the whole, then will the credit of the
Scripture be resolved into the authority of the Church, if the truth of those
miracles, on which alone the credit thereof is said to depend, be grounded upon
such a witness of the Church. But my meaning is, to suppose no more by the
name of the Church, in this place, but the whole number of believers from
Christ to the worlds end; And so to say, that there is no other reason, why we
believe, that such men as Moses and the Prophets, as our Lord and his Apostles,
did such works as the Scriptures report, to evidence that they came from God,
but the consent of all Christians, that have embraced the Gospel upon that
motive. Neither shall the Gospel, hereby, depend more upon the witness of man,
which may fail, than it depends upon the witness of him, who, upon seeing what
was done by our Lord and his Apostles, should be moved to embrace the Faith.
For, though they had not taken effect with him; but for the report of his eyes,
yet did not the force of them depend upon it. He that considers, shall find,
that the consent of all believers, in the whole motive of Faith, more than
supplies the use of our eyes, in showing us sufficient reason to believe. There
is a distance of place as well as of time; And, God forbid we should say,
those that never saw our Lord and his Apostles do the works for which we
believe, had not sufficient reason to believe. Their ears supplied to them the
use of their eyes, inasmuch as experience and common sense shows, that those
things wherein the world agrees are no less certain and evident, though
morally, than those which we see with our eyes. He that should not traffic
into the East or West Indies, or travail to Rome or Constantinople, before he
had seen them, must resolve not to see them. The reason is, because the world
can have no common interest to deceive or to be deceived: Much less could the
Law of Moses, least of all the Gospel of Christ have found credit, (the one
imposing such an endless morosity of precepts to observe, the other the Cross
of Christ) had it not been originally manifest, that such things were done to
evidence that and this. By which it appears, that this reason supposes no
authority in the Church, founded upon the Gospel, as a Society communicating in
it, because it supposes the same, in the people of the Jews, as in the Church;
The authority of the Church standing upon the Gospel, that which was over the
Jews, on the Law, whereof the one was to be removed, when the other took
place. The reason, because it refers nothing to the Church, but that
intelligency which the community of mankind furnish one another with, for
assurance, in those things whereof all cannot be eyewitnesses, by the consent
of all, which common reason makes to be as good evidence as our own senses.

And now it will not be difficult to say, how the Scriptures are to be believed
for themselves. For, inasmuch as the motives of believing are things recorded
in Scripture, it will be necessary to grant, that the Scriptures are to be
believed for themselves, which are to be believed for those things which the
Scriptures report. But, if we be further demanded, for what reason, those
motives, which, if true, are sufficient to oblige all men to believe, are taken
to be true? He that says, because they are recorded in the Scriptures, grants
that there is no reason to believe the Scriptures, granting, that there is no
reason to believe the motives of faith, but the report of those Scriptures, the
belief whereof supposes the truth of those motives. But, if we impute the
belief of that truth, to the common sense of all, who, upon the supposition of
them, have submitted to Christianity and hold it, we have the whole truth of
the Scripture evidenced upon such a ground, as shall serve to enforce a
resolution of whatsoever is questionable in Christianity, upon it. Whereas they
who make the authority of the Church, or the dictate of the Holy Ghost the
reason of believing, must either stand still when they are demanded the reason,
or give it by supposing Christianity and the Scriptures; the truth whereof they
pretend to prove by it, which is the Circle that I spoke of before, admitting
neither principle nor conclusion of discourse.

To confirm that which has been said, let me demand how the Writings of Homer
or Virgil, of Aristotle or Plato, of Tully or Demosthenes, of Hippocrates or
Galen, come to be admitted without any question, for their Writings, after some
two thousand years more or less? Is it not because, ever since they were
penned, there have been those that have studied them for paterns of good
Language and Oratory, for the lest authors in Philosophy and Physic? Because,
by them, and through their hands, they have been transmitted from age to age?
Is not their credit by this means so unquestionable, that a man would be laughed
at, that should ask other reason for it? And yet, what is this in comparison of
that which is to be said for the Scriptures? That, all nations having starred
aside to worship many Gods, one people of the Jews took upon them the worship
of the only true God, according to the Laws recorded in the books of Moses;
and that of so ancient time. That, being planted in the land of Canaan, God
stirred them up Prophets from age to age, to keep them close to the service of
their God. That, howsoever they kept them, they always professed to be under
those Laws as Gods. That our Lord Jesus, and his Apostles by commission from
him, in due time preached both Jews and Gentiles to be rebels against God;
And, that neither the Law of nature nor of Moses was able to free them from
sin; Tendering in Gods name the terms upon which all may be reconciled to God,
and evidencing their Commission by the works which they did in Gods name. That
all parts of the civil world, being by that means convicted of the truth
hereof, undertook to profess Christianity, notwithstanding the persecutions to
which it was liable, and do continue in it till this time. Is not this
infallible evidence, that we have the very Writings of Moses, and of the
Prophets and Apostles, and that they who left them us were sent by God, seeing
them admitted for Laws to men's lives and conversations, which nothing but
sufficient evidence that they came from God could have brought to pass? Here,
if any man should say; I know I have the Writings of Homer, Aristotle or Tully,
by the Writings themselves, he might be convicted by tendering them to one that
knows nothing of Tully or Homer or Aristotle, and asking him, whether he can
say by those books, whether they be Homers or Aristotle's or Tullies Writings.
Bu^ he that first understands, what account the world always has had their
Writings in, and studying them, finds the marks in them, may well say, that he
knows the authors by their Writings. So, tender the Scripture in Ebrew or Greek
to a savage of the West Indies, and ask him, whether they be the Word of God or
not, who believes not in God as yet, do you believe he can tell you the truth?
But, convict him of that which I have said, how and by what means they came to
our hands, how they have been and are owned for Laws to the hearts and lives
of Gods people, and he will stand convict to God, if he believe not, finding
that written in the Books, which the men own for the rule of their
conversations. So, by the same means that all records of Learning are conveyed
us, are the Scriptures evidenced to be matter of historical faith. But, inasmuch
as the matter of them had never been received but by the work of God, in that
regard, they become matter of supernatural faith, in regard of the reason,
moving in the nature of an object, to believe, as well as in regard of Gods
grace, moving in the nature of an effective cause.

I know there have been diverse answers made to assoile this difficulty, by
those that dispute Controversies; That the Scriptures authority is better known
in order of nature, the Churches in that order, by which we get our knowledge,
(as Logicians and Philosophers use to distinguish between notius natura and
notius nobis, because our knowledge rises upon experience which we have by
sense of particulars, and yet the general reason, being once attained by that
means, is in some sense better known than that which depends upon it) That the
authority of the Scripture is the reason why we believe, but, the authority of
the Church, a condition requisite to the same, creating in the minds of men
that discreetly consider it a kind of inferior Faith, though infallible, which
disposes a man to accept the matter of that Faith which God only reveals,
though the reason why we believe is only the act of God revealing that which he
obliges us to believe. But all this to no purpose, so long as they suppose the
foundation of the Church in the nature of a Corporation, for the ground of
admitting the matter of Faith, not the credit of all believers agreeing in
witnessing the motives of Faith. I remember in my younger time in Cambridge an
observation out of Averrois the Saracene his Commentaries upon Aristotle, which
as I find exactly true, so may it be of good use; That, in Geometry and the
Mathematics the same thing is notius natura and nobis, to wit, the first
principles and rudiments of those sciences, which, being evident as soon as
understood, produce in time those conclusions, which no stranger to those
studies can imagine how they should be discovered. For, being offered to the
understanding that comprehendsthe meaning of them, they require no experience
of particulars with sense and time brings forth, to frame a general conceit of
that in which all agree, or to pronounce what holds in all particulars; Because
it is immediately evident, that the same holds in all particulars, as in one,
which a man has before his eyes. The like is to be said of the process in
hand, though the reason be far otherwise. He that considers may see, that
the motives of Faith, assured to the common sense and reason of all men, by the
consent of believers, are immediately the reason, why we believe the
Scriptures in which they are recorded to be the Word of God, without so much as
supposing any such thing as a Church in the nature of a Corporation, endowed
with authority over those of whom it consists; The consent of Christians as
particular persons, obliging common reason, both to believe the Scriptures, and
whatever that belief inferres. As this must be known before we can believe the
Scriptures, so being known, it must be, if any be, the only reason why we
believe either the Scriptures, or that Christianity which they convey unto us.
And if it be the only reason why we believe, then is it better known in order
of reason as well as of sense, to be true, than the authority of the Church,
the knowledge whereof must resolve into the reason why we are Christians. And
if this be true, then is not the authority of the Church, (as a Corporation to
be obliged by the act of some members) so much as a condition requisite to
induce any man to believe; All men, by having the only true reason why all are
to believe, being subject to condemnation if they believe not: But not if they
believe not the Corporation of the Church, unless it may appear to be a part
of that Faith, which that only reason moves us to believe. Neither does the
credit which we give to all Christians, witnessing the motives of Faith to be
true, by submitting to Christianity in regard of them, create in us any
inferior Faith of the nature of humane, because the witness of man convayes
the motives thereof to our knowledge. But serves us to the same use, as men's
eyes and other senses served them, when they saw those things done, which Moses
and the Prophets, which our Lord and his Apostles did, to induce men to believe
that they came from God. For, as true as it is, that, if God have provided such
signs to attest his Commission, then we are bound to believe; So true is it,
that, if all Christians agree, that God did procure them to be done, then did
he indeed procute them to be done that men might believe. For so great a part
of mankind could not be out of their wits all at once: Let not therefore those
miracles which God has provided to attest the Commissions of Moses and the
Prophets, of our Lord and his Apostles, be counted common and probable motives
to believe, unless we will confess, that we have none but common and
probable motives. For, what reason can we have to believe that shall not
depend upon their credit? Unless it be the light of natural reason, which may
make that which they preach more evidently credible, but never evidently true.
If these works were provided by God to oblige us to believe, then is that Faith
which they create truly divine, and the work of God; Though, had all men been
blind, they had not been seen, and had all men been out of their wits, we
might presume, that they had agreed in an imposture.

And now it will be easy to answer the words of S. Augustine contra Epistolam
fundamenti cap. V. which always have a place in this dispute, though I can as
yet admit S. Augustine no otherwise than as a particular Christian, and his
saying, as a presumption, that he has said no more than any Christian would
have said in the common cause of all Christians against the Manichees. Ego
Evangelio non crederem, says he, nisi me Ecclesiae Catholicae moveret
authoritas. I would not believe, or have believed, the Gospel, had not the
authority of the Catholic Church moved me. For, some men have employed a
great deal of learning to show, that moveret stands for movisset, as in many
other places both of S. Augustine and of other Africane Writers. And without
doubt they have showed it past contradiction, and I would make no doubt to show
the like in S. Hierome, Sidonius and other Writers of the decaying ages of the
Latin tongue, as well as in the Africane Writers, if it were any thing to the
purpose. For is not the Question, manifestly, what it is that obliges that man
to believe who as yet believes not? Is it not the same reason that obliges him
to become and to be a Christian? Therefore, whether moveret or movisset, all is
one: The Question is, whether the authority of the Church as a Corporation,
that is, of those persons who are able to oblige the Church, would have moved
S. Austine to believe the Gospel, because they held it to be true: Or the
credit of the Church as of so many men of common sense, attesting the truth of
those reasons which the Gospel tenders, why we ought to believe. What is it
then that obliged S. Austine to the Church? The consent of people and nations,
that authority which miracles had begun, which hope had nourished, charity
increased, succession of time settled, from S. Peter to the present, the name
and title of Catholic so visible, that no Heretic durst show a man the way to
his Church, demanding the way to the Catholic. So he expresses it cap. 111.
And what is this in English, but the conversion of the Gentiles foretold by the
Prophets, attested by God, and visibly settled in the Unity of the Church?
Whereupon he may boldly affirm, as he does afterward, that, if there were
any word in the Gospel manifestly witnessing Manes to be the Apostle of Christ,
he would not believe the Gospel any more. For, if the reason for which he had
once believed the Church that the Gospel is true, because he saw it verified
in the being of the Church, should be supposed false, there could remain no
reason to oblige us to take the Gospel for true. All that remains for the
Church in the nature and quality of a Corporation, by this account, will be
this; That it is more discretion for him that is in doubt of the truth of
Christianity, to take the reason of it from the Church, that is, from those
whom the Church trusts to give it, than from particular Christians, who can
by no means be presumed to understand it so well as they may do. For otherwise,
supposing a particular Christian sets forth the same reasons which the Church
does, how can any man not be bound to follow him, that is bound to follow the
Church? So that, the reasons which both allege being contained in the
Scriptures, the Church is no more in comparison of the Scriptures, than the
Samaritane in comparison of our Lord himself, when her fellow-citizens tell her
John IV. 12. We believe no more for thy saying; For we our selves have heard
and know that this is of a truth the Savior of the World, the Christ. For, the
reasons, for which, our Lord himself tells us that we are to believe, are
contained in the Scriptures.

But by the premises it will be most manifest, that the same Circle in
discourse is committed by them, who resolve the reason why they believe into
the dictate of the Spirit, as, into the decree of the Church. For, the question
is not now of the effective cause, whether or no, in that nature, a man is able
to embrace the true Faith without the assistance of Gods Spirit or not; Which
ought here to remain questionable, because it is to be tried upon the grounds
upon which here we are seeking. And therefore, that Faith which is grounded
upon revelation from God, and competent evidence of the same, is to be counted
divine supernatural Faith, without granting, (whatsoever we may suppose) any
supernatural operation of Gods Spirit, to work it, in the nature of an
effective cause, which must remain questionable, supposing the reason why we
believe the Scriptures. But, in the nature of an object, presenting unto the
understanding the reason why we are to believe, it is manifest by the premises,
that no man can know that he has Gods Spirit, that knows not the truth of
the Scriptures. If therefore he allege, that he knows the Scriptures to be
true, because Gods Spirit says so to his Spirit; he allegeth for a reason,
that which he could not know, but, supposing that for granted, which he
pretends to prove; To wit, That the dictate of his own Spirit is from Gods
Spirit. Indeed when the motives of Faith proceed from Gods Spirit in Moses and
the Prophets, in our Lord and his Apostles, witnessing, by the works which they
do, their Commission as well as their message, who can deny that this is the
light of Gods Spirit? Again, when we govern our doings by that which we
believe, and not by that which we see, who will deny that this is the light of
Faith and of Gods Spirit? But, both these considerations take place, though we
suppose the matter of Faith to remain obscure in it self, though to us evidently
credible, for the reasons God shows us, to believe that he says it. If any
man seek, in the matter of Faith, any evidence to assure the conscience, in the
nature of an object, or reason why we are to believe, that is not derived from
the motives of Faith, outwardly attesting Gods act of revealing it, he falls
into the same inconvenience with those, who believe their Christianity because
the Church commends it, and again the Church, because Christianity commends it.

As for that monstrous imagination, that the Scripture is not Law to oblige any
man in justice to believe it, before the Secular Powers give it force over
their subjects; Supposing for the present that which I said before, that it is
all one question, whether Christianity or whether the Scriptures oblige us as
Law or not; Let me demand, whether our Lord Christ and his Apostles have
showed us sufficient reasons to convince us, that we are bound to believe and
become Christians? If not, why are we Christians? If so, can we be obliged,
and no Law to oblige us? supposing for the present, though not granting,
because it is not true, that, by refusing Christianity sufficiently proposed, a
man comes not under sin, but only comes not from under it, but remains under
that sin, which, by refusing the Gospel, he refuses to escape; The man whom
God shows competent reasons to convict him of the truth of Christianity, does
he not thereby oblige to believe? If so, then is Christianity, by those
reasons, and, by out Lord and his Apostles advancing them, published for Gods
Law, to all them, to whom those reasons become known. Suppose that, not only
the Apostles, but God himself do no more than persuade men to believe, can any
Secular Power do more? For, what can it do more, in making a Law, than declare
the will of the Sovereign, under a punishment expressed? And does not God
declare, when he sends those that are furnished with means to convict the
world of the truth of Christianity, that it is his will that they become
Christians? And is it not competent punishment to inact a Law, that, by
disobeying, men become incapable of escaping their own sin, and the punishment
of it? If Christianity be no Law, because a man has his choice whether he
will believe or not, has not a thief his choice whether he will be hanged or
not steal? or is not the mischief that comes by refusing the Faith, as great as
that? As for the point of justice, is not gtatitude justice? does not God
oblige them in point of justice, whom he obliges in point of gratitude? does
he not oblige them in point of gratitude, whom, by his Gospel, he shows the
way to come from under sin, to everlasting happiness? Again, is it not justice
that mankind should be subjects, and not rebels to God? does not the Gospel
preach, that mankind are become rebels to God, and that they ought to return
and become his Subjects? If we can owe a debt of justice to God or to our
selves, the greatest is that, which the Gospel binds upon us. But, suppose
not only that which this Dogmatist grants, that he who is bound to renounce
Christ with his mouth when his Sovereign commands, is bound to believe him
with his heart at the same time, let me demand by what Law he is bound to it,
if the Scriptures be not Law? Or how a man can be bound to believe in heart
that our Lord Jesus is the Christ, and not be bound to receive, either the
matter, or the motives to believe that which Christ teaches, which is all that
the Scriptures contain? Wherefore we are by no means to admit that which this
Author presumes upon as evident truth; That it is one thing to demand, why a
man believes the Scriptures, another thing to demand, how a man knows them to
be the Word of God, and a third, by what authority they become Law: Because,
says he, one man believes for this reason, another for that; But, to know the
Scripture to be the Word of God, is a thing that no man can do, but only he
to whom this or that Scripture was revealed. For, it is true, that one man
believes for this reason, another for that, if they believe not for that reason
for which they ought to. believe. But there is but one reason for which God
requires us to believe, namely, his will, declared by the motives of Faith,
which he, by his messengers or deputies has presented us with; And he that
is moved to believe for any reason besides that, is but called a believer, for
he is not such in Gods esteem. And he that by these reasons stands convict,
that those messengers came from God, though he cannot know by the report of
his senses, nor by any evidence of the matter which they contain, that the
Scriptures are the Word of God, yet may he reasonably be said to know that
they are so, because he knows those reasons, by which he stands convict that
they are no otherwise. And I have now further showed, that the publishing of
Christianity, that is, the tendering of the Scriptures with this evidence, that
they contain the word and will of God, binds them for a Law upon the
consciences of all that receive them so, obliging them not only to believe all
that they contain to be true, but to undertake and do whatsoever they require.
Wherefore it is true, that the Scriptures, or Christianity, becomes the civil
Law of a State, because the Sovereign Power thereof inacteth it; But we are
further to demand, whether Secular Power is able to do this because it is
Sovereign, or because it is Christian. For, if, because it is Sovetaign, it
will follow of necessity, that those who are not subject to Christian Powers,
are not obliged to believe the truth of the Scriptures, nor to be Christians,
if there be no other Law to require it at their hands but the will of their
Sovereign; Because the only reason, which, this opinion says, obliges them to
believe, that is, the act of Sovereign Power is wanting. If, because it is
Christian, the question will have recourse, what it was that obliged the
Sovereign Power to become Christian. For, the act of Sover^igne Power has no
effect upon it self, but upon those that are under it; And yet, the same reason
why the Sovereign Power is bound to believe, will convince all that are under
it, that they also ought to believe, because concerning them as men, or at
least, as those men whom the motives of Faith are published to, not as of this
or that Commonwealth. But, in this business I am most ashamed for Euclid's
sake, that a man so studied in Geometry, should build such a vast pretense in
Christianity, upon such an imaginary ground. Forsooth, Abraham, and the
Patriarchs after him, and then Moses, had the Sovereign Power of their
Families, and of Gods people; the Patriarchs by their birth and estate, Moses,
by the contract of the Israelites, accepting of God for their Civil Sovereign,
and Moses for his Lieutenant. The same Patriarchs and Moses were absolute in
matters of Religion, because Gods people inferiors were to be ruled in it by no
other Laws, then those which God published to them, by the hands of those
Superiors. He that will go about to draw the conclusion from these principles,
(whether granted, or only supposed) shall easily see that it follows not.
For, half an eye will serve to distinguish two qualities, in the Patriarchs,
and in Moses, the one of Sovereigns, the other of Prophets, or Depuries and
Commissaries, or Interpreters of the will of God to his people; And, this
distinction being made, I will not be beholden to any man to say, which of the
two it was, that could oblige their inferiors to obey, as Gods Laws, those
things, which persons so authorized should declare in his name. For if those,
whom God, by sufficient evidence had witnessed to be his Prophets and
messengers, should falsify his trust, the blame of that which should be done
upon such deceit must needs redound upon God. And therefore this author page
231, 287. agrees with that which I argued even now, that revelations and
inspirations of Gods Spirit are not granted under the Gospel, but to those who
profess the true Christ; Nor under the Law were granted, but to those who
professed the true God. And for this cause they are called by S. Paul 1 Cor.
XII. 7. the manifestation of the Spirit; because they manifest the presence of
God in his Church. As 1 Cor. XIV. 22-25. he says; that unbelievers, seeing
the secrets of their hearts revealed by those graces, were moved to fall on
their faces, and worship God, declaring that God is in his Church of a truth.
Those therefore who are thus witnessed by God, upon his witness are to be
received, whatsoever they deliver in Gods name, concerning either the Law of
Moses, or the Gospel of Christ. For, how can any man imagine, that, upon every
new revelation declared by a Prophet, upon every new letter written, or act
done by an Apostle, a new evidence should be requisite, to attest a new
Commission from God? Especially, the presumption, that God will not suffer his
people to be abused by trusting him, being necessary, and not only reasonable.
Since therefore our Lord and his Apostles carry this quality, no less than did
Moses and the Prophets, it follows of necessity, that their writings, and what
else they may have ordained, are no less the Law of God, no less obliging,
than the Law of Moses, by virtue of their Commission, which makes their acts in
Gods name to be Gods acts: Though civil Law they are not, till civil Powers
bind them upon their Subjects.

CHAP. IV. Neither the Dictate of Gods Spirit nor the authority of the Church
is the reason of believing any thing in Christianity. Whether the Church be
before the Scripture, or the Scripture before the Church. The Scriptures
contain not the Infallibility of the Church. Nor the consent of all Christians.
IT is now time to proceed to the resolution of some part of those disputes and
opinions, which, we showed the world divided into, upon occasion of the
question, how Controversies of Faith are to be tried and ended; That is to say,
so much of them, as must be determined by him that will proceed in this
dispute. For, supposing the premises to be true, I shall not make any
difficulty to conclude; That, neither the dictate of the Spirit of God to the
Spirits of particular Christians, (that is, the presumption of it) nor the
authority of the Church, (that is, the presumption of the like dictate to any
persons that may be thought to have power of obliging the Church) is a
competent reason, to decide the meaning of the Scripture, or any Controversy
about matter of Faith, obliging any man therefore to believe it. And by
consequence, that the authority of the Church, (that is, of persons authorized
to give sentence in behalf of the Body of the Church, here understood) is not
Infallible, which if it were, it must be without question admitted for a
competent reason of believing all such sentences to be Infallibly true. The
truth of this Conclusion is demonstrated by the premises, if any thing, in a
matter of this nature, can be counted demonstrative. If whatsoever the Spirit of
God can be presumed to dictate to the Spirit of any Christian, presupposes the
truth of Christianity, (as that which must try it, whether only a presumption
or truth) then can no man's word, that professes Christianity, be the reason why
another man should believe. For, whosoever it is that gives the sentence, by
professing Christianity, pretends to have a reason for what he professes,
which reason, and not his judgment, if it be good, obliges all Christians, as
well as him, to believe. For, being once resolved, that, we are obliged to
believe whatsoever comes from those persons, whom we are convinced to believe,
that God employed to declare his will to us; Whatsoever is said to come from
them, must, for the same reason be received, and therefore, by the same means
said to come from them, as it is said that they came from God. On the other
side, whatsoever cannot by the same means be said to come from them, can never
by any means be said to come from God, who has given us no other means to
know, what he would have us believe, but those whom he has employed on his
message. Wherefore, seeing the authority of the Church supposes the truth of
Christianity, of necessity it supposes the reason, for which, whatsoever can
be pretended to belong to Christianity is receivable; Because, supposing for
the present, though not granting, that the Church is a Body, which some
persons, by Gods appointment, have authority to oblige, it is manifest, that no
man can be vested with this authority, but he must bear the profession of a
Christian, and, by consequence, suppose the reasons upon which whatsoever
belongs to the profession of a Christian is receivable. For, that which cannot
be derived, as for the evidence of it, from those means, by which we stand
convicted that Christianity stands upon true motives, cannot be receivable as
any part of it. And therefore, however the generality of this reason may
obscure the evidence of it, to them that take not the pains to consider it as
it deserves, yet, the truth of it supposes no more than all use of reason
supposes, that all knowledge that is to be had, proceeds upon something
presupposed to be known.

In which case, it would be very childish to consider, that the Church is more
ancient in time than the Scriptures, at least, than some part of them, as the
Writings of the Apostles for example, and, in some sort, then all Scriptures,
if we understand the people of God and the Church to be the same thing. For,
to pass by sor the present the Fathers before the Law, as the people of Israel
were Gods people by the Covenant of the Law, before they received the Law
written in the five Books of Moses; So was the authority of Moses, (employed by
God to mediate that Covenant) both good and sufficient, before they by
accepting the Law became Gods people: And upon this authority alone, and not
upon any authority founded upon their being Gods people, (free, and possessed
of the Land of Promise, to be ruled by themselves and their own Governors)
depends the credit of Moses and the Prophets Writings. In like manner, the
being of the Church (whether a Society and Corporation or not) supposing the
profession of Christianity, and that, the receiving of the Gospel, which is the
Covenant of Grace, and that, the authority of our Lord and his Apostles, as
sent by God to establish it; Manifest it is, that the credit of their Writings
depends on nothing else, but is supposed to the being of the Church, whatsoever
it is. Which if it be so, no less manifest it must be, that nothing is
receivable for truth in Christianity, that cannot be evidenced to proceed from
that authority that is more ancient than the being of the Church, as a truth
declared by some act of that authority. And therefore, it would be childish to
allege priority of time for the Church, (if perhaps it may be said, in some
regard, that the Church was before the Scriptures) when as, in order of reason,
it is evident, that the truth of Christianity is supposed to the being of it,
inasmuch as no man can be, or be known to be of the Church, but as he is, or
is known to be a Christian. And truly those that dispute, the authority of the
Church to be the the reason to believe the sentence of it in matter of Faith to
be true, are to consider what they will say to that opinion, which utterly
denies any such authority, any such thing as a Church; Understanding the Church
to be a Society founded by Gods appointment, giving public authority to some
persons, so or so qualified by that appointment, in behalf of the whole; For
this all must deny, that admit Erastus his opinion of Excommunication to be
true, if they will admit the consequence of their own doctrine. Which opinion I
have therefore premised, in staring this Question, that it may appear to
require such an answer, as may not suppose the being of the Church in that
nature, but may be a means to demonstrate it. But, as it is not my intent to
beg so great a thing in question, by proceeding upon supposition of any
authority in the Church, before I can prove it to be a Corporation founded with
such authority as the foundation of it requires; So is it as far from my
meaning, to deny that authority which I do not suppose. For, he that denies
the authority of the Church to be the reason why any thing is to be taken for
truth, or for the meaning of the Scripture, may take the due and true authority
of the Church to be a part of that truth, which is more ancient than the
authority of the Church; Inasmuch as it must be believed, that God has founded
a Society of them which profess Christianity, by the name of the Church,
(giving such authority to some members of it in behalf of the whole, as he
pleased) before it can be believed, that this or that is within the authority
of the Church. For, that there is a Church, and a public authority in it and
for it, and what things they are that fall under that authority, if it be true,
is part of that truth, which our Lord and his Apostles, whose authority is more
ancient than the Church, have declared. Indeed if it were true, that the first
truth which all Christians are to believe, and for the reason of it to believe
every thing else, is the saying of persons so and so qualified in the Church,
then were it evident, that the belief of that which is questioned in religion,
could not be resolved into any other principle. But if it be manifest, by the
motives of Christianity, that the authority of the Apostles is antecedent to
it, that all Scripture, and the meaning of Scripture, (which signifies nothing
beside it own meaning) and Tradition of the Apostles, (if any such Tradition
over and above Scripture may appear) is true, not supposing it, (as appears by
the premises) then is the authority of the Church no ground of Faith, and so
not Infallible. There are indeed sundry Objections made, both out of Scripture
and the Fathers, to weaken and to shake such an evident truth, which are not
here to be related, till we have resolved, as well what is the reason of
believing in Controversies of Faith, as what is not. In the mean time, if we
demand, by what means any person, that can pretend to give sentence in
Controversies of Faith, knows his own sentence to be infallible, or upon what
ground he gives sentence; He that answers by Scripture, or authority of
Writers that profess to have learned from the Scriptures, or reasons depending
on the authority of our Lord and his Apostles, acknowledges the authority of
the Church not to be the reason of believing; For, what need we all this, if
it were? If he say, by the same means, for which these are receivable, that
is, by revelation from God; It will be presently demanded, to make evidence of
such revelation, the same evidence as we have for the truth of the Scriptures;
Which, because it cannot be done, therefore, is this plea laid aside, even by
them, who nevertheless, profess to embrace the Communion of the Church of
Rome, because they believe the Church to be Infallible. But if it be
destructive to all use of reason, to deny the conclusion, admitting the
premises, then let him never hope to prevail in any dispute, that holds the
conclusion, denying the premises. For to hold the sentence of the Church
Infallible, when the means, that depend upon the authority of our Lord and his
Apostles, proves whatsoever is to be believed, without supposing any such
thing; when revelation, independent upon their authority there is acknowledged
to be none; averreth Infallibility in the sentence of the Church, denying the
only principle that can infer it. And therefore, those that speak things so
inconsequent, so inconsistent, I shall not grant that they speak those things
which themselves think and believe, but rather, that, like men upon the rack,
they speak things which themselves may, and in some sort do know not to be
true. For, whosoever holds an opinion, which he sees an argument against, that
he cannot resolve, is really and truly upon the rack, and, of necessity, seeks
to escape, by contradicting what himself confesses otherwise. Which every man
of necessity does, who, acknowledging the reason of believing Christianity to
lie in the authority of our Lord and his Apostles, challenges nevertheless
that Infallability, which is the reason of believing, to all sentences of the
Church, the matter of which sentence, if it be true, the reason of it must
depend immediately upon the same authority, upon which the authority of the
Church which sentenceth depends.

But the consequence of this assertion deserves further consideration, because
all that follows depends upon it. Suppose, that the Scriptures prove
themselves to be the Word of God, by the reasons of believing contained in
them, witnessed by the common sense of all Christians. For this admits no
dispute. If the same consent can evidence any thing belonging to the matter of
Faith, that will appear to oblige the Faith of all Christians, upon the same
reason as the Scriptures do, whether contained in the Scriptures or not. For
who will undertake, that God could not have preserved Christianity, without
either Scriptures or new revelations? And therefore he chose the way of
writing, not as of absolute necessity, but as of incomparable advantage. If
therefore God might have obliged man to believe any thing not delivered by
writing, whether he has or not will remain questionable, supposing the
Scriptures to be the Word of God upon the ground aforesaid. Besides, there are
many things so manifest in the Scriptures, that they can endure no dispute
supposing the Scriptures to be the Word of God: Many things are every day
cleared more and more, by applying the knowledge of the Languages and of
Historical truth to the text of the Scripture: And many things more may be
cleared by applying the light of reason, void of partiality and prejudice, to
draw the truth so cleared into consequence. No part of all this can be said to
be held upon any decree of the Church; Because no part of the evidence supposes
the Church in the nature and quality of a Corporation, the constitution whereof
inableth some persons to oblige the whole. Because there are matters in question
concerning our common Christianity and the sense of the Scriptures, upon which
the great mischief of divi^^on is fallen out in the Church, it is thought a
plausible plea to say, that the decree of the present Church, (supposing the
foundation of the Church in that nature, and the power given to every part in
behalf of the whole, of which no evidence can be made, not supposing all that
for truth which I have said) obliges all Christians to believe, as much as the
Scriptures, supposing them to be the Word of God, can do. Which they that
affirm do not consider, that it must first be evident to all that are to be
obliged; Both that the Church is so founded, and who^e Act it is, and how that
Act must be done which must oblige it. Seeing then that the Scriptures are
admitted on all sides, to be the Word of God, let us see whether it be as
evident as the Scriptures, that the act of the Pope, or of a General Council or
both, oblige the Church to believe the truth of that which they decree, as much
as the Scriptures.

I know there are texts of Scripture alleged; First, concerning the Apostles
and Disciples, Mat. X. 14, 15, 40. Luke IX. 5. X. 10, 11, 16. where those that
refuse them are in worse estate than Sodom and Gomorrha. And, He that hears
you, hears me; He that neglects you, neglects me. Mat. XXVIII. 19, 20.
Go make all Nations Disciples -- teaching them to observe all that I have
commanded you, and behold I am with you to the worlds end. 1 Thessalonians. II. 13. Ye
received the Gospel of us, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed, the
word of God. Then concerning S. Peter, as predecessor of all Popes, Mat. XVI.
18, 19. Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. And I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven,
and whatsoever thou bindest on earth shall be bound in heaven, whatsoever thou
loosest on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Luke XXII. 32. I have prayed for
thee that thy Faith fail not, and thou, once converted, strengthen thy
brethren. John XXI. 15, 16, 17. Simon son of Jonas, love thou me? Feed my
lambs, feed my sheep. Again, concerning the Church and Councils, Mat. XVIII.
17-20. If he hear them not, tell the Church: If he hear not the Church, let
him be to thee as a Heathen or a Publican. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever
ye bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: whatsoever ye loose on earth
shall be loosed in heaven. Again I say unto you; If two of you agree on earth,
upon any thing, to ask it, it shall be done them from my Father in heaven, For,
where two or three are assembled in my name, there am I in the midst of them.
John XVI. 13. The Spirit of truth shall lead you into all truth. Acts XV. 28.
It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us. 1 Timothy III. 15. That thou may
know now it behooves to converse in the house of God, which is the Churchof
God, the pillar and establishment of the truth. You have further, the
exhortations of the Apostles, 1 Thessalonians. V. 12, 13. Now I beseech you brethren,
to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you: And esteem them more than abundantly in love, for their works sake. Heb.
XIII 7, 17. Be obedient and give way to your Rulers, for they watch for your
souls, as those that must give account: That they may do it joyfully, and not
groaning; Which is not for your profit. And before, Rememeer your Rulers which
have spoken to you the Word of God: And, considering the issue of their
conversation, imitate their Faith. Those that spoke unto them the Word of God
are the Apostles, or, their companions and deputies, whom he commands them
to obey no otherwise than those who presently watched over them after their
death. In the Old Testament likewise Deuteronomy. XVII. 5-12. He that obeys not the
determination of the Court that was to sit before the Ark is adjudged to death.
Therefore Hag. II. 12. Thus says the Lord the God of Hosts; Ask the Priests
concerning the Law. Mal. II. 7. The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and
the Law shall they require at his mouth. For he is the messenger of the Lord
of Hosts. The answers of the Priests resolved into the decrees of the said
Court; therefore they are unquestionable. And this Power established by the
Law, our Lord acknowledging the Law, allows Mat. XXIII. 2. The Scribes and
Pharisees sit on Moses chair: whatsoever therefore they command you that do:
But according to their works do not.

This is that which is alleged out of the Scriptures for that Infallibility
which is challenged for the Church. If I have left any thing behind, it will
prove as ineffectual as the rest; In all which there are so many considerations
appear, why the sense of them should be limited on this side, or extended
beyond the body of the Church, that it is evident they cannot serve for
evidence to ground the Infallibility of it. For, is it not evident, that the
neglect of the Apostles, in questioning their doctrine, redounds upon our Lord,
who by sending them, stamps on them the marks of his Fathers authority, which
he is trusted with? Not so the Church. For who can say, that God gives any
testimony to the lie which it tells, seeing Christianity is supposed, the
Infallibility thereof remaining questionable? Is it not evident, that God is
with his Chu,ch, not as a Corporation, but as the collection of many good
Christians; Supposing that, those who have power to teach the Church by the
constitution thereof, teach lies, and yet all are not carried away with their
doctrine, but believe Gods truth, so far as the necessity of their salvation
requires? If there were any contradiction in this supposition, how could it be
maintained in the Church of Rome, that so it shall be when Antichrist comes, as
many do maintain? Besides, is it as evident as Christianity, or the Scriptures,
that this promise is not conditional, and to have effect, supposing, both the
teaching, and the following of that which our Lord lud taught, and nothing
else? Surely, if those that refuse the Gospel be in a worse state than those of
Sodom and Gomorrha, it follows not yet, that all that refuse to hear the
Church without the Gospel are so. For the truth of the Gospel supposes that
there is no means but the Gospel to save us. But if we be saved by believing
the Gospel, we may be saved, not believing that which the Church teaches
without it. For, that which the Gospel obliges us to believe unto salvation,
it is agreed already, that we cannot be saved without believing it. Suppose
now the Church to continue till the last day, not as one visible Body, but
broken into pieces, as we see it, so that always there remain a number of
good Christians, (for, whether or no they that communicate not with the Church
of Rome may be good Christians, is the thing in question, not to be taken for
truth without proving) shall the gates of hell be said to prevail against the
Church all that while? Besides; Grotius expounds those words to signify no
more but this; That death and the grave (which (...) or Hell in the style of
the Old Testament signifies) shall never prevail over Christians; That is, that
they shall rise again. And I suppose, it is not so evident that this exposition
is false, as, that the Gospel is true. As for the Keys of Christ's Kingdom, let
him that says they argue Infallibility, say also, that they cannot be abused;
But he will have more shame, if not more sense, than to say it. The
Thessalonians received the Gospel as the Word of God, because they supposed it
to be (...), the Word which God sent them news of. Would they therefore have
received the decrees of the Church with the same reverence, not supposing them
the Word of God, till some body prove it? But, suppose the promises made S.
Peter to import as much as the power of the Apostles, is it as evident that the
present Pope succeeds S. Peter, as, that Christianity is from God? That he
succeeds him in the full right of that Power which is given the Apostles?
Certainly, wheresoever two or three are assembled in the name of Christ, there
is not the Infallibility of the Church. Therefore it cannot be founded upon the
promises made to all Assemblies of Christians as Christians. It is very
probable, that the Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem had a revelation upon
the place, signifying how they should order the matter in question, because
there are many instances in the Scriptures, of inspirations at the very
Assemblies of Gods people, as I have showed in the Right of the Church.
Therefore it is not evident that all Councils may say the like. Therefore, they
cannot presume that the Holy Ghost will lead them into all truth, whatsoever
they take a humor to determine, because it was promised, that he should lead
the Apostles into all truth concerning our common Christianity. But if the
Church be the pillar and foundation that upholdeth the truth, then must that
truth first be evidenced for truth, before the effect of the Churches office in
upholding it, as pillars uphold an house, can appear. The exhortations of the
Apostles, 1 Thessalonians. V. 14, 15. Hebr. XIII. 7, 17. to yield obedience to the
Rulers of the Church, are certainly pertinent to this purpose; But it is
evident, that this obedience is limitable by the grounds and substance of
Christianity delivered before, as it is evident that all Power of the present
Church presupposes our common Christianity. As for the obedience required in
the Old Testament to the Governors of the Synagogue and Priests confirmed by
our Lord, Mat. XXIII. 2. I am very willing to grant the Church all Power in
decreeing for truth, that can appear to have belonged to the Rulers of the
Synagogue, because I am secure, that those who could put malefactors to death,
as they could, were not therefore able to tie men to believe that which they
say to be true. But the great subtilty is the Prophecy of Caiaphas, John XI.
48-52. who, because High Priest, could not but truly determine, that our Lord
must die least the people should perish, even in resolving to crucify him.
Indeed, at the beginning, God was wont to conduct his people by Oracles of Urim
and Tummim in the High Priests breast plate. And though this was ceased under
the second Temple, as we have reason to believe the Jews, yet was it no
marvail, that God should use the High Priests tongue to declare that secret
which himself understood not, being the Person, by whom he had used to direct
his people in former ages. But he that from hence concludes the Church
infallible, must first maintain, that Caiaphas erred not in crucifying our Lord
Christ.

Now, if it be said, that the consent of all Christians, though not as members
of the Church, (because as yet it appears not that the Church is a
Corporation and has members) determines the sense of these Scriptures to
signify Infallibility, which they may, but do not necessarily signify; Let
him consider the disputes that succeeded in the Church upon the decree of the
Great Council at Nicaea, the breaches that have succeeded upon the decrees of
Ephesus and Chalcedon, the division between the Greek and the Latin Church,
between the Reformation and the Church of Rome. For is it imaginable, that all
Christians holding as firmly as their Christianity, that the acts of the Pope
and a Council, (that is the greater part of the present Church) is to be
believed as much as the Scriptures, not only the decree of Nicaea should be
disputed again, but breaches should succeed rather than admit their decrees,
retaining the common profession of Christianity? What disputes there have been
betwixt the Court of Rome and the Paris Doctors, whether it be the act of the
Pope or of a General Council that obliges the belief of the Church, is as
notorious to the world, as that they are not yet decided. And yet the whole
question is disputed only concerning the Western Church; The East which
acknowledges not the Pope, appears not in the claim of this Infallibility,
were both East and West joined in one and the same Council. Now, among them
that maintain the Pope, it is not agreed what acts of the Pope they must be
that shall oblige the Church to believe, as it believes the Scriptures. For it
is argued that Popes have decreed Heresy, Liberius, Honorius, Vigilius, and
perhaps others. And though I stand not to prove, I may presume that the
contrary is not so evident as our common Christianity, or the Scriptures. And
that some of them have held Heresy, seems granted without dispute. Is it then
as evident as our common Christianity, what act of the Pope obliges us to
believe? That he cannot decree that error to be held by others, which, it is
granted, himself holds? Besides, how many things are requisite to make a true
Pope, (whose Power, unless it be conveyed by the (...) act of those that are
able to give it, the acts thereof will be void) which it does not appear that
the present Pope is qualified with, as it appears that the Scriptures are
true. And may not the same question be made of a General Council, whether
constituted according to right or not, whether proceeding without force and
fraud or not? Is it as evident to all Christians as their Christianity or the
Scriptures, that it is not? If it be said, that all Catholics agree that the
Pope with a General Council, or a General Council confirmed by the Pope cannot
err; First, what shall oblige them to agree? For, if they agree not, their
Infallibility is not evident to all Christians, nor if their agreement appear
casual, can it be taken for a ground of Faith that is undefeifible. Then, to
set aside all the East, which, contesting the Power of the Pope cannot concur
to this Infallibility, about the Councils of Constance and Basle, when the
dispute between the Pope and Council was at the hottest, there lived diverse
Doctors of repute that have maintained this Infallibility to be the gift and
privilege, not of the present but of the Catholic Church; By name Ockam,
Alliacensis, Panormitane, Antoninus, Cusanus, Clemangis and Mirandula: Whose
words you may see in Doctor Baron of Aberdene his dispute de Objecto Fidei,
Tract. V. Cap. XIX, XX. Further, I demand, if there be in the Church a gift of
Infallibility ind^pendent upon the Scripture, (that is, obliging to believe the
decrees thereof, which our common Christianity evidenceth not) can it appear
without the like reasons, for which we believe the Scripture? Where is the
evidence that Gods Spirit inspires them with their decrees? Nay, when we see
Popes and Councils employ the same means to find the truth of things in
question which other men do, would they have us believe that they shall not
fail by Gods providence, when they use no means but that may fail, nor have
themselves any reason in them to evidence that they do not fail? For if they
had, they might make it appear. But of all things the str^ngest is, that they
should undertake to per^wade the world this, when as the Church it self never
determined it. Of all things that ever the Church of any time took in hand to
decree, it will never appear that ever it was decreed, that the decrees of the
present Church are to be admitted for Gods truth. And therefore, there is not
so much appearance of any opinion the Church of Rome has, that it is true, as
there is of humane policy, in breeding men up in such prejudicate conceits,
which education makes them as zealous of as of their Faith, though mere
contradiction to the grounds of it; That being entangled in their own
understandings, to hold things so inconsistent, they may be the fitter
instruments to entangle others, in that obedience to the Church which they hold
necessary, though upon false reasons. For, as Antony disputes in Tully de
Oratore, that no man is so fit to induce others into passion, as he that
appears really possessed with the same, so is no man so fit to imbroile the
true reason and order of believing in another man's understanding, as he that
is himself first confounded in it. There is indeed a plau^^ble inconvenience
alleged, if it be not admitted, to wit, that differences cannot be ended
otherwise. But, to object an inconvenience, is not to answer an argument, say
Logicians; Nor is it, say I, to demonstrate a truth. It is requisite the Church
should be one; (Suppose we this, for the present, for it is not proved as yet)
but it is not therefore necessary, that the unity thereof should depend upon
the de^ision of all Controversies that arise, what true, what false. It is a
great deal easier to command men not to decide their own opinions, than to
believe their adversaries. For to decide, is nothing else, but to command all
men to judge one part to be true, when it appears, that a great part have
already judged it to be false. But, not to offend him that has declared a
contrary judgment, is a thing to be attained of him, that cannot see reason to
judge the same. Charity may have place in all things in question among
Christians, though Faith be confined to the proper matter of it, though we
cannot yet determine what that proper matter is, and upon what terms it
stands. It remains therefore; that all presumption concerning the truth of
the Churches decrees presupposes the corporation of the Church, and the
foundation thereof, nor can any way be evidenced by supposing only the truth
of the Scriptures, and the consent of Christians as Christians, which conveyes
the evidence thereof unto us. So that, the belief of the Scriptures, and of all
things so clear in the Scriptures, that they are not questioned in the Church,
depending upon the evidence of Gods revelations to his messengers; But, the
belief of the Churches decrees, inasmuch as not evidenced by the Scriptures,
upon the presumption of the right use of the Power vested in them that decree,
by the foundation of the Church; (if that foundation may appear) they do not
allow us the common reason of all men that require us to yield the same credit
to both.

CHAP. V. All things necessary to salvation are not clear in the Scriptures to
all understandings. Not in the Old Testament. Not in the Gospel. Not in the
Writings of the Apostles. It is necessary to salvation to believe more than
this, that our Lord is the Christ. Time causes obscurity in the Scriptures,
as well as in other Records. That it is no where said in the Scriptures, that
all things necessary to salvation are clear in the Scriptures. Neither is there
any consent of all Christians to evidence the same.
IN the next place, to proceed by steps, I must negatively conclude on the
other side, that, all things necessary to the salvation of all are not of
themselves clear in the Scriptures to all understandings. Whereby I say not,
that all such things are not contained in the Scriptures, as if some thing
necessary to the salvation of all were to be received by Tradition alone: Nor,
that, being in the Scriptures, they are not clear and discernable to the
understandings of those, that are furnished with means, requisite to discern
the meaning of the Scriptures: But, that which I stand upon is, that it is not,
nor ought to be a presumption, that this or that is not necessary to salvation,
because it is not clear in the Scriptures: Which if it were admitted, whosoever
were able to make such an argument against any Article of Faith, as all
understandings interessed in salvation could not dissolve, (such as, it is
plain, may be made against the truth of Christianity) should have gained this,
that, though it may be true, yet it cannot be an Article of Faith. To my
purpose indeed, it were enough, in this place, to prove, that this is not the
first truth in Christianity, to wit, that all things necessary to salvation are
clear by the Scriptures. For, having obtained, that there is no Rule to
conclude those doctrines which may be questioned not to be Articles of Faith;
so that it cannot thereupon be disputed by degrees, that they are not true;
There would be nothing in my way, to hinder the resolution of a positive Rule,
to distinguish between true and false, in all things concerning the Christian
Faith. Notwithstanding, because, by that which already we have said, and that
which appears to all men in the Scriptures, there is sufficient means to
conclude so much as I have proposed, and that the proof of it will be an
advantage to that which shall follow, I shall undertake it, supposing no more
than I have said.

I do remember the Argument made against Tradition, by Marinaro the Carmelite,
at the Council of Trent; Which, as it was thought so considerable there, that
order was taken, that he should appear no more in the Council, so, seemed to
me, when I read it, not easy to answer. Now, upon further consideration, I
make it my ground, to prove the conclusion which I have advanced. He argued;
That it was not possible to give a reason, why God should provide, that some of
those truths which are necessary to salvation should be recorded in Scripture,
others, equally obliging, not. For if you interpose the term clearly, and
argue; That there is no reason why God should deliver some things clearly by
writing, others not; the argument will be the same. To me it seems manifest,
that he who once holds, that all things necessary to the salvation of all are
clearly contained in the Scriptures, (adding only clearly to his terms) to all
understandings, ties himself, by giving the reason why they ought to be clear,
because necessary, to maintain, that all truths are delivered by Scripture, in
the same degree of clearness to all understandings, as they are in degree of
necessity to the salvation of all souls. For, that every cause, every reason
should infer the consequence, produce the effect, answerable in degree, to
that degree which the reason or cause is supposed to hold, is a thing that all
reason inforces, every understanding justifies. But that all things are not
clear by the Scriptures, in the same degree as they are necessary to salvation,
is clear to all in point of f^ct: Inasmuch as there are infinite truths, which
Christians diff^r not about, in the Scriptures, because they think not their
salvation concerned in the matter of them, those which are thought to concern it
remaining in dispute, because not so clear. Neither is it for a Christian to
prescribe a reason why it ought to be otherwise, because that were to prescribe
unto Almighty God a rule, not depending upon his will declared otherwise. This
is the issue upon which I demonstrate my intent. Neither Gods act in general,
of decl^ring his will in writing, not his particular acts, of declaring his
will in such several matters, as the several writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, which make the Body of the Scriptures, contain, do any way import the
declaring of an intent in God, thereby to manifest all things necessary to the
salvation of all clearly to all understandings; therefore, that any thing is
necessary to salvation, is no presumption, that it is clearly declared in
Scripture to all understandings; Inasmuch as it is manifest, that no man can
give Law to God, what he ought to declare, but all men may presume, that, and
that only to be declared, which, by dealing with m^n under such or such a
profession, he has, of his free goodness, tied himself to declare. For, it
being in the free choice of God, whether to declare any will concerning man's
salvation or none, and that choice being made, it remaining yet in his choice,
whether he would declare his will by writing, or not, (as it was in his power,
for so many years before Moses, to save men without Scripture) it cannot be
said, that, either before declaring an intent to save men, he was bound to
declare all that was necessary unto it by writing, or by declaring it. And this
I hold enough to demonstrate to all understandings, that the declaring of an
intent, to deliver us by writing things concerning our salvation, imports not
in God an intent, to declare thereby all things necessary to the salvation of
all, clearly to all understandings. Which will yet be cle^rer, by proving the
other part of my proposition, that, by the intent of writing the several Books
whereof the Scripture consists, clearly declared, God has not clearly declared
the intent so often said. The proof of this by the particulars, I hold the
sufficientest satisfaction that can be tendered here, where the pretense is, to
proceed only upon that which all Christians receive. The particulars consist
in the writings of the Prophets, the sayings and doings of our Lord, recorded
in the four Gospels, and the writings of the Apostles. For, the Gospels
pretending to contain the doings and sayings of our Lord, but to be written by
his disciples; It follows, by the nature of the bus^nesse, that they must
contain some thing as from the person of the Writer, and of his sense, over and
above what they pretend to record; Which, properly will belong to the writings
of the Apostles, though contained in the Gospels: And thus far, to avoid
cavil, I have thought fit here to distinguish.

Now, that all matter of salvation is not clearly contained in the writings of
the Prophets, that is, in the Old Testament, written by Moses and his Scholars
the Prophets, I prescribe upon that which all Christians suppose, as the ground
upon which Christianity is justified against Judaisme; That the Old Testament
delivers but the figure and shadow of the New. For unless a man will have
the figure and shadow to be all one with the body and substance, he must
confess, that the substance of Christianity, which is shadowed in the Old
Testament, is not clearly declared by the same, unless he will have, to be
shadowed and unshadowed, that is, clear, to be all one. Let me demand, if
Christianity be clearly declared by the Law, to be that profession which God
would have all to be saved by, that should be saved, from the time of
prescribing it, what need the miracles of our Lord and his Apostles, what need
the Resurrection, and so his Sufferings, as to the account of evidencing the
truth of his Doctrine? For, the Law being once received upon necessary reasons,
it is impossible to say, why any new reasons should be requi^ite, to enforce
the truth or the obligation of the Gospel, if it were clearly declared by it?
Again, it is manifest, that our Lord, being risen again, and giving the Holy
Ghost unto his Disciples by breathing on them John XX. 22. gave them also a
spiritual grace of understanding the Scriptures, as you find Luke XXIV. 32,
45. Where first, the Disciples that went to Emmaus confess with admiration;
Did not our hearts burn within us, when he talked with us on the way, and
opened us the Scriptures? declaring unto them, how he was foretold in the Old
Testament, as you have it before: Then, having persuaded them all, that it was
even he that was risen again, it follows; Then opened he their minds to
understand the Scriptures; which were only then those of the Old Testament.
Surely, Justine the Martyr, in many places of his dispute with Typho the Jew,
as truly as manifestly professes, that the understanding of Christianity in the
Old Testament was a grace given to the Disciples of Christ, among the rest of
distributions of his Spirit, (upon his ascension into heaven) shed forth upon
the Church Ephesians. IV. 8 --. which being showed the Jews, their eyes were
darkened, as their hearts hardened, that they could not understand the truth in
them. Now, it is not my purpose to say, that thereby he challenges to himself
the same miraculous grace of the Spirit, and that the Prophesies that concern
Christ are by that grace interpreted by him in his writings, and therefore as
truly, as those in the writings of the Apostles. It is enough, that the true
meaning of the Scriptures, in that behalf, was first revealed to the Disciples
of Christ, by the immediate and extraordinary operation of Gods Spirit; Though
Christians, building on that which they received from persons so inspired, may
have added many things inconsequent to those principles. Now, I suppose it is
manifest to all men's reason, that those things are not clear in the Scriptures
to all understandings, that could not be discerned in it, without a miraculous
operation of Gods Spirit. But, nothing can be more manif^st, than those
particulars of the Law, which, our Lord and his Apostles in the New Testament,
have, by way of allegory, expounded to be meant of his Person, and Gospel, and
Kingdom. That the first Adam was to be the figure of the second, though to a
contrary effect, of life by Christ, in stead of death by Adam, and, that he
took our flesh to be the Lord of all things in it, (as to the effect of the
Gospel) which the first Adam was made, as to the dominion of the creature, is
clearly declared by the Apostles Romans V. 12-14. 1 Cor. XV. 45-49. Ebr. II.
6-15. That Noe, and what befell the world hy the deluge under him, was the
figure of what befalls the Church under Christ by Baptism, is no less
manifestly the doctrine of the Apostle 1 Pet. III. 20, 21, 22. And not only
this particular, but all the rest that befell the Fathers, and Prophets, and
Martyrs, under the Old Testament, is evidently made a figure of what befalls
the Disciples of Christ under the Gospel, Ebr. XI. As it is also evident, that
the pilgrimages of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of their
posterity the Israelites, from Egypt through the Wilderness into the land of
Promise, is there declared, and of all Christians received, for the figure of
that Journey which all profess to travail, from sin wherein it finds them,
to the Kingdom of heaven and happiness. How else should the argument hold,
which the Apostles draw, from that which befell the Children of Israel
travailing through the Wilderness to the land of Canaan, to the duty of
Christians in their Journey toward everlasting happiness? 1 Cor. X. 1-11. Ebr.
III. 7.-IV. 11. But, after their coming into the land of Promise, as the
persecutions which the Prophets endured Ebr. XI. 36, 37, 38. Mat. XXIII. 34 --.
evidence them to be the figures of Christ's Cross; as the expiation made by all
High Priests, is evidently expounded by the Apostle to the Ebrewes, to shadow
the taking away of sin by Christ; So it is no less evident, that all the
Judges and Kings and High Priests and Prophets of Gods people, anointed by God,
were figures of our Lord, both in regard of his Church, and the enemies of it,
than it is evident, that our Lord Jesus is the Christ foretold by the Prophets.
Which things, unless we say, (as no man in his right senses will say) that
they are manifest to all that read the Old Testament, though they never heard
of Christianity, or the New, we cannot imagine, that the substance of
Christianity, necessary to the salvation of all Christians, is clear to all
understandings in the Old Testament.

No less clear is it, by the sayings and doings of our Lord recorded in the
Gospels, that it was not his intent, freely and openly, at least all ways and
every where, to declare the truth and substance of it, by the said sayings and
doings. Manifest indeed it is, that he did publicly and freely declare
himself, to be that Christ whom the Prophets had foretold, and the Nation
expected, and of this no doubt can be made by any man, that with common reason
examines all that is written in the Gospels: Though not all times so free in
declaring even this truth; As it is evident by the words of the Jews to him
John X. 24. How long hold thou our minds in suspense? If thou be the
Christ, freely tell us it. And we see, Mat. XII. 14, 20. what difference of
opinions there were about it in his life time, forbidding his Disciples to
declare it till his death. But granting this to be manifest by the Gospels,
neither is it manifest by them, that nothing else is requisite to salvation to
be believed, concerning his Person and Kingdom, nor, that thereby he intended
to make manifest, what he knew requisite to be believed of them that should
embrace it, when it was become requisite? This is enough to answer the
Leviathan with, pretending, that it is not necessary to the salvarion of a
Christian, to believe any more than this, that our Lord Jesus is the Christ.
Which if it could appear by the Gospels alone, then would I not dispute any
further, that all the truth that is necessary to salvation is clearly delivered
by the Gospels. I do for my part believe, that the substance of Christianity,
necessary to salvation, is contained in the badge and cognizance which our Lord
has marked it with, by his Commission to his Apostles, Mat. XXVIII. 19, 20.
Go, make all nations Disciples, baptizing them in the Name of the Father the
Son and the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded
you. But shall I say it is clearly contained in these words, about the intent
and effect whereof, there has been, and is so much dispute? The Church, it is
well enough known, has always rejected those that acknowledge not the Holy
Trinity, Father Son and Holy Ghost, subsisting in one and the same Godhead.
At this day Socinus and his followers will have us believe, only, that we are
to profess (whether we be baptized or not) that our Lord Jesus is a man that
was born of a Virgin, by the power of God which is the Holy Ghost. And, for
undertaking, or for doing Gods message, tendering reconcilement with God to
mankind, has, by Gods gift, the same power with God to govern his Kingdom,
and is to be honored as God for it. Whether or no they would have us to believe
this sense of theirs positively, or would not be tied to believe positively the
sense of the Church, in time perhaps they may declare, I have not hitherto
understood. Shall I say, there is not sufficient argument for the sense of the
Church in the Gospels? It is no part of my meaning. Shall I therefore say, it
is clear of it self in the Gospels, (that is to say, by the sayings and doings
of our Lord recorded in the Gospels)? Does not our Lord plainly make himself
equal to the Father, John V. 17-23? Does he not answer again, being questioned
for this John X. 33, 34, 35. by the words of David spoken of mere men Psalm.
LXXXIII. 6. I have said ye are Gods? Does he not say plainly again; My Father
is greater than I, John XIV. 28? Which things, as it is plain by argument, that
they may stand with the sense of the Church, so, that those arguments are plain
of themselves to all understandings, is as much as to say; That a seeming
contradiction argues an intent in our Lord, that, all men should see the
resolution of it. Again, that all that will be saved by our Lord Christ must
take up his Cross, and profess him to the death, is plain by the Gospels:
But, so long as the Disciples might and did believe, that they should reign
with our Lord, in his Kingdom over that people, which should destroy their
enemies, was the intent of suffering death for Christ to reign with him in
heaven plain by the Gospels? That the Law should stand for ever, is it not
plainly delivered by our Lord in the Gospel, and is it not as plainly of the
necessity of salvation, to believe, that we are saved by the Gospel and not by
the Law? I appeal to S. Paul's Epistles; Though I dispute not, whether this be
abrogating the Law, as Divines commonly speak, or derogating from it.
Certainly, though I know not whether the Socinians would be content, (with the
Leviathan) that no thing be thought necessary to salvation to be believed, but
that our Lord is the Christ; Yet I know they would be astonished to hear, that
he who believes that, and lives according to the Laws of his Sovereign, has
done the duty of a Christian, and may challenge his share in the kingdom of
heaven for it. But, this I must not dispute further in this place; Only, here
I must answer his reasons out of the Scripture, and show you, upon what a weak
pin he has hung all this weight. Christ is the foundation, 1 Cor. III. 11.
Mat. XVI. 18. which all the Gospels pretend to induce us to believe, John XX.
31. as also the exhortations of the Apostles, Acts XVII. 2, 3, 6. by this the
good thief was saved, believing only our Lord anointed by God, to his
Kingdom, Luke XXIII. 42. Everlasting life is to be had by believing this, and
the Scripture, because it witnesses this John V. 39. and XVII. 3. XI. 26, 27.
Which is all blown away with this breath; That he that admits our Lord to be
the Christ, cannot refuse any part of his doctrine. And therefore, salvation is
justly imputed to that, which, whosoever receives, shall be bound to admit and
undergo whatsoever his salvation requires. This is eternal life, to know thee
the only God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, John XVII. 3. These things
are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, and that believing
ye may have life, John XX. 31. How, have life believing? Because he that
believes will be baptized, and he that is baptized, must undertake to live as
Christ teaches, professing to believe in the Father Son and Holy Ghost,
which, believing in Christ, coming from the Father to send the Holy Ghost,
implies; And therefore the Eunuch Acts VIII. 36, 37. is baptized upon this
Faith, as others into it, Acts II. 38. VIII. 16. XIX. 5. The belief of the
Creation of the world, of Providence, the Resurrection and Judgment to come,
not being introduced by Christianity, but found in force among the Jews, when
our Lord came. So, that limitation, by which the Leviathan inlargeth his sense
of that, which the believing of our Lord to be the Christ implies, is not
worth a straw. It is not only necessary to salvation to believe all that the
Messiah was to be or to do, to be verified, and to have been done by our Lord
Jesus; Unless we believe, that we are to believe, and to do whatsoever he
taught us to believe and to do. And that, as I have showed, is not determinable
by any means, but that, which Christ, by himself or by his Apostles, has
provided us, neither whether so or not, and much less whether necessary to
salvation or not.

That which has been alleged to show; That, the substance of Christianity
necessary to the salvation of all under the Gospel is not clearly contained in
the Old Testament, nor in the sayings and doings of our Lord related by the
Evangelists; Holds not in the writings of the Apostles. For, being directed to
Christians already reduced into Churches, constituted upon supposition of the
knowledge and profession of Christianity, there is no reason why they should be
sparing in declaring the truth of it to those to whom they write. True it is,
and evident by their writings, that they used great reservation, in declaring
to those that were of Jews become Christians, the discharge of their
obligation to Moses Law. But whatsoever their proceeding was in that case, not
only the reason of the truth, but also the reason of that proceeding, is
clearly declared by their writings. But, if all their writings suppose, in them
to whom they write, knowledge sufficient for the salvation of all Christians,
and none of them pretend to lay down the sum and substance of that, whereof
the salvation of all Christians requires the knowledge, evident it is, that
the perfection of none of them, (nor the whole Scriptures, consisting of them
and those which we have spoken of hitherto) requires, that they clearly
contain all that is necessary to the salvation of all Christians. For, the
Perfection of every writing consists in the sufficience of it, for the
purpose to which it is intended: If therefore the occasions of the Apostles
writings, and so the purpose of them, evidently express not an intent to lay
down clearly to all understandings, the whole substance of that which is
sufficient to render all Christians capable of salvation, (as, evidently,
neither any nor all of them do) then, neither does the perfection not
sufficience nor clearness of the Apostles writings require, that all things
necessary to the salvation of all, be clear in them to all understandings. For,
let no man object; That they were all of them necessary to the salvation of all
or most of them to whom they were sent; Unless it could be said; That
whatsoever was necessary to the salvation of those to whom the Apostles writ,
is necessary to the salvation of all Christians; Which, so long as there is a
difference between necessity of means and necessity of precept; (That is,
between that which is necessary to the common salvation of all, and that which
becomes necessary to the salvation of some, by reason of their particular
states and conditions) cannot be said. The writings of the Apostles are, their
Epistles, with their Acts, and S. John's Revelations, if these may not be
referred to the rank of their Epistles. The chief of their Epistles, that to
the Romans, that to the Galatians, that to the Ebrewes, with the greatest part
of the rest, are either occasioned by the reservation which they used, in
declaring to those that were become Christians of Jews, their discharge from
the Law, as justified by Christ, or by the secret endeavors of Heretics,
pretending Commission from the Apostles on one side, on the other, practicing
compliance with the Jews, to seduce those that inclined to the Law, to the
damnable inventions of Simon Magus and his Successors. But none of them
pretends more, than preventing or avoiding those particular disorders, which
appeared in the respective Churches. For, what the Apostles did in settling
Christianity at Jerusalem, or propagating it by S. Paul, especially so far as
the book of the Acts relates, what S. John saw touching the state of
Christianity to come, I suppose, is something else than the sum of all that
is necessary to the salvation of all Christians. And though, in discretion,
every man may presume, that, upon occasion of the express purposes of these
writings, there is nothing necessary to the salvation of all, that is not
touched in some place of them, yet it is one thing to be touched upon the by,
another thing to be delivered upon express purpose. For, those things that are
but touched upon occasion, referring to the knowledge which they presuppose,
cannot, must not contain the clear understanding of those things, which they
only touch; Unless we will have the Writer so impertinent, as, upon every
occasion, to turn aside, and instruct him that he writes to, in such things,
as he supposes him to know before. So, the reason why the sum or substance of
Christianity is not clear in the Old Testament, and Gospels, is, because it was
not then clearly preached; Why not in the writings of the Apostles, is, because
it was clearly delivered before, the clear delivering of it being seen, in the
catechizing of them, that came to the profession of the Gospel, and the
communion of the Church.

Beside this reason, particular to the Apostles writings, there is another that
is seen, not only in the Law and Prophers as well as in them, but in all
ancient records of learning, arising from the distance of time between us and
the writing of them, and the change which such a succession produces in the
stare of things, necessarily inferting obscurity, answerable to that
difference, in the condition of those things which they express. There is no
record of Learning so flight, that any man, who knows what belongs to
Learning, can presume of a clear understanding of it, till, by comparing it
with other writings, nearest to it in nature and time, he get satisfaction in
it. For, such a change of language follows the changes that come to pass, in
Times, and Places, and Laws, and Fashions, and the condition of persons
consequent to the same, that, till they be understood by reading, (seeing and
hearing not being available in languages out of use) the meaning of Writers is
not to be had from their words. How much more in writings of such consideration
as the Scriptures are to the Church, of such antiquity, as the Law and
Prophets, and the primitive Church of the Apostles, of such difference from the
present state of things, as between the Law, either flourishing under the
Princes of Gods people, or tolerated by their Sovereigns; between the Gospel,
springing up in the midst of the Empire professing Heathenisme, but protecting
Judaisme, and the Gospel, professed and protected by Christian powers, and
people; So little record remaining otherwise, either of things done under the
Law, or under the Apostles, (so far from priding themselves in writing
books.) How much more, I say, must we be in the dark, for the clear meaning of
that, whereof every tittle is con^^derable? That the Apostles writings were no
way obscure to those they were directed to, is to me unquestionable. For,
though it is reasonable, that they should, as we see they do in some passages,
rise above the pitch of the common capacity, even of them they were writ to,
least they should become subject to neglect; So, that, for the most part, they
should not be understood of the most part, would be a manifest inconvenience.
But, it is no inconvenience, that, by distance of time, they should become
liable to the same difficulty of being understood, which all other ancient
writings necessarily become subject to. And that reason appears no less, in
those things which concern the necessary salvation of all, than in matters of
less consequence. It will therefore be hard, to reconcile to any capacity of
reason, that which is advanced, for the first truth, toward the deciding of
all Controversies of Faith, that all things necessary to salvation are clear in
the Scriptures, to all understandings; Those Scriptures, which only can be
pretended to deliver the truth of Christianity clearly, neither professing to
deliver the whole sum and substance of it, and, being directed to those, who
are supposed already instructed in all things necessary to the salvation of all
Christians. Therefore this unreasonable presumption, is not to create any
difficulty, to that reason of deciding Controversies of Faith, which we
proceed to settle upon the premises.

I cannot tell whether or no it was requisite to say so much against a
presumption merely voluntary, and which common experience contradicts. For if,
all agreeing in the truth of Christianity and the Scriptures, there remain
dispute about things, which some count necessary to salvation; others not; It
is enough that the truth of Christianity infers means, sufficient to clear
the truth of what remains on dispute. But, first it is manifest, that, what
remains in dispute, is not of it self manifest, to all that acknowledge the
Scriptures, but may become manifest, to them that use such means, as the truth
of Christianity inforceth. Nevertheless, since, they that are in love with
their own presumptions, though never so dangerous to the supreme Majesty, take
whatsoever crosses them for a derogation to the Scriptures, let thus much be
said, to show, that, by giving the Scriptures, no man may presume, that God
intended to declare in them, whatsoever is necessary to the salvation of all,
clearly, to all understandings. But, if this must have been supposed, as a
principle or ground, whereupon we are to resolve all Controversies of Faith,
it would have been requisite to have showed us, that this truth is, of all
other, so much more clearly laid down in the Scriptures, as, that which
concurres to the clearing of all, ought it self to be the most clear. Now, if
we consider, that this privilege, of containing all that is necessary to the
salvation of all, belongs not to any part, but to the whole Body of the
Scriptures, it would first have been said, what Scripture, speaking of the
whole Body of the Scripture, has established this property or ^rivilege of it.
For my part, upon the best consideration that I can take, I am at a stand to
find any text of Scripture, any letter or syllable of the whole Bible, that
says any thing at all, good or bad, of the whole Bible. So far is it from
delivering this property or privilege of it. So far further from delivering
it as the first truth, in terms so clear and unquestionable, as to make it a
presumption, to the deciding of all that is or may become questionable
concerning the Scripture. The words of S. Paul 2 Timothy III. 16, 17. All
Scripture, inspired by God, is also profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man of God may be
perfect; Being fitted for every good work; Cannot be said of the whole Body of
Canonical Scripture, being written before it was: That is, when, evidently,
many parts of the New Testament were not written, probably all, and evidently
concerns every part of Gods Word, not the whole Body of the Scriptures.
Therefore with Origin I conceive, they are meant of the Scriptures of the Old
Testament: To this effect; That, that instruction which is necessary to
salvation being had by the Gospel, which the Church teaches those whom it
makes Christians, the right understanding of the Old Testament, according to
the mystery of the Gospel, is that which rendereth him whom God imployeth in
the propagation of his Gospel, and the edification of his Church, able to
convince those that withstand, to edify those that admit it. Which, if it be
far short of that which I deny, the rest of those pitiful lame consequences
which are usually made from the Scriptures, to prove the same purpose, will
easily appear to come short of it, though I take not in hand to determine at
present the full meaning of them, but only to show that they import not, that
all things necessary for the salvation of all Christians, are clear to all
Christians in the Scriptures. The fashion is, to allege Deuteronomy. IV. 2. XII. 32.
Ye shall take heed to do all the Word that I command you. Ye shall add
nothing to it, nor take any thing from it. And, You shall add nothing to the
Word that I command you, nor take any thing from it. That you may keep the
commandment of the Lord your God which I command you. And, that it is
threatened for a conclusion to the whole Scripture, Apoc. XXI. 18, 19 If any man
add to the words of the Prophecy contained in this Book, God shall lay upon
him the plagues written in this Book. God shall take away his share out of the
book of Life and the holy City, and the things that are written in this Book.
For, is not all that is requisite sufficiently clear, if nothing may be added
or taken from the Scriptures? Therefore is S. Paul also alleged pronouncing
anathema, if himself, or an Angel from heaven, or any man should take upon him
to preach any other Gospel than that which they had already received, Gal. I.
8, 9. And, that therefore are the Beraeans commended Acts XVII. 11. that they
did not admit even those things which S. Paul, so great an Apostle, preached to
them, without examining them by the Scriptures, whether so as he said or not.
To the same purpose John XX. 30, 31. Many other miracles did Jesus, which are
not written in this book. But, these are written, that ye may believe, that
Jesus is the Christ, and that, believing, ye may have life through his Name.
Add hereunto the Psalmists commendations of the Law XIX. 7-31. as giving
wisdom to the simple, as inlightning the eyes, and instructing the servants of
God; which, how should it do, if it be not first to be understood? For the
precept is a candle, and the Law light says Solomon, Prove. VII. 22. And Psalm
CXIX. 113. Thy word is a candle to my feet, and a light to my paths. Further;
the Scriptures tell us how they come to be obscure, and what makes them clear.
They shall be all taught by God says the Prophet, Isa. LIVE. 13. speaking of
the times of the Gospel, and the children of the Church. And Jeremy XXXI. 33,
34. promises, that God will put his New Covenant in the hearts of his
children, and write it in their entrails, so that they shall have no need to
teach one another the knowledge of God, because they should be all taught by
God to know God. And is not this that for which our Lord gives thanks to the
Father Mat. XI. 25. because, having concealed the mystery of the Gospel from
the wise and understanding, he had revealed it to babes and sucklings. Which
the Apostle expounds 1 John II. 20, 21, 27. You have an Vnctien from God, and
know all things. I have not written to you because ye know not the truth, but
because ye know it, and, that no lie is of the truth. And; But as for you, the
Unction which ye have received of him remains in you, and ye need not that
any man teach you. But, as that Unction teaches you of all things, and is true
and not false, and as it has taught you, so shall you abide in it. Whereupon
afterward IV. 1. Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether of God
or not; To wit, as those who were possessed of that by which they were to be
tried. Therefore S. Paul 1 Thessalonians. V. 23. Try all things; Hold that which is
good: To wit, by that means which he intimates 1 Cor. II. 15. The spiritual
man is judged by none, but himself judges all things. In fine, I must not
forget Cartwrights argument from the words of the Prophet Jeremy VII. 31. XXXI.
35. where he reproves the Jews Idolatries by this argument, that it never
came into Gods mind to command them any such thing. For if the grievousnesse
even of their Idolatries consist in this, that they were done without warrant
of Gods word, how can it be questionable that he has provided us instruction
sufficient to clear us in all that we are to do, by the Scriptures?

But these Scriptures are as easily wiped away as they are alleged, if we go
no further than to show, that they enforce no such principle as is pretended
for the ending of all Controversies, that all things necessary to the salvation
of all Christians are clear to all Christians in the Scriptures. For what a
pitiful inconsequence is it to argue, that all things necessary to salvation
are clear in the Scriptures, because Moses forbideth to add to or take from
his Law? For, if the Gospel be not clearly contained in the Old Testament
containing the Law and the Prophets, and therefore much less in the Law alone,
then is it not lawful to add to or take from that Scripture in which all
things necessary to salvation are not clear. And surely when they are commanded
to stand to the determinations of their Judges in things questionable
concerning the Law, Deuteronomy. XVII. 8-12. that which was questionable was not clear
to all concerned in the Law, and the determining of it was neither adding to
nor taking from the Law. In like manner, he that should add to or take from
the book of S. John's Revelations (take it if you please, for the complement of
the whole Bible, and say as much, either of the whole, or of any part of it)
deserves the plagues written there to be added to him, and his part taken away
out of the book of Life; For who doubts that falsifying the Scriptures is a
crime of a very high nature? But so it will be, whether all things necessary to
salvation be clear in the Scriptures or not. Nay, falsifying the sense of the
Scriptures, not altering the words, may deserve the very same, because the true
sense might and ought to have been cleared in the Scriptures, as not clear to
all that are concerned in it. And may not S. Paul bid Anathema to whosoever
shall preach another Gospel than that which he had preached to the Galatians,
unless all things necessary to salvation be clear in the Scriptures? First let
it appear, (which cannot appear, because it is not true) that the Scriptures of
the New Testament were written when he preached it: Or, if not, that whatsoever
is clear in the Scriptures which we have, is clear in the Scriptures which
they had when S. Paul preached. The Beraeans had reason to examine S. Paul's
preaching by the Scriptures, who alleged the Old Testament for it, and demanded
to be acknowledged an Apostle of Christ according as his preaching agreed
therewith. But what needed his preaching, if the means of salvation which he
preached were clearly contained in the Old Scriptures? The miracles related by
S. John's Gospel are written, that believing we may have life: Why? because
there is nothing else requisite to salvation to be believed? Or, as I said to
the Leviathan, because, he that comes to believe, shall be instructed in all
things necessary to his salvation, whether by the miracles there related or
otherwise? And cannot the Law be a light to the steps of them that walked by
the Law, can it not inlighten their eyes, and give wisdom to the simple,
unless all things necessary to salvation be clear in the Scriptures? I do
maintain, for a consequence of the grounds of Christianity, that the New
Testament is veiled in the Old,, that David and Solomon being Prophets, and the
doctrine of the Prophets tending to discover the New Testament under the Old,
by degrees, more and more, the Law is called by them a light, because it taught
them who discovered the secret of the Gospel in it and under it, the way to
that salvation which only the Gospel procures. And in this consideration it is
said, Psalm XXV. 8, 11, 13. Them that be meek shall God guide in judgment, and
such as be gentle them shall he teach his Law. What man is he that fears
the Lord? Him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. The secret of
the Lord is among them that fear him, and he will snow them his Covenant. And,
though I cannot here make this good, yet will the exception be of force to
infringe a voluntary presumption, that all things necessary to salvation are
clear in the Scriptures, because the Law, forsooth, is a light to the actions
of him that lived under it. Now, to all those Scriptures, whereby it is
pretended that the Scriptures are clear to them that have Gods Spirit, but
obscure to them that have it not, I conceive I have settled a peremptory
exception, by showing that the believing of all things necessary to salvation,
is a condition requisite to the attaining of the Grace or gift of Gods Spirit.
For, if that be true, then can no presumption of the right understanding of the
Scriptures be granted upon supposition of Gods Spirit, and the dictate of it.
If that exposition of the Scripture, which any man pretends, be not evidenced
by those reasons which the motives of Faith create and justify, without
supposing it to be made known by Gods Spirit to him that pretends it, in vain
will it be to allege, that the Spirit of God is in him that sets it forth.
Neither do we find, that they who pretend Gods Spirit do rest in that
pretense, least they should be laughed at for their pains. But do allege
reasons for their pretense, as much as they, who pretend the Church to be
Infallible, do allege reasons whereby they know that which they decree to be
true. Which were a disparagement to the Spirit of God, if the dictate thereof
were to pass for evidence. I grant therefore, that true Christians have Gods
Spirit, and that thereby they do try and condemn all things that agree not
with our common Christianity, and that this is the Unction whereof S. John
speaks. But, not because the gift of the Holy Ghost imports a promise of
understanding the Scriptures, in all Christians, but because it supposes the
knowledge of that which is necessary to salvation, which is our common
Christianity, and therefore inableth to condemn all that agrees not with it.
If there were over and above, a grace of understanding the Scriptures, and of
discovering the Gospel in the Law, extant in the Church under the Apostles, (to
which our Lord opened their hearts Luke XXIV. 45. and which Justine the Martyr
Dial. cum Tryph. affirms that the Church of his time was endowed with) first,
it was given in consideration of their professing Christianity; Then it tended
only to discover those grounds upon which the Church now proceeds, in the use
of ordinary reason, to exponnd the Old Testament according to the New. As for
Cartwrights argument, I relate it not because I think it worth the answering,
but that you may see how prejudice is able to transport even learned men from
their senses. It had been easy for one less a Scholar than he to have said,
that when Jeremy says it never came in Gods mind to command their Idolatries,
he meanta great deal more, that he had forbidden them under the greatest
penalties of the Law: Which, all that know the Law, know to be true. When he
forgets such an obvious figure, you may see he had a mind to infer more
than the words of the Prophet will prove.

It is to be observed in this place, that there is no mention of things
necessary to salvation in all these Scriptures: Nor can it be said, that this
limitation of the sufficience and clearness of the Scriptures, is as clearly
grounded upon the Scriptures, as it were requisite, that things necessary to
salvation should be clear to all that seek to be saved. And this shall serve
for my answer, if any man should be so confident, as to undertake to prove the
sufficience and clearness of them so limited, by the consent of the Church.
For it is manifest, that, hitherto, the authorities of Church Writers cannot be
considered any otherwise, than as the opinions of particular persons, which no
ways import the consent of the whole Church. For, whereas hitherto, there is
nothing to oblige the Faith of any Christian, but that which is plain by the
Scriptures and the consent of the Church; It no ways appears as yet, how the
authorities of Church Writers can evidence the consent of Church. I will not
therefore be curious here to heap up the sayings of the Fathers, commending the
sufficience and clearness of the Scriptures: One or two I will take notice of,
because they are all I can remember, in which, the limitation thereof, to
things which our salvation requires us to believe, is expressed. S. Augustine
de doctr. Christian^ II. 9. In eis quae aperte in Scripturis posita sunt,
inve^iunt^r illa omnia qnae continent fide^ moresq vivendi. In those things
which are plainty set down in the Scriptures, is found whatsoever that Faith or
manners by which we live does contain. S. Chrysostom in II. ad. Thessal. Hom.
III. (...) All things are plain and plain and straight in the Scriptures, all
things that are necessary are m^nifest. Whereunto we may add^ the words of
Constantine to the Council of N^^^a, in. Theodore^. E^clef. Hist. l. 7. (...).
For the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, and the Oracles of the
ancient Prophets plainly teach us what we are to think of God. But I will also
take notice, that the same S. Augustine de doctr. Christ. III. 2. says, that
the Rule of Faith, (which he had set forth in the first book) is had, from the
plainer places of the Scripture and the authority of the Church. And the same
S. Chrysostom in the same Homily says, (...). Those things (which the
Apostles writ) and those (which they delivered by word of mouth) are equally
credible. Therefore let us think the Tradition of the Church deserves credit.
It is a Tradition, seek no more. And Vincentius in the beginning of his
Comm^nitorium, or Remembrance, confessing the Canon of the Scriptures to be
every way perfect and sufficient, requires nevertheless the Tradition of the
Church for the steady understanding of it. And therefore I have just ground to
say, that all that is necessary to salvation is not clear in the Scriptures to
all that can read, in the opinion of S. Chrysostom and S. Augustine: But to
all that read, supposing the Rule of Faith received from the Church, to bound
and limit the sense and exposition of the Scriptures. And therefore may more
justly suppose the same limitation, when they speak of the perfection and
sufficience and clearness of the Scripture at large, without confining their
speech to that which the necessity of salvation requires us to believe. And
this is already a sufficient bar to any man, that shall pretend the consent of
the Church, which concurreth to evidence the truth of the Scripture, for the
perspicuity thereof in things necessary to be believed, to all whom they may
concern. For so long as Tradition may be requisite besides Scripture, that
cannot appear. When it shall appear, whether requisite or not, then will it
appear how far the sufficience and perspicuity of the Scripture reaches. And
this I come now to inquire.

CHAP. VI. All interpretation of Scripture is to be confined within the
Tradition of the Church. This supposes that the Church is a Communion
instituted by God. What means there is to make evidence of Gods Charter, upon
which the Corporation of the Church subsisteth. The name of the Church, in the
Scriptures, often signifies the Whole or Cathelick Church.
THis presumption then, which is able to prejudice the truth, by disparaging
the means God has given to discover it; And that, by possessing men, that,
things pretended to be necessary to salvation would have been clear of
themselves to all men in the Scriptures, if they were true; But, nothing
conducing to clear the doubtful meaning of any Scripture, that is never so
true; This presumption I say being removed, and the authority of the Church, as
the reason of believing, taken away, it remains that we affirm, whatsoever
the whole Church, from the beginning, has received and practiced for the Rule
of Faith and manners, all that to be evidently true, by the same reason, for
which we believe the very Scriptures; And therefore, that the meaning of them
is necessarily to be confined within those bounds, so that nothing must be
admitted for the truth of them, which contradicts the same. We saw before,
that the Scripture consists of motives to Faith, and matter of Faith; That, in
the motives of Faith, supposing them sufficient, when admitted for true, a
difficulty may be made, upon what evidence they are admitted for true; That the
conviction of this truth, consists in the profession and conversation of all
those, who, from the beginning receiving Christianity, have transmitted it to
their successors for a Law and Rule to their beliefs and conversations:
Wherefore, there can remain no further question concerning the truth of that,
which stands recommended to us by those same means, that evidence the truth of
those (...) for which we receive Christianity. Had there been no (...)
Christianity to have been read, in the profession and practice of all that call
themselves Christians, it would not have been possible, to convince the enemies
of Christianity, that we are obliged to believe the Scriptures. If the
professing and practicing things so contrary to the interest of flesh and
blood, be an ^vidence that they are delivered and received from them, who first
showed reasons to believe; It must first remain evident, that there are certain
things, that were so professed and practiced from the beginning, before it can
be evident, that the motives upon which they are said to be received, were
indeed tendered to the world for that purpose. This is that common stock of
Christianity, which, in the first place, after receiving the Scriptures, is to
be admitted for the next principle, toward the settling of truth controverted
concerning the meaning of them, as flowing immediately from the reason for
which they are received, and immediately flowing into the evidence, that can be
made, of any thing questionable in the same. It is that sound ingredient of
nature, which, by due application, must either cure all distempers in the
Church, or leave them incurable and everlasting.

And truly, if it were as easy to make evidence what those things are, which
have been received, professed, and practiced from the beginning by the whole
Church, as it is necessary to admit all such for truth, I suppose there would
remain no great difficulty in admitting this principle. But, in regard it is so
easy to show, what contradiction has been made within the pale of the Church,
to that which elsewhere, otherwhiles, has been received; I cannot tell whether
men despair to find any thing generally received from the beginning, and
therefore lay aside this principle, not as false, but as useless, and not to
be put in practice. Wherein, that men mistake not themselves, they must take
notice; That it will not concern my position; (That all original Catholic
Tradition is to be supposed for unquestionable truth, in deciding what is
questionable concerning the truth of the Scripture) that, concerning most
matters, there is no Catholic Tradition, or consent of the Church. For I do
profess, that, were not the Church, or had it not been one Society, one
visible Body, Communion, or Corporation of men from the beginning, the
communion whereof always confined the profession and conversation of
Christians to some certain visible* Rule; I should think it impossible to make
evidence, of any common truth received of all Christians. But, if it can be
made to appear, that the Church was from the beginning such a Society, then may
such Rules as reasonably appear to be original and Catholic, as it can appear
reasonable to any man, that he ought to be a Christian. Here I must note,
that, concerning the State of the Church, whether it be such a Society as I
have said, distinct from all Civil Societies of Christian Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, there may be two questions made; The one of Fact, whether
indeed the Church has been such a Society, since the first being of it, and
the conversion of believers to Christianity; The other of Right, whether by the
appointment of God, or by humane consent of such, who, being converted to
Christianity, agreed to live in communion, by whatsoever Rule it may appear
they have admitted. But these two are so near one another, that, if the
question of Fact can be voided, and it appear, that such was the Church from
the beginning, it will be a presumption in a manner peremtory, of the Churches
Title by divine right; Though there is difference made between them, as appe^rs
by the opinion related before, that the power of Excommunication was settled in
the Church before Constantine, by humane consent, not by Gods appointment.
Which, by consequence of like reason, extends to all other points wherein the
power of the Church consists. For my present purpose it were enough, to make it
appear, that the Church was, de Facto, such a Society from the beginning. But,
the proving of the point of Right, will be only making the same inference,
which has been always concluded, out of that evidence which resolves the
point of Fact. And the conclusion thus inferred, will be both necessary and
effectual, to cl^are the positive right of the Church in deciding Controversies
of Faith, which will be the best satisfaction, why, negatively, it cannot
extend to create the ground upon which we are to believe. I will therefore
wrap them up both together, in the process of my discourse.

In which I find that difficulty, which S. Augustine observes in proving any
of those things which are most manifest to common reason and sense; For, it
shall be hard to bring arguments, that are much clearer, than that which they
intend to prove. That the Church had been from the beginning one outwardly, by
visible Communion, as well as one inwardly, by invisible Faith and love, could
not be questioned so long as it prevailed. Neither was it foreseen, at
dissolving the Unity of the Western Church, for the Reformation, that it would
ever come to this dispute, whether there had been always, and ought to be one
Catholic and Apostolic Church; For, each party hoped well to be so
themselves, as being persuaded that their adversaries ought to unite themselves
unto them, upon acknowledgment, that the truth was on their side. And truly I
acknowledge, that there is no clear mention of a precrpt of God, commanding all
Christians to hold the unity of the Catholic Church, by outward communion with
it. For, the intent of God to call the Gentiles to Christianity, seems to be
the utmost of that which is clearly declared by the Scriptures. That his intent
was to unite all Christians in one visible communion of the Church, there is
evidence by consequence to be had from the Scriptures. But, what the form
should be, before the materials were prepared, it were as strange to think,
that the stones and timber, particular Christians ought to know, as, that the
Surveyors, the Apostles and their fellows should not know. That therefore the
Church was from the beginning, and ought to be one visible Communion, must be
showed, by the ingredients, and principles, or elements of all visible
Societies; Which, in the Society of the Church, will appear proportionable to
the nature and pretense of it. Supposing from common sense and experience, that
all Civil Societies or Commonwealths, (unto which the name of Societies or
Communities principally, because most visibly, belongs) are constituted and
founded upon certain Rights of Sovereign Power, which some call in Latin Jura
Majestatis, being indeed, the particulars, wherein the Right and Power of
Sovereignty consists. For, when it is once resolved, in what hands that Power
is to remain, then is the State and Form of Government constituted, and
thereby distinguished from other forms of Commonwealth, according to the
quality of those persons in whom this Power is established. That, being ruled
by certain Laws, acknowledging certain Governors, being subject to the Power
of the Sword, by which those Governors execute those Laws, are the effects of
Sovereign Power, being the principal of the said ingredients or particulars,
the certain and necessary marks of a distinct Commonwealth, is that which I
suppose from common experience. There are Societies which subsist by the Law of
Nature and Nations; As that which Aristotle observes, among those that are
embarked in the same bottom for the same voyage; That which the Jews Law
supposes among the Caravans of the East, consisting of subjects and members of
several Commonwealths. There are Communities and Corporations which subsist
by the Act of Sovereign Power in each Commonwealth, allowing that Power over
the Members, to the whole, (ihat is, such persons as are allowed to act for the
whole) as they think fit. If the whole Church, from the beginning, have
acknowledged certain Laws, by which they were governed in those things wherein
the Communion of the Church consists, certain Governors, to whom they ought
to give respect according to those Laws, a Power of putting out of the Church,
(answerable to the Power of putting to death by the sword) into which the
co^ctive Power of Commonwealths is resolved, then is the Church and always
was such a Society, wherein the same Rule of Faith might be, and was always
from the beginning, preserved by Tradition and Custom, which is my present
business to show. And if the Church always was so, de Facto, then is it so
always de Jure; If it did always hold unity in the Faith, and communion in
the service of God, by the means of certain Laws, certain Rulers, certain
Power of granting or refusing this Communion; Then was there a precept of God
delivered to the Church, by the Apostles, commanding them so to live. For, that
which was as difficult, as impossible to have been introduced, without
conviction of the will of God, as the rest of Christianity, of necessity must
go for a part of it. But, that, in such variety of men's fannies, reasons, and
inclinations, the Church, consisting from the beginning of all Nations, and
dispersed all over the world, should of their own inclination, not swayed by
any information of Gods will received with Christianity, agree in the same
Laws and Rulers, submitting to the exercise of the same Power upon themselves,
is as impossible, as that the world should consist of the casual concurse of
atoms, according to Democritus and Epicurus.

The name of the Church, without peradventure, was first used, to signify the
whole body of Gods people in the Wilderness, when they might be, and were
called together and assembled, upon their common occasions, which the word
(...) or (...) signifies. After which time, the people continuing still one and
the same, by virtue of the same Laws then received, and the Powers placed in
their Ruler; Not only the whole people, but such parts of it, as resorted to
the same Government, have still born and do bear the same name; The Synagogue
of Libertines, Cyrenaeans, Alexandrians, Cilicians and Asians by example; Acts
VI. 9. which name first belongs to the respective Bodies of Jews, that
subsisted at Rome, Cyrene, or Alexandria, in Cilicia or Asia; And consequently,
by Metonymy, to the Places, where such of those Bodies as chanced to be at
Jerusalem might assemble themselves; And, to so many of those Bodies, as, being
at Jerusalem, did assemble at those Places. Now, no Christian can doubt, that
the Body of Christians succeeds in the stead of Gods ancient people. And
therefore, the name of Gods Church, when it stands without limitation,
signifies no less. As, when our Lord says, Mat. XVI. 18. Upon this rock will
I found my Church. Whatsoever the Disciples then conceived the Church should
be, our Lord, that knew all, by the name of it, meant all that duly bears the
name. And therefore, when he says once again; Mat. XVIII. 17. Tell it to the
Church; It is strange there should be Christians, that should think he means
the Jews and their Rulers; And, that the precept concerns Christians no
longer, now they have left the Jews. Though it is true, a man cannot tell his
cause to the whole Church, but to that part of it to which he can resort,
which is called by the name of the Whole, as I said even now of the Synagogue.
S. Paul to the Colossians II. 24, 25. calling the Church the Body of Christ,
says; That he, by the dispensation of God toward them, which he is trusted
with, is become the minister of the Church; to wit, as Angels are ministers of
the Church, because ministers of God toward it. And therefore minister of the
whole Church, which is the Body of Christ, not of any particular Church, as if
an Apostle could be bound to execute his office according to the discretion of
any Church, which, for Gods cause he attends; As all Ministers are bound to
execute their Office, according to the will of them whose Ministers they are.
It is therefore the whole Church in which God has set Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, and the use of the Graces rehearsed 1 Cor. XII. 28. Ephesians. IV. 11.
Because the Office of these Graces can by no means be confined, either to any
particular Church, or to any part of the whole Church. The name of the Church
signifies the same thing again Ephesians. I. 22. III. 21. V. 23-32. While all
Christendom was contained in the Church at Jerusalem, the name of the Church
is so used, Acts II. 47. V. 11. VIII. 1, 3. that it is no matter whether we
understand by it the whole Church, or the Church of Jerusalem. The reason;
Because all right and power, that can at any time be found vested in the whole
Church, was then as fully in the Church at Jerusalem, as it can be at any time
in the whole Church, though in respect of a Body never so much greater than it:
As a child is as much a man the day of his birth, as the day of his death, and
a tree as much as a tree when it grows one, as when it is come to the height.
But, Christianity being propagated among Jews and Gentiles, as we read of
the Churches of Judaea, Samaria and Galilee, Acts IX, 31. and must needs
understand the Epistles to the Ebrewes to have been written to Churches
consisting only of Ebrewes, as those of S. Peter, and that of S. James, which
mentions the Elders of the Church James V. 14. So the Churches of the Gentiles
in S. Paul Romans XVI. 4. we easily understand to be the Churches of Asia 1 Cor.
XVI. 9. Apoc. I. 11. the Churches of Gal^^ia 1 Cor. XVI. 1. the Churches of
Macedonia, 2 Cor. VIII. 1. and the rest that were visible in S. Pa^ls time.
Now, suppose for the present, that these Churches mentioned by the Apostles
were no more than so many Congregations, as our Independents would have it;
Seeing they deny not so many Churches to be so many Bodies, what reason can
they give, why the name of the Church, when it stands for the whole Church,
should not signify the like? There is a prerogative attributed to the whole
Church by S. Paul, 1 Timothy III. 25. when he calls it the base and pillar of
Truth. For, that this should be said of any particular Church, it were too
ridiculous to imagine. Can the Church bear this attribute, if it be not capable
of doing any act that may verify it? And, if it be not a Body, what act can it
do? In fine, the correspondence between Gods ancient people, and his new Israel
according to his Spirit, seems to require; That, as the Religion of the Jews,
and not any Civil Power of the Nation, makes them all one Body at this day, in
point of fact, by sufferance of Sovereigns, because they were once so in point
of right; So the Religion of Christians should make them one Body in point of
right, how many Bodies soever they are burst into, in point of fact, by their
own wantonness.

For, the Independents exception which I spoke of can be of no force, unless
they will make it appear, that all those Churches that are mentioned in the
writings of the Apostles did assemble in one place. Not that if this could be
made to appear, they had done their business. But because, if it do not
appear, their plea is peremptorily barred. We read then of M M M souls added
in one day to CXX. of the Church at Jerusalem, Acts I. 15. II. 41. To these
were added, or with these they became VM Acts IV. 4. To whom were added
multitudes of men and women, Acts II. 47. V. 14. These assembled daily in
private to serve God as Christians, as well as in the Temple, to serve God with
his then people, Acts II. 42, 44, 46. V. 13. VI. 1, 4. And shall we think that
all the Christians in Corinth, where God had said to S. Paul that he had many
people Acts XVIII. 10. could meet in one room, because S. Paul says 1 Cor. XI.
20. when ye meet together in one place --? For they must not only meet
together, but sup together, as the Apostle shows, which would require a great
room if God had many people there. And all the believers at Jerusalem met
together, and supped together Acts II. 44, 46. VI. 1. but not VIM. in one room,
as I suppo^e. Therefore at Corinth also there might be more Congregations than
one, where the Church was but one, and all might meet together, though in
several places several assemblies. In the mean time, I do not hear what they
say to that which I have alleged, in my book of the Right of a Church in a
Christian State page 44-50. to show, that we never read of more Churches than
one in one City, but every where of more than one in one Province, in the
writings of the Apostles. And therefore I will here plead further; That, from
the time of the Apostles, to the Reformation, (which, wherein it consists, my
business is to inquire, and therefore not to suppose that it consists in
every thing that has been done) all the Independents in the world shall never
be able to show me any thing called a Church, but the Body of Christians that
lived in one City and the territory of it. Indeed, at the first preaching of
Christianity, it must needs come to pass, that the number of Christians in a
very great City might be so little, that they might meet all at once. And the
name of Cities might be extended to Towns and Villages that could make but few
Congregations, when the question was made, whether they should make several
Churches, or resort to one; As I have instanced there. But because we have yet
extant ancient lists of all the Churches of the Roman Empire, and the
Soveraignties into which it is dissolved, punctually agreeing with the records
of all Church Writers, in comprising the whole sum of Christians within and
under one City in one Church. It may perhaps be found that all the Christians
in a whole Nation might resort to one Church, which was the Church of the Head
City. But that ever there were any Christians, that took it for a Law, that
every Congregation is to be a Church, before the Reformation, it can by no
means appear, whatsoever has been done since. And therefore I challenge, that
all reasonable men must allow, all Christians that succeeded the Apostles,
understood the meaning of their writings by their acts, when they cast all the
Christians in and under one City every where into one Church, then those, who
now challenge for a Law of God, that all Congregations are to be Churches. And
thus far it appears, by the same evidence upon which we accept of our common
Christianity, that is, by the Scriptures, and by the consent of all Christians,
that the Apostles so founded the Churches of their planting, that they might be
fit to concur to the constitution of one whole Church.

CHAP. VII. That the Apostles delivered to the Church a Summary of
Christianity, which, all should be baptized were to profess. Evidence out of
the Scriptures. Evidence out of the Scriptures for Tradition regulating the
Communion of the Church, and the Order of it. Evidence for the Rule of Faith,
out of the records of the Church. For the Canons of the Church, and the
pedigree of them from the Order established in the Church by the Apostles. That
the profession of Christianity, and that by being baptized, is necessary to the
salvation of a Christian.
BUt I will grant, that this were not evidence enough out of the Scriptures,
for a point of such consequence, as it will appear to be of, when it ap^eares
to be true, were it not for the general inference that I made before. Here I
challenge; having proved against the Leviathan, that, whosoever acknowledges
our Lord Jesus to be the Christ, must acknowledge, whatsoever he teaches and
delivers, either by himself or the Apostles his Deputies, to be Law to the
Church; That, whatsoever it may appear any way, that the Apos^lhs delivered to
the Church to be observed in it, is of that nature. I say further, it is
evident by their writings, that they delivered to the Church, a certain Summary
of Christianity, which, whosoever was admitted into the Church, by Ba^tisme,
underto profess and practice. Indeed this is the main point now in hand, that
all interpretation of Scripture is to be confined within this Summary, as the
Rule of our common Christianity. And therefore it may seem, that I go about
first to prove the Corporation of the Church by this Rule; And then to prove
the Rule by the consent of the Church, whereby I pretend to evidence, what the
Apostles delivered to the Church for the Rule of our common Christianity. But I
can easily answer, that it is one thing to question, whether the Apostles did
deliver any such Rule to the Church from the beginning or not; Another, what it
contains, and, what belongs to it as part of it, what not. If it may appear,
by the writings of the Apostles that delivered it, and by the acknowledgment of
the Church that received it, (for what other mean can there be to make it
appear?) that such a sense the Apostles did deliver to the Church, it will be a
great part of the evidence, that they did found the Church, for a Corporation,
wherein the profession of it might be preserved, and wherein God m^^^t be
served according to the profession of it. And if this may appear, then, the
consent of this Corporation will be as good evidence as the subject matter
allows, whether any thing questionable be part of it or not.

Let us then hear the Apostles: Thanks be to God (says S. Paul Romans VI. 17.)
that, being once slaves to sin, ye have obeyed from your heart that form of
doctrine which was delivered you. Had he only said, it was d^livered, they
had not acknowledged themselves obliged, but when he says, they obeyed it,
he shows they were under the obligation that God cast on them by delivering
it. 2 Pet. II. 21. It had been better for them not to have owned the way of
righteousness, than, having owned it, to return from the holy commandment
delivered. What is this holy commandment, what is this way of righteousness,
but in one word Christianity? Which when he says it was delivered, he means,
by Metonymy, that it was received, because he says further, that they had
owned it. The same is called by another Apostle Jude 3. the Faith once
delivered to the Saints. And S. Paul 2 Timothy I. 13, 14. Hold fast the form of
wholesome words, which thou have heard of me, in faith, and love which is
through Christ Jesus. Keep that good thing which was deposited in trust with
thee, through the Holy Ghost that dwells in us. II. 2. And those things which
thou have heard of me under many witnesses, deposite with trusty persons, who
may alsobe able to teach others. Would you have any thing plainer than this, to
show, that the Sum of Christianity was delivered for a Rule by the Apostles,
by which, their Successors were to examine all Doctrines? Therefore 1 Timothy II.
20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane
novelties of terms, and oppositions of knowledge falsely so called, which some
professing, have failed of the Faith. By the Rule of Faith, which he had
deposited in his trust, he will have him exclude the pretenses of the
Gnostics, which, every man might see, were inconsistent with it. Whereupon S.
John calls it the Unction 1 John II. 20-24, 27. by which they knew all things;
(To wit, that belong to the common Faith of Christians; And therefore the
inconsistence of it with the pretenses of the Antichristian) They continuing in
that which they had heard from the beginning, when they turned Christians. And
you, says the Apostle, have an unction from the Holy One, and know all things.
I write not to you because you know not the truth, but because you know it, and
that no lie is of the Truth. Therefore, let that which you have heard from the
beginning abide in you. If that which you have heard from the beginning abide
in you, then shall you also abide in the Son and in the Father. It is plain
enough why this truth which they have heard from the beginning of their
Christianity is called the Unction, because the anointing of the Holy Ghost,
(the gift whereof, as I have showed you, presupposes Christianity) is granted
upon consideration of being baptized into the profession of Christianity.
Wherefore it follows in S. John; As for you, the Unction which you have
received of him abides in you: And ye need not that any man teach you: But as
the same Unction teaches you of all things, and is true and no lie, and as it
has taught you, abide in it. The Unction teaches all things that a Christian
is to avoid, because it teaches to avoid all that agrees not with the truth
which the same Unction had taught him before; When, according to that which has
been said, being moved by the Holy Ghost to become a Christian, he was taught
that truth, upon profession whereof he received the gift of the Holy Ghost for
an habitual indowment. And the same is the Apostles meaning, when he says
again; 1 John III. 9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for his
seed abides in him. The seed of which a Christian is born, is the Word of the
Gospel, which begets children to God, when it prevails with sinners to
become Christians. This Word, obliging Christians upon their salvation not to
sin, abides not in him that sins, neither sins he in whom it abides.
So, whether you call it Unction or Seed; In regard it is the Rule of our
conversation as well as of our belief, as he that abides in the truth, must
needs reject Heresies contrary to it, so, in whom the seed which he is born of
abides, he cannot sin. And in his second Epistle 6, 7, 9. with S. Paul, he
calls it the commandment which they had received from the same beginning, to
preserve them from the impostures of that time, enticing to transgress it. In
fine, that this Tradition is the Law whereupon our Christianity stands, you
may see by the Apostle 1 Pet. III. 20. when he says; that Baptism saves us,
not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the examination of a good
conscience to God. That is to say, the answer that is made out of a good
conscience, to the interrogatories, that were even then propounded to them that
were baptized, by which answer, they tied themselves to profess the Faith, and
to live according to it; Which S. Paul therefore calls that good profession
which Timothy had made before many witnesses, 1 Timothy VI. 12, 13, 14. to wit,
when he was baptized; and therefore conjures him by the good profession which
our Lord made before Pilate, of his Kingdom, for which he suffered death, to
preserve it unspotted. Which if it be so, then must no Christian imagine, that
the receiving of this Tradition, or Rule of Faith, upon which men were admitted
to Baptism, and made Christians, consisted only, in professing to believe
that which is necessary for the salvation of all Christians to be believed, but
also, in undertaking to live as Christianity requires. Therefore S. Paul
sometimes, in his writings, referres himself to the precepts, not only which
he had delivered them, but also which they had received of him, charging his
flock, not only with their duty, but also with their engagement, 1 Thessalonians. IV.
1, 2, 11. 2 Thessalonians. III. 6.

But, besides the Rule of Faith, there is another sort of Traditions,
concerning the outward order in the Church, (by which Unity is preserved, in
the communion of those Offices, which God is to be served with by Christians)
which Christians come to be subject to, by receiving their Baptism from the
Church, and, consequently undertaking to serve God with the Church. For, it is
manifest, that this communion cannot be maintained without certain Rules,
limiting the manner and circumstances of Gods service, for time and place and
the persons, both which are admitted to communion with the Church, and which
are enabled to minister the Offices of the same. Baptism is the door to all
Gods Ordinances that Christians are obliged to serve God with. The praising of
God, the reading and hearing of the Scriptures, and the expounding of them, the
common prayers of Christian Assemblies, are all Offices, which, no Christian
doubts that God is to be served with under the Gospel, though there be no
express precept of the New Testament, what Offices the public service of God
is to consist of; because, before the Gospel, they were always in use among
Gods people. The Sacrament of the Eucharist, being instituted by Christ to be
frequented by the Church, at their Assemblies for the service of God, must be
reckoned among the positive Laws of God to his Church, obliging only because
commanded. He that supposes the Church a Corporation founded by God, to
maintain the communion of those that believe, in these Offices, must
consequently maintain a Power of settling good order in the exercise of them,
as for all other circumstances, so especially, for the qualities of persons
concurring to the celebrating of them. He that shows by the Scripture, that
this order was provided for by the Apostles, in the Churches of their founding,
shows that they intended the Church for a Body, endowed with Power of limiting
the like Rules for the future. And this is to be showed by many passages of S.
Paul's Epistles. 1 Cor. XI. 2, 3-16. 20-34. having commended them, for observing
his Traditions as he had delivered them, he is fain to argue very hard, that
their women ought, their men ought not to be veiled at divine Service;
Concluding, that, if his reasons would not prevail, the contentious must rest
in this; That we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. Why so, if
particular Churches be not tied to keep unity with the whole? And by and by,
proposing another disorder, in that they received not the Eucharist in commune
poor and rich, he reproves it, as contrary to that which he had delivered
to them from the beginning; Concluding, that; The rest will I set in order when
I come. So 2 Thessalonians. II. 25. Stand therefore, brethren, and hold fast the
Traditions which ye have been taught, either by word of mouth, or by any
letter of ours. Neither can it be imagined, that all Christians should be bound
to hear the Apostles, and not be bound to hold those things, for Laws to
their conversation in matters of Religion, which the Apostles should teach them
to that purpose. Of this nature is the decree at Jerusalem, Acts XV. 20, 28.
that the then Churches of the Gentiles should abstain from things strangled and
blood, as well as from fornication, and the pollution of Idols. For, what is
the ground or the purpose of it, but to preserve them in unity, with the
Churches of Jews become Christians? Of this nature is that blessing or
Thanksgiving mentioned by S. Paul 1 Cor. XIV. 16, 17. 1 Timothy II. 1. being, as I
have showed in a Discourse of the Service of God at the Assemblies of the
Church page 350-370. a form of Prayer or Thanksgiving delivered in substance by
the Apostles, for which the Sacrament of our Lords Supper has been always
called the Eucharist, because it is to be celebrated with it. Of the same
nature is tha order which S. James gives, of praying for the sick, anointing
them with oil; as well for the forgiveness of their sins, as for the recovery
of their bodily health; James V. 14, 15. Which, I suppose, no man will deny,
that it concerns all Churches alike.

If there be this evidence in the Scriptures, for the beginnings of Church Law,
the practice of the Church, from this beginning, will afford much more. He
that would deny the Tradition of the Rule of Faith, what will he say to the
Creed of the Apostles? Not that I would have the words and syllables of it to
contain whatsoever it is necessary for the salvation of a Christian to
believe; But because the Creed is not the words of the Creed, but the sense and
meaning of them, together with that coherence and dependence of the parts
thereof one upon and with another, which the reasons and grounds of them
enforce. But first let it be understood, that I make a difference between the
Rule of Faith, and the substance of Christianity: Supposing Christianity to
consist partly in matter of Faith, partly in matter of manners; Partly in things
to be believed, partly in things to be done, though the Creed extend only to
matter of Faith. There is nothing more evident in the practice of the whole
Church, before the world had admitted the profession of Christianity, than
this; That there was a time allowed and required by the Church for those that
professed themselves converted to believe the truth of Christianity, to give
trial of their conversation, before they were admitted to Baptism. The
Constitutions of the Apostles VIII. 32. name three years, but with this
limitation, that if any man demonstrate extraordinary zele to Christianity, he
be received without so long trial. Therefore if Clemens Alexandrinus require
five, it makes no difference. For what marvail if several Churches at several
times had several customs, when as upon extraordinary occasions they were
dispensable? The Constitutions require extraordinary trial of those that had
practiced any sort of Magic, judging by the experience of the times, that it
was hard to part with such superstitions. It is enough for my purpose, that,
during this time, they might learn to behave themselves as Christians, by
conversing among Christians, by coming to Church, and bearing a part in the
praises of God, and hearing the Scriptures read and expounded. And what is more
notorious in the practice of the ancient Church, than the difference between
Missa Catechumenorum and Missa Fidelium; Between that part of the Office of the
Church, which Pretenders to Christianity were admitted to, (or Hearers, that
is, Scholars and Learners of it) and that which was peculiar to Believers, that
is; those that were Baptized and made Christians? It is the design of Clemens
Alexandrinus his Paedagogus, to show, how the Word, (whether our Lord Christ or
his Gospel) is the Pedagogue of mankind, in bringing them to be Christians.
Not as we mistake that word to signify the Master of a School, but as the
fashion was then, for men of quality to appoint a son a Governor, to conduct
him to School and home again, to attend on him at his exercises, and upon all
occasions, to put him in mind how it might become him to behave himself, and
to report to his Father if he proved untractable. Thus he makes Pretenders
to Christianity to be conducted by our Lord Christ and his Gospel, in the
conversation of Christians, till they come to demand their Baptism of the
Church: As it is manifest by the end of the Book, where this Governor,
conducting his charge to the Church, gives him up into his own hands (so he
says expressly) as no more Governor of children, but Master of men in the
School of his Church. Supposing then the point of manners and godly life to be
part of the substance of Christianity, it is evident, that the Church always
acknowledged a certain Rule of Faith, in that those who were thus prepared,
were always taught their Creed, that is, required to repete it, and hear it
expounded by those whom the Church trusted for that purpose. It is not my
intent here to insist, that the words of the Creed were delivered by the
Apostles themselves, or, that the Rule of Baptism delivered by our Lord, in
the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, is not a sufficient Symbol or
cognizance for a Christian. For what is there necessary to the salvation of all
Christians that is not contained in the profession of him, that desires to be
baptized into this Faith? But it is enough for my present purpose, that it was
always requisite, that whosoever is baptized, should be instructed upon what
terms he is to expect to be saved by Christ, and, that which all were
required to profess for that purpose, to be the Rule of Faith. For, whether it
may appear that this or that is of that nature must come to trial, though the
question be only of the sense of the Creed, supposing that the very words were
delivered by the Apostles themselves. For example: It is not possible to render
a reason of the coming of Christ, not mentioning the fall of Adam; nor of that,
not mentioning the Devil and his Angels; nor of that, not mentioning the
creation of Angels. The knowledge then requisite to save a Christian contains
the Apostasy of the evil Angels, whether it be in the Creed or not, because
neither the Creed as it is, nor Baptism in the name of the Father Son and Holy
Ghost, can be understood to have any sense, without supposing it. And therefore
Irenaeus I. 2. could not deliver this Rule without mentioning the Devil and his
Angels, though I intend not thereupon to argue, that it was contained in the
words of the Creed at that time. By S. Cyrils Catechises you shall understand,
that those who pretended to Baptism at Easter, were to be instructed in the
sense and grounds of their Creed during the Lent. And S. Augustine in his book
de Catechizandis rudibus, where he acquaints his friend that had writ to him
about something of that office, with the form that he was wont to use,
instructs him to begin with the beginning of Genesis, and, setting forth what
course God had taken with mankind before and under the Law, to bring down his
discourse to the coming of Christ, and from thence to his second coming to
Judgment. Which is to the very same purpose, only taking opportunity to mix
the motives of Faith, which the Old Testament contains with the matter of
Faith which the New Testament requires. Whatsoever then is said of the Rule of
Faith in the writings of the Fathers, is to be understood of the Creed;
Whereof, though it be not maintained, that the words which Pretenders were
required to render by heart were the same, yet the substance of it, and the
reasons and grounds which make every point necessary to be believed, were
always the same in all Churches, and remain unchangeable. I would not have
any hereupon to think, that the matter of this Rule is not, in my conceit,
contained in the Scriptures. For I find S. Cyril Catech. V. protesting, that
it contains nothing but that which concerned our salvation the most, selected
out of the Scriptures. And therefore in other places, he tenders his Scholars
evidence out of the Scriptures, and wishes them not to believe that whereof
there is no such evidence. And to the same effect, Eucherius in Symb. Hom. I.
Paschasius de Sp. S. in Praef. and after them Thomas Aquinas secunda II. Quest.
I. Art. IX. all agree, that the form of the Creed was made up out of the
Scriptures; Giving such reasons as no reasonable Christian can refuse. Not
only because all they whose salvation is concerned have not leisure to study
the Scriptures, but because they that have, cannot easily or safely discern
wherein the substance of Faith, upon the profession whereof our salvation
depends, consists; Supposing that they were able to discern between true and
false, in the meaning of the Scriptures. To which I will add only that which
T^rtullian and others of the Fathers observe of the ancient Heretics, that
their fashion was to take occasion, upon one or two texts, to overthrow and
deny the main substance and scope of the whole Scriptures. Which, whether it be
seen in the Sects of our time, or not, I will not say here, (because I will not
take any thing for granted, which I have not yet principles to prove) but
supposing it only a thing possible, I will think I give a sufficient reason
why God should provide Tradition as well as Scripture, to bound the sense of
it; As S. Cyril also cautioneth in the place aforenamed, where he so liberally
acknowledges the Creed to be taken out of the Scripture; (...). For (says
he) the Faith was not framed as it pleased men, but the most substantial
matters collected out of the Scripture do make up one doctrine of the Faith.
For, I beseech you, what had they, whosoever they were that first framed the
Creed, but Tradition, whereby to distinguish that which is substantial from
that which is not? Hear Origin in the Preface to his books (...). Cum multi
sum qui sentire se putent quae Christi sunt, and nonnulii eorum diversa a
prioribus sentiant, servetur vero Ecclesiastica praedicatio per successionis
ordinem ab Apostolis tradita, and usque ad praesens in Ecclesiis permanens;
Illa sola credenda est veritas, quae in nullo ab Ecclesiastica discordat
traditione. Illud tamen scire opor tet, quoniam sancti Apostoli, fidem Christi
praedicantes, de quibusdam quidem, quaecunque necessaria crediderunt, omnibus
credentibus, etiam his qui erga inquisitionem divinae scientiae pigriores
videbantur, manifestissime tradiderunt; Rationem scilicet assertionis
relinquentes eis inquirendam, qui Spiritus dona excellentia, and praecipue,
sermonis, sapientiae, and scientiae, per ipsum Spiritum Sanctum percipere
merebantur. De aliis vero, dixerunt quidem quia sint, quomodo autem aut unde
sint siluerunt, profecto, ut studiosiores quoque (l. quique) ex posteris suis,
amatores sapientiae and scientiae, exercitium habere possent, in quo ingenii
sui fructum ostendere valerent; Hi videlicet, qui dignos se and capaces
sapientiae praepararent. Species vero eorum quae per praedicationem Apostolicam
manifest traduntur, hae sunt. There being many, that think their sense to be
Christian, and yet the sense of some differs from their predecessors; But, that
which the Church preaches, as delivered by order of succession from the
Apostles, being preserved and remaining the same in the Churches; That only is
to be believed for truth, which nothing differs from the Tradition of the
Church. This, notwithstanding, we must know; That the holy Apostles, preaching
the Faith of Christ, delivered some things, (as many as they held necessary)
most manifestly to all believers, even those whom they found the duller in the
search of divine knowledge; Leaving the reason why they affirmed them to the
search of those, that go to receive the eminent gifts of the Holy Ghost,
especially of utterance, wisdom, and knowledge by the Holy Ghost. Of other
things, they said that they are, but how, or whereupon they are, they said not.
Forsooth, that the more studious of their Successors, loving wisdom and
knowledge, might have some exercise, wherein to show the fruit of their wit; To
wit, those that should prepare themselves to be worthy and capable of wisdom.
Now, the particulars of that which is manifestly delivered, by the preaching of
the Apostles, are these; Which he proceeds to set down. But Vincentius
Lerinensis has writ a Discourse on purpose, to show, that, this Rule of Faith,
being delivered by succession to the principal, as S. Paul requires Timothy to
do, and by them to those that were baptized, was the ground, upon which all
Heresies, attempting upon the Faith, were condemned. So that, so many Heresies,
as historical truth will evidence, to have been excluded the Church from the
Apostles time, for matter of belief, so many convictions of this Rule; Which,
because all agreed that they transgressed, therefore they were excluded the
Church. But, Vincentius besides this, advances another mark to discern what
belongs to the Rule, that is, what the ground and scope of our Creed requires.
For it might be said, that perhaps something may come in question whether
consistent with the Rule of Faith or not, in which there has passed no decree
of the primitive Church, because never questioned by that time; Wherein,
therefore, we shall be to seek, notwithstanding the decrees past by the Church
upon ancient Heresies. Which to meet with, Vincentius says further, that
whatsoever has been unanimously taught in the Church by writing, that is,
always, by all, every where, to that, no contradiction is ever to be admitted
in the Church. Here the style changes. For, whereas Irenaeus, Tertullian, and
others of former time, appeal only to that which was visible in the practice
of all Churches; By the time of the Council at Ephesus, (the dare of Vincentius
his book) so much had been written upon all points of Faith, and upon the
Scriptures, that he presumes, evidence may be made of it all, what may stand
with that which the whole Church had taught, what may not. I know this
proposition satisfies not now, because I know Vincentius proceeds upon
supposition, that the Church was and ought to be always one Body, in which,
that which agrees with the Faith might be taught, that which agrees not might
not; Which is the question now in dispute. For, upon other terms, it had been
madness in him to allege and maintain the Council of Ephesus, condemning
Nestorius as infringing the Rule of Faith, upon this presumption, because ten
received. Doctors of the Church had formerly delivered the contrary of his
doctrine. It is well enough known, that there are many questions, in which,
though there may be ten Fathers alleged on one side, yet there may be more
alleged on the other side. And it were a piteous case, if Vincentius or I could
tell you no wiser a way for the ending of Controversies in Religion, than by
counting noses. The presumption lies in this; That the witnesles that depose
being of such credit in the Church, as the quality which they bear in it
presupposes, it cannot reasonably be imagined, that they could teach that for
truth, which is inconsistent with Christianity, but they must be contradicted
in it, and their quality and degree in the Church questioned upon it. And that
the Church having been always one and the same Body from Christ, whosoever
should undertake to teach that for the Christian Faith, which from the
beginning had been counted false, he would have been questioned for
contradicting that profession, which qualified him for that rank which he held
in the Church. It is the case of Nestorius, who, venting his Heresy in the
Church, gave the people occasion to check at it, and the Council of Ephesus to
condemn it. Now Vincentius his discourse presupposes, that the doctrine of
those ten whom he allegeth had not been contradicted. A thing which must needs
be presupposed by him, that supposed the Great Council of Nicaea had decreed no
more than that which had always been taught in the Church. For it is plain,
that without questioning the Faith settled at Nicaea, there is no room for the
opinion of Nestorius. But otherwise, should ten of that quality which he
allegeth be so considerably contradicted, that it must be presumed, their
doctrine was suffered to pass, not as not taken notice of, but as not
contradicting the common profession of Christians, it will appear a
presumption, that neither part is of the substance of Faith, but both allowed
to be taught in the Church. And if it appear further, that the fewer in number,
and the less in rank and quality in the Church hold that which depends more
necessarily upon the Rule of Faith, which contains the substance of the
Scriptures, it will be no way prejudicial to the Unity and authority of the
Church, as a Corporation founded by God, that a private man as I am should
conclude it for truth, against the greater authority, in matters depending upon
the foundation of the Church.

If it be said, that this evidence supposes the necessity of Baptism to the
making of a Christian; Which, not only the Leviatha^ is far from granting,
who professes himself bound to renounce Christ at the command of his
Sovereign; But the Socinians also, and some of our Sectaries hold indifferent
to salvation, whether baptized or not; I answer; That the question here is not,
what belongs or belongs not to the Rule of Faith and Christian conversation,
necessary to the salvation of all Christians, but, whether there be any such
Rule or not. That the original and universal custom of Carechizing all
Christians evidenceth such a Rule, by the consent of all Christians, as you
have seen it evidenced by the frequent mention thereof in Scriptures. That
therefore it stands recommended to us by the same means, and upon the same
grounds, for which we receive the holy Scriptures. And that, though, when the
World was come into the Church, and many more were baptized infants then before,
it cannot be said that this order of Catechizing was so substantially performed
as before; Yet the matter and theme of it remaining in the Tradition of the
Creed, and the sense of it, in the writings of the Fathers and the decrees of
the Church against Heretics, it remains still visible what belongs to it, what
not, as I shall make appear, in that which is questioned within the subject of
this book. Only this is the place, where I am to allege against the Leviathan,
why the profession of Christianity is necessary to the salvation of all
Christians: Whereupon it will follow without further proof, that it is
necessary to salvation, to believe more than that Jesus is the Christ; To wit,
whatsoever this Rule of Christianity contains, the profession whereof is
requisite to Christianity. Hear our Lord, Mat. X. 32, 33. Luke XII. 8, 9.
Whosoever shall renounce me before men, him will I renounce before my Father
which is in heaven. And, whosoever shall acknowledge me before men, him will I
acknowledge before my Father which is in heaven. And S. Paul Romans X. 9, 10. If
thou confess with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lard, and believe with thy heart
that God raised him from the dead, that shall be saved. For with the heart a
man believes to righteousness, and with the mouth he professes to salvation.
And a Tim. II. 12. If we deny him, he will deny us. Our Lords Commission to
his Apostles is, Mat. XXVIII. 19. Go make disciples all Nations, baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. Who are then Christ's
Disciples? That we may know, what the Apostles are to make them whom they make
Christ's Disciples. Y^e are my Disciples (says our Lord) if ye do whatsoever I
command you. And John. XV. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye heart
(...) fruit: And ye shall be my Disciples. And Luke XIV. 26, 27. Whosoever comes
to (...), and hat^th not father and mother, and wife and children, and brothers
and sisters, yea and himself, cannot be my Disciple. And whose takes not up
his Cross and follows ^ee, cannot be my Disciple. To the same purpose M^^.
X, 38. XVI. 24. Mark VIII. 34. X. 21. Luke IX. 23. And S. Paul plainly
declares the Gala^ians fallen from all benefit of the Gospel, if, to avoid the
Cross of Christ, they should ^alk the profession of their Christianity to be
circumcised G^l. V. 11. VI. 12, 14. S. John charges the Churches of Pergamus
and Thyatira Apoc. II. 14, 15, 20. to have some that hold the doctrine of
Bala^m, who taught Balak to lay a stumbling block before the children of
Israel, of things offered to Idols and Wh^r^dome; which is the doctrine of the
Nicolaitanes. And, to suffer the woman J^zabel calling her self a Prophetess,
to teach and lead the servants of God into the error of whoredom, and eating
things sacrificed to Idols. S. Peter 1 Pet. II. 15. and S. Jude 11. charge the
Gnostics, whom they write against in those places, that they go the way of
Balaams, that brought the Israelites to join with B^^l Pe^r, taking the
invitation of their mistresses to the sacrifices of their Idols; Whom Ireneus,
Justin the Martyr, Origin, Cl^mons Alexandri^us and Tertulli^^ witness, to
have made the outward act of Idolatry, in eating things sacrificed to Idols an
indifferent thing, that they might avoid persecution, by complying with the
Gentiles in that, as with the Jews in being circumcised. And now, after
sixteen hundred years, We are told, that all that ever suffered for
Christianity since the Apostles, (who were to witness what they saw our Lord
do, and heard him say) were mutinous sooles, in laying down their lives to
testify that which they were not obliged to witness. or rather, which they
were obliged not to witness, the secular power requiting them not to witness
it. We have found one that calls himself a Christian, wiser than our Lord and
his Apostles, (as they called themselves Gnostics, because they pretended to
know more than the Apostles) that can tell Christians a way to escape the
Cross of Christ by renouncing Christianity, and not fail of the promises
thereof, by believing the truth of it. But they were the Disciples of Simon
Magus and not of Christ that did so, nor did they expect salvation by the
Christianity which they counterseited, but by that secret knowledge which they
pretended to have discovered, beyond that which all Christians had learned from
the Apostles; Though they went for Christians among the Gentiles, who knew not
what Christians were, so that the Name of God was blasphemed because of them,
as the Apostle says 1 Pet. II. 2. because their monstrous abominations were
thought to be the practices of Christians. Whether any man besides, before this
new Dogmatist, pretending to be a Christian, professed a freedom to renounce
Christ in any case, I am yet to learn. Sure I am, the Jews under Antiochus
Epiphanes died freely rather than eat Swines flesh, or give any occasion to
think, that they fell from their Law, and from God that gave it, as the Prophet
Daniel and his Fellows had left them example to do. And therefore, by the same
means, and upon the same grounds, for which we receive our Christianity, it
stands evidenced to us, that we are bound to profess it, that is to say, by
the Scriptures, and the consent of all Christians that receive the Scriptures.

As for Traditions regulating the order to be observed in the communion of the
Church, there is so little question to be made of the consent of all Church
writers, that it shall serve my turn, to produce the noted words of T^rtullian,
de Cor. cap. III. Pla^^ n^gabimus (traditionem) recipiendam, si nulla example
prejudicent aliarum observationum, quas, sine ullius Scripturae instrumento,
solius traditionis titulo; and exinde consuetudinis patrocinio vindicamus.
Denique, ut a baptismate ingrediar; Aquam aditnri, ibidem, sed and prius, in
Ecclesia, sub Antistitis. manu; contest amur, nos renunciare Diabolo, and
pompae, and angelis ejus; dehinc ter niergitamur, amplius aliquid respondentes,
quam Domintes in Evangelio determinavit. Inde suscepti, lactis and mellis
concordiam praegustamus. Exque ea die lavacro quotidiano per totam hebdomadam
abstinemus. Eucharistiae sacramentum, and in tempore victlus, and omnibus
mandatum a Domino, etiam antelucanis coetibus, nec de aliorum manu quam
praesidentium sumimus. Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitiis, annua die
facimus. Die dominico jejunium nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare. Eadem
immunitate, a die Paschae ad Pentecosten usque gaudemus. Calicis, aut panis
etiam nostri aliquid in terram decuti, anxie patimur. Ad omnem progressum atque
promotum, ad omnem aditum and exitum, ad vestitum, ad calceatum, ad lavacra, ad
mensas, ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad sedilia, quaecunque nos conversatio exercet,
frontem crucis signaculo terimus. Plainly we must deny to receive this
Tradition, if there be no examples of other observations for a prejudice,
which, without any instrument in writing, the only title of Tradition and plea
of Custom from it, maintains. In fine, to begin with baptism; Going into
the water, not only there, but somewhat before, in the Church, under the hand
of our President, we take witness, that we renounce the Devil, his pomp and
Angels. Then we are drenched thrice, answering somewhat more, than our Lord in
the Gospel has limited. Being taken up from thence, we fore-taste a mixture
of milk and honey. And from that day, we forbear our daily bathing all the
week. The Sacrament of the Eucharist, which our Lord commanded at the time of
meat, and all, we take also at our assemblies before day, but at no man's hand
but our Presidents. We offer for those that dye, and again, upon the
anniversary of their birth. We count it unlawful to fast, or worship kneeling
upon the Lords day. The same privilege we enjoy from Easter to Whitsuntide.
We are troubled to have any thing, even of our ordinary cup or bread,
scattered upon the earth. At all going forth or advancing, at all coming in and
going out, at putting on clothes or shoes, at watching, at lying or sitting
down, or to table, at bringing in light, whatsoever conversation we exercise,
we rub our foreheads with the sign of the Cross. I must here take notice of
an exception to this authority of Tertullian, that he was a Montanist, or
inclining to the Montanists when he writ it; And marvail, that prejudice in
Religion should transport learned Christians so far, as to deny the records
of the Church that credit, which common sense allows all records of historical
truth, and which all Learning allows the writings of Mahumetans, Jews and
Pagans. And this consideration I interpose the rather here, to prevent the
objection that may be made, that I ground my self upon the authority of men,
when I allege the testimonies of Church Writers. For, those that may abuse
themselves with such a fond imagination as this, are to consider, that I claim
as yet no other credit, not only for Tertullian, who after he turned
Montanist, was not of the Church, but, for the Fathers of the Church, but that
which common sense allows men of common sense, in witnessing matters of
historical truth. To wit, that they who published writings that are come to
posterity, would not have alleged things for true, which every man might see to
be false, in point of fact; Because, by so doing, common sense must needs tell
them, that they must of necessity utterly discredit the cause which they meant
to promote. As in the case in hand. If we say that Tertullian, being a
Montanist, alleged against the Church things so notoriously false, that all the
world might see and know them to be false, we refuse him the credit of a man
in his right senses. For what were he but a mad man, that would tell the
Church, that such or such Customs, you know, are practiced among Christians,
knowing that they were not practiced by the Catholic Church, though they might
be, among the Montanists? Therefore, though I put a great deal of difference
between the authority of Tertullian and S. Basil in regulating the Church, yet,
in witneshng matter of fact, I can ascribe no more to S. Basils testimony, in
his book de Sp. S. cap. XXVII. than I do to this of Tertullian. His words are
these. (...); Of things decreed and preached that are kept in the Church, some
we have from written doctrine, some we have received as delivered in secret
down to us from the Tradition of the Apostles, both of the same force to
godliness. And this will no man contradict, that has but a little experience
in the rules of the Church. For if we go about to refuse unwritten customs as
of no great effect, we shall, unawares, wound the Gospel in the dangerous
part, or rather turn the Faith preached into a bare name. As, first to mention
the first and commonest; Who taught us by writing, to mark with the figure of
the Cross those that have hoped in the name of our Lord Christ Jesus? What
Scripture taught us to turn to the East when we pray? Which of the Saints left
us by writing the words of invocation, upon discovering the bread of
Thanksgiving and the cup of Blessing? For we are not content with those which
the Apostle or the Gospel mentions, but promote and infer others as of great
force toward the Sacrament, which we have received by unwritten doctrine? We
also bless the water of Baptism, and the oil of anointing, and besides, the
man himself that is baptized, from what Scripture, and not from silent and
secret Tradition? And indeed what written word taught the very anointing of
oil? And that a man is drenched thrice, whence comes it? And other things
about Baptism, renouncing Satan and his Angels, from what Scripture come they?
And not from this unpublished and secret doctrine? I will not here dispute the
saying of S. Basil, that these orders are of the same force, toward Christian
piety, as the Scriptures; And, that Christianity would be but a bare name, were
it not for these unwritten customs; how the truth of it holds. Nay, it were
easy to instance against him, as well as against Tertullian, that, among the
particulars which they name, there are those which never were in force through
the whole Church, but only in some parts of it. My present purpose demands
only this, that Christians had rules which they observed for Laws in the
exercise of their communion; And therefore, by the intent of those who enforced
those rules, do constitute a Society or Corporation by the name of the Church.
Which Corporation, Tertullian, whether a Montanist or not when he writ the
book which I quote, claims to belong to, in reckoning himself among those
that observed the Rules of the Catholic Church. If we suppose the Church to
be one Body, consisting of all Churches, which are all of them several Bodies,
it will be not only reasonable, but absolutely necessary by consequence to
grant, that some orders there must be, which shall have the force of the whole,
others only in some parts of it. And though S. Basil or Tertullian mistake
local customs for general, yet had there not always been a Body, capable of
being tied by general customs, there had been no room for this mistake. No
prejudice shall hinder me, to name here the Canons and Constitutions of the
Apostles; Not as if I meant to maintain, that the writings so called, were
indeed penned by them: But because they contain such limitations, of customs
delivered the Church by the Apostles, as were received and in use, at such
times and in such parts of the Church, where those who penned those writings
writ. For, though I should grant, that those limitations are not agreeable to
that which was brought in by the Apostles, no man would be so ridiculous as to
demand, that there were never any orders or customs delivered the Church by
the Apostles, which succeeding times did limit otherwise. The book of Canons
which was acknowledged by the representatives of the whole Church, in the
Council of Chalcedon, if it be survayed, shall be found to contain, only,
particular limitations of general orders, held by the Church, before those
Canons were made by the several Councils, either the same with those in the
Canons and Constitutions of the Apostles, or differing only according to
several times and places. For, we have yet extant a book of Canons made out of
the Africane Councils, containing the like limitations of the same customs and
orders, which, though not the same, yet served to preserve the Churches of
Africa in unity with the rest of the Church. This Code, we find added to the
former, by Dionysius Ex^guus, in his translation of the Canons, together with
the Canons of the Council at Sardica. And Cassiodore, who lived the same time
with Dionysius, affirms, that this collection was in use in the Church of Rome
at that time, Divin. lect. cap. XXIII. But there is extant a later Collection
of Canons, under the title of the Church of Rome, consisting of the same
Canons, together with some of the Rescripts of Popes, which were come into use
and authority in the Western Church, at such time as the said Collection was
made. Of the same Canons consists another Greek collection, printed by du
Tillet, and commented by Balsamon, which adds hereunto the Canons of the
sixth and seventh Synod, in use in the Greek Church, but not acknowledged by
the Latin. Where, instead thereof, the collections of Martinus Braccarensis,
and Isidorus Mercator, of Burchardns Bishop of Worms, and Ives of Chartres;
where, last of all, the collection of Gratiane the Dominican Monk was in use,
till the Rescripts of the Pope took place, and excluded the Canons of the whole
Church. The succession of which Law is so visible, that he that may say, that,
the order presently in force, can no way agree with that, which was established
by the Apostles, shall not have the face to asfirm, that there never was any
order established by the Apostles instead of it, so visible shall the
impressions be, of that corruption, by which it declines from the order first
established by the Apostles.

And therefore, I allege here in the last place, the consent of those of the
Reformation, who, in answering this objection, (when it is argued, that,
therefore Tradition is necessary as well as Scripture) do not deny, that there
was a Rule of Faith, that there were Orders delivered the Church by the
Apostles, to preserve the Unity of the Church. But, to answer for themselves,
why they stand not to the present Church of Rome in them, do allege; That the
Rule of Faith, delivered the Church by word of mouth, is also delivered by
writing, and contained in the Scriptures: Tnat the Rules of good order, which
the Apostles delivered, were never intended, to be unchangeable, as you may
hear Tertullian say de Velandis Virginibus cap. I. For, in making this answer,
they do acknowledge, that the Church had a Rule of Faith, which it had received
for a Law from the Apostles, and therefore delivered for a Law to all that
became Christians. But, whether this Rule be contained in the Scriptures or
not, concerns not my present purpose, seeing it will be as much the cognizance
of Christians, and foundation of the Society and Corporation of the Church,
(tending to maintain unity in the profession and exercise of Christianity)
whether so or otherwise. Only no man will deny, that it may be not so easy to
discern by the Scriptures alone what belongs to it, what not, as it may appear
to be, by the Churches delivering of it. Nor do I pretend here, that the orders
delivered by the Apostles are all unchangeable. For who knows not, that the
Laws of every Commonwealth do change from age to age, the state of Government
remaining the same, because those rights in which Sovereignty consists remain
the same? And therefore, it is enough for my purpose, that the Church had
certain orders, regulating the proceeding thereof, in matters wherein it is to
communicate, as well under the Apostles, as in succeeding ages. Nor requiring,
that they should be always the same, but, that they should come always from the
same power, which they left in the Church, that so the Body may appear to
continue always one and the same. And, that I proceed to prove, by showing,
that the power of those public persons, which did always act in behalf of the
Church, in admitting into and excluding out of the Church (whereby those Laws
were in force, and wherein the Unity of the Church consists) is derived from
our Lord, by the act of his Apostles.

CHAP. VIII. That the Power of Governing the whole Church was in the Apostles
and Disciples of Christ, and those whom they took to assist them in the parts
of it. The Power of their Successors must needs be derived from those. Why that
Succession which appears in one Church, necessarily holds all Churches. The
holding of Councils evidenceth the Unity of the Church.
FOr, this I must presume of, in the first place; That, as the Church is, and
was to be, the true spiritual Israel of God, when his ancient people departed
from him, by refusing the Gospel; So, to signify this, did our Lord choose out
XII. Apostles and LXX Disciples, answerable to the XII Princes of Tribes, and
the LXX Elders, which, with Moses, were to govern Gods ancient people. Neither
do I mervail, that we find in the Scriptures no further use made of these
LXX, no further power exercised by them, under that title; The difference
between Gods ancient and new people appearing straight after our Lords
Ascension, and making that order useless for the future. For Israel, dwelling
all in one Land, might easily be governed by one Sovereign Court, in matters of
the Law, answerable in power to that of Moses and his LXX Elders: But
Christianity, being to be dispersed all over the world, those LXX with our Lord
chose for his present service, could not serve for the like purpose, in time to
come. It is therefore enough, that the number of them signifies unto us the
foresaid purpose, their office, for the time to come, being swallowed up in the
offices of the rest of our Lords Disciples, besides the XII Apostles, remaining
always the Judges of the XII Tribes of Israel, here and in the world to come.
I am sensible that some, both of our Presbyterians and Independents, have been
nibbling at this point, as if they had a mind, if they durst, to say; That the
Apostles had no authority in the Church but as writers of Scriptures: As for
the Government of the Church, that the people, or their buckram Elders were to
give them checkmate in it. But, having met with this pretense in another place,
and heard no man open his mouth to maintain it, I shall, at present, rest
content to have showed before, that their authority is the ground of the
authority of their writings, and here, that their Traditions were Law to the
Church, and that by their writings, which mention not so much as what the
Traditions were. Whereby it appears, that they took place, as acts of their
perpetual authority over the Church, not as revelations of Gods will, sent by
those Epistles, wherein sometimes they are not so much as named.

Besides the Apostles then, at such time as the Church of Jerusalem contained
all Christendom, as I observed before, you have mention of the Elders at
Jerusalem, Acts XI. 30. XV. 2, 4, 6, 22, 23. And again, after the propagation
of Christianity, XXI. 18. Of leading men also among the brethren, who were also
Prophets, Doctors and Evangelists, XV. 22, 32, 35. These then had not their
commission from the Apostles because other disciples, as well as the XII,
received at our Lords own hands the power of remitting sins, by the Holy Ghost,
John XX. 18-23. But there was never yet any doubt made, that their authority
was limitable by the Apostles, because of the eminence of the XII among the
Disciples. And therefore, he that would say, that the LXX were contained in
the number of those Elders and Leaders, could no more be contradicted, then
some of the Ancient Fathers can be contradicted, in reporting, that some of
them were of the number of the VII that were chosen to assist the Apostles,
Acts VI. S. Paul, further, rehearsing the graces that our Lord has granted for
the edification of his Church, reckons Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets,
Pastors and Doctors Ephesians. IV. 11. 1 Cor. XII. 28. Now, it is the whole Church
that the Apostle speaks of here, as I observed before, and therefore, the
authority here mentioned extends to the whole Church. But it is manifest,
that the authority which S. Paul gives Timothy and Titus, as his Epistles to
them evidence, is respective to the Churches of Ephesus and Creet, or at the
most, those Churches which resorted to them; Yet are they enabled thereby to
constitute Bishops for the service of the said Churches, as also their Deacons,
and to govern the same 1 Timothy II. 5. Titus I. 6-9. The Elders of the Church
which S. Paul sent for to Ephesus, had authority respective to the Church there
meant, but received from S. Paul, as his directions and exhortations intimate
Acts XX. 17, 28-21. So did the Elders which he and Barnabas ordained in the
Churches Acts XIV. 28. The like we find in the Churches of the Jews Heb.
XIII. 7, 17. James V. 14. 1 Pet. V. 1-5. and of the Thessalonians and
Philippians, 1 Thessalonians. V. 12, 13. Phil. I. 1. And the seven Churches of Asia
have their seven Angels, which, the Epistles which the Spirit directs S. John
to write them do show, that they were to acknowledge his authority, Apoc. I.
20. II. III. So, as long as the Scriptures last, it is evident, that there was
a common authority, whether derived from, or concurrent with the authority of
the Apostles, which must needs make the Church one Body during that time,
whatsoever privilege can be challenged on behalf of the people, and their
concurrence to the acts either of each particular Church, or of the whole.

And for the continuance of this authority after the Apostles, I see no cause
why I should seek far for evidence. It shall susfice me to allege the Heads
of the Churches of Rome, Alexandira, Antiochia and Jerusalem, recorded by
Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical Histories, from the time of the Apostles. Adding
thereunto thereunto the protestations of Irenaeus III. 3. that he could reckon
those rhat received their authority from the Apostles, in all Churches, though,
for brevities sake, he insist only in the Church of Rome; And of Tertullian
de Praescript. cap. XXXII. who also allegeth, the very Chaires which the
Apostles sat upon, possessed by those that succeeded them in his time, as well
as the Originals of those Epistles which they sent to such Churches, extant in
his time. I will also remember S. Augustine Epistola CLXV, and Optatus lib. II.
alleging the same succession in the Church of Rome, to confound the Donatists
with, for departing from the comminion thereof, and of all Churches that then
communicated with it. For what will any man in his right senses say to this?
That this authority came not from the Apostles? Or that it argues every one of
these Churches to be a Body by it self, but not all of them to make one Body
which is the Catholic Church? He that says this, must answer Irenaeus,
alleging, for a reason, why he instances only in the Church of Rome; Ad hanc
enim Ecclesiam, propter potentiorem principalitatem, necesse est omnem
convenire Ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt undique sideles. For, to this
Church, it is necessary that all Churches, that is, the Christians that are on
all sides, should resort, because of the more powerful principality. What is
the reason why it is enough for Irenaeus to instance in the Church of Rome but
this; That all Churches do communicate with the Church of Rome, when they
resort to Rome, and all resort thither because it is the sear of the Empire?
So, that which is said of the Faith of the Church of Rome, is said of the Faith
of all Churches: And potentior principalitas is not command of the Church over
other Churches, but the power of the Empire, which forces the Christians of all
sides to resort to Rome. Again, the cause of the Church against the Donarists
stands upon this ground; that, the Church of Rome, which the Churches of Africa
did communicate with, communicated with all Churches besides those of Africa:
But, that Church of Rome which the Donatists communicated with, (for they also
had set up a Church of their own at Rome) the rest of the Church did not
communicate with. How this came to pass, you may see by the cause of the
Novatians, being the same in effect with that of the Donatists. By the IV Canon
of Nicaea it is provided, that every Bishop be made by all the Bishops of the
Province, some of them, (as many as can) meeting, the rest allowing the
proceedings under their hand. This provision might be made, when there were
Churches in all Cities of all Provinces, but the I Canon of the Apostles only
requires, that a Bishop be ordained by two or three Bishops. For, when
Christianity was thinner sowed, if two or three should take the care of
providing a Pastor for a Church that was void, their proceeding was not like to
be disowned by the rest of the neighboring Churches, nor, in particular, by
that of the chief City, to which the Cities of the rest resorted for justice.
The Churches of these chief Cities holding intelligence, correspondence, and
communion with other Churches of other principal Cities, those Churches which
they owned, together with their Rulers, (or whosoever they were that acted on
behalf of them) must needs be owned by them in the same unity and
correspondence. The Bishop of Rome being dead while the question depended,
whether those that had fallen away in the persecution of Decius should be
readmitted to communion or not; And the neighbor Bishops being assembled,
sixteen of them ordain Cornelius, three of them Novatianus, who stood strictly
upon rejecting them, whatsoever satisfaction they tendered the Church. Whether
of these should be received, was for a time questionable, especially in the
Church of Antiochia, and those Churches which adheered to it. Until, by the
intercession of Dionysius of Alexandria, they were induced to admit of
Cornelius without dispute. All this, and much more, you have in Eusebius Eccl.
Hist. VI. 42-46. Which being done, there remained no further question, that
those who held with Cornelius were to be admitted, those that held with
Novatianus remaining excommunicate. Whereby it appears, that, by the
communication which passed between the greatest Churches, and the adherence of
the less unto them, whatsoever Church communicated with any Church
communicated with the whole: And in what quality soever a man was known in his
own Church, in the same he was acknowledged by all Churches. And therefore,
the succession of the Rulers of any Church from the Apostles is enough, to
evidence the unity of the Catholic Church, as a visible Corporation consisting
of all Churches.

I must not here omit to allege the authority of Councils, and to maintain the
right and power of holding them, and the obligation which the decrees of them
regularly made is able to create, to stand by the same authority of the
Apostles. Which if I do, there can no further question remain, whether the
Church was founded for a Corporation by our Lord and his Apostles, when we see
the parts ruled by the acts of the whole; That is to say, when we see persons
authorized in behalf of their particular Churches, do an act which shall oblige
those respective Churches. For by the same reason, persons authorized on behalf
of all Churches, shall be able to do an act that shall oblige all Churches;
Which is all that I claim, when I maintain, that, by Gods Law, all Churches are
to make one Church. When Matthias was Ordained an Apostle in stead of Judas, I
demand, why that Assembly of Apostles and Disciples at which this was done,
should not be counted a General Council; having showed, that this Church of
Jerusalem was then the whole Church, and the creating of an Apostle, whom all
were to acknowledge in that quality for the future, being an act concerning the
Whole. I will not say, that the act of creating the seven, Acts VI. concerned
the whole Church, being content that it remain in question, whether the intent
of it were such or not. But in as much as those that do not allow, that they
intended to create an Order of Deacons which all Churches were to make use of
afterward, do not question, that, if they did intend it, the whole Church must
needs stand obliged by it, I am not afraid, to reckon this Assembly also in the
rank of General Councils. As for that of Acts XV. it appears sufficiently,
that, those who founded the Church of Antiochia, had their first commission
from the Apostles, not only by the first preaching of the Gospel there, and
the sending of Barnabas Acts XI. 19-26. but chiefly, in that those which taught
the necessity of observing Moses Law are disowned, as having no commission so
to teach Acts XV. 24. For, as for S. Paul, who challenges an immediate
commission from our Lord, Gal. I. 1. it is easily granted, because he was made
an Apostle; Yet, in that he allegeth the verifying of it to S. Peter and S.
James, and the Churches of Judaea, (who, having never seen his face, glorified
God for him Gal. I. 18-24.) in that he is brought by Barnabas (who acted by
commission from the Apostles) to Antiochia, and upon this beginning was sent by
the Holy Ghost, that is, by Prophecy, to do the office of an Apostle with
Barnabas Acts XII. 1, 2, 3. in that he is owned by the Apostles afterward
Acts XV. 12. Gal. II. 1, 7-10. (which makes it more than probable, that both
these Texts speak of one and the same time of S. Paul's coming to Jerusalem) in
these regards, I say, it appears sufficiently, that the Church was to own him
for an Apostle, upon the owning his immediate calling from heaven, by the rest
of the Apostles. Wherefore; when we see those that were trusted on behalf of
the Church of Antiochia, and those Churches which had been founded by those
that were sent by the Holy Ghost from thence, resort to the Apostles and Church
at Jerusalem, for an end of the difference in debate, well may I, with those
that have gone before me, reckon this meeting among the General Councils, the
cause of it concerning the whole; and no part concerned that it obliged not. I
will not say so much of the meeting of S. Paul with S. James Acts XXI. 18.
(though the Elders there mentioned are thought to be those, that had the chief
authority in the neighboring Churches, as well as in that of Jerusalem; And
though S. Paul, by this time, was become the Head of many more Churches of his
own foundation than before) Because of the dispersion of the rest of the
Apostles, and the founding of other Churches by this time, which could not be
tied by the result of this meeting, further than the matter of it was enforced
by the decree formerly made, of which, among the Apostles, there ought no doubt
to be made. Let no man expect that I infer upon these premises, that the
Church is bound by a positive Law of God to call Councils, and to decide all
emergencies by the vote of them, much less, that it is not able to do this
otherwise. I that pretend the Church to be a Corporation, founded by God, upon
a privilege of holding visible Assemblies for the common service of God,
notwithstanding any secular force prohibiting the same, must needs maintain by
consequence, that the Church has power in it self to hold all such Assemblies,
as shall be requisite to maintain the common service of God, and the unity in
it, and the order of all Assemblies that exercise it, but especially, that
profession which it supposes. But I intend not therefore to tie the Church to
inflame persecution, by holding such Assemblies, as may give occasion of
sinister suspicions, to secular Powers that protect not Christianity, when the
effect of such Assemblies is to be obtained without assembling. For, whosoever
they be, that ought to be authorized in behalf of particular Churches, to
constitute a Council, they can have no other authority than their respective
Churches do challenge. It cannot be imagined, that, being present in one place
together, and seeing one another faces, can purchase them that authority which
they cannot have at home, to conclude the whole by the consent of the Council.
The presence of Representatives affords infinite opportunities, of better
information, one from another, by debate one with another, which distance of
place allows not otherwise. But yet, in matters concerning the state of the
Whole, or any great part of it, means of information, for the maintenance of
that confederacy, wherein I maintain the Society of the Church to stand, is to
be had, by daily intercourse, intelligence, and correspondence between
Churches, without those Assemblies of Representatives which we call Councils.
A thing so visibly practiced by the Catholic Church from the beginning, that,
thereupon, I conceive, it may be called a standing Council, in regard of the
continual settling of troubles, arising in some part, and tending to question
the peace of the whole, by the consent of other Churches concerned, had and
obtained by means of this mutual intelligence and correspondence. The holding
of Councils is a way of far greater dispatch, but the express consent of
Churches obtained upon the place, is a more certain foundation of peace, in
regard of the many questions that may arise, as well in the discharge of that
trust which Representatives are charged with, as in the respect allowed their
votes by the Council; As it may easily appear, by the difficulties that have
risen about executing the decrees of Councils. And therefore the power of them
is merely deriv^tive from their respective Churches, tending to supply those
difficulties of bringing the whole to agreement, which distance of place
creates. That therefore which I allege here is this; That the succession of
Pastors alleged by Irenaeus and Tertullian, to convince the Heretics of their
time, by S. Augustine and Optatus, to convince the Donatists to be
Schismatics, proceed wholey upon supposition of daily intercourse and
correspondence between Churches, as of force to conclude particular Churches by
consent of the whole. Which is the true reason of the visibility of the Church,
and the assurance that every particular Christian might have, during this
intelligence and correspondence, that, holding communion with his own Pastor,
he held the true Faith, together with the Unity of the Catholic Church;
Neither putting trust in man, which God curses, nor in his own understanding
for the sense of the Scriptures, but trusting his own common sense, as well for
the means of conveying to him the matter, as the motives of Christianity. For
why is it enough for Irenaeus and Tertullian, for S. Augustine and Optatus, to
allege the Church of Rome, and the succession from the Apostles, for evidence,
that the Faith of those Heretics was contrived by themselves, that the
Donatists were out of communion with the Church? Because, supposing that the
Apostles and Disciples of our Lord all communicated in the same Faith which
they taught the Churches of their own founding, other Churches founded, and the
Pastors of them constituted by the authority of those Churches, must needs be
founded and settled upon condition of maintaining and professing the same
Faith. So that if any Christian or Pastor should attempt the unsettling of any
part thereof, the people to stand bound, rather to follow the original consent
of the whole, from whence they received their Christianity, than any man that
should forfeit his engagement to the whole, in the judgment of the whole. This,
being the true ground for the authority of Councils, might and did take effect
without assembling of Councils. S. Cyprian directs his leters to Steven Bishop
of Rome, to write to the Churches of Gaul, to ordain a new Bishop in stead of
Marcianus in the Church of Arles, because he had joined with the Novatians. To
the Spanish Bishops, owning the Deposing of Basilides and Martialis, and the
Ordaining of those whom they had put in their places, notwithstanding that,
upon false suggestions; they had gained Steven Bishop of Rome to maintain them,
Epist. LXV, LXVI. Could any man in his right senses have attempted this, had it
not been received among Christians which he alleges, that the people of
particular Churches are bound not to acknowledge those for their Pastors, whom
the communion of the Church disowneth, whether assembled in Council or not? The
acts of Councils themselves, (such are the creation of a Bishop of Arles in
stead of Marcianus, of Spanish Bishops in stead of Basilides and Martialis)
depending upon the authority of the Churches of Rome and Carthage, that
concurred not to them in presence.

If this be imputed to any mistake of Gods appointment in the ancient Church,
it will be easy for me to allege Tertullians reason to as good purpose
against our Independent Congregations, as he used it against the Heretics of
his time. For, if the chief Power of the Church be vested in those that
assemble to serve God at once, without any obligation to the resolution of
other Congregations, then is the trust that a Christian can repose in the
Church resolved into that confidence which he has of those seven, with whom
he joyneth to make a Congregation, that the ruling part of them cannot fail.
Or rath^r, into that which he has of himself, and of the Spirit of God,
guiding his choice to those that shall not fail. They, presuming themselves to
have the Spirit of God, without declaring, what Christianity they profess, for
the condition upon which they obtain it; need no provision of a Catholic
Church to preserve that Faith, which the Gift of the Holy Ghost supposes. God,
who requires the profession of a true Faith, in them upon whom he bestows
his Spirit, has provided the communion of his Church, for a means to assure us
of that which it preserves. That it is presumption in them to oversee this, no
imposture in the Church to challenge it, Tertullians reason determines; The
Heretics pleaded that the Churches had departed from the Faith which the
Apostles had left them: To this, after other allegations, he sets his rest up
on this one, that error is infinite, truth one and the same; That no common
sense will allow that to be a mistake, in which all Christians agree. They all
agreed in the same Faith against those Heretics, because they all agreed in
acknowledging the Catholic Church, provided by God to preserve and propagate
it, against our Independent Congregations. Thus Tertullian, de Praescript.
XXVIII. There have been some Disputers of Controversies that have claimed the
benefit of Tertullians exception against the Heretics of his time in behalf of
the Church of Rome. He pleads, not that the Catholics ought not, but that
they are not bound to admit them to dispute upon the Scriptures, being able to
condemn them without the Scriptures. And they plead, that, the Reformation not
standing to those Pastors, whom they acknowledge to possess the place of those
that derived their authority by succession from the Apostles, may be condemned
without Scripture, as not holding the truth, who hold not that which is taught
by the said Pastors. Which is to demand of those of the Reformation, for an end
of all debates, first to acknowledge those Pastors, and that which they teach,
then to take that for the true meaning of the Scripture, which, that which they
reach allows or requires. But this supposes the sentence of the Church to be
an infallible ground for the truth of that which it determines; And therefore
to be accepted with the same Faith as our common Christianity, or the
Scriptures: Which I showed you already to be false. It shall therefore suffice
me to say, that those men consider not the difference, between the plea of the
Reformation, and that of those Heretics. For they, acknowledging our Lord
Christ and his Apostles, no otherwise than the Alcoran and Mahomet does, where
they served their turn; made no scruple to say, when it was for their purpose,
that they knew not the depth of Gods mind, which themselves, by some secret
way having attained to know, were therefore called Gnostics; That they
imparted not the utmost of their knowledge to all alike, when that served their
turn; That therefore the Scriptures were unperfect, and revealed not that
secret, whereby they promised their salvation, but by incklings. These things
you shall find in Tertullian de Praescript. XXII. and Irenaeus, III. 1. as
well as that plea which I mentioned before, that the Churches were fallen from
that which they had received of the Apostles. Whereas, those of the Reformation
allege against the Church of Rome, that those Heretics pretended Tradition as
they do. Without cause indeed; For, what is Tradition pretended to be delivered
in secret, to them, and by them who tender no evidence for it, to that which
the visibility of Christianity, and the grounds upon which it is settled
justifies? But so as to make it appear that they no way disown the Apostles,
or their writings, nor can expect salvation by any other means. And therefore
are manifestly to be tried by the Scriptures acknowledged on both sides,
provided the trial may have an issue, which, I pretend, requires the Tradition
of the Church, and that, the communion and Corporation of the Church, as the
only means to maintain and propagate Tradition in it. This our Independent
Congregations cannot allow, but must stand upon the other plea of those
Heretics, that it came in beside, if not against Gods appointment; which the
Donatists questioned not. And therefore you shall find S. Austine, in the
place aforenamed, allege against them the Scriptures, foretelling the calling
of all Nations, which he supposes fulfilled in the Catholic Church then
visible; and therefore supposes the communion to be ordained by God, wherein
the visibility thereof consists. Otherwise it had been strange to tell the
Donatists, that they, communicating with the Catholic Bishop of Rome,
communicated with all the Church that acknowledged him, but the Donatists,
acknowledging the Donatist Bishop whom they had set up at Rome, were therefore
disowned by all the Church beside. I do not deny, that those of the Reformation
are to give account of those things which the Donatists are charged with; Nor
do I imagine, that their account cannot be sufficient, because that of the
Donatists was not. But I say, that, the trial must be by the Scriptures which
both parts acknowledge. And I say further, that the rest of the Reformation may
and ought to admit the Unity of the Church in visible communion as the
Donatists did, because otherwise they cannot pretend that others are bound to
b^ what they are: But our Independent Congregations cannot, because if all were
as they, there could be no one Church obliged to that communion which makes it
visible.

Now I must here caution, that I intend not here to infer, that these Rulers
succeeded the Apostles by a title of Divine Right, as if it were Gods Law that
this succession should always continue. For I demand, for the present, upon
the exception of those of the Reformation, that, succession of Faith and
doctrine is of more consequence than succession of persons; And therefore, that
there can be no Law of God, whereby the right which men hold by personal
succession can or ought to hinder the Reformation of Faith and doctrine of
Christianity, if it may appear, that the succession of persons has not been
effectual to preserve the succession of Faith. That which I demand from the
premises is this; That no man in his right senses can imagine, that all
Christendom should agree, in acknowledging those for lawful Rulers of the
Church in the times next the Apostles, that had usurped their places contrary
to the will of the Apostles, and those Disciples which concurred to the work of
the Apostles, and those who derived their authority from either of both, during
the time of the Scriptures which I spoke of before. For, those of the
Reformation that make this exception, by making it, do acknowledge, that there
was such a visible succession of Pastors, the correspondence of whom, as here I
argue, maintained the unity of a visible Corporation in the Catholic Church.
And, how many records of historical truth, undeniable of all that would not be
thought to renounce their common sense, do testify unto us visible acts of the
Apostles, giving power to them whom they left behind them, as those whom they
gave it to have transmitted the like power to their successors? But, when it
once appears, that they were owned by the consent of all Christians,
communicating with them in that quality which they held in their own Churches,
it can no more be imagined, that they could attain those qualities by deceit or
violence, contrary to the will of their predecessors, than it can be imagined,
that the common Christianity, which we all acknowledge, could prevail over
all, by imposing upon their belief, such motives to believe, as never were
seen, because never done. And therefore, whatsoever change may have succeeded
in those qualities, from that which the Apostles instituted from the beginning,
or, by abuse of the same, in the Faith which they were trusted to propagate
without adding or taking away, (which changes may be the subject of Reformation
in the Church and the belief of it) yet that this point is not of that nature;
That all lawful authority in the Church is derived from that which was in the
Apostles, propagated by some visible act of theirs; I will presume upon as
proved by the premises.

CHAP. IX. The Keys of the Church given the Apostles, and exercised by
Excommunication under the Apostles. The ground thereof is that profession,
which, all that are baptized are to make. That Penance and abatemeut of Penance
has been in force ever since and under the Apostles. In particular, of
excluding Heretics.
IN the last place, the right of Excommunication consists in the power of
remitting and retaining sins, given by our Lord to his Church with the Keys of
it. First to S. Peter alone our Lord says; Mat. XVI. 19. I will give thee the
Keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall
be bound in heaven, whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed there;
But afterward, to the Body of his Disciples; Mat. XVIII. 17, 18. If he hear
thee not, tell the Church: If he hear not the Church, let him be unto thee as a
Heathen or a Publicane. Verily I say unto you; Whatsoever yet bind -- as
before. And to the XII. breathing upon them; John XX. 22, 23. Receive ye the
Holy Ghost. Whose sins soever ye remit they are remitted, and whose sins
soever ye retain they are retained. By virtue of this Commission S. Peter
says to Simon Magus, discovered a counterfeit Christian, Acts VIII. 20-24. Thy
money perish with thee, because thou have thought to purchase the gift of God
with money. Thou have neither part nor lot in this Word, for thy heart is not
right before God. Repent thorefore of this thy malice, and pray God, that, if
possible, this device of thine heart may be forgiven thee. For I see thou art
in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of unrighteousness. And Simon
answering said; Pray you to the Lord for me, that nothing come upon me of
that which you have said. Where, having excluded him from the benefit of
Christianity, what he is to expect, he leaves to the trial of future time.
But most manifestly S. Paul 1 Cor. V. commands them to deliver the incestuous
person to Satan, adding directions and reasons why they are to abstain from
the conversation of such Christians. And pursues this discourse with a charge,
of ending the suits of their Christians, within the Church, 1 Cor. VI. which
either signifies nothing, or inforces the power of Excommunication to oblige
the parties to stand to the sentence. But, the case of the incestuous person is
made still more manifest, by the reason of the sentence in joined upon his
repentance, and the sorrow testified by the Church 2 Cor. II. 4-11. VII. 8-11.
In the Epistle to the Ebrewes VI. 4-8. X. 26-29. the Apostle, declaring, that
they who fall away in time of persecution, are not to expect to be restored by
Penance, makes their Excommunication without release, which therefore he
grants may be released u on repentance, in the case of other sins. To which
purpose the Apostle, 1 John V. 16, 17. If a man see his brother sin a sin not
unto death, let him ask, and he shall give him life; To such as sin not to
death. There is a sin to death, I say not that ye pray for it: All
unrighteousness is sin, but there is a sin not to death. The meaning of these
Scriptures, I have argued, and cleared more at large, in my book of the Right
of the Church in a Christian State page 17-40. by such reasons as have not been
disputed, by those that have questioned this power of the Church, since the
publishing of it.

But I will remember, in this place, that which I have also pleaded there page
13-16. that all this power is grounded upon the power of baptizing to
forgiveness of sins, because of the evidence lately produced for the
interrogatories of baptism, and the profession of Christianity, which the
Church did enjoin, and all that were baptized undergo; The promise of
everlasting life in the world to come, and the gift of the Holy Ghost inabling
to perform so great an undertaking, depending upon it, according to such
terms as the preaching of the Gospel imports. For if the Church be trusted
by God, first to induce men to believe Christianity, then to instruct them
wherein it consists, is it not properly said to forgive the sins of them,
who, upon that instruction, undertake that profession, with a good conscience
and a heart unfeigned, which God requires of those that seek his promises? And
this is the ground of that which is there argued, that the power of the Keys
is first seen in granting baptism, though not in ministering of it, other acts
of the same power depending upon this. I will not here omit S. Cyprian Ep.
LXXIII. Manifestum autem est ubi and per quos remissa peccatorum detur, quae in
baptismo, scilicet, datur. Nam Petro primum Dominus, super quem aedificavi^
Ecclesiam, and unde unitatis originem instituit and ostendit, potestatem dedit,
ut id solvere^ur in coelis quod ipse solvisset in terris. Et, post
resurrectionem quoque ad Apostolos loquitur, dicens; Sicut misit me Pater and
ego mitto vos: Hae cum, dixisset, inspiravit, and ait eis; Accipite Sp.
Sanctum. Si cujus remiseritis peccata remittentur illi: Si cujus tenueritis,
tenebuntur. Vnde intelligimus, non nisi in Ecclesia praepositis, and in
Evangelica Lege ac dominica ordinatione fundatis licere baptizare, and remissam
peccatorum dare: Foris autem, nec ligari posse nec solvi, ubi non sit qui ant
ligare possit aut solvere. Here, it is plain, that the Keys of the Church, and
the power of remitting sins is exercised in baptizing, according to S. Cyprian:
For thus he writes. Now it is manifest, where and by whom remission of sins
is given, which, forsooth, is given in baptism. For first our Lord gave power
to Peter, (upon whom he built his Church, and in whom he settled and declared
the original of Unity) that it should be loosed in heaven, which he should
loose on earth. And after his resurrection, he speaks also to his Apostles,
saying; As my Father sent me, so I also send you. And having said so, he
breathed on them, and said; Receive the Holy Ghost: Whose sins ye remit, they
shall be remitted, whose sins ye retain, they shall be retained. Whence we
understand, that it is not lawful, but for those that are set over the Church,
and founded upon the Evangelical Law, and the Ordinance of our Lord, to baptize
and give remission of sins: But, that without, nothing can be either bound or
loosed, where there is no body that can either bind or loose. This is then the
ground of Excommunicating out of the Church. The profession of Christianity is
as necessary to obtain the promises of the Gospel at Gods hands, as baptism at
the Churches. The Church is trusted to allow or to refuse the profession
tendered, and accordingly to receive into the Church or exclude out of it. And,
shall not he that transgresses the profession of a Christian, as visibly as
he made it, (which not only Heretics and Schismatics, but Adulterers,
Murderers, Apostates, and the like do) shall he not forfeit the communion of
the Church, which he attained by it?

Add hereunto the consideration of that which I observed before out of the
Constitutions of the Apostles VIII. 32. specifying what professions and trades
of life there were, which then were refused Baptism, unless they would
profess to leave them, as inconsistent with Christianity. For example, all
that lived by the Stews, by the Stage, by the Games and by the Races of the
Pagans, all Soothsayers, Diviners and Fortune Tellers, all that kept
Concubines, and refused to conform themselves. For, let no man think this book
the only witness of this truth. You have it in many other writers of the
Church; But especially in S. Austines book de Fide and Operibus. The subject
whereof concerns those, who, having put away wives or husbands and married
others, were refused Baptism for it. This, some plain Christians marvelled at,
and thought it reason, that all should be baptized that would, and then taught
their duty; Which, whosoever regarded not, might nevertheless, as they thought, be
saved so as through fir^, according to S. Paul. And this is that which S.
Austine disputes from the beginning to the XIV Chapter of that book, that no
man is to be baptized till he undertake to live like a Christian, marvailing
afterward, cap. XVIII where those Christians had lived and spent their time,
who, seeing every day before their eyes, Whores, Players, Fencers, Panders, and
the like refused Baptism, found it strange, that those adulteries, which
Christianity no less condemned, never to inherit the kingdom of heaven,
should not be admitted into the Church, without a promise to leave them for the
future. Certainly, if the Church have power not to admit those who undertake
not this, then is the power of excluding those who undertake it and perform it
not well grounded.

I shall not repeat here the reasons that I have elsewhere, to show that
Penance, and by consequence Excommunication is to be counted in the number of
Traditions introduced with the force of Laws into the Church by the Apos^les.
It is enough, that they remain entire. I confess they infer an opinion th^^
is not so common; That, under the Apostles, some sins of the deepest dye were
not admitted to Penance, nor to regain the Communion of the Church by the same:
But referred to the mercy of God, whereof, it was not always thought fit that
the Church should become surety or warrant. And this brings in an
interpretation of some very difficult texts of Scripture which is not received.
But he that complains of that will be bound to advance some other meaning of
those texts, which may be free from contradiction, both to the Rule of Faith,
and to Historical truth which common sense justifies; And yet admit no mention
of public Penance in the Church, no intent to speak of it; in all the
Scriptures there alleged: Which perhaps will be too hard to do.

Further I labor not. I will suppose no man so wilful, as to dispute the right
of excluding from the Communion of the Church, granting a power of limiting the
conditions, upon which it is to be restored to them who forfeited it. And this
is visible. It was but a matter of LXX years after the decease of S. John,
according to Eusebius his Chronicle, that Montamis appeared to demand, that
Adulterers might not be readmitted to the communion of the Church upon Penance.
That those that had married the second time might not communicate. That the
rule of Fasting might be stricter than was in use. That it might not be lawful
to fly from persecution for the Faith. It is manifest that these were his
pretenses, by Tertullian that maintains them, being seduced with the opinion
of inspirations and revelations granted him and his partisans to that purpose.
These pretenses were afterward in part revived at Rome by Novatianus, to get
himself the Bishopric there, by excluding from Penance and reconciliation,
those that had fallen away in the persecution of Decius. It appears also that
those men alleged for themselves the very passages of the Apostles which I
allege to my intent. Neither can it appear, that ever any son of the Church did
contradict them, by saying, that the Apostles meant nothing of Penance, as they
imagined. And now let all men judge, whether the Church have reason to hold
this evidence of Penance, and by consequence of its own being a Church. Was
Epiphanius, and all that writ against the Novatians troubled to no purpose at
the VI of the Ebrews, when those Schismatics, alleging it for themselves,
might have been silenced, by denying that it concerned Penance? Why did not the
Church allege, that, the sin unto death 1 John V. 17. is no such thing as
Apostasy from Christianity, when the Novatians alleged it to prove, that
Apostates were not to be reconciled to the Church? How came it to pass, that
there was so much doubt made in the Church of Rome of admitting the Epistle to
the Ebrews for Canonical Scripture, (witness S. Jerome Epist. ad Dardanum) as
thinking that it did absolutely contradict the re-admitting of Apostates, which
had been practiced in that Church before Montanus? Tertullian, of all men, was
troubled without cause, that the incestuous person, whom he supposes to be
excommunicated at Corinth by S. Paul's Order, 1 Cor. V. should be readmitted by
his Indulgence 1 Cor. VII. De Pudicitia, cap. XIII, XIV, XV. because he saw
this was a peremptory exception against Montanus, that a crime equal to
Adultery should by S. Paul be admitted to Penance. How easy a thing it had
been for him to say, that there is nothing of Penance, nothing of
Excommunication (which Penance presupposes, and therefore inferres) in
delivering to Satan the incestuous person, in commanding them, not so much as
to eat with those that are called brethren, that is Christians, but are indeed
such as the incestuous? But he, being some fourteen hundred years nearer the
beginning of Christianity than we, and being satisfied by his five senses, of
those things, which new Heresies and Schisms oblige us to argue by
consequences, found that his Patriarch Montanus could not answer so: And
therefore, thinking that the Church could not answer their arguments, forces an
answer to this, by saying, it was not the same man that is excommunicated by
the Apostles Order 1 Cor. V. and restored by his Indulgence 2 Cor. VII. Because
he saw the reconciling of a sinner to the Church by Penance as lively
described and signified by S. Paul's Indulgence there, as by any record of the
Church, at such time as it was most in use. And can there remain any doubt of
this Excommunication, because the Church cannot now deliver to Satan for
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus? Surely, all the writings of the Apostles do bear witness, that the
miraculous graces of the Holy Ghost (which they had then, but all Christians
see the Church has not now) served not only to witness the truth of
Christianity, but the authority of the Apostles in behalf of it. This authority
having taken effect, by those Ordinances which the Church has received at
their hands; It is no longer requisite, that God should bear witness to his
own Ordinances, by such miraculous effects, seeing he does no longer bear
witness to the truth of Christianity by the like. He that believes, that,
whosoever is not in the Church, is in the power of Satan, needs no reason, why
he is delivered to Satan, that is put out of the Church. He that believes it
not, is not to be persuaded, that there is a power of Excommunication granted
the Church; But, that the Christian says which the Church preaches is true,
for that, without peradventure, preached the Church. At least, till some body
show us that this reason is insufficient, he must not demand, that we give an
Article of our Creed, and all the help to salvation which the communion of the
Catholic Church pretends, for such an objection as this. Choose now whether
you will say as I say; That, under the Apostles, difficulty was made of
re-admitting some sorts of sins, but never any peremptory order against it,
(and, so, that Montanus and Novatianus were Schismatics, for seperating from
the Church, when the whole Church was agreed that there was a necessity of it)
or look about for a more reasonable sense, to assoile the great difficulties of
these passages; Provided, that you offer not violence to common sense and
historical truth, by imagining, that, so near the Apostles time, there could be
so much question about Penance, they having neither meant nor ordained any
thing about it. To this argument, all the most ancient records of the Church,
wheresoever mention is made of reconciling by Penance, all the Penitential
Canons of later ages will bear witness. For, who can undertake to answer, or
rather to obscure the evidence made in the place aforenamed, that, some sins
were refused Penance and reconcilement in the first ages of the Church; When
we have a whole book of Tertullian, contending, with Montannus, to impose a
Law upon it, of re-admitting no Adulterers? When we know a whole sect of
Novatians, that left the Church, that they might readmit no Apostates? As for
the Penitential Canons of later ages, it is manifest to any man, that shall
peruse and compare them with that which has been said of the primitive times,
that they are nothing else, but the abatement of that rigor of Discipline,
which, during the primitive heat and zele of Christianity, was in force; And
therefore as visibly derive themselves fromt the Apostles, as the corrupt
Christianity of this time can derive it self from that which they planted pure
from the fountain.

But there can be no such evidence of this point, or of the whole matter in hand
concerning the Corporation of the Church, as the excluding of Heretics and
Schismatics out of it. S. Paul 2 Thessalonians. III. 6-14. orders them to withdraw
from every brother that walks disorderly, and not according to the Tradition,
which (says he) ye have received from us: To mark them, and not to converse
with them, that they may be ashamed. But with the excommunicate, not so much as
to eat: 1 Cor. V. 11. So likewise, having exhorted the Romans XVI. 12. to mark
those that cause divisions and scandals beside the doctrine, which (says he)
ye have received of us, and to avoid them; he has thereby given us to
understand that he would have Christians abhor all conversation with those
that declare themselves Heretics. I have in another place allowed S. Jeromes
exposition of that Text of S. Paul, Titus III. 9. A man that is an Heretic
after the first and second admonition avoid; Understanding it of Schismatics,
who, as it follows, do condemn themselves, when they voluntarily forsake the
communion of the Church, which other sinners are excluded from whether they
will or not. But, considering there is no admonition against Schism, which is
declared as soon as it is done, as there may be against Heresy, which may lurk
before it is professed; I count is as properly said that Heretics condemn
themselves, when^oever they profess to believe the contrary of that which they
professed when they were made Christians, as Schismatics, when they
excommunicate themselves. The Apostle indeed seems to use a moderate term, when
he says, A man that is an Heretic after the first and second admonition
avoid: So the original (...) is to be translated, according to Cyrils Glosses,
where we read, (...) excuso, recuso, evito, which last sounds in English, to
avoid. But, in Vulcanius his Glosses, evito signifies (...), To have in horror,
as well as, to take heed, and to avoid. And it is to be understood, that S.
Paul prescribes that to Ti^us which he intends all his flock should practice;
Supposing that, being Christians, they would be careful to avoid the infection
of those whom their Pastors should avoid, because they counted them dangerous,
not to themselves, but to their flock. To this purpose S. Jude 22, 23. (...);
(the Copy at S. James reads, (...), reprove some that prefer themselves
before others; But nothing so pertinently to the opposition between pity and
terror that follows) And some truly take pity on, putting a difference, (or
behaving your selves with a difference toward them) others save through fear
(of the judgment of God, or of the Church) hating even the garment that is
spotted with sin. It appears, that the Gnostics, whom he writes against,
could counterfeit themselves Christians, to seduce the simple from the Faith to
their Heresies. Therefore, Jude 11, 12. They perished in the contradiction of
Core. They are spots in your Feasts of love, banqueting with you, and feeding
themselves without fear. And 1 Pet. II. 14, 18. they are said to bait unstable
souls: And, They bait with fleshly concupiscences, through wantonness, those
that had truly escaped from them that live in error. They were not afraid to
communicate with Christians at their Feasts of love, (where the Sacrament of
the Eucharist was also celebrated) that they might get means and opportunity of
seducing the simple to separate with them from the Church. And therefore S.
Jude 19. These are they who separate themselves, as S. Peter says, that they
perish in the contradiction of Core. So then, those that are curable, either by
pity, or by terror, he exhorts them to save: But, when he charges them to
hate even the garm^n^ that is spotted with sin; he charges them much more to
abhor the communion of those that were discovered to be uncurable. For, with
what zele they taught to avoid the Heretics of that time, let S. John be Judge
John II. 10, 11. If any man come to you that brings not this doctrine, (but
transgresses it, and abides not in it, as he said just before) take him not
into your house, (as you do them who bring testimony that they hold the
Christian faith) neither salute him, for he that salutes him is accessory to
his evil works. Certainly, he requires great demonstration of a mind
detesting Heresy, that affirms those, who afford them the ordinary civility
of salutation, to be accessory to their evil works. But it is to be considered,
that the Apostle speaks of the Heresies which Simon Magus and Cerinthus had
then set on foot, when he says there II John 7. Many impostors are gone out
into the world, who profess not Jesus Christ come in the flesh. For, though
they wore the name of Christians, yet they professed not, that Jesus of
Nazareth then come in the flesh, was the Christ; But, Simon Magus, and his
disciple Menander both pretended themselves to be the Christ: Saturninus and
Basilides some of their invisible principles; Valentinus one of his Aeones: and
likewise Marcus; Cerinthus, the power that came upon Jesus of Nazareth at his
Baptism, and left him at his Cross: So the rest until Cerdon and Marcion,
who, pretending that Jesus of Nazareth was not Son of the God of Israel,
denied, by consequence, that Christ was come in the flesh.

S. Cyprian Epist. LXXIII. having disputed that these Heresies do not hold the
same Father, the same Son, the same Holy Ghost with the Church, comes down to
the Marcionites, strongly arguing, that, they who made one God of Israel,
another^ the Father of our Lord Christ, and his Manhood only in appearance,
cannot be said to believe in Christ as Christians do. Adding very plainly, that
they are those of whom the Apostle speaks, 1 John IV. 2. that they are of the
Spirit of Antichrist, and that the Spirit of Antichrist has possessed their
breasts. But there is no such commentary upon S. ^ohns words as that which is
related of hi^ by Irenaeus III. 3. from the mouth of Polycarpus, that he would
not endure to be in the bath with Cerinthus, the enemy of Gods truth. And of
Polycarpus, that, being desired by Marcion to own him, he answered, that he
did own him for ^he firstborn of Satan. Which actions Irenaeus thus
construeth; Tantum Apostoli and horum, discipuli habuerunt timorem, ut neque
verbo tenus communicarent alicui eorum qui adulteraverunt veritatem:
Quemadmodum and Paulus ait; Haereticum hominem post unam and alteram
correptionem devita: Sciens quoniam perversus est qui est talis, and a seipso
damnatus. So great fear had the Apostles and Disciples not to communicate so
far as in words, with any of those who corrupted the truth: As Paul also
says; A man that is an Heretic, after one reproof, and a second, avoid:
Knowing that such a one is perverted, and condemned by himself. Where you see,
it is not I, but Irenaeus that expounds those words of S. Paul to this
purpose. The same Irenaeus III. 4. Cerdon autem qui ante Marcionem, and hic sub
Hygino, qui fuit octavus Episcopus, saepe in Ecclesiam veniens and exomologesim
faciens, sic consummavit; Modo quidem latenter docens, modo vero exomologesim
faciens, modo vero ab aliquibus traductus in his quae docebat male, and
abstentus est religiosorum hominum conventu. But this same Cerdon also that was
before Marcion under Hyginus who was the eight Bishop, many times addressing to
the Church, and confessing, ended accordingly; Sometimes covertly teaching his
Heresy; sometimes confessing: And sometimes, being detected by some in those
bad things which he taught, was excluded the assembly of the Religious.
Tertullian de praescript. cap. XXX. informs us, that Marcion though he was at
the first refused Penance by the Church of Rome, (as I shall show you out of
Epiphanius) yet afterward was cast out of the Church there, (which supposes
him admitted before) with Valentinus the Father of another Heresy, and, having
been received once and again, at the last, for good and all. For, having
obtained to be readmitted upon this condition, that he should reduce with
himself all that he had seduced, at length he died before he was able to
accomplish the same. These things coming to pass so soon after the Apostles as
they did, and the same course being held, in separating those Heresies from the
Church, which sprung up in their several ages afterward, there is no room left
for any pretense, that the Church never had power to do that, which, there
never was any time that she did not do. For, it is to be noted, that these
Heads of Heresies, being condemned and cast out of the Church in which they
first appeared, and which they attempted to divide, were thenceforth disowned
by all Churches, being certified of the proceeding that had passed against them
upon the place. And therefore Vincentius Lerinensis Commentario I. expounding
S. Paul's words Gal. I. 8, 9. Let him be Anathema; Anathema sit, inquit, id est
separatui, exclusus, ne unius ovis dirum contagium innoxium gregem Christi,
venenata permistione contaminet. That is, says he, let him be separated, set
aside, shut out, least the direful contagion of one sheep with any mixture of
poison stain the innocent flock of Christ. And again afterward, handling the
words of S. Paul 1 Timothy VI. 20. Keep that which is committed to thy trust,
avoiding profane novelties of words; What is it to avoid? With such one not so
much as to eat. What is avoid? If any come to you, says he, and brings not
this doctrine, receive him not home nor bid him God speed. Where you see these
are none of my collections gathered out of the Apostles words, but that
exposition of them which the practice of the Catholic Church infers.

CHAP. X. Evidence of the Apostles act from the effect of it, in preserving the
Unity of the Church. Of the business of Marcion and Montanus. That about
keeping Easter. That of the Novations, of rebaptizing Heretics, of Paulus
Samosatenus, of Dionysius Alexandrinus, and Arius. Of communicatory leters, and
the intercourse of the Church under and after the Apostles.
THis is indeed the true demonstration and evidence from the effect, that the
will of God and not the consent of men is the ground upon which the Corporation
of the Church subsisteth. The whole number of Christians, dispersed over all
the Empire, and beyond the bounds of it, continued for diverse hundred years, in
one communion, and in the unity of one Church; Those that endeavored to alter
the Rule of Faith, or to impose such Laws, as were found by the greatest part,
not to stand with the end for which the Church was founded, being, by the
consent of the whole, excluded the communion of it for Heretics and
Schismatics. He that says this was not the work of God, or, the means of
effecting it none of his declared will, why should not he say the like of
Christianity? Indeed since the Council of Ephesus, the Churches of Mesopotamia
and Assyria are fallen from the Unity of the whole, since the Council of
Chalcedon, those of Egypt and Aethiopia. Since that, the Eastern Churches,
under the Patriarch of Constantinople, have been divided from the Western,
under the Pope of Rome. And these from one another, into so many parties, since
the Reformation, that we are now come to dispute, whether they ought to be
united or not. That ever they will be, is so hopeless, that no man would
undertake to dispute that they should be, were it possible, to preserve that
little of Christianity that remains, without re-uniting the Church. I allege
here the most eminent passages that fell out in the Church, from the Apostles
to Constantine, to show, that it is a question whether the evidence be more;
That, by Gods appointment, there was from the beginning, and ought to be
always one Catholic Church; Or the hope less that ever it will be so again.
I cannot begin with a better evidence than that of Irenaeus, because it
contains the effect of the aforesaid ordinances of the Apostles, for the
separating of the Heresies set on foot by Simon Magus and Cerinthus, from the
Communion of the Church, that the Unity thereof might be preserved, by
remaining distinct from them. We understand by reading his first book, that
Basilides at Alexandria, Saturninus at Antiochia, Valentinus, first in Egypt,
then in Cyprus, afterward at Rome, Cerintbus in Asia and elsewhere, others in
several parts of the World, indeavored to adulterate that Christianity which
the Apostles had delivered. That they were so unanimously rejected and excluded
out of the society of the Church from East to West, that he is able to affirm,
I. 3. that, though dispersed all over the world, yet it preserves the doctrine
once preached, as if it dwelt all in one house, believing the same faith, as if
it had the same soul and heart, and preaching and teaching the same, as if it
had but one mouth. And can common sense imagine, that the remotest parts of the
world could remain united to one another, separated from Heresies sprung in
the remotest parts of it, (which they could not have intelligence of but by
communication of it with those parts of it where they sprung) without that
continual correspondence wherein the actual communion of the Church consists?
But the words of Irenaeus are so vigorous, that I cannot leave them out here,
as they stand in his original Greek. (...) (...). The Unity therefore of the
Church was visible; Otherwise it had been senseless for Irenaeus to assume it,
as an evidence of the truth of that Faith, the unity whereof became visible, by
the unity of the Church which professed it. Thus then writes Irenaeus. This
preaching, and this faith the Church having received, as I said before, though
dispersed all over the world, carefully keeps, as if it inhabited one house:
And believes these things alike, as if it had one soul and one heart; And
harmoniously preaches and teaches and delivers them, as if it had but one
mouth. For there be diverse languages in the world, but the Tradition signifies
the same. Nor do the Churches seated in the Germanies believe or deliver
otherwise, nor those in the Spaines, nor among the Gauls, nor in the East, nor
in Egypt, nor in Africa, nor those that are seated in the middle parts of the
world. But as the Creature of God the Sun is one and the same in all the world,
so shines the preaching of the truth every where, inlightning all men that
will come to the knowledge of the truth. And neither will any of those that
Rule in the Churches, though powerful in speaking, say things diverse from
these, (for the Disciple is not above his Master) nor he that is weak in
speech abate of that which is delivered. For to the same Faith, neither he
that is able to say much of it adds, nor he that is able to say little
abateth of it. He that acknowledges this to be Gods doing, must of necessity
acknowledge the means of it, (the concurrence of all Churches to the
maintenance of unity in the same Faith, by disowning those that pretended to
break it) not left to man's will, but enjoined by Gods. And Irenaeus his
instance in the Church of Rome serves to good purpose, to make out this
evidence. For all Churches, (that is, as Irenaeus says, Christians of all
Churches) having necessarily recourse to Rome for all occasions, because it was
the seat of the Empire, might there inform themselves, and their Churches, of
the perverse doctrines that might be on foot, and of the consent of the
Churches in refusing the same.

In the next place, I will not forget the relation of Epiphanius concerning
Marcion, in the beginning of his Heresy, because it is next in time, and of
great consequence. He, being put out of the Church by his Father Bishop of
Sinope in Pontus, and making sure to be admitted by the Church of Rome,
received this answer; That they could not do it without his Fathers consent,
because the Faith is one, and the Unity the same. Compare herewith the
proceeding of Synesius against Andronicus Ep. LVIII. and LXXIX. (though so much
distant in time) which in the first book de Synedriis Judaeorum, page 304. is
said to be of a high strain. He says, that if any Church, neglecting his
Church of Ptolomais, as a poor Church, being the Church of a small City, shall
receive to communion those whom it had excommunicated, he shall be thereby
guilty of dividing the Church, which Christ will have to be one; And tell me
how this proceeding differs from that which, in Marcions case, Epiphanius says
was done at Rome, so near the Apostles. Certainly, if one Church should receive
into communion those whom another Church excommunicates, there could remain no
unity in the whole Church, because no distinction from those that are not of
the Church. When therefore it appears, that the Church held it for a Rule from
the beginning, not to do so, shall not this be evidence, that the reason is
that which was alleged to Marcion at Rome, which Synesius alleges; To wit, the
Unity of the Church?

For the same reason, Montanus, having, as it seems, by pretended revelations
and inspirations, (such as, at that time, there can be no question but the
Church was graced with) brought the Churches of Phrygia to his intent, but
being rejected by the Churches of Asia, went or sent to Rome, to induce that
Church, to undertake and prescribe the same Rules to all that adheered unto it.
For why otherwise should he labor for the consent of that Church, before
others, but in hope, that, having induced it to receive his Rules, the
authority thereof might induce other Churches to do the like, because they
found it necessary for them to hold correspondence with the Church of Rome.
Now, I beseech you, were all Christians utterly out of their five senses, to
contend about the communion of the Church, if there were no such thing in point
of fact? Were they all from the beginning possessed with a frenzy, that they were
bound to maintain it, by voiding all questions that might impeach it, if there
were no such obligation in point of right? Is it not plain, that the issue of
such questions was this, whether the Unity of the Church, or the advantage of
such Rules to the common cause of Christianity wayed most? How is Tertullian
otherwise counted a Montanist, that is, as I suppose, a Schismatic? We may
believe Tertullian, in a matter which all Christians at Rome then might know,
when he tells us, that Zephyrinus, then Bishop of Rome, was about to admit
unto his communion, the Churches of Asia and Phrygia that had acknowledged
Montarus and his Prophets and Prophesies. Contr. Prax. cap. I. Though Pope
Soter before Zephyrinus, had writ against Montanus, as well as Apollonius Bishop
of Ephesus, if we believe Sirmondus his Praedestinatus Haer. XXVI. When he
says, that afterward the contrary was resolved, upon informations brought
from Asia by Praxeas an Heretic; That which appears, that the Montanists were
disclaimed, we must admit; That which appears not, upon what information it
was done, we need not dispute. Tertullian hereupon draws after him a company
which called themselves a Church at Carthage, and subsisted there after
Tertullian, till they were reduced by S. Augustine, as we learn by Sirmondus
his Praedestinatus Haer. XCVII. and S. Augustine de Haeresibus. This makes
Tertullian a Schismatic; That, rather than rest content with those Rules,
which the rest of the Church satisfied themselves with, he departed from the
Unity of it. Otherwise, those blasphemies, for which the followers of Montanus
are counted Heretics, preferring their own revelations above and against those
of the Apostles, he is not chargable with.

Proceed we now to the business of keeping Easter, and the debate about it,
between Victor Bishop of Rome and the Churches of Asia; These resolutely
adheering to the custom, which, in all appearance, they had received from
their founder S. John, to keep the Passion when the Jews kept it, that is,
upon the fifteenth day of the Moon that was the next equinoctial, and the
Resurrection the third after that; The Church of Rome, and almost all Churches
beside, keeping thc Passion on the Friday, the Resurrection on the Ladies day
following. The one aiming at winning the Jews, when it was first set on foot,
the other, to protest against them as incorrigible. It is well enough known,
how Victor, intending to withdraw his Communion from the Churches of Asia, was
reduced to tolerate them by the persuasions of Irenaeus then Bishop of Lions.
Certainly, had not the Communion of the Church been in possession, and practice
at that time, the Bishop of Rome had been a mad man to think, that refusing it
would be the means to reduce those of Asia to his judgment and practice. If
this possession and practice had no ground of right, is it possible that none
of either party should discover the sandy foundation of the dispute, and
persuade the parties (which were so much in love with their own way on both
sides) to give no heed to other Churches, the Communion of the Church having no
ground, and therefore being of no consequence? What meant Irenaeus so to
trouble himself, to persuade Victor, to hold communion with those of Asia,
though not condescending to keep Easter by the same Rule, but that he saw, if
the Church of Rome should break with the Churches of Asia, that he must break,
either with the one or the other of them, who desired to hold communion with
both? Were the Disciples of the Apostles, or at least of their Disciples,
cousened into a humane Tradition of the Unity of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church, when he so earnestly labored, that, holding with the Church of Rome,
he might not be constrained to forbear the intercourse, which, for the
advancement of Christianity he held with the Churches of Asia?

But S. Cyprians time affordes diverse passages of great consequence; The
Schism of the Novatians in the first place. It is a thing manifest by Eusebius
his Histories VI. 44, 46. VII. 4, 5. that the Church of Antiochia, together
with the Churches of Pontus, (which then seem to have either resorted to
Antiochia, or in consideration of neighborhood to have held great
correspondence with that Church) and Cilicia, made very great difficulty in
admitting the election of Cornelius, and condemning the Novatians, for refusing
to receive into communion those, who, in time of persecution had sacrificed to
Idols, and so renounced the Christian Faith. In time, by the intercession of
Dionysius of Alexandria, moved, it seems, with the consent of the rest of the
Church, they were also induced to disclaim the Novatians, and to concur to
restore the Unity of the Church, which, for the time had remained in suspense.
And it is a thing very much to be observed, which the Council at Antiochia in
Encoeniis Dominicae aureae pleads to the Church of Rome, in the dispute they
had with Pope Julius, about admitting the Acts of it, in Sozomenus III. 8. and
Socrates II. 5. They had taken upon them to make a new provision, in that which
the great Council at Nicaea had taken order in before. Which was in effect to
make void the acts of that Council. The Pope, I suppose, had reason to except,
that this could not be done without his consent, (including in it the consent
of the Churches which adheered to him) unless we imagine, that the Synod of
Antiochia, being but a part of those who had decreed at the Council of Nicaea,
had power to dissolve the acts of the whole. What is it then toat this Synod
allege for themselves? Even this; That, having preserved or restored the Unity
of the Church of Rome, by disclaiming the Novatians, they expected the like
compliance from them, in the present business. Whereby it appears, that the
consent of the whole Church did make, and was to make good the acts of part of
it, though not assembled with them in Council, no less than if they were. And
indeed, what made the second general Council of Constantinople under Theodosius
to be general, (none having appeared at it for the Western Churches) but the
consent of Damasus and his Synod ex postfacto, the rest of the West adheering
to the same. Which if it be so, I do not think I need any other evidence, that,
from S. Cyprians time, all Christians did believe, that they are bound to
maintain themselves in communion with the Church, when they believe, that the
consent thereof is able to do such acts as these. I cannot here omit the words
of Dionysius of Alexandria, out of a leter to Novatianus, recorded by Eusebius,
Eccl. Hist. VII. 45. (...). If you were carried away against your will, as you
say, you may show that, by returning with your will. For you should have
endured any thing, rather than smite asunder the Church of God. And to suffer
martyrdom, rather than divide the Church, had been no less glory, than,
rather than commit Idolatry, but greater in my judgmene. For there, a man
suffers martyrdom for his own soul alone, but here, for the whole Church. And
now, if you can persuade or constrain the brethren to return to concord, your
fall will not be so great as that exploit. But, if they will not be ruled, and
you cannot, by all means save your own soul.

It is easy, to observe, that the same Churches, which had made so much
difficulty in disclaiming the Novatians, were they, who joined with S. Cyprian,
in standing upon the rebaptizing of those, that had been baptized by Heretics.
As appears, not only by Firmilianus his Epistle to S. Cyprian, but also by
Dionysius of Alexandria, de bapt. III. (alleged by Euscbius VII. 7.) even
before S. Cyprian. Whereby we see, how much Eusebius contradicts himself, when
he says, VII. 3. that S. Cyprian was the first that called in question the
Tradition received in that case. In this business, the XIX Canon of the
Council of Nicaea makes it evident, that neither S. Cyprians party, nor their
adversaries altogether prevailed. For it is there inacted; That those who had
been baptized by the Samosatenians should be baptized again. And must not the
same needs hold much more of the Gnostics, and of almost all the rest of those
Heresies which S. Cyprian names in his LXX. Epistle? Besides, it is manifest
by the second Council at Arles, can. XVII. that of Laodicea, can. VII, and
VIII. Gennadius de dogm. Eccl. cap. LII. and others, that the practice of the
Churches, after this dispute was ended, was not every where the same. And,
which is most remarkable; Not only the great Council at Arles Can. VIII. makes
a Rule for the Africane Churches (which the first Council at Carthage
follows) to the like purpose with that of the Council of Nicaea; But also
Optatus lib. I. demonstrates, that he rebaptized the Sabellians, which the
foresaid Rule allows not. Whereby it appears, that the extreme opinions,
held by Steven of Rome, that none were to be rebaptized; and by S. Cyprian,
that all; were moderated by the succeeding practice of the Churches, though
diverse in diverse parts of the Church. Now let me ask, by what means this
moderation came to prevail over that vehemence of contention, which you may
see the parties transported with, in S. Cyprians Epistles. What could it be,
but the conscience of that obligation which both parties owned, to preserve the
Unity of the Church, and the respect of those other Churches that were not
engaged in the dispute as they were?

The business of Paulus Samosatenus is of the same time. Was the Synod of
Antiochia mad when they writ the Leter which you may read in Eusebius VII. 30.
in the name of the Churches represented by that Synod, to the rest of the
Churches in Christendom, signifying the sentence of deposition pronounced
against Samosatenus, and requiring them to join with it? If it be madness to
think them so mad, as to summon the rest of the Churches, upon an obligation
which they did not acknowledge, what shall it be to think, that this obligation
was but imaginary, or at least voluntarily contracted, not inacted by the will
of our Lord declared by his Apostles? The Emperor Aurelian being appealed by
the Council, to cause Samosatenus to be put our of his Bishops house by force,
who maintained himself in it by force, against the sentence of the Synod;
decreed, that possession should be given to him, whom the Christian Bishops of
Italy and Rome should acknowledge for Bishop, by writing to him under that
title. Certainly this Heathen Emperor, in referring the execution of the Synods
decree, to the consent of those remarkable parts of the Church, (whereupon the
consent of the rest might reasonably be presumed) understood the constitution
of the Church by his five senses, better than those learned Christians of our
time, who argue seriously, that this Paulus Samosatenus was not excommunicated
by the Synod of Antiochia, but by the Emperor Aurelian. For this is the course
by which all the acts of the whole Church ever came in force, those parts of
the Church, which were not present at the doing of them, concurring, ex
postfacto, to inact them, and the civil power, to grant the execution of them
by secular power.

Perhaps it will not be fit here to let pass that which Athanasius relates,
libro de sontentia Dionysii Alexandrini; That this Dionysius, writing against
Sabellius, gave occasion to the Bishops of Pentapolis, (who resorted to the
Church of Alexandria, as we see by the VI Canon of Nicaea) to suspect him of
that which afterward was the Heresy of Arius. And that, Dionysius of Rome
being made acquainted by them, with a matter of that consequence to the whole
Church, this Dionysius writ him an Apology, on purpose to give satisfaction of
his Faith, wherein S. Athanasius has great cause to triumph, that the Heresy
of Arius, which arose afterward, is no less condemned, than that of Sabellius
presently on foot. Grant we, that it was an office of Christian charity, to
tender this satisfaction, where it was become so requisite; The example of
Samosatenus shows, that their address tended to question, if not to displace
their Bishop, by the authority of the rest of the Church, engaging the consent
of his own, had he been discovered to harbor the contrary Heresy to that of
Sabellius. And indeed what was the rise of all those contentions about Arius,
that succeeded in the Church after the Council of Nicaea, but this question,
whether Arius should be readmitted one of the Presbyters of the Church at
Alexandria, or remain excommunicate? And those truly, that do not believe
there is any Church, but a Congregation that assembles together for the service
of God, must needs think all Christendom stark mad for so many years together,
as they labored, by so many Synods, to attain an agreement through the Church,
in this, and in the cause of Athanasius that depended upon it. But those, who
believe the power of the Church to eschere to the State, when it declares it
self Christian, must think the Emperors Constantius and Valens mad, when they
put themselves to that trouble and char^e of so many Synods, to obtain that
consent of the Church, which, in point of right, their own power might have
commanded, without all that ado. In the decrees of diverse of those many Synods
that were held about this business, you shall find, that those Churches which
the said decrees are sent to are charged, not to write to the Bishops whom they
depo^e. That is to say; Not to give them the style of Bishops, not to deal with
them about any thing concerning the Church, but to hold them as cut off from
the Church. Just as the Emperor Aurelian, before, commanded possession to be
delivered to him, whom the Bishops of Italy and Rome should write to as Bishop.
This little circumstance expresses the means by which the communion of the
Church was maintained. To wit, by continual intercourse of leters, and
messengers, from Churches to Churches, whereby the one understood the
proceedings of the other, and, being satisfied of the reason of them, gave
force and execution to them within their own Bodies.

And this course, being visibly derived from the practice of the Apostles,
suffices to evidence the Unity of the Church established, by the exercise of
that communication which maintained it. When we see the Apostles, from the
Churches upon which they were for the time resident, dare Leters to other
Churches, signifying the Communion of those Churches one with another, by the
communion of all with the Apostles, (who taught, and brought into force the
terms and conditions, upon which they were to communicate one with another)
have we not the pattern of that intercourse and communion between several
Churches, by which, common sense shows all them that look into the records of
the Church, that the Unity and Communion of the whole was continued to after
ages? The words of Tertullian de praescript* haeret. cap. XX. must not be
omitted here. Itaque tot ac tantae Ecclesiae una est illa ab Apostolis prima,
ex qua omnes, Sic omnes prima, and Apostolicae, du^ una omnes probant
veritatem: Dum est illis communicatio pacis, and appellatio fraternitatis, and
contesseratio hospitalitatis. Quae jura, non alia ratio regit, quam ejusdem
Sacramenti una traditio. Therefore so many and so great Churches are all that
one primitive Church from the Apostles, out of which all come. So, all are the
primitive, and Apostolical, while all agree in proving the truth: While they
have the communication of peace, the title of brotherhood, the common mark of
hospitality. Which rights, nothing but the same tradition of the same mystery
rules. It is to be known, that, among the Greeks and Romans, if a man had made
acquaintance and friendship in a foreign City, the fashion was, to leave a
mark, for a pledge of it, with one another, (which was called tessexa) upon
recognisance whereof, he that should come to the place where the other dwelt,
was not only to be entertained by him, (whereupon these friends are called
hospites, signifying both hosts and guests) but also assiisted in any business
which he might have in that place. Such a kind of right as this Tertullian
says there was between Christians and Christians, between Churches and
Churches. He that produced the cognizance of the Church from whence he came,
found not only access to the communion of the Church to which he came, but
assistance in his necessities and business in the name of a Christian. Thus S.
Paul calls Gaius his host and of the whole Church Romans XVI. 23. signifying,
that, as he entertained him S. Paul, so he was ready to intertaine any
Christian as a Christian. And adds to that Epistle a recommendation, whereby
Phaebe might be acknowledged and received as a Deaconesse of the Church at
Cenchreae Romans XVI. 1. Whereas otherwise, leter^ were written express to that
purpose, which S. Paul himself calls (...) or commendatory, 2 Cor. III. 1. The
terms in which S. Paul recommends Phabe are these; That ye receive her in the
Lord as it becomes the Saints, and stand by her in any business where she
may stand in need: For she also has stood by many, and by me. (...), says
S. Paul; (...) at Athens was strangers patron. For, at Athens, a stranger that
came to live there could not act for himself, but by his patron. The same S.
Paul thus charge Titus, III. 22. Send away Zenas the Lawyer and Apollos with
care that they want nothing. That is, put money in their purse, as their
journey shall require; As the Egyptians sent away the Israelites with care,
when they furnished them with all that they demanded, Wisdom XIX. 2. But the
passage of S. John's Epistle III. 5-10. is very remarkable. You saw, how, in his
second Epistle, he forbids them so much as to salute Heretics, much less to
intertaine them, or any that should not bring with him the true Faith; That is,
a cognizance that they professed it. Here he commends Gaius, for assisting
some Christian strangers, that travailed for the name of Christ, that is, upon
the business of the Church, taking nothing of the Gentiles, because themselves
were Jews turned Christians. These, he says, had born witness to Gaius his
love before the Church, by writing leters, to acquaint the Church from whence
they came, with their intertainment: Wishing him so to dispatch them as may be
fitting toward God, because by so doing, a man assists the truth. And whereas
Diotrephes had prevailed with the Church, not to receive them, and did labor
particular men to that purpose, (upon pretense, it seems, of some strangeness
between the Jews and Gentiles that were turned Christians) forbids him to be
ruled by his factiousnesse. We hear S. Paul, in the end of his Epistles,
relate the saluations of the brethren, (that is, of the Church from whence he
dates) and also of particular persons eminent there, to the Body of the Church
he writes to. What ground had there been for this intercourse, had not the
Apostle taught them, that they were all of one Body, and so ought to preserve
themselves? How often do they charge them to salute one another with a holy
kiss, or the kiss of love, Romans XVI. 16. 2 Cor. XIII. 12. 1 Thessalonians. V. 14. 1
Pet. V. 14. which the Constitutions of the Apostles shows was done before the
Consecration of the Eucharist, to signify the love of one another in Christ
and for Christ, wherewith they professed to rceive the same. Though Origin upon
Romans XVI. says it came after Prayer. And Tertullian therefore calls it
signaculum orationis, de Orat. XIV. the seal of prayer. To wit, of that prayer
which the Eucharist was celebrated with. Therefore chose salutations, joined
with the charge of saluting one another in token of this love, signify no
less, than the expression of the same love from foreign Churches, which they
professed among themselves, in the communion of the same mysteries. That is,
that they who absent, thus saluted them, did no less communicate with them in
the same Sacrament, than they did with one another, who saw one another
communicate with one another face to face.

This is then that communication of peace, that title of brotherhood, that
recognisance of the marks of hospitality which Tertullian allegeth, for the
means, whereby all Churches make one Church, the same with that primitive and
original Church, which was first founded by the Apostles; The unity whereof,
being grounded upon the same Faith, delivered and received at the Sacrament of
Baptism, is able to make evidence of the same Faith. Do not all the records of
the Church, from the Apostles time, justify the same visible communion in
Christianity, by the same intercourse and communion of counsels and
business, which were trouble to no purpose, were not the intent of it to
maintain the Unity of the Church? Look upon the Epistles of Ignatius, and
observe in them two things for the present purpose. The first, that Ignatius,
being carried in bands from Rome to Antiochia, the Churches by which he
passed, (not only those he writes his Epistles to, but diverse others) send
deputations of the principal persons among them, to confer with him about
their present estate: Which are the occasions of the leters he directs to
them. The second, that he desires them to depute and ordain certain persons
to go to Antiochia, to his Church there, to congratulate with them, that, since
he was taken from them, they were returned, from persecution, into their
wonted body; The preservation whereof, I suppose, every man will imagine, this
conference, advice, and comfort of so many Churches, was the means to advance.
The same is to be seen by that of Clemens, (or rather of the Church of Rome, in
whose name he writes it) to the Church of Corinth, divided within it self into
factions, to reduce them to peace and unity. For, I suppose, the premises will
show the reason, that must oblige the parties to respect the advice of the
Church of Rome; To wit, the obligation of communicating with the whole Church:
Seeing reason requires, that the party which should refuse to return to unity,
must be refused the communion of the Church of Rome, and those Churches, (by
consequence) that should adhere to it. Look now upon S. Cyprians leters, look
upon the leters of Dionysius of Alexandria, out of which, for the greatest
part, Eusebius has compiled the seventh book of his Ecclesiastical Histories,
look upon the rest of the intercourse, by which the unity and communion of the
Church was maintained distinct from all Heresies and Schisms, from the Apostles
time till Constantine, and let me know, what probable reason can be assigned,
to move foreign Churches, to give that respect to strafigers, which was
effectual to the purpose intended, had not all sides been persuaded, that this
was the end with the Apostles, after our Lord, had ordained, this the means to
procure it. Take for an instance the leter of tha Synod at Antiochia about
Paulus Samosatenus, in the place before quoted. There, showing, that, having
deposed him, they had made a new Bishop in his stead, they write further:
(...). This we have given you notice of, that you may write to him, and
receive from him communicatory leters. But let him that is deposed write to
Artemon, and let them of Artemons sect communicate with him. These leters then
were a mark and cognizance, that they acknowledged him that was ordained, true
Bishop of Antiochia. And; the sending of them from the Bishops of Italy and
Rome, the Emperor Aurelian makes the condition, upon which the decree of the
Synod was to be executed by secular force. In like manner Optatus lib. II.
having brought down his Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome to Damasus; Damaso
Syricius hodie, says he, cum quo nobis totus orbis, commercio Formatarum, in
una commuuionis societate concordat. To Damasus succeeds this day Syricious,
with whom, the whole world together agrees with us, in one fellowship of
communion, by the intercourse of leters of mark. These leters of mark, which
we speak of, concerned not only the public business of Churches, but were
usually given to private Christians, whether of the Clergy or people, that,
when they travailed into foreign Countries, they might certify, of what rank
rhey were at home, and to be received and communicate accordingly; whatsoever
Church they came to, all over the world. A thing so manifest by all records of
the Church, that it were injury for the Reader to go about to evidence it. I
said nothing before, in order of time, concerning the sect of the Dohatists. The
reason was, because they broke out of the Unity of the Church, upon that
quarrel which had been debated before in S. Cyprians time, concerning the
baptizing of Heretics, and, by the Christian moderation of that time, had been
appeased without dissolving the Unity of the Church. But I showed you before,
that S. Augustines refutation of them proceeds very much upon supposition of
that Unity of the Church, which we are now put to prove. Neither said I any
thing of the Schism of Meletius in Egypt, because it proceeded upon the same
ground with that of the Novatians, that those who had fallen away in the
persecution of Diocletian ought not to be readmitted to communion with the
Church again. But he that shall consider the decree of the Council of Nicaea,
for the uniting of them to the Church again, shall find, that they held
themselves obliged to abate of their right, to regain the Unity of the Church;
So far they were from imagining, that God had not commanded it. For, to
encourage them to return, they allowed those, who had been ordained under
Meletius (...), the title, rank and ministry competent to their respective
orders, and, to succeed into the places as those that should die: In the mean
time, not to act in Ordinations of those of the Clergy should do. This you have
in Theodoret and Socrates, Eccl. Hist. I. 9. in Sozomenus, I. 24. And thus, I
conceive, I have demonstrated the Unity of the Church, by the same reasons for
which we hold our Christianity; That is, by the Scriptures interpreted by the
consent of all Christians: Having showed by the proceedings in the Arian
persecutions under Constantius and Valens, that this Union was of force to
defeat all the designs of those Apostates, who, having the power of the Empire
on their side, sought the way to introduce their own Faith. For what appearance
is there, that succeeding Emperors should not acknowledge that, which had
preserved their Faith in despite of their predecessors? Or that Constantine,
from the beginning of his Christianity, did not acknowledge the Church in that
quality, which manifestly defeated the de^^gnes of his successors to poison
Christianity? But the Laws of the Empire are extant, and so are the Laws of
most of those Soveraignties into which the Empire stands divided, and I shall
have occasion to say something of them in the process of my discourse, where I
shall find something objected for me to dissolve. Which when I have answered,
then shall I make account to have completely demonstrated my purpose. In the
mean time, I desire those that have seen what has been alleged for and against
the Infallibility of the Church, to tell me, whether ever they found it
alleged, that there never was any such thing as the Church, in the nature of a
Corporation of Gods founding; Which, had it been the ground of Reformation, as
now Erastians and Independents are founded upon it, there had been no such
bar to all pretense of Infallibility in the Church, as to say, that there is
no such thing as a Church in the quality of a Corporation, that is, with power
in some to oblige the whole. On the other side, having demonstrated, that all
things necessary to the salvation of Christians are not clear in the Scriptures
to all whom they concern, I have also showed, how necessary it was, that the
Corporation of the Church should be provided, as well to preserve that Faith,
upon the profession whereof I have showed it was founded, as to maintain that
service of God in unity, which is the end for which it subsisteth.

CHAP. XI. Upon what grounds the first book de Synedriis holds that the Church
cannot excommunicate. Before the Law there was no such Power, nor by it.
Christians went for Jews under the Apostles. His sense of some Scriptures.
What the Leviatha^ says in general concerning the Power of the Church. Both
suppose that Ecclesiastical Power includes Temporal, which is not true. Of the
Oxford Doctors Paraenesis.
TO much of this great opposition is made by the first and second book de
Synedriis Jud^orum, and the Author of the Leviathan; The first pretending to
maintain the position of Erastus that Excommunication may be a temporal
punishment, if secular Powers think fit to use it, but, that the Church has
nothing to do, to exclude from the communion of the Eucharist those, who,
professing Christianity, live not according to it. To this purpose he produces
all the evidence that can be made, to show, that, under the Law of Nature, as
Ecclesiastical Writers call it, (that is, from the beginning of the world to
the Law of Moses) there was no precept, no practice of Excommunication, for the
Jews, under the Law, to receive it from thence. No precept of the Law, upon
which it can be thought to have been established by divine Right, so as to take
place under the Gospel upon that Title. Here he shows at large; That, when
the precept of Circumcision is inacted by this sanction; That the male child
which shall not be circumcised on the eight day, shall be cut off from his
people; When many precepts of Moses Law have this penalty, of being cut off,
annexed to the transgression of them, the intent is not, that they shall be
excommunicate; But, that their lives shall be forfeited to Gods vengeance in
case he please to exercise it. Inferring, that, when the Sovereign Power was
taken away from that people in their captivity and dispersions, being
nevertheless privileged to live by their own Laws; By their own consent they
submitted to this penalty, as the means to enforce the sentences of their own
Governors, by whom their Laws were dispensed. This being that Excommunication,
whereof we have remembrance in Esdras and in the Gospels; As it appears, by
the original, to have been a mere humane Law, so did it no way concern the
service of God, which the Excommunicate, among the Jews, were not excluded
from by it: But was a mere civil punishment, tending to change and abate the
estate and condition of him that was under it, in his freedom and intercourse
with his own peole. By all this he seems to fortify the argument which
Erastus had made, showing, that there is no such thing as Excommunication
commanded or established by that Law, and therefore that there is no such power
in the Church. But further, seeing that there was no other company of men
extant in the world, for the Apostles to understand by the name of the Church,
when our Lord commanded him that was offended among his Disciples; Tell it to
the Church, Mat. XVIII. 16-20. he insists strongly, that neither the Church of
Christ, nor any Consistory or Assembly of men, or particular person, claiming
or acting in behalf and under the title of the Church can be understood by
those words of our Lord: But that the name of the Church must necessarily
signify the Body of Jews, as well as Christians as unbelievers, or, that
Consistory which was able to act in behalf of them, in their respective times
and places; such as we must also understand the witnesses there mentioned to
be. For it is manifest, that, at the beginning of Christianity, only Jews
were admitted to be Christians, in so much that, the dispute was hot about
Cornelius and his company, Acts XI. 1. being no Jews in Religion, but yet,
such as believed in the true God, and had renounced the worship of Idols.
Whereby it seems, the command of our Lord to baptize all Nations Mat. XXVIII.
19. was then understood to concern only those of all Nations, that had made
themselves Jews by being circumcised, before. Accordingly, we see, that, by
virtue of Claudius his Edict, commanding all Jews to depart from Rome, Aquila
and Priscilla, being Christians, came to Corinth, Acts XVIII. 2. to show, that
Christians at that time must needs use the Jews fashions, who were therefore
reputed Jews by the Law of the Romans, and enjoyed the benefit of their
Religion by the Jews privileges, granted, or confirmed by the same Claudius,
in Josephus, Antiq. XIX. 4. Whereupon it seems necessarily to follow, that the
Excommunication then in force was that, which the Jews had introduced by
humane Law, confirmed by the Law of the Empire. Though, it is to be thought,
that the Christians, upon particular agreement among themselves, (such as we
find they had, by Pliny, Epist. X. 97. Tertul. Apolog. cap. II. Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. III. 33. S. Hierome Chron. 2123. Orig. contr. Celsum I. page 4.) had
limited the use of it, to such causes and terms as their profession required.
Therefore, when our Lord in the next words commands, that he which will not
hear the Church, be accounted as an Heathen or a Publicane; As it is manifest,
that he gives the Church no power, but only prescribes what he would have
the party offended to do; So, neither Heathen nor Publicane being in the
condition of an excommunicate person among the Jews, how can it be understood,
that our Lord would have him to be excommunicate, whom he commands to be held
as a Heathen man or as a Publicane? The effect then of this precept of our Lord
will consist, in limiting the precept of the Law Levit. XIX. 17. to the
publishing of those offenses between parties, the private complaint whereof
should be neglected; So that, if the opinion of Gods people should be no more
esteemed by the osfeuder, the party offended freely to return his scorn, by
avoiding his familiarity, as Jews were wont to avoid the familiarity of
Heathen men and Publicanes. Now, when our Lord adds in the next words;
Whatsoever ye bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; The sense must either be general, to
signify the obligation of all Law, and the right and Power which one man may
have, by the act of his will to tie and limit another man's; Or particular to
the Law of Moses: Whereby, what was declared unlawful by the Doctors and
Professors of it, was said in their language to be held or bound, that which
was permitted, loose: Which signification our Lord also uses, Mat. XXIII. 4.
Luc. XI. 46. This later sense, concerning things and not persons, will be far
from signifying, that any man should be excommunicate. And though
Excommunication be a bond, and was so among the Jews, yet, how should we
understand, that the Church is enabled to tie this bond by a commission, the
terms whereof contain all that superiors may do to oblige their inferiors?
This Author then acknowledges, that S. Paul threatens Excommunication, Gal. I.
8, 9. 1 Cor. XVI. 22. and that he wishes himself that estate which it imports,
Romans IX. 3. Not, as it has been falsely imagined among Christians, to be cut
off from the communion of the Eucharist, and other offices of Christianity; But
as it was used among the Jews, to infer the abridgment of a man's freedom in
public conversation, as vile and subject to the curses of the Church. But when
the same Apostle gives order that the incestuous person be delivered to Satan,
1 Cor. V. 5. As also when he says, that he had delivered Hymenaeus and
Philetus, 1 Timothy I. 20. when he orders them not to converse with such
persons, 1 Cor. V. 11. this he takes no more to concern Excommunication, than
those verses of the Psalms; Blessed is the man that bath not walked in the
counsel of the ungodly; Or, I have not sat with vain persons, nor will have
fellowship with the deceitful; That is to say, that it is bad counsel toward
God, but neither ground nor sign of any commission to excommunicate, in the
body of the Church. Whereas the Leviathan, (to show here, out of order, his
sense of that place) though he acknowledge, that both ancient and modern
writers have understood it, as if, by the extraordinary graces which the
Apostles then had, to evidence the presence of God in his Church; the
excommunicate became subject to plagues and diseases inflicted by evil Angels,
(to show, that they came under the power of Satan, when they were put out of
the Church) yet he satisfies himself by saying, that other learned men find
nothing like the excommunication of Christians in it, page 209. and, that it
depended upon the singular privilege of the Apostles.

These are the grounds upon which the power of the Keys, and by consequence,
the charter and corporation of the Church, and all Ecclesiastical right and
power grounded thereupon, are taken away, in the first book de Synedriis, to
the same effect, as in Erastus his positions. But the Leviathan comes up close
to the point in general, and, following the supposition which I have refuted;
That the Gospel, or Christianity, and the Scriptures that contain it, are not
Law, till the secular Power that is Sovereign inact it; By consequence must
needs deny, that any Act of the Apostles could be Law to the Church, whose
office was only to publish the news of the coming and rising again of Christ,
and to induce men to submit themselves to his kingdom of the world to come.
Much less can there be any Power to give Laws to the Church, but that which
is in the Sovereign of each State, which therefore, when it is Christian, is
called the Church of such a Kingdom. Though he acknowledge also, that, before
the Empire was Christian, the Body of Christians in every City is called in the
Scriptures the Church of such or such a City, page 275; But denying, that there
can be upon earth any such universal Church as all Christians are tied to obey,
because they are liable to other Powers of this world, according to the States
of which they are, page 248. and before, page 206. As for the Power of bunding
and loosing, very properly he understands it to be a consequence of the
Apostles commission to baptize unto forgiveness of sins. But so, that,
supposing they have nothing to do either to loose them that repent not, or to
bind them that do, and that no man's repentance is visible but by our outward
signs, there must be some Power to judge of the truth of those fignes, because
they may be counterfeit. And this Power, as it is expressly given by our Lord to
the Church, Mat. XVIII. 16. when he says, Tell the Church; So does S. Paul 1
Cor. V. 11, 12; and, 3, 4, 5. acknowledge the power of casting out the
incestuous persons and other finners to be in the Congregation, reserving to
himself only the pronouncing of the sentence. Supposing this Church to be now
the Sovereign Power that represents the people, but when S. Paul writ, the
Body of Christians in such or such a City, page 275. In like manner, the
appointing of Persons, either to officiate the Service of God, or to wait upon
the necessities of the Church, he also gives unto the Church, that is, then,
to the respective Bodies of Christians, but now, to the Sovereign Power into
which all Rights of the People resolve by the establishment of it. But, the
consecrating of them by Imposition of hands, as to the Apostles for their time,
so, to the worlds end, to their Successors. For thus were Ma^thias, Paul and
Barnabas made Apostles Act. I. 15, 23. XIV. 1, 2, 3. XIV. 14. Thus the seven
Deacons, thus the Elders of Churches were constituted, Acts VI. 3. XIV. 23. the
Congregation choosing, the Apostles declaring the choice, as in binding and
loosing. As for the maintenance of Persons thus appointed, it is no marvail if
he make it mere alms and benevolence, without any Law of God to make the
purses of Christians liable to it, who acknowledges not Christianity to be any
Law; For, how shall he be bound to contribute toward the maintenance of such
persons, that is not bound to be a Christian? But, that Tithes, under the Law,
were due only by the Civil Power which God had upon the people, having made
God their Sovereign, by their Covenant with him, in which right Moses and
Aaeron, and the High Priests that succeeded him, were but his Lieutenants, (so
that, when this Power was translated and settled upon their Kings, it held
merely by their sufferance) this is an imagination that no man's brain ever
teemed with till now. And truly in the point of giving Law to the Church, by
determining Controversies of Faith, and by interpreting difficulties of
Scripture (call it what you please) as also by deciding that which becomes
questionable in any thing that concerns the community of Christians; It had
been a necessary consequence of this opinion, that, as he owneth the Sovereign
Powers right to decree, so he should assign the Persons thereby appointed for
the Church, a Right to declare, publish or pronounce the same, as in
Excommunicating and Ordaining he does; For which he has found no ground, no
pretense in the Scriptures. Besides, whereas, by the Act of the Apostles,
laying a burden upon believers, Acts XV. 28. and by the practice of their
successors, practicing the holding of Councils, (which common sense would make
ridiculous, if they had no effect upon the Church) he is convinced to
acknowledge that they were able to bind themselves, though not the Church; It
will be impossible for him to render a reason, either why this power should
cease, or how it should continue when the Sovereign Power becomes Christian,
and all right in the Church is resolved into it.

I must not leave this point, before I have taken notice of one presumption,
wherein both these Authors seem to agree. For the Leviathan, in several places
page 285 286, 282, 205, 206, 322. takes for granted, that there is no Law in
the world, but the Law of Nature, and the Civil Laws of Commonwealths. And
therefore, that he which makes Ecclesiastical Power not to depend upon the
Civil, must indow it both with right and means, to constrain men to obey it;
and thereupon inferrs all the inconvenience which he so much aggravates; That
then all Civil Power must of necessity be swallowed up and resolved into the
Power of the Church, in as much as all Christians, even Sovereigns are members
of it. Which to avoid, it is necessary to grant, that the Church is nothing
else but a Christian Commonwealth, and the Clergy ministers of the Sovereign
Power, deriving all their authority from it, page 209, 249, 296. In like manner,
the first book de Synedriis Ebraeorum, in defining Excommunication, page 105.
takes it for granted, that those who challenge the power of it in behalf of the
Church, would have the Civil estate and condition of him that is excommunicate,
in regard of his reputation of freedom, changed and abated by it. Which must
needs infer the Church to be endowed with such a power, as is able, by
outward force to constrain obedience. For otherwise, the estate of no man, that
is protected in all right by the Civil Power, could be changed or abated by it.
Accordingly, in several places he presumes, that those who maintain the Power
of the Church, and the right of Excommunicating, which is a prime part of it,
to stand by Gods Law, are obliged by consequence to maintain the Power of the
Church in matters of the world, in Ordine ad spiritualia. And hereupon follow
the reasons, whereby these Authors have disputed, the one a priori, that this
constitution of the Church is destructive to the peace and safety of all
States, Kingdoms, and Commonwealthes, (in as much as a Power not depending
upon them, may lawfully be used against them, by giving the people a title of
executing the commands of it by force) The other a posteriori, from the
practice of all Christian States, Kingdoms, and Commonwealthes; Who, by
limiting the exercise and effect of all kinds of acts which the Church has
done, or pretended to enforce by Excommunication, have sufficiently
demonstrated, that they grant the Church no Title to any part of the Power it
challenges, but their own grant, thinking fit to execute their will in Church
matters by Church men, no otherwise than they execute their will in military
matters by soldiers, in matters of public or private right by Judges and
Lawyers. As you may see at large in the first book de Synedriis cap. X. By
which it may appear, that I do this Author no wrong, when I infer; That the
Church is no Corporation, nor has any Power but from the State, according to
his opinion, because it has no Power to excommunicate. For, if those
di^ferences of persons, whereby, some are qualified to act in behalf of the
Church, are grounded originally upon the act and will of the State employing
them to that purpose, then can no act that they do be referred to any Power
estated upon the Corporation of the Church, founded by God upon any charter of
divine right. Now, it is well enough known, that there is such an opinion
maintained in the Church of Rome; And it is manifest, to him that shall peruse
what has passed in the Scottish Presbyteries, that the effect of the same
position has been practiced by them, when the ground of it has been
disclaimed; which is, to my judgment, the more dishonest course of the two. But
it mvst be acknowledged, because it cannot with truth or sincerity be either
denied or dissembled, that there are very many of that Church that think
otherwise, and think that the Church allows them so to think and to profess.
And it is reported with likelihood enough, that Cardinal Bellarmine himself,
(though then a Jesuit, and employed to dispute all Controversies upon the
highest terms that are tenable) was not, of his own choice, willing to have
maintained it, had he not writ under an Imperious Pope Sextus V, that refuted
passeport to his books de Romano Pontifice, till he had added the fifth,
concerning this point. Which, what contradiction it has found from those of
his own profession, ought to be notorious to all, that give a judgment in this
point, and would not judge of they know not what. It is therefore manifest,
that there are enough of those, that believe the Church to be, by the Charter
of God, a Society, Corporation, or visible Body; And yet, by this Charter, not
protected by the power of the Sword, but exposed to be persecuted by the same;
That is to say, called by God, to the profession of Christianity, (part whereof
is, to believe the Catholic Church, and (by consequence) to be a member of it)
but to maintain this profession, not by force, but by suffering rather than
renounce it. Thereupon it follows, that, by the original institution of the
Church, to be excommunicate, inferres no manner of loss in this world, unless
it be to the Church that exco^municates, as the Leviathan very truly and
pertinently observes, page 276; In as much as, by being excommunicate, a man
may be moved to seek a course of revenge upon the Church that did it; And yet
nevertheless, upon supposition of Christianity, it may well be counted the
punishment, of not performing that Christianity which a man professes. For,
he that does not believe Christianity to be true, or submits not to it, cannot
think it any penalty for himself to be shut out of the Church. But, he that
professes Christianity, and lives not according to it, though the penalty
which he incurres by transgressing that profession is already incurred in
respect of God, yet, hoping that God will not take the forfeiture which he may
take, may count his Excommunication, as indeed it is, the loss of the means
of salvation, which the communion of the Church imports. If then it be
demanded, whether the Church, by the original Charter of God, have power to
constrain men by punishment to obedience; The answer is, that, absolutely it
has not, but, upon supposition it has. For, to him that thinks the Communion
of the Church no gain, Excommunication is no punishment; And therefore no
censure tending to Excommunication, which is the utmost constraint that the
Church can use. But, to him that believes the Communion of the Church to be the
means that God has ordained for the salvation of particular Christians, as the
loss of it is necessarily a punishment, so is the expectation of that loss a
constraint, to embrace the condition of retaining it. But, as this constraint
depends not upon outward force, but upon a persuasion of the mind which goes
before; So does it not originally enforce any punishment of this world, but
only upon supposition of privileges granted by secular Powers to the
profession of it, or penalties upon not professing it. Which, being accessory
to the original constitution of the Church, (because all the world knows,
that, from our Lord to Constantine, there were no such privileges or penalties)
it is manifest to all understandings, that he who pretends the Church to be
a Society or Visible Body by Gods appointment, is not obliged to grant, that it
is endowed with any temporal Power of this world, to constrain those who are of
it by outward force, because he pretends, that it has Power to refuse the
communion of those offices which God is to be served with by Christians, to
those that perform not their Christianity; Which it grants to those who
undertake it. As therefore, whatsoever is a condition of obtaining salvation
under Christianity, is Gods Law, so, whatsoever, by virtue of Gods Law, is a
just condition of obtaining or holding Communion with the Church, that is a Law
of the Church, supposing the Church to be a visible Society of Christians by
Gods appointment; though we grant not, that the loss of this Communion
imports any change in the worldy quality of any man, by the original
constitution of the Church, as it was founded by our Lord and his Apostles,
but, by the privileges necessarily accruing to it, when the Powers of the
world, professing Christianity, undertake the protection of it.

But having named these two Authors for my adverse parties in this dispute, I
am obliged to take notice of the Oxford Doctors late Paraenesis, ad
aedificatores Imperii in Imperio, published since the penning of this. For the
whole book proceeds upon the same oversight which the other two have made, and
the very Title of it contains. I demand of any man in his right senses, whether
he can be said to build the Church into an Empire, within that Empire or
Sovereignty which maintains it, that challenges no manner of temporal effect for
that Excommunication, which is the utmost means the Church has to enforce the
sentence of it. They that oblige Subjects to depose their Sovereigns if the
Pope excommunicate them, I confess, make both Sovereigns and Subjects the
Popes Vassals, them to rule, and these to obey at the discretion of him that
can excommunicate them if they do not. That the Scottish Presbyterians have
done the like, it were easy to show, were it worth the while, as also from
whence they took their rise to do it. And if he please to step over the water
again into France, I can show him a more lively picture of an Empire erected
within an Empire, when the Reformed Churches their had there Civil Assemblies,
to order the business which should arise upon the privileges which they had
purchased by their arms, for the maintaining of their Religion by force.
Whether by right or by wrong I say not here: But this is the thing which he
calls Imperium in Imperio, the Popes temporal Power making him rather
Sovereign above, than within other Soveraignties. But, I have showed you
already, that this opinion never was the Faith of the Catholic Church, but the
position of the Papal Faction, disclaimed at this day by the far greater part
of that communion, though the contrary, being countenanced the more, make the
greater appearance. For my own opinion, I have delivered it so clear in my book
of the Right of the Church in a Christian State, that these Authors might, if
they pleased to oversee all other Divines that deliver the same, by that alone
have seen what they had to refute. And truly, I do not believe, that any of
them can allege a more convicting reason against those that build a Sovereignty
within a Sovereignty upon the Title of the Church, than that which there is
alleged from the Unity of the Church, prophesied of in all the promises of the
calling of the Gentiles, which the constitution of one visible Church of all
Christians fulfilleth. For, if the Church of several Soveraignties is to be one
and the same Body, by communicating in the Service of God, upon supposition of
the same Faith, then cannot the foundation of it create any title of temporal
right, to the prejudice and disturbance of those Soveraignties, from whence all
force, within their respective territories, is derived. If it be said, that the
supposition is impossible, to wit, that the Church should have power to Ordain,
Excommunicate, decree, and yet be endowed with no force to constrain those that
are obliged to stand to the acts thereof; The reason now alleged to the
contrary is evident. For, if the obligation of the inward man be of force to
resolve a Christian, to part with his life to maintain the profession of it; If
it be part of that obligation which Christianity creates, to hold communion
with Gods Church; is not this obligation enough to enforce the acts of the
Church, and that excommunication which inforces the same? And for experience
from the effect, it is but alleging the subsistence of the Church, till the
time that Gregory II and III Popes withdrew their obedience, and the obedience
of those parts of Italy that followed them, from the Emperor Leo Isaunus, upon
pretense of his erring in the Faith, in putting down Images. For that is the
first example which Christendom has brought forth, of temporal freedom from
allegiance due to the Sovereign, founded upon the Title of Christianity. If
yet it be evident that this was the case, in which, I see, there is some
difficulty made. But, before this time, it can neither be said, that the Church
was not the same after Constantine as before, nor that the power of it ever
produced any rebellion against the Sovereign, upon this Title, more than when
the Martyrs suffered for their Christianity, without defending themselves by
force.

And therefore, when this Doctor, for the ground of his opinion, (as visible to
his imagination as the common notions in Euclide) alleges, that all Power, all
Jurisdiction, all Laws, all Punishment, all Government, all Appeals, all
Councils are derived first, and do lastly resort to the Secular Power, no less
in Ecclesiastical than in Secular Causes, and concerning Ecclesiastical as well
as Secular Persons, because all force which constrains obedience is vested in
it; his imagination is merely imbroyled with equivocation of words. For all
Power is nothing else but a moral quality, consisting in the right of obliging
other men's wills, (those in respect of whom the Power holds) by the act of his
or their wills that have it. And what shall hinder God to create such an
obligation upon the consciences of Christians, by virtue of their Christianity,
not allowing them any force to inact it, but the denial of the communion of the
Church? Whether the Rules of the Church be called Laws or Canons, he that is
tied to hold communion with the Church, is tied to observe those Rules by which
it subsists, and, if he do not, deserves to be set aside, rather than the
Unity thereof perish. Whether ye call them Magistrates or Elders that are
appointed to govern the Church, it matters not; if by virtue of Gods Law, the
obligation of obeying them be evident in the Scriptures. Whether it be properly
called Jurisdiction or not, when a Christian is censured to be put out of the
Church, it shall have the same effect, with that Jurisdiction whereby a
malefactor is put out of the world, according as the correspondence between the
Church and the State will bear it. How this may be counted punishment, how not,
I will not say again, having said it already. In all causes and concerning all
persons, I acknowledge there lies an appeal to the Sovereign, the Church having
to do only in Ecclesiastical causes, concerning men as they are members of the
Church, and so accidentally, (when the Church is as large as the State, all
acknowledging the same Church) the Jurisdiction thereof, whether properly so
called or not, extending to as many as that of the State. For, the last appeal
is one of those Jura Majestatis, or Prerogatives wherein Sovereignty
consists, neither is it alienable, though it is limitable by those terms
which Christianity, when it is acknowledged to come from God, establishes. On
the other side, the Power of the Church, though never so evidently settled by
Christianity, may be abused, not only when it is extended to some temporal
effect, but also when it is extended beyond the ground and reason of that
Christianity which it presupposes. Instances you have of both, in the claims,
of temporal Power and Infallibility in behalf of the Church. And, as there lies
an appeal to a Heathen Sovereign, professing not to persecute his Subjects for
their Christianity, but to protect them in it, upon pretense that it is
extended to a temporal effect; so may there by an appeal to a Christian
Sovereign, upon pretense that it is extended beyond the bounds which
Christianity allows. So the Council of A^tiochia appealed Aurelian, because
Paulus Samosatenus protected himself in his House, belonging to the the Church,
by power derived from him. But he allows them that trial which Christianity
settleth. So Constantine received the appeal of the Donatists, but referred the
trial to the Church, in a Council at Rome, and again another at Arles,
representing all the West. But of the bounds of Secular and Ecclesiastical
power I must speak again. That the Ecclesiastical may be from God, though
limitable by the Secular, hitherto this is evidence. As for the holding of
Councils, I mervail to see this Doctor so securely to dream, that the calling
of them all belongs only to the State, and that it were an usurpation in the
Church to hold any but by commission from it; For he is not ignorant how many
Synods were held by the Church before Constantine, and that, upon the same right
as those meetings of the Apostles, which, I have showed, had the power and
force of General Councils, without asking leave either of Jews or Romans.
Which is enough, for the present purpose, to infringe the argument made by this
Doctor in the former part of his book; Not, that there is no Church, but that
there can be none where there is a State. Wherein he out-vieth the first book
de Synedriis his Master, who, having granted, that the Excommunications of
Christians were taken up by the voluntary consent of Churches, has, by
consequen^e granted, that the Church was a Church, that is, a Corporation,
before Constantine. And therefore I referr the consideration of the time after
Constantine, till I speak of the bounds of Ecclesiastical and Civil Power in
Church matters; Where, it will as easily appear, as it is easy to look into any
record of the Church, that the holding of Synods was a matter of course and
Canon and custom, allowed indeed by the Empire, but constituted and limited by
the Church. Not because the State might not have forbid them; Had they gone
beyond the bounds of that right which the constitution of the Church
establishes, justly; unjustly if they had not; So that, the power of
forbidding to be just, the use of it unjust; But, that the Church was yet
unacquainted with the motives of transgressing those bounds, and so the State
had no just cause to interpose. Of General Councils I say not the same. Not as
if the Church before Constantine had usurped a right not due, had it assembled
by representatives in a General Council: But, whether such assemblies were
forborne, as matter of more jealousy to the State, than either ordinary meetings
for the service of God, or Synods; Or of more charge to the Church; It must be
acknowledged, that the first General Council of Nicaea could not have been
assembled, without the command, as well as the charge of Constantine. That
other General Councils were never assembled without the concurrence of the
chief Powers of Christendom. That every Sovereign has a Power to command the
presence of every subject, where and when he shall please. And that
Constantius, when he constrained the Council of Ariminum to sit against their
will, to the prejudice of the respective Churches, (on purpose, by this
duresse, and the opportunities of time, to bring them to his will) abused his
Power indeed, but usurped it not. For, if the constitution of the Church be no
ground for any temporal Right, then can no quality in the Church exempt any
man, from the service, which, as a member of the Commonwealth, he owes his
Sovereign. But, whether they acted by commission from Constantius, or by the
quality they held in the Church, the success of his design witnesses. For,
as I have showed you, that without being assembled, they had both right
obliging them, and means inabling them to maintain the Faith by mutual
intelligence and correspondence: So, being assembled alters nothing in the
case, saving the opportunity it gives, to employ their right, to that end
which their quality pretends; Their assembling upon his command signifying no
trust which they undertook to him, prejudicial to that which their quality in
the Church imports. Having said this in general, to that general Argnment,
upon which this Doctor pretends to build his opinion, I am content to turn my
Reader loose to him, provided he be content to consider also, that which shall
be found requisite to be said, when I have done with his two predecessors.

CHAP. XII. That the Law expersly covenanted for the Land of Promise. A great
Objection against this, from the Great precept of the Law. The hope of the
world to come under the Law, and the obedience which it requires, was grounded
upon reason from the true God, the Tradition of the Fathers, and the Doctrine
of the Prophets. The Love of God above all by the Law extends no further than
the precepts of the Law, the love of our Neighbor only to Jews. Of the
Ceremonial, Judicial and Moral Law.
SO much difference as there is between these two or these three opinions, and
the reasons upon which they proceed, it is manifest, that the issue and
pretense of all is the same; That there is no such thing as a Church:
Understanding by that name, a Visible Society or Corporation of all Christian
people, subsisting, or that ought to subsist by a Charter from God, one and the
same from the first to the second coming of Christ. Which therefore remains
distinct from all States and Soveraignties that profess Christianity, by the
Rights upon which it subsists, though the persons of which both consist may be
the same, if it so fall out, that Christianity be professed by all the
Sovereign Powers under which there are Christians. But, that is the reason why
I am forced to quote both Authors and Opinions by name, which in other points I
shall avoid: Not only because I would be as short in this abridgment as my
design will bear; But because nothing seems to me more odious, or further
from the profession of a Christian, than the affectation of contradicting the
opinions of men in repute for Learning; which therefore I would have avoided by
silencing the names of these, had I not found so much difference in the means
from which they would infer the same consequence. And truly the Leviathan
has done like a Philosopher, in making the question general that is general
indeed, and giving that resolution of all the branches of it, without which,
whatsoever is said to some parts of it, leaves the whole unresolved, while any
part so remains. Those that only dispute the power of Excommunication, are
nevertheless to give account, what Right the Secular Power can have, to
appoint the Persons, that shall either determine or execute matters of Religion,
to decide Controversies of Faith, to minister the Sacraments, (which they may
do themselves by much better Title than by their Deputies) than if they
resolved and maintained all this as expressly, as the Leviathan has done. It
may be indeed he has made his resolution more subject to be contradicted, by
so freely and generously declaring it; But whosoever shall undertake the same
pretense, will stand no less obliged to God and to his Church, to give
account, how every part of that Power, which, as well before as since
Constantine has been exercised by the Church, should henceforth be exercised
by Secular Powers, without prejudice to Christianity, before he go about to
void it; Though he give not the truth so much advantage against himself,
because he expresses not so much of his meaning. For my part, as I found it
necessary, so I find it sufficient to have quoted these opinions and reasons,
advanced against the right of the Church, because I find, they oblige me to
digg sor a foundation, upon which, as the true ground of that right which the
Church claims, I may be enabled to dissolve whatsoever reasons, wit, and
learning, impregnated by passion or interest can invent to contradict the same.

Here then I must have recourse to a position, which some men will count
hazardous, others prejudicial to Christianity, according as their prejudices or
engagements may work; But will appear in truth, to them that shall take the
pains to look through the consequences of it, in the resolution of
Controversies which divide the Church, to concern the interest of Christianity,
and the peace of the Church, more th^n any point whatsoever, that is not of the
Foundation of Faith. In as much as, there is no question that is started, or
can be started, (as the case is now with the Church, so as to call in question
the peace and unity thereof) but the interpretation of the old Test^ment, or
some part of it, in relation and correspondence to the New Testament, will be
engaged in it. Concerning which, the position that I intend to advance is this;
That, by the Law of Moses, and the Covenant between God and the people of
Israel upon it, nothing at all was expressly contracted, concerning everlasting
life and the happiness of the world to come. Not that I intend to say; That
there was not, at that time, sufficient ground for a man to be competently
persuaded of his right to it, or sufficient means to come to the knowledge of
that ground, (for he that should say this; could not give account, how the
Fathers should attain salvation under the Law) which, I find all that maintain
the truth of Christianity against the Jews so obliged to do, that without it
they must give up the game. But, that the thing contracted for between God and
the people of Israel, by the mediation of Moses, was the Land of Promise; (That
is to say, that they should be a free people, and enjoy their own Laws, in the
possession of it) upon condition of embracing and observing such Laws as God
should give. As for the kingdom of heaven, which the Gospel of Christ
preaches, the hope of it was so mystically intimated, that there was
sufficient cause to embrace it even then, but not propounded as the condition
upon which God offered to contract with them, as he does with Christians. And
this, though I cannot say that the Church has at anytime expressed to be a
part of the Rule of Faith, yet, that the Church has always implicitly
admitted it for a part of the reason of Faith, which we call Divinity, I must
and do maintain.

Before I come to prove this, I will here propound one objection, because it
seems to contain the force of all that is to be said against it. For, when our
Lord says, Mat. XIX. 19. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments;
When he resolves the great commandments of the Law to be the love of God
above all things, and of our neighbor as of our selves, Mat. XXII. 36. In fine;
wheresoever he derives the duties of Christianity from the Law of Moses, he
seems to suppose, and so do his Apostles, that the same life everlasting which
he promises by the Gospel was proposed by the Law, as the reward for
observing it. And indeed, what can the Gospel was propound, for a more suitable
way or means to salvation, than the love of God and man, in that order which
the Law of God appoints? It is not for nothing, that S. Augustine observes;
The first commandment of the Decalogue, to acknowledge God, and the last; not
to covet that which is another man's, to contain in them the utmost office of a
Christian: And all Divines have distributed the precepts of Moses Law, into
Moral, as well as Judicial and Ceremonial; The Moral precepts containing in
them no less than the duties of Christianity, when they are done with such an
intent, as God, who by giving Moses Law declares himself to see the most
inward of the heart, requires.

Here, in the first place, (supposing that God, entering into Covenant with that
people, intended to establish their Civil Government by the Law of Moses) I
will proceed to argue, that all Civil Laws, that are not contrary to the Law
of Nature, and the actions by them enjoined or prohibited, may be done or not
done for two several reasons: For, if there be reason enough for the Nations
that know not God, nor ground their Laws upon any presumption of his will, or
expectation of good or evil from him, to unite themselves in Civil Society,
then is their reason enough for them, to observe the Laws upon which the
benefit of Civil Society is to be had, though they suppose not themselves
obliged by God to them, nor to oblige God by keeping them. And if it be
evident, that all Civil Laws, not contrary to the Laws of God and Nature, do
come from God, as Civil Society does, it will be as evident, that the keeping
of them in that regard, and for that consideration, is obedience to God. The
Jews Civil Law has this privilege above the Civil Laws of other Nations, to
be gronnded upon those acts, whereby God, revealing himself for their freedom
by Moses, tendereth them the Land promised to their Fathers upon the Covenant
they then had with God, upon condition of undertaking the Laws which he
should give them for the future. And no reason can deny, that this was
sufficient to convince them, that God required of them, not only the work
which the Law specified, but that it be done in consideration of his will, and
in reference to his honor and service; Though on the other side, it is not
necessary to grant, that so much is expressed by the Civil Law of that Nation,
expressly tending to their Civil freedom and happiness, in the possession of
the Land of Promise. It cannot be doubted, that the immortality of the soul,
and the reward of good and bad after death was received among that people, from
and before the time of receiving the Law: Otherwise, how should the Patriarchs
obtain it, which the maintenance of Christianity requires that they did
obtain? It is also evident by the Scriptures, that the same conversation which
Christ and his Apostles preached, was extant in the lives and actions of the
Fathers before the Law, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Job, Moses, and the
rest, as the Fathers of the Church are wont to argue against the Jews, that
Christianity is more ancient than Judaisme. It is also manifest, that the same
conversation was extant, and to be seen under the Law, in the lives of the
Prophets and their Disciples, by the words of our Lord to the Scribes and
Pharisees Mat. XXIII. 29-36. when he charge them, that, professing to honor
the Prophets by building their monuments, but hating himself and his Apostles,
they made themselves the heirs of those that killed the Prophets; And pursuing
the same discourse, adds; That he would send them Prophets and Scribes and
Wisemen, (which were his Apostles and Disciples) whom they should crucify, and
scourge, and persecute from City to City, that all the righteous blood that had
been shed from Abel to Zacharias son of Barachias might come on their heads.
The same is testified by the Apostle Ebr. XI. 36, 37, 38. where, having through
the whole Chapter showed, that the Fathers before and under the Law were saved
by Faith, as Christians are, he adds; Others had trial of mockings and
scourgings, and bands, and imprisonment, were stoned, were sawed asunder, were
tempted, died by the sword, went about in sheeps and goats-skins, wanting,
afflicted and distressed, (of whom the world was not worthy) wandering in
deserts, upon mountains, in caves and holes under ground. Which being the
condition of the Christians to whom he writes, (exhorting them, by all that
Epistle, to endure persecution of the Jews, rather than to deny Christianity
by turning to the Law, which the Jews indeavored to force them to, by raising
them trouble) makes it manifest, that the same righteousness, for which the
Jews then persecuted the Christians, was that, for which their Fathers had
persecuted the Prophets and other righteous men under the Law. And, he that
shall make trial to maintain the truth of Christianity against the Jews, that
acknowledge all the Old Testament as well as we, shall find, that the Fathers
of the Church have reason, when they allege this against the Jews, to show,
that the salvation which the Patriarchs and Prophets and other righteous men
before and under the Law obtained, was not by Judaisme, but by Christianity,
Eusebius by name de demonstr. Evang. lib. I. There was no need then, that the
Law should condition that this should be believed, and it was agreeable to the
immediate intent of the Law, only to suppose it. For, at that time, by reason
of their deliverance out of Egypt, they did acknowledge God to be the only
true God, searcher of hearts and Judge of the world to come. Though formerly
they had been tainted with the Idolatries of the Egyptians; as by the Prophet
Ezekiel XX. 7. and their often relapses to Idolatry, upon occasion of the
company that joined themselves to them when they came out of Egypt, Exodus XII.
38. Number. XI. 4. Exodus XVI. 2. XXXII. 1. may appear. Therefore this Law being
tendered for the Civil Law of that people, it is not s^range that he should
covenant with them no further, than that they should expressly acknowledge him
for their God, in opposition to all other pretended Gods, and serve him by such
ceremonies as he should appoint; Governing their civil life by such Laws, as
he should allow an interest in the Land of Promise to those that should
observe, having appointed those to be cut off from it, that should not observe
the same. Though, this being the immediate intent of the Law, another principal
and utter intent of it must be acknowledged, to make way for that inward and
spiritual righteousness which the Gospel requires. For those, who, by the
temporal punishment of the Law should be constrained to yield outward obedience
to it, and abstain from such evil deeds as should put them out of protection
of it, being assured, by the doctrine of their Fathers before the Law,
maintained by the Prophets under the Law, of Gods particular providence, and
the immortality of the soul, and the reward of good and bad, according to that
spiritual righteousness which they themselves lived in, were thereby
sufficiently obliged to obey God, not only as their Sovereign in this world
civilly, but inwardly and spiritually, as him whom they expected to be judged
by, and remain with everlastingly in the world to come. For, as the necessity
of Christ's coming is necessary to the maintenance of Christianity, so it is
also necessary to the same purpose, that we maintain this coming of his to
have been foretold and signified by the Old Testament, and yet the intent of
it not covenanted for, because the intent of his coming was to covenant for it*
Which had it been covenanted for by the Law, he should not have needed to
come, for the purpose of introducing and establishing a Covenant, which was
already effectually accepted and in force; Nor to do the miracles which yet
serve not to convince the Jews that this was the intent of the Law, so far
were they from being convinced without them.

True it is indeed, that, though this Covenant had been established by the Law,
and accepted by Gods people, the coming and miracles of Christ would have been
no less necessary to introduce the Faith of the holy Trinity. But it is
manifest, that the revelation of that Faith was necessary, as the means to
procure this Covenant to be accepted, as obtained by the Son, and made
effectual by the Spirit. And therefore, the coming of Christ tending to
convince the world thereof, it is manifest, that the end for which the world
was to be convinced thereof, (that is to say, that the Covenant of the Gospel
might be accepted) was not in effect before, not brought to pass without it. I
do therefore much approve of the comparison which Grotius has made between
Moses his Law and the Roman Laws, which had their rise from the Pretors
Edicts; Who, being annual Magistrates, and having a great Jurisdiction in
their hands, were wont, because at the first written Laws were not provided,
to signify at their entrance, by posting up an Edict, what pleas they would
receive and give process to; But so, that of course they retained the most
points which their predecessors had declared, which therefore, being translated
of course out of this years Edict into the next, were called tralatitia, and
thereupon all things that are customary and usual, are properly called
tralatitia in Latin. We must understand further, that, the Fathers before the
Law had separated themselves from the Nations, (that had fallen, and were
falling away every day from the true God to the worship of Idols) not only by
acknowledging and serving the only true God, but by very many Laws and
Customs, whereby they ruled their Families and inferiors in religion and
justice among themselves. It must therefore be concluded, that those principles
upon which their Religion stood, were not blotted out when they received that
taint of Egyptian Idolatries. But remained in force and virtue among them, at
such time as, by receiving the Law becoming a free State, they undertook to
serve God, and to govern themselves according to the Laws which he should
give. For it is evident, that diverse Laws and Customs which were in force
among them before the Law, are presupposed, and further limited by the Law, and
therefore not introduced by it, but derived from the Fathers, as our Lord
observes of Circumcision, John VII. 22. Such was the Law of mourning for the
dead, so much in force at giving the Law, that, upon the death of Aarons sons,
it was necessary, that a Law should presently come forth, incerdicting the
Priests to mourn for them upon pain of death, the rest of the people
remaining under that Law; Though Aaron thereupon excuses himself, that they did
not feast upon the sin offering upon that day of mourning, and is accepted,
Levit. X. 5, to 19. This the Law introduces not, but was in force under the
Fathers, as we see Genesis L. 2, 10. XXVII. 41. The same is to be said of the
seven days in which Marriages were celebrated under the Law, as we see in
Sampson, Judge. XIV. 12, 15, 17. which is doubled Tob^ VIII. 22. no where
introduced by the Law, no more than the seven days, or seventy days, or
thirty days of mourning, Genesis L. 2. Deuteronomy. XXXIV. 8. The like of answering
adjurations, which the Law, Levit. V. 1. presupposes, as also Prove. XXIX. 24.
as a duty then received, that, if a man conjure all that know any thing of his
business, to declare what they know, all that hear him stand bound to declare
their knowledge in it. For, for this cause it is, that the Law, supposing him
guilty of perjury that conceals his knowledge in that case, makes him liable to
the sacrifice for expi^tion of perjury, as you may see Levit. V. 1. And by
virtue of this custom among Gods people, not only stood they bound to answer
the High Priest, as our Lord answers Ca^aphas, Mat. XXVI. 63. or the King, 1
Kings XXII. 18. 2 Chronicles. XVIII. 15. Jos. VII. 19. Job. IX. 24. but also private
men, in the Co^^ where their cause was hearing, adjuring all that were present
to testify their knowledge in their causes, if we believe the Jews
Constitutions. In like manner, we have nothing ordained in the Law that Tithes
should be paid, or, that it should be lawful, or acceptable to God to
consecrate any other part of their goods to the service of God, or to make
Vows of abstinence from things otherwise lawful: But we have it determined
by the Law, what kinds shall be Tithable, what Vows shall stand good, what
sacrifice shall be offered by him that transgresses his Vow, how every thing
that a man freely consecrates to the service of God shall be valued in money,
Levit. XXVII. 1-30. Psalm. XV. 4. Genesis XIV. 20. XXVIII. 22. Numb. XVIII. 29. The
like is to be said of many other Laws, which, being in the Old Testament
mentioned as in force by custom, and no where introduced by the Laws of
Moses, must be presumed to descend by Tradition from the Fathers. Which he
that believes, as it cannot be doubted, must of necessity acknowledge, that not
only the principles and grounds of spiritual and inward obedience to God for
Gods sake, but also the precepts wherein it consists, are rather presupposed by
the Law than introduced by it; And therefore may well be said, to be translated
out of the Law of Nature into Moses Law, when they are mentioned by it.

Though hereunto I must add this; That, they had not only the doctrine of
their Fathers before the Law, to introduce and to regulate this inward
obedience, but also the Prophets under the Law. The intent of whose Office was,
not only to reclaim them from Idol; to their own true God, but also to
instruct them wherein consisted, not so much that civil and outward observation
of his Law, which it promises to reward with temporal happiness in the Land
of Promise, as that spiritual and inward obedience to God, from which they
might conceive competent ground of hope toward the world to come. Every man
knows, how ready they were to fall from God, all the time, whereof we have the
records in the Scriptures, before the Captivity of Babylon. After that time,
we do not find that ever they ^ell to the worship of Idols, but we find
abundantly, by the reproofs of the Scribes and Pharisees by our Lord in the
Gospels, that the next sin to it, of Superstition and Hypocrisy, was soon
come in ins^ea^ of it; When, by the outward observation of the Ceremonial and
Judicial Laws, they promised themselves the favor of God and the reward of the
world to come. As, by paying Tithes precisely Mat. XXIII. 23. Luc. XI. 42.
XVIII. 12. by washing their hands and vessels according to the Tradition of
their Predecssors, Mar. VII. 4, 8. Mat. XXIII. 25, 26. Luc. XI. 39. by
punctually observing the Sabbath, Mat. XII. 1-12. Mar. II. 23-28. Luc. VII.
1-9. XIII. 10-16. XIV. 1-5. Joh. V. 9 -- enlarging their Phylacteries and
fringes Mat. XXIII. 5. by many things more, which are to be read up and down
the Gospels. This disease could not have been reproved by our Lord by the
testimony of the Prophet Esaias, Mat. XV. 9. Mar. VII. 7. Esa. XXIX. 13. had it
not taken root even before the Captivity, when as yet they were so subject to
fall to the worship of false Gods. Therefore we find the reproof of this
superstitious and hypocritical confidence in the Sacrifices which they thought
to bribe God with, and other outward performances of the Law, to be the
ordinary work of the most part of the Prophets; David, Psalm. XL. 7, 12. Psalm.
L. 8-13. LI. 18. The Prophet Samuel, 1 Samuel XV. 22. The Prophet Esaias, of
Sacrifices and Festivals, Esa. I. 11-20. Of their Fasts, Esa. LVIII. 3-10. Of
their serving God by Traditions, Esa. XXIX. 13. The Prophet Jeremy, that God
required not Sacrifices but obedience, Jer. VII. 21, 22, 23. and concerning
patience and hope, in the afflictions which he sends, Lam. III. 25-33. The
Prophet Hosea, in the Calves of our lips, Hos. XIV. 2. The Prophet Micah, when
he teaches what they should come before God with, Micah VI. 6, 7, 8. The
Prophet Zachary, of celebrating their Fasts, Zac. VII. 3-10. VIII. 16, 19. In
fine, all the Prophets in their instructions and exhortations to the inward
obedience of God in spirit and in truth, have showed themselves true
forerunners of our Lord Christ and his Apostles; Not only in preaching the
principal intent of the Law to be the same which the Gospel pretends to
covenant for, but in suffering, (as well for this, as for reproving Idolaters)
at the hands of those that taught for doctrines the Traditions of men, the like
things as our Lord and his Apostles suffered for the same cause, at the hands
of the Scribes and Pharisees. First then, the acknowledgment of one God that
disposes of all things, and knows the secrets of all hearts, expressly
covenanted for by Moses Law, by consequence of right reason infers the duty of
spiritual obedience to him in all his commands; Secondly, the Fathers before
the Law had delivered, the Prophets after the Law did preach the same, no less
than they did the acknowledgment of the true God, but more principally than the
outward observation of the Ceremonial or Civil precept of it; Therefore there
might be, and was sufficient means under the Law, to make them understand their
obligation to that spiritual obedience which the Gospel covenanteth for, though
we suppose, as the truth is, that the Law expressly covenanteth only for the
temporal happiness of the Land of Promise; Therefore there was also sufficient
means to oblige them to expect the coming of the Christ, as we see by the
Gospel that they did at the coming of our Lord, and, as all that will maintain
Christianity against the Jews are bound to maintain.

And therefore to the objection proposed I answer; That, though the words of
the precept of loving God with all the heart, and all the mind, and all the
soul, and all the might, may contain all that Christianity requires, to be
done, in consideration of duty to God, and with an intent of his honor and
service; Yet nevertheless that sense thereof that depends upon the Covenant of
the Law is to be limited, to the observation of those precepts which God should
confine their civil life to, in the service of him alone; The intent of the
Covenant being to contract with God for temporal happiness in the Land of
Promise, they undertaking, as a Commonwealth, to live by such civil Laws as
he should give, as well as to worship him by such Ceremonies as he should
prescribe. And therefore, supposing they observed those precepts, they were to
expect the inheritance of the Land of Promise, though we suppose, that they
did it out of respect to that reward, and not only to God and to his honor and
service. Yea, though we grant, that, for the acknowledging of the true God
alone, they were bound to endure persecution and death, rather than for fear of
torment to deny God, or sacrifice to Idols, or renounce his Law, as we see
Daniel and the three Children did under Nebuchadnesar, and the zealous Jews in
the Maccabees time under Antiochus Epiphanes. For, if the Heathen had cause to
believe, (that which is received of all, as the ground of civil Society) that
particular persons are bound to expose their lives for the defense of their
Country, (that is, to no other end, but, that they may live and die in the
Laws under which they are bred) though they had no promise of God, that they
should hold their inheritance of this world by maintaining them; Cereainly, the
people that obtained their inheritance by taking upon them Moses Law, shall
stand bound, not only to maintain it by the sword, under the conduct of their
Sovereigns, but also by suffering for it when they were not to maintain it by
force. A thing nothing strange to a man that shall consider, how des^rable life
is to him, that is forced from the Laws of his Country.

As for the other part of loving our Neighbor as our selves, it is without
doubt pregnant with an evident argument of this truth, seeing, in plain reason,
the extent of the precept might so argue the intent of it: For it is evident by
infinite Texts of the Law, that a man's neighbor, in this precept, extends no
further than to Israelites, whether by birth or by religion, that is to say,
those that are ingraffed into the Covenant by being circumcised. For example:
Let me ask, how the Law could forbid the Israelites to seek the good of the
Moabites and Ammonites, if it be part of the same Law, to love all men, under
the quality of neighbors, as themselves. Let me demand of any man, how
Mordecai was tied, not to do that honor to Haman, that his Sovereign commanded
to be done. How he could in conscience disobey his Prince, in a matter of
indifferent nature, of it self, had it not been prohibited by the Law of God.
Whether a Jew that is commanded by the Law to profess hostility against all
Amalekites, could be dispensed with in this obligation, by any act of his
Sovereign. Whether any just reason can be alleged for Mordecai but this. Nay,
those who are called strangers in the Law; (That is to say, those that had
renounced all Idols, and professed to worship the true God, and thereupon were
privileged to dwell in the Land of Promise, out of which the Israelites were
sufficiently commanded to root all Idolaters) those strangers I say, by the
leter of Moses Law, are not comprehended in the precept of loving our neighbor
as our selves. For he that asked who is the neighbor that the Law speaks of,
Lut. X. 27-37. is not convicted by our Lord, by any leter of the Law, but by a
Parable, intimating, the example of that which he did for mankind to be the
reason of that which the Gospel requires. Forsooth, if the love of Christians
extend to strangers and enemies, because the good Samarit^ne, which is our Lord
Christ, extended his so far, then, not because Moses Law had convenanted for
it. Therefore, besides this precept of loving our neighbors as our selves, it
was requisite that the Law should, by a particular provision, limit that
respect and tenderness wherewith they were required to use those strangers, as
converts to the true God, (for so the Syriack translation of the Law calls them
always) to wit, in the rank of Widows and Orphans. If this be true, the
precept of not coveting, by the immediate intent of Moses Law, stands confined
to that sense which the Jews at this day give it, according to the decisions
of their Doctors, that no man, by contrived oppresion or vexation, design to
force his neighbor, that was by the Law enabled to make a divorce, to part with
his wife, or any thing else that he called his own. Which sense our Lord also
in the Gospel manifestly favors, Mar. X. 19. where, recounting the precepts
that those must keep that will inherit life everlasting, after thou shall not
bear false witness, he inserres, thou shall not take away, by fraud or
oppression, that which is another man's, for the sense of the tenth
Commandment, thou shall not cover that which is thy neighbors; All which
extends no further, than the over act of seeking what is not a man's own. And,
though this be out Lords answer to him that asks what he is to do to obtain
life everlasting, yet it may well seem, that our Lord intended first to
propound unto him the civil Law of Moses, as necessary to salvation, and a step
toward it, because the Gospel says, that our Lord loved him that answered;
All these things have I kept from my youth up, as acknowledging that he said
true; For, that he had kept these precepts in that spiritual sense, and to the
intent and purpose which the Gospel requires, it was not true. And by that
which follows, when he asks what remained to be done, namely, that he leave
all to follow Christ, he inferrs in one precept, the whole inward and
spiritual obedience of God, which, under the Gospel, is expressly required; To
wit, that a man set all the world and himself behind his back, that he may
follow Christ. Therefore, though they be the obedience which under the Gospel
is expressly required, yet, when it is said of the precepts of the Law, which
who so shall do shall live by them, Levit. XVIII. 5. Ezekiel. XX. 11, 21. it is
not to be granted, that everlasting life is necessarily signified, but only a
prosperous estate, which vivere in the Ebrew, as well as in the Greek and
Latin, elegantly signifies. And yet there is good reason why these are counted
by our Lord the chief precepts of the Law, though, as for the immediate intent
thereof, they reach no further than the over act which other Laws determine as
well as they. Because more apt to signify the general extent of that inward
and spiritual obedience, which, being preached and taught by the Fathers, was
first to be translated out of their doctrine into the Law of Moses; that the
Prophets, (who, being authorized by the Law Deuteronomy. XVIII. 18. --. were raised by
God to prepare the way for our Lord Christ and his Gospel) might have as it
were a Text in the Law, upon which they might ground their Sermons of spiritual
obedience, which the Gospel of Christ, whose coming they preached, should
expressly require. And this is that secret of Gods Law and of his Covenant,
which the Prophet David declares to be revealed to those that keep Covenant
with God, and prays that his eyes may be opened to see it in the Law, the
study whereof inlightens a man to discover it, Psalm. XXV. 13, 15, XIX. 9, 10.
CXIX. 18. if we add hereunto the secret of Christ his coming, which this
obedience, or, at the least, the tender of a Covenant which should condition
for it, presupposes.

As for the division of the Precepts of the Law into Ceremonial, Moral, and
Judicial, it will very fitly fall in with the truth which I insist upon, in
case those that advance or maintain that division be content to receive this
truth. For it will be very proper to say, that the Ceremonial and Judicial
Precepts are those that depend upon the express and immediate intent of the
Law, as it contains the condition on their part, upon which God on his part
covenants to give them the civil happiness of the Land of Promise; But the
Moral precepts, such as might be counted Civil Laws, being observed civilly
out of respect to that happiness, and might be counted spiritual Laws, as the
offices of them might be done out of obedience to God, in respect to his
service; Which sense, the light of Nature, stirred up by that measure of
revelation which God was pleased to grant the Fathers before, and the Prophets
under the Law, having prevailed to bring into force before the Law, was
translated out of unwritten custom into the Law of Moses, to give the Prophets
a ground of their doctrine of the love of God above all and a man's neighbor as
himself, so to make way for that spiritual obedience, which, under the Gospel
was expressly to be required. But, if they refuse to admit this division, so as
to comply with the sense I pretend, then will it be easy for me to refuse the
division, as not contained in the Scripture, but the conceit of Divines, that
neither do understand the true difference between the Law and the Gospel, not
can be content to be showed it. For, neither does any Scripture of the Old or
New Testament express this division to come from the first and immediate, and
express intent of the Law, nor is there any Tradition in the Church of it,
which are the two only means that hitherto remain in question, whether matter
of Faith can be grounded upon both of them, or only upon the one: And to have
recourse to any opinion of the Jews, since the separation of them from the
Church of God, in a point concerning that difference, must needs be an affront
to Christianity.

CHAP. XIII. That the Law tendreth no other promise but that of the Land of
Canaan. How the Resurrection is signified by the Prophets. Express texts of
the Apostles. Their arguments, and the arguments of our Lord do suppose the
mystical sense of the Scriptures. That this sense is to be made good throughout
the Scripture, wheresoever the ground of it takes place; Christianity well
grounded supposing this. What parts of Scripture may be questionable, whether
they have a mystical sense or not. The sayings and doings of our Lord have it;
As also those passages of the Old Testament, which are fulfilled by the same.
The sense of the Fathers.
HAving showed, by removing this block, that there is no appearance of
inconvenience in admitting this truth, I am now to show, what appearance of
necessary consequences from the Scriptures there is to enforce it. Beginning
then with the first proposition of the Covenant of the Law in Marah, Exodus XVI.
27, 28. we read, that at Marah God appointed them a Statute and a Judgment.
The Jews say, that there he gave them the precepts of the Sabbath, and
Honoring parents. Whether so or not, something God propounds them to do; For,
to show what he bids them expect, doing it, he inferres; And there he tried
him and said; If thou will hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and do
that which is right in his eyes, and wilt receive his precepts, and do all his
Statutes, I will bring upon thee none of the griefs that I brought upon Egypt.
For I am the Lord thy God that heal thee. It will be hard to say, how the Law
could be established upon any other condition than first it was propounded on,
and here is nothing but an earthly promise. Come we to the giving and
receiving of the Law, Exodus XIX. 5, 6. And now, if you will hear my voice and
keep my Covenant, ye shall be to me, whose all the earth is, a Jewel above
all Nations of the earth, a kingdom of Priests, an holy people. All Nations
being at this time polluted by offering sacrifices to devils, and enemies to
God, the Israelites, redeemed by God out of Egypt to be free under his
government, and to offer sacrifices to him alone, might well be a kingdom of
Priests, a holy people, Gods Jewel above all Nations of the earth, without any
Covenant for the happiness of the world to come. After the giving of the
Decalogue, and other Precepts, by the mediation of Moses, Exodus XXIII. 25 --.
And you shall serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread and
waters: And I will take sickness from amid thee: There shall no woman miscarry,
or be barren in thy Land. I will make full the number of thy days. I will send
my terror before thee, and the rest that follows there to assure them, how and
by what means he will bring them into the Land of Promise. Hitherto, in
treating, in contracting this Covenant, no mention of the world to come; What
shall we find at renewing it? Deuteronomy. XXIX. 1. These are the words (that is,
the terms) of the Contract which Moses struck with the Israelites in the plain
of Moab, besides that in Horeb. Then, repeating the sum of what they had seen
since their coming out of Egypt, as to move them to embrace Gods Covenant;
Wherefore, says he, ye shall observe the terms of this Covenant, and do
them, that ye may prosper in whatsoever you do. And so, contesting the whole
Assembly, that they and their posterity must, by transgressing, come under the
curse which it is inacted with, thus expresses the sum of it; That he may
settle thee to himself, for a people, and he be thy God, as he has said to
thee, and as he has sworn to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, thy Fathers: To whom
he had expressly sworn to give the Land of Promise, and therefore so determined
the express sense and intent of being their God. For, to expound what it
means, for them to have God for their God, and he them for his people, it
follows, that if any of them return from the Lord to the Gods of the
Egyptians, and other Nations, they shall incur the curse which the Covenant
is inacted with, that the Land, being turned into salt and brimstone, shall not
be to be sown, nor spring, nor grass grow, but be like Sodom, and Gomorra,
and Seboim, which the Lord overthrew in his wrath Hereupon he begins the XXX
Chapter thus; And it shall come to pass, that, when all these things are
lefallen t^^e, and thou shall call them to mind, among all Nations to which
God shall have driven thee, and return to the Lord thy God; And the rest,
whereby God promises, that he will be entreated of his people, and turn the
said curses from them upon their enemies. Remitting plainly, him that will
understand what those are, to that which went before, from cap. XXVI. 16 --.
XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX. which he that will peruse, may trust his own senses,
whether they speak of life everlasting, or of the Land of Promise. And indeed,
the whole book of Deuteronomy containing nothing else, but the repetition, and
continuation of what was most necessary to introduce and persw^de this renewing
of the Covenant, whether we judge of the premises by the conclusion, or of the
conclusion by the premises, we shall ^inde no more th^n what I have said. Now
the whole XXV of Leviticus, being nothing else, but an exhortation and warning
to keep the Law, propounded before the camp removed from Mount Sinai, as you
have it XXVI. 46; Had any such thing as eternal life been covenanted for, of
necessity the arguments there used must have been drawn from thence. But you
shall find no more than concerns the Land of Promise. The effect of this
reason is not to argue a negative from Scripture; That is to say, this is not
recorded in the Scripture, not in this or that part of the Scripture, therefore
not true; But to argue from the common reason of all men, and the visible
nature of the business then in hand, that, what was not then expressed for a
condition of that Covenant which is related to have been struck between God and
the Israelites, cannot be presumed to have been an express condition of it.
For, by interpretation, from, not only the conversation of the Fathers, but
the doctrine of the Prophets, and the preaching of the Gospel, I grant that it
is the principal intent which the Law intimates, though not expresses.

One particular precept of the Law I must not omit. It is that of Lev. V. 1-5.
which appoints the same sacrifice to be offered for legal uncleanness as for
perjury. Now, it is to be considered, that legal uncleanness is not a thing
forbidden by the Law, but is contracted by observing the Law, as Tobits
uncleanness, which made him lie out of the house, and occasioned his
blindness by burying the dead, Tobit III. 11. being indeed an outward
accident, coming to pass without any inclination of man's will to it, and
therefore not imputable. If therefore the same means of expiating that which is
not forbidden by the Law, expiate such a sin as perjury, let any man understand
how by this Law expiation is made for the guilt of perjury, whereby every
Christian believes he becomes liable to everlasting death, when by the same,
expiation is made, not for sin, but for a legal incapacity of conversing with
Gods people, or coming to the Tabernacle. Another is that of Prayer negatively:
For, who will believe, that the spiritual reward of everlasting life is
promised by the Covenant of the Law, which does not so much as command the
spiritual service of Prayer, as the Jews themselves observe, ( Maimoni in the
beginning of the Titles of Prayer and Blessings) that Prayer is commanded only
by the precept of the Law, Deuteronomy. VI. 13. X. 20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, and serve him. The Lord thy God shall thou fear, and him serve. And those
Blessings in which so much of their Religion consists, only by Deuteronomy. VIII. 10.
And when thou have eaten and art full, then shall thou bless the Lord thy God
for the good Land which he has given thee. Out of these texts their Elders,
they say, have taken occasion to prescribe the kinds, and measure, and
circumstances of their Prayers and Blessings. And truly, when there is so much
in the Law, of their Festivals, and Sabbaths, and Sacrifices, and so little of
the spiritual duties which God is to be served with, and was served with even
under the Law; It is impossible to give a reason of it, unless we say, that,
as the Gospel was yet to be a secret to the spiritual service of God, which
under it was to be required, was not, under the Law, to be covenanted for, that
is expressed.

And here I am not to forget the Sect of Sadducees, which, though it denied the
reward after death, yet notwithstanding was not, only tolerated among the
Jews, but also in such Power, that I have showed in another place, that,
during the time mentioned by the Acts of the Apostles, it had authority in all
public matters of the Nation under the Romans. For, if they that denied the
Resurrection, expressly renounced the Law, by renouncing the express condition
of it, it will be impossible to say, how they that renounced the Law, should
manage that Power of governing their own people by the Law, which was reserved
to the Nation by the Romans. Indeed, when Idolatry prevailed, the precepts
which punished that sin by death, of necessity were super^eded for the time.
But, when after the Captivity, some denied the life to come, others expected it
from the literal and carnal observation of the Law, both maintaining themselves
under the Law and by it, it might be signified by the Law, as our Savior proves
the Resurrection, Mat. XXII. 23. Mar. XII. 18. Luc. XX. 27. but, had it been
covenanted for, impudence would not have had wherewith to maintain the
contrary, acknowledging the Law. And therefore I agree, that, when our Lord
says; Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life; John
V. 39. This think is a term of abatement: Signifying, that they expected
salvation by the Law, which indeed is not to be had but by his Gospel, which
the Law intimates and involveth. Ye think ye have it so, as indeed ye have
it not.

In the next place, consider we a while the Writings of the Prophets, that is,
all that follows the Law in the Old Testament, and we shall find there, such
intimations of the world to come, such instruction to that conversation by
which it is attained, as may show, that it was not covenanted for, though
attainable by Gods dispensation of that time. That which we read in the
Propher Esaias XXVI. 19. Thy dead shall live, my carcasses shall arise, awake and
sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is the dew of herbs, and the earth
shall cast forth the Giants; is the very picture of the Resurrection which
Christians believe. But what it signifies there, let the consequence of the
Scripture witness, which shows it (by the beginning of the Chapter) to be
part of a Song which should be sung in the Land of Judab at that day: That is,
at such time as God, having afflicted his people, according to the Prophesies
going before, should restore them again, as he prophesies there and afterward.
The Vision of dry bones which the Prophet Ezekiel XXXIII. saw, upon the
breathing of God, clothed with flesh and skin, to rise again, manifestly
foretells the return of the Jews from Captivity, to be a Nation again; But
^o, that it cannot be denied, that S. Hilary had reason to call him several
times the Prophet of the Resurrection for it. Nor must we make any other
account of Daniel, who, having prophesied of the miseries that were to befall
the Jews, especially under Antiochus Epiphanes, and their deliverances in the
end, sets forth the glory and ignominy of those that had stuck to their Law
till death, or fallen from it, after they had their freedom under the
Maccabees, by the figure of rising from the dead, XII. 1, 2. For, having first
said, at that time thy people shall escape, whosoever is written in the book;
(Which time is that persecution under Epiphanes) when he adds incontinently;
And many of those that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, some to everlasting reproach and shame. And teachers shall
sbine as the shine of the sky, and those that make many righteous, as the
stars for ever and ever; I say this following immediately, it cannot stand
with common sense, that it should not concern the same times and persons:
Though we allow it a competent argument, that the Prophet, which sets forth
the deliverance of that people in such terms, understood the Resurrection of
the dead well enough, and intended, by using the same, to make way for
Christianity that professes it. But the words of S. Job XIX. 25. are more
questionable. I know, says he, that my Redeemer lives, and shall stand upon
the earth at last: And after they have pierced this my skin, I shall see God
out of my flesh. But if we compare this with what has been hitherto produced
out of the Prophets, it will not seem probable, that the Resurrection, which
they so darkly intimated, should be so plainly preached, either before the Law,
when Job lived, or under the Law, when the book of Job is said to have been
penned. And truly, he that persuaded himself that God would deliver him out of
his present affliction, might well say; I know that my Redeemer lives: And he
that says XLII. 5. By the hearing of the ear, I had heard of thee, but now
does mine eye see thee; might say to the same purpose, that he should see God
standing at length upon the earth, after that his skin had been pierced with
sores. Consider now those passages of the Prophets, whereby they declare, how
they are moved to question Gods providence, by seeing the righteous afflicted
and the wicked to flourish in this world, Psalm. LXXIII. 2-20. Jer. XII. 1, 2.
Mal. III. 13-18. besides all the discourses of this point, in Job,
Ecclesiastes, and elsewhere. It is plain, every Christian can answer this out
of the principles of his profession, by saying; That God reserves his full
account to the day of judgment, in the mean time maintaining sufficient
evidence of his providence, by the account which he takes of some sins in
this world. And, had this been a part of the old Covenant, it had been no less
ready for every one to answer with. What says David? When I went into the
Sanctuary of God, then understood I the end of those men: Forsooth, thou
set them in slippery places, and castest them down to ruin. How came they
to desolation in a moment? they came to an end by terrors. As when a man awakes
out of a dream, Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall scorn the image of them.
Is there any thing in all this to determine, whether in this world or in the
world to come? Though the consequence be good, not in this world, therefore in
the world to come. What says Jeremy? And thou, O Lord, know me, and triest
my heart before thee. Pluck them out as sheep to be slain, and consecrate them
to the day of slaughter. What says Malachi? They shall be mine, says the Lord
of Hosts, when I store up my Jewels, and I will spare them, as a man spares
his son that serves him. And ye shall again distinguish between the righteous
and the wicked, between him that serves God and him that serves him not. All
this is true to those that are in Covenant with God, as the temporal promises
are true, even in this life, and therefore expresses not the world to come,
whatsoever may be inferred by the foresaid consequence. And truly Ecclesiastes
is so far from expressing the answer that Christianity makes to this
objection, as to give some men occasion to imagine, that it allows the world
to come no more, than the lives of worldly men do own it. And all the obscurity
of the book of Job will never be resolved, without acknowledging, that this
truth was then a secret, which the Prophets knew, but preached it so sparingly,
(and with such good husbandry, which the Greek Fathers use to call (...)) as
the hope of proficience by their Doctrine, in their hearers did require. The
same account is to be had of the Prophet Habakkuk II. 3-14. where he proposes
the difference between the Chaldeans and Israelites in these terms; Behold,
the soul that is exalted is not right in him: But the just shall live by faith:
And concludes; See, is not this of the Lord of Hosts? And the people shall
labor for fire, and the Nations be weary for nothing. For the earth shall be
filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the
seas. Which, all the Prophets will witness to signify the restoring of the
people of God, to the destruction of Idolatry, and their enemies Idolaters. No
where is this truth more observable than in the Psalms XVI. 11. Thou shall
make known to me the way of life: Fullness of joys is before thee, and
pleasures at thy right hand for ever more. Is not this true in the sense of
Ezekiah, Esa. XXXVII. 10, 21? First he says; I shall see the Lord no more in
the land of the living: But upon the tender of the Prophet, he asks, What is
the sign that I shall go up into the house of the Lord? Where, the presence or
right hand of God, and the pleasure of it, is the joy that his people have to
worship him before the Ark of his presence. Psalm. XVII. 15. As for me, I will
behold thy presence in righteousness, when I awake, I shall be satisfied with
thy likeness. The same thing he means, and he awakes, when he comes out of
trouble to serve God. Though I am to grant, that I cannot think of any text in
all the book of Psalms, wherein the world to come is more literally ex^ressed,
th^n in these words. Psalm CXXVI, 5, 6. They that sow in tears shall reap in
joy. He that now goes on his way weeping, shall doub less come again in joy,
and bring in his sheaves. Whether at the return from Captivity, or in heaven,
let the beginning of the Psalm speak; When the Lord turned again the Captivity
of his people, th^n were we like men that dream. But there would be no end,
if I should go about to produce all those passages of the Psalms, wherein the
same is to be observed.

Let us come now to the New Testament, and produce first the sayings of the
Apostles, wherein my position is expressly affirmed, especially in the Apostle
to the Hebrews VII. 19. For the Law persited nothing, but the bringing in of a
better hope, by which we draw nigh unto God. What is this better hope, but
that of the world to come, so much better than the Land of Promise? and what
brings it in but the Gospel of Christ, by whom alone sinners have access to
God? X. 19 --. Again, VIII. 6. But now he has obtained a more excellent
ministry, by how much he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which is
inacted upon better promises. IX. 15. And therefore is ^ee the Mediator of a
New Covenant, that, death interceding for the redemption of those sins that
were under the first Covenant, those that are called may receive the promise of
eternal life. This more excellent Ministry, is the Priesthood of Christ after
the order of Melchisedeck. To make way for which, the whole Epistle ci^put^s,
that the Levitical Priesthood is removed, as the interest of Christianity
against the Law of Moses, and the q^^^^ion on foot required. Now Melchisedek
was ^ Priest, not by the law of a carnal precept, but by the power of
indissoluble life; says he again, Ebr. VII. 19. What thi^ carnal precept is,
you have IX. 9-14. When he says, that at present; to wit, under the Law;
gifts and sacrifices are offered, which cannot persit him that serves, as to
the conscience, consisting only in meats and drinks, and several washings, and
carnal justifications, imposed till the time of Reforma(...) When Christ,
coming as a High Priest of good things to come, and having fo(...) sage into
heaven, cleanses the conscience from dead works to serve the living ^^d. So
that, according to the Apostle, the Sacrifices of the Law effecting only a
carnal right to the Congregation of Gods people, the Sacrifice of Christ a
right to heaven, this right is tendered by the Gospel, the other by the Law. And
thus S. Paul, 2 Timothy I. 9, 10. calls the Gospel, the Grace that was given us
in Christ Jesus before the ages of the world, but is manifested now by the
appearance of our Lord Christ Jesus, who has destroyed death, but declared
life and incorruption by the Gospel. For, though the life to come was known and
declared by the Prophets under the Law, yet had they no express commission to
engage God for it, till Christ rendered it, as that which the Gospel covenants
for on Gods part. But, I must not forget the occasion of that memorable
passage, quoted from Ebr. IX. 9. from the discourse that went before, whereby
the Apostle declares the whole course and constitution of the service of the
Temple to be nothing else, but a Parable of the present time, to wit of
Christianity; As also the legal Tabernacle was nothing else but a Copy of the
Heavenly, by the pattern whereof he observes that Moses was commanded to build
it, VIII. 5, 6. calling it therefore the Worldly Sanctuary IX. 1. because it
was a Copy, as it were, of this whole world, in the several parts of it, as
Philo and Josephus have discoursed at large. The most Holy place, into which
the High Priest entered once a year, by the Apostles interpretation, answers
to the highest heavens, whereunto our Lord Christ is ascended, whom therefore
he calls the minister of the true Tabernacle, which God and not man pitched,
VIII. 7, And therefore the outward Sanctuary, into which the Priests went once
a day, was intended to signify the Starry heavens, and the Court of the
Tabernacle the World here below, as Philo and Josephus declare, justifying the
reason why the Apostle calls it a Worldly Tabernacle.

This interpretation of the Ceremonial Law made by the Apostle in this place,
by that which it expressly affirms concerning the twofold sense of that part of
the Old Testament, induces a consequence to the twofold sense of all the rest;
Inferring, that, if the mystical and allegorical sense of the Old Testament
determine in the promises of the world to come, then the literal and historical
sense of the same determines in the promises of this life; the allegory, that
is to say, the reason of interpreting the Old Testament to that purpose,
consisting in nothing else, but the correspondence between them. I am not
ignorant, that some Divines have done their best to create one Controversy
more to divide the Church, by maintaining, that there is but one sense of the
Scriptures, which the leter intends; The things figured under the Old
Testament, and the figures of them there set down, making but one and the same
sense, as a man and his picture are called the same man, because without the
things signified, the signs are nothing, at least, in the nature of signs.
For my part, I find it a thing as easy, as for every fool to tie knots which
a wise man cannot loose, to engage in disputes, in which men cannot yield to
the truth, while that engagement continues. But I find no pretense, why that
sense of the Scriptures which they make one, consisting of the figure and the
thing figured, should not be counted two, one immediately, the other
principally intended. Because the Gospel was a secret under the Law, as S. Paul
so many times lays down; So that, he which knew the Law, many times
understood not the utmost intent of it under the Gospel. Seeing then that this
way of allegorizing the Old Testament is used by our Lord and his Apostles, not
only in the Ceremonial Law, but in all that properly belongs to the Old
Testament; I do conclude, not that the Scriptures have two senses, but, that
the Scriptures of the Old Testament have an obvious sense, (that was
understood, or might be understood by Jews) and a retired sense, which could
not be understood, but by those under the Old Testament, that belonged to the
New, as S. Austine many times distinguishes. And, by thus limiting my position,
I avoid a great inconvenience, which Origin, and those that go the same way
with him, though to several purposes, have incurred. He, in his Exposition
upon S. John, notes it for the fashion of the Valentinians and other Gnostics,
to draw their strange fantasies from some mystical sense, which they fasten
upon the Scriptures, though they be not able to prosecute and make good the
same sense, throughout the text and thread of that Scripture which they allege
for it, as we understand by Irenaeus, in the later end of the first Chapter of
his first book. To avoid this inconvenience, both Origin, and many after him,
have sought for a mystical sense of the Scripture many times where it is not to
be found, that is to say, where the reason and ground of the difference between
the Leter and the Spirit reackes not. For, the ground thereof is the purpose of
sending our Lord Christ in due time, and, in the mean time the Prophets, to
prepare the way for the Covenant of the Gospel which he came to proclaim. But
first the Chief of them, Moses, was to treat and strike a Covenant between God
and his people, whereby they should hold their freedom in the Land of Promise,
upon condition of serving him, and governing their own civil conversation by
such Laws as he should give. It will therefore be necessary to grant, that
those Scriptures which proceed not upon supposition of such a purpose, but of
the accomplishment of it, have but one sense; To wit, that which was figured by
the Old Testament. But, this being excepted, the rest of the Scriptures, which
suppose this purpose not yet declared, must, by the same necessity, have this
twofold sense, according as the subject of several parts of it shall be capable
of, or require both.

Here, those that know what an allegory is, must distinguish the vulgar use of
it, even in the Scriptures themselves, from that which stands upon this
ground, which is particular to the Scriptures; Wherein even men of learning
sometimes lay stumbling blocks before themselves. For, as an allegory is
nothing but an ornament of Language, it is plain, that even the literal sense
of the prophesies of the Old Testament, and other parts both of the Old and
New, is set forth by allegories; The sense whereof, he that should take to be
the allegorical sense of the Scriptures, would deceive himself too much. For,
the allegorical sense which we speak of here, is seen as well in things done,
as said in the Old Testament, as not contained in the sayings there recorded
immediately, but by the means of things done under the Old Testament, wherein,
that which is written is true indeed; But so, that the things which come to
pass in the outward and temporal estate of Gods people are intended to figure,
that which comes to pass in their spiritual estate under the Gospel, or in
their everlasting estate of the world to come. The ground whereof being the
purpose of making way for the coming of Christ, and the Gospel which he was to
preach, as all Christians against the Jews are bound to maintain; The New
Testament, being figured by the Old, must needs be the intent and meaning of
all that which figured it. This we shall find by the writings of the
Apostles, and the arguments, which, upon supposition of this truth, they draw
against those, who, having received Christiani^y, and upon that account
admitting it for a principle, did nevertheless, by acknowledging the
obligation of the Law, seek their salvation by it. Thus S. Paul, 1 Cor. XV. 45.
And so is it written, the first Adam was made a living soul; The last Adam a
quickening spirit. Meaning, that his being made a quickening spirit, is in
correspondence to the Scripture that says; Adam became a living soul; Genesis II.
7. whereby he establishes this way of allegory which we treat, upon
correspondence between corporal and spiritual, from the beginning of the Bible.
For, upon this ground, that which we read in Genesis, of the dominion of Adam
upon living creatures, is by the Apostle transferred to the subjection of all
things to Christ, being exalted to the right hand of God, Heb. II. 6. 1 Cor.
XV. 27. Ephesians. I. 22. Neither does the Apostles arguing the duties of Wives and
Husbands, upon that which Christ performed to his Church Ephesians. II. 31, 32. stand
upon any other ground but this. So when S. Peter argues, that Christians are
saved by Baptism, as Noe by the flood 1 Pet. III, 20, 21. he appropriates
eternal salvation to the New Testament, by finding it figured in the temporal
deliverances of the Fathers. Whose Faith, manifestly tending to the Land of
Promise, the Apostle by allegory shows the secret of Christianity, tending to
eternal life, in it Heb. XI. 13-16. For Abraham and his Successors died, says
he, without receiving the promises, but seeing and saluting them afar off,
and confessing themselves strangers and pilgrims in the land whereof they had
received the promise. Which they that profess, declare they have a Country,
which they seek. For, if they had thought of that which they had forsook, they
had time enough to return. But now they desire a better, that is, an heavenly;
Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: For prepared them a City.
Can this be understood, without the correspondence between their inheritance of
this world, and that which was figured by it, of the world to come? So, when S.
Paul expounds those things which befell the children of Abraham and Isaac, by
the allegory of the Jews and Christians, Gal. IV. 22 -- Romans IX. 7-10. plainly
he makes the promise of the life to come proper to the New Testament, upon
such terms as I have said. And if this be the reason, why and how those things
that went before the Law shadowed and were to shadow the Gospel, it could not
but hold in the Covenant of the Law, and the precepts of it. This appears by
the Apostles exhorting the converted Jews to stick close to the Gospel, from
the Psalm. XCV. 7 -- Heb. III. 12 -- where, if the Israelites, who, having seen
Gods works forty years in the Wilderness, tempting and provoking him entered
not into his rest, but left their carcasses in the Wilderness; He inferres
thereupon, Heb. IV. 1-11. that they are to beware, least, having received a
promise of entering into Gods rest, they also should come short by the example
of the same disobedience. Which all supposes this correspondence, for the
ground of such consequences from the Old Testament. And truly the same is the
argument by which S. Paul recalls the Corinthians, (which Church evidently
consisted as well of Jews as Gentiles) srom the misprision of Idolatry which
they incurred, by eating things sacrficed to Idols, 1 Gor. X. 1-6-11. where,
having related what befell the people in the Wilderness, he concludes; These
things happened to them in a figure, and are written for our instruction, upon
whom the ends of the world are come. That is to say, they are written to
deter Christians from the like sins, by the fear of punishment
correspondent to that which they incurred. And therefore threatening Christians
with the loss of eternal life, by the example of Jews coming short of the
rest of the Land of Promise, he supposes the correspondence which I argue.
Which is yet plainer in the words of the Apostle, H^b. X. 28, 29. He that
despised the Law of Moses under two or three witnesses, died without mercy. How
much worse punishment, do you think, shall he be thought worthy of, that
treads under foot the Son of God -- For it is manifest, that his meaning, or,
the answer of his question is a question, how much eternal death is worse than
that death which they incurred. Only, that they incurred it de facto, which,
under the Gospel he says not shall come to pass, but reserveth hope of
mercy. In fine, whosoever will go about to deny the mystical sense of the Old
Testament, must deny all the arguments that the Apostles make against them,
who, supposing Christianity, thought the Law necessary to salvation
nevertheless, as impertinent to the purpose to which they are used: All of
them supposing this sense. And therefore I conceive it is necessary to yield
Origin this, and whosoever imployes Origens reason, that the mystical sense of
the Old Testament is to be made good throughout, so far as it concerns the
Old Testament; (because I have cautioned before, that the New Testament is begun
to be discovered under the Old) and, according as the nature and subject of the
several parts thereof will either require or endure: Which is thus to be
understood according to the grounds already laid.

If the Old Testament contain one continued Prophecy of our Lord Christ, and
of the New Covenant which he preached, and the People of God under it a figure
of the Church, then must the Rulers of Gods People, (the Patriarchs before the
Law, under the Law, the Kings, the Priests, and Prophets) be first figures of
Christ, whom all Christians suppose anointed King, Priest, and Prophet; Then
must the Civil Government of Gods People by them figure the spiritual conduct
of the Church. And, in as much as particular Christians, who are such not only
to the Church but to God, by participating of Christ's anointing are conformable
to his example, that which befell them outwardly in the leter under the Law,
befalls all Christians inwardly in the spirit. This is no more than S. Austine
proposes us, as the Rule for expounding the Psalms, and must take place all
over the Old Testament, where the reason is the same. This for the Histories
and Prophesies of the Old Testament. As for the Precepts of the Law, the
Ceremonial do openly profess an intent of signifying and foretelling the
mystery of Christ and Christianity; As for the Judicial, they also may be said
to be a figure of those precepts of inward and spiritual obedience, which the
Gospel declares, as civil righteousness is a rude shadow of inward and
spiritual righteousness; And as, in Aristotle, a rude draught is said to be
done (...) in a figure: When the outmost lines of a picture give in gross the
shape of the person represented, before it be filled up within to make the
representation complete. But it is not to be denied, that there is a difference
between these two reasons and ways of figuring, both derived from the same
ground of foretelling and making way for Christ and the Church. As for the
instructions, exhortations, praises of God, prayers, and the rest of that
nature, which, in consequence to the Covenant of the Law, and the intimation of
the Gospel with it was to contain, are found in it, or in the Prophets; it were
an impertinence to seek two senses in any part of it; all belonging to the
Gospel, though accommodated to the dispensation of the Law, in that the duties
of Christians were to be more sparingly declared even by the Prophets, than
under the New Testament, as I shall have time to show.

This r^ason justifies that course of interpreting the Prophets which Grotius
holds in his Annotations, assigning the fulfilling of all their Prophesies to
something that fell out to the ancient people of God, afterward, by
correspondence, mystically to be fulfilled again in our Lord Christ and in his
Church; And thereupon, brings upon this opinion the displeasure that he
undergoes, for expounding Esaias LIII first of the Prophet Jeremy, and then
mystically of our Lord Christ and his sufferings, in correspondence to what
befell that Prophet. But those who are displeased at him for it, should
considar what he has said generally to the point upon Mat. I. 22, 23. where
it appears, that the words of the Prophet Esa. VII. 14. were first fulfilled in
a child born Esaias of the Prophetess his wife, if we will allow any
consequence of sense in the text. For this reason is the ground, upon which,
the like meaning of the rest will necessarily be found requisite. And truly, if
Origin was justly rejected by the ancient Church, for not making good the
literal and historical sense of that which befell Adam and Eve in Paradise, he
that will draw this out into consequence, must necessarily yield, those
Prophesies which belong to our Lord and the New Testament to have been
literally fulfilled in the temporal state of the Jews before; Otherwise, the
history is no less destroyed in Prophesies, than in the relation of Paradise.
And if all Prophets were figures of Christ, it is no strange thing, that the
Prophet Jeremies sufferings, being the greatest that we find recorded, and
from his own people, should figure our Lords. This for Christ. Now, Prophesies
either promising good or threatening punishment, either to Gods people, or their
neighbor Nations, the promises of temporal good to Gods people, are, if the
premises be true, promises of temporal good to the Church: Threatenings of
temporal punishment, are predictions, partly of the rejection of Gods ancient
people, partly of punishment upon the New, no^ continuing in the Covenant, as I
showed out of Psalm. XCV. 7 --. Ebr. III. 7 --. But those promises trauslated to
spiritual good concern first, certain remains of Israel according to the
flesh, intended by God to be added to the Church; Then the coming of the
Gentiles to the communion of the same: The comminations, as spiritual,
signifying the utter destruction of both sorts of enemies, as well Jews as
Gentiles, or whatsoever enemies of Gods Church, in the world to come. Neither
is there just cause to think, that thereby advantage is given to the Jews
against Christianity, by granting, that such passages, out of which the New
Testament draws the birth and sufferings of our Lord, are reasonably to be
understood of his predecessors in Gods ancient people. For it is plain, that,
it despite of the Jews, the works done by our Lord, and his Prophesies,
concerning his Dying and Rising again, and the destruction of the Jews, and
the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations, seconded by his Apostles, and that
which they did to winn credit, that they were the witnesses of the same, are
the evidence upon which the Gospel obliges. The Scriptures of the Old
Testament, (which were no evidence to the Gentiles, as much and more concerned
in the Gospel than the Jews) were evidence, and so to be, not of themselves,
for what need Christ then have done those works? But upon supposition that God
intended not to rest in giving the Law, but to make it the thread to introduce
the Gospel by; Which supposition, as it is powerfully enforced by the nature of
the Law, and the difference between the inward and the outward obedience of
God, as it has been hitherto declared and maintained; So is it also, first
introduced, by those works which our Lord declares to be done for evidence
thereof, then made good, by the perpetual correspondence between the Old and
New Testament, which any considerable exception interrupts. And there reasons
so much the more effectual, because this difference of literal and mystical
sense was then, and is at this day acknowledged by the Jews themselves,
against whom our Lord and his Apostles employ it, in a considerable number of
Scriptures, which they themselves interpret of the Messiah, though they are not
able to make good the consequence of the same sense throughout, because they
acknowledge not the reason of it, which concludes the Lord Jesus to be the
Messiah whom they expect. If these things be true, neither Origin nor any man
else is to be endured, when they argue, that a mystical sense of the Scripture
is to be inquired and allowed, even where this ground takes no place; For
vindicating the honor of God, and that it may appear worthy of his wisdom, to
declare that which we admit, to be the utmost intent of the Scriptures. For,
if it be for the honor of God to have brought Christianity into the world, for
the salvation of mankind, and to have declared himself by the Scriptures for
that purpose, then whatsoever tends to declare this, must be concluded worthy
of God and his wisdom, whatsoever referres not to it, cannot be presumed
agreeable to his wisdom, how much soever it flatter man's ear or fantasy, with
quaintness of conceit or language.

Now, as I maintain this difference between the literal and mystical sense of
the Old Testament to be necessary for the maintenance of Christianity, as well
as for understanding the Scriptures; So are there some particular questions
arising upon occasion of it, which I can well be content to leave to further
dispute. As for example; There is an opinion published which says; That the
abomination of desolation, which, our Lord says, was spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, Dan. IX. 24 --. Mat. XXIV.
15. Mar. XIII. 14. was fulfilled in the havoc made by Antiochus Epiphanes:
Which is also plainly called the abominatio of desolation by the same Prophet,
Da^. XI. 31. XII. 10. Whether this opinion can be made good according to
historical truth or not, this is not the place to dispute. Whether or no the
difference between the literal and mystical sense of the Scriptures will
endure, that the same Prophecy be fulfilled twice in the literal sense,
concerning the temporal state of the Jews, once under Antiochus Epiphanes, and
once under Titus, that is it which I am here content to refer to further
debate. One thing I affirm; that, notwithstanding this difference, it is no
inconvenience to say, that some Prophesies are fulfilled but once: Namely, that
of Jacob Genesis XLIX. 8-12. that of Daniel IX. 24. that of Malacbi III. 1. IV. 5,
6. Because the coming of Christ boundeth the times of the literal and mystical
sense; And therefore there is reason why it should be marked out by Prophesies
of the Old Testament referring to nothing else. Again, I am content to leave
to dispute, whether the many Prophesies of the Old Testament, which are either
manifestly alleged or covertly intimated by the Revelation of S. John, must
therefore be said to be twice fulfilled, once in the sense of their first
Authors under the Law, and again under the Gospel in S. John's sense to the
Church; Or, that this second complement of them was not intended by the Spirit
of God in the Old Prophets, but, that it pleased God to signify to S. John
things to befall the Church, by Prophetical Visions, like those which he had
read in the ancient Prophets, whereby God signified to them things to befall
his ancient people: For, of a truth, it is the outward rather than the
spiritual state of the Church, which is signified to S. John under these images.

A third particular must be the first Chapter of Genesis: For, in that which
follows, of Paradise, and what fell out to our first Parents there, I will
make no question that hoth senses are to be admitted, the Church having
condemned Origin, for taking away the historical sense of that portion of
Scripture. But whether the creation of this sensible world is to be taken for a
figure, of the renewing of mankind into a spiritual world, by the Gospel of
Christ, according to that ground of the difference, between the literal and
mystical sense of the Scripture, which hitherto I maintain; This, I conceive,
I may, without prejudice, leave to further debate. But leaving these things to
dispute, I must insist, that those things which the Evangelists affirm to have
been fulfilled by such things as our Lord said or did, or only befell him in
the flesh, have a further meaning, according to which they are mystically
accomplished in the spiritual estate of his Christian people. The chief ground
hereof I confess is that of S. Matthew VIII. 17. where, having related diverse
of our Lords miracles, he adds; that they were done, That it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet Esaias LIII. 4. He took our
infirmities and ^are away our sicknesses; Together with the words of our Lord,
Luke V. 17-21. where he tells them of Nazareth, This day are the words of
the Prophet Esaias (LXI. 1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor --) fulfilled in your hearing;
And his answer to John Baptist grounded upon the same passage, Mat. XI. 4, 5,
6. Go and tell John what ye have heard and seen: The blind receive sight, the
lame walk, the l^pers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and
the poor have the Gospel preached them. For, as the Evangelist and our Lord
both affirm, that these things were prophesied concerning the cures which our
Lord did upon their bodies, so can it not be doubted, that the cure of our
souls is spiritually signified by the same, whether you consider the promises,
whereby the ground of this correspondence is settled, or the express words of
the Apostle 1 Pet. II. 24. where, that which S. Matthew expounds of the cures
which our Lord did upon their bodies, is referred to the taking away of s^nne
by the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross. Which if it cannot be denied, I
shall make no difficulty to infer, that the words of the Prophet Esaias VII.
14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and ye shall call his
name Emmanuel; (which the Evangelists refers to our Lord, Mat. I. 22. and,
by the premises, were fulfilled when they were first said, as in the figure)
are still accomplished in the children, which by Gods grace are still ^orn of
the holy faith of his Church by grace. Nor, that the words of the Prophet Osee
XI. 1. Out of Egypt have I called my Son, (which, being manifestly said of the
Israelites coming out of Egypt, the same Evangelist II. 15. affirms to be
fulfilled in our Lords coming back out of Egypt) are still accomplished in
those which out of the darkness of this world are brought to Gods Church,
which is spiritually the Land of Promise. Nor, that the words of the Prophet
Jeremy XXXI. 15. (which the same Evangelist expounds of the Innocents which
were slain by Herod at Bethlehem, but, the correspondence hitherto established
requires us to understand of the captive Jews at Ramah in that Prophets time)
are still fulfilled in all that suffer persecution and death for Christianity.
Nor, las^ly, that the words of the Psalms XXII. 8, 18. He trusted in God that
he would deliver him; let him save him seeing he loves him; They pierced my
hands and my feet; And, They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my
vesture; XLI. 9. He which did eat of my bread, has lift up the heel against
me. XLIX. 9, 21. The zeal of thine house has eaten me up; And, They gave
me gall to eat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. VIII. 2. Out
of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou have perfected praise; CIX. 8. His
Office let another take; XVI. 10. Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell, nor
suffer thine holy One to see corruption; (which the New Testament will have to
be fulfilled in those things that befell our Lord Christ, in the flesh, in his
crucifying, Man. XXVIII. 18, 35, 43. Mark XV. 22, 23, 24. John XIX. 17, 29. in
Judas betraying him, John XIII. 18. in his purging the Temple, John II. 17. in
the children that praised him, Mat. XXI. 16. in Matthias chosen in Judas stead,
Acts I. 20. in the resurrection of Christ, Acts II. 31. XIII. 35. But the
correspondence premised and the reason of it, require us first to understand of
those things which befell David and Gods ancient people) are still spiritually
verified and accomplished, in those things which befall the children of God and
his Church under the state of Grace. Neither shall I make any question that,
the correspondence between the Law and the Gospel which we have settled being
supposed, it will not follow nevertheless, that all the Old Testament ought,
by virtue thereof, to be so fulfilled in the life of our Lord Christ; But, that
the Spirit of God in the Evangelists shows, that the Spirit in the Prophets
so directed their words, that they were intended to be far more properly
fulfilled in our Lord Christ, than in those whom they were spoke of in the
literal sense. For we do not find that the Text (that is to say, that which
went before and that which follows after those words which the Gospels say
were fulfilled in our Lord Christ) is answered by any thing which we read to
have befallen him in the flesh. And the general correspondence between Israel
according to the flesh in the Old Testament, and Israel according to the Spirit
in the New, being sufficient to justify our Lord to be the Christ whom they
expected, and, by consequence, that twofold sense of the Old Testament which
here we maintain; there is no cause why they should be said to be
impertinently alleged, though by ordinary reason supposing this correspondence,
that could not be proved from those Texts, which the Gospels say that they
signify. Indeed, such of them as are used by our Lord and his Apostles to
prove him to be the Christ, must be said, and well may be maintain^d, to do it,
by the perpectual correspondence of Gods earthly promises (made good to his
carnal people, through the means of their Kings, Priests, and Prophets) with
the promises of the world to come, made good by the means of our Lord Christ to
the Church.

Ther^ is yet another kind of our Lord Christ's sayings, and of things that
befell him in the flesh, in which there appears at the first view, that
difference of literal and mystical sense which has been settled, between the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments. The Parable of the Prodigal child
for example, seems not only to contain a plain song of Gods earnest desire to
be reconciled with penitent sinner^, but also a descant, of the rejection of
the Jews and the calling of the Gentiles figured by it. In like manner, the
Parable of him that fell among thieves as he went down to Jericho, Luke XI.
seems not only to instruct, who is the neighbor that we are to love as our
selves, but also to figure the fall of man and the sending of our Lord for the
restoring of him, intimated as the ground of it. So the acclamations of them
that went before and them that came after our Lord, at his entrance into
Jerusalem, Mat. XXI. agreeing in the same note of Hosanna to the Son of David,
I cannot tell whether any Christian could be so moro^e as to doubt, but that it
fell out on purpose to signify the agreement of the Old and New Testament
concentring in our Lord Christ. But, as it cannot be reasonably denied, that
these Parables and the like are mystical significations, of the purpose of God
in sending Christ, or the event of it, in the rejection of the Jews and
calling of the Gentiles; So is all this nothing to the two senses of the Old
Testament in which it is twice fulfilled, once according to the Leter, and
again, according to the Spirit.

I have thus far enlarged this point concerning the correspondence and
difference between the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, between the
Ancient and New people of God, to show how I conceive the scruples are to be
resolved, which may be made against an assumption of more efficacy and
consequence than any other, wheresoever any point of Christianity is to be
showed from the Old Testament. Yet so much more protection I owe the truth, as
to show further, how well it agrees with the sense of the Catholic Church, by
which I had begun to show that we are to examine all matters of Faith. Indeed,
I must caution this first, that I do not pretend, as if this point were any
part of the Rule of Faith, which is the substance of Christianity to be
believed, but, of all points concerning the knowledge of the Scriptures, which
is the skill of Christian Divines, I hold it of most consequence. And that
therefore, though I am not obliged to affirm, that it is expressly taught by all
the primitive Doctors of the Church, (as, all maintaining the mystical ^ense,
it may be maintained, that, by consequence they do all unanimously deliver it,
and Origin in praef. de Principiis so accounts it) so will it be necessary to
show how well it stands with the sense of them, that it may appear, that
there is no consent of the whole Church against it. It shall be therefore
sufficient to name S. Jerome, S. Chrysostom, and S. Augustine, the first
affirming that he reads nothing of the kingdom of heaven in all the Old
Testament, Epist. CXXIX. Mihi in Evangelio promittuntur regna coelorum, quae
vetus Instrumentum omnino non nominat. To me the kingdom of heaven is promised
by the Gospel, which the Old Testament names not at all. The second, in his
Homilies de Lazaro, and diverse others places, raising his exhortations drawn
from examples of the Saints in the Old Testament upon this ground, that, if
they did so, and so when the Resurrection was not preached, it behooveth us
under the Gospel to do much more. The last, besides other places, (whereof some
you may find quoted in my book of the Service of God at the Assemblies of the
Church) in the book de Gestis Palestinis, relating it for one of the Articles
which Pelagius renounced at that Synod, not only that the Saints under the Law
obtained salvation by it, but even that the salvation of the world to come was
preached under the Law. The Article charged upon Pelagius you shall find there
to be this, cap. V. Regnum coelorum etiam in veteri Testamento promissum. That
the kingdom of heaven was promised also in the Old Testament. To which
Pelagius answering; That this may be proved by the Scriptures; was judged by
the Council, not to depart from the Faith of the Church. Which notwithstanding,
when S. Austine considers; That the Old Testament in vulgar Language signifies
the books of the Old Testament, in which, the kingdom of heaven is promised,
as the Gospel is foretold; But, in the Scriptures, the Old Covenant in which
it is not promised; He says as much as I have done. Therefore he says
further; In illo vero Testamento quod Vetus dicitur, and dat^m est in monte
Sina, non invenitur apertissime promitti nisi terrena foelicitas. But in that
which is called the Old Testament, and was given in mount Sina, none but
earthly felicity is found to be very openly promised. Whereupon he proceeds
to observe, that the Land of Canaan is called the Land of Promise, in which,
the promises of the Old Testament, figuring the spiritual promises belonging to
the New, are tendered by the Law. And reason he had to insist upon this,
because of another Article charged upon Pelagius, of kin to this, that men were
saved under the Law, as under the Gospel: As you may see there cap. XI. Which
might well be understood to mean, without the Grace of Christ. But having
cleared the ground of the difference between the literal and allegorical sense
of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, I hold it utterly unnecessary, if not
altogether impertinent to tender further proof of this position from the
Fathers, then the constant agreement of them in maintaining that difference;
Being, when it is rightly understood, the necessary and immediate consequence
of it. Indeed, it cannot be maintained, that they did understand expressly the
true ground of this difference; which had they done, they would not have been
found to use it impertinently and unseasonably, as all lovers of Truth must
avow that many times they do. Notwithstanding, in as much as they agree in
maintaining and using of it, from which use, the ground of it, which is this
position, is to be inferred; it shall be enough, that all of them agree in
delivering that by consequence, which the principal of them, at least in
expounding the Scriptures, do expressly asfirme. For, nothing obliges me to
maintain, that this is a poi^t necessary to the salvation of all Christians to
be believed. And by consequence, that it has been every where taught, and no
where contradicted. It is sufficient, that I can and do hold it more generally
necessary to the right understanding of the Scriptures, than any other point of
skill in the Scriptures. Now, if any man object, that this is the doctrine of
the Socinians; I answer, first; That they also hold, that nothing is necessary
to salvation to be believed, but that which is clear to all men in the
Scriptures. And, that this position has a necessary influence into their whole
Heresy, which is grounded upon the unreasonable presumption of it. On the
contrary, the difference between the Law and the Gospel, is a principle, from
which I hope to draw good consequences, in maintenance of the Faith of the
Church against the Socinians; who, if they did always see the consequence of
their own positions, would not deny the Tradition of the Church, as I observed
before: If they do not, I am not to waive the doctrine of the Fathers, because
the Socinians acknowledge it. But lastly, I demand, whether Socinus provide for
the salvation of the Fathers, or not. If so, why is his opinion blamed? If not,
why is mine opinion, that do, taken for his?

CHAP. XIV. The Leviathans opin^on, that Christ came to restore that kingdom
of God which the Jews cast off when they rejected Samuel. It overthrows the
foundation of Christianity. The true Government of Gods ancient people. The
name of the Church in the New Testament cannot signify the Synagogue. Nor any
Christian State.
THis position being settled, in the next place, I will proceed upon it, to
argue the vanity of that conceit of the Leviathan, page 263. that the intent of
Christ's coming was, to regaine unto God, by a New Covenant, that Kingdom,
which, being his by the Old Covenant, had been ravished from him, by the
rebellion of the Israelites, in the election of Saul. For, supposing most
truly, that God became their King, by the Covenant of the Law, and that under
him Moses had the Sovereign Power to all purposes, page 250, 251, 252. he
infers further, that, after Moses, it was by God vested in the High Priests
Aarons Successors, though he for his time was subject to Moses: And this, page
217. from that text of Exodus XIX. 6. where God promises them, that, upon
undertaking his Covenant, they should be a Sacerdotal Kingdom, which in the
Original is a Kingdom of Priests, in 1 Pet. II. 9. (where he challenges the
effect of the promise to the Church of Christ) a Royal Priesthood, in S. John
Rev. I. 6. Kings and Priests; But chiefly, page 253. from that text of Numbers
XXVII. 21. where it is ordered, that Josue stand before Eleazar the Priest, who
shall ask counsel for him before the Lord, At his word they shall go out, and
and at his word they shall come in, both he and all the children of Israel
with him. For, says he, unless we understand them to be a kingdom of
Priests, because the High Priests succeeded one another in the Kingdom, it
accords not with S. Peter, nor with the exercise of the High Priesthood, the
High Priest only being to declare the will of God to them by entering into the
Sanctum Sanctorum, page 218. Though after the death of Josua and Eleazar, when
a generation was risen that knew not the Lord, Jud. II. 10. it came to pass,
(as it is said diverse times in that book) that there was no King in Israel; The
High Priests not being obeyed according to Law, and the power of the Judges
depending upon the voluntary submission of the people, to the graces, and the
success God gave then for their deliverance; Till, rebelling against Gods
appointment, they desired a King: As God expressly construes it, 1 Samuel VIII. 7,
8. page 253, 254. For thenceforth, God having given way to them, when God was
to be consulted, the High Priest put on the holy Vestments, and inquired of the
Lord as the King commanded, according to the examples which he allegeth, page
228. This kingdom of God, says he, so cast off by the choice of Saul, is that
which our Lord Christ, accor^ing to the promise of God by the Prophets, came to
restore: And the Gospel nothing else, but the good news, that God would give
them that should believe our Lord Jesus to be the Christ, and submit to Gods
government by him, immortal life, in that kingdom which Christ, after the
general Judgment, should restore upon earth, page 219, 234, 240, 241. and so
Christ's kingdom is said not to be of this world, John XVIII. 36. because it
comes not till after the general Judgment, that this world is past, page 262,
263.

This monstrous conceit is reproveable upon the same grounds as Christianity is
receivable upon, from the Scriptures of the Old Testament, upon which, the
difference between the Law and the Gospel is stated, and the Old Testament
admitted for a figure, representation and introduction to the New; So that, the
Law being admitted to proceed from God, the Gospel is inferred, so soon as the
true meaning and purpose of God, in providing it for the time as an
introduction to the Gospel, is understood. If the maintenance of Christianity
require, that the ancient people of God, their Kings, their Priests, and their
Prophets be taken for figures of our Lord Christ, and of his Church and
Christian people; (as the Covenant of the Law, promising civil and temporal
happiness. is a figure of the New Covenant of Grace, promising forgiveness of
sin and ev^rlasting happiness in being freed from it and the punishment
thereof, and perfectly subject to God by perfectly knowing God) Then is the
kingdom of Christ, though not of this world, yet in this world, as taking
place in them, who, living in this world, nevertheless acknowledge the inward
and spiritual obedience of their souls to be due to him, who, having ransomed
them from the bondage of sin, and maintaining them here against it, will one
day make them reign with him in the world to come; Which all Christians,
until the Leviathan, always took to be Christ's Kingdom. For though there be
those that believe, that Christ is to come and reign again upon earth for a
thousand years after the worlds end, and would astonish us into an expectation
to see it come to pass within these very few years; (whose opinion, as I am
far enough from allowing, so I cannot think this the place to say any thing
to it) Yet is it not their intent to say, that this reign of Christ upon earth,
is either his kingdom of Grace, which is begun here, by the obedience which we
yield to his Gospel; Or his kingdom of Glory, which is consummate in the world
to come, by the accomplishment of that subjection and our happiness in it. For
after the thousand years aforesaid are past, then do they expect the general
Judgment which all Christians believe, not before the reign of Christ upon
earth, and the kingdom which he shall resign to the Father, 1 Cor. XII. 24-28.
It had been worth this Philosophers wit to tell us, what kind of Immortality
we are to expect, in a civil government under Christ. When our vile bodies are
made like his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to
subdue all things to himself, Phil. III. 21. When we are neither to marry nor
to be given in marriage, but shall be like the Angels of God in heaven; Mat.
XXII. 30. And when we shall have been caught up in the clouds to meet our Lord
in the air, 1 Thessalonians. IV. 10. what shall bring us down to live upon earth
again? But to leave this singularity to the father of it, I must needs stand
astonished to see an imagination of such consequence to all Christianity
advanced upon such imaginary grounds. For my part, truly, I fully believe
Josephus, that the Jews, after the Captivity, were governed by the High
Priests in chief, so far as by sufferance of their Sovereigns, (the Persians
and after them the Macedonians) they were governed by themselves. For this must
be the reason, why the sons of Mattathias, having been the means to free them
from the monstrous tyrannies of Antiochus Epiphanes, and thereupon, by degrees
seizing into their hands the Sovereign Power, found it necessary to make
themselves High Priests, which by lineal succession from Aaron they were not
entitled to be. After which time, being reduced under the dominion of the
Romans; that power which they allowed them over themselves was in the High
Priest, so often as they allowed them not a King of their own, as will easily
appear by the Gospels and Acts of the Apostles, compared with Josephus. For
first indeed, after the return from Captivity, it seems to me, that there was
a Governor over them for the King of Persia: For Zerobabel is styled Governor
of Judah, Hag. I. 1. And Nehemiah, who, we know, had his Commission from the
King of Persia, qualifieth himself by the same style, making mention also of
others besides, Neh. V. 14, 15. and it is to be observed, that the word or
title (...) is elsewhere reckoned among the styles of the Lieutenants, or
Governors, of the Chaldean and Persian Empires, Dan. III. 2, 3- 27. VI. 8. Ezra
V. 3. VI. 7. VIII. 36. Nehem. VII. 7, 9. Esther VIII. 9. IX. 3. When as
therefore, they obtained of their Sovereigns to be governed by their own
Nation, shall we imagine that this power was trusted with the High Priests,
because God had made them Sovereigns by the Law; Or because, after the King,
whom in that estate they could not have, the High Priest was regularly the
second person in the Kingdom? For, what a ridiculous thing is it to imagine,
that, because Josue and the people to go in and out, at the word of the Lord
by Eleazar the High Priest, therefore the High Priest was always Sovereign?
Was it any more for Josue to be ruled by El^azar the High Priest, and his
answer by Urim and Tummim, not by going into the Sanctum Sanctorum, than for
Saul or David to be directed by the answer of the High Priest in those days;
when, as our Author says, the right of the High Priest, was, by Gods
permission, though against Law, seized in the Kings hands? As for the Judges,
they that read; In those days there was no King in Israel, every man did what
was right in his own eyes; with their eyes in their head, do thereby
understand, that, though the stories of the Idol in Dan, and of Gibea, are last
in the book of Judges, yet they are first in order of time, before any Judge
had succeeded Josue, the Judges having the same power for which Moses is called
King in Israel, Deuteronomy. XXXIV. 5. For, God being their King by the Covenant of
the Law; while he raised up no Judge to be his Vicegerent in Moses stead, he
governed the^ by the Elders of the people, to whom, therefore, Clemens and
Eusebius and other Chronologers impute the time between Josue and Judges. When
this Government proved not of force to rule so stiffnecked a people, and that
God had raised up a Judge, to refuse him, was to refuse God, who, by manifest
operations of his Spirit in him, had declared him his Vicegerent. Which is the
plain reason why God pronounces, that, in refusing Samuel, they had refused
him, and not Samuel. For it is manifest, that they might by the Law demand a
King, Deuteronomy. XVII. 14, 15. so ridiculous a thing it is to imagine, that, by
demanding a King as other Nations had, they rebelled against God, who had made
the High Priest their Sovereign: For God expresses their rebellion to consist
in refusing Samuel, whom he had declared his Vicegerent, who being once
declared, they were no more free do demand a King, by the Law, till his death.
Neither does a Royal Priesthood, or a Kingdom of Priests signify, that the
High Priests were their Kings; But, that they who came out of bondage should
now make a Kingdom themselves, to be governed by their own Nation and Laws,
which Laws should consist much in offering sacrifices to God: And those
sacrifices, though, for the future, special persons were to be appointed to
offer them, yet, in regard they were offered in the name and on the behalf of
the people whose offerings they were, the body thereof are justly called
Priests; As all Christians, to whom S. Peter challenges the effect of this
promise, are ftiled by him a Royal Priesthood, and by S. John, Kings and
Priests; though nothing hinder them to have their Priests, whose functions
cannot be intermedled with by those who are no Priests, without sacrilege. In
fine, the effect of these words is that of the Prophet Esaias LXI. 5, 6. that
when the people shall be restored, the Gentiles shall be their laborers and
Vine-dressers, while they, in the mean time, attend upon keeping holiday, by
offering sacrifices, and feasting upon the sacrifices which they had offered.

It will now be easy to maintain, that the Church, when our Lord says tell it
the Church; is not, nor can be understood but of the Congregation of
Christians, though at that time, in common speech, it signified no more than
the Congregation of Gods people. For, supposing that our Lord Christ came to
contract a New Covenant with those that received him, whereby they became his
people on other terms, and to other purpose than the people whom he had
before; That he conditioned with them to leave all things and take up his
Cross; That he appoints those that embrace this condition to be baptized in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; I say this being supposed, they
that before were the Congregation of Gods people, are no more the Congregation
of his people upon the same terms, not by the same right or title, though the
same persons; The one being his people under a Covenant for the Land of
Promise, and the condition of living by Moses Laws; The other under the
promise of life everlasting, (which the former were not excluded from, though
not expressly included in it) upon condition of receiving the Christian Faith
and continuing in it. Suppose we, that, when our Lord Christ commanded them to
baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, his
Disciples understood no more by all this, than, that those who should become
Proselytes to this new and true Judaisme which our Lord preached, should be
initiated unto the same by Baptism, as Proselytes then by custom were unto
the Law, because we see, after the resurrection of our Lord, how strange it
was to them, that the Gospel should be preached to the uncircumcised as such;
Suppo^e we further, that all the Nation of the Jews, whether in Jewry or
wheresoever dispersed, and none but Jews had received the Gospel of Christ, so
as the ancient and New people of God to consist of all the same persons; I say
all this supposed, shall make no manner of difference in the case: But there
shall be as much difference between the Old and New people of God, considered
as Societies and Bodies, constituted, and therefore distinguished by the
several Covenants upon which they subsist, as if they consisted of all several
persons. Should a man judge only by his bodily eyes, and see the people of
Rome as it was when the Sovereign Power was in the people, and again after it
had been seized by Augustus, I could not blame him to say, that it was the same
people. But he that should look upon that people with his understanding, as a
Civil Society, State, and Commonwealth, and ^ay it was the same, all men of
understanding would laugh at him for it, how much soever the interest of
Augustus required that it should seem the same to gross people. Apply this
instance to the case in hand, and I shall need say no more. Several things must
either have several names, or the same name in several notions or
significations. If our Lord took upon him to teach his Disciples the New
Covenant he came to introduce, to make them the New people of God which he
came thereby to constitute, (such is the correspondence between the Old and the
New) the old Name served best to signify the New thing; But in the same sense,
it could not serve to represent to his hearers the several terms upon which
Jews and Christians are Gods people. Be it therefore granted, that the word
(...) and the word (...), with such additions as the place where they stand
requires, signify that Body, which, at the time when our Lord spoke was Gods
ancient people; This signification, if I mistake not, descending from the first
bodying of them into a Commonwealth in the Wilderness, when they might and
were all called and assembled together, to take resolution in what concerned
their posterity, (as Commonwealths are presumed to be everlasting Bodies) as
well as themselves. When, after the return from the Captivity of Babylon, they
became dispersed into Egypt, Syria, Mesopotamia, Asia, and elsewhere, (owning
still or challenging the same Laws by owning which they first became one Body)
such Bodies of them as lived in Alexandria, Antiochia, Ephesus, Nearda, Sora,
Pombeditha, or other Cities, and their respective territories, are by the same
reason to be called the Synagogues of Alexandria, Ephesus, and so forth; Being
by that name sufficiently distinguished from the Gentile Inhabitants of the
same Cities and Territories. Neither is it pretended that there is any thing in
the original force of the word (...) or (...), why they should not both
signify the same. But suppose our Lord Christ declare an intent of instituting
a New people upon condition of embracing his Gospel, and use the old word (...)
to signify this New people, (as, well he may use it, for the near
correspondence between them) necessary it is that his hearers, understanding
him, understand by that term, something else than the Law had de^clared before.
And very convenient it was afterward, that, when there fell out not only
distinction but opposition between the two Bodies, they should be divided by
names as they were by affections; As the one is signified in all Church Writers
by the name of the Synagogue, the other by the name of the Church, to signify
the distance, which, ought not to be between them, but is. For, though nothing
is more odious than to quarrel about words; Yet, (as in diverse things else) the
not appropriating the term of Synagogue to the Jews, as of Church to the
Church, which the Fathers thoroughly observe, is an argument of not well
distinguishing between the Law and the Gospel; (Which gives them a privilege in
understanding the Scriptures above our times, because, as I said before, this
is, in my judgment, the prime point of it, notwithstanding all the advantages
we have above them for learning) and a means to convey the same confusion to
the minds of our hearers. When therefore we read in the Apostles Writings, of
the Churches of Judaea and Samaria, the Churches of Syria, Asia, Macedonia, and
Achaia, when we read of the Church of Rome, of Corinth, Ephesus, Philippi or
Thessalonica; And again, in other places, find the name of the Church
absolutely put, without any addition, to signify the whole that contains all
the Churches named in other places, so often do we meet with so many
demonstrations to common sense, of several bodies signified by those that so
speak, as intended to constitute one whole Body of the Church. After which
nothing can be demanded, but, whether the intention of the Apostles prove them
to be so only in point of fact, or in point of right, which demand a Christian
cannot make. Our Lord in particular, when he answers Mat. XVI. 18. Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it; cannot be understood to speak of building the Synagogue
which Moses had built so long before.

Here, I would desire him that thinks it so strange, that our Lord should
understand by the Church, something else than the Jews signified by it, to ask
the Author of the Leviathan what reason he had, when he acknowledged, that
the Church of Corinth, Ephesus, and Thessalonica is the Body of Christians
living in those respective Cities; And whether he had reason to affirm, that
the Church so signified, did do those acts of right which only Bodies can do,
and which he affirms the Church under the Apostles did do. For if these
reasons be not reconcilable, it will be worth the considering, what truth
there is in that position which is maintained by two, that cannot agree about
the reasons upon which they maintain it. Neither let any difficulty be made
from the difference that may arise, who they be, to whom our Lord conmands
there to resort, whom he bids tell the Church; one, or more, or all. For, when
it is resolved, that the Church is a Body or a Society, it will be by the
nature of the subject manifest, that the right of acting in behalf of this Body
must, by the constitution thereof be reserved, either to one or to a few, or to
the whole in some principal acts, in others, referring themselves to their
Deputies, as in popular Governments. And, whosoever they are that this right is
reserved to, he that resorts to them, is properly said to resort to the
Church, though our Lord, declaring here the purpose of instituting a Church,
declare not whom he will trust the power of acting for the Church with. Before
I go further, I must infer against the Leviathan; that, seeing the whole
Church is signified by the name of the Church absolutely put, without addition,
by the Apostles, as the body which all particular Churches constitute;
therefore the Church is understood and intended by them, as a Body capable of
right, and able to act, though not by all that are of it, yet by persons
trusted for it. A thing which he that had remembered his Creed could not have
doubted of. For, though the name of a Church may be said to rest in a number of
men not united by any right into a visible Body, yet, one, holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Church cannot consist of all persons maintaining the profession
thereof, (in opposition to all Societies claiming that name, but not holding
the profession requisite) but it must be distinguished by something which it
acknowledges for Law to oblige it, they do not. Again, if the Name of Church
in the Apostles, rest upon the bodies of Christians in the Cities of Rome,
Cori^th, and Ephesus, then can it not now, as of divine right, signify the
several States, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths wherein Christianity subsisteth.
Not only because the bounds of Christendom are not, either materially or
formally the same, with the bounds of those States under which it is now
maintained: But chiefly, because, the signification of that name in the
Apostles, once resting by divine right upon those Congregations, can never be
transferred upon those Commonwealths which subsi^t not by the same right, but
necessarily descends upon those Bodies, which derive their succession from
them, by visible acts of humane right. Against both I further infer, that the
Church, being signified as one by divine right in the Scriptures, can never be
understood now to consist in all those States, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths that
profess Christianity. First, because several States, Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths are not apt to constitute one visible Body, signified by the name
of the Church absolutely put for the Body of all Chr^sti^^s* For, it is most
truly said by Plate, that all States are naturally enemies to all States, but
especially those that are borderers. And how should so many enemies be
signified as constituting one Body? Secondly, and most evidently, because many
parts which belong to the unity of the whole Church, and help to make up the
whole, are not now governed by Christian Powers, any more than the whole was
from the beginning. In fine, whether the Leviathan had reason, so confidently
to affirm, that the Church can do no act, I report my self to that which has
been said of the excluding of Heretics and Schismatics out of the Church;
Seeing it cannot be denied to be the act of the whole Body, (that is to say, of
those tha are able to act in behalf of the whole Body) which the whole Body is
ruled by and obeyes. For, whether we have record extant of any Council at
which they were condemned; or, whether they were condemned in that Church where
they appeared; In as much, as, upon information of the proceedings, by daily
intercourse and correspondence, the rest of the Church sentenced the same, (as
finding the Rule of Faith and the Unity of the Church so to do) the excluding
of them becomes the act of the whole Church. For how else are so many Heresies
and Schisms come to an end with their Fathers? Nay, I will boldly say, that,
whosoever died excommunicate, because being excluded by his own Church he
could not be admitted by another Church, whosoever for fear of this, either
submitted to that which any Council ever decreed in matter of Faith, or
reconciled himself to his own Church that he might not be disowned by the
whole, whatever instances hereof the records of the Church afford, so many
witnesses we have of the acts which the whole Church either did, or was able
to do.

CHAP. XV. How the Power of the Church is founded upon the Law. The Power of
the Kingdom, Priesthood, Prophets, and Rulers of that people all of divine
right. How far these qualities and the powers of them are to continue in the
Church. The sense of the Fathers in this point. That the acts of S. Paul and
the rest of the Apostles were not of force by virtue of the Law. What
Ecclesiastical Power should have been among the Jews, in case they had
received the Gospel, and so the State had stood.
ANd now it will not be difficult to answer; that, though the Power of
Excommunicating did not belong to the Synagogue by Gods Law, but by humane
constitution, providing for the maintenance of Gods Law, and that of secular
Power; yet is it of the Churches right by Gods Law, distinguishing the Society
thereof from the Commonwealth. But this will not be effectually, nor
sufficiently done, unless I make the discourse general, and show how the
reason holds in other points of that right, upon which the Church is founded. I
say then, that, if it be true that S. Paul says Romans III. 21. Now the
righteousness of God (and so his Gospel, which proclaims that
righteousness) is manifested without the Law, being witnessed by the Law and
the Prophets; then are we not to think, that either the Church, or any part of
that right upon which it subsisteth, can stand by the Law, or be derived from
it, otherwise, than as Christianity it self, which destroys the Law, may be
derived from it, because, as S. Paul says, it is witnessed by it. For, the Law
will not fail to yield us such arguments of those rights, as, the
correspondence thereof with the Gospel, (that is to say, of the Synagogue with
the Church) requires.

Consider we then, that, by the Law, God became King of his people, but under
God, Moses his Vicegerent; With this provision for succession, that, he whom
God should raise up in Moses stead should be obeyed as Moses, Deuteronomy. XVIII. 15
--. Besides, we know there were XII Princes of the XII Tribes from Moses to
David, Number. I. 4-16. II, III, VII. 1 Chronicles. XXVII. 16. XXVIII. 1. And under
these Princes, it seems, the Tribes were divided into Thousands, Hundreds,
Fifties and Tens, the Captains whereof were made Judges under Moses during the
march through the Wilderness, Exodus XVIII. 21 --. Deuteronomy. I. 15. And it should
seem, that the people continued to be divided by these Thousands and Hundreds
in the Land, because we find, that in David's time, the whole Land, and not
only the Soldiery were divided so, 1 Chronicles. XIII. 1, 2, 5. where David,
advising with the Captains of Thousands and Hundreds, is said to advise with
the whole Assembly of the People. But as for the office of Judges, there is no
question but another course is taken by the Law of Deuteronomy. XVI. 18. when they
should be planted in the Land. For, when order is taken, that Courts be set up
in their Cities, it is intimated, that they were to come in stead of those
Captains, which had the ministering of Justice in their hands, in the
Wilderness. And whereas, besides the assistance of these Captains, M^ses is
allowed LXX more of the Elders of Israel, upon whom his Spirit is departed, to
help him in bearing the burden of that people, Number. XI, 15, 16, 17; Provision
is made for succession by the Law of Deuteronomy. XVII. 8-13. That there be always a
standing Court at the place where the Ark should rest, to which the more
difficult causes should resort, from the Courts of inferior Cities, there to be
finally decided. Which being to be the seat of Moses successors Judges or
Kings, it is not only the constant Tradition of the Jews, but of it self
evident, that this Court did exercise and was to exercise that Power, which was
first committed to them that were chosen for the assistance of Moses. Though
nothing oblige us to believe, that, while the seat of the Ark was either not
declared, or n^^ constantly used, it was always in force according to the
intent of this Law.

Beside these Powers established by the Law for the Government of that People,
we have the Priesthood tied by the Law to the Tribe of Levi, with diverse
privileges, or pety jurisdictions, in that quality annexed to it. For, when God
commands Aaron, that he and his sons drink no wine or strong drink when they
come into the Tabernacle, that they may distinguish between holy and common,
between clean and unclean, and teach the children of Israel all the Statutes
which the Lord had commanded them by Moses, Levit. X. 8-11; it is manifest,
that, by this Law, the people is referred to them for resolution in the cases
here intended, though what the cases are that are hereby intended, and what
rule their resolution should be tied to, nothing hinders, by other Laws to be
declared, and limited. And those ancient Doctors of the Jews seem to have
reason, that observe the terms of the Law, Deuteronomy. XXI. 5. every cause and every
plague shall be according to their mouth; inferring that all (...) (which we
may translate doctrines, but must understand that which the Greek calls (...),
or decrees) must come out of their mouth, Siphri 243. Pesicta Zoterta fol. 91.
col. 4. and instanding in the causes to be purged by the ashes of the Red Cow,
Number. XIX. not as if none could sprinkle those ashes but a Priest, (which is
otherwise ruled by Number. XIX. 17. to be any man that was clean) but because they
could not be burnt but by a Priest, Number. XIX. 3. which is by their Law any
Priest, Maimoni in that Title I. 11, 12. and because part of them was set aside
for Priests to purify with, as another part for other Israelites, Maim. III.
4. So, in the causes concerning Wives questioned by their Husbands being
jealous, by the Law of Number. V. 15. the causes of murder for which an Heifer
was to be killed by breaking her neck, Deuteronomy. XXI. 5. And in the plagues of men,
houses and clothes, Deuteronomy. XXIV. 8. none of which could be decided without a
Priest. In this regard, it seems to me, the Prophet says, The Priests lips
shall preserve knowledge, and they shall require the Law at his mouth, for he
is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. II. 7. and in terms Deuteronomy. XXX. 10.
(...), They shall teach Jacob thy Judgments, and Israel thy Laws. According to
the other Law Deuteronomy. XVII. 11. (...), According to the doctrines that they shall
teach thee.

Another Power in that people is that of Prophets, which seems to be founded
upon the Law of Deuteronomy. XVIII. 20, 21, 22. where, having commanded that the
Prophet which should succeed Moses be obeyed, as Moses, the Law proceeds to
charge them to put to death whosoever should prophecy in the name of strange
Gods: And then, giving a rule whereby to discern between a true and a false
Prophet, seems to intimate the authority of Prophets. Which was so very great
in that people, that, the Kings themselves were to obey them, so long as they
had the reputation of true Prophets, (whereupon we see how they reprove them,
Elias Ahab, 1 Kings XVIII. 17. Elisha the King of Israel, 2 Kings VI. 33. John
Baptist and our Lord Christ Herod, Mat. XIV. 4. Luc. XIII. 32. though, when
their reputation could by faction be questioned, ^o often were they questioned,
condemned, and killed for the messages they brought in Gods name, as the
Apostle says Heb. XI. 37. and as it befell our Lord Christ) Nay further, that,
when they taught, that any particular Law should cease for the time, they were
to be obeyed, as Elias commanded to offer sacrifice in another place than at
Jerusalem, 1 Kings XVIII. 17. contrary to the Law of Levit. XV. 2-9. the Temple
being then on foot. Whereby it appears, that the Prophets had their authority
immediately from God, not depending so much as upon his Law, further than as
the acknowledgment of the authority of it to come from God was a necessary
condition to the receiving of them for Prophets, as I said asore; Seeing the
matter thereof might cease to oblige, if they should declare the will of God to
be such. The Commonwealth then of Israel subsisting by divine right, (that is,
by the appointment of God giving them freedom, and the command of themselves,
upon condition of undertaking the Law) not only the Kingdom, which is the form
of Government limited by the Sovereign Power placed in one person, whether by
the permission of God or his appointment, together with the Ministers thereof,
Judges and Magistrates and Officers, but also the Priestly and Prophetical
Office, must be understood to stand by the same title.

As for the Church, which we have seen to be the spiritual Israel of God, and
maintain to be one visible body, by virtue of undertaking the Covenant of Grace
which the Gospel tendreth; It is manifest, that the King thereof is the Lord
Christ, who professes not to govern it by his bodily presence, but by the Law
of his Word, and by the invisible presence of his Spirit, which was to commence
upon his departure. That, being here, he appointed XII Apostles as Patriarchs
thereof under him, as the XII Princes of the Tribes were under Moses, and LXX
Disciples, or Apostles of an inferior rank, under himself also, as they under
Moses; But, for the dispatch of such business, concerning his Kingdom, as
that, which neither the Captains of Thousands and Hundreds, (who were ordained
Judges before the LXX were ordained to assist Moses) neither after them the
Judges of particular Cities that succeeded them could decide. And shall we not
conclude all this correspondence to be as competent an argument, as we are to
expect for the New Testament in the Old, for the constitution of the Church, in
the institution of the Synagogue? To wit, that, seeing we see God has
appointed our Lord Christ, he, his XII Apostles and LXX Disciples his
ministers in governing of it, that he intended it a visible body, to which the
visible right of governing the same might be conveyed, by the reasonable
voluntary act of those, in whom, placing the power, he must needs place the
right of propagating the same in his own absence. One point indeed of
difference there is, wherein, we should abuse our selves too much, to seek for
any correspondence between the Synagogue and the Church. For, we suppose the
intent of God to have been, that the Law should oblige one people, but the
Gospel all that are to attain salvation out of all people, so that there is no
particular seat of Gods worship according to the Gospel, to which all
Christians are bound to resort, as Jerusalem was the seat of Gods worship which
all Jews were to resort to. And, we suppose our Lord Christ to be in heaven,
where the Princes of Israel and the LXX Elders cannot be present, to assist him
with their ministry. Therefore we cannot imagine that he appointed his LXX
Disciples for a standing Assembly, as, under the Law; But, to be dispersed all
over the world, where Christian people should be, though united by the same
Rule which all should follow for the preserving of Christendom in unity. Let no
man therefore any more imagine, that the title by which any Power is held or
pretended to be held in the Church, can be derived from that right which the
Priesthood held under the Law; So as from thence to infer, that the Power
which the Priesthood had not under the Law is not under the Gospel to be
ascribed unto the Church, as it is the Church. For, I do of my own accord
allege, that, seeing the Priesthood was purely ceremonial, to figure that
expiation of sin which Christ should bring to pass, and therefore to expire
when it was brought to pass, it is not possible to imagine, that any right of
the Church can be founded upon the right thereof, or derived from it. Neither
is it otherwise with the Prophetical Office. The authority whereof, as I have
showed, was of divine right under the Law, as depending immediately upon the
will of God, that raised them up, and gave them authority by those evidences,
which his own Law had made legal; And this, that he might tie his people the
more strongly, by their ministry, and by the evidence of his presence among
them, to observe his Law. And yet, in as much as all Christians must believe
them forerunners of Christ, sent to give notice of his coming by such means,
as God that sent him thought fit, (so that he, by his Office, is the chief
Prophet, to whom the Father reserved the full declaration of his will and
pleasure, concerning the alliance he intended to hold with men) of necessity
their office was to expire in him, neither can it remain in the Church,
further than he, by a new act, may appear to have appointed. I do not here
make any doubt that S. Paul argued very well, when he said 1 Cor. IX. 13, 14.
Know ye not, that they which work holy things eat of the holy? That they who
wait upon the Altar, take part with the Altar? So also has God appointed them
that bring news of the Gospel to live of the Gospel. But, he that will
understand this argument, must make up the comparison, by completing the
correspondence, between the bringing of souls to Christ, by preaching the
Gospel, and the sacrificing of living creatures to God, by executing the Law.
This correspondence the Apostle himself has delared to our hands, Romans XV. 15,
16. Because of the grace given me of God, says he, that I should be the
minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, exercising the sacred function of
preaching the Gospel of God, that the oblation of the Gentiles may be
acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. And Phil. II. 17. Nay, though I
be poured forth upon the sacrifice and ministry of your Faith, I rejoice, and
that jointly with you all. Where it appears, that, by submitting to the
Gospel, men become a sacrifice to God, in as much as they dye to the world, and
that they who bring them to Christianity are the Priests that offer this
sacrifice; And by this Priesthood it is, that the Apostle challenges a right
of living upon preaching the Gospel, as the Priests lived by attending upon the
sacrifices of the Law. Which if it be true, then is the Apostles office that
Priesthood under the Gospel, which was to remain by the correspondence*
thereof with the Law, and therefore cannot derive any Title from the Levitical
Priesthood, which it makes void. As for the Office of Prophets under the
Gospel, it is plain by S. Paul's Epistles, that it pleased God, among other
miraculous Graces of the Holy Ghost, whereby he evidenced his presence in the
Church, to stir up Prophets in those Primitive Churches, by whom, besides,
they might be instructed in the more solid understanding of their Christianity,
as may appear in particular by S. Paul 1 Cor. XIV. Which being supposed, can
any man imagine, that the Office of those Prophets, and the authority which it
imports, can be derived from the Prophets under the Law, whose Office expired
in Christ? His act it must be to give authority to Prophets under the Gospel;
and, since we have showed, that the chief authority which he left in the
Church was left with his Apostles, it follows by consequence, (which by other
Scriptures in another place I have showed to have been true) that the Apostles,
by their Office, were the chief Prophets of the Church; Though, as, for the
continuance of the gift of Prophecy, under the Gospel there is no promise
recorded, as under the Law there is; So, neither any precept requiring
obedience to their Office, as then I have showed there was. In fine, God by
Christ designed to raise up children to Abraham, which are the new Israel
according to the Spirit; He has given the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord
that authority over them, which may answer the power of the Patriarchs and
Elders of his ancient people under Moses; He has incorporated into their
Office under the Gospel, the authority both of Priests and Prophets under the
Law, which both were to cease with the Law; Therefore we are not to derive any
Power of the Church from the rights of the Priesthood under the Law, not to
argue, that the Church has no right to that Power, which the Priesthood, as
then, was not seized of; But, whatsoever power was in the Prinees of Tribes and
their inferiors, in the Elders and Judges of Israel, for the civil Government
of that people under Moses, the same we must infer to have been in the
Apostles and Disciples of Christ, (and, by consequence, in them to whom they
may appear to have committed any part of it) for the government of the Church
under our Lord Christ; Saving the difference, which the condition whereupon
either people are gathered into one Society imports; Which is, in them, the
possession of the Land of Promise upon the observation of the Law, in us, the
Kingdom of heaven upon the Faith of Christ. And therefore in them infers
temporal Power in disposing of causes and things of this world, in these, only
the Power of directing in spiritual matters, wherein the Church, by the Covenant
of Grace, does communicate.

This opinion may seem to some man not to agree with the doctrine of the
ancientest Fathers, who do many times argue, what order ought to be held in the
Church, from that which the Law provided for the Levitical Priesthood; As
Clemens Ep. ad Corinthios from the order which the Law had prescribed for the
Sacrifices prescribed by it, argues, that the like ought to be kept in the
Church, page 53. And S. Cyprian, that, as Eleazar was consecrated High Priest
by Moses, before the Congregation of the People, so ought Ordinations to be
celebrated before the Assembly of the Church. Which kind of argument seems to
have no force, unless we derive the Offices of the Church from the Levitical
Priesthood; Together with abundance of passages to the same purpose, whereof it
shall be enough to have produced these for an example. But this kind of
argument is easily stopped by one instance. For it is manifest, that the like
argument, of instruction or exhortation to those that claim by and under the
Apostles, may be drawn from diverse passages of the ancient Scriptures, wherein
the Prophets of the Law are exhorted to do, or reproved for neglecting their
Office; And yet no man can go about to derive the right of their authority from
the Prophets Office by the Law of Moses. And then it is easily answered, that
nothing hinders, the same reason that appears in the Ordinances of the
Levitical Priesthood to be of evident consequence in the ordering of Gods
Church Not because the order of the Church depends upon the Priesthood, but
because both are from God, who has expressed those marks of his wisdom in the
elder, that may seem to direct the later, though claiming no title from it.
This reason is general. There is another more particular, to be drawn from that
which has been showed, that the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, as Governors
of Gods spiritual Israel, and therefore those that claim a right answerable to
theirs, have in them both the Office of the Levitical Priesthood, and of Legal
Prophets, in such consideration, and to such purpose as the effect of those
Offices under the Gospel, in the Church, requires. Whereupon, if at any time
the Fathers of the Church do argue, or dispute the Office of those who claim
by the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, from those things which are said in
the Old Testament, concerning the Levitical Priesthood, or the Prophets under
the Law; Much more ordinary it is, to find them grounding the like
instructions and exhortations, upon those things, which are said in the Old
Testament, concerning the Rulers and Judges of Israel according to the flesh.
What is more ordinary in Tertullian, Origin, S. Cyprian, Clement, Justine, the
Apostolical Constitutions, the rest of the most ancient Fathers of the Church,
than to draw into consequence the Rebellion of Corah, and the Law of obeying
that which the Priests and Judges of every age should ordain, concerning
difficulties of the Law; against Schism in the Church? Those things which the
Prophets, Esaias LVII. 10, 11. Jer. 11. 8. III. 15. XXIII. 1-4. Ez. XXXIV. 1-16.
pronounce against the Shepherds of Israel; against those that claim under the
Apostles in the Church? For the Prophets themselves Esa. LVII. 10, 11. Jer. II.
8. XXIII. 1-4. Ez. XXXIV. 23. do manifestly show, that these Shepherds are the
Rulers of the People, distinguishing them both from the Priests and the
Prophets. And the interest of Christianity requires, that the promise of
raising up better Shepherds, be understood to be fulfilled in the Holy
Apostles. He that doubts of the sense of the Fathers in this point, let him
take the pai^^s to read S. Basil upon III of Esaias, and see how he expounds
those things which are prophefied against the Rulers of Gods ancient People,
against those that offend like them, in ruling Gods Church.

And therefore it is utterly impertinent to the Power and right of the Church,
which is observed as matter of consequence to it, in the second Book de
Synedriis Judaeorum VII. 7. that S. Paul ordained Presbyters in the Churches,
Acts XIV. 22. as himself without doubt had received Ordination from his Master
Gamaliel in the Synagogue; For, if the meaning be only, that he Ordained them
by Imposing hands, as himself perhaps was Ordained, he tells no news, for
that is it which the Scripture affirms. But, if he mean further, that S.
Paul did this by authority received from Gamaliel, it will he ridiculous to
imagine, that S. Paul, by the Power which he had from the Synagogue, was
enabled to give that authority in the Church, which the Synagogue found it self
obliged to persecute, as destructive to it. Besides, it is easily said, that
the Apostles, finding that it was then a custom to Ordain those Elders, which
were wont to be created in the Synagogue, for such ends, and to such faculties
as the constitution thereof required, by Imposing hands; And, intending to
confer a like Power in Church matters upon the like order in the Church, which
by such acts they institute; held fit to use the same ceremony in ordaining
them, which was in use, to the like but several purposes, in the Synagogue. In
which case it is manifest, that the Power so conferred cannot be derived from
that which the Synagogue gave, (and therefore not limited by it) but by that,
which the Society of the Church, and the constitution thereof requires. As,
suppose for the purpose, that, by the Jews Law, at that time, they created
Elders to Judge in criminal causes only in the Land of Israel; But for
inferior purposes, (as of resolving doubts in conscience rising upon the Law,
by pronouncing this or that lawful or unlawful to be done) in other places;
Is it reason therefore to infer, as it is there inferred page 325. that when
S. Paul faith, 1 Cor. V. 12. Do not ye judge those that are within? he must
not be understood, of any judgment which the Presbyters of the Church exercised
there, because, out of the Land of the Land of Promise, Elders were not
ordained for Judges by the Synagogue? I say nothing of the point it self for
the present, I say it is no argument to infer thus, as is inferred page 325.
the Elders which the Synagogue made were not enabled to judge out of the Land
of Promise; Therefore, in the Christian Church, there was no Power to judge the
causes of Christians at that time; Unless we derive the authority of the
Church from the Synagogue. As for that which is argued page 328. that; Had they
conferred any other power, than the Rules of the Synagogue allowed, they would
have been questioned, and persecuted for it by the Jews, either in their own
Courts or before the Gentiles, (in as much as the Christians had then no
protection for their Religion, which the Jews had, but as they passed for
Jews in the Empire) it depends merely upon the opinion the Jews themselves
had of Christianity. For, where the Jews stood yet at a bay, expecting the
trial of that truth which the Gospel pretended, not proceeding to persecute the
profession of Christianity, it is not to be imagined, that they should proceed
to persecute those acts, which were done in prosecution of it. But where the
separation was complete, and enmity declared, no man need bid a Jew persecute a
Christian, for any thing that he did as a Christian, nor a Christian to suffer
for that, which a Jew should persecute. All the question only was, how far
both their Masters, that is, the Powers of the Empire would make themselves
executioners of their hatred, (Christianity being hitherto tolerated though not
protected) till the Laws of the Empire had declared against Christianity,
which at that time it is plain they had not done. As little do I think it
concerns the Right of the Church, which is there observed VII. 4. page 287.
that, Ordination by Imposition of hands was merely of human^e institution in
the Synagogue, and no way derived from the example of Moses laying hands upon
Josue, Number. XXVII. 18-23. which, being a singular case, can no way ground a
Rule. For supposing, that, by the Law, a Judiciary Power, or what ever inferior
Right was to be maintained, and conveyed by the Act of those which were legally
possessed of it, or the right of conveying it; Let all limitations whereby the
way of conveying it was determined, be counted as much of humane right as you
please, the power so conveyed cannot be merely of humane right, being
established by Gods Law, with a Power of limiting all circumstances in
propagating of it, which are not against Gods Law, but according to it. As for
the Apostles of our Lord Christ, (all whose acts, done with intent to oblige
the Church, are of force by Gods act of establishing them) all that can remain
questionable is, with what intent they introduced their Ordinances into the
Church, which are unquestionably of force by Gods Law, for whatsoever they
intended, whatsoever the Synagogue might intend by the like. As for that
voluntary conjecture of page 315. which makes the XII Apostles, created with
Power of Binding and Loosing, so many Elders to declare what was lawful and
unlawful in Christianity; I admit all, understood according to the premises. To
wit; that, as there was in those Elders which the Synagogue created, a Power to
declare what was lawful or unlawful by the Law of Moses, to make a man capable
or incapable of the society of that people, to which those promises were made,
but in every one as his creation limited; So were the Apostles ordained by our
Lord, to declare to the world, upon what terms it might be reconciled to God
and obtain everlasting life: And, those whom they prevailed not with, they are
therefore said to bind, because they loosed them not. And as they held this
Power in chief, and fully to all purposes; So all that claim any part of it
under them must claim no more, than the act by which they conveyed it upon
them may appear to have limited. But it were too great an impertinence to
imagine, that this power depended any way upon that authority which the Law
might allow or constitute, even in our Lord Christ, (supposing him a Prophet
acknowledged according to the Law) otherwise then as the Gospel depends upon
the Law, and the Church upon the Synagogue: in that they give evidence to them,
by which they are made void. For, that which our Lord gives his Apostles, is
more then the Law was ever able to effect, if the premises be true, though the
Law gave competent witness and evidence to it. Neither is there any more force
in that which is conjectured in the same place, that the VII, who are created
to wait upon the Tables, or common Diet of the Christians at Jerusalem, Acts
VI. are also so many Elders, because made by Imposing hands. For, if it be the
authority of the Apostles that made Imposition of hands in force to Christians,
(though they had a pattern from the Synagogue to move them to introduce it) who
shall limit them not to use it, unless they be Elders whom they ordain? and
therefore, who shall conclude that they are Elders, because so ordained?

If these things be true, it will be easy to resolve the consequence of that
supposition, which is propounded in the Preface to that Book. To wit, supposing
the Jews in the Land of Promise had received Christianity at the Preaching of
the Apostles, as they ought to have done, and so, that their Estate had
continued as it did, (which, for refusing it, was taken away) whether the Civil
Law of that people, continuing as it ought to continue, should have had the
same Power in Ecclesiastical causes, as it had in ordering all things that
concerned the Ceremonial Law. For, if so, then no Ecclesiastical Power could
have subsisted among the Jews, and therefore no cause could be alleged, why
other Nations, im^bracing Christianity; should not reserve the same Power to
their own Civi^l Law. For, supposing the Covenant under Moses, to be no more in
force at such time as the New is on foot, which the Preaching of the Apostles
had declared to be the intent of the Old, at such time as Christ should come;
it will follow indeed, that the reason why the Nation was taken away, (that is,
the refusal of the Gospel) ceasing, God might have preserved them in Estate,
had he pleased, but, by the terms of the Covenant which was expired, could
not be tied to it. But, supposing he had preserved them so, we must then
suppose, that the Civil Law of Moses ought to be still maintained among that
people, not by the Covenant, which being expired, and the condition of the Land
of Promise holding no longer, when the taking up of Christ's Cross is
propounded and admitted by receiving Christianity, the obligation of
maintaining the same Civil Law can no further hold, than the reason of
maintaining Christianity should require; That is; So far as the quiet of that
people, in the privileges which till then they enjoyed, would evidently have
been for the advancement and maintenance of Christianity, and the preserving of
the Laws which they were always tied to, as evidently for the quiet of that
people. For, suppose at this hour a Synagogue of Jews, in the Empire, or in
Italy, or wheresoever else they subsist, should receive Christianity; Neither
would any obligation of the Law remain upon them, why they should not give it
all over to become free denizens of the States in which they dwelt before their
conversion, (which is that, as I suppose, that Christian States ought to
propose to them, to move them to embrace Christianity) neither is there any
thing to difference their case now, from those of our Lords time, that enjoyed
so much of their own Laws in the hand of Promise. And, supposing that God had
been pleased to preserve them in that estate, we must also suppose, that God,
intending his Church as well of the Gentiles as Jews, intended both to make
parts of it upon the same terms. And therefore, that Power which the Apostles
left, for the preserving of unity in the communion of the service of God, for
which the Society of the Church stands, that, as well Jews as Gentiles must
have admitted, as a part of the Christianity which they professed, bounding the
force of their own Civil Laws, upon the same Terms, as we show, the Civil
Laws of other Nations that received Christianity are to be bounded with in
Church matters.

CHAP. XVI. The Church founded upon the Power given the Apostles. What is the
subject matter of Church Laws. The right of the Church to Tithes and Oblations
is not grounded upon the Law, though evidenced by it, and by practice of the
Patriarchs. Evidence of the Apostles Order in the Scriptures. The Church of
Jerusalem held not community of Goods. The original practice of the Church.
HAving thus far showed the foundation of Ecclesiastical Power, in the
Apostles and Disciples of our Lord Christ, (whom we may justly affirm, to have
been the Church materially as so many Christians, but, in virtue and force, as
much as the whole Church can ever be) it will not be requisite, to those that
consider things a right, to argue, that their Acts and Ordinances must of
necessity have the force of Gods Laws to the Church, as much as those things,
which God said alone to Moses in the Tabernacle of Assembling, had the force of
Laws to his ancient people. For, those that consider the beginnings of States
from the beginning of the World, shall easily find, that people were not
governed from the beginning by written Laws, but reasonable and lawful
consent in some person, or quality of persons, (whether of Gods designing or
man's choosing) to govern in chief, was a first a Law sufficient to constitute
any Commonwealth, as being sufficient to produce all other Laws, which
dissatisfaction should make requisite for determining common differences,
either in writing, or by silent custom. Thus was the Commonwealth of Israel
constituted under Moses, so soon as that People had received God for their
King, and referred themselves to Moses, for the man, by whom they should
understand his will and pleasure. Nevertheless, because the wisdom of God
easily foresaw, how lightly those, who presently received him for their King,
would be moved to fall away from him to other Gods; (that which was as easy
for his wisdom to do) he gave them presently such Laws in writing, both for
the Ceremonies wherewith he would be worshipped, as held the most particular
difference from those which the Nations worshipped their Gods with; and for
their civil conversation, as might best distinguish them from all other Nations
that were fallen away to the worship of Idols. And all this, besides the secret
intent of scretelling and figuring the Gospel in and by the same. This was the
intent of the Decalogue first, then, of those Laws which Moses received in the
Mount to be delivered to the people, Exodus XXII, XXIII, XXIV. and lastly, of
the ref: which Moses received in the Tabernacle from Gods mouth, speaking with
him as God faith, face to face. When God the Father had sent our Lord Christ to
publicsh his Gospel, and to declare the intent of founding his Church upon it,
when our Lord Christ had declared his intent of leaving the world, and the
prosecution of his Gospel, and gathering of his Church to his Apostles and
Disciples, then was the Society of the Church founded in as full force of
authority, as ever can have been in it since; Though not yet actually a Church,
because the materials of it are not men but Christians, that is, such, as by
receiving Christianity, should come into the communion of it.

Besides, God intending one communion of all that should become Christians out
of all Nations; And therefore, pretending to maintains the State of this World,
and all the Commonwealths in which the Church stands, on the same terms
which it finds; discharges the Church of all that power to force men to
obedience by harm of this world, by which all States maintain themselves.
Therefore, the Church can pretend no more, than to communicate in some certain
particulars, for which the Society thereof is erected, and, in the communion
whereof it consists. Suppose we then the Law of Moses to be ceased, as to
the outward force of governing the People to whom once it was Law, though not
as to the inward intent of introducing the Gospel, to which it was the Preface;
Suppose we the Society of the Church to be ordained, in the communion of those
things which Christianity introduces; I say, those Rules, without which the
Unity of the Church cannot be maintained, whatfoever they be called, have no
less the force of Laws, than any that Secular States either inact or enforce.
Because, as he that once has undertaken to take God for his God, under a
promise of being a free Israelite, cannot, so long as that prosession stands,
make question of undergoing the rest of Moses Laws, howsoever troublesome they
seem; So he that once has embraced the communion of the Church, in hope of
life everlasting, is by the fame reason, obliged to observe such Rules,
according to which the communion of the Church is in force and use. But the
communion of the Church not consisting in anything of this world, only in the
Offices of Gods service, (for, invisible communion in the faith and love of
Christ, and all for Christ's take, as Christianity requires, is presupposed to
the visible communion of the Church) no reason can require that they should be
many, at least at the beginning. Our Lord Christ, having preached and declared
unto his Disciples, that Prosession of Christianity, into which he appoints
all Chrissians to be Baptized, may well be said to have ordained the Sacrament
of Baptism for a Law to all Christians; distinguishing the Ceremony, by which
the Prosession of Christianity is solemnized, from the Prosession it self of
Christianity, which, he that comes to be baptized must have taken upon him for
a Law before. As little question there can be, that our Lord Christ, at his last
Supper, instituted, not his last Supper, (for what sense can there be in
saying, that our Lord at his last Supper instituted his last Supper?) but the
Sacrament of his last Supper, which is the Sacrament of the Eucharist, for a
perpetual Law to the Church. Here then we have for Laws to the Church; First
the Rule of Faith, containing the prosession, upon supposition whereof the
Corporation of the Church is founded: Secondly, the Sacraments of Baptism and
of the Eucharist: Thirdly, other offices of common Prayers and Praises of God,
together with the Hearing of his Word, (common to the Church with the
Synagogue) which God is to be served with: And therefore thus far I have
proved, that there is a Society of one Catholic Church, founded by God upon
the precept, or the privilege of communicating in the service of God, by there
offices of Christianity, equally charged upon all Christians; And consisting in
the obligation of maintaining unity, in serving God by the said Offices.
Supposing then a visible authority settled in the persons of our Lords Apostles
and Disciples, in behalf of the community of Christians; Supposing this
community efected into a Society, visible Body, or Corporation of the Church;
whatsoever can become questionable, (not concerning mine and thine, which Civil
Government pretends to decide, but) concerning communion in those Offices
which God is to be served with by Christians, is virtually and potentially
already decided, by the right of doing such acts, as, being done, oblige the
Church for whom they are done; Which therefore are the Laws of the Church. We
see, that the intent and meaning of Christianity is many times quessionable in
matters of that weight, or taken to be of that weight, that Christians are not
to communicate with those, who, pretending to be Chistians, do believe
otherwise. Here, we have none but the Apostles themselves to have recourse to.
None but they have convinced Christendom to believe that their word is Gods
word. For, though Moses and the Prophets and our Lord Christ all spoke by the
same Spirit, in as much as they all intended a secret, which was not to be
published till the Apostles preached, the recourse we have to them is, with
intent to argue, and discover by their writings the truth of that, which may
become questionable in the preaching of the Apostles. What then may appear to
be deter-mined by the act of the Apostles, (as the writings of the Apostles are
certainly their act) the declaration of the Church, (proceeding no further,
than the means provided by God for that purpose will enable the Church to
discern) that this does appear, will have the force of a Law, to oblige all
Christians, not to violate the communion of Christians, upon pretense that it
does not appear. So, the rcason of believing, and the evidence thereof, are
both antecedent to the foundation of the Church: But the declaration of the
Church, obliging those that are within it, not to violate communion upon
pretense of contrary evidence, that is the effect of that right and power which
God gives his Church. But there are other acts, which the Church will be as
often necessitated to do, as it becomes questionable in the Church, how any of
those Offices which God is served with by Christians is to be performed. What
times, at what places, what persons are to assemble themselves for that
service, as of it self it is not determined, so, were it never so particularly
determined by the writings of the Apostles, yet, so long as the world is
changeable, and the condition of the Church, by that reason, not to be limited
in that service by the same Rule always, the Society of the Church could not
subsist without a Power to determine it. The persons especially, that
communicate with the Church, if you will have the Church a Society, must be
endowed with several qualities, some of them inabling to communicate passively,
that is, to join in the Offices of Gods service; (For till our time I think it
was never quessioned among Christians, whether the same persons might minister
and he ministered to in the Offices of Christianity) Then, if some persons be to
be set apart for that purpose, of necessity, it may become questionable, by
what acts the fame is lawfully done, according to the will of God declared by
his Apostles. Further, when it is determined, who, when, where are the Offices
of Christianity and the Assemblies of the Church to be celebrated, the least
circumstance of matter and form, of solemnity and ceremony, though it make no
difference of says, yet is able to create a cause of separation of communion,
that shall be just on the one side. Is it any great Power that is demanded for
the Church, by the Original constitution thereof, when it is demanded, that the
Church have Power to regulate it self in things of this consequence? Let me be
bold to say, there is never a Company in London so contemptible, that can stand
without having the like, excepting the determination of matters of Faith. And
therefore it is a small thing to demand, that the Apostles, for their time,
should be able to do it by Power from God, so as to be heard in Christ's stead;
Those that received Power from them, according to the measure of that Power
which they received, though they pretend not their acts to be our Lord Christ's,
as the Apostles, yet, within the bounds of that Office to which they are
ordained, they have power from God, determining their persons, though not
justifying their acts. Suppose then that our Lord Christ assume a Ceremony in
use in the Synagogue, at such time as he preached, of baptizing those that
embraced Moses Law, being born of other Nations, to signify and to solemnize
the admission of them that undertake Christianity, to the privileges of his New
people; I suppose it is the act of our Lord that makes this a Law to his
Church, though it was the Power, which God had provided to govern his ancient
people, that made it a Law to the Synagogue. It is no more doubted among men of
Learning, that our Lord Christ, at his last Supper, made use of Ceremonies
practiced among the Jews at their Passover, in the celebration of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, the outward act whereof he appointed to consist in
those Ceremonies, whereas the inward intent thereof was not known before; For,
whatsoever they knew of Christ, they could not thereby know, that he would
institute the Sacrament of his Body and Blood in those Elements. In like manner,
it had been always a custom of Superiors in the Synagogue, (according to that
of the Apostle, Ebr. VlI. 7. Without all contradiction, the less is blessed by
the greater) to bless, and to pray for interiors, with laying hands upon them,
or lifting up hands over them. So did the Priests, so did the Prophets, so
Isaac, Genesis XXVII. 4, 7, 12, 19, 21, 22. Jacob, Genesis XLVIII. 9, 14, 17. Aaron,
Levit. lX. 22. because a man cannot lay hands upon an Assembly all at once. The
Priests blessing, therefore is called among the Jews listing up of hands, and
many scrupulous observations there are among them in doing it. Number. VI. 23, 24,
25. So our Lord in doing cures, (as Naaman thought Elisha would have done, 2
Kings V. II.) in blessing his Disciples, Lue. XXIV. 50. and diverse the like. If
then the Apostles of our Lord frequented the same Ceremony, in solemnizing
Ordination, (as praying for the grace of the Holy Ghost upon those that
received it) and in other acts of public effect in the Church, it cannot be
conceived, that any thing but their own act brought it in force, (though the
practice of Gods ancient people gave them a precedent for it) but it must be
conceived, that this argues a Society of the Church, where such Ceremonies are
instituted to celebrate such acts with, as were to provide for the maintenance
of it.

Here I must not forget the Law of Tithes, and the Title by which they are
challenged to be due to the Church. For having made, that this, proved the
Church a Corporation, by the power of making Laws within themselves, of
creating Governors, and of Excommunicating; If it be demanded, where is the
common stock and revenue of it, (seeing no Corporation can subsist, without
means, to maintain the attendance requisite to those things, wherein it is to
communicate) it will be necessary to show, that those who founded the Church
have provided for this. Tithes are commonly claimed by the Levitical Law; And,
it is not easy to give a reason, why other Laws of the Church should not come
in force, or stand in force, by the Law of Moses, if it be once said, that
Tithes are due to the Church under the Gospel, because they were as- signed the
Levitical Priesthood by the Law. Truly it deserves consideration, whether they
that insist upon the Levitical Law, in the claim of Tithes to the Church, do
not prejudice the cause which they pretend to maintain. For if they look into
the tenor of the Law, it will easily appear, that Tithes of fruits of the earth
are assigned the Priesthood by God, in consideration of the Land of Promise,
which he gave them; And that therefore, the practice of the Jews at this very
day is due and legal, who pay no Tithes of those fruits, because the service,
for which they are due, is, by the Law prohibited out of the Land of Promise.
Besides, it is manisest, that by the leter of the Law, Deuteronomy. XIV. 23. XVIII. 4.
Number. XVIII. 12. of all fruits of the earth, onelyCome and Oil and Wine are
Tithable; Of living creatures, the Tith goes not to the Levites, (who paid the
Priesthood the Tenth of their Tithes) but to the Altar, that is, they are to be
sacrificed to God. So that by this means, the Priests and Levites themselves
paid this Tith, as well as other Israelites, and that, no more to the interest
and advantage of the Priesthood, than the Paschal Lambs, which they also
sacrificed, for Tithe cattle went to the owners as the Paschal Lambs did, the
Law having provided only, that they should be holy to the Lord, Levis. XXVII.
32. that is sacrificed to God, their blood sprinkled upon the Altar, and their
flesh eaten in Jerusalem. Which Law, providing also, that this Tith he only of
the Herd or of the flock, that is, of Bullock, Sheep, or Goat, that passes
under the rod, they that will derive the Churches claim of Tithes from the
Levitical Law, must, by consequence, tie themselves to these Terms; Which would
be, not to abridge the claim, but to destroy it. For, though many kinds
besides these were Tithable among the Jews, by virtue of the Constitutions of
the Synagogue, yet, that would not advantage the Church, which, forsaking the
Synagogue for refusing Christianity, cannot avail it self of the authority of
it. And truly, he that would insist, that the Law is in force, for the payment
of Tithes to the Church, will never be able to give a reason, why it should not
be in force for observing the Sabbath,) that is, the Saturday) for being
circumcised, and keeping all the Festivals and Sacrifices and Purifications of
the Ceremonial Law, and much more the Civil Law of that people, (as much
contrary to the Civil Law of Christian people, as to Christianity) seeing that,
whatsoever is contained in that Law which is made void by Christianity, must be
understood to be void, till it appear to be contained and imported in that Act,
which introduces and establishes Christianity in stead of the Law. Indeed, I
must not say, that the Levitical Law is the only evidence that is alleged for
the right of Tithes in the Church. For, every man knows, that Abraham's paying
Tithes to Metchiseck, the Priest of the most high God, Genesis XIV. 20. and Jacobs
paying Tithes, or vowing to pay them, Genesis XXVIII. 22. are alleged, (as indeed
they ought to be alleged) to show, that, paying of Tithes was in force under
the Law of Nature, that is, in the time of the Patriarchs, before the
Ceremonial Law. In which regard, God faith, that Tithes are his, Levis.
XXVII.30. to wit, by a Law introduced before. And the consequence hereof seems
to be more effectual to the Church, than that which is drawn from the Levitical
Law, in that consideration, which the Fathers of the Church do press with
advantage enough against the Jews, that the Patriarchs were the forerunners
of Christians, and, that Christianity is more ancient than Judaisme, in regard
that the same service of God in spirit and truth, by the inward obedience of
the heart, was in being in the lives of the Patriarchs, as the Gospel requires,
before the scrupulous, and precise, and supperssitious observation of bloody
sacrifices, and smoke of fat and incense, and troublesome purifications of the
outward man, and the rest of Moses positive Law was required. For, if the Law
of Nature, and the conversation of the Patriarchs under it, is indeed the
pattern of Christianity and of the life of Christians under the Gospel,
expressed by deed, before we find it indented for by Covenant; Then
certainly, that which ought to be outdone by the Church, is not abrogated by
Christianity. But this argument being made, and allowed to be of force, he
that therefore should say, that the Church claims this right, by virtue of
that Law, whereby it was in force under the Patriarchs, would be presently
liable to peremptory instances, of the difference of clean and unclean
creatures, Genesis Vll. 2. Of raising up feed to a brother deceased, Genesis XXXVIII.
II. Of the Polygamy of the Patriarchs, and others, which, though then in force,
under the Gospel hold not. Wherefore, it is not to be said, that the Law of
that time is the act whereby the Church claims, but a ground, whereupon the
act whereby the Church claims was done. In like manner, he that should affirm
this right due to the Church, by virtue of the Levitical Law, would meet with
these exceptions (peremptory as I suppose) that have been advanced. But, when
it has been said and made good, that the Levitical Law, supposing the Gospel
ordained by God to succeed it, yields a sufficient ground to argue, that a
provision answerable thereunto was to be established in the Church, as the
correspondence between the Law and the Gospel, between the Synagogue and the
Church requires; I say, this being premised, there remains nothing in
question, but, how the establishing of it may be derived from the act of them,
that had the settling of the Church in their hands.

Considering then, that provision is made, by the Law, only for the
maintenance of Gods Ceremonial service confined to Jerusalem; (for a powerful
evidence, that the intent of that Covenant expressed no more than the Land of
Promise) that the promise of bringing the Gentiles to Christianity, and the
real destruction of the Law, with the Place of this service, inferrs, the
service of God in all places, in spirit and truth, to succeed it under the
Gospel, and by it; that no order, for all Nations that should be converted to
resort to this service, can be maintained, without a Society or Corporation of
the Church, visibly telling them whither to resort for that purpose; Upon these
premi^es, it will be of necessary consequence, that the like provision, for the
maintenance of that service of God which the Church professes, be made, to
that which had been made, for the service of God at Jerusalem, during the time
of the Synagogue. Now the maintenance of Gods service in the Church, (with the
maintenance of the Church, subsisting for no other end than that service)
consists in the maintenance of those persons, that are to attend on Gods
service. Of which persons there are two sorts: The first is of those that
attend, either upon the Government of the Church, or else upon the minis^ring
of those Offices, which God is served with by his Church, unto the Assemblies
of his people: The second sort is of those, that, to preserve this temporal
life, being obliged to attend upon the employment of it, cannot spare
themselves and their time to attend on Gods service. It was therefore
necessary, that Christian people should contribute the first fruits of their
goods, in Tithes, and oblations to the Church, by which, those that attended
upon the public government of it, as well as upon ministering the Offices of
Christianity, should both maintain themselves, and be trusted to maintain the
poor, that, for the necessities of the world, they might not neglect the
Osfices of Christianity. And this necessity, necessarily imported, in the
correspondence between the Law and the Gospel, between the Synagogue and the
Church, but evidenced by the practice of all ages of the Church, to be the
effect of the first order given out and established in the Church by the
Apostles. The first order that we find mentioned by the Acts of the Apostles,
to have been held in the primitive Church of Jerusalem, mentions expressly
only the provision for the poor. But it is in the first place to be remembered,
that the Apostles had long before told our Lord; Behold, we have left all
things to follow thee; And if, as it is said there, Acts IV. 35. Distribution
was made to every one as they had need; If their Oblations were laid at the
Apostles feet, to signify, that they were put into their power to dispose of,
as they should think fit; if the seven men whom they ordained to attend upon
that Office, Acts VI. were trusted under them and by them, then is it necessary
to conceive, that themselves were in the first place provided for by those
Oblations.

It will presently be said; That, at that time, the Christians imposed upon
themselves a Law to make all estates common, that all might live upon all that
every one had: As has been granted to the Anabaptists; Denying nevertheless,
that it was a Law necessarily obliging all Christians, but an order which which
they took up voluntarily, as, being convinced, that it was for the advancement
of Christianity, at that time. And S. Basil, it is plain, supposes that they
all renounced their estates, as Monks did afterward; Otherwise, he could not
have inferred the duty of Monks from this example, as in the beginning of his
short Rules he does. Besides, we have Grotius his conjecture, that those
Christians took up the Rule of those Essenes which were married. For, besides
the Pharisees and Sadduces, whom the Lord in his Gospel so deeply condemns,
there was a third Sect of religious people among the Jews, called Essens,
whereof, though some lived continent, some in marriage, yet both, renouncing
the property of their goods, contributed all to the maintenance of the
community into which they betook themselves. And these, being no where reproved
by our Lord, he conceives, the Church of Jerusalem then consisted most of,
and therefore their order received by the Church, as easily as introduced by
the Apostles. But all this is in vain, only that S. Basils argument stands
upon a consequence, the validity whereof must be disputed in due place, that,
if bare Christians did voluntarily part with their goods in that estate, much
more are those, that take upon them the profession of Monastical life, bound to
do the same. For, nothing can be more evident than this; That no man was bound
by any rule, common to the whole Body, to bring in his goods, but every man
brought in voluntarily, what his heart prompted him to part with, all being
satisfied, that they were to bring in what the maintenance of the Church, in
that estate, should require. At least if we believe S. Peter telling Ananias,
Acts V. 4. Did it not remain thine own while so it remained? And being sold,
was it not at thy disposing? Which could not have been said, had he been tied
to dispose of it otherwise. And Acts V. 33, 34 -- how it is said, that they had
all things common Acts II. 44. is thus expounded; That there was great grace
upon the believers, for neither did any of them want, because, as many of them
as had houses and Lands sold them, and brought the prices of the things they
had sold, and laid them at the Apostles feet. Neither could it have been any
particular commendation for Barnabas, which, for his particular commendation
follows there, that he, having a land, did the like with it. Therefore,
neither did they profess the communion of Monks, who were married, nor of
Essenes, who were tied to no more than other Christians, to contribute of their
estate, whatsoever the maintenance of the Church should require, but did
contribute whole estates, or parts of estates, as God moved them to do that
which they were not bound in that measure to do. Not was it any thing, but, not
judging of that primitive estate of Christianity by that which was afterward
practiced, though in an inferior degree, that moved men to grant the
Anabaptists more than is true, that they were under the Law of community of
goods. But I will not here repeat those texts of Scripture which I have
produced, nor the arguments which I have made, for the true sense of them, and
the consequences drawn, in the Right of the Church, page 200-220. which, I
suppose to remain in force, till some body will show me that they are not.
Only I will particularly stand upon it, that there is no answer for S. Paul 1 Timothy V. 3, 8, 9, 16, 17. Where, the widows that are so indeed are to be
honored with a Pension: The Presbyters that rule well, especially if they labor
in the Word and Doctrine, with a double one. Is Timothy commanded to see this
done, and no stock provided out of which he might do it? Why then does he not
ask the question; Where is the money to do it with? If any Christian man or
woman have widows, (of their near kindred) let them maintain them, and let
not the Church be charged; For, they that take not care for their own, have
denied the Faith, and are worse than Infidels. And how shall the Church be
charged, if it have no stock, nor none bound to have? Therefore I suppose, I
have given a good reason, that S. Peter, when he says, (...), 1 Pet. V. 3.
forbids the Presbyters to domineer over the inferior Clergy, whose Pensions
were to come by their allowance. For those Pensions, being allotted to their
several Offices, are most properly called (...). And therefore, (in Clemens
Alexandrinus his relation of S. John) reported by Eusebius Eccles. Hist. III.
23. (...), is, to make some one of the Clergy. And Cornelius, of Novatianus, in
the same Eusebius VI. 43. (...); Because it was not lawful for him that had
been baptized in bed, for fear, (of suffering for his Christianity, which to
avoid, baptism was deferred till danger of death) to come to any place in the
Clergy. And I may well take up again here, that which I alleged before of S.
John, commending Gaius, for intertaining those brethren whom Diotrephes would
not suffer the Church to intertain: And of S. Paul, commanding Titus to send
away Zenas and Apollos with care, that they wanted nothing. For, the same
question will be fit to be asked; where they should have money to do it, did
not S. Paul or S. John suppose a stock of the Church provided to do it with.

If this kind of evidence had been used, it would have been easy to have
derived the Title of the Church to Tithes, in the nature of First Fruits and
Oblations, whereof they are but a kind, from the time and practice and
constitution of the Apostles, which the History of Tithes finds no evidence
for till CCCC years after Christ: But it would have spoiled the design of the
work, if, as it is commonly thought, the design was to destroy all title of
divine right, which the Church has, to that which is once consecrated to it. I
must touch some testimonies here, because the matter is so questionable. That of
Basil shall clear me in the first place, that I bring in no new interpretation
of the proceedings of the primitive Christians at Jerusalem; He, in Sermon. de
Instit. Monachorum, argues against him, that, having made the profession of a
Monk, reserves to himself any thing, either of his own will, or of his worldly
good, from the example of Ananias and Sapphira, who, having consecrated their
Land to God, by professing to give the price of it to the Church, detained part
of the price, and, by detaining it, drew upon themselves that judgment of God
which we know. So also, concerning the words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. XI. 20, 21,
22. I will allege the passage of S. Ambrose, or whosoever writ the Commentary
under his name, to show that I do no new thing, when I argue, that they suppose
the right of the Church in First Fruits and Oblations. Hos notat, qui sic in
Ecclesiam conveniebant, ut munera sua offerentes advenientibus Presbyteris,
(quia adhuc Rectores Ecclesiis non omnibus erant constituti) totum sibi qui
obtulerat vindicaret schismatis causa. Dissensiones enim inter eos
Pseudo-apostoli seminaverant, ita ut oblationes suas zelarentur, (cum una atque
eadem prece omnium oblationes benedicerentur) ut ii, qui, ut assolet fieri, von
obtulerant, aut, unde offerrent non habebant, pudore correpti confunderentur,
non sumentes partem. Et tam cito illud agebant, ut supervenientes non
inveniebant quod ederent. Ideoque, si sic, inquit, convenitis, ut quisque suum
sumat, domi haec agenda non in Ecclesia, nbi unitatis and mysterii causa
convenitur, non dissensionis. Munus enim oblatum totius populi fit, quia in uno
pane omnes significantur, 1 Cor. X. 17. per id enim quod omnes unum sumus, de
uno pane sumere oportet. He sets a mark upon those, who, so assembled in the
Church, that, presenting their Oblations to the Priests that came first,
(Governors not being yet placed in all Churches) he that offered took all for
himself in regard of schism. For the false Apostles had sowed dissentions among
them, so that, being zealous of their own Oblations, (whereas the Oblations of
all were blessed with one and the same Prayer) they, who, as it is ordinary,
had not offered, or had not whereof to offer, were seized with shame and
confounded, not getting any share. Therefore, if so ye meet, as every one to
take his own, these things (says he) are to be done at home, not in the
Church: where the meeting is not for dissentions, but for unities, and the
mysteries sake. For, the gift that is offered becomes all the peoples, because,
by one bread all are signified. For, in as much as we are all one, we are all
to take of the same bread. Here you have both the order of their Feasts of
Love, and the disorder which the Apostle corrects. The Oblations of all the
Congregation made an intertainment for all, rich and poor. They were all
blessed at once, by some of the Priests; This blessing including in it the
Consecration of the Eucharist. For he says, that they assembled for the
Mysteries sake, that is, for the Sacrament, alleging S. Paul's words spoken of
the Eucharist; That all are to take of the same bread, because all are one.
Hereby they became the Churches goods, to intertain the Body of it. And they
that challenged their Oblations for their own, by complying with the Priests
who consecrated them, did it out of zeal to their own faction, that they who
were not of it might not partake of their Oblations, as those, whom they would
not have to be of the Church. What is then the difference between those of
Jerusalem and these? There, men laid down estates at the Apostles feet, to
maintain this Communion daily, through the year, and continually: As the
Scriptures quoted out of the Acts do evidence, that it was practiced for the
service of God, in the Offices proper to Christianity; Whereupon it is called
the daily ministration, Acts VI. 1. Here, at Corinth, the First Fruits of their
goods, which they offered from time to time, as the maintenance of their
Assemblies and Communion required, served the turn. For, when Christianity was
propagated, it was not possible, that all Christians should give that daily
attendance upon the service of God, for which, those of Jerusalem are commended
in the Acts. Therefore S. Chrysostom in ad Cor. Hom. XXVII excellently
reasons; That, as at Corinth, they did not contribute their estates, as at
Jerusalem; So, the reason was, because this Communion was not continual, but
upon set days; On which, after the Communion of the Eucharist, the Service
being done, they refreshed themselves altogether with a common internment. I
confess, he says, that those at Jerusalem had all things common, which is to
be understood with that abatement which the premises require; So far as the
maintenance of this Communion, required, and, at the good will of those whose
hearts God touched to do it. For the rest, that which I say is not mine, but S.
Chrysostomes. In the Epistle of Clemens to the Corinthians, you may see, the
disorder which he labors to compose grew, about, who should consecrate the
Eucharist, and by consequence, about disposing of the peoples Oblations, p. 53,
54. But Irenaeus alone is enough to serve my turn. His words are these; IV. 32.
Sed and discipulis suis dans consilium, primitias Deo offerre ex suis
creaturis, non quasi indigenti, sed ut ipsi nec infructuosi nec ingrati sint,
eum qui ex creatura panis est accepit, and gratias egit, dicens; Hoc est corpus
meum. Et calicem similiter, qui est ex creatura secundum nos, suum sanguinem
confessus est. Et Novi Testamenti novam docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab
Apostolis accipiens, in universo mundo, offert ei qui alimenta nobis praestat,
primitias suorum munerum in Novo Testamento. And, (our Lord) counsailing his
Disciples to offer unto God First Fruits out of his creatures, (not as if he
wanted, but that they might neither be fruitless nor thanklesse) he took that
bread which was made of his creature, and gave thanks, saying; This is my Body.
Likewise he acknowledged the cup, consisting of the creature which we use, to
be his blood. Teaching the new oblation of the New Testament, which the Church
receiving of the Apostles, through all the world, offers to him that feeds
us the First Fruits of his own gifts, in the New Testament. So, the precept of
Oblations goes along with the precept of celebrating the Eucharist, as provided
for the maintenance of it. Again IV. 34. Et propter hoc, illi quidem decimas
suorum habebant consecratas, qui autem perceperunt libertatem, omnia quae sunt
ipsorum ad dominicos decernunt usus, hilariter and libere dantes ea, non quae
sunt minora, utpote majorum spem habentes; Vidua illa and paupercula hic totum
victum suum mittente in Gazophylacium Dei. And therefore (that there might be a
difference between the Oblations of slaves, and of those that are free) they,
(the Jews) had the Tithes of their goods consecrated. (by the Law) But, those
who have received freedom, do themselves order all their goods to the Lords
use, (as those at Jerusalem did) cheerfully and freely; Not giving less, as
having greater hopes; But, that poor Widow throwing into the Treasury of God
her whole living. Again; Quoniam igitur cum simplicitate Ecclesia offert,
just munus ejus purum sacrificium deputatum est. Quemadmodum and Paulus
Philippensibus ait; Repletus sum, acceptis ab Epaphrodito quae a vobis missa
sunt, odorem suavitatis, hostiam acceptabilem placent em Deo. Oportet enim nos
oblationem facere, and in omnibus gratos inveniri fabricatori Deo, in sententia
pura, and fide sine hypocrisi, in spe firma, in di^ectione ferventi, primitias
earum quae sunt eis creaturarum offerentes. Therefore, because the Church
offers with simplicity, justly is her Oblations counted a pure Sacrifice: As
Paul says to the Philippians; I am full, having received of Epaphroditus the
things which you sent, a sweet smell, an acceptable sacrifice, pleasing to God.
For it behooveth us, making oblations, to be found in all things thankful to
God that framed us; Offering with pure minds, and faith unfeigned, with firm
hope, and servent love, the First Fruits of those creatures which we have. You
see he qualifieth that which they sent S. Paul no otherwise, than the
Oblations, out of which the Eucharist is consecrated. But charge the duty
peremptorily upon all Christians, which evidently presupposes, that it was in
force through the whole Church: for he declares that they did do that, which
he moves them cheerfully and freely to do; Making the freedom of Christians
the reason, why the Gospel declares not what is Gods, as the Law did, and so,
tying them to more. Tertullian in the place afore-quoted de praescript. Cap.
XXX. says, that Marcion the Heretic, when he was admitted into the Church,
(out of which he was excluded afterward) brought in with him ducenta
Sestertia: And, adversus Marc. IV. 4. Adeo antiquius est quod est secundum nos,
^t and ipse illi Marcion aliquando crediderit; Quum and pecuniam in primo
calore fidei Catholicae Ecclesiae contulit, projectam mox cum ipso, posteaquam
a nostra veritate descivit. So is that (Gospel of S. Luke) which we use the
more ancient, that Marcion himself sometimes believed it; When, in the first
heat of the Catholic faith, he contributed also money to the Church, which
was straight cast out with him, when he fell off to his own Heresy from our
truth. How could the money, that Marcion had brought into the Church with, be
cast out with him afterward, but because he offered it to the treasury of the
Church, and, because, being there, it was with himself disowned by the Church;
Which never would admit any offering from any body, that was not admitted to
communion with the Church? For how many ancient Canons of the Church are there,
in which it is forbidden to receive the Oblations of such and such, to
signify, that they are not admitted to communion with the Church? The
Testimonies of Tertullian, Origin and S. Cyprian, I leave them that please to
peruse in the History of Tithes, Chap. IV. contenting my self, by these few to
demonstrate, upon what ground, and with what intent and conscience Christians
from the beginning tendered their Oblations, at the celebrating of the Eucharist:

But it will as easily appear, that the Church was owner of goods and
possessions, which Christians did contribute to the maintenance thereof, even
when it was subject to be persecuted, until persecution was proclaimed; For
then, it cannot be doubted, that the Church goods were seized into the Emperors
coffers. And what evidence more any man can demand for the Corporation of the
Church, which Idolaters acknowledged, as long as they tolerated Christianity, I
understand not. But there can be nothing so eminent as the charge laid to S.
Athanasius, in the Council of Tyrus, and ever after, wheresoever his case was
questioned, that, going to visit after the Council of Nicaea, and to put the
acts of it in execution in the (...), (which was a Shire of Egypt next to
Alexandria, always part of the Diocese) and coming with a guard to the Cell
of one Ischyras, pretending to be a Priest among the Meletians, (whom the
Council had commanded to be subject to Athanasius, and the rest of the
Catholic Bishops, upon such terms as I have remembered elsewhere) and his Cell
a Church, it fell out that there was a glass broken, which they pretended to
be a Chalice. For it can no ways be imagined, that this case should trouble
the whole Church, as it did, so long as it remained questionable, whether
Athanasius was regularly removed or not, had not all the Church presupposed,
that Churches, and Altars, and Chalices, consecrated to God, are the Churches
goods, and that the irreverence which might be showed them, might charge upon
one of Athanasius his rank, a presumption of so much irreverence to
Christianity, as should render him unworthy of it. Therefore Athanasius, in his
Apology, never allegeth any thing to the contrary, but many things to evidence,
that there was neither Church, nor Altar, nor Chalice there. The order of the
Emperor Aurelian given for the execution of the sentence of the Christian Synod
at Antiochia against Paulus Samosatenus, is express and peremptory to the
purpose. How can the Sovereign acknowledge the House of the Church, (which is
in our Language, the Bishops Palace at Antiochia) but he must be understood to
acknowledge, that which the Christians had disposed of to the Church to be done
by virtue of their Law, which he, for that time, conniving at Christianity,
allows to be the Churches. The good Emperor Constantine the Great, in
restoring to the Church the goods and possessions which had been ravished from
it in the persecution under Diocletian, and should then be found in being, (as
you may see by Eusebius de Vita Constantini II. 36-40. Eccles. Hist. X. 5.)
intends not hereby to erect the Church into a Corporation, by a secular
capacity of possessing lands or goods without interruption of Law; but,
professing to restore that which was the Churches before, acknowledges, as a
Christian, that right which Christians acknowledge, of holding Land and Goods,
to be in the Church. For, when we read before, in any records of the Church,
where the persecution of Diocletian is mentioned, (as in Eusebius Eccles. Hist.
IX. 9.) that Churches and Oratories were pulled down, and the books of the
Scriptures burned; were not these Churches and Oratories and Books the common
goods of the Church, dedicated to the service of God, but given the Church for
the purpose of it? When Constantine writ that famous letter to Eusebius, to
provide fifty Copies of the Bible, was it not to furnish the Churches which he
had erected at Constantinople? There is nothing more ancient in the records of
the Church, than the mention of Titles and Coemiteries, belonging to the Church
at Rome; nor any thing more effectual to convince this intent, than the name
and condition of the same. The manner was at Rome to set marks upon eschetes*
and confiscations, and all other goods belonging to the Exchequer, whether
moveable or immovable, intimating, that the Exchequet claimed them, and that
no man was to meddle with that Title, for so it was called. And truly, the same
was the reason, why they set a bodily mark upon soldiers, to signify them to
be the Emperors men, as private men did on their goods, which occasioned the
allegory of the character of Baptism, the reason whereof, S. Austine, by that
comparison declares. When therefore a piece of ground or a house was given the
Church to exercise their Assemblies in, the name of Title evidences, that a
mark was set upon it, (whether a Cross, as Cardinal Baronius would have it,
whether visible to the world, or only to those of the Church, I dispute not
now) to distinguish the Churches goods from the goods of private persons. And
therefore what can be more clear, than, that the Church had goods? In the life
of Alexander Severus, you have a question about a certain place, challenged, on
one side, by the Christians, on the other by the Taverners, popinariis, (whom,
with the like, he had made Corporations, as the same Life relates) decreed by
him in favor of Christians. It will, perhaps, be said, that it is enough to
justify those that have seized the goods of this Church, that the Tenth part,
and those kinds, of which it is to be paid, are not determined by Gods Law.
For, if it be once granted, that the act of man is requisite to design what
he will please to indow the Church with; That the act of Sovereign Power is
requisite, to make such or such or all kinds Tithable through each State, it
will be in the Sovereign Power, either to recall its own act, or, to limit or
void the acts of particular persons. To this my answer shall be; That all this
dispute proceeds upon a supposition, that the men are Christians, to whom it
addresseth. Seeing then it is a part of Christianity, to acknowledge the Church
a Corporation founded by God, and so, capable of rights as well as of goods;
Whatsoever, by any man's voluntary act it stands endowed with, as the Church of
England is with all Tithes, some man may have force, no man can have right to
take from it. But, I have showed further, that all Christians, whether public
or private persons, are bound to indow the Church with the First Fruits of
their goods: Of which First Fruits, the Tenth has been the part most eminently
limited, under the Laws of Nature, Moses, and Christ. Therefore, the persons
whereof a Commonwealth consists may be Christians, in giving their goods, as
the necessity of the Church requires, but the Commonwealth it self cannot be
Christian, but by securing such Christian acts from violence. Which if it be
true, so far must any State be, from seizing such goods, that the first
thought thought should be, to restore the breach made upon Christianity by such
feizures, For the intent of consecrating First Fruits and Oblations, (whether
presently to be spent, or to make a standing stock) to the maintenance of one
Communion and corporation of the Church, is evidenced by the same means as our
common Christianity; That is, by the Scriptures, expounded by the original
practice of Ghristians. And therefore, supposing Christian States were mistaken
in accepting the Obligation of Tithes as from the Levitical Law, they were not
mistaken, either in their duty to indow the Church, or in limiting the Tith for
the discharge of it; suppo^ing it necessary, that all being become Christians,
the rate should be limited, and that the Tenth, whether alone, or with other
consecrations, might serve the turn. And therefore there can be no difference
between the Churches goods, that is Gods, and private men's, but the difference
between man's Law only, and Gods and man's Law both, speaking of those Churches
upon which man's Law has once settled that, which private or public devotion
has once consecrated to God. For consider, that there is neither Kingdom nor
State to be named before the Reformation, that ever undertook to maintain that
Christianity which it professed, wherein there has not been a course taken, to
settle Goods consecrated to God upon his Church, for the maintenance of Gods
service, that it might not lie at the casuality, of Christians behaving
themselves as Christians should do, whether the service of God should be
maintained or not. For, though, while no man was a Christian, but he that had
resolved to undergo persecution to death, for the profession of Christianity,
it was not to be doubted, that, he who had given himself up to the Church;
would not stick at giving up his goods, so far as the necessities thereof
should require; Yet, when all the world was come into the Church, (whether for
love of God, or, of the World that favored the Church) what disorder might have
insued, had not a standing provision been made, it is obvious to common reason
to imagine: Or rather, what disorder did ensue for want of it, it is evident,
by the provisions of the Civil Law of all Christian Kingdoms and States, that
proved requistie to prevent it for the future. Whether or no the Tenth part
were due by virtue of the Levitical Law, seeing it appears by that which has
been said, that, from the beginning of Christianity, a stock of maintenance was
due to the Church, out of the First Fruits of Christians goods, offered and
dedicated to God, whereof Tithes were from the Law of Nature before Moses one
kind; They might be bad Divines in deriving the Churches Title from the
Levitical Law, who had not been good Christians, had they not discharged
themselves to it; But they can be neither good Divines nor good Christians,
that discharge the Church of the rights so purchased to it. Always, this being
the course of maintaining the Church from the beginning, the evidence for the
corporation of the Church is the same with the evidence for our common
Christianity; To wit, the Scriptures, with the consent of all Christians to
limit the meaning of it.

And therefore, as every Church is a Body by it self, and all Churches
notwithstanding bound to make one Body, by visible communion one with another,
which Body is the Catholic Church; So is this common stock of the Church
provided for the maintenance, first of that Church whose it is, then, of the
whole Church, by defraying the charge of those correspondences whereby the
unity thereof is entertained. In the place afore-quoted out of my Book of the
Right of the Church in a Christian State, you shall find those Scriptures
alleged, which speak of the Collections of other Churches for the maintenance
of the Church of Jerusalem, the then Mother Church of all Churches. And in this
Book before Chap. X. you have evidence, that the correspondence between all
Churches, by which the communion of all was to be maintained, was instituted
and set on foot by the Apostles. You have therefore evidence, that such a stock
was requisite, even in regard of correspondence between several Churches, when
you see upon what business it was spent. Whether this correspondence were
exercised in holding of Councils, or by daily intercourse and intelligence, the
case was always the same as at the Council at Ariminum, where the Fathers
complained that they were detained against their will, as to the great charge
of them, who were to maintain their Representatives there. And if my memory
fail not, the British Bishops particularly in Sulpitius Severus, that their
Churches were not able to maintain them there at the charge which was
requisite. For Constantine indeed, at the Council of Nicaea, had furnished not
only the wagons of the Exchequer to convey them to the place, but also the
greatest part, if not their whole charge during the action. But his son,
intending by duresse to constrain them to decree that which he intended,
(because he knew, that, if they decreed it not, his authority would be of no
more effect to induce the Church to receive it, than the Heathen Emperors had
been to induce it to renounce Christianity) using his Sovereign Power in
commanding his subjects to assemble and continue assembled, laid for a further
burden and duresse upon them, to continue their at their own charge, that is,
at the charge of their Churches. I will conclude with a memorable passage of S.
Gregory Nazianzens, in Julianum I. where he tells us, that, among other
designs os the Apostate to extinguish Christianity, one was, to bring the
Laws of the Church into use among the Gentiles, as the means to propagate and
maintain their Idolatry, which was visibly the means to propagate and maintain
Christianity. Indeed it is a testimony that concerns all parts of Church Law,
and evidences all the parts of Ecclesiastical Power that I have insisted upon.
But because it mentions partly the erecting of Hospitals, for the
correspondence of Christians, I have put it here in the last place, where I
allege the practice of the Church for the corporation of it: (...). He was
ready to set up Auditories (in stead of Churches) in every City, and Presidents
of higher and lower States, readings and expositions of the doctrines of the
Gentiles, both, which compose men's manners, and the more abstruse. Also in
part, the form of Prayers, and censuring of sinners according to their
measure. Of Catechizing also and Baptizing, and other things which manifestly
belong to the good order that is among us. Besides, to found Hospitals to
intertain strangers, and convents of Virgins and Monasteries, and the humanity
which we use to the poor. Also, beside the rest of our order, that of leters
of mark which we give to those that need, when they travail from Country to
Country. Julian believed not that these Orders came from God, because he
believed not Christianity. Those that can believe as he did of these Orders,
why not of Christianity? Those Christians whose purses maintained the charge of
them, would not have been so forward, had they thought themselves left free to
themselves, without obligation from our Lord by his Apostles. And, to that
which has been said, to make evidence of this Law, and other Laws whereby the
Church was made a Corporation by the Apostles, I will here desire the Reader to
add all that he shall find written by Epiphanius, in the end of his work
against all Heresies; concerning the Rules and customs of that one Church,
which continues so only by separating from them. Perhaps, they who can think
the Constitutions and Canons of the Apostles mere fables, because the books
were not written by them to whom they are entitled, will not believe that
Epiphanius would have writ the same things, had they not been real and visible.

CHAP. XVII. The Power of Excommunication in the Church is not founded in the
Law. What argument there is of it in the Old Testament. The allegorical sense
thereof is argumentative. It was not necessary that the Christians should
incur persecution for using the Power of the Keys, and not by virtue of the
Law.
I Am now come to the point principally insisted on, for all this is premised
for a ground to that contradiction which I must frame, to that which has been
said against the Power of Excommunicating in the Church. To which, insisting
upon the premises I say; That I am so far from pretending that right to depend
upon the Church by virtue of the Law, that I insist expressly, that there was no
such thing introduced by Moses Law, or in force under the Law of Nature in the
time of the Patriarchs; And not only admit, but, as for my Interest, demand
all that for truth, which the first book de Synedriis has proved at large, and
saved all them that believe it the pains of doing i^ again; That
Excommunication came in force in the Synagogue after the Captivity, and in the
dispersions of the Jews, when they, (desiring, as their duty was, to maintain
Gods Law by which they were to be governed, and not having the Power of
insticting Penalties requisite to maintain it, as not being enabled by their
Sovereigns) devised a course that might appear reasonable, because necessary,
upon ^upposition of their own Law, and yet less presuming upon the Sovereign
Power; Which was, to divest those that should incurr that forfeit, of the
privilege of a Jew, and to banish him the conversation of his native people,
either in whole or in part, as the penalty was to be measured by the offense.
And truly, I count my self with the world, obliged to him that has employed so
much learning to show it, and, that it will only become the wilfulness of
them, who neither understand the Scriptures themselves, nor will learn of them
that do, to imagine an Ecclesiastical Court distinct from the Secular, under
the Law, in which the Priesthood were Judges: And to take pains, to show
themselves incapable of truth, by seeking to maintain that, which he has
showed to be evidently false. But this being granted, I do not understand what
reason can be imagined, why it should follow that, under the Gospel, there
should be no such Power in the Church. For, had it been never so clear, never
^o much granted, that such a Power was in force under the Law, yet, could it
not be derived upon the Church, mediately or immediately, from some act of our
Lord Christ founding his Church, it would not have served the turn. The Law of
Moses continuing Scripture to the worlds end, but Law to none but to those whom
it was given to oblige: That is, the people that subsisted by receiving it, and
that for that time when it was intended to be in force. But if it may appear,
that the Church is made one Society and Communion by the act of them that
founded it, and that such it cannot be, without a Profession, limiting or
uniting the right of that Communion to him that makes it, nor stand such,
without power of denying the same to him that visibly makes that Profession and
visibly fails of it; Whether any such thing were in force under the Law or
not, under the Gospel it shall not therefore fail to be in force. True it is,
that this cannot be true, unless a competent reason may be made to appear, of
something answerable to it under the Law, in the same proportion, as the
correspondence between the Law and the Gospel, between the Synagogue and the
Church holds. But such a one will not be wanting in this case.

They that argue from the excluding of Adam out of Paradise, to the putting of
sinners out of the Church, if they argue no more than a figure discern^ble by
the truth, when competent evidence of that truth is made, conclude not amiss.
For, though this be before the Law, yet, not before the purpose of God in
figuring Chri^^ianity was set on foot. And, that Paradise, as it is a figure of
heaven and the joys thereof, so likewise is a figure of the Church upon earth,
is necessarily con^equent to the reason, upon which the mystical sense of the
Old Testament is grounded. So likewise under the Law, the shutting of Lepers
out of the camp of Israel, (answerable in the Jews Law to the City of
Jerusalem, and, supposing the truth of the Gos^el, a figure of the visible
Church) neither signified any cause, nor produced any effect, but of a legal
incapacity of conversing with Gods people; But, supposing a spiritual people of
God, entitled, by their profession, to remission of sins and life everlasting,
a visible failleure of this profession is the cause which, producing invi^ble
separation from God, is competent to produce a visible separation from the
Church, which is visibly that people. The penalty allotted to the neglect of
circumcision is; The child to be cut off from his people: Which penalty,
beginning there, is afterward much frequented by the Law in many cases, the
penalty whereof is, to be cut off from Gods people. Signifying, (as he has
learnedly showed, and saved me the pains of doing it again) that such a
forfeiture should make him that incurred it liable to be suddenly out off by
Gods hand, from the land of his people. And, because it was an evident
inconvenience, that a civil Law should leaye such faults to Gods punishment,
who never tied himself to execute the punishment, though he made the
transgressor liable to it, therefore the Antiens of Gods people, according to
Gods Law, have allotted to such faults the punishment of scourging, as next in
degree to capital, for grievous. But there are several other crimes mentioned
in the Law, which, who incurres, is, by the same Law, cut off from Gods people
by being put to death. I demand now, what correspondence can be more exact,
(supposing, the Law that tenders the happiness of this life in the Land of
Promise to them that undertake and observe it, to be the forerunner of the New
Covenant, that tenders remission of sins and life everlasting upon the same
terms) than is seen betwixt the invisible and visible forfeiture of the
privileges of Gods people in the Land of Promise, and the invisible and visible
forfeiture of the Communion of Gods people, as the sin is notorious or not? Nor
will it serve his turn to scorn S. Cyprian, urging, (as you may see by my book
of the Right of the Church, that Origin and S. Austin do, page 27.) that,
Excommunication in the Church is the same, as putting to death, under the Law;
As proving that by a mere allusion, which, if it have not other grounds, is not
like to be received. For, S. Paul says well, that the Scriptures are able to
make a man wise unto salvation through Faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy III. 15.
speaking of the Scriptures of the Old Testament; Because, without faith in
Christ, upon the motives which his coming has brought forth to the world, they
are not able to do it; but, supposing those motives received, do enable a
Christian to give a reason of that different dispensation, whereby it pleased
God to govern things under the Law; and so, not only to attain salvation, but
with wisdom to direct others in it, and take away stumbling blocks o^t of
their way to it. And in this case, should a man go about to persuade Christians
to admit such a Power over them, by no other argument than this, well might the
motion be scorned by them to whom it were tendered. But, there being no pretense
in this allegation, but, of rendering a reason for a Power of the Church from
that of the Synagogue, and the Fathers so well stated in the difference between
the Law and the Gospel, as, not easily chargeable of the indiscretion to use
ridiculous arguments; it is to be maintained, that they have given such a
reason from the Old Testament as is to be required, by such as would be wise to
salvation by it.

Indeed, I could not but observe in the late History of Henry the Eight, p.
157. where the Writer imagines what reasons Cardinal Woolsey gave the Pope, for
his consent to the dissolving of some little Monasteries, for the erection of
his Colleges at Oxford and Ipswich; that he alleges among others; That the
Clergy should rather fly to Tropes and Allegories, if not to Cabbala it self,
than permit, that all the parts of Religious worship, though so obvious, as to
fall easily within common understandings, should be without their explication.
The intent whereof may justly seem to charge the Clergy, to have advanced the
mystical sense of the Scripture, as a means to make the Religion they maintain
more considerable, for the difficulty of it. But, I would there were not too
much cause to suspect, from other writings of the same Author, a compliance
with Porphyry, Celsus, Julian, and other enemies of Christianity, that have not
spared to charge our Lord Christ and his Apostles with abuse and imposture, in
alleging the Scriptures of the Old Testament impertinently to their purpose,
though here he charge only the Clergy for that wherein they follow his and
their steps. To me, I confess, it smelled so rank, that I conceived my self
bound to cry out upon the venene, that may be so closely couched under the
words. But, to those that believe the truth of Christianity, arguments from the
mystical sense of the Old Testament must not seem contemptible, (those of our
Lord Christ and his Apostles being such) provided, that the correspondence
between the Law and the Gospel be preserved upon the right ground, and in the
right grain. Provided also, that no more weight be laid upon them, than they
are able to bear; To wit, no more than we can lay upon the Law of Moses, in
proving the truth of Christianity. Which, if we premise not the miracles of
our Lord Christ, and his Apostles, done to witness their commission from God,
together with the excellence of Christianity above Judaisme, even in the
balance of reason; If we make not good and constant correspondence between
both, wheresoever the ground of that correspondence takes place, we allege a
reason that needs a reason to defend it. But if we do that, we impressed all
the miracles done by Moses to introduce the Law, to depose for the truth of the
Gospel: We furnish our selves of a magazine of argument, in all points of
Christianity, to convince those who have received it, what, the con^^itution of
Gods ancient people, and the truth then on foot will infer, upon the
correspondence which they are supposed to hold, with Christianity, and with the
Church. I do then freely grant, that Excommunication stood not immediately by
Gods Law, among Gods ancient people, though by that Power which Gods Law had
vested on them that first introduced it; Were it Esdras, (by commission from
the King of Persia, as to the Power that enforced it with means to constrain,
though by the Law, as to his Title, before and against other men by the Law) or
whosoever it were besides. But I will allege evidence for it after the return
from Captivity, which, to my knowledge has not hitherto been alleged; Namely,
that which is called in the Greek Bible the third Book of Maccabees, where it
is r^lated, that, when some of the Jews at Alexandria had obeyed the Edict of
Ptolomee Philometor, comman^ing to worship an Idol which he had set up, the
rest of the people (...). Abhorred those of them that had turned Apos^^^es, and
condemned ^^em as enemies to the Nation, depriving them of mutual conversation
and the henefit of it. III. 25. Upon the consideration of which passage I
eas^ly conclude, that of 1 Macc. XIV. 38. not to be well understood, n^^
transl^ted, where it is said that Razias (...): signifying indeed that, in the
^or^er times, (under Antiochus Epiphanes, when so many Jews departed from
their Law) he had brought in the decree of not mixing Judaisme: That is to
say, that he had been the means of passing a decree, that those who stuck to
their profession should not comm^nicate with the Apo^^ates. These things were
done by virtue of the Law, against the will of their Sovereigns, and therefore
Philometor complains of them for it, 3 Macc. III. 16. but it is by virtue of
his decree, being his subjects, that they put them to death aft^rwards, VII. 8,
9, 10. I do also grant, that, the putting of a man out of the Synagogue,
(which, I admit to have come in by the act of those men, who, n^verth^lesse,
had their authority originally from that act of God; which made them a people
under those Laws) imported a great abatement of the temporal privilege of each
Jews estate, in as much as it is evident, that, whosoever was banished the
conversation of Jews, in whole or in part, was, at the same rate, abated the
privilege of a Jew, which they held, by the declaration of their Sovereigns,
to maintain them in the use of their own Laws. For, the privilege which a man
holds among his people whereof he is a native, will appear of what
consequence it is, when he comes to live among strangers. But, I do not
therefore yield, that, to be excommunicate out of the Church, by the original
constitution thereof, and the Law of God, imports the abatement of any secular
privilege: Because of the difference between the Synagogue and the Church,
which God appointed to be gathered out of all Nations, under the condition of
bearing Christ's Cross. For, such a company refusing their Communion to such as
they exclude, can neither prejudice their persons, goods, nor fame; which,
being doubtful to the world, so long as they profess the Religion which the
world owns not, returns, by consequence, when they quit that Religion, to
return to the Religion of the State. Rather, as the Leviathan truly says, they
make themselves liable to all the persecution, that may be brought upon them by
such, as think they have had ill measure by being put out of the Church.

Now, to that which is argued; That, because the Christians went for Jews
among the Gentiles, at the beginning of Christianity, enjoying Jews
privileges, and thereby the exercise of their Religion, therefore, the
Excommunications used by them must needs be such, as were in force among the
Jews according to Moses Law, that is, by the Power which it establishes; The
answer is by denying the consequence. The reason this: The Christians at the
beginning communicated with the Jews in that service of God which they used,
as well in the Temple, as in the Synagogue: How should they have opportunity to
make them acquainted with the Gospel otherwise? But, as sometimes they
assembled secretly among themselves for fear of the Jews, Acts XII. 12. John
XIX. 38. so also, besides those Offices which they served God with among the
Jews, in the Temple or in the Synagogue, they acknowledged others, which they
held themselves bound to, and for which they retired themselves from the Jews,
Acts I. 13. II. 42, 46. III. 23. V. 42. VI. 2. The ground of their Communion
with the Jews, Christians know to have been the hope of winning them to be
Christians, (lasting while that hope should continue the ground of serving God
in their own Assemblies) the obligation of Christianity for ever to continue.
In regard of the conversation and communion which they held with the Jews,
whether Civil or Religious, they were subject to be excommunicated by the
Jews. That is part of our Lords Prophecy, John XVI. 2. They shall put you out
of their Synagogues; Nay, the time comes, that whosoever kills you, shall think
that he does God service. But, whatsoever the effect of these Excommunications
might be; being driven, and confined, in a manner, to the Communion of the
Church (by being excluded, or at least abridged the Communion of the
Synagogue,) must they not needs forfeit their Communion, by not fulfilling the
condition by which they held it? Or could they forfeit it upon other gronnds,
or to other effect, than those, upon which, and to which they held it? Indeed,
I will not undertake to give you many Scripture examples of Excommunications
during that time. For, when it appeared, that, the Apostles discerned the
secrets of men's hearts, and inflicted death on those that proceeded
hypocritically in their Christianity, it is no mervail, that none of the rest
durst join themselves to them, as S. L^ke informs us, Acts V. 13. that is, of
those that were not persuaded sincerely to embrace and untertake Christianity.
And, Excommunication is only for those who appear not to be sincerely
Christians, denying it, either by express profession, or by consequence of
their actions inconsistent with it. Simon Magus may well be reckoned the first:
Who, being sentenced by S. Peter to have nor part nor lot in this Word; that
is, in any thing which Christianity pretends to give, (because it appeared,
that he had professed it out of hope to learn how to do such strange feats, as
might advance the credit and ends of his Magic) is by him exhorted indeed to
repentance, but so, that the Apostle engages not himself, (that is, the Church)
to pray for him, as not satisfied yet of the truth of his repentance and
conversion to Christianity, Acts VIII. 18-24. Which is the very practice of the
primitive Church, (as I have showed more at large in the Right of the Church,
page 17-27.) toward Apostates, Murderers, and Adulterers, whom many times,
and in diverse parts they restored not to the Communion of the Church; (As
counting it very difficult for them that had failed so grossly, to give
competent assurance of sincere Christianity) though exhorting them to
repentance, and giving them hope of forgiveness from the goodness of God,
when they found not reason to engage the Church, by restoring them, to become
the warrant of it. In consequence to this passage of S. Peter with Simon Magus,
and in consideration of those Texts of the New Testament which I have handled
before, though I acknowledge a Power of excommunicating in the Church, yet I do
not imagine that any man could be absolutely excommunicated, further than this
severity of Discipline was in force, which refused Penance to some of the most
grievous sins. For whosoever was, or might be, by the custom in force,
readmitted upon Penance, is rather excommunicate by his own act if he refuse
it, than by any act of the Church that requires it. But in as much as,
whosoever is refused communion till he perform his Penance, is absolutely
refused not performing it, there is never a Penitential Canon in the records of
the Church, never a passage mentioning Penance in any of those that writ before
the Canons of the Church were in writing, that deposes not for a Power of
excommunicating in the Church. As for those whose sins were allowed no hope
to be readmitted; though they were absolutely shut out of the Church, yet, in
as much as they were sent to God with hope of mercy, they were saved, if saved)
by that Key, which, by authority as well as knowledge, let them into heaven by
shutting them out of the Church. But suppose this case may be understood
otherwise; for the possibility of the thing, those that were subject to be
excommunicated by the Synagogue, are not therefore disabled to excommunicate
one of themselves, (any more, than those who now depart from the Church of Rome,
are disabled to excommunicate one of their own) though we suppose them to
pass for Jews to the Romans their Masters, and to enjoy thereby the exercise
of their Christianity. For so long as their Interest obliged not the Romans to
distinguish between carnal and spiritual Jews, it is no mervail, if, allowing
the Jews to govern themselves in the Land of Promise, they allowed them also
to persecute those whom they took for Apostates, though their own subjects.
But, when the persecution upon the death of Steven ceased, (whether by the
conversion of Paul, or by the death of Herod, or whatsoever might move the
Jews to surcease, not the Romans to forbid it) no mervail if the Romans
maintained that liberty which the Jews tolerated, (that is, persecuted) not in
those whom they held Apostates. For, if the Romans themselves, in after times,
did not always persecute Christianity when they allowed it not, is it any
thing strange, that the Jews, who held their own Religion from the mere grant
of the Romans, should find cause, not to persecute their Apostates, as they
counted the Christians, with that Power which they were allowed by the Romans?
This being the case of the first Christians in Palestine, it will be easy,
thereby to take measure, how it must stand with them in the dispersions of the
Jews, to whom they were to bring the Gospel in the first place. For, suppose
it entertained with that repute among them, which might preserve it from being
persecuted, the foresaid reason would oblige the Christians to communicate
with the Jews, as well in the service of God in the Synagogue, as in civil
converse; Though obliged moreover, as they should be able, to assemble
themselves for the service of God as Christians. So the Christians of
Antiochia, whom Paul and Barnabas assembled in the Church for a year together,
Acts XI. 26. were not to forbear to serve God with the Jews in the Synagogue,
so long as they, and Christianity could hold so much credit with them, as to
give hope of reducing them to it. So, when the same Paul and Barnabas created
Presbyters for the Churches which they had founded, Acts XIV. 23. sure they
intended them not for the Synagogue, which was provided without them; But, to
maintain the communion of those Churches in the service of God as Christians.
As for the Romans their Sovereigns, by whose grant the Jews enjoyed all that
use of their Laws which they enjoyed, no man will mervail, that they took no
notice of the difference between Jews and Christians, so long as the Jews
complained not, when we see them refuse to make themselves executioners of
their wrath, upon the Christians, when they did complain. We must not forget
Gallio, Acts XVIII. 12-17. when Paul was brought before him, taking the
difference to be only about names and terms of their own Law, and refusing to
be judge in it, though leaving them to persecute the Christians, as, by their
own Customs, namely by scourging, they might do. Nor mervail, that he at that
time, should think no more of it, when we find by Origin, that Celsus the
Epicurean, writing against the Christians two hundred years after, takes it for
a suit about goats wool, which is nothing. As for the Edict of Claudius, that
all Jews should depart from Rome, Acts XVIII. 2. the case is plain, that
Aquila and Priscilla, and all native Jews, though Christians, were involved in
it, and bound to withdraw. But, whether or no it laid hold on those that had
been converted to Christianity being Gentiles, and had not the legal mark of
Jews, which was Circumcision, upon them, by the text of S. Luke appears not;
No, though we suppose, that which I have showed, in the Primitive Government
of Churches, p. 53-57. to be probable, and have still much reason to believe,
that the Christians at Rome lived at first divided into two Bodies, one of
Jews under S. Peter, the other of Gentiles under S. Paul. For the Jews, as,
in the Land of Promise, they were bound by the Law to protect strangers, (such
as, renouncing Idols, should profess to serve the true God) but not to suffer
Idolaters to live in it; So, in their dispersions, they must needs find
themselves bound, proportionably, to cherish those that should make the like
profession, whom they called the Godly of the Nations. But the Empire, and the
Ministers thereof, whether they intended to comprise them in the right and
privilege of Jews, because joined to their Religion, or of Gentiles, because
uncircumcised, the text of that Scripture decides not. I confess, considering
the words of Suetonius Claud. XXV. Judaeos, impulsore Chresto assidue
tumultuantes, Roma expulit; The Jews, raising continual tumults at the moving
of Chrestus; he drove out of Rome; I cannot give a better reason for the
tumults, which, he says, occasioned the Edict, than the difference between
them and the Christians, part of whom were Jews, others adheered to them as
Gentiles converted to the true God. Whether his meaning be, to lay the fault
upon the Christians, (supposing that it is our Lord Christ whom he calls
Chrestus, no difference in found being discernable) Or, whether he meant to
say, that one Chrestus, a Jew in Rome was author of those tumults (as some
would have it) no reason can be given for those tumults so probable. But
whether so or not, to our purpose it will be of no consequence. For, as well
Gentilish as Jewish Christians being forced from Rome, and seeking shelter
among Christians elsewhere, would easily accomodate themselves with the Jews of
other parts, upon the same terms as Christians did otherwise, and yet continue
to preserve themselves Christians, and thereby members of the Church, upon such
terms as all Christians understood. It should seem, by the Epistle to the
Ephesians I. 11, 12, 13. II. 2, 3. 11-20. III. 1-6. that the first foundation
of that Church was merely of Gentiles, the Jews that may have been converted
being so few, that S. Paul held them not considerable to be taken notice of in
his Epistle. A thing that agrees punctually with that which S. Luke relates,
Acts XIX. 8, 9, 10. that S. Paul, perceiving he could not prevail with the
Jews by his discourses in the Synagogue, departed, and separated the
Disciples, that is the Christians, from them, disputing daily in the School of
one Tyrannus. And this for two years, till the Gospel was known to all Asia,
Jews and Gentiles. (This Tyrannus nevertheless, holding a School, seems to
have been a Doctor of the Jews Law, so that all Jews refused not the Faith.)
These, I suppose, no man will argue that they used Excommunication as the Jews
did, because they had departed from the Jews: And yet, it is agreeable to the
case under Gallio, to conceive, that they were looked upon by the Romans, as a
sort of men that had broke from the Jews, whose Religion they had professed
before, and indifferently protected by them, as not concerned in the difference,
while no Law was made against Christianity. The coming indeed of S. John into
Asia seems to have inned a very great harvest of Jews into the Church, by that
compliance which his successors at Ephesus, and in the rest of Asia, held with
the Jews, for the winning of them to Christianity. But this was afterward. In
fine, before the separation of Christians from the Jews, the Church seems to
have been, as it were, a child unborn in the mothers womb, which, though it
draw the means of subsistence from the mother, yet is it complete in all the
same faculties of life which it shall exercise afterward: So, whatsoever it
was fit for the Church to do while it held communion with the Synagogue, it was
able then, by the Power of conducting as well as founding it in the Apostles,
to do whatsoever it did afterward, only the Body was strangely changed which
it was to govern.

CHAP. XVIII. The difference between S. Paul's anathema and that of the Jews.
It is not necessary that the Christians anathema should signify cursing. That
the incestuous person at Corinth was Excommunicated by S. Paul. Jurisdiction of
the Church. Telling the Church, binding and loosing, holding him that is bound
for a Heathen or a Publicane, signisie the same. The coherence of our Lords
discourse. Of Excommunication and Indulgence by private persons in the Ancient
Church. That Excommunication and the Power of the Church could not come in
force by the voluntary consent of the first Christians. How it may be said to
be voluntary. Of the confederacy of the primitive Christians.
ANd here, I cannot choose but mervail, that the Anathema which S. Paul's
Epistles mention sometimes, should be made an argument, that the
Excommunication which he means by it is the same which the Jews used, because
theirs was called by the same name. For the answer is the same that I said
before, of the name of the Church, but, there is more particular evidence for
the reason here, in the words of the Apostle. I do, for my part, believe them
that conceive, the name by which the Jews call anathema, that is (...), to
signify the same that S. Paul means by maranatha. For the Jews use to call
God (...), that is, the Name. And this, I conceive, they compound with the Verb
(...), signifying to come, and to make of both the Verb (...), signifying
maledixit or execravit, he cursed by the coming of God. Though they use it to
signify the least degree of Excommunication, whereas, to curse a man by the
coming of God, seems to leave him to God to take vengeance of, as incurable and
desperate; For every man knows how much difference there is between the
original and use of words. Now it is evident by the writings of the Prophets
every where, that they use to describe the appearance of God to punish sin, in
the style of Gods coming. And in that style the passage which S. Jude refers
to, proceeds, Jude 14, 15. Behold the Lord comes with his holy myriads, to
execute vengeance on all, and to reprove all their wickedness, for all the
wicked works that they have done, and for all the hard words which they have
stoken against him as wicked sinners. For these are the words, which Enoch, the
seventh from Adam, is brought in speaking in that place, to the old world whom
he preached to, to recall them from that wickedness, which, in the end, was
punished by the deluge. Now, when S. Paul says, 1 Cor. XVI. 22. If any man
love not the Lord Jesus, let him be anathema, maranatha. It is plain, that
Maranatha signifies our Lord comes; And so referrs to the second coming of our
Lord Christ, which the Gospel preaches. For this learned person, in the first
book de Synedriis, p. 214. acknowledges, that it is not in use among the Jews.
And the correspondence between the Law and the Gospel requires, that those
things which are prophesied in the Old Testament concerning the coming of God,
be understood to be completed in the second coming of Christ: According to that
of S. Paul, Romans XIV. 10, 11. We shall all be presented before the Judgment
seat of Christ, as it is written; As I live, says the Lord; To me shall every
knee bow, and every tongue shall give glory to God. Where, that which the
Prophet had said of the appearance of God in former judgments concerning his
people, Esa. XLV. 23. that, the Apostle affirms to be fulfilled in the coming
of our Lord Christ to judgment. Therefore, when S. Paul says, Let him be
anathema maranatha, he means, let him expect vengeance at the second coming of
Christ: At which, S. Jude says, that the Prophecy of Enoch against the old
world shall be accomplished upon those that he writes against; For how can he
say otherwise; Enoch prophesied against these? And can it be thought, that a
Jewish Excommunication can proceed upon supposition of the coming of our Lord
Christ to judgment? That were as much a jest, as that of the History of Don
Quixote, where he says; That the original Historian in the Arabic, being a
Mahumetane, protests the truth of it, upon the faith of a good Christian. So,
when S. Paul says again, Romans IX. 3. I my self could wish to be anathema from
Christ, for my brethren, my kindred according to the flesh. I will not dispute
that ingenious interpretation of Grotius, which this Learned person, with
others, allows; That he wishes, in stead of an Apostle, and Chief in the
Church, to be counted a man unfit for any Christian to converse with: For it
punctually agrees with S. Paul's style, 1 Cor. XII. 12. For, as the body is one,
and has many members, and all the members of the body, being many, are one
body, so is Christ; That is to say, the Church. And so Gal. III. 27. We are
baptized into Christ, because into the Church. But, admitting this
interpretation, how can it be imagined to signify a Jewish Excommunication,
that cuts of a Christian from the Church? He that is put out of the Synagogue,
in as much as he is put out of it, is made Anathema to Moses, not to Christ.
That is, he is cut off from the privileges of a Jew, from the hope of
returning into the Land of Promise, and freedom in it from the yoke of foreign
Nations; Not from the hope of life everlasting, which they indeed promise
themselves by the Law of Moses, but Christians know they cannot have, unless
they renounce the holding of it from the Law of Moses. And therefore S. Paul,
when he bids Anathema to whosoever shall preach another Gospel than that which
he had preached, Gal. I. 8, 9. must needs mean the same as a Christian, which
he signifies to be meant by him that calls Jesus anathema, 1 Cor. XII. 3.
He that calls Jesus anathema, defieth him as rejected by God. Anathema
indeed signifies that which is consecrated to God: But it answers the Hebrew
word (...), as in Levit. XXVIII. because consecration was a profession of
abandoning for ever that which was consecrated, implying a curse upon all that
should lay hands on it to any other use. And when the Jews said to their
Fathers or Mothers; Be it Korban, whatsoever thou may be the better for of
mine; They cursed themselves, if ever their Father or Mother were the better
for any goods of theirs, as much, as if they should give them things
consecrated to eat or to drink: Supposing that if they did so, no man was to
touch or come near them more than consecrated things. So, when God made Jericho
anathema or (...), whatsoever was not for the use of Gods service was to be
destroyed; whatsoever might be for his service, he that laid hands on it to
any other use, became himself of the condition of that which was not for Gods
service. And such the Apostle professes to hold him, whosoever should preach
any other Gospel besides that which he had preached.

For, I must not allow, that the Church, when it excommunicateth, or the
Apostle, when he bids anathema, intends to curse, that is to say, to pray
to God, actually to bring those curses upon them which they are liable to;
Though I confess this is not the place to dispute such a question, because the
resolution of it will suppose something, which can neither be proved, nor
supposed without proof in this place, where my purpose is to settle the
Principles of Christian Truth, by which Principles this is to be resolved. It
shall be enough to say here, that it is evident, that the Greek Church,
following an order or sentence of S. John Chrysostomes, does, for the most
part, insist, that Christians are not to curse Christians; Whatsoever be the
practice of the Church of Rome, in the Bull of Maundy Thursday at this time.
And yet the very present practice of that Church does not seem necessarily to
import praying for Gods vengeance upon Heretics, and others who are then
cursed; Because it is their custom to pray for their conversion the very next
day, that is, on Good Friday. Therefore it may very well seem, that all their
Solemnities of cursing do not amount to signify, that the Church prays for
mischief upon them whom they declare to be accursed, but by these solemnities
express how they would have them esteemed by Christians. Though, by that
corruption of Christian charity which time has brought to pass, it be now
generally understood no otherwise, than as a Prayer for Gods vengeance; And
there may be great reason to think, that the ancient Fathers and Councils did
not pronounce anathema against Heretics in any other sense, or to any other
purpose. Nay the words of Vincentius Lirinensis, which I quoted before, make it
most evident, that the ancient Christians understood nothing else by Anathema,
when he expounds S. Paul Gal. I. 8, 9. Anathema sit, inquit; Id est,
separatus, segregatus, exclusus, ne unius ovis dirum contagium innoxium gregem
Christi venenata permistione contaminet. Let him be anathema, says he; That
is, let him be severed, set aside, shut out, least the direful contagion of
one sheep, with any mixture of venene, stain the innocent flock of Christ.
Which is enough to show, that therefore it ought not to have been put into the
definition of that Excommunication which is pretended to be made by the Power
of the Church, that it contains a curse or curses against them on whom it is
inflicted, as you shall find the first book de Synedriis does, in the place
quoted before. Because, those that agree in challenging that right for the
Church, do not appear to agree in that point. And this will serve for an
argument of difference between the Excommunications of Jews and of Christians.
For, the first without question were curses, of the second, it is at least
questionable, whether it stand with Christianity to take them for curses or
not. I do believe that which is said in the first book de Synedriis, page 209.
that the Jews did not so cut a man off by Excommunication, as to cast him
quite out of their Body; But so, as to deprive him of free conversation with
his native people; To wit, according to the terms limited there before, the
less, that no man should come within his four cubits; The greater, that he
should dwell in a cotage alone, and have bread and water brought him, and see
no man otherwise. Neither do I find any third kind by the Jews
Constitutions, which others would have. But it were a wrong to common sense to
extend this to Apostares. Justin Martyr Dial. cum Tryphone, and after him
Epiphanius haer. XXX. and Jerome in Esa. tells us, that the Jews, shortly
after our Saviors time, sent an Order through all Synagogues over the world, to
curse the Christians thrice a day, at public Prayers in their Synagogues. And
at that time practiced all means possible to stir up the Empire to persecute
them to the death. Neither was it strange they should proceed so far, against
those whom they took for Apostates, because the punishments which their own
body could inflict would not serve their turn. But this is evidently another
thing than that which the great Excommunication by their Rules imports. In
the mean time, here you have cursing to the purpose, in this utmost exigent;
But so, that ordinary Excommunication amongst them imported a proportionable
measure of the same. That the Apostles should intend to curse, nothing can seem
so pregnant as the words of S. Peter to Simon Magus, Acts VIII. 20. Thy money
perish with thee. But he that, in the next words, advises with so much
charity; Repent thee of this thy wickedness, and pray to God, if perhaps this
design of thy heart may be forgiven thee; I suppose was far enough from
wishing, that he might perish, whom he seeks to reclaim. Neither is there any
reason why he should wish his money to perish, which the first sound of his
words bears. And therefore it will be requisite to take it for an expression,
signifying, that he held, and would have the Church hold him as certainly in
the way and state of perdition, as the money that he loved was perishable.
Much more, when S. Paul wishes himself anathema, or him that should preach a
new Gospel, or loved not the Lord Jesus, it is not his intent to pray for the
evil which anathema signifies upon them, but to induce the Church to take them
for such men, as the Church believes to be liable to the utmost of Gods curses.

As for the business between S. Paul and the Corinthians, thereare in it so
evident marks of Penance enjoined by that Church upon the Apostles Order, as no
wit, no learning can serve to deface. S. Paul advises them to restore the
Offender in these terms, 2 Cor. II. 5. ^* 11. If any body has grieved me, he
has not grieved me but in part, that I may not charge you all. Sufficient for
such a one is this censure inflicted by many. So that ye are rather to
gratify and comfort him, least such a one should be swallowed up with too much
sorrow. Wherefore I pray you settle love toward him. For, I writ also for this
end, to know the trial of you, whether you be obedient in all things. But if
you grant any thing, I also grant it. For, if I have granted any thing for your
sake, in respect of Christ I have granted it, that Satan get nothing by us; For
we are not ignorant of his devices. What is the censure inflicted by many, but
the Penance, which the Church, upon S. Paul's order having enjoined, now desires
the Apostle to rest content with; which hereby he accords? What is it that he
grants, because they grant it, but in respect of Christ, willing them also to
gratify and comfort him whom they had censured; But, (upon undergoing this
censure) the re-admitting of him to the Communion of the Church? Since Luther
first disputed against Indulgences, this Text has been in every man's mouth.
Was there ever any reason to deny, that there is in the Church a Power of
abating Penance once enjoined, upon trial of him that undergoes it? Or, that
the example of S. Paul in this place is good evidence for it? Had there been
any controversy about it, if the Church of Rome had demanded no more under
this title? Though, to speak my own mind, perhaps men mistake this Indulgence,
because they take not S. Paul's proceeding to be so rigid, as the strictness of
discipline under the Apostles requires. They take it commonly, as I said, that
S. Paul, hereby, releases him of the Penance that had been enjoined; whereas,
it may be, he only admits him to Penance at their request, and so, to the
Prayers of the Church. Being formerly so excluded from the Church, as not to be
assured of his reconcilement with God by the warrant of the Church, though not
excluded from the hope of it by the mercy of God. Tertullian indeed has an
opinion, that it is not the same man whom the Apostle commanded them to deliver
to Satan before, 1 Cor. V. 5. Because, as I said before, according to the
strictness of the Montani^^s, he will not believe, that the Apostle would
admit such a sinner upon any Penance. But this opinion is excluded by the
express words of the Scripture; For I writ also for this cause, to know the
trial of you; which show that this is the case which he writ of in his former
Epistle. It remains therefore, that, upon S. Paul's first Epistle he was
delivered to Satan, but, upon their submission, and request that he would be
content with the censure which they propose, he admits him to the comfort of
their Prayers. According to this supposition, the Indulgence which S. Paul
admits, is not the releasing of Penance enjoined, as afterward it signified in
the Church; but the injoyning of Penance, inferring a grant of the Prayers of
the Church, toward the means of reconcilement. But, whatsoever become of this,
Indulgence presupposes the censure which it mitigateth, and therefore, the
Communion of the Church, either abated or quite taken from him, whom it
restores to it. And, what is the matter that S. Paul grants that which he
grants for their sakes, but in respect to Christ, that Satan, (says he) whose
devices we are acquainted with, get nothing by us? Two reasons are rendered for
this: The one, in respect of the party excluded, not to drive him to despair of
salvation by Christianity, and consequently to Apostasy, or what else that
despair might produce: The other, (which I remember S. Austine in some place
advances, as the reason, whereupon the Church, in after ages, was driven to
abate of that strictness that was in force under the Apostles) least those
that favored the party excluded, if he should be refused upon the submission
tendered, should make a faction and separate from the Church. Take whether you
will of these reasons that have been said, or produce a better that has not
been rendered yet, you shall never make that good which S. Paul says, 2 Cor.
VII. 11. Plainly, ye have approved your selves clear in the business; But in
this sense: That, whereas before there was a party that bare out this
incestuous person in his attempt, upon the coming of the first Epistle, the
better part prevailed to do that, which S. Paul says they should have done
before, 1 Cor. V. 2. Ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he
which did this deed might be taken from among you. For, since it is evident by
diverse passages of the primitive Church, that Excommunication was solemnized in
a fashion of mourning, as for a member whom the Church had lost, what reason
can be given, why S. Paul, when he speaks of mourning in this case, should
mean any thing else? At least, for Epiphanius his sake, accept of his reasons
before any man's opinion without it. He, when S. Paul says, 1 Cor. XII. 21. I
fear God will humble me in respect of you when I come, and, that I shall mourn
for many, that have sinned before, and not repented, (by that time I come) of
the uncleanness, whoredom, and wantonness which they have done; renders the
reason of this mourning of S. Paul, to be for those whom he should be
constrained to put out of the Church; Either then utterly lost, or for their
reconcilement with God, being admitted to Penance. Though Epiphanius
distinguishes not between mourning for the reconcilement of sinners, and
mourning for the loss of them, when they were shut out of the Church.

Now when S. Paul writes to them, 1 Cor. V. 11. not to converse, not so much as
to eat with him that is called a brother, and is a whoremaster, a slanderer, a
cheater, an Idolater, a drunkard, an oppressor or the like; He that will, may
pretend to take this for no more but good counsel: But he shall not consider
what follows; For what have I to do to judge those that are without? Do not ye
judge those that are within? And ye shall heave out from among you him that
has done evil. Which good counsel will not serve to do: but Censure or
Judgment, call it what you please; Not as of a Court, pretending force to
execute the sentence by virtue of the Laws of the Empire: But as every Society
or Corporation, so far as it is so, has a Jurisdiction answerable to the end
and pretense for which and upon which it stands, whereby the Laws must be
enforced, without which no such Body can continue. I grant, that Jurisdiction
absolutely named, and without any addition, is that of a Civil State, which, by
force of lawful arms is able to execute the sentence which the ministers
thereof give. But every State maintains the Corporation which the Charter
thereof constituteth. And, all Christian States are to maintain the Corporation
of the Church, if constituted by God. And in this regard, both the Rules by
which the community of the Church stands, are truly called Laws, and, the
Jurisdiction of the Church is the exercise of that Power which executes the
same. So Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is really Jurisdiction, though
Jurisdiction according to the Roman Laws is resolved into the Power of the
Sword, whereupon it depends. When S. Paul writes to Titus III. 10. to avoid a
man that is an Heretic, after the first and second warning; When S. John
writes, 2 John 10, 11. He that comes to you, and brings not this doctrine,
(of God the Father, and the Son come in the flesh) receive him not home, nor
bid him God speed; For he that bids him God speed is accessory to his evil
works; When S. John, according to this Precept, refused to come into the Bath
with Cerinthus, his Scholar Polycarpus to own Marcion otherwise, than as the
firstborn of the Devil; it is more than good counsel which tied them to
forbear even Civil conversation with those, whom, thereby they demonstrated,
how far they would be from communicating with, in the Offices of Christianity.
Neither is the objection of that weight as is pretended, that Judas
communicated in the Eucharist, at the last Supper of our Lord. For it is
notorious to all that understand but a little in Christianity, that it is not
sin, but the notoriousnesse of sin that renders a man liable to be
Excommunicate: Even as it is not Christianity, but the profession of it that
qualifies a man to be of the Church. The reason of it being this, that others
may not think, that such as notoriously act contrary to that profession, can be
capable of the promises to which it intitleth. Which opinion cannot be grounded
upon sins that are not publicly seen. For, even when they are seen, there is
yet a difference between legal conviction, and that which is only sensible and
reasonable. Neither is any man legally convicted, till he or they who are to
act in behalf of the Body, whatsoever it is, declare them convicted. For though
it were to be wished, that all notorious sin could be legally convicted; Yet,
because the execution of Laws without discretion manifestly tends to the ruin
of all Societies; It is also to be excepted, that, neither is the toleration of
notorious sins in the Church a just argument, that there is no such thing as
Law or Jurisdiction or a Community of the Church, that may put away such sin.
To that case then I say, that, neither the knowledge of our Lord, nor of his
Disciples, concerning Judas his wickedness, rendered him incapable of the
Eucharist, even according to the ordinary Rule of the Church. A legal
conviction was requisite over and above, which might either demonstrate him
incapable of the quality of a Disciple, that is, of a Christian, or be a means
to reconcile him to that quality, and so to the society of Christ's Disciples.
And this conviction, absolutely depending upon the will of our Lord to publish
the sentence, cannot be thought to be had, so long as he declared nothing in
it. If any man here object the inconveniences, which the peremptory prohibition
of conversing with the Excommunicate must needs cause, in that state of things,
which the incorporating of the Church into Christian Commonwealths necessarily
produces; let me desire him to have patience for an answer to this, which I
shall have a care to give, before I leave this point, but cannot before I have
premised something more. As for that which may be objected, that S. Paul, by
saying; Do not ye judge those that are without; makes the Body of every
Church, that is, the people thereof, or the commonalty, judge; It shall be
sufficient to remember that which I said before, that the intent at present
being only to prove a Corporation of the Church by divine right, it is
sufficient in this place, only to show, that there is a right in the Body of
the Church, by Gods appointment, to do such things, as the Nature of a Society
founded upon a Charter of Gods, infers: For, whatsoever persons shall be by
the same appointment enabled to act for the Church, and to conclude it, (as in
no form of Government the whole is able to act by it self) whatsoever is done
by those persons is reasonably and legally said to be done by the Church,
though I referr it to another dispute to determine, what persons they are, and
in what cases. These reasons therefore do satisfy me, that, the delivering to
Satan which S. Paul condemns the incestuous person to, implies indeed something
extraordinary, which the sentence of Excommunication in these days produces
not: And it is this; That, during the time of the Apostles, to manifest the
presence of God in his Church, those that were shut out of it became subject to
the visible incursion of evil spirits, plaguing them with bodily diseases;
Which S. Paul calls the destruction of the flesh; Intimating, that Gods end
in them was, to reduce him to the sense of that Christianity which he had
professed, that, by inwardly returning to it, the spirit might be saved in the
day of Christ, whether or no, by outwardly professing it, he might be
reconciled to the Church, for salvation by the means of it.

As for the words of our Lord, Dic Ecclesiae; I will not insist upon the
improbabilities of Erastus his interpretation, that, Let him be unto thee as a
Heathen or a Publicane, is no more but this; Be it lawful for thee to sue him
in the Romans Court. For this I say; It is plain by S. Paul 1 Cor. VI. 1. that
our Lords Disciples, that is Christians, might in no case implead one another
before the Gentiles, whatsoever Erastus imagine: Which, it is plain, the Jews
also did their utmost to avoid. Nor is the other more probable, that makes it
no more, than, that upon his neglect of the Synagogue, he was free to return
scorn, and to avoid him who had scorned the Synagogue. For, would our Lord
bind his Disciples to resort to the Synagogue, and yet obtain nothing but
leave to scorn him that scorned them first, and afterward the Synagogue?
Besides the inconvenience common to both these interptetations; that, such a
precept to his Disciples, that is, to all Christians, should concern them no
longer, nor in any other consideration, than that, for which, at the first,
Christians were bound to comply with the Synagogue; which compliance, not only
what it was, but, even what it signified, they then understood no more, than
he that understands nothing. But I leave all other advantage, to prosecute the
principle premised: That the Disciples of our Lord acknowledged a new King of
Israel, (which, the title of Gods anointed, the Messiah signified) a new
Covenant by which he was their King, a new Israel according to the Spirit, not
according to the flesh, and, by consequence, new Laws, which a New
Commonwealth must needs infer. And therefore, call it what you will;
Synagogue, (which as yet they understood not to be void) or Church, (which they
understood must be, but that it should be distinct from the Synagogue
understood not) being commanded to tell the Assembly, they must understand it
to be an Assembly of themselves, Christ's Disciples, which all Jews might be,
for any thing they yet understood. And, when our Lord says; Let him be unto
thee as an Heathen man or as a Publicane; though they understood that Heathen
men and Publicanes resorted to the Temple, as also those that were
Excommunicate by the Synagogue did, (because the Law stood not upon any promise
of the world to come, but upon the privilege and sitl of a Jew, to all rights
that Jews were endowed with) yet they underflood also, that our Lord spoke in
Parables, containing sharp speeches, figures and riddles. When he faith; He
that smites thee on the right cheek, turn him the left; they underflood, that
himself no way balked his own command, when, being smitten by the Jews
Ministers, he an-swered not by turning the other cheek: But, that his meaning
was, to have his Disciples as ready to do them good that so should assront
them, as if they should pleasure his anger, by turning him another cheek to
strike. And when he faith; He that constrains thee to go a mile with him,
go thou twain; His meaning is not, that they should leave their business to be
counted fools for it: But, to be ready to do him as great a pleasure. So, he
that fees the Jews so to avoid the society of the Gentiles, (and by consequence
of publi^anes, who has necessary and continual frequentation with Gentiles)
that, when they came from the Piazza, they washed their hands before they went
to meat, (as polluted by coming near them) he that fees S. Peter obliged to
give account to his brethren the Jewish Christians, why he did eat with
Cornelius and his Company, though worthippers of the true God, and such as had
embraced the Faith; that fees God instruct him so to do, by the vision of
earing unclean beasts, as if he could no more do the one than the other by the
Law; He, I fay, that considers these things will say, that our Lord, when he
says, Let him be to thee as an Heathen man or a Publicane, has very sharply
expressed the fame that S. Paul means, when he says; with such a one no not
to eat. And therefore I conclude his meaning to be that which I have concluded
heretofore, that his Disciples should carry none of their suits, though
concerning matter of Interest, out of the Church, but stand to what it shall
determine. For, how should S. Paul demand; Dare any of you, having a cause with
another, go to suit before the unrighteous and not before the Saints? I Cor.
VI. I. If it had not been a Law known to Christians, that their suits were to
be determined within themselves? Referring my self for further evidence, that
this was then in force, to what has been showed in another place, and having
not been contradicted, must needs be in force. And if any man shall object,
that this would be the ruin of all States so soon as they prosesse
Christianity, if the Jurisdiction of them should be swallowed up in the
Jurisdiction of the Church, all causes being, in that case, causes of
Christians; For an answer, referring him, not only to that which I have said
already there, but, to that which I purpose to say further before I have done
with this point And upon these terms I grant Erastus, that, when out Lord
says; Let him be unto thee as a Heathen and a Publicane; He says in effect,
be it lawful for thee to sue him in the Court of the Gentiles: Not as if our
Lord did allow that which S. Paul forbids; That a Christian should sue a
Christian before Gentiles: But because, being to be held as a Heathen or a
Publicane, as being Excommunicate, (that is to say, suppposing that to be true,
which Erastus would have to be salse) by consequence, and in effect it would
become lawful to sue him before Gentiles, as being no longer a Christian.

Now, when it follows; What forever ye bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven, and whatsoever ye loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; If we
take binding and loosing in a general sense, to signify that Power of giving
Law, so that hereeby the Church is enabled to give Law to the Church (setting
aside for the present, who of the Church is to give Law, who to receive it)
then I say, that, by virtue hereof, the Power of Excommunicating is given to
the Church: Because it is nothing else but such a Right established by a Law of
God; And, if God give his Church a Power to make Laws, then he gives it Power
to make a Law that shall give force to all the rest, by inacting that penalty
that shall be requisite to restrain disobedience. But, if we take the terms of
binding and loosing as they are used among the Jews, (and, by consequence, when
that which is unlawful is done, for declaring what is lawful or unlawful to
be done to be discharged of it) I say that, admitting the difference between
the Law and the Gospel which I have established, the Power of Excommunicating
will follow in the Church. For, supposing the Law not to tender remission of
sin in order to life everlafting, but to the remporal privileges of a Jew; to
be bound and to be loose will signify no more, than, to be in or out of
possession of those privileges, incapable or capable of the fame, by doing or
not doing what the Law requires to be done for that purpose. In the mean time,
this Power will argue a Commonwealth of Israel, founded by God, by virtue of
which foundation, the Power of those who are enabled by the Law to make this
declaration takes effect to all purposes contained in the Law. But. supposing
the Gospel to tender remission of sins in order to life everlasting, upon such
terms as the Covenant of Grace imports; To be bound and to be loose will
signify freedom from sin, or the captivity and fervitude of it. And therefore
the Power of declaring this estare, and, what is to be done for the attaining
of it, will necessarily inserre a Society of the Church, founded upon the Power
of making that declaration, whereupon, any man may be accepted for such;
Neither can it be imagined, that any part, any degree of the fame can be in any
man, but so far, and to effect, as the Community of the Church shall have
allowed. It is not now unknown, that diverse of those that dispute Controversies
for the Church of Rome, do challenge the Power of making Law, for the Church,
by virtue of this Power of binding and loosing given by our Lord to his
Apostles. And this opinion takes place by the former interpretation of these
words, which being admitted, that consequence cannot be refused. But, taking
the Power of binding and loosing to be by virtue of the Keys of Gods House,
which are the Keys of David, or the House of David, the figure of the Church,
(which is that signification which the language of the Scripture required, when
our Lord. having promised his Church, adds, Mat. XVI. 19. Unto thee will I give
the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest on earth, shall
be bound in heaven, what soever thou loosest on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven.) The Power of binding and loosing in the Church will be correspondent
to that, which the Doctors of the Synagogue had, of declaring this or that
lawful or unlawful according to Moses Laws, and a man tied to do this or that
for maintaining his privilege by it. And having said this, I conceive I have
done more, than he that distinguished these two meanings in our Lords words
thought fit to do. He, distinguishing thus in the first book de Synedriis,
page 291 -- has thought it enough to argue, that neither the one nor the other
will serve to ground the Power of Excommunicating in the Church; Wherein, what
he has proved, I refer my self to that which has been said. But in what
sense the words of our Lord are to be understood, according to his own opinion,
he has not declared, how requisite foever it had been to do, as I, according
to my opinion, endeavor to do. As for that little Objection, that, in Our Lords
words, it is not persons but things, that are said to be bound and loose; It is
to be underflood, that things are neither bound nor loose of themselves; But
that, by the way of common understanding of men, and speech, it is attributed
to them from the obligations that Iye upon men or persons, by virtue of which
obligations, or freedom from them, such things as they import are said to be
bound or loose, as lawful or unlawful for them to use, who, using them, are
either bound or free to such rights, as the using or not using of them inferrs.
Though by consequence of this Power, the Power of binding by Law, or loosing,
(that is, of leaving free without tying by Law) will naturally follow. For as
in Civil Government, whatfoever person or persons are, absolutely and without
limitaiton, endowed with the Sovereign Power, must necessaraily be endowed with
the Power of giving Law, whereby they do but limit themselves what Law they
will govern by, which is, before those Laws be declared, their will and
pleasure; So, if we suppose in the Church, a Power of admitting into, and
casting out of the Society of the Church, we must needs suppose a Power of
giving Law to this Society, because no Society at all can have Communion with
it self, but according to some Rules of exercising the said Communion; which,
for the present, are called Laws. Now, our Lord Christ. having given his
Disciples the Power of binding and Loosing, by opening or shutting. the doors
of his Church, that is, by admitting into, or excluding out of it; has thereby
given them the Power of framing his Catholic Church. Not that they are so
properly said to bind those whom they shut out of the Church. For, when
Christianity declares mankind to be under sin, (not to be freed of it, but by
submitting to Chrissianity) the bond is contracted by him that finneth, the
shutting of the Church door upon him is but refusing him the cure, whereof he
tenders himself incapable. But, those whom they admit into the Church, they are
properly said to loose, because, though they cannot be loosed without their own
act, yet that act is not to be done, without submitting to that authority which
is entrusted to require it. And this authority, with those who acknowledge it
by being admitted into the Church, is that which consstuteth the Society and
Corporation of the Church. For, admitting into the Church, and allowing to
continue in the Church, are both one and the fame act, because they proceed
both upon the fame, of Christianity, and preserving Unity in the Church.
Therefore. at present, I speak of both under one. And, if it be demanded
whether the Power of binding and loosing do signify generally binding by Law,
and not hindering; Or particularly, binding by shutting out of the Church for
sin, and loosing, by admitting into the Church, or retaining in the Church as
free from sin; I answer, that expressly and formally, the Power of binding and
loosing signifies the later; But the former, by consequence. For, in the
Commonwealth also, the Power of giving Law is the same in generals, with the
Power of Jurisdiction in particulars; All parts of Sovereignty flowing
naturally from that act, whereby it becomes settled upon some person or
persons; Whose will is necessarily the Law whereby it is to be governed, in as
much as it is not limited by the original establishment thereof, and acts done
legally by vietue of the fame. And so, the Disciples of our Lord being
prevented by nothing but our common Christianity, (which, our Lord Christ
having established, left them the framing of his Church) what they, or, those
who claim under them shall do to obligue the Church, obliges by virtue of this
Power, of admitting into, or excluding out of the Church. And it is truly said,
that the Power of giving Law to the Church as the Church, by virtue the Power
of the Keys belongs to the Church; Provided that the effect of it belimited to
those things, which, after the preaching of our Lord, remained for his Apostles
and Disciples, as well as their Assistants and Succcessors to determine, for
the framing of Gods Catholic Church.

Before I leave this point, I shall desire that the consequence of our Lords
discourse may be considered. For unless the command of resorting to the Church
be understood, as sending to bind or loose him to the Church, that is supposed
to be bound to sin or loose from it, that which is inferred; Whatfoever ye
bind on earth -- will be utterly impertinent to that which went before, Tell
the Church -- But if we suppose the speech to concern Excommunication, and
Penance, by consequence, we give a good reason why it follows; Again, I say
unto you, that, if two of you agree upon earth, about any thing to be demanded,
it shall besall them from my Father in the heavens. For, supposing, (as known
by the general and original practice of the Church, whereof mention has been
made in the premises) that the means of loosing from sin was the Prayers of the
Church, we conclude, that our Lord, in the next place, could not infer any
thing more proper and pertinent to that which he had premised, than this; To
wit, how the Penitent is to be reslored to the favor of God, and, upon
presumption thereof, to the unity od the Church: To wit, by the Prayers of the
Church. For, when he says, the Prayers of two Chrussians will be available
with God, he must needs signify, that the Prayers of the Church will be much
more available. I know, there are some Expositors, Origin, S. Austine, and
Theophylact of old, and Grotius of late, who, when our Lord, having said, Let
him be to thee as a Heathen or a Publicane; infers, whatsoever ye bind on
earth -- do understand, that, hereby, particular Christians do bind and loose
particular Christians, when they show them the sin they do, and they that do it
will or will not make reparations. And truly, in as much as the knowledge of
sin is a condition requisite to make the bond thereof take firm hold upon the
conscience, whosever procures this knowleg is truly said to bind, as he that
shows the means of being loose is truly said to loose him that uses those
means. But, if this were here meant, there were no reason why our Lord should
send him to the Church, whom he declares to be thus bound, which this opinion
supposes; Never dreaming of the Synagogue, when our Lord faith, Tell the
Church. For, to say, that a private Christian binds or loses him whom the
Church has first declared to be in the wrong, and not otherwife, is as much as
to say, that a private Christian neither binds not looses, but the Church; Not
because he cannot bind and loose before God. in that sense which I spoke of
before, but because he cannot bind or loose any man as to the Church, whom the
Church had bound before, by declaring his sin. For this opinion supposes, that,
when our Lord faith; Whatsoever ye bind on earth -- he speaks of the sins
of those that had refused to hear the Church before. Which being supposed, it
will remain manifest, that when our Lord faith; Let him to be thee as a Heathen
or a Publicane; immediately adding, whatsoever ye bind on earth. -- he does
not only teach what the wronged party, but what every Christian is to do; to
wit, what the acts of the Church oblige him to do as a Christian and one of the
Church, not as one that is wronged, though the discourse, rising upon this
cafe, if thy brother wrong thee -- end in the mention of him alone, let him be
to thee as an Heathen and a Publicane; because of the reason which follows,
grounded in the Power of binding and loosing, which all Christians are to
acknowledge.

These things being proved, I will here repeat, and insist upon that
observation which heretofore I have advanced in another place, that our Lord,
(whom, from the premises, I suppose to treat here of Excommunication) forbids
that course to be held in the Church, which then was used in the Synagogue,
namely, that private persons should Excommunicate one another; The effect of
such Excommunications reaching no further than themselves, or their inferiors,
and not obliging any stranger to take such a person for Excommunicate. Which
observation I oppose to an argument made, from that which was used in the
Primitive Church, for Martyrs, and Consessors in bonds for the Gospel, to
restore to the Communion of the Church, those that were under Penance. Tertul.
de Pudic. XXII. Ad martyras I. Cypr. Epist. X. XI. XII. XIII. XIV. XV. XVII.
XXVII. XXVIII. XXIX. XXXVIII. and John the Monk of the deserts of Egypt having
Excommunicated the younger Theodosius, he was not satisfied with the Bishops
absolution until the Monk had done the fame. Hence it is argued, that
Excommunication in the Church was the same that had been practiced in the
Synagogue, because private Christians used that Power, as private Jews had
done. The ansswer is easy to him, that will observe the reason of such
Excommunication and obsoulution in the Church. There were in the Church, from
the beginning, besides those who had the chief authority of governing it,
diverse ranks of persons of special esteem: The rank of Widows, honored with
public maintenance from the Church, as we understand by S. paul orders I Tim.
V. 3-16. The rank of Virgins, the Prerogative whereof we may understand by
Tertullians book de Virginibus velandis, Wherein he disputes, whether they
were privileged against S. Paul's order, I Cor. XI.5-15. of vailing their faces
in the Church. of the rank of Marryrs and Consessors, (that is, those, who had
abondones themselves to whatsoever the prosession of Chrissianity should
infer, howsoever they escaped) I need say nothing; The esteem of them being
known to have been such, that it is no mervail, if their desire, or their
sentence were counted a Prejudice or Prerogative to the Church. As thus: At the
elections of the Roman Magistrates, the Century of the Tribe, that voted
first, was counted to have a Prerogative, the Vore thereof being a kind of
Prejudice to them that followed, to vote the same. So that it was found, that
whose carried this Prerogative, commonly carried the whole Vote. Such was the
effect of that absolution which Consessors in their durance did sometimes grant
Penitents in the Primitive Church; To wit, a confidence, grounded upon the
esteem of their merit toward Christianity, that their act would not be made
void by the Body of the Church. Whereupon S. Cypr. Epist. XII. Qui libellos a
Martyribus acceperunt, and eorum Praerogativa apud Deum adjuvari possunt --
Those who have received billets from the Martyrs, and may find help before God
by their Prerogative --. The Monks Excommunication proceeded upon the same
ground; That is to say, upon a confidence, that, whom he, by that sentence
declared to have forfeited the Communion of the Church in his judgment, those
who had his Holiness in esteem would not communicate with. The Emperors
proceeding shows it was not for nothing. Who, being absolved by the Ordinary,
rested not content, till he had satisfied the Monk. The reason, because even
then it might be evident, that, the preservation of Unity in the Church,
obliged to grant the Communion thereof to such, as there was no reasonable
assurance that Gods pardon did go before it; which, otherwise, the restoring of
that Communion ought to suppose. Which might move a tender conscience to do
more than the Church enjoined him to do. But I intend not hereby to justify
matters of fact in the Primitive Church: It shall serve my turn to argue, that
the reason inferred appears not by this practice, because another reason does
appear. Only I say further, that nothing of primitive institution can be
argued from a custom, which, they that relate it, Tertullian and S. Cyprian do
mark for an abuse, tending, either to abate the severity of discipline, or to
dissolve the unity of the Church. And therefore, he that observes all this,
must not forget to observe the reasons, whereby S. Cyprian protests, that the
courses whereby those of his time went about to force the consent of the
Church, by the credit of the Martyrs, were seditious, Ep. IX. and XXII. And
also the course that he takes, to referr the matter to the debate and common
sentence of other Churches, equally concerned in the cause, Ep. XVII. For, to
have recourse to the Unity of the Church, to cure the distemper of a particular
Church, had been against common sense, for him that had not known, that those
whom he had to do with acknowledged the same; And, that being acknowledged, it
will be more against common sense to imagine, that Martyrs or Confessors of one
Church could give Law to the whole; as they must do, if we suppose, that
absolution granted by them in the Church of Carthage, was of it self of force
and valid, which, by the same right and title, must extend to all that were in
the same case.

But there remains a second reason or plea, how a Communion of the Church might
be, and so a Power to Excommunicate, (and, by consequence, other Rights, in
which it has been showed, that the Society of the Church subsisted before
Constantine) without any title of divine Right, which Princes and States
professing Christianity are bound to maintain. For, it is alleged, that
Excommunication, and Penance which is the abatement of it, was in force in the
Primitive Church, by virtue of the voluntary consent of Christians,
consederating themselves, upon such terms as we find to have been in use,
into a discipline taken up of their own free resolution; Which, by consequence,
must be said of the rest of those rights, wherein the Communion of the Church,
and the Unity thereof, did consist at that time. To which I must except
generally in the first place; That this plea, whether true or false for the
present, is not receivable so much as into consideration, until it be
qualified and limited so, that it may be consistent with the former now
refuted. For, no man can pretend to advance such a plea for his cause, as
consists of two parts, whereof the first destroys the second. Now, it was
pretended before, that there was no Excommunication in use under the Apostles,
but that which was in force in the Synagogue, by virtue of Moses Law, and the
Power erected by it, of introducing such Penalties, as the maintenance thereof
should require. And here it is pretended; That Excommunication and other
effects of Ecclesiastical Power came in force upon the voluntary agreement of
Christians. Therefore the whole plea, if you will have it hang together, must
be this; That the whole Body of Christians did voluntarily agree among
themselves, to receive that Excommunication which was in force by virtue of the
Law, and by consequence, such other Rights already in force by virtue of the
Law, as they agreed to be no less useful for maintaining the Communion of the
Church, than they found Excommunication to be. And on these terms I admit the
two parts of this plea not to be inconsistent. For the effect of the whole will
be this; That there was indeed a Society and Corporation of one visible Church,
from the beginning of Christianity to Constantine, such as I now challenge that
there ought to be: But not by any order of the Apostles, or title of divine
right, but by the free consent of all Christians, which, being the consent of
subjects, and subsisting by sufferance of the Sovereign, resolves into his will
when he pleases to seize it into his hands. But then I will appeal to the
common reason of all men, whether it be consistent therewith in two regards.
The first shall be that which I alleged before out of Irenaeus, whether it be
consistent with common sense to imagine, that neither the Churches planted in
the Germane Provinces or Spanish or Ganlish, of the Roman Empire, nor those in
the East, nor in Egypt or Africa, nor those that were planted in the middle
parts of the world should practice or observe otherwise, than the Communion
which de facto I have already showed to have been maintained among them did
require, and all this have no other beginning than their own free and voluntary
consent, prevented by no obligation at all, but the dictate of common reason,
pronouncing what would be best, for the maintenance of that common
Christianity, to which we suppose them obliged. If there were no more in
question but the uniting of seven persons into one of our Independent
Congregations, (or as many more as may all hear any man preach at once) I
should grant, that such Bodies might subsist for such a time, as the common
batred of the Church restrains the peevishness of particular persons, from
breaking that Communion, which no tie of conscience obliges them to maintain.
But, if the experience of diverse years has not brought forth any union betwixt
any two such Congregations in England, so far as I can learn, what was it that
united all Christians from East to West into that one Communion visibly
distinguished from all Heresies and Schisms, which till about the Council of
Chalcedon remained inviolable, supposing no obligation of our common
Christianity delivered by the Apostles, to maintain it. Is it possible for any
man to imagine, that, with one consent they would have cast themselves into
such a form of observation and practice, as all to acknowledge the direction of
the same persons, in several parts; to acknowledge those Rules, which Generally
were the same; (though, in matters of less moment, differing in several parts)
to intertain or refuse communion with them, that were entertained or refused by
the Church where they dwelt, for a common cause, had there been nothing but
their own fansy to tell them, not only what was requisite to intertain such
communion, but whether it were requisite to intertain such communion or not? If
such a thing should be said, the process of my discourse were never a whit the
more satisfied, unless some body could show me how the truth of Christianity
can be well grounded upon those motives, the evidence whereof resolves into the
consent of all Christians; And yet, that which all Christians have visibly made
a Law to their conversation from the beginning, to wit, the communion of one
Catholic Church, not belong at all to the matter of our common Christianity.
And therefore this plea is no less ruinous to our common Christianity, the
ground whereof it undermineth, than to common sense. For, that, in such
difference of judgments as mankind is liable to, the whole Church should be
swayed to unanimity herein, by the Prerogative, as it were, of the Synagogue,
uniting themselves, by embracing the Ordinances thereof, the evident state of
the times whereof we speak will not admit to any pretense of probability; The
division between Jews and Christians being then advanced to such a hatred on
the Jews part, that it would have been a very implausible cause to say, that
Christians ought to follow the Jews, whose curses they heard every day, whose
persecutions they felt, in the tortures, which, at their instance, were
inflicted by the Gentiles. A thing so evident, both by the Writings of the
Apostles, and the ancientest records of the Church, that I will not wrong the
Readers patience to prove it. True it is, that at times and in places, great
compliance was used by Christians to gain them, who, elsewhere, were so ready
to persecute their fellow Christians. As at Jerusalem under and after S. James,
at Ephesus and in Asia under S. John, there is great appearance to believe. In
the mean time, he that can make a question, whether the separation between
Jews and Christians, and the hatred ensuing upon it were formed under the
Apostles, must make a question of the truth of S. Paul's Epistles, to the
Galatians, to the Colossians, to the Philippians, to Titus, and especially that
to the Hebrews. Besides that, during the time whereof Irenaeus speaks,
Christianity was extended so far beyond Judaisme, that, a great part of the
Church could not be acquainted with the conversation of the Jews, much less
learn and embrace their orders. And therefore, as I do admit and embrace the
diligence of those learned men, who bestow their pains to show, how the Rules
and Customs of the Church are derived from those of the Synagogue; So I
prescribe one general prejudice concerning all orders that may appear to be so
derived, that they are all, to the Church, Traditions of the Apostles, and by
their act came in force in it: And that upon the premises, that, neither they
had any force from the Law of Moses, not could be admitted by common consent of
Christians, after the separation was formed, that is, after the Apostles time;
And therefore, by their authority were introduced into the Church.

Having excepted thus much, it will notwithstanding be time to distinguish,
that, the orders and customs, and observations of the Church may be said to be
voluntary, as nothing is more voluntary than Christianity it self, though there
be nothing to which a man is so much obliged. For, though the will of God, and
our salvation, and whatsoever God has done to show that salvation depends upon
Christianity, oblige us to it, yet they oblige us also to embrace it
voluntarily, so that, whatsoever should be done in respect of it, without an
inward inward inclination of the will, would be abominable. In which regard,
whatsoever our Christianity obliges us to is no less voluntary than it is.
And, in this sense, I grant, that the confederation of common Discipline, which
prevailed in the primitive Church, was by the free and voluntary consent of
Christians, who, be freely and voluntary consenting to the profession of
Christianity, consented freely to maintain the Communion of the Church, which
they knew to belong to that profession, as a part of it. But then, this
consent, which is voluntary in regard that the choice of Christianity is free,
becomes necessary upon the obligation of making good the Christianity which
once we have professed; the Communion of the Church, professed by all,
obliging every one for his part to maintain it. So, when Pliny reports to
Trajan, of the Christians, Ep. X. Solitos Sacramento se obstringere, ne Furta,
ne Latrocinia, ne Adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum
negarent; That they were wont to tie themselves by a Sacrament, to commit no
Thefts, Robberies or Adulteries, not to fail of their faith, or deny that which
was deposited in their trust being demanded. It is manifest, that all this is
the profession of all Christians, and, that the Sacrament of Baptism is
properly the Vow of observing it. And, though I dispute not here, that the
Eucharist is called a Sacrament, and Sacramentum in Latin signifies an Oath,
yet, in as much as it is the meaning of the Sacrament of Baptism, I conceive,
I understood not Pliny amiss, when I conceived, that he speaks in this place
of the Eucharist, when he reports, that they were wont, before day to sing
Psalms in praise of Christ as God, and to tie themselves to the particulars he
names, by a Sacrament. And, the same Tertullian understood by Pliny, when he
says he reports to Trajan Apolog. II. Praeter obstinationem non sacrificandi,
nihil aliud se de Sacramentis (as Heraldus truly reads it) eorum comperisse,
quam coetus antelucanos, ad canendum Christo and Deo, and ad confederandam
Disciplinam, Homicidium, Adulterium, Fraudem, Perfidiam, and caetera scelera
prohibentes. That he had discovered nothing of their Sacraments, or Mysteries,
(besides obstinacy not to sacrifice) but assemblies before day, to sing praises
to Christ and to God, and to confederate their Discipline, prohibiting Murder,
Adultery, violation of Faith, and other heinous deeds. For the Eucharist is the
Sacrament by which this discipline of Christianity is established; But, far
from being voluntary to those whom we suppose Christians. As for Origin in
Celsum I. page 4. It is manifest that those private Contracts, which Celsus
calumniateth that the Christians made among themselves, as against the State,
are acknowledged by him to have been those that were solemnized at their Feasts
of Love; That is, at the Eucharist, which from the beginning was a part of
them; whether then it were so or not. And therefore, the confederacy of
Christians among themselves, whom these Authors speak of, was no otherwise
voluntary than Christianity, and therefore not voluntary supposing it. The
words of Origin: (...). Which I do not admit to be well corrected (...): As
being too obscure an expression for so clear a Writer as Origin to say, that it
was of force to do more mischief than the Bacchanalia; (which for that
jealousy were put down, as we understand by Livy) besides, that he must have
said, (...), and not have used a general word for a particular. And therefore I
suppose he alludes to the Verse of Homer (...), meaning (...), dissolving by
private confederacy, that public League and Bond, wherein the peace of every
Commonwealth consists. Thus then says Origin; And he seeks to calumniate
the Love (so called) of Christians toward one another, as subsisting at the
peril of the Public, and able to do the mischief of disloyalty. If this will
not serve the turn, but it be demanded, that the Communion of the Church was
then frequented by voluntary agreement, let me demand, whether the authority
of the Apostles in the Church subsisted upon no other title. For, as to the
credit of them in delivering the Gospel, believing what God had given them to
evidence it with, it is not possible for any man that pretends to be a
Christian to question it. If then it be said, that they who were tied to
believe them concerning the truth of the Gospel, were not bound to receive them
as chief Governors of the Church; let me demand, how it came to pass, that
those were received all over the Church, whom, it was believed, that they had
granted their authority to, or what part soever of it. There being no
obligation to tie them to receive such before others; and, the variety of
judgment which all men are subject to being such, as never to agree in the same
reason, where nothing obliges. So likewise, whereas it is manifest, that the
Church then, both had, and must needs have many Rules, the general importance
whereof was received by all, though with particular differences according to
times and places; I demand, how any such could come in force, when, neither the
Jews deserved that love, that all should embrace them for their sake, nor the
judgments of all Christians, so different in all things, could concur in any
thing which their Christianity imported not. Especially I demand this
concerning the indowment of the Church, because it is evident, that, as
Constantine, first, made good by the Empire all the acts of them that had given
whatsoever was ravished away by the persecution of Diocletian, then, gave much
more of his own; So, all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, after the example of that
Empire, have proceeded to indow it with the first fruits of their goods in
Houses and Glebes and Tithes and Oblations. I demand then, what imposture could
have been then so powerful, as to seduce all the Christian world, in a matter
so nearly concerning their interest, had they not stood convict by the constant
practice of Christendom before Constantine, that it was no imposture, more than
the Christianity brought in by the same Apostles. Lastly, whereas it is
acknowledged, what strange severity of discipline the Primitive Church was
under, by the Rules of Penance which then were in force, (though I have showed
in another place, that they were yet stricter under the Apostles, and that the
severity of them necessarily abated, as the zele of Christianity under them did
abate) I demand, what common sense can allow, that all Christians should agree,
to make themselves fools, by submitting themselves to such Rules, which,
nothing but their own consent could oblige them to embrace. For, neither can it
be said, that they had them from the Jews, nor, had they been extant among
them, that the Christians would have received them for their sake.

CHAP. XIX. That Power which was in Churches under the Apostles, can never be
in any Christian Sovereign. The difference between the Church and the Synagogue
in that regard. The interest of Secular Power in determining matters of Faith
presupposes the Society of the Church, and the act of it. No man can be bound
to profess the contrary of that which he believes. Every man is bound to
profess that Christianity which he believes. The Church is the chief Teacher
of Christianity through Christendom, as the Sovereign of Civil Peace, thorough
his Dominions. Why the Church is to decide matters of Faith rather than the
State, neither being infallible.
I Shall not now need to say much to those terms which the Leviathan holds,
beside that which has been already said, to evidence the Society of the whole
Church, and the foundation thereof, by the Scriptures. He that acknowledges in
the Church a Power, to judge of true repentance, and accordingly, to bind and
to loose; (and that, upon the same score, and therefore to the same effect, as
it baptizes) together with the Power of appointing public persons in the
Church; and, the Church in which he acknowledges the Power, to be the Body of
Christians in each City; by what Title does he suppose the Church to hold this
Power or this Right, the evidence whereof he fetches from the Scriptures,
whereby he proves it? For, those Scriptures do not import, by what Act it is
established, but only that it was in force, or use, at the doing of those
things which they relate. Can it be imagined to be any thing else than the act
of the Apostles, declaring the will of God in that behalf? If then by divine
right, (that is, by Gods appointment and ordinance imported by those
Scriptures) the Church, that is, the Body of Christians in each City, stands
endowed with those rights; how shall the Church, that is, the Sovereign Power
of each State, stand endowed with the same rights by the same Title, that is,
by Gods appointment, evidenced by the same Scriptures? How shall Gods Law, that
inableth the Body of the Church to bind and to loose, to nominate and elect
public persons in the Church, (but requires the Apostles and those that hold
under them to pronounce the sentence, and to impose hands) enable the Sovereign
Power to do the same, and yet require those that claim from the Apostles to
execute? If Philosophers have the privilege to justify such contradictions as
these, then may this opinion pass for a truth. In the mean time, to men of
common reason, how reasonable it will sound, that the Apostles, (being employed
by God to order these things in the Church, and that, for the maintenance of
Christianity received) should tie themselves to execute those acts, which the
Body of Christians in each City should determine to be for the maintenance of
that Christianity, which they knew nothing what belonged to, but what they had
learned from them, the Apostles; I am well content to referr my self to
judgment. But always there remains, or may remain a difference between the
Bodies of Christians in several Cities, and the Sovereign Powers over them; So
that the rights of both cannot be derived from one and the same Title. Sad
experience shows, that Churches may continue where the Sovereign Powers are not
Christians, as they subsisted before they were. Shall these Sovereign Powers
give sentence of binding and loosing, and appoint persons to be ordained, and
those that claim under the Apostles be bound to execute? Shall the Great Turk
have Power to officiate, and minister the Sacraments of divine service in the
Church, because whatsoever a man may do by his minister, he may do in his own
person much more, as this opinion, page 297. 298, 299. expressly disputes that
the Sovereign may do, and that, employment or more public consequence is the
only reason why he does not? It is said indeed, page 299. that he that had
Power to Teach before he was a Christian, being Baptized, retains the same
Power to teach Christianity. And so, every Sovereign being the Chief Master, to
teach all his Subjects whatsoever the peace of his State requires; by being
Baptized, he gets no new right, but is directed how to use that which we had
before. But, if the premises be true, the assumption is ridiculous. A Doctor of
the Synagogue duly qualified, is not a Doctor of the Church, because the
Church stands not upon the same terms with the Synagogue, Doctors and Disciples
being relatives, terms of a relation grounded upon the Society of the Church or
Synagogue. The Sovereign Power teaches by Laws, to keep the Public peace
(though, that it should do no more than teach were ridiculous.) The Church
teaches the way to heaven, and, for that reason, the bond of Public peace not
the matter of it. And therefore, as no man, by being Baptized, gets the right
of teaching by Civil Laws; So, he that has the right of teaching by Civil
Laws, by being baptized, gets no right to teach Christianity.

The Law of Moses was given to one people, which had covenanted with God to be
ruled by it, and upon that condition to be maintained in the Land of Promise.
So, the Covenant of the Law, and the obligation of that people to it, was
presupposed, before God had declared whom he would make Sovereign of that
people after Moses. But, in as much as the determination of all things that
became questionable concerning the Law was to come from those Powers, which
were under the Sovereign, it is manifest, that the act of such Power secured
the consciences of Inferiors. For, the promise of the Law being the temporal
happiness of the Land of Promise, and, the body of the people being, by the
Law, to depend upon the determination of their Superiors, they practicing the
Law according to such determination, the promise thereof must needs remain
indefeisible. As for the inward obedience to Gods spiritual Law, whereupon, as
I said, they might and did ground a firm hope of everlasting life under the
Law; it concerned not the consciences of the people, how the outward Laws were
determined, seeing, howsoever they were determined, this inward obedience to
Gods spiritual Law received no hinderance. Though, the consciences of
Superiors, from whom those determinations proceeded, were so much concerned in
them; that, those who should violate that obedience due to the carnal
commandment, by determining it to an unjust intent, could no ways pretend any
inward and spiritual obedience. But Christianity, covenanting for this inward
and spiritual obedience, and expressing everlasting life, as the consideration
of it, and particular Churches being constituted upon these terms, (and
constituting the whole Church, which is nothing but the Communion of all
Churches) whatsoever rights are acknowledged to be in particular Churches,
(which, the precept of preaching to, and the promise of calling the Gentiles
shows, might be under several Soveraignties) being settled in them already by
divine right, can never accrue to a Sovereignty, though constituted by right,
but, such as God only allows, by commanding Government in general, but
appoints not, by revealing it self in particular. And therefore, necessarily
tend to the constituting of the whole Church, by the concurrence of all
Churches, though of several Soveraignties, to the maintenance of that
Christianity, in which all had equal interest before any Sovereign was
Christian. And now, I cannot mervail, if he that believes not the Scriptures
to be Law to Christians, otherwise than as they are enjoined by Christian
Powers, acknowledge no Power in the Apostles of obliging the Church, or in any
body else beside the Sovereign. My mervail is, that he who had pretended all
this, should nevertheless acknowledge a right in several Churches; that is, in
the Bodies of Christians dwelling within several Cities, the Power of
Excommunications and Ordinations, and that by the Scriptures, that is, by
divine right. For, whatsoever act it was, or whose act soever it was, whereby
those rights were settled, upon those Churches, will he or will he not, was a
Law to those that stood bound to acknowledge such right; which was really
nothing, if no man were bound to acknowledge and to yield effect to it. Neither
is it mervail, if he acknowledge no Law for the indowment of the Church, that
acknowledges not the judgment of the Levitical Priesthood to have been a Law
to the Jews, but by the will of the Sovereign, under the Kings. But, those
that acknowledge that indowment to be Gods act, not to be voided so long as the
Covenant was in force, will have seen as good an argument for the like
provision to be made for the Church, as the correspondence between the Law and
the Gospel will allow any point of Christianity from the old Scriptures. And
then, as it has appeared, that several Churches are, by Gods appointment,
several Bodies capable of indowment, constituting one whole Church, which is
the Body of all Churches; So, by the same means it appears, that, what the
Church is once endowed with, is as much the Churches, as any man's cloak is his
own. And, as the giving of alms in general is not arbitrary to a Christian, but
due from all that will be what they profess; So, the indowing of the Church,
to those purposes for which the communion thereof stands, (though called
Alms, even by the Laws of this Land) had never prevailed over all Christendom,
had not the obligation thereof been a part of our common Christianity.

But now, as concerning the Power of determining Controversies of Faith, I do
here insist upon this argument; That, because no Secular Power is enabled by
God to determine Controversies of Faith, therefore God has provided a Society
of the Church for preservation of unity among Christians, by such
determinations, as may reasonably satisfy the consciences of those for whom
they are made. Though, not in order to any penalty of this world, pretending by
outward force to constrain obedience, but only in order to the Communion of
the Church, that is, to the holding or loosing of it, as a man conforms to the
determination or not; All outward force and constraint being acknowledged to
proceed from the power of the Sword, which the Sovereign bears. This
difficulty only the Leviathan answers, they who, denying the Power of
Excommunication, dissolve the Communion of the Church and the Society thereof,
into the Community of a Christian Commonwealth, contenting themselves to name
godly Magistrates (which term I use not, because incompetible to the Sovereign)
or Christian Powers, (as if their godliness or Christianity did entitle them
to this Power) though it might have concerned them to show, how the Profession
of Christianity comes to oblige Christian Subjects, to the determinations of
Christian or godly Powers, if they would not be thought to beg the question
which they tie themselves to answer. For, I also say, that all Christians stand
bound to the decrees of godly Powers, because, I suppose, (and the presumption
of piety implies them to suppose) that it is a part of godliness to profess one
holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, the unity whereof once professed, obliges
a private Christian to be of it, a public person to maintain it: Which if the
Sovereign do, then must he maintain those persons, who, by the Society of the
Church, have right to act in behalf of the Church, both in doing their duty,
and in giving force to their Acts. For, I acknowledge (as I have already done)
two points of that right, which Secular Power has, in the acting of Church
matters: The first is that which the trust of Secular Power imports in all
matters; As they hold it not by their Christianity, and therefore not by the
Church, so, that they suffer it not to be invaded upon pretense of
Christianity, and the Power of the Church. For, as experience has showed that
there may be such pretenses; So, the reasons whereupon I ground the Society and
right of Sovereign Power, show, that Christianity abridgeth not the Sovereign
Power in any thing that may concern the public peace. The second arises from
Christianity; Which, as it gives all Christians an interest both in all
Christian truth, and in the Communion of the Church, as the common birthright
of Christians; So it gives public Powers a public interest in the
maintenance of the same: That is, of all truth, which the Church, by the acts
of the Church, (done by the Power of the Church for the preservation of
Christianity) stands possessed of; and of all Laws, whereby the Communion of the
Church in the service of God according to Christianity is duly maintained. But
this interest presupposes, therefore, a Society of the Church, by the acts
whereof, Christian truth, and the unity of the Church is to be maintained; And
imports in the Sovereign, a Right to constrain, even those that act in behalf
of the Church, not to transgress their own profession, that is, either the due
power of determining things questionable, which the Society of the Church
infers, or the acts which have been duly done by the same.

Therefore, not supposing this Society, (that is, such an Act of the Church, as
it may be evident, that, the Sovereign may or ought to maintain, because it may
be evident, that the Church transgresses not those grounds which it professes)
and supposing Controversies among Christians about Christianity; I say the
Secular Power can have no right to determine them, that is (to oblige those
that are under their Power to stand to the determination which they shall make^
unless we do grant, that, by their Christianity, they may be obliged to
believe one thing, and, by their Allegiance, to profess another. For, seeing
there be Sovereigns that profess Christianity, whereof some are of the
Eastern, others of the Western Church, and, of these, some of the Communion of
the Church of Rome, others that are departed from it; some Calvinists, others
Lutherans, (and, Socinus his Sect, no man knows, how soon some Sovereign may
follow) besides new Religions that appear; how shall the common profession of
Piety or Christianity oblige several Nations to obey those Laws, whereby,
several Soveraignties may establish contrary things in Christianity, but, by
obliging them to profess contrary to what they believe? For, what
contradictions soever are held among Christians, nevertheless, they are
sensible, that no man's private spirit, that is, any evidence of Christian
truth, in the mind of one man, can oblige another man to follow it, because it
imports no evidence, to make that which he thinks he sees appear to others.
What becomes then, of the Christianity of Christian Subjects, obliging them to
stand to the Determination of their Sovereigns, in all things questionable? If
the Sovereign Power have right to limit all that is questionable, this right
will create an obligation of professing and doing the contrary of that, which
Christianity will oblige a man to believe, and to think fit to be done; Unless
all the Subjects of each Sovereign, have the strange hap to believe as their
Sovereigns, in all things questionable. Besides, if the Sovereign Power have
right to determine them, it will be impossible to show a reason, why this
Power, in him that is no Christian, should not have the same right; Seeing it
is plain, that the common profession of Christianity, being in Sovereigns that
command contrary things, does it not, and the Sovereign Power which remains is
the same in those that are not Christians, as in those that are. And therefore
I conceive, that the Leviathan has done like a Philosopher in this, to object
unto himself the greatest of those difficulties that his opinion is liable to;
and has but pursued his own principles, when he inquires, what a Christian
should do, when a Sovereign that is no Christian commands him to renounce
Christianity. For, when he argues, that every Sovereign, by being a
Sovereign, is the chief Teacher of his people, (whom, it is manifest that
Sovereigns Teach not, but by their Laws or commands) but, that Christianity
only inableth to use this Power right; He must know, that there is no Power
that will not oblige when it is used amiss, though not to all purposes, yet to
all within the compass of it. So that, if Christianity only enable Christian
Sovereigns to determine matters of Religion right, the Power of determining will
be the same in the Great Turk, (supposing him a lawful Prince) as in any
Christian Sovereign. And, if his act oblige the Christians under him, being
well used, why not ill used, the Power being the same?

But though I commend him, as a Philosopher, for charging his own opinion with
the greatest difficulties; When he answers, that a Christian in that case
shall stand bound to reserve the belief of his Christianity to himself, for
satisfaction of his conscience, but to profess or act outwardly as his
Sovereign commands; I must so much detest this answer for a Christian, that I
cannot conceive any thing so destructive to the foundation of Christianity has
been published among Christian people, since the time of Simon Magus and the
Gnostiaks, who, when Christianity was not protected, would do this, and yet
pretend to be Christians. Only the difference is, that he does it not, but
declares himself free to do it, if the Sovereign commands it. Which, though it
may seem to preserve him the quality of a Christian, yet it is to be
considered, that, by so declaring himself, he recalleth that solemn vow,
promise, and profession upon which he was admitted to Baptism, or made a
Christian in the Church of England. For, he that is free to renounce the Faith
at the command of his Sovereign, cannot be bound by the promise of professing
it unto death. If therefore, it prove, that this promise is the substance of
our whole Christianity, he will prove an Apostate, if only part of it, an
Heretic. But, I perceive, he is well enough aware of the Interest of his
opinion, for love whereof he waives the Interest of Christianity. For, as all
Divines have made the profession of Christianity the outward act of Faith, the
inward act whereof is to believe; So, upon this profession (the visible act of
Christianity) the visible Society of the Church is built, which there is no
pretense for if this be not commanded, nor against, if it be. This profession,
solemnized by the visible though mystical act of Baptism, (that is, signifying
more to the understanding than the mere sight of the eyes can evidence) being,
as S. Austine argues, nothing else but the entering or dedicating of a Christian
unto God, in that visible body of Religion which the profession of Christianity
designs.

Which consideration sets right the mistake that is commended to us from a true
Principle, that Sovereign Powers are the chief Teachers of their People. For,
the relation, Offices, and Interests of Teachers and Scholars do not subsist,
but upon supposition of some certain Society contracted between Masters and
Scholars; as may appear by the instance of Masters and Apprentices, the society
between whom is grounded upon a contract of learning the Trade. And no man
denies, that there is a Society between Sovereign Powers and their People
lawfully to be contracted: And, that this Society makes the Sovereigns Masters
and Teachers, and the People their Scholars, if it be rightly understood:
(Though, that it should make them no more, would be an imagination so absurd,
that he is not far from that absurdity who takes notice of no more, seeing
all Teachers cannot make their Scholars learn as Sovereigns can do) But, this
relation must be limited by the ground of civil Society, which is of necessity
no more than civil life; though the grace of God by Christ adds unto it a
capacity of advancing everlasting life, by maintaining the profession of
Christianity, which is merely accessory to it, as appears by all those
Commonwealths that never were Christian. And therefore, that which civil
Society teaches is no more, than that civil conversation, which the
maintenance of civil Society requires. If therefore there be any such thing as
a Relation of Teacher and Scholar in Christianity, (which this argument
supposes that there is, seeing that the common quality of Christian is no
ground at all of that difference, which the different denominations of Teacher
and Scholar suppose) of necessity it follows, that there must be a Society of
the Church, upon supposition whereof, the qualities and relations of Teachers
and Scholars in Christianity are grounded and subsist. Which relations, which
Society, did they not suppose Christianity to come from God, but to be a
religion, either invented by the Sovereign, (as Mahumedisme, by the first
founder of that Power under which Mahumetane Princes now claim) or enforced by
the Powers that profess it, (as Heathenisme) then were it essentially a Law of
that civil Society, the act whereof is all that obligation by which it
stands. And truly, he that should believe Christianito be no more, than a
Religion taken up as a means to govern people in civil peace, (which is not
only the opinion of Machiavillians, if any such there be, who, by believing no
more of that Religion which they profess, signify, that they believe no more
of God, or of Religion at all, but also of those Philosophers, if any such
there be, who do admit a Religion of all maxims which nature and reason has
taught all men to agree in, but, that which supposes revelation from above,
only as the Religion of their Country, not as true) I say, he that should
believe this, must necessarily believe nothing of the Church, more than the
Sovereign Power shall make it. But, as he that makes outward Profession to be
no part of it, can never give account, how the inward belief of it could be
maintained and propagated to the worlds end, as I suppose all Christians agree;
that God would have Christianity; So, he that leaves the determination of all
matters questioned in Christianity to the Secular Power that is Sovereign, (by
dissolving the Society of the Church into the Commonwealth that is Christian,
and that without limitation, because by Gods Law) he must by consequence
oblige men to profess that, as the means of Salvation, which the Interest of
State shall oblige every Sovereign to think necessary, for the preservation of
it.

And that is the answer, that I shall make, to him who shall object the same
inconvenience to me, that the determinations of the Church are subject to
fail; To wit, that there are three points of difference between it and the
Secular Power, in consideration whereof, it is reasonable to believe, that God
should provide a Society of the Church for the maintenance of Christianity,
notwithstanding that he leaves them subject to fail. The first, because this
right cannot be said to be assigned the Sovereign Power by the Scriptures. For,
in the Scriptures of the New Testament, there is no mention made of Sovereign
Powers that were Christian. And, as for the Old Testament, if any man argue;
That, the Power which the Kings of Gods ancient people had in marais of
Religion, the same Christian Princes have in Church matters, not only ^^^wer
has been made by denying the consequence; But also evident reason has been
drawn from the difference between the Law and the Gospel, why the consequence
holds not. The second, because, the supposition of a Society of the Church,
imports in it, means of determining matters controverted in Christianity, which
the dissolution of Ecclesiastical Power into the Secular voideth. The third,
because those means of determining matters of Christianity, will infer a
limitation of that obligation which the determinations of the Church produce in
them that are subject to them, merely upon this ground, that they cannot
produce any effect beyond the means upon which they proceed. And these two
differences, as I have begun to open, according as the subject of this
discourse has ministered occasion to do it, (having hitherto removed this
opinion, that makes the Church nothing in the nature of a Society, nor the act
thereof to have any force but that which the Sovereign Power allows; and
coming now to determine the means of discerning between true and false, in
things questionable concerning Christianity, together with the effect of the
Determinations of the Church) I shall have occasion to determine more
distinctly in that which follows. Which being done, it will be time to limit
the due bounds, by the which the Secular and Ecclesiastical Power are to
concur, in the establishment of things to be determined to Christian States
and Kingdoms, in the matter of Christianity. Which will be the due place to
meet with that objection which is so hotly pursued in the first Book de
Synedriis, cap. X. that the Excommunications of the Church have been always
thought lible, in Christian Commonwealths, to be limited by the Secular Power;
And therefore, that there is no Excommunication by divine right. Which
objection, if it have any force, must hold in all parts and rights of
Ecclesiastical Power, as well as in one.

CHAP. XX. The rest of the Oxford Doctors pretense. The Power of binding and
loosing supposes not only the Preaching of the Gospel, but the outward act of
Faith. Christians are not at liberty to cast themselves into what forms of
Churches the Law of Nature allows. They are Judges in chief for themselves in
matter of Religion, supposing the Catholic Church; not otherwise. Secular Power
cannot punish for Religion, but supposing the act of the Church, nor do any act
to enforce Religion, unless the Church determine the matter of it.
NOw, because the Doctor of Oxford might think himself neglected or disparaged,
if, having considered the first book de Synedriis, (which in the point of
Excommunication he has made his own) and the Leviathan, I should take no
notice of that which he has added; I will not turn my Reader to him, till I
have noted the particulars, in which he seems to go alone: Putting him first
in mind, to advise, how to make his choice, whom of the three he will follow
against all Christendom, who, upon several grounds, have set upon the Church,
and the Article of our Creed that professes the same, to destroy it. He seems
most to ground himself upon a supposition, that the Power of the Keys extends
no further than the converting of a man to become a true Christian, by
preaching the Gospel, or rather the convicting of him that he ought so to be:
Resting therefore in the inward Court of the conscience, and not reaching to
any visible effect in the Church, because nothing can be wanting to the
salvation of such a one. For him that is loose from sin, by this means, the
Church cannot bind, him that is bound by sin it cannot loose. They that are by
this means, loosed from sin, have in themselves every one the Sovereign Power
of judging between true and false in Christianity, as to the inward Court; as
to the outward, their Sovereign. They are therefore at their freedom, to join
in Ecclesiastical Communion, with whom they like best, and, being so joined, do
constitute a Church. And C^rches so joined, may, as they shall find their
proficience in Christianity require, combine themselves with other Churches,
and assemble themselves in Synods, to take order in matters of common
concernment; provided they be tied no further by the resolutions of them, than
every man stands convict, by the light which his loosing has given him, that
they are either just or requisite. By the same right they create themselves
Pastors, not with any Power to censure either people or Pastors, further than
reproving. And, such Churches as these, he imagines, the first Synagogues of
the Israelites, under the Prophets, to have been, especially in the ten Tribes
after Jeroboam; Seeing they could not resort to Jerusalem, and yet resorted to
such meetings, for that service of God which was not confined to the Temple.
But the judgment of matters concerning Religion in the outward Court, that is,
as to the world, belonging only to the Sovereign, and the Powers derived from
him, he vesteth even in the Heathen Emperors, to the same effect as in
Christian, allowing a reason why they do well or ill in the exercise of it, as
they do that which the Scriptures allow or not, but maintaining, that they do
not exceed their power, whatsoever they do. So that, Excommunications, Decrees
of Councils, Ordinations, and whatsoever else may be done in behalf of the
Church, being done by virtue of this Power, whether just or not, are valid to
^y the outward man, either to stand to them, or to undergo the penalty assigned
to the transgressing of them; which, being done in the name and the title of
the Church, are mere usurpations and nullities.

The ground then of this deceit (which Aristotle calls (...), (or the first
mistake) lies in this; That a man is loosed from his sin, merely by the act of
the inward man, acknowledging himself convicted of the truth of Christianity,
or producing besides, what inward act of faith this opinion can require.
Contrary to that which is settled by the premises, that the outward act of
professing Christianity is absolutely requisite to obtain forgiveness of sins,
and other promises which the Gospel tendreth by the Holy Ghost, the gift
whereof the Sacrament infers. For, Baptism, presupposing the profession of
the true Faith consigned into the hands of the Church, (requiring it as the
condition upon which it tendreth remission of sins, and the promise of the Holy
Ghost) infers also the communion of the Church, unto which it admits.
Therefore is no body a Christian by believing the Scriptures, nor has, by
consequence, any title to the Kingdom of God, but by being baptized. Nor is it
worth the while, among reasonable people, to except those, who may be
prevented, by unavoidable necessity of mortality, of recovering that Baptism,
which, they had utterly resolved to submit themselves to any condition, to
obtain; The Rule of the Law being a production of common reason, that an
exception confirms a Rule in cases not excepted. Now, if it appear, by the
same consent of Christians that evidenceth our common Christianity, that he
who obtains Baptism by making that profession which the Church requires,
owneth the person of the Church (for Corporations are persons in Law) for the
evidence which he trusts in the matter of his Salvation; I shall not need to
have recourse to the Article of our Creed, to prove that he owneth the unity
of it, and obliges himself upon his Salvation to abide in the same. Nor,
indeed, have I any need here to repeat the process, by which I have
demonstrated the corporation of the Church. Here I infer, as clearly gained
by it, that the effect of binding or loosing men from sin is limited by God, to
a condition of acknowedging or not acknowledging the Church, for two reasons,
and in two cases. For, he that is admitted to Baptism upon professing the
Faith of the Church, and undertaking to live as a Christian, if he transgress
this profession, forfeits the communion of the Church which he attained by
making it. And, he that acknowledges the unity of the Church (which, all that
are baptized must needs acknowledge) forfeits his share in it, by doing that
which dissolveth it, though he transgress not the profession of his
Christianity, doing it. Now, it appears by S. Paul and our Lord, that
Christians under Infidels are forbidden to carry any of their suits out of the
Church, and commanded to end them among themselves. And shall he not forfeit
the benefit of his Christianity, and become bound by the sin he commits, in
so doing, that does this? I may therefore grant Erastus and this Doctor, that
Let him be to thee as a Heathen or Publicane, signifies; be it lawful for thee
to implead him before Unbelievers; But it must be, as I said before, upon
supposition that he is first excommunicate, and become no Christian to thee,
and therefore to be used as a Heathen or a Publicane. As also I grant him,
that, to be delivered to Satan, signifies not to be excommunicate, but supposes
it. For if S. Paul, calling the miraculous graces of the Apostles time the
manifestation of the Spirit; do teach us, that the world was thereby convicted,
That God of a truth was in his Church, as he says again, 1 Cor. XIV. 24, 25;
then was it to the same purpose and effect, that those who were shut out of the
Church should become liable to the incursions of evil Spirits; To wit; To make
the difference between the Land of Goshen and the rest of Egypt visible. It was
therefore necessary, that the power of binding or loosing, in the Apostles and
Disciples of our Lord, should be accompanied with the gift of the Holy Ghost,
which our Lord breathed upon them. For by them the world was to be assured,
upon what terms they might be loosed from sin, and continue in the Unity of
the Church, which if they forsook, they became bound again. But there is not
the same reason, why the same should be thought requisite, to the same power in
their successors. For, those terms being once declared and settled, he that
professes and teaches them as the Apostles have taught, is a competent
Minister to loose or to bind another: not only though he have not that gift
of the Holy Ghost, that may make him appear to be appointed by God to that
purpose; but also, though he be bound himself, because he undergoes not that
which he professes.

Now, if the premises be true, it is a mistake as gross as pernicious, to
imagine, that particular Christians, by the light common to all Christians, are
Judges in all things concerning Christianity, or the Scriptures. For, if the
attaining of Christianity, and Salvation by it, require no more, but to know
the Rule of of Faith, and the common precepts of Christian conversation,
together with the Offices wherewith God is to be served by his Church; If the
gift of the Holy Ghost be promised to those that are baptized, upon undertaking
this; then is the understanding of the rest of the Scriptures no further
required at their hands, neither have they any warrant for that which they
shall do, upon any such presumption as this. The Church, that has received of
God the trust of maintaining unity in this service of God, so as may best stand
with the maintenance of that profession which it presupposes; has by
consequence, an obligation upon them, to stand to the resolution thereof,
saving that common Christianity which the constitution thereof presupposes. It
is therefore utterly a most poisonous doctrine to be infused into the ears of
Christian people, that they are, by their Christianity, free to cast themselves
into Churches, as they may meet with those whom they best like to communicate
with. It is therefore a thing to stand astonished at, that they who have
hitherto declamed against any thing in Christianity, the reason whereof is not
to be derived from the Scripture, not seeing in the Scripture any such thing as
a Church, that was not founded by the Apostles; or by commission from the
Apostles, not in all Christianity, any thing ever counted a Church, that was
not planted by mean authority derived thence to some Church; should now think
themselves at liberty to build Churches, upon no other foundation, than an
arbitrary agreement of seven persons. Suppose I say nothing as yet, in what
right and interest, several Members, or rather several ranks and qualities
concur to the resolution of the Church; Suppose I grant the power may be so
abused, that several parts of the Church may stand obliged to provide for
themselves without the whole, which is all that the common profession of
Reformation imports; Shall we not be thoroughly reformed, till we renounce one
Catholic Church, as visibly a corporation, as the Baptism which we received
upon acknowledging of it is visible? If every Church be planted by the
authority of the Apostles to that effect, extant and alive in some Church, then
is not the communion thereof with all other Churches (by the means of that
which planted it, communicating with all) arbitrary, but a necessary
consequence of that obligation to the Unity of the whole, which it gets by
being a Church. Nor is there any reason why the acts of the whole, (whether
done by representatives in Synods, or resolved at distance of time and place,
by intelligence and correspondence of the absent) should any way depend upon
the satisfaction of particular Christians, how just or how requisite. For,
neither does their conformity to them, in any reasonable construction, import
any engagement of their conscience, to the justice or necessity of them.
Unless it could be said, that a man could not live in society, without binding
himself to answer for the acts of that society wherein he lives. Which he
that says, will not find an independent congregation to continue in for four
and twenty hours, or to enter into, only for one. For, what obligation can all
Christians have, to answer for that, which our Christianity, upon profession
whereof we are become Christians, contains not? Indeed, when the abuse is so
visible, that the unity of the Church, provided for the service of God upon
supposition of this common Christianity, evidently destroys what it
pretends to maintain; I leave the case at present, for their plea, who cannot
obtain the consent of the whole, if they reform themselves. But you see what
reason I have to deny, that this Reformation consists, in voiding the
obligation of the acts and decrees of the Church. For the same reason, the
authority of Pastors is as visibly derived from the act of the Apostles in
primitive Churches, as their own authority is visible in the Scriptures. And
unless all Christendom could be cousened or forced at once to admit such an
imposture, they can be no Churches further than the name, in which it is
derived from the Law of nature and reason, and the liberty left private
Christians to dispose of themselves in Ecclesiastical communion where they
please. For, of that liberty, neither the Scriptures, nor all Christianity
since the time of them will yield one example. I marvel therefore that S. Paul's
commission to Timothy, 1 Timothy V. 17. should seem to import no more then a
reproof, and that at the discretion of him that is reproved, whether he will
admit it, or return him as good as he brings. For if S. Paul's commission to
Timothy extend no further, what could he have done more himself had he been
present? And the Apostle, injoyning obedience to those who first brought the
Gospel, and to those who presently ruled those Churches, in the same terms,
Hebr. XIII. 7, 17. must needs be thought to give the successors their
predecessors authority, saving the difference observed before. So certain is it
which I have advanced in another place, that this opinion is not tenable,
without denying the authority of the Apostles, in the quality of Governors of
the Church. For, as to the exception that may be made concerning the use of
this Power, I have already demurred to the doubt that may rest in difference,
between the succession of Faith, and the succession of persons. In fine, not to
insist here, what the respective interests of public and private persons in
the Church are and ought to be, because it is a point that cannot here be
voided; It shall be enough to say, that, of necessity, the authority of public
persons in and for the whole must be such, as may make and maintain the Church
a Society of reasonable people, not a Commonwealth of the Cyclopes, in which,
(...), no body is ruled by any body in any thing, according to Euripides. As
for the Synagogues, that may be presumed, rather then evidenced, to have
subsisted in the ten Tribes, during the Schism; Let him make appear what he
can, he shall never have joy of it toward his intent, so long as the
difference between the Law and the Gospel stands, which I have ^ettled; that
the Church and the State were both one and the same Body under the Law, as
standing both by the same title of it; But several under the Gospel, the one
standing upon the common ground of all Civil Government, the other upon the
common Faith of Christianity, which ought to make all Christian States one and
the same whole Church. For, in the two Tribes, who were at their freedom to
resort to the Temple for that service of God which was confined to the Temple,
(which all, could neither always do, nor were bound to do) there is no record
of any settled order for assembling themselves to serve God, either in the Law,
obliging of right, or actually practiced according to Historical truth. How
much less in the ten Tribes, being fallen from the Law by the Schism? And, if
there wanted not those who had not bowed the knee to Baal; nor Prophets, and
schools of Prophets, under whom they might assemble themselves; yet was this
far from a Society, formed by a certain Rule and Order for communicating in
Gods service, as I have showed, the Church is. And therefore he, who, upon
that account, thinks himself free from the Rule of Gods service under which we
now have in the Church of England, must first either nullify the Gospel, as
owning no such thing as one visible Church, or prove the Church in which he
received his Christianity to be apostate.

Now, I confess, our Doctor here makes use of an assumption which I intend not
to deny, being an evident truth; That every man has the Sovereign Power of
judging, in matter of Religion, what himself is to believe or to do. For, how
should any man be accountable to God for his choice, upon other terms? But,
he will entangle himself most pitifully, if he imagine; That God has turned
all men loose to the Bible, to make what they can of it, and profess the
Religion that they may fancy to themselves out of it. Even those who make men
believe the Infallibility of the Church, must, in despite of themselves, appeal
to the judgment of whomsoever they persuade, to pronounce, that so it is. And,
for the rest, how much soever he refer himself to him that has entangled him
in that snare, it proceeds wholly upon this supposition, to which he has once
made his understanding a slave. But, if all the world should do as men do now
in England, make every fansy taken up out of the Bible a Law to their Faith
(not questioning, whether ever professed, owned, or injoined by the Church, or
not) it would soon become questionable, whether there be indeed any such thing
as Christianity or not, these that profess it agreeing in nothing wherein they
would have it consist. And, for my part, the the matter is past question,
supposing what has been said; That God provided from the beginning of
Christianity, that all Churches should be linked together by a Law of visible
Communion in the service of God, and so to make one Church. For, by this means,
to become a Member of any Church, was to become a Member of the whole Church,
by the right of visible Communion with all Churches, into which, all Members of
any Church were baptized. And this it is which made the Church visible. For,
when a man had no further to enquire, but, what Christians they were who in
every City communicated with all Christians besides, the choice was ready made
without further trial, avoiding the rest for Heretics or Schismatics. And,
this choice being made, there was no fear of offense by reading the Scriptures,
the sense whereof, this choice confined to the Faith and Rules received through
the whole Church. So that, speaking of Gods Institution, every man is Sovereign
to judge for himself in matter of Religion, supposing the Communion of the
Church, and the sense of the Scripture to be confined within that which it
allows. But, he, who, thereupon, takes upon him to judge of Religion out of
the Scripture, not knowing what bounds the Communion of the Church has given
the sense of it, shall never impute it to Gods Ordinance, if he perish by
choosing amiss. Now, if it be objected, that we are at a distance from the
Church of Rome, and all who communicate with it, upon a just cause of refusing
the Reformation, as all that profess the Reformation suppose; And therefore,
that there remains no visible presumption what is true, the ground of
visibility being destroyed, by the division of the Church; I shall be far
enough from extenuating the force of this objection, or the effect of this
division, acknowledging, that, according to my opinion, holding both the
Reformation, and the Catholic Church, the Church should be visible, but is
indeed invisible. Not absolutely, but, as that which is hardly visible may
truly be called invisible, because every one whom it concerns cannot attain to
discern it, upon clear grounds. For, my intent is to aggravate the mischiefs of
division to the highest, which, they who believe not the Catholic Church do
not take for any inconvenience. And therefore I grant all, and do acknowledge,
that division in the Church necessarily destroys that provision which God
has made, for the unlearned as well as the learned (equally concerned in the
common Salvation of Christians) to discern by their common sense, where to
resort, for that which is necessary to the Salvation of all; and how to improve
and husband the same, as their proficience in Christianity calls for more at
their hands, then the Salvation of all requires. Whereby it comes to pass, that
they are put to make their choice, in matters, whereof it is not possible for
ordinary capacities to comprehend the grounds; And so, must choose out of fansy,
education, prejudice, faction, or which is the vilest of all, interest of this
world, which is in one word, profit. But, this being a choice that must be
made, and though difficult, yet possible to be well made, he that, without
supposing Infallibility on the one side, or Reformation on the other side,
would discern between true and false supposing the Original unity of the
Catholic Church, must be a madman if he advise not with the Records of the
Catholic Church, though out of date, as to force of Law, on both sides, to
tell him wherein Reformation infallibly consists. For, by that means, though
he shall not be able to restore that unity which is once violated (the duty of
all but obliging to an effect, that cannot take place without the consent of
parties) yet he shall be able so to behave himself; and that Church which goes
by this Rule, be it greater or be it less, shall be so constituted, as not to
make, but to suffer the division which it is charged with. But, he who
preaches original liberty to all Christians to cast themselves into
Presbyteries or into Congregations at their choice, bids them sail the main Sea
without Ballast; and, besides departing from the Unity of the Church, by
becoming Members of arbitrary Societies, not parts of the whole by the visible
act of visible power in it, expose themselves to the shelves and quick sands of
positions destructive to the Faith of the Church. And I am to demand of this
Doctor, if the Presbyteries be Churches by association of Congregations, and
the Congregations Churches without it, and those which are neither Presbyteries
nor Congregations (that is in effect, all the Parish Churches of the land) be
Churches no less than either of both, (because they have one whom the Triers
call a godly man, sent them to preach whatsoever he can make of the Bible) I
say, I must demand of him, what it is that qualifies a man a Member of a
Church, or a Church a Church, and how a man, by being such a one, becomes a
Member of the whole Church, which hitherto has been thought necessary to the
Salvation of every Christian. For, who knows not the dispute that remains
between the Reformation and the Church of Rome, which shall be the true Church?
Which, if every man be at liberty to become a Member of a Congregation, with
any six more that he likes, (who by that means shall be a Church) is plainly
about nothing. And therefore we are plainly invited to a new Christianity,
part whereof has hitherto been, to think our selves Members of the Catholic
Church, by being Members of some particular Church, part of the Catholic. So
certain it is, that, had not the Creed been first banished out of men's hearts,
it had not been banished out of the Church.

But, when this Doctor maintains further, that, all men having power in chief
to choose for themselves, in matter of Religion, the Sovereign has Power, not
only to choose for it self, but to impose penalties upon those which owe no man
any account of their choice, if they choose not that which the Sovereign
chooses; I confess I find this touches me, and the remnant of the Church of
England, to the quick; edifying the Sovereign, to deny protection in the
exercise of Religion, to them, who find themselves bound, never to communicate
in the change that is made, and in making, in Religion amongst us. But I find
withal, so much inconsequence, and contradiction to his own sense, and the
sense of all Christians, in it, that, I hope no Secular Power will be so
prodigal of a good conscience, as to make it self the executioner of a doctrine
tending to so unchristian injustice. For, if, as he says, no man is
answerable for the Religion he chooses, to any but God, how shall he be
liable to be punished by man, for that, wherein he offends him not? Or, how
can any man offend him, to whom he is not countable? Nor will it serve the
turn to say; That, by denying protection in the exercise of Religion, the
Secular Power punishes no man for the judgment of his conscience. For all
Christians, of what profession soever, do generally believe, that they are
bound to exercise the Religion which they are bound to profess; That Baptism,
wherein, (by the positive will of God under the Gospel) the profession of
Christianity consists, truly obliging true Christians, to assemble themselves
for the service of God with his Church, according to the Rules of it. It cannot
therefore be said; that it is no penalty, no persecution for Religion, to deny
protection in the exercise of Religion, to them who are not punished for the
judgment of their conscience. For, whosoever can be supposed to be a good
Christian, not only had rather, but surely had better lose his life, (much
more any comfort of it) than lose the exercise of his Christianity in the
service of God, whereupon his Salvation so nearly depends. Nor will it serve
the turn to say, as this Doctor says, that, in persecuting the Christian
Faith, (much more, in denying protection to the exercise of any profession
which it inforceth) the Heathen Emperors exceeded not their Power, but only
abused it; having granted before, that a man is free to choose for himself, that
is, not countable for his Religion to his Sovereign. For, if it once be said,
that God grants all men all freedom in the choice of their Religion, it
cannot be said, that God grants the Secular Power any right to punish him for
that choice, for which he makes him unaccountable. The ground of my reason
lies in that which has been said, against the Infallibility of the Church. For
if the sentence of the Church be not of force to oblige any man to believe the
truth of it, much less can the sentence of any Christian, though never so
Sovereign, oblige the meanest of his Subjects to believe that Religion to be
true which he commands, because he commands it. And, whatsoever penalty
the Sovereign inflicteth upon those that concur not to the exercise of that
Religion which he holds forth (as when he denies them protection in the
exercise of their own, which, as I have showed, is no mean one) implies a
command of exercising his, and is inflicted in consideration of obeying Gods
command, which, the Subject is enabled by God to judge that he has, against
all the world to the contrary. So that, upon these terms, the Secular Power,
which is enabled to judge for it self upon the same account with the meanest
Subject thereof, cannot have power to punish any Subject, for exercising any
Religion which it allows not. For all Power, as I said before, is a moral
quality, consisting in a Right of obliging another man's will by the act of his
will that has it. Therefore, if a Subject cannot be obliged by the will of his
Sovereign, to profess and to exercise that Religion which his Sovereign
prescribes, then cannot the Sovereign have power, to impose any penalty upon
his Subject, for professing or exercising that Christianity which he
believes; All Christianity obliging a man, to the utmost of his ability, to
profess and to exercise that Religion which he believes to be true. And the
reason is manifest. For, Christianity is from God, and the Secular Power is
from God, though by several means. Christianity, by the coming of Christ, and
the preaching of his Apostles. Secular Power by what means, I will not here
dispute, nor yet suppose any thing that is questionable. That which serves my
turn is evident to the common reason of all men; That, by another act of God
than that upon which Christianity stands; That Christianity depends not
upon it; That, as I argued against the Leviathan, by a Law which no Secular
Power can abate. If therefore God oblige a Christian by his Christianity, to
serve God otherwise than his Sovereign commands, he is bound by the same
bond to disobey his Sovereign to obey God; which obliged the primitive
Christians to suffer death rather than renounce the Faith. But I intend not to
say that absolutely, which I say upon supposition of this Doctors sense. Nor do
I intend here to dispute that, which I have resolved in another place, what
kind of penalties Secular Power is able to inact that Christianity with, which
it self professes. The question is now, how the Secular Power is able, or
becomes able to impose penalties in matters of Religion; (which as a Christian,
it is not able to oblige the Subject to acknowledge) not how far these
penalties may extend. A question which cannot be answered, not supposing the
Church. A question which is no question supposing it. For, supposing that God,
sending Christianity, founds, for part of it, the visible society and
corporation of a Church, assuring the common sense of all people thereby, what
is the condition, upon which Salvation is to be had by communicating with it;
What will remain, but to conform to the communion of this Church, laboring to
work out, every man his own Salvation, by the means which the communion thereof
furnishes? Which whosoever does not, but pretends to disturb it, will remain
punishable by the Secular Power, (for I have said already, that the Church is
not enabled to inflict temporal penalties) not absolutely, because it is
Christian, but upon supposition, that it maintains the true Church; The acts
whereof, as Excommunication, by the original constitution thereof, inforceth;
So, did not the Secular Power enforce that Excommunication, it must of
necessity become ineffectual, when the world is come into the Church, and
Christianity professed by the State. And this is the resolution that I have
given in another place, that the acts of the Church, for the matter of them, are
limited by the Church, (that is to say, by persons qualified by the Church, and
in behalf of it) but the force that executes them must come from the State.
For, supposing the Church to be founded by God, and the power of it resolved
into that act wherein this foundation consists; Whatsoever the Church is by
this power enabled to do, will belong to the Church by Gods Law to do, though
the matter of that which it does be not limited by Gods Law, but by the act of
men enabled by Gods Law to do it. S. Cyprian, and others of the Fathers have
reason, when they argue, that the acts of the Church are the acts of God. For,
no man capable of common reason can doubt, that, what is done by commission
from superior Power is the act of that Power which granted the commission, so
far as it ownes the execution of it; And, I have sufficiently limited the Power
granted the Church heretofore, by the matter of that communion for which it
subsisteth, and the supposition of the Christianity upon which it subsisteth.
What is therefore done by virtue of this commission, though perhaps ill done,
for the inward intent with which men do it, yet, being within the bounds of the
Power established by God, is to be accepted as his own act, without contesting
whose act of founding the Church, it cannot be infringed. Which if it be true,
so far is the Secular Power from being able to create or constitute a Church,
(by creating that difference of qualities, in which, the difference between
several Members thereof consists) that it is not able of it self to do any of
these acts, which the Church, that is, those who are qualified by and for the
Church, are thereby qualified to do, without committing the sin of Sacrilege,
(in seizing the Powers, which by Gods act are constituted, and therefore
consecrated and dedicated to his own service, into its own hands) not supposing
the free act of the Church, without fraud and violence, to the doing of it.

CHAP. XXI. How the Tradition of the Church limits the interpretation of
Scriptures. How the declaration of the Church becomes a reasonable mark of
Heresy. That which is not found in the Scriptures may have been delivered by
the Apostles. Some things delivered by the Apostles, and recorded in the
Scriptures; may not oblige. S. Austines Rule of Apostolical Traditions.
ANd, by this means, I make account, I have gained another principle toward
the interpretation of Scripture, and resolution of things questioned in
Christianity, either concerning the Rule of Faith, or such Laws and Customs
determining the circumstances of Ecclesiastical Communion, as, I showed before,
are understood by the name of Apostolical Traditions. Which principle, that no
man mistake me, pretends not any general Rule for the interpretation of
Scripture, even in those things which concern the Rule of Faith; but inferrs a
prescription against any thing that can be alleged out of Scripture, that, if
it may appear to be contrary to that which the whole Church has received and
held from the beginning, it cannot be the true meaning of that Scripture, which
is alleged to prove it. For the meaning, even of those Scriptures which concern
the Rule of Faith, must be had, by the same same means, by which, I shall come
by and by to show, that the meaning of all Scriptures, whatsoever they concern,
is to be had and established. But the being and constitution of the Society of
the Catholic Church from the beginning is of force to prescribe this
limitation, to the Fancies of all men that take upon them to interpret the
Scriptures; that they neither admit, nor impose upon any man, any thing for the
true sense of Scripture, whereby, the substance of Christianity, which the Rule
of Faith imports, may become questionable. So that, an evidence of such
opposition, ought to outshine and supresse any appearance or supposed evidence
of truth, in any such sense.

The Rule of Faith, (Not to go about to determine, in this place, what it
contains, because it is the Masterpiece of all the Divines of Christendom,
to say, what is fundamental in Christianity and what is not, but to give a
gross description of what men mean when they inquire for it) consists partly
in things to be believed, partly in things to be done: He that holds so much
of Christian truth, as may reasonably certify him of all that is requisite to
qualify a Christian man for remission of sins and life everlasting, which are
the promises of the Gospel, may well be said to hold the whole Rule of Faith in
things to be believed. He that holds so much of Christian truth, as may
reasonably certify him, of all that is requisie to preserve all Christians
with consciences void of sin, may be said to hold it in things to be done. For,
the common Rule of Faith imports not what is necessity for any Christian, but
for all Christians. And, that any thing contrary to the salvation of all
Christians should be held and professed by all Christians, is a gross
contradiction to common sense. Whereupon it is no less evidently true, that
the Catholic Church of all ages and places is utterly infallible; In as much
as it is a gross contradiction, to suppose a number of men to attain
salvation, who all do hold some thing destructive to the salvation of any one.
So much difference there is between the whole Church, which is the Catholic
Church of all times and places, and the present Catholic Church, respectively
to those ages, in which the Communion of the whole was not interrupted by any
breach, but effectuated by actual correspondence. For, the act of the Catholic
Church, in this sense, which I call the present Church, if it be lawful,
obliges all that are of it; But it self stands obliged to the Faith of the
whole Church, as that, which, the being and privilege of a Church* resupposeth
to be^ rofessed by it. And of this I cannot conceive how any question should
remain. The difficulty that remains is, how it may appear, that all this is not
a fine nothing, how it may reasonably seem to signify something toward the
limitation which I prescribe, to the interpretation of those Scriptures which
may be alleged, in matter concerning the Rule of Faith. And the answer is, that,
seeing it has appeared, that the Apostles of our Lord Christ established from
the beginning one Catholic Church consisting of all Churches, by the will of
God and his appointment; (and that, in consideration of that which was made to
appear before, that all things necessary to the salvation of all Christians,
though evidently extant and discernable in the Scriptures, are not
nevertheless evidently discernable by all them whose salvation they concern)
that therefore the unity and Communion of the Catholic Church was provided by
God, as the depository of his truth, the acknowledgment whereof should be
necessary to obtain life everlasting. So that, the effect of this trust,
deposited by God in the Church, to be at least thus much; That, whatsoever was
advanced in any part thereof, as belonging to the Rule of Faith, being
condemned where first it was advanced, and, in consequence of that
condemnation, by all other parts of the Church, to that effect, as to render
those that held it incapable of the Communion of all the whole Church; That
this, I say, might be accounted a reasonable mark, to discern such doctrine to
be destructive to the Rule of Faith. And thus were all Heresies marked for such
by the Church, and, upon this ground, those marks were receivable, not only
before Constantine, but, so long as it may be visible that nothing hindered this
correspondence, wherein the actual unity of the Church consisted, to operate
and have effect. For, if this be the reason and ground which made these marks
reasonable, as grounded upon it, then, he that supposes this reason either
actually interrupted or impeached, cannot presume upon the like effect. And
therefore, the justifying of these marks requires the evidencing of this
correspondence of the Church, and no more. And truly, I could not but admire,
to find it alleged by Crellius the Socinian, (in his answer to Grotius
concerning the satisfaction of Christ, where he argues, that no Ecclesiastical
Writer ever professed that opinion) I say, I admired to find him answer, that
Pelagius the Heretic maintained the same. For sure it is not much more
pertinent, than, if he should allege, that the Jews profess our Lord Jesus
not to be the Messiah, or that the Gentiles do not worship one true God; In as
much as, though they be further from the faith of true Christians than
Pelagius, yet an Heretic is no less excluded from the Communion of the
Church, than a Jew or a Gentile: And the whole reason, for which the
testiemonies of Ecclesiastical Writers is receivable, to evidence matters
concerning the Rule of Faith, (to which they can give no credit, but are, by
acknowledging the same, receivable for Christians) is the Communion of the
Church, which make it evident, that, what such men profess in the Church is
not against the Faith of the Church. And this, in the second place, may be a
reasonable presumption or evidence of that which belongs to the Rule of
Faith, when a thing is so ordinarily and vulgarly taught by Church Writers,
that there can be no reasonable presumption made, by the doctrine of any of
them, that the contrary was ever allowed by the Church. So then, I do not tie
my self to this, that, if any thing be found in the writings of any of those
whom we call commonly Fathers, it is therefore not contrary to Christianity,
or to the Rule of Faith, that is, either expressly, or by consequence; For, who
will or can think it reasonable, that the Church should be thought to avow all
that has been written by any of the Church, and is come to the hands of
posterity by whatsoever means? Or who will think it strange, that a Christian
should not understand the Rule of his Christianity, though the right
understanding thereof should have been the condition requisite to the making of
him a Christian? If the profession made by the writing from which posterity
has it, were evidently so notorious to the Church, and the maintenance thereof
so obstinate, that the Church could not avoid taking notice of it and
contradicting it, without quitting the trust of the Rule of Faith deposited
with it; then, and not otherwise, I do admit, that the contrary of that which
is regularly and ordinarily taught by Church Writers is inconsistent with the
Rule of Faith.

Besides this, another presumption or prescription, limiting the interpretation
or Scriptures in such things as concern the Traditions of the Apostles, we may
be confident to have gained, from the Society of the Church, demonstrated by
the premises; To wit, that, if any thing be questionable whether it come by
Tradition from the Apostles or not, there can no conclusion be made in the
negative, because it is not expressed in the Scriptures. Here, I desire all
them that will not mistake me, to take notice, that I intend not here to
conclude, or infer, what force those Traditions, which I pretend may come
from the Apostles, though it be not certified by the Scriptures, may have, to
oblige the Church, which question, I found it requisite to set aside once
before. But, that which here I affirm only concerns the question of fact, that
it is not impossible to make evidence, that some Orders, or Rites and customs
of the Church had their beginning of being brought in for Laws to the Church,
by the Apostles, though not written in the Scriptures. Confessing
nevertheless, that the proving hereof, which no reason can hinder me to
proceed with here, will be a step to the resolving of that force, which the
Traditions of the Apostles (whether written or not written in the Scriptures)
have and ought to have, in obliging the Church at present, when it shall appear
to be common to written and unwritten Traditions, to have their authority from
the Apostles. And, the evidence of this prescription depends upon a more
general one, limiting the interpretation of Scripture, in matter of this nature
(that is, concerning the Laws of the Church, how far they were intended by the
Apostles to tie the Church) not to exceed the practice of the Church succeeding
the times of the Apostles. The demonstration whereof consists in certain
instances, of things recorded by the Scriptures of the New Testament, either
evidencing only matter of fact, that is what was then done (and therefore
importing no precept what was to be done for the future) or importing such
precepts, as no man will stand to be now in force.

It is manifest, that the Scriptures report, how the Disciples, under the
Apostles, were wont to assemble themselves to serve God by the Offices of
Christianity, upon the first day of the week called vulgarly Sunday, after the
Resurrection of Christ, John. XX. 19, 26. Acts. XX. 7. Con. XVI. 2. Apoc. I.
10. Speaking of the banishment of S. John, conforming himself to the times of
the Church for the service of God, and thereupon ravished in Spirit: Which no
man questions. It is said indeed in this case, as it is said by others in the
question of Tithes, that the first day of the week is commanded to be kept holy
of Christians by the fourth Commandment. But I demand of any man that can tell
seven whether the first day of the week and the seventh day of the week be the
same day of the week or not; And if this be unquestionable, I demand further,
whether the Jews were tied by the fourth Commandment to keep the last day of
the week or not: Assuring my self, that, whosoever believes the Scriptures, and
reads the Commandment, that obliges them to rest all that day, in which God
rested from making Heaven and Earth, can no more doubt, that they were bound to
rest on Saturday, than, that God rested from making Heaven and Earth upon that
day. I demand then, whether the same precept, that obliged them to keep
Saturday, can oblige Christians to keep Sunday? And do conclude that it can no
more be said, then, that the same word signifies both the seventh and the first
day. So wide an error so small a mistake can cause, when faction has once
swallowed it. A man would think it a very easy mistake to understand the
seventh day of the week, which God commands to be hallowed, as if it signified
one of the seven and no more. Which if it were true, then were the Jews never
tied to rest on the Saturday by Gods Law, but might have chosen which day of
seven they would have rested on, notwithstanding that God rested on the
Saturday, which is, to make the reason of the precept impertinent to the matter
of it. I intend not to deny, that the reason and ground, upon which the
Christian Church came to be enjoined to keep the first day of the week, is
drawn, and to be drawn from the fourth Commandment. But I say further, that,
the reason and ground of a positive Law makes it not a Law, but the act of him
that has power to give Law, signifying that he intends to inact it for a Law,
whether he express the reason or not. And thus I say, as I have hitherto
said, concerning other Ordinances which have the force of Law to oblige the
Church; that they can no more stand, by virtue of such Ordinances, as I
acknowledge to have been torrespondent to them under the Law of Moses, than
Christianity by the virtue of Judaisme, or the Gospel by virtue of the Law;
which though it bear witness to the Gospel, yet, he were a Madman that should
say; That he who was bound to be circumcised, by virtue of that circumcision
should be bound to be baptized, supposing him of the number of Christians, who
agree, that, Baptism coming in force, circumcision could no more continue in
force. And surely, those simple people, who of late times have taken upon them
to keep the Saturday, though it were, in truth and effect, no less than the
renouncing of their Christianity, yet, in reason, did no more then pursue the
grounds which their Predecessors had laid, and drawn the conclusion which
necessarily follows upon their premises; that, if the fourth Commandment be in
force, then, either the Saturday is to be kept, or the Jews were never tied to
keep it.

Besides this particular, it is manifest, that the Apostles observe the third
and sixth, and ninth hours of the day, for the service of God, Acts II. 15.
III. 1. X. 3, 9, 30. And this, according to an Order then in force among Gods
people, according to the Scriptures, Psalm. LV. 18, Dan. VI. 11. As the very
words of these Texts, and common reason, with the Testimonies of Tertullian, de
Jejuniis cap. X. Epiphanius, Heresi XXX, S. Hierome upon the Text of Daniel, S.
Cyprian de Oratione Dominica, and diverse others import. And again, Acts XIII.
2. we see, that the Christians at Antiochia assembled themselves in fasting,
for celebrating the service of God, when they were to send away those, that by
Gods appointment were to carry the Gospel to further parts. As the Church,
according to this example, has, of ancient ages, had a custom of Fasting
before Ordinations. But, whether or no those things are to be observed by the
Church, as Laws introduced and begun by these practices, this, whether true or
false, whether questionable or unquestionable, is not to be concluded by the
words of those Scriptures which barely relate what was done. Again: At the
institution of the Passover, it is expressly commanded, that it be eaten with
their loins girt, shoes on their feet, and staves in their hands, Exodus XII.
11. which notwithstanding, it is manifest to all that believe, that our Lord
did eat the Passover, that he did eat it sitting at the Table, or leaning on
his side, as then they did eat at Table, Mat. XXVI. 20. Mar. XIV. 18. Luke XII.
14. in which posture, neither were their loins girt, nor their shoes on their
feet, nor had they staves in their hands: And yet, so sure as our Lord knew
what the Law required, so sure is it, that his intent was to observe the same.
And therefore, knowing this to be Scripture, he knew nevertheless that it
obliged not, and every one that practiced it knew the same, and by the
Scriptures could not know it. See the like at the last Supper of our Lord. Our
Savior, instituting the Sacrament of the Eucharist at his last Supper,
commands his Disciples to do that which he had done. And the Disciples of
our Lord, in pursuance of this Commandment, are reported by the Scriptures, to
have celebrated the Eucharist at Supper, as our Lord had instituted it, and
held those Assemblies, at which they served God with the Offices of
Christianity for that purpose, the rich bearing out the poor in the charge of
it. This, I have showed before more at large, to be the meaning of those
Scriptures, wherein mention is made of these their Assemblies, Acts II. 42. 46.
VI. XX. 7. 1 Cor. XI. 20, 21, 22. 33, 34. Jude 12. 2 Pet. II. 13. By all this
we find not, that the Eucharist was instituted by our Lord to be celebrated at
the public service of God, where this Supper of our Lord is not celebrated, as
Tertullian acknowledges, where nevertheless he affirms, that it was
delivered to the Church by the Apostles so to observe it. de Cor. III.
Eucharistiae Sacramentum, and in tempore victus, and omnibus mandatum a Domino,
etiam antelucanis coetibus, nec nisi de manu Praesidentium sumimus. We receive
the Sacrament of the Eucharist which our Lord instituted at the time of meat,
and for all, at our Assemblies before day also, but, only at the hands of our
Presidents. Though I have indeavored in another place to show, that this is to
be gathered from some circumstance of the Apostles writings; (to wit; That, in
point of fact it was so practiced under them) yet it is manifest, that the bare
words of the Scripture, Do this in remembrance of me, and the Scriptures, that
relate only what the Apostles did, do not determine, whether it ought to be
celebrated otherwise than at Supper, as our Lord instituted it,

Further. The Apostles Acts XV. 29. decree; that those who were then converted
to Christianity of Gentiles, should abstain from things offered in Sacrifice to
Idols. Which, being done to comply with the Jews, manifestly signifies, that
they were to abstain from those meats, as meats of Gods making, notwithstanding
that the eating of them implied no communion with the sacrificing to Idols.
For, it is a thing certain, by the examples of Daniel and his fellows, Dan. I.
9. of Tobit, I. 11, 12. and Judith, XII. 2, 3, 4, 19. that the Jews, from the
time of their captivity, when they could not avoid conversing with the
Gentiles, had taken upon them to abstain, not only from things really
sacrificed to Idols, but from most things that came out of Gentiles hands,
because there was some presumption, that a part of most kinds, (for
First Fruits) had been consecrated to Idols, the rest being by those
First Fruits polluted, as dedicated to Idols. Therefore, in those places
alleged, it appears, that they forbore all meats and drinks that came from the
Gentiles. Neither can there be reason to think it a folly which the Jews tell
us, that Nehemiah, being Cup Bearer to the King, was dispensed with for
drinking the wine of the Gentiles. For, why should we think him less
scrupulous of the Law than those aforementioned? About this wine of the Gentiles,
and consequently, other kinds, there are many nice and scrupulous decisions in
the Jews Constitutions, the ground whereof, you may see by the premises, is
more ancient than the beginning of Christianity. And this is that wherein the
Apostles order the Gentilish Christians to comply with the Jewish, to satisfy
them, that there was no intent of falling from that God who gave their Law, in
those that turned Christians. And this decree S. Paul delivers to the Churches
of his foundation to be observed, Acts XVI. 4. Which notwithstanding, writing
to the Corinthians, he manifestly distinguishes between eating things
sacrificed to Idols materially, as Gods creatures, without inquiring whether so
sacrificed or not, and formally, when notice must needs be taken that they are
such, 1 Cor. VIII. ^ --. instancing in two cases; First, when this is done, nor
only in the company of Idolaters, but in an house of Idols, 1 Cor. VIII. 10.
Secondly, when a man, being invited by Idolaters, knows that they intertain
him with the remains of things sacrificed to Idols, part of which, as the
First Fruits, whereby the rest was consecrated, were first consumed upon the
Altar, whereby they that made these Feasts professed to communicate with their
Altars, that is, with their Idols, which were Devils, 1 Cor. VIII. 19-30. In
these two cases then, the Apostle, forbidding them to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, (lest they might give occasion to those that uncer^^ood not what they
did, to communicate in Idolatries) manifestly allows them, when that
consideration takes no place, to eat that which the Apostles had forbidden to
eat, intending to forbid the meats of the Gentiles, for compliance with the
Jews, in the distance they kept from Idolaters. And truly the same is
manifestly to be gathered from that which he orders among the Romans, XIV. 2,
3, 20, 21. neither to condemn one another for not observing that difference of
meats, which, by the Law, then obliged; nor yet to use such meats, in case it
might scandalize those that were of the Law, to think, that Christianity stands
not with it. Whereby, it is evident, that he allows them that which the
Apostles had forbidden, because it is evident, that this is one of those
differences, which Jews, by the Law, were bound to make. If therefore there be
this difference in the Scriptures, it is manifest, that the leter of them does
not determine what obliges. So again, the same Apostle, 1 Cor. XI. 1-16.
disputes at large, that men ought not, but women ought to cover their heads at
praying or prophesying in the Church. For the intent whereof, though it has
been the subject of whole books in this age, I conceive, I need go no further
than Tertullians book de Velandis Virginibus; who, living so much nearer the
Apostles, knew better the custo^ms of their Churches, than all the Critics of
this time. He disputes the case in question then, whether Virgins had a
privilege not to vail their faces at Divine Service; by arguing, that they
cannot be excepted from S. Paul's words, and alleging the example of the Church
of Corinth, where, at that very time, the Virgins veiled their faces at Divine
Service as other women did. Which whether it tie the Church or not at this
time, it will scarce be granted by those who now practice it not. And in
another place, 1 Timothy V. 3-6. he shows, that there was then an Order of
Widows, whose maintenance he orders to come from the stock of the Church,
as likewise, how they are to be qualified, and how employed; Of which Order,
there is no where any step remaining in the Church at ^resent, though nothing
be more imperative than the Order concerning it. So, the precept of the Apostle
serves not to oblige the Church at present, though by Scripture. And if I may
use the argument ad hominem, upon the supposition of those that I dispute with,
who intend not to take any thing for true which I prove not, as debating the
principles of Christian truth; it is manifest, that the Apostle, James V. 14.
appoints that the sick be anointed with oil, together with prayers, as well
for the recovery of their health, as for the forgiveness of their sins. Which,
it is manifest, that it cannot appear not to oblige the Church at this time, by
virtue of that Scripture which injoyneth it. And therefore, to say nothing at
present, whether it do indeed oblige the now Church or not, those that believe
it does not oblige, cannot be able to give a reason why it obliges not, by the
Scripture alone. And this is the argument whereby I prove, that the
interpretation of Scripture, as concerning matter of Law to the Church (or the
means to be used in determining what obliges what not) cannot transgress the
tradition and practice of the Church: Because, that which is propounded in the
Scriptures as mere matter of fact may oblige, and that which is propounded as
matter of precept creating right, may not oblige, the Scripture not determining
whether it intend that obligation to be universal or not. For, having showed
before, that the Church is a Society instituted by God, to which these Rules are
given, as Laws to govern it, in the exercise of those Offices wherein the
Communion ther^of consists; all reasonable men must grant, that, as the
intent and meaning of all Laws is to be gathered from the primitive and
original practice of that Society for which they were made, so is the reason of
all Orders delivered to the Church by the Apostles, and by consequence their
intent, how far they were to oblige, to be measured by the first and most
ancient practice of the Church, which first had them to use. Whereunto let us
add these considerations; That the Orders delivered the Church by the Apostles
were of necessity in force, before mention can be made of them in their
writings; That the writing of them is neither the reason why they oblige, nor a
thing thereunto requisite, but merely supervenient to the force of them; And,
that there is sufficient evidence, that those motives to believe which the
Scripture records but cannot evidence, are nevertheless true; and, that the
truth of those motives cannot be evident, but by the Society of the Church
which the said Laws do maintain. For, upon these con^^derations, it will appear
necessarily consequent, that, as there be Apostolical Traditions which the
Scripture evidently witnesses, so evidence may be made of them without
Scripture.

The Rule of S. Austine, how to discern what Traditions do indeed come from the
Apostles, is well enough known to be this; To wit, that which is observed over
all the Church, though it cannot be discerned when, where, or by whom it came
first in force, (that is, in his times, by the authority of what Synod it was
settled) that must be deemed and taken to come from the authority of the
Apostles themselves. I will not use the terms of Synod or Synods, because I
conceive, the Church was from the beginning, by virtue of the perpetual
intelligence and correspondence settled and used between the parts of it, a
standing Synod, even when there was no Assembly of persons authorized to
consent in behalf of their respective Churches; Such things as became requisite
to be determined in any Church being thereby so communicated to the rest, as
the order taken in one, either to be accepted by them or redressed. Neither
will I say, that the Rule is so effectual as it is true. For, I cannot warrant,
how general the practice of every thing that may come in question can appear to
have been over the whole Church, nor whether it may appear to have begun from
some act of the Church, to be designed by some place or persons, or not; which
in S. Austines time, I doubt not, might be made to appear, and being made to
appear, would maintain the Rule to be true. Nor have I need of any such Rule,
as may serve to discern whatsoever may become questionable, whether it come
from the Apostles themselves or not: It shall suffice me here to presume thus
much, that no man can prescribe against any Rule of the Church, that it comes
not from the Apostles, because it is not recorded in the holy Scriptures. And
therefore, that nothing hinders, competent evidence to be made of the
authority of the Apostles, in some Orders of the Church, of which there is no
mention in the Scriptures. Correspondently to that which was settled before
concerning the Rule of Faith, that no man can prescribe against any thing
questionable, that it is no part of it, because it is not evident in Scripture;
or, because such arguments may be made against it out of the Scriptures, which
every one, whose salvation it concerns, is not able evidently to assoile. And,
all this being determined, I intend nevertheless, that it still shall remain
questionable, how far these Orders of the Apostles oblige the Church: Because
I intend not to prescribe from all this, that those Orders which shall appear
to have been brought in by the Apostles may not become useless to the Church.

CHAP. XXII. The Authority of the Fathers is not grounded upon any presumption
of their Learning or Holiness. How far they challenge the credit of
Historical truth. The pre-eminenee of the Primitive. The presumption that is
grounded upon their ranks and qualities in the Church. Of Arnobius, Lactantius,
Tertullian, Origin, Clemens, and the approbation of posterity.
THese things being said, we have got ground for a resolution, in the dispute
concerning the authority of the Fathers in matters questionable concerning
Christianity, and the interpretation of the Scriptures. For truly, did the
credit of those things which they affirm consist in the reputation of their
holiness or learning, whether or no the premises be true, the consequence
would be lame. He that could make a question of the godliness and of the
Christianity of those persons, to whom we owe the maintenance and propagation
of Christianity under God, (by preserving Christ's flock from the contagion of
Heresies, by intertaining the unity of the Church, and by laying down their
lives for the truth) must, by consequence, question, though not that
Christianity which he has sansied, yet that which was delivered by the
Apostles. Which notwithstanding, if the Holy Ghost, that was in them to save
them, by saving the common Christianity, has not given the Church evidence,
that he was given them to preserve them from error in understanding the
Scriptures, we wrong them, and the Holy Ghost in them, if we take the truth
of their doctrine upon their credit. For, though the having of the Holy Ghost
presupposes the profession of Christianity, as I have showed, yet that
imports no evidence to warrant the truth of all that they might say, in
defense or interpretation of it. And though their learning, in that which is
proper to Christians, that is, their skill in the Scriptures be such, as these
ages, that boast so much of learning can never equal, because they made it in a
manner their whole business of study; And though some of them, as Clemens,
Tertullian, Origin, and S. Hi^rome, that looked about them for further helps to
the defense and interpretation of Christianity, may well challenge the
curiosity of these times for great knowledge; Yet, because man's wit is always
fruitful in that which it is employed about, and may still be well employed in
clearing the true intent of Christianity and the Scriptures, so long as there
are contrary opinions and sects which cannot all be true; I will not create any
prejudice to the learning of this time upon that score, which, it is evident,
may and does employ more helps of learning, than they ever did employ toward
the understanding of the Scriptures.

Two privileges there are, belonging to the Fathers of the Church, which, no
man that writes in these days can pretend to, how godly, how learned soever
he may be. The first is that of their age and time, creating an infallible
trust, in point of historical truth, concerning the state of Christianity
during those ages in which they lived, or which they might know. This is that,
which, neither Pagans, nor Jews, nor Mahumetanes can refuse them any more, than
Christians can refuse to believe them in matters of fact, which they relate, not
as things done in private, (which themselves with a few more may pretend to
have had means to know) but which were visible to the world at such time as
they writ, and wherein, had they been otherwise, they might have been reproved,
as imposing upon the world, not the belief of that which does not appear to be
true, but of that which does appear to be untrue. Neither do I demand, that,
upon this score, their credit be admitted any further, than that which I have
premised will enforce. For, if I have well concluded, that the Church is a
Society instituted by our Lord Christ and his Apostles, in trust, for the
maintenance and propagation of Christianity, contained in the holy Scriptures
which he deposited with it; then is the sense of that time which is nearest
the age of the Apostles a legal presumption of the truth of that which it was
trusted with. And as all Writers, that relate things subject to the sense of
all men as well as their own, have the credit of historical truth, and Church
writers, in matters of fact concerning the Church of their respective ages; (the
state thereof being always visible) So those that write under the first ages
of the Church, though competent authors for the truth of nothing in
Christianity, (for then why should not Christianity be believed upon their
credit?) yet must be admitted, as unquestionable witnesses of that
Christianity, which came hot and tender from the forge of our Lord and his
Apostles. Nor do I complain, that any man refuses them upon this score. But
when I see, how many, pretending to search the Scriptures, and the truth of
things questioned in Christianity, never make use of any information they might
have from them, to argue thereupon the true sense of the Scriptures, (who, if
they were to expound any Author of humane learning, would count him a mad man
that should neglect the records of those Authors that lived nearest the same
time, and perhaps do themselves employ the writings of Jews and Pagans in
expounding the very Scriptures) I cannot choose but take it as a mark of
prejudice against some truth, that men care not to be informed of the primitive
Christianity, least consequences might be framed against some prejudices of
their own, which, supposing only the credit of historical truth, might prove
undeniable.

And here, I must needs mervail at the Cardinal of Perrons demand, that the
trial of what is to be thought Catholic, (or, universally received in the
whole Church of God) should proceed chiefly, or at least necessarily, upon the
testimonies of those Writers which lived about the fourth century of years from
Christ, as that which flourished most for number and learning of Writers. For,
seeing the authority of Church Writers is not grounded upon presumption of
their learning; And, that the credit of historical truth cannot be denied even
the single witness of those, that writ, when they were more scarce, and less
knowing, at least in Secular studies; But, what is primitive, what accessory,
is not to be discovered, but by the state of those times which were before
additions could be made; he that demands to be tried by the times of three
hundred years distance from the original, (wherein, what change may have fallen
out, not presumption but historical truth must determine) I say, he that
demands this trial, demands not to be tried. Not that I would deny the Writers
of that age, and such as follow, the credit which their time, in the
consideration now on foot, allows; But, that the resolution of what is
original and primitive must not come from the testimony thereof, but from the
comparison of it with the testimony of those ages that went before.

The second consideration, in which the writings of the Fathers are valuable,
comes from that which is now proved, that is, from the Society of the Church,
and the unity thereof, from whence it follows, that, what is foun^d to be
taught in the Church by men authorized by the Communion thereof, and qualified
to teach, and that without contradiction, is not contrary to the Rule of Faith,
but, if it be taught with one consent, it is part of it. Without contradiction,
I mean here, when a man is not charged to transgress the Faith of the Church,
in that which he teaches, much less disowned by the Church for teaching it.
Not, when no man is found to hold a contrary opinion, which always falls out
in things disputable. For, the Communion of the Church necessarily imports,
that a man qualified with authority in it, profess nothing contrary to that
Faith, the profession whereof qualifies all to be of the Church: Though, other
things there be many, wherein a man may be allowed, not only to believe, but
to profess contrary to that which another professes, and yet qualified, not
only to be of the Church, but to bear that authority which the Society thereof
constituteth. The name, therefore, of Fathers imports at least some part of
that superiority, which the Society of the Church gives; And therefore
belongs not properly to those that are not so qualified, though they that are
not so qualified may be the authors of such writings, as have the lot to remain
to posterity. But, the authority of Fathers which is grounded upon this
presumption, that persons qualified in the Church teach nothing contrary to the
Faith of it, because their quality in the Church would become questionable if
they should teach that which agrees not with the Faith of the Church; This
authority, I say, cannot appear in the writings of private Christians; Because
the Church is no further chargable, by allowing him the Communion of the
Church, who declares to believe only that which indeed contradicts the Rule
of Faith, then of taking no notice what a private man professes to think, out
of that ignorance, which may beseem a capacity of being better informed.

Hereupon it is, that I think it no exception to the due authority of the
Fathers, that Arnobius or Laectantius should be utterly disdained in some
particulars. The one, known to have been a Novice in Christianity, when he
writ, and writing, as S. Jerome testifies, to declare himself a Christian, by
trying his style (as being Master of a School of Eloquence) in defense thereof,
against the Gentiles, had, it seems, the ill chance to light upon some writings
of the Gnostics, according to Saturninus, or Basilides; and, taking them for
Christians, because they affected to go under that name, translated their
monstrous opinions into his work, as points of Christianity. The other, whether
a novice or no I cannot say, marked nevertheless by S. Jerome, as one more
able to refure Gentilisme, than to give an account of Christianity, (and
therefore, to have been converted to Christianity, but not to have learned it)
what presumption a discreet man can make of Christianity by his Book, let every
discreet man judge. I will not say the like of Justine the Martyr, a man who
has deserved far more of Christianity, by renouncing the world, and taking
upon him the profession and habit of a Philosopher among the Gentiles, thereby
to gain opportunity of maintaining Christianity on all occasions which the
Heathen Philosophers took, to maintain the positions of their several sects. A
resolution truly generous and Christian. In the mean time, having in him more
of a Philosopher than of a Scholar, and gathering his knowledge rather from
travail and conversation than from reading, it is no mervail, if he has
suffered many impostures, at least in matters of historical truth, which, he
that should demand that the Church should answer, as allowing his books to be
read, would be very unreasonable; When as, bearing no rank in the Church above
that of all Christians, for any thing I can perceive, if he should have
mistaken himself in any thing, nearly concerning the substance of Christianity,
his eminent merits toward the Church might have been of force to have drowned
all consideration of them, and given his writings passeport to posterity
notwithstanding. I will not extend this consideration to the writings of
Clemens Alexandrinus, of Origin, and of Tertullian; The last whereof, that is
Tertullian, belongs not to this rank, having put himself out of the Communion
of the Church, by making a party against the Church of Carthage, upon the
pretenses of the Montanists. The second, that is Origin, whatsoever opinions
he had, cannot be said, either to have held them so resolutely, or to have
professed them so publicly, that those that were nearest him could be thought
accessories to them. And therefore, as his very great merits of the Church
otherwise, held him in his rank in the Church during his time, so his
extravagancies cannot impeach that authority, which others, and he also in
such things as he agrees with them in, do truly purchase by the allowance of
the Church. The same is to be said of his Master Clemens, whose writings as
they are not so many, so neither his extravagancies so great and considerable.
But even these eccentrical Writers, by being marked for positions particular to
them, besides the credit of historical truth, (which, in times nearest the
Apostles, is of great consequence to inform us of the primitive state of
Christianity, and therefore of incomparable value toward the settling of a
right judgment in all things now questionable) I say, beside that which is
common to them with all Writers, they get, by the exceptions which are made
against them, the advantage of a Rule of Law in the rest; that is to say, that,
setting aside those points in which they are excepted against, they are
according to the Rule of Faith in things not excepted against, against. In
fine, the authority of the whole Church is found to be expressly engaged, in all
things, that have passed into effect, either from the determination of Synods,
(which, having been assembled by the free consent thereof, have been received
by the like free consent, whether all or part were present at the Synod) or,
from the act of any particular Church; the proceeding and grounds whereof, has
been approved of, and received into effect by the whole. Which, in some
measure, may be said of the writings of particular Doctors: In as much as it is
manifest, that extravagant doctrines may have been published in several parts
of the Church, which particular Doctors may have employed their pens to
contradict, before any Church had employed any censure to condemn. As, by
Epiphanius in the Heresy of the Origenists, it appears that Origin was
contradicted by Methodius. If therefore such extravagances so contradicted be
extinguished, such writings have continued cherished by the Church, it is
evidence enough that the Church it self is engaged in the condemnation of those
extravagances, which have been suppressed by the means of such writings. And
all this serves to maintain and evidence the Society of the Church, and the
influence of it in those acts, whereby Christianity has been maintained and
propagated from our Lord and his Apostles. But, for the present, the question
concerning only the Rule of Faith, that which has been said shall suffice to
ground this prescription; that, whatsoever the Church may appear unanimously to
have agreed in, and to have allowed no contradiction to it, that may, and does
as evidently appear to belong to the Rule of Faith, as evidently it may and
does appear, that the Society of the Church, freely acted by it self, has
given such consent. And therefore this prescription will infer nothing, when
it may by any means, appear, that the consent of the Church, and the freedom
which is requisite to the validity thereof, has been anticipated or
over-swayed, by any means intercepting that intercourse and correspondence by
the which it appears. In the mean time, the interpretation of the Scriptures
is to be confined within the bounds of that which the whole Church from the
beginning has taught, when as, by the means hitherto demonstrated, it may be
evidenced, in things that become questionable.

CHAP. XXIII. Two instances against the premises, besides the objection
concerning the beginning of Antichrist under the Apostles. The general answer
to it. The seven Trumpets in the Apocalypse foretell the destruction of the
Jews. The seven Vials, the plagues inflicted upon the Empire for the ten
persecutions. The correspondence of Deniels Prophecy infers the same.
Neither S. Paul's Prophe^^e nor S. John's concerns any Christian. Neither the
opinion of the Chiliasts, nor the giving of the Eucharist to Infants new
Baptized, Catholic.
BEfore I leave this point, I must here take notice of two instances against
that which I have said. The first is the opinion of the Millenaries, which is
said to be the general opinion of the primitive Fathers, Justine the Martyr,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Victorinus the Martyr, Lactantius,
and I know not how many more. So that universal antiquity will prescribe
nothing in matter of Faith, when we see so general an error of the most ancient
corrected by their successors. The other, in the custom of giving the Eucharist
to Infants, as soon as they were baptized, pretended to be so general, that no
practice of the Church can conclude any thing to come from the Apostles, to him
that avoweth this to have been well and duly changed by the Church that is.
There is besides these a more general objection against the testimony of the
Church in any matter of Christianity, rising from S. Paul's Prophecy 2 Thessalonians.
II. 2, 7, 14. that the mystery of iniquity was then on work, till he that
hindered were out of the way, not to be revealed. Which is pretended to be the
corruption of Christianity by such as professed to be of the Church, then
begun, not to be declared, till the rise of the Papacy, by the fall of the
Empire: Or, as the Socinians will have it, till after the death of the
Apostles, at what time, as Hegesippus in Eusebius witnesses, the Church, that,
till then, had continued a Virgin, was defloured and defiled by mixing with
adulterate doctrine. This objection I have produced elsewhere, and repeat it
here, in the first place, to be considered, as pretending here to make fuller
answer. I excepted heretofore thus; That, unless they that make this objection
tie themselves to demonstrate, wherein that corruption consists, which the
Apostle says was then on working underhand; it will be as free for Socinians
to pretend, that he means this corruption to consist in the Faith of the
Trinity, and the Satisfaction of Christ and Original sin, as in any thing
peculiar to the Papacy. And that with so much the more reason, because, if we
make the Pope Antichrist by virtue of this Scripture, we must make him so for
that which is peculiar to the Papacy, whereas, the corruption here spoken of
concerns the whole Church, as well as that of Rome. Now I except more strongly,
that, supposing the purpose of S. Paul to concern the corruption of the Church,
that corruption cannot consist in any thing, which, by sufficient testimony may
appear, to have been received in the Church from the beginning. That is to say,
to this bare surmize of S. Paul's meaning, I have opposed all the reason that
has been alleged to prove, that, whatsoever has been received in the Church
from the beginning, is either of the Rule of Faith, or some custom introduced
by the Apostles. But because still, this is but an exception in bart to the
objection, not in resolution of the difficulty which groundeth it; I will
proceed further, to show, that neither this Prophecy, nor the Revelation of S.
John is meant of those that professed Christianity, either in corrupting it, or
in persecuting Christians, but of the professed enemies thereof, who persecuted
the profession of it, to wit the Princes of the Roman Empire.

To which purpose, having observed, that the whole Prophesy of the Revelation,
from Chap. V. to XX. consisting in the Vision of a Book sealed with seven
Seals; at opening the seventh whereof, seven Angels are seen to blow seven
Trumpets; at blowing the seventh whereof, seven Angels come forth, and pour
forth seven viols of Gods Judgments upon the earth; I now say further, that the
seven Trumpets signify the Judgments of God poured forth upon the Jews in
Jewry, for refusing and persecuting the Gospel. The evidence hereof is first,
in that of Apoc. VII. 4. 8. where there are sealed CXLIVM, of every Tribe XII
M. to be preserved from the plagues of the seven seals, to wit, the Christians
of whom our Lord had said, Mat. XXIV. 31. Mar. XIII. 20. that for the elects
sake, those days should be shortened. For it is evident, that this Vision is
presented S. John upon occasion of the like, which he had read in Ezekiel IX.
4, 5, 6. in the like case, where the Angel is first commanded to mark those
that should be saved from the destruction which he prophesies. And therefore,
where, in the beginning of the Chapter, he sees four Angels standing at the
four corners of the earth, who are forbidden to hurt it, till the servants of
God be marked; it is manifest, that this earth is not the world, but the land
of Jewry. Again, when it is said, XI. 1, 8, 13. that the Gentiles shall trample
the outer Court of the Temple; and that therefore S. John should not measure
it, as he is tied to measure the inner Court and Temple; That the carcasses of
the two witnesses should lie in the streets of the great City where our Lord
was crucified, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt; That there was a great
earthquake, which cast down the South part of that City, and killed seven
thousand; he that would see men pitifully crucify themselves by racking the
Scriptures, let him look upon them that engage themselves not to understand by
all this, the City of Jerusalem and the Temple there. Further, what is the
meaning, that the CXLIVM are seen standing with the Lamb upon mount Sion, XIV.
1. if they belong not to that people? What is the meaning, that afterward XIV.
19, 20. when the Angel with the sickle had made the Vintage, and cast it into
the Wine Press of Gods wrath, this Wine Press is trod without the City, and
the blood over-flows to the space of XVI C furlongs; But, that the City of
Jerusalem is meant, and the Judgment executed in the destruction thereof
expressed by the Wine Press of Gods wrath, which over-flowed all that compass
without the City? If these things cannot be, unless the sounding of the seven
Trumpets, Chap. VIII and IX be understood to proclaim the same vengeance; Let
me ask, what is the reason, that, having related what the founding of them
produced, he adds, IX. 20, 21. The rest of men, that were not slain with
these Plagues, neither repented of the works of their hands, so as not to
worship Devils, and Idols of gold, silver, brass, stone and wood, which can
neither see, nor hear, nor go: Nor of their murders, and witcheries, and
whoredoms, and thefts. For, the Jews not being chargeable with Idolatry at that
time, nor the consequences thereof, how should the rest be chargeable for not
repenting of the same? For, to say, that covetousness of silver, gold, and
goods of brass, stone, or wood, is the Idolatry, and these the Idols here
meant, is to strain the Scripture to an improper sense, whereof there is no
argument in the words. But if we say, that the rest of men, that were not
slain with the Jews, are the Gentiles, to whom God by destroying Jerusalem,
sent a warning to turn them from their Idols to Christianity, for persecuting
whereof they saw the Jews destroyed; we say, that the main scope of the whole
Prophecy is touched in these words; And from hence we shall be able to give a
reason, why, having propounded (in the twelfth and thirrteenth Chapters) the
subject of that vengeance which he sees God to take, by the Vision of the
seven Viols, in the fifteenth and sixteenth Chapters; he returns to
remembrance of those CXLIV M that were marked to be saved, and of the
destruction of the rest of the Jews, XIV. 1-5, 14-20. of which, I shall not
easily believe, that a reasonable account can be given otherwise. For, having
foretold the persecution of Christians in those two Chapters, the twelfth and
thirteenth, what could be more pertinent, than, that he should return to the
remembrance of the saving of those that were marked, and the destruction of
Jerusalem, as a pattern of comfort to Christians, to encourage them to endure,
and of terror to the Gentiles to refrain that fury? And therefore, as before,
IX. 20. this intent had been signified, so it is most expressly repeated by the
proclamation of three Angels one after another, XIV. 6, 8, 9-11. warning all to
worship God alone, not the Beast of Chapter XIII. and fore-warning of the fall
of Babylon for her Idolatries.

Now I am to remember you, that, after the sealing of the CXLIVM Jewish
Christians, there appears before the Throne of God, so great a multitude as no
man could number, of all Nations, Tribes, people, and Languages, clothed in
white Robes, and singing praises to God. Which, afterward, are expounded by
the Angel to be those that come out of the great tribulation, and had washed
their Robes white in the blood of the Lamb, VII. 9. 14. that is to say,
Martyrs. And further, that these are they, who are seen at opening the fifth
Seal, standing beneath the Altar, and calling for vengeance upon their blood,
VI. 9, 10. Which vengeance begins to be executed by the seven Trumpets. And the
Angel that throws down those coals of vengeance upon the earth, from the Altar
above, is said to put incense to the prayers of the Saints, VIII. 3, 4, 5. So
that the same Censer, sends up perfume, that is those prayers, to the throne,
and vengeance down upon earth. Seeing then, that it is manifest to all, that at
opening the first Seal, our Lord goes forth upon a white horse to make war,
VI. 2. Who, after victory and revenge upon his enemies, appears in the same
likeness again, as triumphing over his enemies, XIX. 11-16. it will be
requisite, to understand the Vision of opening the six Seals to be a general
proposition of the whole Prophecy, signifying the publishing of the Gospel,
and the prevailing thereof, through the vengeance which God would execute upon
the persecutors of it, Jews first, and afterward Gentiles of the Roman
Empire, who would not take warning by the destruction of Jerusalem, to turn
from persecuting the Gospel, to embrace Christianity. And therefore the
signification of the rest of the Seals is common to both. For, when he feeth a
Red Horse to signify war, a Black Horse to signify famine, and a Pale Horse
to signify pestilence, VI. 3-8. it is manifest, that all this agrees
wonderfully with that which our Lord had foretold should come to pass in
Jewry, as a preface to the destruction of Jerusalem, of wars, famines,
earthquakes and pessilences, so as, notwithstanding, the end not to be yet,
Mark XIII. 5-10. Mat. XXIV. 6-15. Luke XXI. -- 8-20. And yet it expresses as
punctually, those calamities of the world, which, those of the Empire did
impute to the sufferance of Christianity, when as God indeed intended thereby
to punish them that embraced it not. Antiquity is copious in this subject,
that, when these calamities fell out, the Romans cried out upon the
Christians, as the only cause of them. The beginning of Arnobius his dispute
against the Gentiles will satisfy you of it. When as, therefore, the
persecution of Christianity was both begun in Jewry, (as the Acts of the
Apostles inform us) and prosecuted in the Empire, it will be against the truth
of the case, to restrain the cry of the Souls under the Altar, upon the opening
of the fifth Seal, either to those that suffered by the Jews, or by the
Empire. Now he that peruseth that which is said to have come to pass upon the
opening of the sixth Seal, Apoc. VII. 12-17. might have cause to think that he
reads the destruction of the world; but that it is evident, both, that the
destruction of Jerusalem is prophesied by our Lord by the like expressions,
(which the Prophets also of the Old Testament do use in describing the
vengeance which God takes upon the Nations) and also, that this Prophecy
expresses a large time for Christianity to continue in the world, after this
vengeance taken by God upon the enemies of it. And therefore we must believe
that those have reason, who referr the effect of it, no less to the great
change that fell out in the world, upon the ceasing of the persecution of
Diocletian, and the coming of the Empire into the hands of the Christians, than
to the destruction of Jerusalem. For, when could it be said more justly, that
the world was in an earthquake, that the Sun became like hair cloth, and the
moon like blood, that the stars fell to the earth, as a fig tree shaken with a
great wind casts her figs, that the heavens passed away as a book folded up,
and the Mountains and Islands were removed out of their places, (if ever such
things could justly be said by the Prophets to express great alterations to
fall out in the world) then when those Tyrants, and by consequence all their
ministers, for shame that they were not able to root up Christianity, gave up
the design with their power, and left the Empire to strangers, which, in a few
years, fell into the hands of Constantine, and the Christians his Ministers?
When could it be mo^re justly said, that the Kings and great Ones of the earth,
the rich, the Captains, and the Nobles, the bond and the free, hid themselves
in caves and rocks of the Mountains, saying to them, fall on us and hide us
from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb,
for the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? Then, when the
Persecuters, some gave up the design, others proclaimed the hand of God upon
them, and all their Ministers saw Christianity, which they had persecuted, to
flourish, and their powers possessed by Christians? Which how strongly it
infers (especially if you take the premises along) that, the Trumpets
sounding the vengeance taken upon the Jews, the Viols must signify the like
upon the Empire for the ten persecutions raised upon the same pretense of
rooting out Christianity (not by those that profess Christianity, though
indeed they corrupt it) I leave to all the world to judge. Especially, if we
consider that which is often repeated from the beginning of the Prophesy, that
the matter of it must come to pass shortly, that they are happy that shall read
and observe it, and that to that purpose it is sent to the seven Churches of
Asia, as concerning them deeply; Which, if it concern vengeance to be taken of
the blood of those that suffered by the Papacy, by consequence of the premises
is yet to come, at least the vengeance prophesied, and ten thousand chances to
one if ever it do come, while those that rack the Prophesy to signify it, are
forced to prophecy themselves, without evidencing any commission for it; and
the seven Churches in a manner suppressed by Infidels, far enough from being any
thing of the effect of it, or any of those to whom S. John can be supposed to
speak when he sends it. And truly, supposing that the sound of the Trumpets
concerns the Jews, which no reason refuses, no modesty denies; and supposing
again, that S. John was not banished into Patmos till Domitians days, which is
the original and more probable report of Irenaeus (though some suppose he was
sent thither before, when Claudius his Edict commanded all Jews to depart from
Rome, because Epiphanius says, that he prophesied under Clandius, and the
Pro-consul of Asia might, as it was ordinary, command the same for that
Province which the Prince had at Rome; For, what probability can there be, that
S. John should be forbidden Asia, when S. Paul was permitted Achaia, as we
find by the Acts? I say supposing this, a very good reason is to be given, why
the calamities of the Jews, then past, are represented to S. John by the vision
of the Trumpets; to wit, for the assurance and encouragement of the Christians,
for the terror and conversion of their Persecuters, who, knowing that which was
come upon the Jews, prophetically described by the sounding of the seven
Trumpets, might, both the better understand that part of it, and better infer
the meaning of the seven Vials; together with that which goes before, to prepare
the way for the pouring of them forth, and follows, to show the consequence of
it. And, I must add farther, that, though I say, that the destruction of
Jerusalem was past when S. John was banished into Patmos; yet this Prophesy of
it, and of the seven Trumpets, might be revealed to him before, according to
Ep^phanius, affirming that he prophesied in Claudius his days. For, what
hinders that which concerned the Jews only to be revealed while Jerusalem
stood, the visions of the seven Seals, and seven Vials, (concerning the
Gentiles either in part or only) being reserved to the persecution under
Domitian, in which S. John is commanded to write that Letter to the seven
Churches, which he is commanded to send the whole Prophesy with?

Let me now desire the Reader to look upon that interpretation which I have
given in the Review of my Book of the Right of the Church in a Christian state,
to that which is prophesied of the Reign of the Saints, that is the Christians,
with their Lord Christ, for a thousand years, Apoc. XX. which, they they that
refer the seventh Trumpet, and the seven Viols, in which it is accomplished,
to the judgments to come upon the Papacy, cannot avoid to infer the opinion
of the Millenaries, condemned long since, and suppressed in the Church, in so
much that the most learned of them has professedly set up the Standard to
revive it. I will not here suppose any thing, how prejudicial this opinion
either is, or, as it is held, may be to Christianity. This I will say, that
those which read the History of the Successors of Alexander, Kings of Syria and
Egypt, so expressly prophesied Dan. XI. that many particulars of it might have
been buried in oblivion, had not the exposition of it enforced S. Hierome and
his Predecessors to have recourse to those Histories which now are lost, and
out of them to relate such passages as the Prophet points at; I say, I shall
count them strange men, if, seeing the rest agree with the Story, when they
come to Antiochus Ep^phanes, and those things which the Prophet foretells of
his acts in a continued Narrative, they can persuade themselves, that they were
not fulfilled under him, but must belong to the coming of Antichrist. I know S.
Jerome is chargeable with it: But it is one thing for him to follow some
Predecessors, in expounding that which he knew not how to expound otherwise,
another thing to impose such a doctrine upon the Church, upon no ground, but
such an interpretation as that. I must say farther, that, the Visions of the
VII and VIII Chapters of Daniel of the four Beasts, and the ten horns of the
fourth, and the little horn that blasphemed God and made war against the
Saints, VII. 8, 9. Of the Ram^e and the Goat, and the little horn thereof which
made war against God and his people, Dan. VII. 9-14, must of necessity be
understood of Antiochus Epiphanes, because of the taking away of the daily
sacrifice so expressly foretold; That Nebucchadnezzars vision of the Statue,
which represents four Kingdoms, the last whereof is evidently that of Syria
and Egypt, whereof both in their turns had the command of the Jews, Dan. II.
seems to have no other aim but to introduce the Prophecy of their sufferings
under Epiphanes. The purpose of these Visions toward the Jews being the same,
with that of the Apocalypse toward the Christians, to comfort them with
resolution to adhere to the Law, under to great trials, the good success
whereof, the same Prophecy which foretold the Persecutions assures. It is not
my business here to enter into any farther exposition of the particulars,
presuming that, the reasons which confine the Interpretation being so
concluding, those that will look into the writings of those that walk within
the bounds of Epiphanes his time, especially Grotius the latest and ablest,
will find a more proper sense within those times, than any can be imagined
otherwise. If therefore the Persecutions then related be fulfilled in the
sufferings of the Jews under Epiphanes, then the Kingdom which there is
soretold to be given the Saints and People of God, after vengeance executed
upon him, Dan. VII. 18, 22, 27. XII. 2, 3. must also of necessity be understood
of that Dominion which that Nation attained by freeing themselves from the
Dominion of the Macedonians under the Maccabees.

Now, there being such correspondence, not only between the main intent of
both Prophesies, but also between the particulars of them, in very many things,
which, no man can read both with diligence but must observe (though it is true,
that many figures are used in S. John's Revelations which are found to
correspondent purposes in the Visions of others of the Prophets concerning Gods
ancient people) I conceive no man will be able to reprove the consequence;
that, both the Persecutions which pretended to make the Christians renounce
Christ, as Antiochus pretended to make the Jews renounce the Law, are intended
by the fifth Seal, and also the coming of Constantine to the Empire, whereby
the Government of the world came into the hands of Christians by the sixth
Seal; As well as the Dominion of the Maccabees succeeding the persecution of
Epiphanes, by the reign of the Saints foretold by Daniel. From whence I argue,
that S. Paul's Prophecy cannot intend any that should profess Christianity
with an intent to corrupt it, because of the terms which he uses; He that
exalts himself against all that is called God, or to be worshipped, so as to
seat himself in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God; Being the
same in which Epiphanes is described, Dan. XI. 36, 37. And the King shall do
what him list: He shall exalt himself, and magnify himself against all that
is God, and shall speak marvelous things against the God of Gods, and shall
prosper till the wrath be accomplished: For the determination is made. Neither
shall he regard the God of his Fathers, nor the desires of women, nor care for
any God: For he shall magnify himself above all. For who is it that magnifies
himself above all that is called or accounted God, and worshipped for God,
though by his own Predecessors, but he that appoints the Jews, whom they shall
worship, for their own, the true God, in the Temple? But he that appoints the
Christians to whom they shall sacrifice? Which, as, of all other Princes that
had the Jews in their power, none did but Epiphanes, so, all the Emperors that
raised persecution against the Christians did necessarily do. For, as it is
manifest, that, both the Macedonian Kings and Roman Emperors were themselves
worshipped for Gods by their Gentile Subjects; so can none be said to advance
himself above all that is called or worshipped for God, but those that, first,
forbid the worship of the true God, then, of false Gods, allow or disallow the
worship of whomsoever their own fancy directs, which is a thing common to
Antiochus Epiphanes with the Roman Emperors. For the saying of Tertullian is
well enough known; Apolog. V. cap. Nisihomini deus placuerit, deus non erit;
Spoken in regard of the Power that State used, to allow or disallow the
Religions and the Gods which they pleased; Whereupon he rests and says; That
such Gods, if they have not man to friend, must be no Gods. And besides, the
Emperors by assuming the Legal power of Pontifex maximus, were invested with a
Civil Right, of allowing or disallowing whomsoever should pretend to be
worshipped for God, within the bounds of the Empire.

Whether then that we suppose, that the Prophecy of S. Paul to the
Thessalonians, and the Revelations made to S. John do concern Antichrist or
not; (seeing the Scripture no where says, that either the one or the other
intends to speak of Antichrist.) And for the present, omitting the dispute,
whether that Antichrist whom S. John in his first Epistle II. 18, 19. IV. 1, 2,
3. admits to be appointed to come, though other Antichrists were come before;
whether I say that Antichrist be such a one as by persecution should seek to
constrain Christians to renounce Chirst, or such a one as by professing
Christianity should induce Christians to admit the corruption of Christianity,
and thereby to forfeit the benefit of it; I say, omitting to dispute this for
the present, out of the premises I shall easily infer, that there is neither
in S. Paul's Prophecy, nor in S. John's Revelations, any thing to signify, that
they are intended of any that should bring in the corruption of Christianity,
by making profession of it. Whereupon it follows, that, though we suppose
the mystery of iniquity which S. Paul foretells to be the same that S. John
saw, (as truly I do suppose) and both to begin with the preaching of
Christianity, yet from thence no exception can be made to the interpretation of
the Scriptures, and the determination of things questioned in Christianity,
from that which may appear to have been received by the whole Church from the
beginning. Only I will add, that it is a very barbarous wrong that is done
the Church, whether by the Socinians, or by whosoever they are, that allege the
testimony of Hegesippus in Eusebius, acknowledging; That the Church, which,
during the time of the Apostles was a pure Virgin, after their departure began
to be adulterate with the contagion of pestilent doctrines; to argue, that this
being the mystery of iniquity which S. Paul prophesies, is also the corruption
of the Papacy, which, beginning so early, leaves nothing unsuspected that can
be presumed upon the consent of the Church. For, it is manifest, that
Hegesippus speaks of the abominable doctrines of the Gnostics, which, as it is
manifest by the writings of the Apostles, that they were on foot during their
time, so may we well believe Hegesippus, that, upon their death, they spread
so sarr, that, in comparison of what succeeded, the Church of the Apostles may
well be counted a pure Virgin. It is also manifest, from the premises, that the
Gnostics could find in their hearts to counterfeit themselves as well
Christians as Jews or Gentiles, to secure themselves from punishment, and winn
followers: But it is also manifest, that, as they were discovered by the
Church, so they were put out of the Church, and forced to range themselves
among their own respective Sectaries. So that, to impute the corruption of
their damnable inventions to the Church, because they mixed themselves with the
Church till they were discovered, is the same justice that the Gentiles did the
Christians, in charging them with those horrible incests and vilainies, which
the Gnostics only were guilty of, because they, so far as it was for their
turn, affected to shelter themselves under the profession of Christians. I
shall have occasion in another place to inquire further, concerning the ri^ng
of the Gnostics during the time of the Apostles. In the mean time, because I
see those, who know not how to yield to the truth when it is showed them, stand
in the justification of the wrong that is done the Church, by expounding, of
the corruptions of the Papacy, that which Hegesippus says of the Gnostics, it
shall be enough to give you his own words in Eusebius Eccles. Hist. III. 32. R.
Steph. (...). Hegesippus says; That till that time, the Church remained a pure
Virgin and undefloured; Those that indeavored to adulterate the true Rule of
that preaching which saves (the Rule of Faith, which I said so much of before)
lurking in obscure holes of darkness till then, if any such there were. But,
the sacred quire of the Apostles having found the several ends of their lives;
And, that generation of men being past, that were vouchsafed to hear the
wisdom of God with their own ears, then did the confirmation of atheistical
error receive beginning, through the deceit of false Teachers; Who now, none of
the Apostles remaining, undertook, bare-headed, for the future, to preach that
Knowledge which is falsely so called in opposition to the preaching of the
truth. For, here you have, in express terms, that Knowledge falsely so called,
from whence the Church, after S. Paul, calls all those Heretics Gnostics, as
pretending to have got it by such means, as our Lord had not discovered to his
Apostles. You have also the difference between their lurking under the
Apostles, and their open preaching after their death, in terms so express,
that, he must have a good will to it, whoever oversees. I shall be obliged to
referr my self to these same words in another place.

Now, to that which is objected concerning the opinion of the Millennaries, I
answer first, that it cannot be thought ever to have been Catholic. For,
Iustine the Martyr, who first mentions it, in his dispute with Trypho the Jew,
not many years after the Apostles, expressly testifies, that it was the opinion
of the most orthodox Christians: (to wit, in his judgment) but withal, that it
was contradicted by others, who were nevertheless Christians, even in his
account, that is, of the Communion of the Church. Which, as it is a peremptory
exception against the Universality, so is it a reasonable presumption against
the Originality of it; Seeing that, in so few years between him and the
Apostles, those that believed not all which they had delivered for the common
Christianity can, in no probability, be thought to have enjoyed the Communion
of the Church. And truly, had it not been contradicted elsewhere, that
excellent Prelate, Denis of Alexandriae, that suppressed it in Egypt about CXXX
after, as you may see in Eusebius Eccles. Hist. VII. 23, 24, 25. would have
found a hard text of it. For, the intelligence and correspondence then in use
between all parts of the Church, would easily have confirmed those of his
charge even against him. The reason of atchieving the work was, because the
rest of Christendom insisted not on it. Neither is the number, or repute of
Writers extant, the reason to conclude any thing Catholic, if the premises be
true; But the evidence which may be made, (sometimes from the disputes of able
Writers, but much more, from the acts which past in the Church, according or
against that which they dispute) that their doctrine was received or not
received by the Church, in whole or in part, as necessary, or not. And
therefore secondly I say, that the matter of this position concerns not the
Rule of Faith commonly obliging all Christians, but the interpretation of a
true Prophecy indeed, but, the true understanding whereof, whosoever would make
necessary to the salvation of all Christians, should tie all Christians, upon
their salvation, to understand the Apocalypse, which who does? To justify this
opinion, it has been showed that the Jews have this opinion, that their
Christ shall reign M years when he comes, which seeing they cannot be supposed
to have received from the Christians, it makes a just presumption, that they
had it even in S. John's time. The Jews have a Tradition which they attribute
to the School of one R. Elias, mentioned in many of their writings, by name in
Baal haturim upon Genesis II. and which is also the conceit, not only of
Lactantius, VII. 14. Tychonius the Donatist in his V Rule for expounding the
Scripture, and the Epistle anciently entitled to S. Barnabas and lately
published, but also, (as you may see in the late Lord Primates Latin Discourse
of Cainan) That, as there passed II M years before the Law, under the Law,
(counting from Abraham) II M years, so the days of Christ should be II M
years, and after that the everlasting Sabbath. But whether or no the Jews of S.
John's time could expect this thousand years for the complement of the Sabbath
or work of VIIM years, which this Tradition promised; Whether or no Christians
may expect the end of the World at the end of VII M years, the Sabbath that
shall succeed being eternity; (according to that of S. Peter and of the Psalm,
that M years are as a day in Gods sight) let them that have nothing else to do
inquire; Certainly it will not concern the meaning of the Apocalypse, unless
it could be said, that the M years there foretold are to begin after II M
years of our Lord are finished. Indeed, this we see, that the Jews whom King
Alphonsus employed to make the accounts of the Celestial motions, in appointing
the motion of the fixed Stars from West to East to come rome round in XLIXM
years, the irregularity of that motion to come round in VII M years, (and that,
not being obliged to it by any observations) made the like account of Sabbaths
of thousands of years, and VII thousands, as the Law does of days, or years,
or Sabbaths of years. But if these Jews be pitifully put to it, when, to
excuse their not believing in Christ who came when the World was about IVM
years old, according to their own Tradition, they are fain to say that it has
failed a small matter, of almost XVII C years, for their sins; Among the
Christians what can be said more, but, that it pleased God to promise them M
years of prosperity and reign, which the Jews, forsaking Christ, promised
themselves to no purpose? Seeing the beginning of them cannot be tied to the end
of VIM years from the beginning of the world. And truly no more than this can
be thought requisite to the purpose of the whole Prophecy, of encouraging them
to continue constant in the profession of Christianity, notwithstanding all
persecutions, as foreknowing the issue. Now, he that continues constant in
Christianity, and never knew this Prophecy, shall want nothing necessary to
his salvation, though he want so nething very effectual to the having of that
which is necessary; To wit, of perseverance in Christianity; The intent of this
Prophecy being to persuade them to it. Which is enough to show any man a
difference, between the right understanding of this Prophecy, and any part of
the Rule of Faith.

As for the custom of giving the Eucharist to Infants so soon as they were
baptized, I answer, that, the evidence which I will give you, that it was never
used out of an opinion of necessity to Salvation, as the Baptism of Infants
was, seems to be an exception sufficient against the universal use of it, as
supposed to come from the Apostles. He that will show me any Writer of the
Church, by whose testimony it may be presumed, that the Church did not baptize
Infants, out of an opinion that they could not be saved without it, (I speak
not now of the truth of this opinion, but only of the point of fact,
whatsoever may be argued from thence by virtue of the premises) I will yield
him, that the same Writer did believe, that the giving of the Eucharist to
Infants upon their Baptism, was commanded by the Apostles. I acknowledge it is
the opinion of Tertullian (for which there is no mark upon him as ever a whit
the less Catholic) that it was not expedient to baptize Infants, because of
the danger of years under discretion, to seduce them from the fulfilling of
their profession, before they could thoroughly understand what it imported. But
I deny that this was, because he, or any body then believed, that they could go
out of the world unbaptised, and yet be saved. For, when the vigilance of
Parents, and the diligence of all, might assure them, not to fail of Baptism in
case of necessity; it is no marvail, if the reason alleged might move men to
defer it to the years of manhood, believing no less the necessity of it. Now
in the writings of Fulgentius, a worthy African Prelate, there is extant a
little piece, in answer to a Letter of Ferrandus, a Deacon of his, it seems,
about a certain Moore, who being converted, and having diverse times made
profession of Christianity, as the custom of the Church then required; after
that, being taken sick, was baptized, without being able, by speaking, to make
the like profession as the rule required all at their baptism to make. Upon
other considerations, the Letter desires resolution of the salvation of this
Moore; But, upon this also, because he survived not to receive the Eucharist,
which is clearly answered in the affirmative, upon as good reasons of
Scripture, as a good Christian can desire. Which is without exception, to show,
that they had not that opinion of the necessity of the Eucharist, as of
Baptism, sufficient to argue a several beginning of observing them both. And
truly, seeing it is granted on all hands, that it is no inconvenience in
Christianity, that the Church, or any part of it, mistake the true meaning of
some Scriptures, the alleging of our Lords words; Unless ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have not life in you, Joh. VI. 53.
seems to argue, that this came to be an order from some new act of the Church,
or part of it; rather then, that it was practiced as coming from the Apostles.
Whereunto if we add that which here follows; though it appear (chiefly by S.
Cyprian, de lapsis) to have been frequented in Africa, though it were practiced
in the Western and Eastern Church, yet perhaps it will appear to comeshort of
S. Austins rule, of discerning what comes from the Apostles, as affording
appearance, that it was neither Original, nor Catholic: as for how
prejudicial, this is not the place to determine it.

The words of Innocent I Pope, out of which it is commonly taken for granted,
that this custom was in use at Rome, are these, Epist. XCIII. Apud Augustinum:
Illud vero quod eos vestra fraternitas asserit praedicare, parvulos aeternae
vitae praemiis etiam sine baptismatis gratia posse donari, perfatuum est. Nisi
enim manducaverint carnem filii homins, and biberint sanguinem ejus, non
habebunt vitam in ^semetipsis. But, that which your brotherhood affirms that
they publish, that Infants may have the reward of eternal life given them even
without the grace of baptism, is very foolish: For unless they eat the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink his blood, they have not life in themselves.
Where it is plain, that eating the flesh, and drinking the blood of Christ,
which he makes necessary to salvation, is that which consists in being
baptized; but of giving them the Eucharist, not a word more then this. The same
fense (concerning the eating of the flesh, and drinking the blood of Christ in
and by baptism, and that only necessary to salvation) S. Austine also most
manifestly delivers in a passage alleged by Gratain, de Consecrat. did. 2
Cap. Quia passus est dominus, out of a certain Homily, de infantibus, which
Bid also has, in 1 ad Cor. X. Nulli est aliquatenus dubitandum, unumquemque
sidelium Corporis and sanguinis Dominici tunc esse participem, quando in
baptismate membrum efficitur Christi? nec alienari ab illius panis calicisque
consortio, etiamsi antequam panem illum comedat calicemque bibat, de hoc seculo
migraverit, in unitate Corporis Christi constitutus. No man is any way to
doubt, that every believer then becomes partaker of the body and blood of
Christ, when he is made a member of Christ by baptism: Nor does he become a
stranger to the communion of that bread and cup, though before eat that bread,
and drink that cup, he goes out of the world, estated in the unity of Christ's
body. And thus he expounds also the eating of Christ's flesh, and drinking his
blood, de peccatorum meritis and remis. III. 4. And so he is likewise there to
be understood, Cap. XX. And, to this purpose, all those passages of his are in
force, whereby he requires nothing but Baptism to the salvation of Infants.
And, in this sense, Hypognost. ad Art. V. Quomodo vitam regni coelorum
promittitis parvulis non renatis ex aqna and spiritu, non cibatis carne, atque
non potatis sanguine Christi, qui fusus est in remissionem peccatorum? Ecce non
baptizatus, vitali etiam cibo poculoque privatus, dividitur a regno coelornm,
ubi fons viventium permanet Christus. How do ye (Pelagians) promise little
ones, not born again of water and the spirit, no^ fed with the flesh, nor
drenched with the blood of Christ shed for re^^ission of sins, the life of the
Kingdom of heaven? See, the unbaptized, deprived also of the bread and cup of
life, is divided from the Kingdom of Heaven, where Christ the well of life
remains. So, it appears that the African Church had this custom, but held it
not necessary to salvation as Baptism; But by Gennadius, de dogmatibus
Ecclesiasticis, Cap. LII. It appears to have been a custom of the Church, when
Heretics were reconciled to the Church by confirmation, to give their little
ones the Eucharist presently upon it. And Ordo Romanus de Baptismo, prescribes
it after the solemn Baptism before Easter, which the French Capitulary, I. 161.
and Alcuinus also, de divinis officiis provideth for. And in the Eastern
Church, Dionysius in the end of the book de Hierarchia Ecclesiastica. In the
mean time it is to be considered, that, there being no order that all should be
baptized Infants; nor at what age: (Whereupon St. Gregory Nazianzene, Orat.
XLII. in Sanctum Bapt. advises at three or four years of age) it cannot be said
to have been a general custom of the Church; Nor, that it could be original
from the Apostles, because the solemn times of Baptism, at Easter and
Whitsontide, cannot be thought to have been settled, till Christianity was
grown very vulgar. For, as for those that were baptized upon particular
occasions, or in danger of death, it cannot be thought, that the Eucharist was
celebrated for their purpose; nor does any example appear, that it was ever
brought them from the Church. On the contrary, when the times of Baptism came
to be disused, because it was found to be for the best, that all should be
baptized Infants; upon this occasion, the receiving of the Eucharist came to be
deferred as much longer then was fitting, in my opinion, then it was given too
soon in S. Cyprians time, according to the example related by him in his Book
de Lapsis; where the Child, whom the Pagans had given bread dipped in the wine
that had been consecrated to their Idols, (because too young to eat of the
flesh of their sacrifices) receives the Eucharist in the Church.

CHAP. XXIV. Two sorts of means to resolve whatsoever is resolvable concerning
the Scripture. Upon what terms the Church may, or is to determine controversies
of Faith. And what obligation that determination produces. Traditions of the
Apostles oblige the present Church, as the reasons of them continue or not.
Instances in our Lords Passover and Eucharist. Penance under the Apostles, and
afterward. S. Paul's vail, eating blood, and things offered to Idols. The power
of the Church in limiting these Traditions.
I May now proceed, I conceive, to resolve generally, upon what principles any
thing questionable in Christianity is determinable; and as franckly as briefly
do affirm, that there are but two sorts of means to resolve us in any thing of
that nature: Tradition and Argument, Authority and Reason, History and Logic.
For whatsoever any Artist or Divine has said, of the great use of the
languages, in discovering the true meaning of the Original Scriptures, by the
ancient Translations, as well as the Originalls, (which I allow as much as they
demand;) they must give me leave to observe, that, seeing all languages are
certain Laws of speaking, which have the force of signifying by being
delivered to posterity upon agreement of their Predeoessors, all that help is
duly ascribed to Tradition, which we have from the Languages. Indeed this is no
Tradition of the Church, no more then all History and Historical truth,
concerning the times, the places, the persons mentioned in the Scripture,
concerning the Laws, the Customs, the Fashions, and orders practiced by
persons mentioned in the Scriptures in all particulars whereof the Scripture
speaks; which, whether it be delivered by Christians or not Christians, as far
as the common reason of men allows or warranteth it for Historical truth, is
to be admitted into consequence, in inquiring the meaning of the Scriptures;
and without it, all pretense of Languages is pedantick and contemptible, as
that which gives the true reason to the Language of the Scripture, whatsoever
it import in vulgar use. This help being applied to the Text of the Scripture,
it will be of consequence, to confider the process of the discourse, pursuing
that which may appear to be intended, not by any man's fancy, but by those
marks, which, cleared by the helps premised, may appear to signify it; Which
is the work of reason, supposing the truth of the Scriptures. And whereas other
passages of Scripture, either are clearer of themselves, or, being made clearer
by using the same helps, may seem to argue the meaning of that which is
questioned: whereas, other parts of Christianity resolved before, may serve as
principles to infer, by consequence of reason, the truth of that which
remains in doubt (not to be impured therefore to reason, but to the truth from
which reason argues, as believed and not seen) this also is no lesss the work
of reason, supposing the truth of the Scriptures. But whereas there be two
sorts of things questionable in Christianity; and all that is questionable
merely in point of truth, has relation to, and dependence upon the rule of
faith, as consequent to it, or consistent with it, if we will have it true; or
otherwise, if false: I acknowledge in the first place, that nothing of this
nature can be questionable, further, then as some Scripture, the meaning
whereof is not evident, creates the doubt. And therefore, that the
determination of the meaning of that Scripture, is the determination of the
truth questionable. For, seeing the truth of Gods nature and counsails, which
Christianity reveals, are things which no Christian can pretend to have
known, otherwise then by revelation from God; and that we have evidence, that
whatsoever we have by Scripture, is revealed, but, by the Tradition of the
Church, no further then all the Church agrees in it; (all that wherein it
agreeeth, being supposed to be in the Scripture, and much more then that) It
follows, that nothing can be affirmed as consequent to, or consistent with
that which the tradition of the Church contains, but by the Scripture, and
from the Scripture. So that I willingly admit, whatsoever is alleged from
diverse sayings of the Fathers; that, whatsoever is not proved out of the
Scriptures, is as easily rejected as it is affirmed, limiting the meaning of it
as I have said. But, whatsoever there is Scripture produced to prove, seeing we
have prescribed, that nothing can be admitted for the true meaning of any
Scripture that is against the Catholic Tradition of the Church; it behooves
that evidence be made, that, what is pretended to be true, has been taught in
the Church so expressly, as may infer the allowance of it, and therefore is
not against the rule of Faith. But this being cleared, so manifest as it is,
that the Church has not the privilege of infallibility, in any express act,
which is not justifiable from the universal original practice of the Church,
whither in prescribing what is to be believed, what is to be professed, or what
is to be done: So manifest must it remain, that nothing can be resolved by
plurality of votes of Ecclesiastical Writers, as to the point of truth. For
then were the privilege of infallibility in the votes of those Writers, which
themselves disclaim, from the substance of what they write. And it is to say,
that, what had no such privilege when it was written, if it have more Authors
survive that hold it, shall be and must be held infallible. Which consequences
being ridiculous, it follows, that, for the trial of truth within the bounds
aforesaid, recourse must be had to the means premised. And the effect of those
means every days experience witnesses. For, the obligation which all men
think they have, firmly to hold that, which by these means, they have all
concluded from the Scriptures, is the consequence of these principles in
expounding the same. Which obligation, though sometimes imaginary, in regard
that between contradictory reasons the consequence may be equally firm on both
sides; yet that it cannot be otherwise, he that believes the truth of
Christianity must needs imagine. For, true principles truly used, necessarily
produce nothing but true consequences.

Which if it be so, why should any question be made, that the Church may and
sometimes ought to proceed, in determining the truth of things questionable
upon occasion of the Scriptures, concerning the rule of Christian faith? or
which is all one, that the exercise of this power by the Church, produces in
those that are of the Church, an obligation of submitting to the same? Indeed
here be two obligations, which sometimes may contradict one another, and
therefore, whatsoever the matter of them be, the effects of them cannot be
contraries. The use of the means to determine the meaning of the Scriptures,
produces an obligation of holding that which follows from it; which
obligation no man can have, or ought to imagine he has, before the due use of
such means; whither his estate in the Church oblige him to use them or not.
But, the visible determination of the Church, obliges all that are of the
Church, not to scandalize the unity thereof, by professing contrary to the
same. And to both these obligations the same man may be subject, as the matter
may be, to wit, as one that has resolved the question upon true principles,
not to believe the contrary; and as one of the Church, that believes the Church
fails in that, for which he is bound not to break the unity thereof, not to
profess against what the Church determines. For I am bold to say again, that
there is no society, no communion in the world, whether Civil,
Ecclesiastical, Military, or whatsoever it be, that can subsist, unless we
grant, that the Act of superior Power obliges sometimes, when it is ill used.
In the mean time, I say not that this holds always, and in matters of
whatsoever concernment; nor do take upon me generally to resolve this, no more
then what is the matter of the rule of Faith, which, he that believes may be
saved, he that positively believes it not all, cannot. It shall be enough for
me, if I may give an opinion, whether that which we complain of, be of value to
disoblige us to our superiors, or not: As, concerning what is questioned
amongst us, whither it be of the rule of Faith or not. But this I shall say,
that, to justify the use of this power toward God, requires, not only a
persuasion of the truth, competent to the weight of the point in question, in
those that determine for the Church; but also a probable judgment, that the
determination which they shall make, will be the means to reduce contrary
opinions to that sense, which they see so great Authority profess and enjoin.
For, without doubt, there can be no such means to dissolve the unity of the
Church, as a precipitate and immature determination of something that is become
questionable. (For, effectually to proceed, to exercise Ecclesiastical
Communion, upon terms contrary to that which has been received before, is
actually to dissolve the unity of the Church) The engagement to make good that
which men shall have once done, being the most powerful Witcheraft and Ligature
in the world, to blind them from seeing that which all men see besides
themselves; or at least, from confessing to see that which they cannot but see.

But if we speak of things which concern the communion of the Church, in those
offices which God is to be served with by Christians, or that tend to maintain
the same; besides the meaning and truth of the Scriptures, there remains a
further question, what is or ought to be law to the Church, and oblige them
that are of the Church; (seeing that whatsoever is in the Scripture, obliges
not the Church for Law, though obliged to believe it for truth) the resolution
whereof, will require evidence of the reason, for which every thing was done by
the Apostles; (for as it holds or not, so the constitution grounded upon it, is
to hold, either always, or only as it holds). And this reason must be
evidenced by the Authority of the Church, admitting that reason into force,
whither by express act, or by silent practice. When the Israelites are
commanded to eat the Passover in haste, with their loins girt, and their
staves in their hands; there is appearance enough, that the intent of it was
only concerning that Passover which first they celebrated in Egypt, not for
an order always to continue, because then the case required haste; and because
then the Angel passed over their houses, upon the door-posts whereof the blood
was commandded to be sprinkled, that by that mark he might pass over them to
smite the Egyptians. For, though Philo would have the Passover to be
celebrated at home, and not at Jerusalem, (though perhaps only by those of the
dispersions, those that dwelt in the Land of promise, being all tied to resort
to Jerusalem) yet all that acknowledge the Talmud, think it not lawful to
celebrate it but at Jerusalem; contenting themselves with the Supper, and
abatng the Lamb, as one of those sacrifices which the Law forbids every
where, but before the Ark. But had not the practice of the Nation, and the
Authority of the Elders, trusted by the Law to determine such matters, appeared
in the business; our Lord, who, according to his own doctrine, was subject to
their constitutions, had not had a rule for his proceeding. So, in the infancy
of Christianity, it is no marvail, if the Christians at Jerusalem entertained
daily communion, even at board also, among themselves; and, that they gave
their estates to the maintenance of it, not by any law of communion of goods,
but, as the common necessity required; For what could make more toward the
advancement of Christianity? And when, at Corinth, and in other Churches, the
communion was in use, though not so frequent, nor giving up their estates, but
offering the first fruits of them to the maintenance of it; yet still was the
Eucharist frequented at these occasions, as it was first instituted by our
Lord, as, by the express words of Tertullian, we understand that it was, even
in his time. But, when the number of Christians so increased, that the use of
the like communion could not stand with the maintenance of the world, which
Christianity supposes, when the same discipline could not prevail in so vast a
body, which had ruled at the beginning; is it then any marvail to see these
Feasts of love laid aside, (whether with the Eucharist, or without it) and the
Sacrament of the Supper of our Lord become so unfrequented at Supper, that it
is strange to the rest of Christendom, to see it so used in Egypt, on Maundy
Thursday, in remembrance merely of the primitive custom? What shall we say of
the order of Widows, whereof S. Paul writes? Is it not manifest, that there
was then a necessity of such persons, as might give attendance upon the sick,
and poor, and impotent of every Church? that might minister hospitality to
those strangers that should travail by every Church, and were to receive
entertainment according to the custom? And is it not manifest, that when,
Christianity increasing, daily oblations could not serve for this purpose, but
standing indowments were to be provided; this course could not serve the turn,
nor the office continue necessary, when the work ceased? There is nothing more
evident, then that which I have said in another place, concerning the rigor of
Penance under the Apostles. Nothing to intimate, that they forbade any sin,
how grievous soever, to be admitted to reconcilement with God by the Church.
Many evident Arguments, that they left it in the power of the Church to grant
it or not. But, the increase of Christianity, abating the sincerity and zeal of
Christians, made it so necessary to abate of that rigor, and to declare free
access even for Adulterers, Murderers, and Apostates to the worship of Idols;
that Montanus first, and afterward the Novatians, are justly counted
Schismatics, for departing from the Church, upon that, which the change of
times made necessary for the preservation of unity in it: Which the Donatists
remain much more liable to, breaking out afterward upon a branch of the same
cause. Yet is nothing more evident, to them that use not the unction of the
sick, then that instance. For what is, or what can be alleged, why an
express precept of the Apostles, backed with the uninterrupted practice of the
Church, should not take place, but the appearance, that the reason for which it
was commanded cease; the miraculous curing of bodily sickness no more
remaining in the Church, and so drawing after it the ceremony which signified
and procured it? But, in S. Paul's dispute of women's covering their heads in the
Church, the case is not so clear, unless we admit two suppositions, both
evident upon the credit of Historical truth. The first, that neither Jews,
Greeks, or Romans, ever used, or knew what it meant, to uncover the head in
sign of reverence. What use soever they made of Hats or Caps, as they had use
of them (though not to continue all as we have) seeing you never find that they
put them off in sign of reverence; it is impossible, that keeping them, on
should be understood among them for a sign of irreverence. And therefore, that
the whole dispute nothing concerns the question, of preaching with a Hat or a
Cap on in the Church. The second is, that which we learn by Tertullians Book,
de Velandis Virginibus: The subject whereof being, that Virgins are not
exempted, by any privilege, from vailing their faces in the Church, is argued
by consequences drawn from this dispute of S. Paul; And namely, it is alleged,
that, in the Church of Corinth at that time, according to S. Paul's order, they
veiled their faces. Whereby it appears, that S. Paul was understood to speak of
a vail, which, covering the head, came down before the face, which S. Paul
therefore one while calls, (...), another while, (...), signifying, that which
is so upon the head, as it comes down before the face; in English, a vail. And
so Clemens Alexandrinus and others, understand it. This being the case, what is
the reason, which ceasing, the precept thereupon may be thought to cease?
Surely, nothing else, but, because those Christians which overcame the Roman
Empire, did not think, that civility, and the modesty of women, required them
to keep their faces veiled; as the opinion and custom of Jews, Greeks, and
Romans, to whom S. Paul preached, did require. And though he argues, that
nature, which teaches women every where to let their hair grow at length,
teaches them to vail their faces, because, even unclothed, they are provided of
a vail; yet, when he adds; If any man be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Chuches of God: It is manifest he intends no law of
Nature, but an inference, which, civility making from Nature, was fit to be
maintained by the custom of the Church, as that custom, for the unity of the
Church. But when those Nations, whose civility had not made the same inference,
received Christianity, is it marvail that Christianity should not impose that
upon them, which, being no part of Christianity, had no ground, unless they
would be bound to receive the civility of other Nations upon the account of the
common Christianity? In the decree of the Apostles at Jerusalem, prohibiting
the Gentilish Christians things sacrificed to Idols, strangled, and blood, it
appears by the disputes of sundry learned men, admitting the Jews Tradition;
that all the Sons of Noe received seven precepts from God, which, when other
Nations fell away to Idols, remained visible only in the practice of such, as,
not being Jews nor circumcised, are nevertheless, in sundry places of the Law,
allowed to live among them in the Land of promise, under the name of the
stranger within the Gates: For, this allowance was, upon condition of
undertaking these seven precepts. When therefore Gentiles were admitted to
Christianity with Jews, and the question resolved, that they were free of the
Law of Moses, and yet an expedient was requisite, not to scandalize the Jews by
the use of that freedom, that Jews and Gentiles might the more kindly join in
one Church; it appears, that the precept of blessing the name of God, that is,
worshipping God, was sufficiently provided for by the Christian faith: The
precepts of maintaining Courts of Judicatures, and of forbearing rapine, were
sufficiently provided for by the Government of the Empire; and the precept of
the Sabbath out of date under the Gospel. It remains therefore, that, by
prohibiting things sacrificed to Idols, and fornication, with that which was
strangled, and blood; the Apostles establish such compliance between Jewish and
Gentilish Christians, as was in use between Jews and strangers, Proselytes, in
the Land of promise. Not as if Christians had not sufficiently renounced
Idolatry in receiving the faith; or, as if it were not free for them, being
Christians, to Gods creatures, which perhaps might have been sacrificed to
Idols: But because, as I said before, the Jews had a custom not to eat any
thing, till they had inquired, whether sacrificed to Idols, or consecrated, by
offering the first fruits thereof; which scrupulosity those who did not
observe, they counted not so much enemies to Idols as they ought to be; which
opinion of their fellow Christians, was not so consistent with that opinion of
Christianity which was requisite. Not as if fornication were not sufficiently
prohibited by Christianity, but because, simple fornication being accounted no
sin, but merely indifferent among the Gentiles; all the professions, and all
the decrees that could be made, were little enough to persuade the Jews, that
their fellow Christians of the Gentiles, held it in the like detestation as
themselves. Now, though we find, that the Christians did sometimes, and in most
places forbear blood, and things strangled, and offered to Idols, even where
this reason ceased; and that perhaps out of an opinion, that the decree of the
Apostles took hold of them, in doing which they did but abridge themselves of
the common freedom of Christians) yet, seeing the Apostles give no such sign of
any intent of reviving that which was once a Law to all that came from Noe, but
forgotten and never published again; it follows, that the Church is no more
led by the reason of their decree, then those Churches of Rome and Corinth
were, whom S. Paul licenses to eat all meats in general, (as the Romans) or
things sacrificed to Idols expressly, (as the Corinthians) excepting the case of
scandal, (which our common Christianity excepteth) setting aside the decree of
Jerusalem, which S. Paul alleges not, and naming two cases, wherein that
scandal might fall out, as excepting no other case. But in all these
instances, (and others that might be brought) as it was visible to the Church,
whether the reasons for which such alterations were brought into the Church,
continued in force or not; so was it both necessary and sufficient, for them
that might question whither they were tied to them or not; to see the express
act, or the custom of the Church for their assurance. For, what other ground
had they to assure their consciences, even against the Scripture, in all ages
of the Church? For, if these reasons be not obvious, if every one admit them
not, much less will every one find a resolution wherein all may agree, and all
scandal and dissension may be suppressed.

CHAP. XXV. The power of the Church in limiting even the Traditions of the
Apostles. Not every abuse of this power, a sufficient warrant for particular
Churches to reform themselves. Heresy consists in denying something,
necessary to salvation to be believed. Schism, in departing from the unity of
the Church, whether upon that, or any other cause. Implicit Faith no virtue;
but the effect of it may be the work of Christian charity.
SUpposing now the Church a Society, and the same from the first to the second
coming from Christ, by Gods appointment; Let it be considered, what is the
difference between the state thereof under the Apostles, and under Constantine,
or now, under so many Soveraignties as have shared these parts of the Empire;
And let any understanding, that can apprehend, what Laws, or what Customs are
requisite to the preservation of unity in the communion of the Church, in the
one, and in the other estate; I say, let any such understanding pronounce,
whither the same Laws can serve the Church, as we see it now, or as we read of
it under Constantine, and as it was under the Apostles. He that says, yea,
will make any man that understands, say, that he understands not what he speaks
of; he that says nay, must yield, that even the Laws given the Church by the
Apostles, oblige not the Church, so far as they become useless to the purpose
for which they are intended, seeing it is manifest, that all Laws of all
Societies whatsoever, so far as they become unserviceable, so far must needs
cease to oblige. And the Apostles, though they might know by the spirit the
state of the Church that should come after; yet, had they intended to give Laws
to that State, they had not given Laws to the State which was when they lived
and gave Laws. The authority therefore of the Apostles remaining
unquestionable, and the Ordinances also by them brought into the Church, for
the maintenance of Gods service according to Christianity; the Church must
needs have power, not only to limite and determine such things as were never
limited nor determined by the Apostles, but even those things also, the
determination whereof made by the Apostles, by the change of time, and the
state of the Church therewith, are become evidently useless and unserviceable
to the intent for which it stands. And if it be true that I said before, that
all power produces an obligation of obeying it in some things, (I say not in
all, as before) even when it is abused, in respect of God, and of a good
Conscience^ then is the act of the Church so far a warrant, to all those that
shall follow it so far, even in things which a man not only suspects, but
sees to be ill ordered by those that act in behalf of it. This is that, which
all the variety and multitude of Canons, Rites, and Ordinances, which has been
introduced into the Church, before there was cause of making any change without
consent of the whole, evidenceth; being nothing else, but new limitations of
those Ordinances, which the Apostles either supposed or introduced for the
maintenance of Gods service, determining the circumstances according to the
which they were to be exercised. For, if there were always cause, since the
beginning, for particular Churches, (that is, parts of the whole) to make such
changes, without consent of the whole, as might justly cause a breach between
that part and the whole; then was there never any such thing as a Catholic
Church, which all Christians profess to believe. And truly, the Jews Law may be
an argument, as it is a pattern, of the same right; which, notwithstanding an
express precept, of neither adding to it, nor taking from it, unless we admit
a power of determining circumstances not limited by the letter of it, becomes
unserviceable, and not to be put in practice: as may easily appear to any man
that shall peruse the cases that are put, upon supposition of those precepts
which determine not the same. Whereupon a power is provided by the same Law, of
inflicting capital punishment upon any, that, not resting upon the
determination established by those that have authority in behalf of the whole,
shall tend to divide the Synagogue.

Iintend not hereby to say, that the power of giving Law to the Church, cannot
be so well abused, that it may at length enable, or oblige parts of the Church,
to provide for themselves such an order in the communion of Christianity, as
may stand with the Scriptures, and the unity of the Church, though without
consent of the whole Church of the present time. For it is evident, that this
disorder may be so great in the Laws of the Church, as to make them useless
and unserviceable, not only to the profession of the true faith, or to the
service of God, for which the communion of the Church stands, but even to the
unity of the Church it self, which is the prime precept, that all which the
Church does, ought to aim at. It is evident also, that this is the true cause
which the reformation has to dispute against the Church of Rome. But this I
say, that, though particular Churches must necessarily have their particular
Laws (which are the differences which several Churches observe, in the
exercise of the same Ordinances) yet may not any particular Church make it
self any Law which may tend to separation, by disclaiming the unity of the
whole Church; or, either expressly, or by due construction denying the same.
This is done by abrogating Apostolical Traditions as inconsistent with
Christianity for the matter of them; not because the reason and ground of them
is ceased. For, they who disclaim the Authority of the Apostles, cannot
acknowledge the unity of the Church: And they who make Apostolical Ordinances
inconsistent with Christianity, do necessarily disclaim the Authority of the
Apostles. The same is done, by abrogating the constitution of the Church, done
by virtue of the Authority left it by the Apostles. For, to disclaim the Church
in this Authority, is to disclaim the Apostles that left it. And though this
Authority may be so abused, that particular Churches, (that is to say, parts of
the whole Church) may thereby be authorized, yea obliged to provide for
themselves without the consent of the whole; yet not against the authority of
the whole, that is to say, of the Apostles from whence it proceeds: Nor is
every abuse thereof a cause sufficient to warrant the scandals, that such
proceedings necessarily produce. And this shall be enough for me to have said
in this place; Having, I suppose, established those principles, by the right
application whereof, he that can make it, may judge what is the true plea,
whereby that separation, which the reformation has occasioned, must either be
justified, or be thought unjustifiable.

From that which has been said, the difference between Heresy and Schism,
and the true nature of both crimes, in opposition to Christianity, may and
ought to be inferred in this place; because it ought not to be forgotten,
(which ought daily to be lamented that at) the beginning of the troubles, it
was questioned in the Lords House, whether there were any such crimes or not,
or whether they were only bug-bares to scare Children with; and that,
hereupon, every man sees England overrun with both. The word Heresy signifies
nothing but Choice, and therefore the signification of it is sometimes
indifferent, importing no more, then a way of professing and living which a man
voluntarily chooses, as S. Paul uses it, when he says; That he lived
according to the most exact Heresy of the Jews Religion a Pharisee, Act.
XXVI. 5. For it is known, that, besides the necessary profession of the Jews
Law, there were three sects, which no man by being a Jew was obliged to, but by
his own free choice, the Pharisees, the Sadduces, and the Essenes; which being
all maintained by the Law, as it was then used, the common name of them cannot
signify any crime among them, to whom S. Paul then spoke, whatsoever we
believe of the Sadduces. And thus it sounds among them, who use it to signify
the Sects of the Grecian Philosophers, allowed by those who embraced them not:
As in the Title or Lucians discourse, (...). But because it is too ordinary,
for men, of their own choice, to depart from the rule to which they are or
ought to stand obliged; thereupon, the word is most part used to signify the
free choice of a rule of living, contrary to that rule which they stood obliged
to before: In which sense, Adam is called by Tertullian the first Heretic, as
he that first departed from the will of God, to live according to his own.
Supposing now that Christianity obliges, both to the rule of faith, and to the
society of the Church, by virtue of that rule; (because the belief of the
Catholic Church is part of it, as has been declared before) it is manifest,
that, whosoever dis-believes any part of that rule, the belief whereof is the
condition upon which a man becomes a Christian; and thereby forfeits his
interest in those promises which God has made to Christians, does or may
either lead others or follow, in living according to that belief which he
chooses, whether, professing it, as a Christian ought to profess his
Christianity, or not. And, in this sense it seems to be used by S. Paul, when
he says, Titus III. 10. 11. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and
second admonition, avoid. Knowing that such a one is turned aside, and sins,
being condemned by himself. For, when he speaks of admonishing them, he
signifies, that he speaks not of such as had actually departed from the
communion of the Church, but sheltred themselves under the common profession of
Christians, doing every thing as they did, that, by such means, they might
inveigle such as suspected nothing, to admit their infusions; which, I showed
before to have been the fashion of the Gnostics, whose Doctrines the Apostle,
1 Pet. II. 1. calls, (...), Pestilent Heresies: And whom S. Paul must needs
speak of in this place, because there were no other on foot, so as to be
mentioned by their writings. Such a one then the Apostle says is condemned by
himself, in the same sense, as the Councills and Chuch-Writers say of one in
the same case, in seipsum sententiam dixit; He has given sentence against
himself; because, by refusing the second admonition, he has declared himself
obstinate, in that which the common Christianity makes inconsistent with the
communion of the Church. And this more proper to the circumstance of this text
then S. Jeroms interpretation, of those that condemn themselves to be put out
of the Church by voluntarily leaving the communion of it; though that also is
not far from truth, concerning them who are properly signified by the
general name of Heretics.

For, it is very evident, that, when S. Paul says, 1 Cor. XI. 17. There must
be Heresies among you; his meaning is only of such factions as tended to
Schism, whereof he admonishes them, 1 Cor. I. 10. That there be Schisms among
them. Now it is manifest, how much difference there is between him who holds
something contrary to the faith, and yet departs not from the communion of
the Church; and him that departs from the commnion of the Church, though
holding nothing contrary to the substance of the Christian Faith. The one
forfeiteth his interest in Heaven, by the inward act of his soul, refusing the
common faith which saves all Christians, though outwardly holding communion
with the Church: The other, by the inward act of the soul, proceeding to the
outward act of dissolving the communion of the Church, which the common charity
of Christians in the first place is to maintain. If both these crimes may come
under the the common name of Heresy, (because inward misbelief naturally
tends to make a sect of such as shall profess to live according to it) no
marvail, if all divisions of the Church be commonly called both Heresies and
Schisms, whatsoever be the cause upon which they divide; If mere schisms, (that
is, where the cause is not any thing necessary to the salvation of all to be
believed) be also Heresy in the Language of the Apostles. Nevertheless, there
being so much difference between the two crimes, and the grounds of them, it is
necessary to understand, setting aside all aequivocation of terms, that there
is a crime consisting in mis-believing some Article of the faith (which, if you
please, may properly be called Heresy;) And another consisting in dissolving
the unity of the Church, which is properly called Schism, when there is no
further pretense for it then some Law, which, the Church being able to make,
the other part will rather depart then admit. There may divisions in the Church
upon pretense of such doctrines, as are not necessary to the salvation of all
(and so, no part of the rule of faith) but, so evidently to be deduced from it,
and from the rest of the Scriptures, that the Church may have cause to
determine the same; and yet others may choose rather to depart from the Church,
then suffer the determination thereof to take place. Which divisions, that
memorable observation of S. Jerome seems to call Heresies, which said that all
Schisms naturally devise to themselves some Heresy, (that is, some doctrine
extravagant from the doctrine of the Church) that they may seem not to have
departed from the Church for nothing; Which is very well exemplified by S.
Austine in the Donatists. But whether such divisions are to be counted Heresies
or Schisms, both names properly signifying all divisions of the Church, (and
only that crime which consists in mis-believing some Articles of faith,
appropriating the name of Heresy, because common use has given it no peculiar
name of its own) I leave to him, that shall please to determine it.

Supposing these things, it will not be requisite for me to say much, to that
which has been published concerning the nature of Schism, of late. That, being
to be had only out of the Scripture, it is no where there to be had, but in S.
Paul to the Corinthians. That there was at Corinth, when S. Paul writ, only
one Congregation of Christians, which he calls the Church of Corinth. That
therefore, there is no crime of schism, but in breaking one Congregation into
more. As for any visible society of the Catholic Church, acknowledging the
materials, men that profess Christianity, (which he that sees cannot believe)
to the form (which is that unity which is visible) he is as great a stranger,
as if he had never heard of the Creed; acknowledging, notwithstanding, an
invisible unity in the common faith and love of Christians; upon persuasion
whereof, he challenges as great freedom from schism, as ever any member of the
Catholic Church could claim. For, having showed, how a thing which God made
visible for many ages, may reasonably be expected to be found in the
Scriptures; I am not to yield to try it by any part of them, knowing, that,
whosoever evidenceth a society of the Church by Gods Law, evidenceth the crime
that consists in the dissolving of it. And, it were fit we were told, how all
the Christians, in a City where God had much people, should sit at one Table;
(or, at least, sup in one room) before we believe, that there was then no more
Christians at Corinth, then could assemble at once. Which if I did believe, I
would notwithstanding allege Iustine the Martyrs words, Apol II. (...), On the
day called Sunday, all that dwelt in Cities, or in Countries, assemble
themselves in one. And, supposing, that then, there were more Christians in
Rome, and the Territory thereof, for example, (for he writes to the Emperor
Antoninus) then could meet together in one place; As Iustine means not, when he
says, That all in Cities or Countries meet in one, that all made one Assembly,
but met all in common assemblies: I would thereupon argue; that, no more does
S. Paul say, (when he gives these rules to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. XI. 14.
which serve any assembly) that there was then but one Congregation at Corinth.
If in Iustines time, if before, if after, he can show me any Church of Rome, or
any City beside Rome, that contained not all the Christians of that City, and
the Territory thereof; I will believe, that, when Clemens writ the Letter
lately published, from the Church of Rome, to the Church of Corinth; there were
no more Christians at Rome, or at Corinth, then could meet all at once. But, if
in all the Scripture, as well as in all the Records of the Church, a Church
signify the university of Christians, which one City, and the Territory
thereof, contains; it is an affront to common sense, for him to deny, that
(...), or (...), is the Church that is contained in the City and Territory of
Rome, or Corinth. Let the learned Publisher of that Epistle, take (...) there
for Inquilinus or Peregrinus, in Inmate or Pilgrim, (because his Greek gave him
leave) he that has been showed so plentiful mention of (...), in the subject
in question, for that which we now call a Diocese, can have no reason to see
with his eyes, but because he is resolved not to use his own. For, in the very
address of Polycarpus his Epistle, (...), To the Church of God dwelling beside
Philippi; The dative case quite spoils the construction of the words to his
sense. If the Church of the Philippians dwelt near Philippi, then the
Christians of the Territory belonged to the Church of the City. As for the
visible unity of the Catholic Church, it was not so easy for me to evidence
that, which could not be questionable till the difference between Catholic
Church and true Church, came to be questionable: As it is not hard for any
Christian to question, whither the Church, which was Catholic for so many
ages, ought now to be Catholic, or not. For, till he have destroyed the
evidence which this abridgement has been able to advance, (and, when that is
done, new evidence will not be wanting, so long as the records of the Church
are Historically true, and men continue possessed of common sense) it is in vain
to allege the dictate of his own spirit, to show, that he is no Schismatic,
not acknowledging, much less holding the unity of the Church, out of which no
man can be accounted otherwise. But I marvail most, wherein he would have the
crime of Schism, acknowledged by S. Paul, in that one Text which he would be
tried by, to consist. It is the Law of Nature that inables Christians to ^oyn
in a independent Congregation, as our other Doctor of Oxford has told us. If a
Covenant or League pass between so many Sovereigns in this point; consider how
difficult it is, to charge a Sovereign with breach of League, such contracts
consisting of many Articles, one whereof violated voids the contract; At least,
to the contrary there is no Rule. Now, the Covenant of a Congregation must
suppose all Christianity, the violation whereof in any point, by any member,
supported by the rest, frees a man of his contract. How then shall S. Paul's
words take place, 1 Cor. XI. 19. There must be Heresies, that the approved may
become manifest among you: For, if one leave six, (the Congregation consisting
of seven) how shall it appear that the six are in the right? But, in my
supposition, these petty animosities at Corinth, may have been fomented by
secret Heretics, as in time I shall show that they were. And their endeavor
might be, to make a party for their Heresy out of other Churches, as well as
out of that of Corinth; and, being formed, to unite them by the like bond, as
they saw the Church tied with by the Apostles. In this case division is ruinous
to Christianity, not when the question is, whether seven shall meet together,
or three and four. For by this means, it may become difficult for particular
Christians, upon true principles, to give sentence for themselves in the matter
of differances, but easy to miss the truth, and to join with the enemies of
it, (thinking they serve God in communicating with them) by charging
themselves, with judging of the sense of the Scriptures, either in those Laws
of the Church, which concern not the salvation of particular Christians; or, in
the common faith, without those bounds which God has provided by the Church.
And, upon these terms, those that are approved may and do become manifest, by
the rising of Heresies in the Church.

That which I shall infer, is this; That, though there be no such virtue as
implicit faith, because it is no part of faith, no office of that virtue to
believe, that any thing is true (because the Church believes it with that firm
adherance to it, as we are resolved to stand to that, by believing which we
hope to be saved) yet it is part of the virtue, and part of the office of a
faithful man, that is a Christian, to conform himself to the belief of all
that which the Church lawfully determines to be believed; that is to say, not
to profess the contrary of it, (and upon that profession, to do any thing
toward dissolving the unity of the Church) so long as the determination
thereof causes not that corruption of those things which the society of the
Church presupposes, as may seem to make the unity thereof useless; whereof,
this is not the place to debate when it comes to pass. It is sufficient for the
present, that, whatsoever the Church has power to determine according to the
premises, that the Church (that is, all particular Christians) are obliged, not
to believe, (by the office of faith, which is only exercised in them, who can
make deductions of conclusions from the principles of faith, who necessarily
holding the conclusions in consideration merely of the premises, do necessarily
believe the conclusions, by that virtue of faith which holds the principles)
but to hold, and to conform to, and not to scandalize, by the office of that
charity, which is most eminently exercised, about that which concerns the
common good of all Christians in general; which, uothing in the world can so
much concern, next the common faith, as the unity and communion of the Church.
Thus have I bounded the power of the Church, and so showed the reason upon
which the right use of it is to proceed. I showed before the ground of that
exception, which, the interest of secular Power in Church matters creates, to
the due use of it. When I shall have showed, in the third book, what the Law of
God has determined in matters concerding the communion of the Church; (and, by
consequence, what it leaves to the Church to determine) it will be time to
take in hand the same consideration again. For, the ground of this exception
will show, how far it extends; whereby it will appear, that Christian
Powers do acknowledge the Church, and the power of it to stand by Gods Law,
even when they limit the exercise of it, by virtue of that interest, which the
law of God allows them in Church matters.

CHAP. XXVI. What it is to add to Gods Law; What to add the Apocalypse. S.
Paul's Anathema. The Beraeans. S. John's Gospel sufficient to make one believe;
and the Scriptures, The man of God perfect. How the Law gives light, and
Christians are taught by God. How Idolatry is said, not to be commanded by God.
IN the beginning of this Book, I proposed the chief Texts of Scripture, which
are usually drawn into consequence, to prove, either the infallibility of the
Church, or the sufficience and clearness of the Scriptures. Of which I may
truly say, that they are, and have been, for these hundred and forty years,
the Theme of a dispute, between the Scriptures and the Church, for the right of
giving Law to the consciences of Christians, what communion to choose, that of
the Reformation, or that of the Church of Rome: But with so little success,
that a discreet man may truly say, that the parties do now stand at a bay, as
it is visible that they do, merely because they are not able to force one
another, by the arms which they are furnished with; the Arguments of either
side serving to maintain them against the adversary, merely because the
arguments of the other side are insufficient; not because either has, either
the whole truth, or nothing of the truth for it. I showed you there, that they
come short of making good that which they are employed to prove, on this side
as well as on that. As for my present business, (which is here to show, how the
sense of them concurs to the truth which I have established) I shall but desire
any man of common sense, to make an argument from the Text of Moses alleged in
the first place, and say; The people of Israel are forbidden by the Law of
Moses, to add any thing to the said Law, and to take any thing from it.
Therefore the Scriptures contain, (clearly set down to all understandings
concerned) all things necessary to the salvation of all Christians; then to
tell me, whither he will undertake to make good this consequence of not. For,
if the Law of Moses cannot pretend to contain clearly all things necessary to
the salvation of all Christians, it will not hurt my opinion to infer; That,
because it is unlawful to add any thing to Moses Law, (by saying, that it is
and ought to be part of it, when it is not, nor ought to be) therefore it is
unlawful to add any thing to the Bible, by saying, that it is necessary to
the salvation of all Christians, though not written there: For, this my opinion
says not. And truly; I must here allege, that Gods Law, Deuteronomy. XVII. 8.-12.
provideth a power in that people, to resolve and determine all things, which
the peace and unity of that people requires to be determined: And that, for
the effect of this power, we have to show, all the constitutions and
determinations (whereby the precepts of Moses Law are limited, how they are to
be observed) which we find recorded in the Jews Talmud, and all the disputes
and debates, that have ended in those determinations. In as much as we have to
allegde, that our Lord in the Gospel, has commanded to hear the Scribes and
Pharisees, as those that sit in Moses Chair. For those constitutions derive
their Pedigree from those that were in force in our Lords time, by the
authority of the Scribes and Pharisees, as it appears to all that compare them
with the particulars mentioned in the Scriptures, in Philo, and Josephus. For
though the particulars be not always the same, because time produces continual
charge in particular custom; yet there is agreement enough to show, that it
was successively the same authority, that made such orderly and moderate
changes, (as the state of the time might require, or men's fancies imagine) in
the practice of their Law. Whereby it is evident, that, the power of so
interpreting the Law, being established by the Law, cannot be against the Law,
as forbidden by it. And this abundantly enough for the justifying of that which
I have said. For, the interpretation and limitation of the Precepts of the Law,
by the tradition left with Moses, and by the Authority settled in the Synagogue,
being established by the Law, cannot be counted an addition to the Law.
Therefore, the interpretation of the Scriptures, by Tradition, left the Church
by the Apostles, and the limitation of the circumstances which the service of
God is to be regulated with, by the Authority settled in the Church, cannot be
counted an addition to Gods new Law, or to the Scriptures of the New Testament.
But, because the satisfaction of the Reader, in the true intent of these
precepts of the Law requires more, I shall say further; That I conceive, that
God, providing a power requisite to determine all circumstances, which the
practice of the Law should require; repeats nevertheless a caution of adding
to, or taking from the Law, that it might not be thought, that this Power
extended to alter any thing in the worship of the one true God, which all the
precepts of the Law tended to limite. Surely, in the Text of Deuteronomy. XII. 32.
this caution follows immediately upon warning given, not to worship God by any
of those Ceremonies, with which the Gentiles honored their false Gods: the
reason whereof is plain, least, by using the like ceremonies, the honor of
those false Gods, to whom they were tendered by those that believed in them,
might be admitted. Whereupon, when it is inferred, that nothing be added to or
taken from those precepts, by which the Law commands to serve the true God;
it is manifest, how well, the limitation of circumstances questionable in the
practice of the Law stands with this caution, so soon as it appears, that the
precepts thereof cannot be practiced, till so limited. And upon the same
caution, Deuteronomy. IV. 2. he inferres immediately; Thine eyes have seen what the
Lord did to those that served Baal-peor, now they are dead, and thou alive this
day. As supposing this consequence; That, if they stuck close to their own, the
true God, nothing should seduce them from his Laws: Not this; That, if they
stuck close to their own, the true God, nothing should persuade them to
practice the precepts of his worship, in that sorm, which the power appointed
by him should determine. So that both Texts prepress upon them the precepts of
the Law, as those whereby the worship of the true God is distinguished; not as
if, of themselves, they contained matter to oblige that people, or to procure
them happiness. And surely, the determinations of their Elders, as they concur
to the same ends, so are they enforced by the same obligation which the
precepts themselves produce. And therefore it will not be amiss to take notice,
how far the Jews, who acknowledge all that I say of limiting the Law, are, from
thinking it to be contradicted by these Scriptures. Solomon Jarchi upon Deuteronomy.
VI. 2. Thou stalt not add; As for example, to the five Sections in the
Phylacteries; to the five kinds in the banquet, which we carry at the feast of
Tabernacles; to the five Thrummes in the Fringes: And so when he says, Thou
shall not take away. They are commanded by the Law, to wear frontlets upon
them, to put them in remembrance of the precepts thereof, Ex. XIII. 9. Deuteronomy.
VI. 8. XI. 18. to carry in their hands, and to walk with a Bush, made up of the
branches of several trees, at the feast of Tabernacles, Levit. XXIII. 40. to
put a fringe to the corners of their Garments, made of a thread of Hyacinth
among others, Numb. V. 38. 39. But that those frontlets should contain five
Sections of the Law, and no more; that those fringes should consist of four
kinds besides the Hyacinth (which are the determinations of their Elders)
these, according to his opinion, they are as much forbidden to add to, as to
take from that which is determined by the leter of the Law. Abenezra seems to
be more sober upon the same place; Thou shall not add, says he, Of your own
conceit, as thinking the worship of God to consist in it. For, believing that
they vow to worship one God alone, and, that no passive acts, which the light
of nature injoyneth not, can be esteemed the worship of God of themselves; but,
in the doing of them, is the keeping of that Law which appoints them: it is one
thing to worship God, as the precepts of the Law, determined by that Power
which it appoints, do enjoin; another thing, to introduce rules of worshipping
God, not by virtue of his Law, but upon a man's own conceit. And therefore it is
forbidden them, to inquire after the fashions, by which the Gentiles worshipped
their Gods, Deuteronomy. XII. 30. as a presumption, that he which should say, that he
would worship God as they did their Idols, had a mind to worship their Idols in
stead of God, otherwise he would rest content with that way of worshipping God,
which the Law had prescribed. Whereupon the Jews determine, that there are four
Ceremonies, which who so does to any thing but to God alone, must be understood
to worship it for God; which are, sacrificing, burning incense, pouring out
drink offerings, and adoration: But others there are, by doing which, a man
cannot be concluded to worship any thing but God, till he do it in that way and
fashion, as is one by those that profess to worship it for God. If it be said,
that these are Jews which allow Traditions; but, that there is another sort of
Jews called Scripturaries (...), which admit nothing but the leter of the
Scriptures. I answer, that those also who admit only the Text of Scripture,
and pretend to determine all controversies about the Law, by consequences to be
drawn from it, could never come to agreement among themselves, what consequence
should take place, and what not, did they not acknowledge some public persons,
whose determinations the whole body of them submits to; the consequences
which they derive their observations by from the leter of the Law, being so
ridiculously insufficient, that they could not satisfy the meanest
understandings otherwise, as may appear by those which the Talmudists allege
for their constitutions. Which being no less ridiculous, then the traditions
which they allege incredible, would be both to no effect, did not the public
power of the Nation (which, while the Law stood was of force by it; but, now it
is void, ought to cease) put all pretenses beyond dispute.

And for that which is alleged out of the Apocalypse (which in sound of words,
seems to import some such thing concerning the whole book of the Scriptures,
as these Texts of Moses import concerning the Law) I shall desire the
understanding Reader, but to consider that protestation whereby Irenaeus
conjures all that should copy his Book, to collate it well with the Original,
that they might be sure, neither to add to it, nor take from it, as Eusebius
relates out of his Book de Ogdoade against the Valentinians, Eccl. First. V.
21. (...). I adjure thee, that shall copy out this Book, by our Lord jesus
Christ, and by his glorious presence, when he comes to judge the quick and
dead, to collate what thou have transcribed, and correct it by this Copy whence
thou have transcribed it, with care; and likewise to transcribe this
adsuration, and pu^^it in the Copy. Setting aside this adjuration, what is the
difference between S. John's charge, and the matter of it? And, finding the
words of S. John to import neither more nor less, to tell me what he thinks of
this argument; S. John protests in the conclusion of his Revelation, that,
who so shall add any thing to the true and authentic Copy of these
Prophesies, to him shall be added the plagues written it; who so takes from
it, from him shall be taken his share in the Book of life, and the holy City,
and the good things written in that Book: Therefore, all things necessary to
the salvation of all Christians, are contained in the Scriptures clearly to all
understandings. But, strain the consequence of this Text beyond the words of
it, (which concern only the words of the prophecy of this Book; that is, the
Apocalypse) if you please; and take it for a seal to the whole Bible, forbidding
to take any thing from, or to add any thing to it (for some of the Ancients
have so argued from it) shall he that adds the true sense to, or takes false
glosses from the Bible, by force of that evidence which the Tradition of the
Church creates, be thought therefore to add to the Word of God, or to take
from it? Then did God provide that his own Law should be violated by his own
Law; when, having forbidden to add, or to take from Moses Law, he provided a
power to limit or to extend both the sense and practice of it, and that under
pain of death to all that refractarily should resist it. Now, I demand of them
that shall allege S. Paul's Anathema, against him that should preach any other
Gospel then what he had preached to the Galatians, against the position that I
maintain whether he do believe, that the Galatians had then the New Testament,
consisting of the four Gospels, and other Apostolical Scriptures; or whether
he can maintain that they had any part of it. For if this cannot (as is evident
that it cannot) be affirmed, then, of necessity, S. Paul speaks of the Gospel,
not as we have it written in the Books of the New Testament, but as they had
received it from the preaching of S. Paul, by word of mouth; which, being
common to all Christians, (unless we question whether all the Apostles
preached the same Gospel) cannot be thought to destroy, either the being of
the Catholic Church, or the says which it supposes, or the power wherein it
consists; and the Authority of those acts which have voluntarily proceeded
from it. As for the Beraeans, that examined even the doctrine of S. Paul by the
Scriptures; is it a wonder, that they should not take S. Paul for an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, upon his own word, but should demand of him, to show by the
Scriptures, that Jesus was the Christ, that so they might be induced to believe
him sent to preach the Gospel of Christ? Therefore, when they were become
Christians, we must believe, that they understood themselves, and S. Paul
better, then to call his doctrine under examinarion, or to dispute with him
about the meaning of the Scriptures which he should allege; which our
illuminati, which take this for an argument, must consequently do, because they
value not, in S. Paul, the commission of an Apostle, but the presumption they
have, that the Holy Ghost moved him to write the Scriptures which he has left
us, though they have nothing to allege for it, but the general commission of
an Apostle. To the words of the Evangelist, Ioh. XX. 30. 31. I answer, that he
speaks only of his own Gospel. And, that the things written in that Gospel are
sufficient to induce a man to believe, that believing he may have life; But
that is not sufficient to infer; that, therefore all things necessary to the
salvation of all Christians, are clearly expressed, either in S. John's Gospel,
or in the whole Scripture; because, he that is induced by the things there
written, to belive the truth of Christianity, may seek further instruction in
the substance thereof, that he may attain unto life by embracing the same. So,
S. John says not, that a man has life by believing what is there, but what,
by knowing it he comes to believe. As for those words of S. Paul, 1 Timothy III.
16. 17. I confidently believe, that S. Paul speaks only of the Books of the
Old Testament, then (before the writings of the Apostles were gathered into
that body, which now is the New Testament) known by the name of the Scriptures:
Being well assured, that no evidence can be made to the contrary, because of
those alone it could be demanded, that they should bear witness to that which
the Apostles preached and taught: There being no question, that the sayings and
doings of our Lord and his Apostles, (the matter of the Gospels and Acts) and
the writings of the Apostles, contain the same, which the man of God, that is
Timothy, is to Preach and Teach. Nevertheless, waving so evident a
presumption, I am ready to stand to all, that the words, understood of the
whole Bible, will argue. For, granting, that all Scripture was inspired by God
to this purpose, That the man of God might be perfectly furnished to every good
work, of edifying believers, or convincing gainsayers; of instructing the
sons of the Church, or correcting the rebellious; it would be nevertheless
in vain to infer, that, therefore, all things necessary to the salvation of
all Christians, are clearly expressed to all understandings in the Scriptures;
because it is evident, that the man of God, by being first made a Christian, or
else a man of God, might be instructed in all things necessary to the salvation
of all Christians, or to the discharge of his particular trust, which by
learning the Scriptures, he might afterward be more plentifully enabled to
know. For, granting that the Scripture is able abundantly to furnish him that
has learned all that is necessary for a Christian, or for a man of God to
know, with all parts belonging to a man of God; It follows not, that the
Scripture clearly teaches him that has not learned the same, all that is
necessary to the salvation of all Christians: Because, he that transgresses
not the substance of Christianity, may find in the Scriptures sufficient
furniture, both for the maintaining, and for the advancing of that Christianiy
which he acknowledges; And yet, he that trusts his own sense, to find out
what is the substance of Christianity, by the leter of the Scriptures, may well
miss of that, which God never bade him trust his own sense, to find by the
Scripture.

Now if it be demanded, how the Law can be said to give light, or wisdom to
the simple, being of it self not to be understood; I will answer from the
peculiar consequence of my position, concerning the double sense of the Law:
For it becomes a Christian to believe, that the Law is thus highly extolled by
the Brophets, (whom he is obliged to take for the forerunners of Christ, not
for the outward and carnal sense of it, as it was the condition of holding the
Land of promise, and the happiness thereof; but for the inward and spiritual
sense, as the means whereby the Spirit of God then enlightened them to discern
the true inward and spiritual righteousness of Christians, as I said before.
And, what is the reason that the Psalmist sairh, XXV. 11. 13. What man is he
that fears the Lord? Him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. The
secret of the Lord is among them that fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant: The Covenant of the Lord being clearly expressed to all Israelites,
whose Ancestors, contracting it with God, had undertaken to teach it their
children? But that there was something more in it than all that were of it
understood, which, God teaches by the Psalmist all that were of it, that he
was ready to teach them, that should come with his fear in their hearts to
learn it. The same which our Lord tells the Jews of his time, Ioh. VII. 17. If
any man will do the will of my Father, he shall know, concerning my doctrine,
whither it be of God, or I speak from my self. For, that which our Lord Christ
shows, shall be expressly received and acknowledged by those, who, by the Law
had been conducted, to be willing to do what God should command, in point of
inward and spiritual obedience; To them that stand so affected, nothing
remaining to be done, but to show them that Christ was come from God with
instructions, what he would henceforth have them to do that would be saved.
Now, if the Prophets, Esaias and Jeremy promise, that, under the Gospel, all
Christians shall be taught of God: If our Lord praises the Father, for
revealing to babes the secret thereof, which he had concealed from the great
and learned of the world; If, upon the same account, it was not flesh and
blood, but the Father that had revealed to S. Peter the Christ the Son of God:
I demand whether we shall imagine their meaning to be, that God taught them
these things without showing them reason sufficient argument to believe them to
be true; Or, having showed them such, that he taught them, by inclining them to
follow that which he had showed them sufficient arguments to believe. If we
say, that he taught them immediately, without showing them any sufficient
reason for the truth of that which he taught them to follow; we expose our
common Christianity to the scorn of all unbelievers, whom, by consequence, we
can show no reason why they should become Christians, unless God make them so
before they know why. Nay, we can show them no reason, why we deal with them to
become Christians; why the Gospel should be preached at all, or any man suffer
for preaching or professing it, in order to reduce the world to it, unless we
suppose that we can show them reason so sufficient why they should be
Christians, that it may by Gods grace become effectual to make them no less.
But this is the reason why our Lord Christ protests, concerning the
testimony of John the Baptist, (which, every man sees how available it was to
make him receivable of those who before had admitted John to be sent by God,
professing himself sent expressly to bear witness to our Lord Christ) I say,
this is reason enough, why he professes nevertheless, not to receive any
witness from man. For, had not God provided aforehand, that the witness of
John should he accepted for the word of God; that, being so accepted, it might
leave no doubt in them that had accepted it (so considerable a party, that
those who refused our Lord Christ, durst not provoke it, as we see by the
Gospels) that our Lord was come from God; in vain had it been for our Lord to
allege his witness. Wherefore, when he alleges him, alleging not him, but
the Father, who had procured him to be accepted; well and truly, though
alleging witness of John Baptist, be renounced the witness of man, but
professes to speak those things whereby they might be saved, only under the
witness of God. Neither is it strange that the Prophets, Esaias and Jeremy, and
the Apostle S. John, should say; that those who had been thus taught of God,
should need no instruction from one another, because they know all things
already, or because they had that within them, that should teach them all
things. I confess, if we look impertinently, upon that infinity of disputes
that remains in the world, either about action, or about knowledge; if we look
upon the multiplying of controversies in Religion, the least of which dispute
of reason decides not, and therefore faction determines; it may appear a very
large word to make good: But if we look upon the intent of those that spoke
it, and the matter which they had in hand, it will appear very unreasonable to
extend it to any thing else. Now I suppose, upon the premises, that the
Prophets, Esaias and Jeremy, in the first, and literal, and obvious sense, intend
to soretell the return of the people of Israel from Captivity, and the great
change that should be seen, in their faithfulness to God; though figuring
thereby that knowledge of God, and that fidelity of Christians, which the
preaching of the Gospel should produce. And truly, I do challenge all them that
are best acquainted with the state of that people from the beginning, to show
me any greater change in it, then that which we see came to pass upon their
return from the Captivity. To wit, that they, who formerly, before the
Captivity, had been every day falling away from their own the true God, to the
worship of imaginary Deities; should from thenceforth continue constant to him,
when tempted with the greatest torments in the world, to renounce him for the
worship of Idols, as we see by the relations of the Maccabees. And is it
strange then, that I should say, that this is the change which these Prophesies
intend to declare? Especially when I say not, that this is all they intend,
because I know, that the Apostles have declared them to be intended of the
times of the Gospel; But, that this is that which they intend in the first
instance, which, by the premises, must be a figure and step to that which the
Gospel intends to declare. And yet, in regard of the manifold Idolatries which
prevailed before the Captivity, it shall be most truly and significantly
understood; that the people of God, who, after the Captivity never departed
from the true God, shall not then teach one another to know the true God;
because that Law, the sum of the old Law, should be written in their hearts
and entrails, so that they should have no need to teach one another to know the
true God. If this be true, referring this Prophene to the Gospel, of which the
Apostle expounds it in the mystical sense, Heb. VIII. 8 -- it will be much more
evident, how those that are baptized upon the profession of the Christian
faith, (who are the new Israel according to the Spirit) shall have no need to
teach one another to know the true God, who both know God, and the way to God,
which is the Law of God which they bear in their hearts, if their Christianity
be not counterfeit. So that, when God promises to establish this new Covenant,
he promises neither more nor less, then the conversion of the world to the
Christian faith.

Accordingly, S. John truly tells the Christians to whom he writes, that they
knew all things, and had no need that any man should teach them, because the
unction that was in them, taught them the truth; because he does not mean, that
they knew the secrets of Geometry, or the mysteries of nature, or whatsoever
is, or is done in the utmost parts of the world, or any thing else impertinent
to his present discourse: But, because they had in them a principle sufficient
to condemn those errors which he writes against there; to wit, those that deny
both the Father and the Son, by denying Jesus to be the Christ, which, says
the Apostle, is the spirit of Antichrist. For surely, he that has unfainedly
professed the Christian Faith upon being catechized in it, has in him a
principle sufficient to preserve him from such gross infections; which the Holy
Ghost, wherewith he is anointed upon being baptized into this profession out of
a good conscience, seals up in his heart, so that such corruptions can have
no access to infect it. And therefore the Apostle might well call upon them, to
try such Spirits, whither of God or not; seeing that the comparing of their
pretenses, with that which they had once received, must needs be sufficient to
condemn that which is opposite to it, by the judgment of any man that
unfainedly adhereth to it. So that S. Paul, when he bids the Thessalonians try
all things, but hold that which is good; demands no unreasonable thing at their
hands, if we understand those things which he would have tried, to be such as
are tri^ble by the rule of faith, common to all Christians. Indeed the same
Apostle, when he writes to the Corinthians, that the spiritual man is judged
by no man, but himself judges all things; seems to speak more generally, not
only of the rule of Faith, but of the secret counsel and good pleasure of God,
in dispensing the revelation thereof, one way to the ancient Prophets, another
way to the Apostles, both, by the Spirit of God and Christ: Which secret
counsel, those spiritual men that he speaks of, were able to interpret, in
the Scriptures of the Old Testament, by comparing spiritual things with
spiritual things; That is, the revelations granted under the Law, with those
which the Gospel had brought forth. Which though the Apostles could do, yet,
the grace of understanding the Scriptures of the Old Testament, by the Holy
Ghost, was no more common to all Christians at that time, then now, that the
understanding of the Scriptures is to be purchased by humane endeavors, it can
be common to all Christians to be Divines. By all which it appears, not that
the Scriptures con in all things necessary to salvation, clearly to all that
want it; but that Christianity affords sufficient means of instruction, in
all things necessary to the salva^ion of all that learn it. And those, who, to
find this instruction, turn simple plain meaning Christians to that translation
of the Bible which they like, to find resolution in the pretenses of the sects,
which can arise, cannot be said, either to teach them Christianity, or
sufficient means to learn it. For, he who has not only acknowledged the
substance of Christianity, but grounded the hope of his salvation upon it, will
rather deny his own senses, then admit any thing contrary to it, to be the true
meaning of the Scripture, whatsoever be the sound of the words of it. But, he
that only knows the Scriptures to be Gods truth, and believes he has the
spirit of God to conduct him in seeking the sense of it, not supposing the
belief of Christianity to be a condition requisite to the having of Gods
spirit, may easily be seduced by his inbred pride, to devise and set up new
positions, sounding like the Scriptures, which the Church acknowledges no
more, then that meaning of the Old Testament, which our Lord and his Apostles
first declared, was acknowledged by the Scribes and Pharisees. And, thinking he
does it by the same right as they had, must needs take himself and his
followers for our Lord and his Apostles, but the Church for the Scribes and
Pharisees. As for that extravagant conceit of Cartwright, I will once more
stand amazed at it. A man of so much knowledge, as to think himself fit to
recall the Laws of his Country, and give new Laws to the Church of God in it,
is not ashamed to admit, that the reason why the Idolatries of Israelites were
so odious to God, was, because he had not commanded them by the Scriptures; As
if God had never forbade them to worship Idols by the Scriptures. For,
otherwise, he could not have inferred by the words of the Prophet, that a
Christian ought to do nothing without a Text of Scripture to warrant it; much
less, to admit any Law of the Church without such evidence. Which had it been
granted him, with power to give the Church such Laws, he could not have
proceeded without demanding this exception; that those which Cartwright should
make without any such warrant, might be counted godly and religious; but these
which the Church, superstitious.

CHAP. XXVII. Why it was death to transgress the determinations of the Jews
Consistory, and what power this argues in the Church. A difference between the
authority of the Apostles, and that of the Church. The being of the Church to
the worlds end, with power of the Keys, makes it not infallible. Obedience to
Superiors, and the Pillar of truth infer it not.
IT will not be more difficult to show, how the true sense of all those
Scriptures, which are alleged toward the infallibility of the Church,
concurs to make good the terms upon which I have resolved the dispute in hand.
For, having showed, that the Law of Moses was given the Jews for the condition
of holding the land of promise, they ruling as well their civil communion, as
the service they tendered to God, according to it; I will demand but one thing
more, from the general experience of all civil people: which is this; That no
form of Laws can be propounded to any community of men whatsoever, so as to
serve it, without further determining and limiting of such things, as time, and
the occurrences of time shall discover to be undetermined by that Law, and
therefore questionable. So that Moses Law, though given by God, who foresaw
whatsoever could become questionable concerning the matter of his Law; yet,
because given for the civil Law of the people, must needs be given liable to
want such limitations as the occurrences of time should make requisite. Neither
can the truth hereof be better evidenced, then by showing the course which God,
by the Law, has taken, for the ending of all such disputes arising upon the
Law. I do therefore not only grant, but insist upon this, that the power
established by the law of Deuteronomy. XVII. 8.-12. extends to all manner of debates,
arising upon occasion of any recept of Moses Law; and to the determining of
them, by limiting those things, which the leter of the Law had not expressed. I
do likewise grant, that death is allotted for a penalty, to whosoever should
not conform to any such determination, and the practice of the Law according to
it. And I do find so much reason for it, that I do not understand, how possibly
that people should subsist (and, by consequence, the Law which made them that
people) in practice of it, without such a provision as this; An opinion of the
intent and meaning of God, in the practice of any precept, being sufficient to
divide that people into parties, not to be reconciled but by the voice of God,
either upon the occasion, or by the Law, warranting the sentence of those whom
he authorizeth to declare what he requires of his people. Setting aside for
the present to dispute, whether it be the Priests alone, or the Priests with
the chief of the People, in whom this Power is vested by the Law, (as, for the
present, I dispute not, who the persons are, in whom the power of Church matters
rests, in behalf of the Church) it is plainly, by this Law, a capital crime,
to teach and do contrary to what the public Power of that People should
determine, concerning the intent and practice of any Precept of that Law. And
therefore accordingly I grant, and insist, that, in the new Israel of God
according to the Spirit, which is the Church of Christ, there is and ought to
be a Power of putting out of the fellowship of the same any man, that shall not
stand to the resolution, which legally is able to conclude it. For, without
such a Power, it cannot be imagined, how the unity thereof should subsist,
seeing that there can be no community, in which debates shall not arise, about
those things wherein they communicate. I grant further and insist, that he who
is justly put out of the Church, though merely for violating the unity thereof,
by disobeying that just order which unites it, is thereby condemned to the
death of the world to come; As, he that teaches and does contrary to the
sentence of that power that concludes the Synagogue is put out of this.
Notwithstanding, as many other crimes besides this, are capital by the law of
Moses; so, there be many other causes, both of faith, and of life, by which a
man forfeits his interest, both in the world to come, and in the communion of
the Church. But if any man argue, that, because a man forfeits the Communion of
the Church, by disobeying the determination thereof; therefore all the
determinations thereof are infallibly true, and obliging by virtue of Gods Law.
I shall deny the consequence, by virtue of that very Law of Deuteronomy. XVII. 8.-12.
upon which this Argument is grounded; For, whereas it makes disobedience a
capital crime, there are other Laws, that suppose a breach of the Law, even in
following the determinations of that power which it establishes. At least if
we admit the practice of those Jews that follow the Talmud, in those precepts
of Levit. VI. 13.-21. Numb. XV. 21.-26. which indeed cannot reasonably be
otherwise understood: How should the Congregation offer sacrifices to expiate
that ignorance wherein all were involved; but, as those that had power to make
wrong determinations, should expiate that ignorance, which the Congregation, by
following, had incursed. Neither says our Lord any less in the Gospel, though
in a matter of greater consequence, when, having condemned them that
transgressed Gods commandment, for the Tradition of their Predecessors, Mat.
XV. 5-10. Mar. VII. 8-12. nevertheless, he commands them to observe; and do
all such things as the Scribes and Pharisees, sitting in Moses Chair, should
command, Mat. XXIII. 2. to wit; because the authority of Moses his Chair
presupposed the Law of God, but extended not to nullify any part of it. In
like manner, the authority of the Church presupposing the truth of Christianity,
the profession whereof makes Christians, the Body whereof is the Church: It is
not possible that it should reach so far, as to warrant any man to believe
that, which, those grounds, upon which the truth of Christianity stands, cannot
evidence to be true. I say not that the Church cannot determine what shall be
taught and received, in such disputes, as will divide the Church, unless an
end be put: But I say, that the Authority of the Church can be no reason,
obliging or warranting to believe that for truth, which cannot be reasonably
deduced from the motives of our common faith; only it shall be a reason,
obliging and warranting to keep the peace of the Church, by not scandalizing
such determinations thereof, as are not destructive to the common faith. Much
more, where the faith is not concerned, (only the question is, of determining
the circumstances of those actions, wherein the Communion of the Church is
exercised, which neither our Lord, nor his Apostles have determined) shall the
disobeying of such determinations, be the violating of that unity, which all
Christians profess that God has ordained in his Church. And now we have an
easy account to give, how the Prophets Haggai and Malachi send the Israelites
to the Priest, for resolution in those things, which the practice of that
people determined, to belong to their office to resolve; Because it cannot be
doubted, that their resolutions depended upon upon the acts of that authority,
which concluded that people, by the Law aforesaid of Deuteronomy. XVII. 8.-12. Which,
if not infallible, and yet authorized by God, to warrant the proceedings of his
people, it will be no marvail, if those that act in dependence on them, be
authorized to warrant the people, though further from being infallible.

To come now to those things that are alleged to be said of the Apostles and
of the Church; having already limited the power of the Church not to extend to
the faith of Christianity, which it presupposes it will be easy to
distinguish it from the power of the Apostles. Which, though it presuppose the
truth of Christianity preached by our Lord, as that which they are employed to
introduce and establish^; yet, in order of nature and reason, is before the
very being of the Church, as serving to evidence any truth of the Gospel to
them that believe, being convicted that they came from God to move them to
believe. For, how can they stand obliged to believe the truth of our common
Christianity to be that, which God sent our Lord Christ to preach; but, by
standing convict, that the Apostles were sent by him, to move them to accept of
it, and thereupon enabled with means to evidence this Commission, and trust;
whereupon, the world may safely repose themselves upon the credit of them,
whose act God owns, by the witness he yields them for his own? The true reason
and ground, upon which, no act of theirs, whither by word or writing, is
refusable by the Church: Upon which, the truth of things determined by their
writings, is no more determinable by the Church, because the meaning of their
words, which is the truth sought for, is in the words from the time they are
said. And is it then an unreasonable demand, that their Charter, He that
hears you, hears me -- extending to all that falls under their office,
should not be thought to descend upon the Church indefinitely, but according to
such limitations as the constitution thereof determines; That is to say, not
to the effect of creating faith, but of preserving peace and unity in the
Communion of the Church? Not prejudicing, nevertheless, that force of
evidencing the truth of Christianity, and the meaning of the Apostles writings,
which I have showed to be in the testimony of the Church, not by any authority
it has from God, but from that conviction, which the testimony of such a body
of men infers I shall not therefore deny, that he who hears or refuses
their successors, hears and refuses God; if that which they would be heard
in, be within the bounds of that power which God has assigned them, but is not
the same that he assigned the Apostles. But I shall utterly deny, that it is by
virtue of these words, which were spoken by our Lord, at such time, as he had
not declared, whither they should have successors or not. For, there is very
great appearance, that they themselves, after this, expected to see the worlds
end, and the coming of Christ. When the Apostles, Mat. XXVI. 3. inquire of our
Lord, When shall these things come to pass? And what shall be the sign of thy
coming, and of the worlds end? Though our Lord by this answer, distinguishes
the time of the destruction of Jerusalem from the end of the world; yet, by the
question, there is no appearance, that the Apostles did so distinguish, before
his answer, And, when his answer contains; That this generation shall not be
over, till all these things come to pass; and that, not only after he had
declared the destruction of Jerusalem, but his coming, and the end of the
world, Mat. XXIV 14.-23-29-34. it appears, that those things, which, he
declares, shall forerun the worlds end, were to begin before that generation
were out, when to end, being not thought sit then to be said. If this
interpretation of Grotius, which makes good the leter best, suffer
contradiction; yet is it evident by S. Paul's Epistles, 1 Cor. XV. 51, 52. 2
Cor. V. 11-44. 2 These. IV. 15. 17. that he was not certificed, but that the
coming of Christ to judgment should be during his time. In which S. John, by
the Apocalypse, was more fully informed. If these things be true, the obedience
due to the Apostles successors, cannot stand by virtue of this command, given,
when it was not declared, whither they were to have successors or not: But, by
those Scriptures, whereby it may appear, so far as in due place it shall
appear, whither or no, and upon what terms the Apostles left their Authority
with successors; which when it appears, then, by consequence of reason it will
be inferred from these words, that, who hears or refuses them, hears or refuses
God, by whom the Apostles were enabled, to leave such part of their power with
successors.

Neither will it be strange, that I allow not any Council, in which never so
much of the authority of the present Church is united, to say, in the same
sense, and to the same effect, as the Synod of the Apostles at Jerusalem; It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us: Though I allow, the overt act of
their assembling to be a legal presumption, that their acts are the acts of
the Holy Ghost, so far as they appear not to transgress those bounds, upon
which the assistance of the Holy Ghost is promised the Church. For, as for the
Apostles, I have showed before, that they had the Holy Ghost given them, not
only to preserve them in the truth of the common profession of Christians, but
to reveal unto them the true sense of the old Scriptures, according to the
Gospel which they preached, (though that grace was common to many more besides
the Apostles, not to all Christians) upon which depended the resolution of the
point then in debate. Besides, I do not intend to depart from that observation
which I have made in another place, that we find by the Scriptures, and by the
primitive Records of the Church, many revelations made to Gods people at their
public Assemblies, by the means of such as had the Grace. And thereupon do
infer, that such a revelation was made to that Assembly upon the place,
directing the decree which there follows, and is signified (according to that
brevity which the Scriptures use, in alleging that whereof no mention is
premised in the relation that went before) by these words it seemed good to the
Holy Ghost, and to us. Now, the words of our Lord, Mat. XXVIII. 20. Behold, I
am with you to the worlds end; are manifestly said to the body of the Church,
and therefore do not promise it any privilege of the Apostles. And truly,
seeing it is a promise immediately ensuing upon a Precept; Go preach and make
Disciples all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; teaching them to observe all things I have commanded you: I find it a
matter of no ill consequence, but very reasonable, to say, that the Precept is
the condition of the Promise, seeing no act so expressed can reasonably be
understood otherwise. But, in regard it is otherwise manifest, that the
continuance of the Church is absolutely promised and foretold, till the world
end, by name, in those other words of our Lord, The Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it, Mat. XXI. 18. I shall easily admit, that God absolutely
promises to be with his to the worlds end, so as to preserve himself a people
in the manifold distractions and confusions that fall out, by the fault of
those that profess themselves Christians, as well as by the malice of
Infidels: But I shall deny that this inferres the gift of Infallibility in any
person, or quality, in behalf of the Body of Christians. For, supposing the
visible profession of Christianity to continue till the worlds end; so that,
under this visible profession, there is sufficient means to conduct a true
Christian in the way to salvation; And that by this means, a number of men
invisibly united to our Lord Christ by his Spirit, do attain unto salvation
indeed: These promises of our Lord will be evidently true, though we neither
acknowledge on one side, any gift of Infallibility in the Church; nor deny on
the other side, the visible unity of the Church instituted by Gods Law. It will
be evidently true, that our Lord Christ is with his Disciples, (that is
Christians) till the worlds end, who could not continue invisibly united to
him, without the invisible presence of his Spirit. It will be evidently true,
that the Gates of Hell prevail not against his Church, in the visible society
whereof, a number of invisible Christians prevail over the powers of darkness.
For though, granting the Church to be subject to error, salvation is not to be
attained without much difficulty: And, though division in the Church may create
more difficulty, in attaining salvation, then error might have done; yet, so
long as salvation may be, and is attained by visible communion with the Church,
so long is Christ with his, nor do the Gates of Hell prevail against his
Church, though error, which excludes infallibility, though division, which
destroys unity, hinder many, and many of attaining it.

But if the consequence that is made from those words of our Lord be lame, that
which may be pretended from the power of the Keys, or, of remitting ^^d
retaining sins, (both one by the premises) granted S. Peter, the Apostles, of
the Church, will easily appear to be none at all. For, no man can maintain the
power of remitting and retaining sins to be granted to the Church, but he must
yield it to be communicated to more then those, in whom the gift of
Infallibility can be pretended to reside. Neither can the greatest of the
Apostles remit o^ retain any man's sin, without inducing him to embrace
profession of Christianity, or (if, having embraced it, he fall from it in
deed, and in effect) without reducing him to the course and study of performing
the same, and upon due profession thereof, readmitting him into the Church; on
the other side excluding those that cannot be reduced to this estate. Nor can
the least of all that are able to bring any man into the Church, fail of doing
the same, upon the same terms. And, did ever any man ascribe the gift of
Infallibility, to all them that should have power and right from the Church,
and in the Church, to do this? What means then the exception of clave non
errante, which is every where, and by every body cautioned for, that, with any
reason challenges the power of the Keys for the Church? To me it seems rather
an argument to the contrary, that, seeing this power is challenged for the
Church, under this general exception, without limiting the exception to any
sort of matters or subjects: And, that the act of it is the effect of the
decrees of the greatest authority visible in the Church; (as, whether Arias
should communicate with the Church or not, was the issue of as great a debate,
as the authority of the Church can determine) that therefore, the sentence of
his excommunication proceeded not from the gift of Infallibility in any
authority concurring to the decree of Nicaea, whence it proceeded, granting
generally the power of excommunication to be liable to the exception of clave
non errante. Indeed it cannot be denied, that something requisite to the
exercise of this power, was in the Apostles infallible, or unquestionable, as
presupposed to the being of the Church. For, what satisfaction could men have
of their Christianity, if any doubt could remain, whether the faith which they
preached were sent from God or not? whither the Laws of Ecclesiastical
communion, which they advanced, were according to their Commission, or not?
But, the causes upon which the Church is obliged to proceed to employ this
Power, being such as depend many times upon the rule of faith, and the Laws
given the Church by the Apostles, by very many links between both; The
dependence whereof, it is hard for all those, that are sometimes to concur to
these sentences to discern; I conceive it now madness to maintain the gift of
Infallibility from the power of the Keys; in the exercise whereof, so many
occasions of failing may come to pass.

As for the exhortations of the Apostles, whereby they oblige the Churches of
the Thessalonians and Ebrues, diligently to obey and follow their Governors, 1
These. V. 14. 15. Heb. XIII. 7. 17. these I acknowledge to be pertinent to the
question in debate, as, concerning such Governors, as had in their hands the
ordinary power of the Church; saving that, when he says; Remember your Rulers,
which have spoken to you the word of God; And, considering the issue of their
conversation, imitate their faith; It is possible he may speak of those that
first brought them the Gospel, and those were the Apostles and Disciples of
Christ, either of the first rank of the XII. or the second of the LXX, whose
privildges are not to be communicated to any authority, to be preserved in the
Church afterward. But the importance of these exhortations is not such, as can
infer any imagination of infallibility, in those whom they are exhorted to
follow. For, they that know the bounds of that Power, which the Apostles had
trusted with the Governors of particular Churches, presupposing the
Christianity and Laws of Ecclesiastical communion which themselves had
delivered, may safely be exhorted to acknowledge them, to esteem them above
measure in love, to obey them, and to give way to them, remembering those, from
whom they had first received Christianity; (from whom they had received these
instructions, as well as their then Rulers) because they had long before
received, and yielded obedience to those things, which we except from the
obedience of present Rulers, as presupposed to any power they can challenge. As
for the words of S. Paul, 1 Timothy III. 15. I confess they contain a very just
and full attribute of the Church, and a Title, serving to justify all the
right I challenge for it. For, if the Church be the House of the living God,
then is it, by Gods founding and appointment, a Body consisting of all members
of the true Church, wherein God dwells, as of old in the Temple at Jerusalem;
as he dwells in every Christian; as he dwelt in the Tabernacle and Camp of the
Israelites. And if it be the Pillar that sustains the truth, then must it have
wherewith to maintain it, beside the truth it self, which is the Scriptures.
And what what can that be, but the testimony of it self, as a body and
fellowship of men only; which, securing it self, (that is succession) by the
evidence made to the Predecessors of the same body, maintains the truth once
committed to the trust of it, not only by writing, but also by practice. But
what is this to the gift of Infallibility? for, suppose the Church, by the
foundation of it, enabled to maintain both the truth and the sufficience of the
motives of faith against Infidels, and also the rule of faith against
Heretics, by the evidence which it makes that they are received; What is this
to the creating of faith, by decreeing that, which, before it was decreed, was
not the object of faith; but upon such decree obliges all faithful to believe?
Surely the Church cannot be the Pillar that sustains any faith, but that which
is laid upon it, as received from the beginning, not that which it lays upon
the foundation of faith. Here I will desire the Reader to peruse these words of
S. Basil, Epist. LXII. speaking of the Bishop of Neo caesarea deceased; (...).
There is a man gone, that of all men of his time, most evidently excelled in
all and every of those good things that belong to men: The stay of his Country,
the ornament of the Church, the Pillar that sustained the truth. For, if a
particular Prelate may duly be qualified, as well the Pillar that supporteth
the truth, as the prop of his Country; Well may the Church be thought capable
of the same style, though it create no matter of faith, by decreeing, but only
preserve that which it has received, by defending and maintaining it.

CHAP. XXXI. The Fathers acknowledge the Sufficience and clearness of the
Scriptures, as, the Traditions of the Church. They are to be reconciled, by
limiting the terms which they use. The limitation of those sayings which make
all Christian truth to be contained in the Scriptures. Of those which make the
authority of the Church the ground of Faith.
IT is now time, having showed the meaning of those Scriptures which are
alleged for both extremes which I avoid, to do the like for some of those
sayings of the Fathers which are pleaded to the same purpose. This abridgment
cannot consider all; Therefore I will not multiply those which speak to one and
the same purpose; Nor marshal them according to the matter which they speak to;
Finding them speak to any branch of those extremes which I decline, I will put
them down as they come. S. Augustine again de Doctr. Christiana II. 6. for one
place you had before; Magnifice and salubriter Spiritus Sanctus ita Scripturas
modificavit, ut locis apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus fastidia
detergeret. Nihil enim fere de illis obscuritatibus eruitur, quod non
planissime dictum alibi reperiatur. Gallantly as well as wholesomly has the
Holy Ghost so tempered the Scriptures, as to satisfy hunger by those places
that are plain, by those that are obscure, to wipe of queasiness. For, there is
scarce any thing dug out of those dark places, that is not found most
manifestly said elsewhere. Epist. III. Tanta est Christianarum profunditas
literarum, ut in eis quotidie proficerem, si eas solas, ab ineunte pueritia
usque ad decrepitam senectutem, maximo otio, summo studio, meliore ingenio
conarer addiscere. Non quod ad ea quae necessaria sunt saluti, tant a in eis
perveniatur difficultate; Sed cum ibi quisque fidem tenuerit, sine qua recte
pieque non vivitur, tam multa, tamque multis mysteriorum umbraculis opaca
intelligenda proficientibus restant -- So great is the depth of the Writings of
Christianity, that I should profit in them continually, if I should endeavor to
learn them only, at very great leisure, with most earnest study, having a
better wit, from the beginning of my nonage till decrepit old age. Not as if it
were so hard to attain to that which is necessary in them; But when a man has
attained the Faith, without which there is no good and godly living, there
remain so many things to be understood, and so darkly shadowed with manifold
mysteries -- Clemens Protreptico: (...). Hear ye then that are far off, hear
ye that are near hand. The word is not hid from any. It is a common light, it
shines upon all men. There are no Cimmerians in the Word. As some said then,
that there were in the world, that had no Sun. Irenaeus II. 46. Vniversae
Scripturae and Propheticae and Apostolicae in aperto and sine ambiguitate, and
similiter ab omnibus audiri possunt. All the Scriptures both of the Prophets
and Apostles are open, and without ambiguity, and may be heard (or understood)
alike of all. III. 15. Doctrina Apostolorum manifesta and firma, and nihil
subtrahens: neque alia quidem in abscondito, alia vero in manifesto docent um.
The doctrine of the Apostles is clear and firm, and conceals nothing; As not
teaching one thing in secret and another openly. Origin, contra Celsum VII.
(...). The vnlgar, after their entrance made, may easily study to apprehend
even the deeper notions that are hid in the Scriptures. For it is manifest to
any man that reads them, that they may have much deeper sense than that which
straight appears in them; Which becomes manifest to those that dedicate
themselves to the examining of the Word, according to the rate of that leisure
and forwardness which they bestow upon their exercise in it. Athanasius Disp.
cum Ario in Conc. Nic. (if it be his) speaking of the Godhead of the Holy
Ghost; (...). The Holy Scriptures clearly declare all things; And not only
that which was in debate. S. Chrysostom in Lazarum Hom. III. incourages to
read the Scripture, because it is not obscure; the Gentiles that sought
vainglory by writing books, affecting obscurity as the way to be admired, but
the Holy Ghost, seeking the good of all, contrariwise. In ^oan. Hom. II. he
compares S. John's doctrine to the Sun, as shining to all, not only men of
understanding, but women and youths. In Mat. Hom. I. to the same purpose;
Epiphanius Haer. LXXVI. (...). For, all is clear in Gods Scriptures, to those
that will come to the Word of God with godly reason, and turn not themselves
down the precipices of death, through lust wrought in them by the devil. To the
same purpose, Haer. LXIX. Gregory Nyssene in Psalm. Inscriptiones I. commends
the Psalms for rendering deep mysteries easy and pleasant to men and women,
young and old. Cyril in Julianum VII. answering his scorn of the Scriptures for
their vulgar language, says it was so provided, that they might not exceed any
man's capacity. Fulgentius, according to S. Austine, Sermde Confessoribus: Ita
suae moderationis tenet temperiem, ut nec ovibus desint pabula, nec pastoribus
alimenta. The Scripture holds this moderation in the temper of it, that neither
the sheep wants food, nor the shepherd nourishment in it. S. Chrysostom
observes, that when S. Paul says 2 Cor. III. 14. Their senses are blinded in
reading the Scriptures; He makes the cause to be in the Jews blindness when
they understand not in the Scriptures.

Again, Origin in Mat. Tract. XXV. in Romans III. S. Basil. Moral. definitione
XXV. S. Chrysostom in Psalm. XCV. S. Cyril Catech. IV. Rufinus in Symb. agree
in affirming, that, whatsoever is taught in Christianity is to be proved by the
Scriptures. S. Jerome in Mic. I. Ecclesia Christi quae habitat been, and in
toto orb Ecclesias possidens spiritus unitate conjuncta est, and habet urbes
Legis Prophetarum, Evangelii, and Apostolorum; non est egressa de finibus suis,
id est, de Scripturis sanctis. The Church of Christ being well seated, and
having Churches all over the world, it has the Cities of the Law the Prophets,
the Gospel, and the Apostles; goes not out of her bounds, which are the Holy
Scriptures. Optatus V. putting the case of the Church with the Donatists to be
the case of children about their Fathers inheritance, sends them to his Will,
as the Judge of their pretenses. And so S. Austine also, in Psalmum XXI. The
Constitutions of the Apostles II. 19. Leo Epist. XXIII. S. Cypr. Epist. LXVIII.
and many more agree, that the People are to answer for themselves, if they
follow bad Pastors. S. Austine adversus Maxim. III. 14. Neque ego Nicenum, nec
tu debes Ariminense, tanquam praejudicaturus, proferre Concilium. Scripturarum
authoritatibus, non quorumcunque propriis, sed utriusque communibus testibus,
res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione decertet. Neither am I to
produce the Council of Nicaea, nor you that of Ariminum, for a prejudice. With
authorities of the Scriptures, as witnesses common to both, not proper to
either, let matter contend with matter, reason with reason, cause with cause. De
Vtilitate credendi VI. he says, the Scripture of the Old Testament, ita esse
modificatam, ut nemo inde haurire non possit quod sibi satis est, si modo ad
hauriendum devote ac pie, ut vera religio poscit, accedat. Is so tempered, that
any man may draw out of it that which is enough for him, if he come devoutly
and piously, as true religion requires, to draw. Vincentius Commonit. I.
confesses that inveterate Her^^es, and Opus imperfectum in Mat. Hom. XLIX.
that the corruptions of Antichrist are not to be convinced but by Scripture.
The same Vincentius Commonit. I. and Sulpitius Severus Hist. II. acknowledge the
Arians to have overspread the greatest part of the Church. Therefore
Nazianzene Orat. advers. Arianos scorns them that measure the Church by number.
And Liberius in Theodoret Eccles. Hist. II. 16. answers Constantius, (...). The
cause of the Faith has never a whit the worse, because I am alone. But truly,
I know nothing in all antiquity, more peremptory against the Infallibility of
the Church, than that of Vineentius, denying, that the Rule of Faith can ever
increase, or Councils do any more in it, than determine that expressly and
distinctly, which was simply held from the beginning. Commonit. I. And S.
Austine de Vnitate Ecclesiae cap. XVI. challenges the Donatists to demonstrate
their Church out of the Scriptures. S. Ambrose de Incarnatione cap. V. S.
Hilary de Trinitate VI. Victor in Marcum cap. III. agree, that the Faith is the
foundation of the Church, by virtue whereof, the gates of Hell prevail not
against it. Therefore S. Austine de Bapt. contra Donat. II. 3. acknowledges,
that not only particular Councils are corrected by General, but that, of
General Councils the later may and do correct them that went before.

Again Irenaeus III. 1. affirms that the Apostles writ what they preached, by
the will of God, for the foundation and pilar of our Faith. Tertulliane de
Pr^script. cap. VIII. Cum credimus, nihil ultra desideramus credere. Hoc enim
prius credimus, non esse quod ultra credere debeamus. When we believe, we
desire to believe nothing else. For, first we believe, that there is nothing
further which we ought to believe. So cap. XIV. XXIX. contra. Hermog. cap.
XXII. Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis Officina. (that the world was made of
matter preexi^ent) Si non est scriptum, timeat vae illud adjicientibus aut
detrahentibus definitum. Let the shop of Hermogenes show it written. If it be
not written, let it fear the woe decreed for them that add or take away.
Apollinaris in Eusebius Eccl. Hist. V. 10. is afraid to write, least he should
seem to write or enjoin more than the Gospel, to which nothing is to be added,
or taken from it. S. Basil de Fide, says, it is plain apostasy, to bring in
any thing that is not written. And in Asceticis Reg. LXXX. proves it, because
faith is by Gods Word, and, that which is not of faith is sin. So likewise S.
Ambrose de Paradiso cap. XII. alleging Apoc. XXII. 19. S. Austine de Bono
Viduitatis I. Sancta Scriptura doctrinae nostrae Regulam figit. The Holy
Scripture prescribes a Rule to our doctrine. To the same purpose de peccatorum
and remiss. II. 36. S. Cyril de Trinitate and persona Christi, whose words
Damascene uses de Orthod. Fide I. 1. Theodoret in Levit. Quaest. IX. Theophilus
II. Paschali. S. Jerome in Psalm. XCVIII. Omne quod loquimur debemus affirmare
ex Scripturis Sanctis. Whatsoever we say we are to prove out of the Holy
Scriptures. To the same purpose in Mat. XXIII. in Aggaei I. Origin in Mat.
Tract. XXIII. That we are to silence gainsayers by the Scriptures, as our
Lord did the Sadduces. Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem, quae mihi and factorem
ostendit and facta. I adore the fullness of the Scripture, which shows me both
the Maker and what he made, says Tertulliane contra Hermog. cap. XXII. S.
Austine de peccat. meritis and remiss. II. 36. Credo etiam hinc divinorum
eloquiorum claerissima autorit as esset, si homo sine dispendio promissae
salutis ignorare non posset. I believe there would be found some clear
authority of the Word of God for this (the original of man's soul) if a man
could not be ignorant of it without loss of the salvation that is promised. In
fine, seeing it is acknowledged, that the Scripture is a Rule to our Faith, on
all hands, the saying of S. Chrysostom in Phil. III. Hom. XII. is not
refusable, (...). A Rule is not capable of adding to, or taking from it: For
so, it loses being a Rule. For the same reason, S. Basil in Esa. II. and
Ascet. Reg. I. condemns all that is done without Scripture.

On the other side, in the next place, a greater thing cannot be said for the
Church than that which Tertul. contra Marc. IV. 2. S. ser. Ep. LXXXIX. S. Aust.
cont. Faust. XXVIII. 4. have said, that S. Paul's authority depended upon the
allowance of the Apostles at Jerusalem. Tertul. Denique, ut cum au^o^ibus
contu^^t, and convenit de regula Fidei, dextras miscuere. In a word, as some as
he had conferred with men in authority, and agreed about the Rule of Faith,
they shook hands. S. Jer. Ostendens, se non habuisse securitatem praedicandi
Evangolii, nisi Petri, and caeterorum Apostolorum qui cum eo erant, fuisset
sententia roboratum. Showing, that he had not assurance to preach the Gospel,
had it not been confirmed by the sentence of Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles that were with him. S. Austine; That the Church would not have
believed at all, had not this been done. Among the sentences of the Fathers,
which make S. Peter the rock on which the Church is built, the words of S.
Austine contra partem Donati, are of most appearance; Ipsa est Petra quam non
vincunt superbae inferorum Portae. This (Church of Rome) is the Rock which the
proud gates of Hell overcome not. S. Jerome is alleged hereupon, consulting
Damasus then Pope in matters of Faith, as tied to stand to his sentence, Epist.
LVII. and Apolog. contra Rufinum; Scito Romanam fidem, Apostolica voce
landatam, istiusmodi praestigias non recipere; Etiamsi Angelus aliter annunciet
quam semel praedicatum est, Petri authoritate munitum, non posse ^^utari, Know,
that the Faith of Rome, commended by the voice of the Apostle, is not liable to
such tricks. Though an Angel preach otherwise than once was preached, that,
being fortified by the authority of S. Peter, it cannot be changed. The saying
of S. Cyprian is notorious; Non aliunde haereses orta sunt aut nata schismata;
nisi inde, quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur, nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus
Saeerdos, and ad tempus Judex Christi vice cogitatur; cui si secundum
magisteria divina fraternit as obtemperaret universa, nemo adversum Sacerdotum
Collegium quicqam moveret, and nemo discidio unit atis Christi Ecclesiam
scinderet. Heresies spring, and Schisms arise from no cause but this; That the
Priest of God is not obeyed, that men think not that there is one Priest in the
Church, one Judge in Christ's stead, for the time; Whom, if the whole
Brotherhood did obey as God teaches, no man would move any thing against the
College of Priests, or tear the Church with a rent in the Unity of it. The
authority which the Church gives to the Scripture is again testified by S.
Austine contra Epist. fundamenti, cap. V. Cui libro necesse est me credere, si
credo Evangelio; Quum utramque Scripturam similiter mihi Catholica commendet
authoritas. Which book (of the Acts) I must needs believe, if I believe the
Gospel; Catholic authority alike commending to me both Scriptures. To the
same purpose, contra Faustum XI. 2. XIII. 5. XXII. 19. XVIII. 7. XXVIII. 2.
XXXIII. ult. Therefore he warns him that reads the Scriptures, to prefer
those books which all Churches receive before those which only some. And of
them, those which more and greater Churches receive, before those which fewer
and less. So that, if more receive some, and greater others, (though the case,
he thinks, does not fall out) the authority of them must be the same. And,
contra Cresconium II. 31. Neque enim sine causa tam salubri vigilantia Canon
Ecclesiasticum constitutus est, ad quem certi Prophetarum and Apostoloruus
libri pertineant, quos omnino judicare non audoamus. For neither was the Rule
of the Church settled with such wholesome vigilance, without cause, to which
certain books of the Prophets and Apostles might belong, which we should dare
on any terms to censure. Where, manifestly he ascribes the difference between
Canonical Scripture and that which is not, to an act of the Church settling the
same. Of the Power of the Church to decide Controversies of Faith, all the
Records of the Church, if that will serve the turn, do bear plentiful
witness. But the evidence for the gift of Infallibility from them, seems to
consist in this consequence; That otherwise there would be no end of
Controversies, neither should God have provided sufficiently for his Church. S.
Austine contra Cresconium I. 33. Quisquis falli met uit huyus obscuritate
quaestionis, Ecclesiam de illa consulat, quam sine ulla ambiguitate Scriptura
sacra demonstrat. Whosoever is afraid to be deceived by the darkness of this
question, (concerning Rebaptizing) let him consult the Church about it, which
the Holy Scripture demonstrateth without any ambiguity. S. Bernard Epist. CXC.
ad Innoc. II. Papam. Opertet ad vestrum referri Apostolatum pericula quaeque,
and scandala emergentia in regno Dei, ac praesertim, quae de fide contingunt.
Dignum namque arbitror, ibi potissimum resarciri damna Fidei, ubi non possit
Fides sentire defectum. All dangers and scandals that appear in the kingdom of
God are to be referred to your Apostleship. For I conceive it sitting, that the
decaies of the Faith should there especially be repaired, where the Faith is
not subject to fail.

As concerning the matter of Traditions, we are not to forget Irenaeus III. 2,
3, 4. where he shows, that the Gnostics, scorning both Scripture and
Tradition, as coming from those that knew not Gods mind, as they pretended to
do, (thence calling themselves Gnostics) may be convinced by that evidence,
which the consent of all Churches in the same Faith tenders common sense, for
the Tradition of the Apostles; Which, says he, we must have stuck to, had
they left us naught in writing, as those Christians then did, which had not the
use of leters. Epiphanius Haer. LXI. (...). All Gods words do not need
allegory, but are to be understood as they are. But they need consideration, to
know the force of each matter. Tradition also is to be used: For all is not to
be had from Gods Sriptures. For the Holy Apostles delivered some things in
writing, others by Tradition, as the Apostle says. So Haer. LV. LXXV. S.
Jerome advers. Lucif. Multa quae per Traditionem in Ecclesiis observantur,
auctoritatem sibi scriptae Legis usurparunt. Orthod. Non quidem abnuo hanc esse
Ecclesiasticam consuetudinem: Sed quale est, ut Leges Ecclesiae ad haeresim
transferas? Many things that are observed in the Churches by Tradition have
usurped to themselves the authority of written Law. The Orthodox party answers.
I deny not the custom of the Church to be such: But what a business is it,
that you transform the Laws of the Church into Heresy? S. Austine Epist.
CXVIII. Illa autem quae non scripta sed tradita custodimus, quae quidem toto
terrarum orb servantur, dantur intelligi, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel
plenariis Conciliis, quorum est in Ecclesia saluberrima auctoritas, commendata
atque statuta retineri. But those things which we observe, though not written
but delivered, being observed all over the world, we are given to understand,
that they are held as recommended and settled either by the Apostles themselves,
or by General Councils, the authority whereof is very wholesome in the Church.
To the same purpose, de Bapt. contra Donat. II, 7. IV. 6, 24. V. 23. de Vnitate
Ecclesiae XIX. contra Cresconiam I. 31, 32, 33. The supposed Dionysius the
Areopagite Eccles. Hierarchiae cap. I. mentions that instruction which the
Apostles delivered without writing, as a witness of the Church, though not as
a Scholar of the Apostles. And Eusebius de demonstr. Evang. I. 8. acknowledges
written Laws of the Apostles. Concilium Gangrense in fine; (...). And we
desire in sum, that all things delivered by the Scriptures of God, and the
Traditions of the Apostles, be observed in the Church. And Greg. Nazianzene
Orat. I. advers. Jul. referrs those Ordinances, which I quoted out of him
before, to the Apostles, as Authors of them.

Some sayings of the Fathers are also alleged, to show, that they held the
Scriptures obscure. Origin in Levit. Hom. V. allegorizeth the Law of burning
some part of the peace offerings, to signify, that some things in the
Scriptures are reserved to Gods knowledge, least we understand them otherwise
than truth requires. The same says Irenaeus II. 47. even in the world to come,
that man may always learn, but God always teach the matters of God. S.
Chrysostom in Joan. Hom. XL. observes, that our Lord bids; Search the
Scriptures; By digging, as for mines, or treasure; So, if they may be
understood with searching, yet it follows not, that every one is able to take
that course in searching them, that is requisite. And, Opus imperfectum in Mat.
Hom. XLIV. Ergo non sunt Scriptnrae clausae: Sed obscurae quidem, ut cum labor
inveniantur, non autem clausae, ut nullo modo inveniantur. Therefore the
Scriptures are not shut: Dark indeed they are, so that they are found with
pains: But not shut, so as by no means to be found. Adding, that, as it is for
the praise of them that find them, that they sought, so, for the condemnation
of them, that seek not, that they understand them not. S. Jerome ad Algasiam
Quaest. VIII. Omnis Epistola ad Romanos miris obscuritatibus involuta est. The
whole Epistle to the Romans is involved with mavelous darkness. Epist. ad
Paulinum. Hoc autem velamen non solum in facie Moysi, sed and in Evangelistis
and Apostolis positum est. This vail is not only in Moses face, but upon the
Evangelists and Apostles. And; Nisi aperta fuerint universa quae scripta sunt,
ab eo, qui habet clavem David, qui aperit, and nemo claudit, qui claudit, and
nemo aperit, nullo alio reserante pandentur. Unless all things that are written
be opened, by him who has the Key of David, who opens and no man shuts, who
shuts and no man opens, no man else will unlock and lay them forth. Before him,
Origin in Exodum Hom. XII. is afraid, that the Evangelists and Apostles, as
well as the Prophets, will prove not only veiled, but sealed to us, as the
Prophet says, unless we both study and pray, that the Lamb of the Tribe of
Juda may open us the Seals of it.

Here I will advise the parties to consider, how they can advantage themselves
by those sayings of the Fathers, which contain not the terms of that position,
which, they do nothing unless they enforce. Allege they what they can allege
out of the Fathers, to show, that they acknowledge the Scriptures both
sufficient and perspicuous; I shall not be troubled at it, but shall willingly
concur to acknowledge the same. I acknowledge the Scriptures to be an Instrument
of God, though a Moral Instrument. And I shall have a care not to acknowledge,
that God ever provided or used au Instrument that would not serve his turn.
Instrumentum Vetus and Novum, is a term in every man's mouth, to signify the
Old and New Testament. But there are Natural Instruments, and there are Moral
Instruments. I say not that there is no third kind of Instruments, for it may
be there are Artificial Instruments, of a several nature from both, but my
present pur^ose obliges me not to consider that difference. When the substance
or frame of the Instrument inables it to serve him that imployes it, well may
it be called a Natural Instrument, as the parts of man's body, or other
creatures, which execute the operations of the soul. When neither the substance
nor frame of the thing which that substance produces, concurrs to the work to
the which it is Instrumental, but it is done merely by the consent of man's
will, (the reason is the same of Gods will, if it be an Instrument between man
and God) then is it great reason why it should be called a Moral Instrument;
because the force of it lies in the manners of those, who use it to testify
those acts, which they do not mean to transgress: Such as all civil records
are, in regard of the effect of those contracts, or deeds, which they come to
witness. The Old and New Testament are the records of two several Treaties, or
Contracts if you please, that have passed between God and Man. And therefore
authentic, because the writings of those who contracted those Treaties. But
does every Instrument of a contract contain every thing that is in force by the
said contract? Surely it is a thing so difficult, to contain in writing every
thing that a contract intends, that, many times, if witnesses were not alive,
other whiles, if general Laws did not determine the intent of words, in fine,
if there were nothing to help the tenor of such Instruments, things contracted
would hardly sort to effect. Consider now what is alleged on the other side,
how resolutely, how generally, the Tradition, both of the Rule of Faith, and of
Laws to the Church, is acknowledged even by those witnesses, whose sayings are
alleged to argue the sufficience, perfection, and evidence of the Scriptures.
Is it civil, is it reasonable to say, that the Writers of the Christian Church
make it their business to contradict themselves; which no Scholar will admit
either Infidels, Pagans, Jews, Mahumetans or Heretics to do? Is it not easy
to save them from contradicting themselves, by saying, that Tradition of Faith
contains nothing that is not in the Scriptures, but limits the meaning of
that which they contain; Tradition of Laws, may contain that which is not in
the Scriptures, for the species of fact, but is derived from the Scripture, for
the authority from whence it proceeds? Or, is it possible by any other means,
reasonably to save them from contradicting themselves?

These generals premised, freely may we make our approaches to the
particulars, and, by considering the circumstance of the places where they lie,
make our selves consident to find some limitation, restraining the generality
of their words to make them agree, as well with my position, as with
themselves. For example; Epiphanius Haer. LXXVI. Irenaeus II. 46. III. 15.
Athanasius Dispcum Ario say, all is clear in the Scriptures; Meaning, that the
sense of the Church is clearly the sense of the Scriptures, in the points
questioned; But not to them who exclude that Tradition, which themselves
include and presuppose. Observe again, that the perspicuity of the Scriptures
is not limited to things necessary to salvation, in all that has been alleged,
but once in S. Austine Epist. III. and observe withal, that the knowledge of
things necessary proceeds upon supposition of the Rule of Faith, acknowledged,
and received from the Church, in the Catechizing of those that were baptized;
Not determined by every ones sense of the Scriptures. It is therefore easily
granted, that the Scriptures were made for all sorts of people, that they might
profit by them; Always provided, that they bring with them the Faith of the
Catholic Church, for the Rule, within the bounds whereof, they may profit by
reading them, otherwise, they may and they may not. And therefore, those
sayings which were alleged, to prove them obscure, convincing, that they are
not clear to all understandings, because they require study, and search, and
digging; do necessarily leave him that comes without his Rule, not only in
doubt of finding the truth, but in danger of taking error for it. Upon the like
supposition S. Austine affirms, de Vtilitate credendi VI. that any man may
find enough in the Old Testament, that seeks as he ought: For, to seek humbly
and devoutely, is the same thing for him that is no Christian, (For, the
Manichees, to whom S. Austine recommends the Old Testament, in this place, were
Christians no further than the name) as it is, for him that is a Christian, to
seek like a Christian that is, having before his eyes the Faith of the Church.
And this is that which S. Austine means, that he who is no Christian, so
seeking, may find enough to make him a Christian; That is, as much as he is
to expect from the Old Testament. And this supposition is expressed by Origin,
contra Celsum VII. when he says; that the unlearned may study the Scriptures
with profit, after their entrance made: For, this entrance is the Rule of
Faith, which they were taught when they were baptized. And, the Catechism of
that time, containing as well the motives as the matter of Faith, appears to the
unlearned the way into the deep, that is, the mystical sense of the Scripture.
Upon the same terms may we proceed, to grant all that is alleged to show, that
which is not contained in the Scriptures not to be receivable in point of
Christian truth. For, having showed, that the Rule of Faith is wholly contained
in the Scriptures; And, nothing contained in the records of Church Writers to
be unquestionable but the Rule and Tradition of Faith; Whatsoever further
intelligence and information can be pretended, either tending to establish the
same, or, by consequence of reason to flow from it, if it cannot be pretended
to come from Tradition, (because there is no Tradition of the Church concerning
that wherein the Church agrees not) either it must come from the Scripture, or
by the like revelation as the Scriptures, which no Church Writer pretends to
have. For, as for that, which by consequence of reason is derived from those
things which the Scripture expresses; Seeing the words of the Scripture is not
the word of God, but the sense and meaning of them, it were a thing very
impertinent to question, whether or no that be contained in the Scripture,
which the true sense of the Scripture, by due consequence of argument imports.
But if the question be of Laws delivered the Church by the Apostles, having
showed, that there may sufficient evidence be made of such, though not recorded
in the Scriptures; there can no presumption be made, being not found in the
Scriptures, that therefore a Law was not first brought into the Church by the
Apostles. And yet it remains grounded upon the Scriptures, in point of righ^,
because the authority, by which it was brought into the Church, is either
established or attested by the Scriptures; Matter of fact being competently
evidenced, by other historical truth besides. And upon these terms we may
proceed to acknowledge the goodness of an argument drawn negatively from the
Scriptures; that is to say, inferring, this is not in the Scriptures, therefore
not true. Does my position then oblige me to deny Irenaeus, affirming III.
that the Apostles writ the same that they preached? Or S. Austine in Psalmum
XXI. de Vnitate Ecclesiae cap. V. and Optatus V. tying the Donatists to be
tried by the Scriptures? Both parties pretending to be children of God, are to
be tried by their Fathers Will, that is by the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament. But, if there shall fall out any difference about the intent of
their Fathers Will, the meaning of the Old and New Testament, shall I think
that is said in vain, which is alleged on the other side, out of the same S.
Austine contra Cresconium I. 33. that, if a man would not err in that point,
he is to advise with the Church, which the Scripture evidenceth? For, the
question being about the rebaptizing of Heretics, (that is, about a Law of the
Church) if you will have S. Austine agree with S. Austine, it must be upon the
terms of my position, the practice of the Church giving bounds to the sense of
the Scripture. I can therefore safely agree with the Constitutions of the
Apostles, with S. Cyprian and Leo, and whosoever else teaches, that it is not
safe for the people, to assure their consciences upon the credit of their
Pastors: But it is because I suppose the Unity of the Church provided by God,
for a ground, upon which the people may reasonably presume, when they are to
adhere to their Pastors, when not; To wit, when they are owned, not when they
are disowned by the Unity of the Church. For, though this provision becomes
uneffectual, when this Unity is dissolved, yet ought not that to be an
argument, that the goodness of God never made that provision, which the malice
of man may defeat; But, that, whosoever concurrs to maintain the division,
concurrs to defeat that provision which God has made. As safely do I agree
with all them, who agree, that whatsoever is taught in Christianity is to be
proved by the Scriptures. For, if it belong to the Rule of Faith, it is
intended by the Scriptures, though that intent is evidenced by the Tradition of
the Church. If to the Laws of the Church, the authority of it comes from the
Scriptures, though the evidence of it may depend upon common sense, which the
practice of the Church may convince. If over and above both, it is not
receivable, if not contained in the Scriptures. And in this regard, whosoever
maintains the whole Scripture to be the Rule of Faith, is thoroughly justified
by all those testimonies that have been alleged to that purpose. For, though it
be not necessary to the salvation of all Christians, to understand the meaning
of all the Scriptures; yet, what Scripture soever a man attains to understand,
is as much a Rule to his Faith, as that, which a man cannot be saved if he
understand not the sense of it, whether in and by the Scripture, or without it.
And though a man may be obliged to believe, that which is not in the Scripture,
to have been instituted by the Apostles; yet is he not obliged to observe it,
but upon that reason which the Scripture delivers. And, upon these terms, is
the whole Scripture a Rule of Faith, from which, as nothing is to be taken
away, so is nothing to be added to it, as the saying of S. Chrysostom in Phil.
II. Hom. XII. requires. And the saying of S. Basil in Esa. II. and Ascet. Reg.
I. condemning all that is done without Scripture, takes place upon no other
terms than these. Not as Cartwright and our Puritanes after him imagine, that a
man is to have a text of Scripture, specifying every thing which he does, for
his warrant; For, as it is in it self ridiculous to imagine, that all cases
which fall out, can be ruled by express text of Scripture, our Christianity
being concerned infinite ways, of which, it is evident, that the Scripture had
no occasion to speak; So, if the words of the Scripture be lodged in a heart,
where the work of them dwells not, (a thing which we see too possible to
come to pass) it is the ready way, to make the Word of God a color for all
unrighteousness, not only to others, but to the very heart of him who has
that cloak for it. It is therefore enough, that the reason of every thing which
a Christian does is to be derived from that doctrine which the Scripture
declaeth. And, where a man proceeds to do that, for which he has not such a
reason so grounded, as reasonable men use to go by, then comes that to pass
which S. Basil charge Ascet. Reg. LXXX. That, What is not of faith is sin. It
is true, according to that sense which hitherto I have used, after many Church
Writers, the Rule of Faith extends not to all the Scriptures, but only to
that, which it is necessary to salvation to believe and to know; Which, every
man knows, that all the Scripture is not. For, though it be necessary to
salvation to believe, that all the Scripture is true, yet is it not necessary
to salvation to know all that the Scripture contains. And, the reason why I
use it in this sense is, to distinguish those things contained in the
Scriptures, which Tradition extends to, from those to which it extends not;
For, upon these terms, is the sense of them limitable to the common Faith. But,
I quarrel not therefore the opinion of them that maintain, the whole Scriptures
to be the Rule of Faith, acknowledging that, whatsoever it contains is
necessarily to be believed, by all that come to understand it: And whatsoever
it contains not, though the Scripture alone obliges not to believe the truth
of it, is not necessarily to be observed, for any other reason, but that which
the Scripture declares. As for S. Basil, making it apostasy, to bring that
which is not written into the Faith; It is a thing well known, that the Arians
were charged by the Church, for bringing in words that were not in the
Scriptures, saying (...); There was a time when Christ was not; And, (...);
That he was made of nothing; On the other side, after the Council of Nicaea,
the Arians charged the Church, for bringing in the word (...), of the same
substance. Where then lay the difference, between the Inndelity of the Arians,
and the Faith of the Church? Theodoret shows it Hist. Eccles. I. 8. out of
Athanasius de Actis Council. Niceni: (...), says he; They were condemned by
written words piously understood. But how appears this piety? For, I suppose
the Arians would not have granted it. He adds, that the word (...), had been
used by the Fathers, (which, had it been inconsistent with the sense of the
Church, could not have been endured, in a matter concerning the Rule of Faith)
whereas their terms were contrary to that which is found in the Scriptures. Now
S. Basil acknowledges that he had elsewhere, dealing with Heretics, used
terms not found in the Scriptures; to exclude their sense contrary to the
Scriptures, (as, you shall find by the Authors alleged, that the Council of
Nicaea had done) but to those who desired information with a single heart, he
resolves to rest content with the Scriptures; The terms whereof, his meaning is
that the Heretics did not rest content with, because they had a mind to
depart from the Faith. Upon the same terms, Tertullian pronounces the Woe that
belongs to them which add to Gods Word, upon Hermogenes, because his error
concerned the Article of our Creed, that God made heaven and earth. And S.
Austine presumes, the reason why there is no clear Scripture for the original
of the soul, to be because he presumes that it concerns not the substance of
Faith. Besides these Observations, some of those passages which are alleged may
concern Christianity, rather than the Scriptures. The Word shines upon all, and
is hid to none, says Clemens to the Gentiles. But it is enough for his
purpose, that they may be convinced of Christianity, whether the Scriptures
contain it clearly to all understandings or not. Tertullian prescribes, that,
when once we believe, we are to believe that we have nothing else to
believe; because the Gnostics pretended secrets, which our common
Christianity, they confessed, contained not. Claudius Apollinaris is afraid
that our common Christianity might be thought unperfit, if he should write
against Montanus. And does not Christians writing one against another cast a
mark of imperfection upon it, in the opinion of unbelievers, though Christians
ought to know that God is not tied to prevent offenses? Assuredly, the Gospel
of which he speaks, is neither any one Gospel nor all four: Nor can the word
Gospel signify, either the New Testament alone, or the Old and New both: Nor
could he be thought to add to them, by expounding them, and thereby
maintaining the Church. Therefore, he inferrs a good consequence, that,
because it is forbidden to add to, or take from the Law, therefore, our common
Christianity is not unperfit, nor ought we to do that, whereby it may seem
unperfit. Now, as for the sayings alleged out of S. Austine, that import as
much as the words which we had before; Ego Evangelio non crederem -- having
showed what is the effect and intent of them, I shall not be very solicitous to
show, how all that is said to the same effect is answered. For, as there is no
head so hard, that cannot distinguish, between the authority of the Church, as
it is a visible Body of men, that could never have been cozened into the
belief of Christianity upon pretended motives (whether sufficient or not) and,
as it is supposed by Christians, to be a Body founded by God; So is there no
heart so hardened with prejudice, as to refuse this demand: That the authority
of the Church as the Church presupposes the truth of Christianity, and
therefore proves it not; And, by consequence, no truth, that Christianity
either contains or infers. Which being admitted, if any thing be ascribed
to the Church, which seems not to suppose any part of Christian truth, it must
be referred to the authority and credit of the Church, as a visible Body of
men, moving others to embrace the Christian Faith. For, though this credit
contribute to the making of those men Christians, which are won to the Church
already settled, and so the Church is the Church before they are Christians; Yet
is the ground and reason which makes the Church a Body founded by God, to wit,
the profession of Christianity, more ancient in order of reason and nature,
than the being of the Church. And upon supposition of this ground, (that is,
that the Church has true reasons, as well as sufficient, to believe) proceeds
all that authority of the Church, which S. Austine allegeth to the Manichees,
upon so high terms, that he would not believe, were he not moved by it to
believe. Neither was it the authority of the Church, vested in the rest of the
Apostles, that gave S. Paul the authority of an Apostle over the Church;
(though I have said before, that all the authority which the Church can ever
have, was in the Apostles and disciples of our Lord, for the time. And though
it is manifest, that S. Paul could not have had the Authority of an Apostle
over the Church, had he not been owned by the rest of the Apostles) but the
Authority of our Lord Christ in the Apostles, of the same effect, in obliging
the Church to receive S. Paul for an Apostle, as, to receive that which they
preached, for the Faith. Nor is the matter much otherwise, in the receiving of
any Scripture for Canonital. For, neither can any man's writing be owned for
Canonical Scripture, not supposing his person owned by the Apostles. And his
authority, being so owned, is necessarily before any authority of the Church,
and the very being of it. That some Scriptures may be received in some
Churches, and not in others, is not because any Church can have authority to
reject that which another is bound to receive; but because some Church may not
know, that some Scripture comes from a man so owned by the Apostles, (though
another may know it) and yet be a Church, and salvation be had in the communion
of it, such knowledge depending merely upon evidence in point of fact; And
therefore, the act of the Church in listing the Scripture has no authority but
that which the presumption of such evidence creates. As for the rest of that
which is alleged for the authority of the Church, if S. Jerome resolve to stand
to the Church of Rome, it is not because he takes the sentence thereof to be
infallible; but because he had reason to presume, that it were in vain for an
Angel in heaven to preach any other Faith to it, than that which once had been
received. Nor does S. Cyprian make the not believing the Popes infallibility
the sourse of all Heresy and Schism, but, the neglect of authority derived
from the Apostles, upon the Heads of particular Churches, in the consent of
whom, the visibility of the true Faith, and Church both, consists. For, it is
mere slight of hand, to take the Rock which the Gates of Hell vanquish not, in
S. Austine, for the Church of Rome, because he spoke of it in the words next
before; Being meant of the Vine which he had speech of a little before that; to
wit, the Christianity which our Lord Christ preaches. For, in S. Bernards
time, I grant, the style was changed, and it might pass for good doctrine to
say; That the Faith cannot suffer any failleur in the Church of Rome. As for
all those passages of the Fathers, which are alleged in recommendation, whether
of Tradition for the Rule of Faith, or of Traditions which are the Laws of the
Church, they are all mine own; They cannot serve the turn of any opinion but
that which I pretend; That the Tradition of the Church, (witnessed and
evidenced by the continual exercice and practice of the Church, extant in the
records of the Church, not constituted and created by any express act of those
that have authority in behalf of the Church) as it gives bounds to the
interpretation of the Scripture, in such things as concern the Rule of Faith;
So it discovers what Laws the Church received from the Apostles, and, by
consequence, what is agreeable and consequent to the intent of the same in
future times, according to the difference between that and the present state of
the Church. Let those things therefore which have been produced here, be added
to that which I alleged in the beginning, to make evidence for the Corporation
of the Church, from the Laws given it by the Apostles. Irenaus shall serve,
both for the authority of the Scripture antecedent to the authority of the
Church, and for the Tradition of the Church bounding the sense of it. For, if
the same Faith which first was preached, was afterward committed to writing by
the Apostles, (and, how should those Christians which had not the use of
leters, be saved otherwise?) then was it the authority of the Apostles,
acknowledged by them that found themselves tied to be Christians, which made
the Faith to oblige, whether delivered by writing, or without it; The consent
of all Churches, in the same Rule of Faith, serving for evidence of the
Apostles act, in delivering the same to the Churches. Nor can any further
reason be demanded, why that knowledge, which the Gnostics prerended to have
received by secret ways should be refuted, than the want of this. And
therefore it is in vain to allege, that, as they scorned the Scripture, so they
alleged Tradition for this secret knowledge; The Tradition which they alleged
being secret, and such as could not be made to appear; But no less
contradictory to the Tradition of the Church, than to the Scriptures, both
infallibly witnessed by the consent of all Churches. And hereupon, I leave the
sayings of S. Austine, setting aside the authority of the Council of Nicaea,
and affirming, that former General Councils may be corrected by later, without
answer; As also the sayings of them who affirm, the Faith which our Lord has
taught to be the rock, upon which the Church is built. For, if no building can
lay that foundation, upon which it stands, then cannot the Church make matter
of Faith, being founded upon it. And that authority which may be set aside, or
corrected, can be no infallible ground of Faith. It is true, it is pleaded,
that, though, in the Church of Rome there be some, that do believe, that the
Church is able to make new Articles of Faith; (that is, to make such
determinations in matters of Faith, as shall oblige all men to believe them, as
much as they are obliged to believe all that which comes from our Lord by his
Apostles) Others, that do believe only, that the Church is able to evidence
what the Apostles delivered to the Church, and that this evidence is the ground
whereon particular persons are to rest, that, whatsoever is so evidenced, was
indeed so delivered by the Apostles; yet both these agree in one and the same
reason of believing, both of them alleging the Tradition of the Apostles to the
Church, for the ground of their Faith. But this is more than any man of reason
can believe, unless we allow him that affirms contradictories, to ground
himself upon one part of the contradiction, which the other part of it
destroys. For, seeing that there must be but one reason, one ground, upon
which we believe all that we believe, and that it is manifest, that, those
Articles of Faith which the determination of the Church creates, (being not
such by any thing which that determination supposes) are believed to be such,
merely in consideration of the authority of the Church that determines them; By
consequence, the Scripture, and whatsoever is held to be of Faith, upon any
ground which the authority of the Church creates, is no matter of Faith, but by
the authority of the Church, determining that it be held for such. On the other
side, he that allows Tradition to be the reason why he believes the
Christian Faith, necessarily allows, all that he allows to be matter of
Faith, not only to be true, but to be matter of Faith, before ever the Church
determine it. So that, allowing him to say, that he holds his Faith by
Tradition, he must allow me, that he contradicts himself, whenever he
takes upon him to maintain, that the Church creates new Articles of Faith,
which were not so, the instant before the determination of the Church.

CHAP. XXXII. Answer to an Objection, that choice of Religion becomes difficult
upon these terms. This resolution is for the Interest of the Reformation. Those
that make the Church Infallible cannot, those that make the Scripture clear and
sufficient may own Tradition for evidence to determine the meaning of the
Scriptures, and Controversies of Faith. The Interest of the Church of England.
The pretense of Rushworthes Dialogues, that we have no unquestionable
Scripture, and, that the Tradition of the Church never changes.
AS little shall I need to be troubled at any reason that may be framed against
this resolution, having answered the prejudice that seems to sway most men to
apprehend, that God must have been wanting to his Church, if all things
necessary to salvation be not clearly laid down in the Scriptures. For, it is
very manifest, that the very same presumption possesses the minds of the
adverse party, that God must needs have provided a visible Judge infallible in
deciding all Controversies of Faith; Whether the Church, or any person or
persons authorized in behalf of the Church, for the present all is one. I shall
therefore only demand, that it be considered, first, that God was no way tied
either to send our Lord Christ, or to give his Gospel; which, because it comes
of Gods free grace, is therefore called the Word of his Grace, and the Covenant
of Grace. Then, that he has not found himself obliged to provide effectual
means, to bring all mankind to the knowledge of it; resting content to have
provided such, as, if men be not wanting to their own salvation, and the
salvation of the rest of mankind, may be sufficient to bring all men to the
knowledge of it. And, when it is come to knowledge, all discreet Christians,
notwithstanding, must acknowledge, that the motives thereof fully propounded,
though abundantly sufficient to reasonable persons, yet do not constrain those
that are convicted by them, to proceed according to them, as necessary reasons
constrain all understandings that see them, to judge by them. For, how should it
be a trial of men's dispositions, if there were no way to avoid the necessity of
those motives that enforce it? Now, if any knowledge can be had, of truth in
matters of faith that become disputable, it must all, of necessity, depend upon
the sufficiency of those motives, which convict men to embrace the Christian
Faith. And if there be any such skill as that of a Divine among Christians, of
necessity, all of it proceeds upon supposition of the said motives, which, not
pretending to show the reason of things which they convict men to believe,
convict them notwithstanding to believe, that they are revealed by God. For,
what conviction can there be, that this or that is true, unless it may appear
to fall under those motives, as the means which God has employed, so to
recommend it? Therefore can it not be reasonable, to require a greater
evidence, to the truth of things disputable among Christians, than God has
allowed Christianity it self; which being supposed on all hands, it remains
questionable, whether this or that be part of it. Therefore can it not be
presumed, that God has made the Scriptures clear in all points necessary to
salvation, to all understandings concerned; or, that he has provided a
visible Judge, infallible in determining Controversies of Faith; either because
originally his goodness requires it, or because we cannot suppose that men
can be obliged to embrace the Gospel upon other terms. It is sufficient, that,
having given the Scriptures, he has over and above provided the Communion of
the Church, to preserve the Rule of Faith, and the Laws of the Church, in the
sensible knowledge and common practice of all Christians; that the means of
salvation might be sufficient, and yet men remain subject to trial, whether
they would render them uneffectual or not, to themselves and the rest of
mankind. I confess indeed, it would be much for the ease of the parties, and
would shorten their work very much, if it might be admitted for a presumption,
that all things necessary are clear in the Scriptures, or, that the Church is
an infallible Judge in Controversies of Faith. For then, the superficial sound
of the words of Scripture, repeated by rote, in the Pulpit or out of the
Pulpit, would serve to knock the greatest question on the head, without any
advise, what difficulties remain behind, undecided, upon no less appearances
in Scripture; On the other side, a decree of the Council of Trent would serve
to put the Scripture to silence, without any proffer to satisfy the conscience
that is moved with the authority thereof, equally obliging with our common
Christianity, with the sense of the Church on the same side to boot. Thus much
is visible, that they whose business it is, in England, to reconcile souls to
the Church of Rome, find their work ready done when they have gained this
point; and men, all their lives before grounded upon contrary reasons, in the
particulars which are the subject of the breach, change their profession
without any coutrary resolution in those particulars, that is, their former
grounds remaining in force. Surely nothing were more desirable, than a ready
and short way to the truth, in things so concerning. But, to pretend it upon a
ground, which, if any thing can be demonstrative in this kind, is
demonstratively proved that it cannot be true; To wit, the authority of the
Church decreeing, without means to derive that which it decrees, from the
motives, that should evidence it to be revealed by God; This, I say, to
pretend, is no better than an Imposture.

And if this be true, I remain secure of that which every man will object
against the resolution which I advance, that, whereas, the meaning of the
Scripture alone is a thing too difficult for the most part of men to compass,
I require further, that it be assured by the records of the Church, which are
endless, and which no man's industry can attain to know; So that, the mere
despair of finding resolution by the means propounded, will justify to God,
him that follows probabilities, as being all one in that case, whether there
be no truth, or whether it cannot appear to those whom it concerns. This
Objection, I say, I do not find so heavy upon me, that I have any cause to
mince, but rather to aggravate the difficulty of it, having showed, that the
means provided by God, to make evidence of the Faith to the consciences of
particular Chaistians, is not any gift of infallibility vested in any person or
persons on behalf of the whole Church, but the Unity of the whole Church,
grounded upon the profession of the same Faith as the condition of it. For in
all reason, what Unity binds, that Division destroys. And, whatsoever Unity
contributes to the assurance of a Christian, that he is in the way to
salvation, so long as he continues in the Unity of the Church; that the
Division of the Church necessarily derogates from the same assurance, in him
that cannot continue in that Unity which is once dissolved, and yet, believing
the Scriptures and our common Christianity to be infallibly true, cannot
believe the parties to be infallible, as they are. And, what has he that
desires the Unity of the Church to do. but to aggravate that difficulty of
attaining salvation, which the division thereof produces? I do therefore
grant, and challenge as for mine own Interest, that it is very difficult for
unlearned Christians to discern the truth in those Controversies, about which a
settled division is once formed, as now in the Western Church; At least upon so
true and so clear grounds, as may assure them, that they make their choice upon
no other interest than that of Gods truth. But I do not therefore yield to that
which this difficulty, it seems, has wrung from Vincentius Lerinensis, with
whom agrees the Opus imperfectum in Mat. as you have them quoted before; That
there is no means but Scripture to convince inveterate Heresies: The reason
whereof, the later of those authors renders; Because those Heresies have their
Churches, their Pastors, and the succession of them, and their Communion, as
well as Catholic Christians: For he supposes Pastors lawfully constituted to
have fallen away to those Heresies. And truly, the case of this difficulty was
put, when the Arian Faction had possessed so great a part of the Church, that
S. Gregory Nazianzene, in the place before quoted, acknowledges, that the true
Church could not be judged by numbers; With whom S. Hilary, libro de Synodis,
agrees. But if the same Nazianzene scorn them that value the Church by
numbers, Liberius, in the place before quoted out of Theodoret, revies it upon
him, in saying, that the cause of the Faith could not suffer, though he were
alone. For, not only the Scriptures continue always the same, but, though the
present Church fail, it follows not, that the Tradition of the Whole Church
must fail with it. So long as the original sense of the Whole Church may be
evident, by the agreement thereof with the Scripture, we may discern what is
Catholic, without the sentence of the present Church: And, that which is not
so to be discerned for Catholic, we may presume, that our salvation requires
us not to believe it. And therefore Vincentius and his fellow are so to be
understood, that it is difficult indeed, to make evidence to private
Christians, of Tradition contrary to that which they see received by Heresies;
(And therefore, that for the convicting of them in the truth, recourie is to be
had to the Scriptures) But Vincentius, who, as I showed you, acknowledges
evidence for Tradition, from written records of the Church, need not have said,
that there is no means to convince inveterate Heresies, but the Scriptures. Be
this difficulty then the evidence, how much it concerns the salvation of all
Christians, that the Unity of the Church be restored; That the choice of
private Christians, in matters concerning their salvation, be not put upon the
sentencing of those disputes, the reasons whereof they are not able to manage.
For, being restored, upon agreement in those things, which, it is sufficient
for all Christians to believe, it will neither be easy for private Christians,
to frame to themselves opinions, destructive to their particular salvation,
within that compass, neither will their fall be imputable to the Church, but
to themselves, if they do. But, neither shall this difficulty be so great an
inconvenience in our common Christianity, nor so insuperable as it seems to
those, that are loath to be too much troubled about the world to come. For, I
never found that God pretends to give, or that it is reason he should give
those means, for attaining that truth by which we must be saved, which it
should not lie within the malice of man to render difficult, for them to
compass, whom they concern. I find it abundantly enough for his unspeakable
goodness, and exactly agreeable with those means whereby he convicteth the
world of the truth of Christianity, that he give those whom it concerns, such
means to discern the truth of things in debate, as, being duly applied, are of
themselves sufficient to create a resolution as certain, as the weight of the
matter in debate shall require. And such I maintain the Scripture to be,
containing the sense of it within those bounds, which the Rule of Faith, and
the Laws given the Church by our Lord and his Apostles do limit. For, what is
more obvious, than to discern, what the whole Body of the Church has agreed
in, what not, what is manifestly consequent to the same, what not? what is
agreeable to the ground and end of those Laws which the Church first received
from our Lord and his Apostles, what not? Let prejudice cast what mists of
difficulties it can, before the light which God has given his Church, to
discover the truth, he that stands out of their way, shall discern, much more
art used to obscure than to discern it. Neither is there any reason why it is
so hard to make it discernable to all that are concerned, but the unreasonable
prejudices, either of the force of humane authority in matter of Faith, and the
extent of Tradition beyond the Rule of Faith, or, that the consent of the whole
Church may as well come from Antichrist as from the Apostles. If the records of
the Church were handled without these prejudices, less learning than this age
shows in other matters, might serve to evidence the consent of ^ Church in more
controversies than we have, to those that would be content to rest in the
Scripture expounded according to the same. But, if the Church, that is, those
that uave right in behalf of the Church, being persuaded of a sacrilegious
privilege of Infallibility, shall take upon them to determine truths in debate,
to limit Laws to the Church, without respect to this Rule, (which, if they
respect, they manifestly renounce the privilege of their Infallibility) I
mervail not that God suffers his people to be tried with such difficulties,
whose sins I doubt deserve this trial; But then I say further, that it is not
the providence of God, (that is, the means which he has provided to resolve
men in debates of Christianity) but it is the malice of man, that makes that
means uneffectual, which God has made sufficient.

I must now answer an envious objection, that this resolution is not according
to the positions of those, that profess the Reformation with us: To which I
will speak as freely as to the rest, having professed my self utterly assoiled
of all faction and respect of men's persons, to way against the means of finding
the truth, and, for that reason, divested even the Fathers of the Church, of
all authority, which their merits from Christianity have purchased, to hear
what their testimonies argue in point of Historical truth. I say then first,
that may saying no way prejudices the intent and interest of the Reformation,
whatsoever insufficience it may charge the expressions of Reformers with. I
know the worst that can be alleged in this point is, that Luther, in appealing
from the Pope and Council called by him, to a Council that should judge merely
by the Scriptures, first framed this Controversy between the Scriptures and
the Church, which since has been always in debate; so that he which will not
be tried by the Scriptures alone, plainly seems to quit the party, and give up
the game. Who has this imagination, though never to apparent, let me desire
him to go a little higher, to the first commencing of the plea about
Indulgences. For, there can be nothing more manifest than this; That, when
those that undertook that cause against Luther found, that the present practice
of the Church could not be derived from any thing recorded in the Scripture,
they were forced to betake themselves to the authority of the Church, not that
which consists in testifying the faith once delivered, but in creating that
which never was of force, until the exercice of it. Here, let all the world
judge, (for, I am confident, the case is so plain, that all the world may judge
in it) whether Luther had any Interest to demand, that the Scripture alone
should be heard, in opposition to the Tradition received from the beginning by
the Church, tending (as I have said) to nothing, but to limit the meaning of
the Scripture; Or, that his Interest required him to protest, that the truth
for which he stood, was not to be liable to the Sentence of the present
Church. And therefore, when, afterward, he appealed to a Council which should
pronounce by the Scriptures alone, if this tend to exclude those means which
are subordinate to the attaining of the meaning of the Scriptures; I do utterly
deny, that it can be understood so to be meant, by any man that would not
defeat his own enterprise: And therefore, that it must be understood, to
exclude only the authority of the present Church, so far as it proceeds not
upon supposition of those grounds, whereupon the Church is to pronounce. For,
what hinders the sentence of the Church to be infallible, not of it self alone,
but as it proceeds upon those means, which, duly applied, produce a sentence
that is infallible? And truly, were not his plea so to be understood, all his
Followers, Melancthan, Chemnitius, and others, who have written Volumes to
show, how their profession agrees with that of the Catholic Church, should
have taken pains to commit a very great inconsequence. For, as I have argued,
that those who maintain the Infallibility of the present Church, do contradict
themselves, whenever they have recourse, either to the Scripture, or to any
Records of the Church, to evidence the sense of the Scripture, in that, which,
otherwise, they profess, the authority of the Church alone infallibly to
determine; So, those that will have the Scripture alone to determine all
Controversies of Faith, and yet take the pains to bring evidence of the meaning
thereof, from that which has been received in the Church, may very well be
said to take pains to contradict themselves. Some of our Scottish Presbyterians
have observed, that the Church of England was reformed by those, that had more
esteem of Melancthon than of Calvin, and therefore affected a compliance with
the ancient Church. And truly it is fit it should be thought, that they
complied with him, because he complied with the Catholic Church; for by that
reason, they shall comply with the Church, if in any thing he comply not with
it. But it is a great deal too little for him to say, that will say the truth
for the Church of England. For it has an Injunction, which ought still to have
the force of a Law, that no interpretation of the Scripture be alleged,
contrary to the consent of the Fathers; Which had it been observed, the
innovations which I dispute against could have had no pretense. If this be not
enough, he that shall take pains to peruse, what Dr. Field has writ hereupon,
in his work of the Church, shall find, that which I say to be no novelty,
either in the Church of England, of in the best learned Doctors beyond the
Seas. And sure the Reformation was not betrayed, when the B. of Sarum
challenged all the Church of Rome at S. Paul's Cross, to make good the points
in difference, by the first DC years of the Church. Always it is easy for me
to demonstrate, that this resolution; That the Scripture, holding the meaning
of it by the Tradition of the Church, is the only means to decide
controversies of Faith; is nearer to the common terms, that the Scripture is
the only Rule of Faith, than to that Infallibility which is pretended for the
Church of Rome; Having demonstrated, that, to depend upon the Infallibility of
the present, and the Tradition of the Catholic Church, are things
inconsistent, whereas this cannot be inconsistent with that Scripture, which is
no less delivered from age to age than Tradition is, though the one by
writing, the other by word of mouth, and serving chiefly to determine the true
meaning of it, when it comes in debate. And if prejudice and passion carry not
men headlong to the ruin of that Christianity which they profess^, it cannot
seem an envious thing, to comply with the most learned of the Church of Rome,
who acknowledge not yet any other Infallibility in the Church then I claim,
rather than with the Socinians, the whole Interest of whose Heresy consists,
in being tried by Scripture alone, without bringing the consent of the Church
into consequence, and that, supposing all matter of Faith must be clear in the
Scripture, to all them that consult with nothing but Scripture.

But I cannot leave this point, till I have considered a singular conceit
advanced in Rushworthes Dialogues, for maintaining the Infallibility of the
Church, upon a new account. The pretense of that Book is, to establish a
certain ground of the choice of Religion, by the judgment of common sense; To
which purpose I pretend not to speak in this place, thinking it sufficient, if
this whole work may enable them who are moved with it, duly to make that
choice for themselves, and to show those that depend on them, how to do the
like. But, in as much as no man will deny, the choice of Religion to be the
choice of truth before falsehood, in those particulars whereof the difference of
Religion consists; It is manifest, that the means of discerning between true
and false in matter of Faith, which I pretend, cannot stand with that which he
advances. It consists in two points; That the Scripture is not, and that
Tradition is the certain means of deciding this truth. Which, if no more were
said, will not amount to a contradiction against that which I resolve. For, he
that says, the Scripture is not the only means, excluding that Tradition
which determines the meaning of it, does neither deny that Tradition is, nor
say that the Scripture is the certain means of deciding this kind of truth. But
the issue of his reasons will easily show, upon what terms the contradiction
stands. He cites, then, common sense to witness, that we cannot rest
certain, that we have those Scriptures which came, we agree, by inspiration
of God, by reason of the manifold changes, which, common sense makes
appearance, must come to pass in transcribing upon such a supposition as this;
That, so many Columns as one Book cont^ins, so many Copies, at least, are made
every hundredth years, and in every Copy so many faults, at least, as words in
one Column: Upon which account 15 or 16 times as many faults having been made
in all copies, as there are words, it will be so much odds, that we have no
true Scripture in any place; Abating only for those faults, that may have
fallen out to be the same in several copies. And, if Sixtus V Pope, causing 100
copies of the Vulgar Latin to be compared, found two thousand faults,
supposing two thousand copies extant, (which may be supposed a hundred thousand
in any Language) what will remain unquestionable? It is further alleged, that
the Scripture is written in Languages now ceased, (which some call Learned
Languages, because men learn them, to know such Books as are written in them)
the meaning whereof, not being subject to sense, depends upon such a guessing
kind of skill, as is subject to mistake, as experience shows in commenting of
all Authors: But especially the Hebrew, and that Greek in which we have the
Scriptures; That having originally no vowels to determine the reading of it,
wanting Conjunctions and Preposiaions to determine the signification of him
that speaks, all the Language extant being contained in the Bible alone (the
Jews Language differing so much as it does from it) the Language of the
Prophets consisting of such dark Tropes and Figures, that no skill seems to
determine what they mean: This, so copious, and by that means so various in the
expressions of it (though wanting that variety of Conjugations by which the
Hebrew and other Eastern Languages vary the sense) that, to determine the
meaning of it, is more than any ordinary skill can compass. Add hereunto the
manifold equivocations, incident to whatsoever is expressed by writing, more
incident to the Scripture, as pretending to give us the sense of our Lords
words (for example) not the very syllables; Add the uncertainties which the
multiplicity of Translations must needs produce; and all this must needs amount
to this reckoning; That God never meant the Bible for the means to decide
controversies of Faith, the meaning whereof requires many principles which God
alone can procure, because so indefinite. Which, the nature of the Book argues
no less, as I observed, being written in no method of a Law, or a Rule, nor
having those decisions that are to oblige distinguished from matter of a far
diverse, and almost impertinent nature. Upon these premises it is inferred, as
evident to common sense; that the Scripture produces no distinct resolution of
controversies, though, as infinitely useful for instruction in virtue, so,
tending to show the truth in matters of Faith in gross: and being read, rather
to know what is in it, than to judge by it; by the summary agreement of it with
that which is held and practiced, convincing where the truth is, and on which
side, especially if we content our selves with what is probable from it,
expecting from Tradition what is definite and certain.

For, supposing so great a Congregation as the Church to take this for the
ground of their Faith; that, nothing is to be believed, for revealed truth, but
what they have received from hand to hand from the Apostles; it must be
granted; First, that they had the same persuasion from the beginning; Because,
having never declared to their successors, what are the particulars they are to
receive, either they had from the beginning this principle, to distinguish
matter of faith from that which is not, or could never introduce it without
gross imposture: And besides, that, holding this persuasion, they could never
admit any thing as received from their Forefathers which was not so indeed;
Because, whole Nations can never agree so to deceive, in a matter subject to
sense, as to say, that they received this or that from their Forefathers, when
they did not, the reason being the same in all ages since Christ, as in our
own. For, the Christian Faith being so repeated, so inculcated by the preaching
of the Apostles; how long soever we suppose the remembrance of their doctrine
to have remained certain in the Church, so long we may infer, that age which
had this certain remembrance must convey it as certain, in a sensible distance
of time, and, by the means of such distances, that it must needs come no less
certain to us. Neither can any breach have been made upon the Faith, without
contesting the common principle of Tradition in the first place: and secondly,
the consequence and correspondence which the Articles of Christianity have one
with another, by means whereof, he that questioneth one, must needs, by
consequence, prejudice others. And, Religion being a bond, by observing which,
people are persuaded they shall attain happiness; the same motives to enter
into this bond in general, the same grounds of embracing Christianity in
particular remaining; how should we imagine, any part of it should be either
lost or changed, which necessarily must concur to the effect of the whole?
For, being dispersed, as from the beginning it has been, over so many Nations,
whose authority can be a sufficient reason, to persuade them all, that which
he says to have been received from the Apostles, not that which they were
possessed of before? Who is able to move them with hopes and fears, answerable
to those which wrought them to embrace it, either to silence or to change it?
And yet, so long as it can appear, that the contrary was received, so long time
must the change require to prevail, and so much more to leave the truth
forgot, and yet subject to be evidenced by any Records that may remain. So that
there is no appearance, that the principles producing such a change, should so
long time prevail as those motives, that first evidenced the truth. And
further, upon all this appearance in point of fact, it is argued a priori, and
as it were in point of Right; That, God having provided so many possibilities
to make the preservation of Christianity so easy, the effect must needs have
followed, lest the means should have been provided in vain, if no effect should
ensue: All possibility being to no purpose when no effect follows, and no
effect but this answering the means that render it so possible.

CHAP. XXXI. That the Scriptures which we have are unquestionable. That
mistakes in Copying are not considerable to the sense and effect of them. The
meaning of the Hebrew and Greek, even of the Prophets, determinable, to the
deciding of Controversies. How Religion delivered by Tradition becomes subject
to be corrupted.
THis is the sum of this new account, which, to my understanding, maintains
the Infallibility of the present Church, upon as high terms, as those that
resolve the reason of their Faith into it; and yet, not upon any gift of
Infallibility, intailed upon any visible act of any persons, however qualified
on behalf of the Church; but upon a pretense of evidence made to common sense,
that those who acknowledge Tradition, cannot receive any thing, not only which
they believe to be, but which is indeed inconsistent with it. Wherein I shall
protest in the first place, that I have nothing to do with the terms of great
error, or Christianity, so as to say here, that, either Christianity, which he
calls Christ's Law, or any part of it, either has been, or may be renounced
by them, that pretend to admit nothing as revealed truth, but what they believe
was received from the Apostles, and that so great an error as this may have
crept into the Church. For, the present purpose being general, to try how any
thing in debate may be tried, whether agreeable to the Faith or not; I should
count it a great impertinence, and the ruin of all that I design to infer,
upon sufficient principles (which, I pretend, those which I reject, not to be)
to be engaged to show, how great any error may be, before I have a ground to
infer, whether it be an error or not. But, if I may proceed to settle such a
ground, I shall make no doubt to convince all, that remain convict of the truth
thereof, how great the error is which it convicteth. It shall therefore suffice
me, for the present, to state the opposition which I make to this pretense
upon these terms; That the common sense of all Christians determines, those
who pretend to admit nothing as of Faith but what they receive from our Lord
and his Apostles, to be subject nevertheless, under that pretense, to receive
things really inconsistent with it, and, which may be discerned so to be, by
the means which we have to decide such questions; The Scriptures interpreted
by the Original and Catholic Tradition of the Church. The evidence of this
position necessarily consists in that, which is to be said for Scripture and
Tradition jointly, as the only sufficient means to evidence Christian truths;
that is to say, that, having showed, the arguments made against Scripture
alone, and for Tradition alone, to be ineffectual and void; That which remains
for the truth will be this, that the Scripture, with Tradition to determine the
meaning of it, do both together make a sufficient means, to determine the truth
of any thing questioned concerning Christianity.

I say then, in behalf of the Scripture, which this plea so undervalueth, as
not to acknowledge any such thing, but in favor to them whom they dispute
with; that it is a mervail to see, how the greater difference with common
enemies is forgot, upon less quarrels among our selves. For, if there be any
such men as Atheists, that deny the beginning of the world, and the marks of
Gods providence, expressed in the government of it (as I would there were none)
I demand, how they could be more gratified, than by making it believed, that we
are no more tied to believe Moses writings that we have to come from God, than
we please? For, if it be fifteen or sixteen to one, that the words which we
have are not from God, what respect can oblige us to do more? And would Pagans
and Idolaters think themselves less bound to us, if we could persuade them,
that, whatsoever is pretended in Scripture, of a Covenant made by God with
Abraham and his posterity, to acknowledge and worship him alone for the true
God, may be denied, so far, as by saying, that no man can say we have any
Record of it? As for the Jews, what a favor were it to them, to quit them all
that can be alleged against them out of Moses and the Prophets, by saying; That
we cannot be assured that it is their writing? For, if it be said, that,
whatsoever the Church has interest to use against Atheists, Pagans and Jews,
will be admitted upon Tradition, having renounced Scripture; can it be
imagined, that, having granted, that the whole narration, upon which
Christianity steppeth in, may have been counterfeited in writing, any man can
undertake to show the truth of the same, unquestionable, by word of mouth?
Surely it may well astonish a man void of prejudice to see it so carefully
alleged, how many ambiguities and equivocations necessarily fall out in
expressing men's minds by writing; never considering, that the same may fall
out, in whatsoever is delivered by word of mouth, so much more uncureably, as a
man writes upon more deliberation than he speaks: and, posterity can affirm
with more confidence, that which is delivered by writing to have been said,
than that which is only so reported. For, let common sense judge, by what is
usually done by men, for the preserving of evidence concerning their estates,
whether it be more effectual to have it in writing, or only by word of mouth.
For, whatsoever can be pretended to come by Tradition from the Apostles, must
first have been delivered in the Ebrew language; (at least that language which
they spoke, and was so near the Ebrew of the Old Testament, that in the New
Testament it is called by that name) Thence, being turned into Greek or Latin,
it must have come afterward into the now vulgar languages of Christendom.
Neither can any man imagine, how the profession of Christians should be
conveyed by Tradition, and not by word of mouth. Where, though they that heard
the Apostles certainly understood their meaning; (which there can be no
question of, when the intent is, familiarly to teach it) yet, the terms wherein
it was delivered not remaining upon record, as much difference may creep in, as
there may be difference in several men's apprehensions, saving that which the
communion of the Church determines, And will any common sense allow, that the
meaning thereof shall be more certain than the words are? more certain, than
the meaning of written words, which are certain, though obscure, and yet not
without competent means, to bring the intent of them to light? But I must not
prefer any thing of this nature before any thing we have in the Scriptures,
so long as both sides acknowledge it. I demand then, whether the precept of the
Law, which enjoined the Israelites to teach it their children, concerned the
written Law or not. The Prophet David Psalm LXXVIII. 1-8. shows the practice
of it, and so do other passages of the Old Testament; and surely there can be
no doubt made, that Moses himself did deliver and inculcate the sense of the
precepts to his hearers: But will any common sense allow, that he forgot his
text, when he expounded the meaning of it? Our Lord commands the Jews to
search the Scriptures, he remits Dives in the Parable to Moses and the
Prophets. S. Paul presses, that all things that are written are written for our
learning, that we, through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope: That all Scripture inspired from God is profitable -- and a great deal
more to the same effect; and shall we, open the mouth of Atheism with an
answer, that this concerns not us, who no way stand convict, that we have the
words of Moses and the Prophets, of our Lord and his Apostles? Let this
therefore pass for a desperate attempt, of making a breach, for Atheism,
Heathenism, Judaism, to enter in, provided that the Reformation should have
nothing to say against the Church of Rome. But, let it be demanded, whether any
of those that writ for the Church against Heresies were masters of the common
sense of men or not? And let it be demanded, when they alleged the Scriptures
against them, whether they thought the meaning of them determinable or not. It
is true, Tertullian prescribed against Heretics that the Church was not tied
to dispute with them out of the Scriptures, and certainly had just reason so to
do; Because, though they admitted the Apostles to have Gods Spirit, yet they
admitted not, that Spirit to have declared to them the bottom of the truth, as
to themselves, and therefore made use of the Scriptures as the Alcoran does; so
far only, as they agreed with the Traditions of their own Masters, whom they
supposed to have the falnesse of the truth: Whereas it is manifest, that
Christianity admits no dispute from the Scriptures, but from them, that
acknowledge no gifts of Gods Spirit, that suppose not Christianity and the
Scriptures. Therefore, those that disputed against the Heresies that grew up
afterward, and acknowledged no revelation, but that which had brought on
Christianity, what did they dispute upon? For evidently they neither had, nor
used that prescription, which Tertullian insisted upon against his Heretics.
But, as Tertullian might, (though not bound to so much) use the Scriptures
against such Heretics, as well as against Jews and Infidels; did they who
succeeded only use it against succeeding Heresies that own no further
revelation than that which Scripture came with, not as necessity, but to show
the advantage they had? for, this they must do, if nothing but probability is
to be had from the Scriptures, but the peremptory truth, is, without Scripture,
evident in the determination of the present Church, which was first visible in
ejecting Heretics? Certainly, such a breach upon common sense cannot be
admitted, as, for them that have evidence for the truth, to compromise it to a
dispute of probabilities. Here therefore, I do appeal to the common sense of
all men, that see, how all the disputes that have been made from the beginning,
for the Faith against Heresies, do consist of Scriptures drawn into consequence
against them, though in behalf of that which they professed to hold from the
Apostles; whether all this pains was taken to show, what was probable, or what
was true upon the evidence of the true sense of Scripture, falling within the
compass of that which they held from the Apostles.

The ground then of that account, which pretends, that we have no Scripture,
is very frivolous. For, if common sense be valued by the experience of those,
that handle written Copies, not by the imagination of them that do not; the
faults, which it is probable all Copies carry from their makers, cannot
endanger the truth of the Scripture, but in that one case which he allows to
abate his account, that is, when the same fault falls out in several Copies;
which is a rare chance. For, where diverse Copies agree in the same fault, it
behooves, that there should be some occasion of committing the mistake, capable
to induce several men into the same, the consent of whose Copies may in time
create a doubt what is true. But, to imagine, that a fault committed at large
by a Copyer, which, it is so great odds, that none else shall fall into; (The
truth being one, errors infinite) should endanger the true reading of any
writing, is not to appeal to common sense, but to renounce it. For, neither in
that one case, where, it is confessed there may be danger, are we left without
cure; the consequence of the sense, either alone, or with the help of some
Copy, always outwaying the credit of Copies liable to so many mistakes. He
that sees not what benefit all records of learning have received, even from
negligent Copies, industriously handled, to the preservation of all records,
may pretend ignorance in this point. But, for the Scriptures, as common sense
bears, that there is more occasion of making faults than in other writings,
because more multiplying of Copiesl so, common sense showing, that there is so
much more means of correcting them, the danger of changing the text is
vanished. Which, if all this were not, common sense, that sees the present text
of Scripture make a sense so reasonable, so agreeable, will as much scorn as a
reasonable man will scorn to admit, that this beautiful order of the world
comes from the casual interfering of atoms: For, is it not the same case, when
it is said, that so constant sense arises from the contingence of errors? And
therefore I mervail, that the varieties of readings recorded in Sixtus V his
Bible should be alleged to this purpose; Which, though they are the records of
errors, yet they are the arguments of truth; The true reading, by the credit of
them, over-balancing all mistakes. And truly, he that shall not up a just
account, of the hinderance, which the variety of reading in the Scripture,
gives the resolution of truth, shall find three or four texts questionable for
their reading, by the enemies of the Trinity; In other things, though diverse
readings questionable, yet none of consequence to any point in debate: And
those I speak of, so questionable, that that either they make no consEquence,
there being evidence sufficient without them, or there remains evidence enough
to weigh the true reading down.

Now, the ceasing of the Languages, in which the Scripture was written, is
indeed a difficulty to the attaining of the sense of them, as it is a
difficulty to the attaining of the Language: But, either we suppose the skill
of the Language attained when it is not, or, being attained, we must suppose,
that which we have upon record in it, as well understood, (to wit, as to the
Language) as men understand one another in their mother tongue. And therefore,
the Ebrew and Greek have hard fortune, to lie under contrary charges: As to
say, that the Ebrew is obscure because it is scarce, and the Greek is obscure
because copious; and, the Scripture being written in the one and in the other,
is therefore obscure. Certainly, those that spoke Ebrew, and those that spoke
Greek had means, to understand one another meaning, or else those Languages
were useless to the end of all Language: And, shall we imagine, that they
determine not the meaning of the speaker in writing, but when they are spoken,
well and good? No. To them that know not the Language, there is no sufficient
mark to determine the meaning of what is said in it. It is no mervail: On Gods
name, let them learn a little further, and they may discern the marks, whereby
the force of signifying is stamped upon the Languages. And truly, the
scarceness of that Language lies rather in the sloth of learners, (who save a
great deal of pains, by persuading themselves, that they know that Language,
when they have learned what is to be found in the Scriptures) than in want of
words to express all conceits. It is an easy thing to imagine, that the
writings of later Jews are not good Ebrew, and indeed it may appear, that,
after the Captivity, the Vulgar did not speak it. But, by the Traditions,
whereby they determine the exercise, of Moses Law (which, the Jews of Palestine
resident at Tiberias agreed to put in writing, about the Emperor Antoninus his
time) it appears plain enough, that the Language was preserved alive among the
Learned, and extends far further, than that which is found only in the
Scripture, though with some little difference: Which, that excellent Master of
humane learning Joseph d'Escale seems to me, very properly to distinguish, by
the names of the Ebrew and Jewish Languages; Because this difference may well
seem to have begun, from the times of Esdras, when the Tribe of Judah, (with
the apperrenances of it) with the recovery of their ancient inheritance, took
upon them the study of their Law. And, I appeal to the common sense of all,
that have found by reading, with what ease and property, that Language serves
to express all the conceits of their Philosophers and Divines, how beggarly,
how unable to determine the meaning of man's mind, we are to account it. As
for the Greek, be it never so defective in those expressions, which the variety
of Conjugations in Eastern Languages do produce, he that knows both the one
and the other, shall find the force of those expressions, signified by other
means, in the Greek, and other Languages; Be it never so copious otherwise, he
that will husband his pains to the learning of the Scriptures, shall find
means enough to attain the meaning of them, without undertaking to overcome all
that is written in that Language. As for the figurative speech that is used,
especially by the Prophets, and other writings of a Poetical style, (as the
Psalms, Job, the Canticle, and the like, if you reckon them not among the
Prophets) as it is not to be denied, that the style of them is obscure by that
means, so, when we see the meaning of them determined by the writings of the
Apostles, we must either grant, that means to be sufficient for that effect,
or, that the Apostles have alleged them upon no just ground, to no just
purpose. Now, that our Lords and the Apostles words are set down in such
expressions as the Evangelists and S. Luke thought meetest; I suppose, he that
has a due respect for them, will not think to be any argument, that he who
has the meaning of the Penman, has not the meaning of him that spoke. And if
all these be difficulties to the attaining of the true meaning of the
Scriptures, sure, the multiplicity of translations, (those especially, which
are the most ancient) by those who understand them, is duly esteemed a help to
that end, and not a hinderance. For, as the turning of them into so many
Languages prevents all errors of Copiers, and assures the true reading, so, the
comparing of the translations with the original (showing how it was understood
anciently, by those who were better and nearer acquainted with the matter of
them, than we are, who must have it from them) makes up a commentary of the
meaning of the same, and how far it extends. I do therefore here appeal to the
common sense of all them, that have been at charge, or at pains, to procure and
compass the Edition of all translations of the Bible, especially the ancient,
in particular the Spanish, Anwerpe and Paris, (which, it is hoped, is now
improved to the same purpose here at London) and do challenge all men to say,
first, whether the design be commendable or not, then, whether it can be
commendable, if it contribute not to preserve the true reading, to determine
the true meaning of the Scriptures.

As for that, which, I conceive, I have sufficiently insisted upon, in behalf
of the truth, that the writings of the Apostles presuppose a Rule of Faith,
received by those to whom they address, together with certain Rules, limiting
their communion in the service of God, upon supposition of that Rule; I am here
to claim the effect of it, that the sense of the Scripture is to be limited to
that, which common sense may discover, by the records of the Church, to have
been the sense and intent of the same, But, that this should argue an intent in
God, not to have given the Scriptures to determine debates that might arise
among Christians concerning the common faith; and that, upon, only the visible
profession of the Church, all arguments to the contrary from the Scriptures,
all clamors of conscience are to be silenced, without reconciling them to the
primitive Faith and practice of the Church, (to which, it is evident, that, if
the Church be not wanting to their duty, they are reconcilable) this is that
which I must and do proclaim to be utterly brutish and unreasonable. And
therefore, to proceed to the next point, I grant, and insist, that, nothing but
that, which is received from our Lord Christ and his Apostles, can, by any
means seem receivable to any Christian: But, whereas it may be received either
by writing alone, or by word of mouth alone, or by both; I say, that the
receiving of Christianity by word of mouth alone cannot be pretended, (the
power of the Church to create articles of Faith, which was never heard of till
the quarrel with Luther was on foot, being excluded) but supposing it evident to
common sense, that the act of the present Church, is the act of the Catholic
Church from the Apostles; Which, so far as I know, was never heard of till
Rushworths Dialog ues came forth. The Christianity, that was from the beginning
received by word of mouth, consists in the profession, of believing a certain
Rule of Faith, and undertaking a certain Rule of life, as the Law and
condition, whereby all Christians hope to attain everlasting life. Besides, all
Christians being, upon this profession, admitted to communicate with the Church
in the service of God, acicording to such Rules as determine the circumstances
thereof, first brought in by the Apostles; These Rules may also be said to be
received by word of mouth, because the practice of them holds by custom from
age to age, though the express knowledge and profession of them is not the
means to save particular Christians, further than it is the means, to maintain
the service of God in the unity of his Church, which is the means of it. Here
are then two heads of things received by word of mouth, which, he that will
speak expressly in this point must distinguish. And, according to this
distinction I say, that, only the Rule of Faith, which is the Law of attaining
everlasting life, and the communion of the Church, is delivered by word of
mouth; though, when I say so I understand, that the true intent and meaning
thereof, and what it imports to common sense, cannot be excluded. Besides
which, there is, of necessity, infinite matter of discourse, concerning things
consequent, or impertinent, or repugnant to the same, some whereof, obtaining
credit in some times and some parts of Christendom, comes, by tradition of word
of mouth, nevertheless, to other ages and places, which therefore do truly
bear the name of Tradition; Though not as delivered from the beginning by the
Apostles, further then, as, by them the means is delivered, whereby it may
appear, which of them is consequent, which of them repugnant, which of them
impertinent to that which they have delivered indeed. As concerning the Laws of
the Church, so certain and so manifest as it is, that there were Rules
delivered by the Apostles, to have the force of Law, in directing the communion
of Christians in the public service of God, to the Unity of the Church; So
certain and manifest is it; First, that the same Laws are not capable to
regulate the communion of the Church in all estates of it, which the change of
times should produce; And yet secondly, that, whatsoever should be changed, or
taken away, or added to the same, ought to tend to the same intent, which, it
is visible, those of the Apostles did purpose. Let any understanding, that is
capable, but consider the difference that needs must arise, by the Secular
Power undertaking the protection of Christianity, between the Church before and
the Church afterward; If he say, the same Laws will serve to maintain the
communion of the Church in both estates, (supposing the society thereof to be
the same, upon the premises) I shall then confess, that it is to no purpose to
appeal to any discourse of reason in this whole dispute. I say further, that,
among those who profess, that nothing ought to be received for revealed truth,
but that which was first delivered by our Lord and his Apostles, nothing ought
to have the force of Law, but that which tends to the same purpose, with that
which they inacted; Nothing hinders, things to be received into belief and
practice, that are really, not only impertinent to, but inconsistent with that
which indeed they have delivered to us. The appeal is to common sense,
therefore let discourse and experience satisfy common sense.

Religion indeed is a bond, by the condition whereof we persuade our selves of
peace with God; of attaining the good and avoiding the ill, which belongs to
those that are so or otherwise. And thus far, it is certain, that Religion is
a thing bred in man's nature, which it is impossible for him to shake off or
renounce. But is it impossible for him to become persuaded hereof upon undue
terms? Whence then comes all false Religion, whether of Jews or Pagans? For, we
shall not need here to consider Mahumetanes, whose Religion supposes
Christianity, as the corruption of it. Surely, he that considers not amiss,
will find, that it was a great ease to them, that were convinced to acknowledge
a God above them, to imagine the name and honor of this God to rest in
something of their own choice, or devising; which being set up by themselves,
reason would, they should hope to please, and have propitious, by such
obedience and service as they could allow. Correspondently, God, having given
the Jews a Law of such precepts, as might be outwardly performed without
inward obedience; whosoever believe, the most difficult point of Gods service
to be, the submission of the heart, will find it a gain, that he can persuade
himself of Gods peace, without it, whatsoever trouble, whatsoever cost he be
at, for that persuasion, otherwise. If then there be in man's nature, a
principle of Paganism and Judaism, notwithstanding that men cannot be at quiet,
till, by embracing a religion, they think they are at peace with God; Is it a
strange thing, that they who have attained the truth of Christianity should
entertain a persuasion of peace with God, upon terms, really inconsequent to,
or inconsistent with the true intent of it? Surely, if we reflect upon the
motives of it, and the motives of them, it cannot seem strange. I have said,
and it is manifest, that the nature of Christianity, though sufficient, yet
were purposely provided not to be constraining, that the effect of them might
be the trial of those dispositions, that should be moved therewith. And, is it
a mervail, that, means to persuade those that have received Christianity, that
things inconsistent with that which was first delivered, are indeed consequent
to the same, should be left, among those that profess, that they ought to
receive nothing, but what was first delivered by our Lord and his Apostles? I
say nothing now of renouncing Christianity, while men profess this; for, I
confess, and insist, that, while men do believe, that there is a society of
men visible by the name of the Church, it will not be possible for them to
forget their whole Christianity, or to embrace the contrary of it. But I say,
that, notwithstanding the profession of receiving Christianity from our Lord
and his Apostles, the present Church may admit Laws, (whether of belief or of
Communion) inconsistent with that which they received at first. I allege
further, that, so long as all parts of the Church held free intercourse and
correspondence with one another, it was a thing either difficult, or altogether
impossible, to bring such things, either into the persuasion or practice of all
parts of it, according to the difficulty, of bringing so great a body to agree
in any thing, against which any part might protest with effect. And this held,
not only before the Church was ingraffed into the State of the Romano Empire,
but also, so long after, as this accessory help of Christianity did not
obscure, and in the end extinguish the original intercourse and correspondence
of the Church. For then, it grew both possible, and easy for them, who had the
Secular Power on their side, to make that, which the authority thereof was
employed to maintain, to pass for Tradition in the Church: Seeing it is
manifest, that, in the ordinary language of Church Writers, Tradition signifies
no less, that which the Church delivers to succeeding ages, than that which it
received from the Apostles. Add hereunto the opinion of the authority of the
Church, truly pretended originally, within the true bounds, but, by neglecting
the due bounds of the truth of Christianity which it supposes, infinitely
extended to all States, which, Powermay have interest to introduce. For, if it be
not impossible to persuade those, who know they have received their
Christianity upon motives provided by God, (to convince the judgments and
consciences of all that see them, to embrace those things, to which the
witness of them may be applied) that they are to embrace whatsoever, either
the express act, or the silent practice of the Church inforces, whether the
motives of Faith be applicable to them or not; Then is it not impossible to
persuade them any thing, which this Power shall think to be for their Interest
to persuade: For, no man's Interest it can be, to go about to persuade the
world, that express contradictories are both true at once. And if it were not
impossible, that the imaginations of most of them, that dispute Controversies
for the Church of Rome, should be so imbroyled with the equivocation of this
word Church, as not to distinguish the Infallible authority thereof, as a
multitude of men, not to be deceived in testifying the truth, from the
authority of it, as a Body constituted upon supposition of the same; Shall it
not be easy for those, who can obtain a reputation of the World, that their
act is to oblige the whole Church, to obtain of the same, to make no
difference, between that which is presently decreed, and that which was
originally delivered by the Apostles; The said difference remaining disputable,
not only by any text of Scripture, but by any record of historical truth,
testifying the contrary to have passed for truth, in any other age or part of
the Church.

Upon these premises, I do appeal to the common sense of all men to judge,
whether the Church, professing to hold nothing but by Tradition from the
Apostles, may not be induced to admit that, as received from the Apostles,
which indeed never was delivered by the Apostles. For, when the Socinians
pretend, that the Faith of the Trinity, of the Incarnation and Satisfaction of
our Lord Christ, not being delivered by the Apostles in their writings, crept
into the Church as soon as they were dead, they still maintain, that nothing is
to be admitted, but what comes from our Lord and his Apostles; But, upon their
supposition, that Antichrist came into the Church as soon as they were dead,
are obliged to renounce all that can be pretended to come by Tradition, and in
that very next age. Which, I yield and insist, that, whosoever shall consider
the intercourse and correspondence visibly established by the Apostles, between
all parts of the Church, shall easily perceive to be a contradiction to common
sense. But, when so much difference is visible, between the State of the Church
in several ages, and, what change has succeeded in things manifest, to infer
what may have succeeded in things disputable; He must have his mind well and
thoroughly possessed with prejudice, to the utter renouncing of common sense,
that can endure, a demand so contrary to all appearance, to be imposed upon his
common sense. The same I say to the other demands, of certain and sensible
distances of time, which, they that see the end of may be certainly assured,
what was received at the beginning of them, and so, by mean distances, this
age, what was held by the Apostles; Of the like time, for blotting out the
remembrance of the truth, as for introducing falsehood. For it is evidently
true, that the motives of Christianity could never have prevailed to introduce
it into the belief and profession of all Christendom, had they not been true;
But it follows not therefore, that, Christianity being settled, and a Power
to conclude the Church lawfully vested in some members of it, in behalf of the
whole, within due bounds; The act of this Power transgressing the due bounds,
shall not be able to produce, in so great a Body, an opinion of the like
obligation, upon the express act of this Power, as upon Tradition truly
derived from the Apostles. For, the truth of Christianity professed, called in
question men's lives and fortunes, which they were not therefore so ready to
engage, upon an imposture. But, if when Sovereigns own the act of that Power
which concludes the Church, he that acknowledges it not, calls in question
his estate and reputation, or whatsoever good of this world the protection of
the Church ingageth. Upon this account, then, it is possible that innovation
should come into the Church, without calling in question the common principle,
that nothing is to be admitted which comes not from the Apostles. Nay, without
calling in question other points of Christianity, so received; Because nothing
hinders, things inconsistent with, or at least impertinent to that which the
Apostles have delivered, to be received, as consequent to that, which indeed
they have delivered, though not as expressly contained in the same. And, because
I would not speak without instance, in a business so general, I demand of
those that hold this opinion, whether they believe, that the Greek and Latin
Church, at such time as the Schism fell out between them, did both believe
Tradition as well as Scripture: And, when it appears, that there was no visible
difference between them in that regard, at that time, I shall desire them to
tell me, what they think of their demand, that all Sectaries have always left
Tradition, to betake themselves to Scripture alone. For, though I pretend not
to suppose either the one party or the other guilty of Schism or Heresy in
this place; yet I pretend it visible to common sense, that they who pretend to
receive nothing but from the Apostles, may think that which is not, to be
received from the Apostles, unless contradictories may be both true at once.
Another instance I will give that learned Gentleman Tho. White, who professes
to put Rushworths Dialogues into the world as his ward, and an Orfane, out of
the book which he has published of the mean state of souls between death and
the general Judgment, to show; that there is a Tradition of the Church, that
the greatest part of the souls of Christians that are not damned, continue in a
state of joy or grief, proportionable to the affection they had to this world
while they were of it, to be purged thereof at the general Judgment, but are
not translated, by any prayers of the Church, to the kingdom of heaven from
Purgatory pains. For, I demand of him that believes this, whether it be
received now or not, how he will defend his Ward, that maintains the present
Tradition to be always the same. For, if it be said, that it is not decreed by
the Church, though generally believed and practiced accordingly; I will say
that my business is done, when the most votes, by so many degrees, are
consenting to that, which, he maintains, is contrary to the Tradition of the
Apostles, his vote, and perhaps two or three more in the communion of the
Church of Rome, not hindering that which is received in practice, to be a more
effectual Law in force, than abundance of things inacted in writing that will
never come to effect. A third instance I will give, in the difference between
the Reformation and the Church of Rome, concerning the Canon of Scripture;
Supposing, that the late Scholastical History thereof has made evidence, that
those books belonging to the Old Testament, which the Council of Trent makes
Canonical Scripture, were never received for such from the Apostles: In as much
as it is evident, that there were, in all ages of the Church, that did not take
them for Canonical Scripture. For, this being supposed, what question can
remain, that this decree cannot be taken to proceed from Tradition of the
Apostles; But from a mistake in the Power of the Church, as grounded upon a
gift of infallibility, tied by God upon the visible act of persons enabled to
decree in Council? Otherwise, men of reason would not have taken upon them, to
make that Canonical Scripture, which, there is evidence, that they never
received for Canonical Scripture. And indeed, I, who have no more to demand
here, but, that, something may be thought, by the Church, to come from the
Apostles, which, in truth, it never received from the Apostles, do seek no more
by the premises but this; That no general presumption, from the present Church,
be receivable against evidence of historical truth, in the records of bypast
ages: That men will not take that, for the Tradition of the Catholic Church,
which some part of the Church, they see, has not owned for such: That they
will abate of the generality of their position, as the particulars, out of
which the induction must rise, may require. I take not upon me to say here,
that any foundation of Faith, necessary to the salvation of all, has been, or
can have been extinguished by Tradition of the present Church. But I say here,
that something may be taken by the present Church to come from the Apostles,
which, in truth, comes not from the Apostles. And, so long as that is true, I
say, that the choice of Religion cannot be prejudged by common sense, without
taking into consideration the weight of those truths which may appear to be
held otherwise by the present Church then, originally, they have been received
from the Apostles.

Now, to that which is said, that, unless Christianity continue as it was
delivered, the possibilities provided by God to that end will be in vain;
Though it be a dispute as unseasonable here, as to little purpose, yet, because
it requires no more than common sense to judge; I say, that the ends of Gods
creatures and works are none of Gods ends. My meaning is, that it is one thing
to say, God would have this to be the end of his creature; (happiness, for
example, to be the end of man) another thing to say, that he made man to bring
him to happiness: The difference being the same in the works of his
providence, whether it be said, that he provided such means, as, of their
nature tended to propagate the truth of Christianity preached by the Apostles
to all posterity; or, that he intended thereby to propagate the same: In a
word, whether it be said to be Gods end, or the end of his works. And truly,
he that says it was Gods end, consequently says, that God falls short of his
end, if it come not to pass. But he that will speak of God with reverence,
must not imagine, that he has any end but himself, nor, that he does any
thing to any other end, than to exercise and declare his own perfections. If
he do sundry things, which, of their nature have necessarily such an end as
they attain not; it is to be said, that Gods end never fails, in so much as, by
failing of the end to which they were made, they become the subject of some
other part of that providence, wherein his perfections are exercised and
declared. Seeing then, that all Controversies concerning the Faith, have
visibly their original from some passages of Scripture, which, being
presupposed true before the foundation of the Church, ought to be acknowledged,
but cannot be constituted by it; And seeing that no man, that, out of the
conscience of a Christian has embraced all that is written, can deny that,
which he may have cause to believe, to be the sense of the least part of the
Scripture, without ground to take away that belief; It remains, that the way to
abate Controversies, is, to rest content with the means that God has left us,
to determine the sense of the Scripture, not undertaking to tie men further to
it, than the applying of those means will infer. And truly, to imagine, that
the authority of the Church, or the dictate of Gods Spirit, should satisfy
doubts of that nature, without showing the means by which other records of
learning are understood, and so resolving those doubts which the Scriptures
necessarily raise, in all them that believe them to be true, and the word of
God; is more than huge cart-loads of Commentaries upon the Scriptures have have
been able to do. Which, being written, upon supposition of certain
determinations pretended by the Church, or certain positions, which, tending to
reform abuses in the Church, were taken for testified by Gods Spirit; have
produced no effect, but an utter despair of coming to resolution, or, at least,
acknowledgment of resolution, in the sense of the Scriptures. Whereas, let men
capable of understanding, and, managing the means heretofore mentioned, think
themselves free, as indeed they ought to be, of all prejudices, which the
partialities on foot in the Church may have prepossessed them with, and come to
determine the meaning thereof, by the means so prescribed, and, within those
bounds which the consent of the Church acknowledges; They shall no sooner
discern, how the primitive Christianity, which we have from the Apostles,
becomes propagated to us, but they shall no less clearly discern the same in
their writings. And, if God have so great a blessing for Christendom, as the
grace to look upon what has been written with this freedom; there has been so
much of the meaning of the Scripture already discovered, by those that have
laid aside such prejudices, and so much of it is in the way to be discovered
every day, if the means be pursued, as, is well to be hoped, will, and may make
partisans, think upon the reason they have, to maintain partialities in the
Church. If God have not this blessing in store for Christendom, it remains,
that, without or against all satisfaction of conscience, concerning the truth
of contrary pretenses, men give themselves up to follow and profess that,
which, the protection of secular Power, shall show them means to live and
thrive by. In which condition, whether there be more of Atheism or of
Christianity, I leave to him, who alone sees all men's hearts, to judge.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Dispute concerning the Canon of Scripture, and the
translations thereof, in two Questions. There can be no Tradition for those
books that were written since Prophecy ceased. Wherein the excellence of them
above other books lies. The chief objections against them are questionable. In
those parcels of the New Testament that have been questioned, the case is not
the same. The sense of the Church.
HAving thus resolved the main point in doubt, it cannot be denied
notwithstanding, that there are some parts, or appertenances, of the Question,
that remain as yet undecided. For, as long as it is only said, that the
Scripture, interpreted by the consent of the Church, is a sufficient mean to
determine any thing controverted in matter of Christian truth, there is nothing
said, till it appear, what these Scriptures are, and in what records they are
contained. And truly it is plain, that there remains a controversy, concerning
the credit of some part of those writings, which have been indifferently copied
and printed for the Old Testament, commonly marked in our English Bibles, by
the title of Apocrypha; And no less, concerning the credit of the Copies
wherein they are recorded. For, though it is certain and evident, that the Old
Testament has been derived from the Ebrew, the New from the Greek, in which at
first they were delivered to the Church; Yet, seeing it appears not of it
self impossible, (such changes may have succeeded in the Copies) that the
Copies, which the Jews now use, of the Old Testament, are further from that
which was first delivered, than the Vulgar Latin, as also the Copies of the
Greek Testament now extant; It is a very plain case, that, this doubt
remaining, it is not yet resolved, what are the principles, what the means to
determine the truth in matters questionable concerning Christianity. I must
further distinguish two questions that may be made in both these points, before
I go further: For, it is evidently one thing to demand, whether those writings,
which, I said, remain questionable, are to be counted part of the Old Testament
or not; Another, whether they are to be read by Christians, either for
particular information, or for public edification at the assemblies of the
Church. And likewise, as concerning the other point, it is one thing to demand,
what Copy is to be held for authentic, another thing to dispute, how every
Copy is to be used and frequented in the Church; To wit, whether translations
in mother languages are to be had, and into what credit they are to be
received. For, it is manifest, that the one sense of both questions demands,
what the body of the Church either may do, or ought to do, in proposing or
prohibiting the said writings or Copies, to be used by the members thereof, for
their edification in Christian piety; But the other, what credit they have in
themselves, upon such grounds, as are, in nature and reason, more ancient than
the authority of the Church, and which, the being and constitution thereof
presupposes. And, as manifest as it is, that these are two questions, so
manifest must it needs remain, that the one of them, to wit, that which
concerns the authority of the Church, and the effect of it, does not belong to
this place, nor come to be decided, but upon supposition, of all the means God
has given his Church, to be resolved of any truth that becomes questionable.
As for the other part of both questions, though it has been, and may be, among
them that will not understand the difference between principles and
conclusions, (because it is for their turn, that differences in religion should
be everlasting) the subject of great Volumes written for and again; Ye, to them
that are content to set aside that which cannot here be decided, I am
confident, there remains so little to be said, that the resolution of them will
appear to be mere consectaries and inferences from that truth, which hitherto
has been premised. For, supposing that which common sense is able to inform,
that the writings which we call Apocrypha, are more ancient than the Church of
Christ; And that, whether they were written by inspiration from God, as we
believe the Law and the Proph^^s to have been, the Church never had any
express revelation, beside the credit upon which it received them from the
Synagogue; it remains, that, whether they were received by the Synagogue as
inspired by God, is all that can remain questionable; Seeing it is not within
the compass of common sense to imagine, that, being not inspired by God at the
beginning, when they were penned, they can become inspired by God, by virtue of
any act of the Church, inducing them to be received for such.

Here then is to be seen the use of that distinction, which was made, between
the Church, as a Society of men, visible to common sense, and the same Church,
as a Society of men founded by God, and visible only to the faith of
Christians. For, the belief of this later, presupposes the truth of
Christianity, the motives whereof, without more ado, must evidence the truth of
the Scriptures: And so this question must be decided by such means, as are more
evident than the being of the Church in this later sense, to wit, by the being
thereof in the former sense. And this is that which I said, that the testimony
of the Synagogue, in matters of this nature, is, every whit, of as much force,
as the testimony of the Church; Both of them proceeding upon the same evidence,
which, the visible consent of such a company of men advances to common sense.
In fine, if it may appear, that the writings in question, were, from the
beginning, admitted by the Synagogue in the nature of writings inspired by God,
there will remain no cause why they should not be received into the same credit
with other writings, whereof the Old and New Testament consists; If it may
appear to the contrary, it will be utterly in vain to allege any act of the
Church, to enforce that, which is, as evidently beyond the Power of the Church,
as it is evident that there is such a thing as the Church. Neither can there be
any question, whether these writings were ever received by the Synagogue, in
this nature, seeing it is evident, that they do not receive any Prophets after
Malachi. I will not undertake, that they do not believe, that any body, after
that time was inspired by God to foretell things to come; For, that is not all
that belongs to those, whose writings are to be received as inspired by God. It
must appear further, that they are sent by God to his people, with commission
to declare his will to them; There must be evidence, that they are moved to
speak by the Holy Ghost, and by consequence, the people of God, to whom they
are moved to speak, obliged to receive them: How else should the gifts of Gods
Spirit, and the commission upon which they that have it are sent, challenge, of
duty, the acknowledgment of Gods people? I read in Josephus, of diverse things,
foretold with truth, after this time, nor I do I find my self obliged to
maintain, that the motions were not from God. But, in as much as they were not
furnished with such means as God appoints, to manifest unto his people, whom
he sends on his message, they are not to receive them as sent from God;
whatsoever his secret purpose may be, in sending such motions; but shall
always remain obliged, to govern themselves according to his will otherwise
declared. Now, there is nothing more manifest, than the declaration of
Josephus, intending to acquaint the Gentiles with the Faith and Laws of the
Jews; That, until the time of Artaxerxes that succeeded Xerxes, (being, in his
opinion, the time whereof I speak) the Prophets had written the relation of
their own times: But after that time, things were written indeed, but not with
the like credit, because there was no succession of Prophets. Cont. Ap. I. And
what can be more agreeable to the conclusion of the Prophet Malachi, IV. 4 --
where, having warned them to give heed to the Law of Moses, the Statutes and
Ordinances which God by him had given Israel; Behold, says he, I send you
Elias the Prophet, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come, and he
shall turn the hearts of the Fathers to the children, and of the children to
the Fathers, least I come and smite the Land with a curse: Which, the Gospel
tell us, was fulfilled, in sending John the Baptist, to make way for the
Christ, the Chief, and end of all the Prophets, Luke I. 17. Mat. XI. 14. XVII.
12. according to the saying of the ancient Jews, that the Christ is to be
anointed, that is, solemnly invested in his Office, by Elias. And for this
reason, when Judas Maccabeus purged the Temple, and the question was, what
should be done with the stones of the Altar that had been polluted, it is said
1 Mac. IV. 46. And they laid up the stones in a fit place, in the Mount of the
Temple, until a Prophet should come and give answer concerning them. And,
speaking of the persecution after the death of Judas, it is said, 1 Mac. IX.
27. And there fell out so great tribulation in Israel, as had not been, from
the day that no Prophet had been seen in Israel. And this time it is, whereof
it is either said, or prophesied; Psalm. LXXIV. 10. We see not our tokens,
there is no Prophet any more, neither any that understands any thing. Now it
is manifest, that, in the Scriptures, as well as in the Jews writings, the name
of Prophet is not understood only of foretelling things to come, but of
uttering things unknown to humane understanding. And so, the Law and the
Prophets contains all the Scriptures of the Old Testament. If therefore there
were no Prophecy from those times to the coming of our Lord, and John the
Baptist, it follows, that there is no Scripture inspired by God left us by
those times, according to the words of Eusebius in his Chronicle at the XXXII
year of this Artaxerxes; Hucusque Hebraeorum divinae Scripturae, annals
temporum continent. Hither to the divine Scriptures of the Hebrews contain the
annals of the times. And the Synagogue in S. Jerome, in Es. cap. XLIX. lib.
XIII. Post Aggaeum, and Zachariam, and Malachiam, nullos alios Prophetas usque
ad Joannem Baptistam videram. From Haggai, Zachary, and Malachy to John the
Baptist, I had seen no other Prophets. And so S. Austine de Civ. Dei XVII. 24.
Toto ille tempore ex quo redierunt de Babylonia, post Malachiam, Aggaeum, and
Zachariam, qui tunc prophetaeverunt, and Esdram, non habuerunt Prophetas usque
ad Salvatoris adventum. All that time from their return from Babylonia, after
Haggai, Zachary, and Malachy, who then prophesied, and Esdras, they had no
Prophets till the Saviors coming: Excepting those whom we find mentioned in
the Gospels. And truly it is manifest by historical truth, that there was a
part of that Nation, that gave themselves to use the Greek Language in there
dispersions, whereas, those that returned into the Land of Promise, as well as
those that remained in Babylonia, had learned the language of that Country,
being very near their own, which was retained only amongst the book-learned.
Seeing then, that it is manifest, that these books were committed to writing in
the Greek, for the most part at least, it cannot in reason be imagined, that
the whole Nation acknowledged them, as Scriptures inspired by God must have
been acknowledged; which, no man can say, that ever they came generally to be
used by the whole Nation, or could come to be used, being only in Greek. We
shall not find much of them translated, for the use of them that conversed in
the Ebrew, unless it be Tobit. For, Ecclesiasticus, it is true, was first
written in Ebrew, and but translated into Greek; When the Old Testament was
translated into Greek, then, and among them that used it, were they added to
the writings of the Prophets, and so received by the Church, that received
those Scriptures from them in Greek, in the same nature, and upon the like
credit, as it was visible they held them, from the time that first they were
received.

It is now no mervail, to see some men, upon the truth of these reasons, quite
renounce all the advantage which Christianity has, by the witness, which
these writings, being impartial, as uttered before it came into the world, do
render it; because they are unduely advanced by others, to the rank of those
that are inspired by God. For, the spirit of contradiction naturally carries
weak men, to oversee, to destroy their own Interest, so they may be far enough
from those whom they desire to bear down. So, we are content to yield the
Socinians all the advantage, which the consent of the Church gives us against
them, upon condition, that the differences we have with the Church of Rome,
may be decided by Scripture alone; And so are we content to betray the Church,
to fight, without the arms that are to be had out of these books, that we may
be free of them, when they seem to cross some prejudice, wherein we have
engaged our selves. But, if that which has been said, of the fulfilling of the
Prophets in the literal sense, at this time, between the return from Captivity,
and the coming of our Lord, be not premised amiss; Without doubt, all the
world could not recompense the loss of the books of Maccabees, and the use of
them; to the understanding of the Prophets, so inestimable is the benefit of
them to that purpose. And truly, I should not stick to the reasons which I have
premised, if I should not observe here, that, when that people began to be
persecuted for their Religion, by the Gentiles, it pleased God so to order the
matter, that, for their comfort, and resolution in adhering to it, the truth of
the Resurrection, and Judgment, and the World to come, should be openly and
clearly received and professed; which, though never questioned, yet had been
sparingly and darkly preached by the Prophets themselves. We see it in the
exhortations of the mother of the Maccabees to her children, 2 Mac. VII. 23.
29. and in their own protestations; according to the words of the Apostle, Heb.
XI. 35, 36. that they suffered in consideration of the world to come. And, it
is as well to be seen in those visions, whereby the Resurrection is figured out
to the Prophets Daniel and Ezekiel. (for in their time began the persecution of
Gods people) And, as in their time those revelations were granted, so, by their
doctrine, and the doctrine of the Prophets their successors, were the people of
God fortified against Apostasy, by the assurance of the resurrection and the
world to come. And by this means also, and upon this ground, that inward and
spiritual obedience, which the mystical intent of the Law requires, in order
to everlasting life, is so clearly and so plentifully expressed in those moral
writings, of the Wisdom of Solomon, and Ecclesiasticus; that it is a great
mervail, to see those, who are so eager to persuade Christian poople, to be
informed in the Law of Moses and the Prophets, (though many times, not knowing
the reason upon which the obligation of the Law cease, they are not only
scandalized thereby with Jewish opinions, but lost, and seduced to be
circumcised) so violent to prohibit them the information, which, from hence,
they may have in their Christianity. For, so sure as the Apostle, in the
eleventh to the Ebrews, shows, that all the Fathers were saved upon the same
terms as Christians are; so sure as the Fathers of the Church, as I have
elsewhere alleged, convince the Jews; that the Fathers before the Law were
saved as Christians, and not as Jews, so sure an advaatage has Christianity,
from all that is written before it came in force. Whether, because it could not
have been received by the Synagogue, had it contained things contrary to that
rule of piety, and means of salvation, which, in the Synagogue, (within which,
it is acknowledged on all sides, that, means of salvation was found) was in
force; Or whether, because, being written by the immediate successors of the
Prophets, they had, as it were, the sound of that doctrine still in their ears,
which they had received from them by word of mouth. For, he that would make a
question, that the doctrine of the world to come, is more plentifully and
clearly delivered in these writings, than in the Scriptures of the Old
Testament inspired by God; And, by consequence, that inward and spiritual
obedience, which becomes due in order to the same, more plentifully here
described; has no more to do, but to turn over the books, and compare them,
which will not fail to justify what I affirm. As for the book of Judith,
(though perhaps, ignorant people may scandalize themselves at it) yet I shall
profess to think it no disparagement to the credit, or to the right and due
use thereof, if the conceit which Grotius has published, and confirmed by
several circumstances, observed in the tenor of the book, should hold, both in
it, and in the book of Tobit: To wit, that it was not written for a history,
nor requires historical faith, that such a thing was ever done, but as an
allegory, or figure, described by way of Romance, to express the malice of
Satan under the shadow of Nebuchadnesar against Jewry, signified by Judith a
widow and fair, exercised by his Deputy Holofernes, in the person of Antiochus
Epiphanes, but trusting in God for deliverance; The rest serving to fill up the
relation. I will not say so much of the book of Tobit, because it is so far
from creating any difficulty in point of time, that it helps very much to
dissolve those difficulties which are made otherwise. But this I will
confidently say, that, supposing it to be a mere parable, relating what happened
to a true Israelite in whom was no guile, continuing faithful to God and to
his people, in a difficult time of persecution; it will be of no less
consequence, to the animating of Christians in the like course, then, supposing
the thing related to have come to pass. As for the History of Susanna, what
pains Origin has taken to persuade the learned Julius Africanus, (for to him,
as we learn by S. Jerome in Catalogo, his leter of this subject is directed)
that it is a true story, every man that will take the pains to peruse that
leter may see. Some say, that the Jews have the same story, differing in the
relation of it, in that they make the two Elders to be punished by
Nebucadnezar, not by their own people. And, though Origin is witness that the
Jews had the Power of the Sword sometimes in their dispersions; Yet under the
Chaldeans, when they were lately transplanted, it is like enough they had it
not. For these two Elders, the Jews, they will have to be Ahab and Colaiah, of
whom you read Jer. XXIX. 21. And truly there is appearance, that this
relation, being delivered from hand to hand among the Jews, was at length
penned by some of them that used the Greek, and so added to the Greek Bible;
For, you have in the Great Bible, two several Editions of it in the Syriack,
much differing one from the other in little circumstances; Though one of them
gives the two Elders other names than the Jews do. Which, as it will not allow
the Writing to be inspired by God, so will it enforce as much edification from
it, not detracting from the truth of it. For what does it detract, that he
that writ it uses an allusion from the names of Trees under which they accuse
her to have committed uncleanness, which the Greek only bears? Daniel
answering to him that saw her under a Holm tree, in Greek (...), to him that
said, under a Mastick tree, (...); This is indeed an argument, that he who
penned it in Greek, was willing to bring in a figure, to set forth a conceit,
which the Ebrew would not bear, (for Origin cannot persuade me, that there can
have been those names for these trees in the Ebrew, though now unknown to us,
which hold the same allusion; a chance of ten thousand to one) but is the
writing of ever the less effect and consequence, to the encouraging, and
warning of Gods people to walk in his Law? I will here add the
consideration of that, which, I observe to be common to many of them, and, in
my opinion serves to shovv, how much there is in them of the sense of the New
Testament, and of the doctrine of our Lord and his Apostles. This consideration
rises thus. S. Jerome in his Preface to the Books of Solomon says, that some
ancient Church Writers ascribe the Book of Wisdom to Philo the Jevv: Not
meaning, (as he expressly adds) that Philo that lived under Caligula, whose
works we have, but another that lived under Onias the High Priest. Therefore,
whatsoever may have been said since S. Jerome, of the author of this book,
cannot make it to be of the age of Caligula. S. Augustine de Civ. Dei XVII. 20.
says, that Ecclesiasticus and it both have been ascribed to Solomon (as S.
Jerome also in Dan. IX. says, that Ecclesiasticus was then called Solomon's
Wisdom) propter nonnullam eloquii similitudinem: Because there is some
resemblance between the frame of Solomon's style and that which they use. Which
as it is most true, so is it manifest, that there is no manner of resemblance
between the style of them, and of our Philo. As for the matter of the work, the
address which he makes to the Kings and Princes and Judges of the earth, I.
a. VI. 1, 2-10, 22. manifests, that it is intended for an exhortation to the
Gentiles, under whose power Gods people was, not to persecute them for serving
the only true God, but rather, to learn the knowledge and worship of him
themselves. This is the occasion of setting forth the Wisdom of God, from
whence the Law, (in which the wisdom of the Nation consisted, according to
Moses Deuteronomy. IV. 6, 7.) came, and which dwelt afterward, as in Solomon, so in
the rest of the Prophets and Patriarchs from Adam downwards, as you may see,
from that sixth Chapter, in the process of the Book. This is the intent of
that which is said, concerning the wisdom of that people coming from God, in
the Book of Baruch III. 12-38. For, intending to exhort them, to stick fast to
God, and not to fall away to the Idols of the Nations, in the Captivity, as the
Prophets Esaias and Jeremy had done, (which is the cause, why it is ascribed to
Baruch) he puts them in mind, that it was none but God, that could discover
that way of wisdom, which the Law taught Israel; Which wisdom, says he,
afterward was seen on earth, and conversed among men: For so I construe the
words, not to mean, that God was seen on earth and conversed among men (not
because it is not true, but because it is not so plainly said in the writings
of the Prophets) but the wisdom of God was seen on earth, and conversed among
men; to wit, in the Prophets who spoke by the word and wisdom of God. In like
manner, when the three Squires of the Body to King Darius undertook to plead,
what is of most force; the third, having named women to be the strongest,
adds, that Truth prevails over all; Meaning, that the truth which God, by
his Law, had declared to his people, should prevail over all that is strong in
this world; And so encouraging the King, to protect it, by countenancing the
building of the Temple: As you may see in the third of Esdras II. III. 34-40.
Which, I suppose here, to be a piece that comes from the Egyptian Jews, being
first read in the Greek Bible, and not in any record of the Jews otherwise.
Finally, Ecclesiasticus, commending the Wisdom which he pretends to teach,
and, for the matter of his commendation, having recourse to the original of it,
descants indeed upon Solomon's plain song, in the VIIIth and IXth of the
Poverbs, (and therefore delivers no new revelations, but the right intent of
that Prophets doctrine) but recommends the Wisdom of his Nation, far beyond
all that can be said of any Wisdom of the Gentiles, as coming from that
Wisdom, by which God made the world, and governs it ever since, Ecclesiasticus
I. XXIV. from which also the Law and the Prophets came. Now Ecclesiasticus,
though first penned in Ebrew, yet was translated into Greek in Egypt, as the
Prefice witnesses. Supposing then, the interest of Christianity against Judaism
to consist in that which the Fathers of the Church do plead; That the same Word
and Wisdom of God, which first dealt with the Patriarchs, which gave the Law
to Moses, and afterward spoke by the Prophets, in after time dwelt in our Lord
Christ Jesus and delivered the Gospel; I demand, what could have been said,
more to the purpose of Christianity against Judaism, by those that lived under
Moses Law? There is a question, whether the Apostles, S. Paul, and whosoever it
was that writ the Epistle to the Ebrews, do allege these Books, and allow them
for their Authors, when they call our Lord Christ the Image of God, 2 Cor. II.
4. the Image of the invisible God, Col. I. 15. the resplendence of the glory of
God, and the express image of his substance. Ebr. I. 3. the Power of God and
the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. I. 24. When they say, that all things in heaven and
earth were created by him, and to him, and subsist through him, as the
firstborn of the whole creature, Col. I. 16, 17. that the world was made by
him, and, that he sustaineth and moves all things by his powerful word, Ebr.
I. 2, 3. For, how like are these things to those which we read in
Ecclesiasticus I. 1, 4. All wisdom comes from the Lord, and is with him for
everlasting. Wisdom was made before all things, and the understanding of
prudence from everlasting. And XXIV. 14. (...). Before the world, from the
beginning he made me, and for ever I fail not; Having said, in the beginning
of the Chapter, according to the Latin Copy; Ego ex ore Altissimi prodivi,
primogenita ante omnem creaturam. I came forth of the mouth of the most High,
the first born before every creature. And again, Ecclesiasticus I. 9, 10. The
Lord himself made her, and saw, and numbered her, and poured her upon all his
works. With all flesh she is, according to his gift, and he furnishes her to
them that love him. And XXIV. 5-9. I came out of the most High, and covered the
earth like a mist. I dwell in the highest, and my throne is in the pilar of
cloud. I alone compass the circumference of heaven, and walk in the bottom of
the deep. In the waves of the sea, and in all the earth, in every people and
nation is my inheritance; Adding, that, seeking rest among men, she found it
no where but in Israel. And in the book of Wisdom VII. 22.-27. For there is in
Wisdom an understanding spirit, holy, only begotten, manifold, subtle,
thinn, nimble, perspicuous, undefiled, plain to be understood, inviolable,
loving goodness, quick, not to be hindered, beneficent, loving to men, firm,
sure, not solicitous, that can do any thing, that survayeth all things, and
passes through the purest and finest understanding spirits. For Wisdom is
nimbler than all motions, and attaineth and passith through all things because
of her pureness: For it is a vapor of the power of God, and a sincere effluence
of the glory of the Almighty, therefore no pollution can happen to it. For it
is the resplendence of the everlasting light, the unspotted mirror of Gods
working, and the image of his goodness: Which being one can do all things, and
remaining in her self renews all things, and passing into pious souls in all
ages, makes them friends of God, and Prophets. And IX. 9, 10, 11. And with thee
is Wisdom that knows thy works, and was present when thou made the world,
and knows what is pleasing in thine eyes, and right in thy commands. Send her
from thy holy heavens, and from the throne of thy glory, that she may assist
and labor with me, and I may know what is pleasing before thee. For she
knows and understands all things, and will guide me wisely in my doings,
and keep me in her glory. Can any man read these things, and not remember the
beginning of S. John's Gospel; In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All
things were made by it, and without it was nothing made that was made? Can any
man conceive, that, the Apostles should call our Lord Christ, the Word, the
Power, and the Wisdom of God, that made all things in heaven and in earth, it
self being brought forth before all creatures, supporting and moving all
things, which was with God from everlasting, that he is the image of God, the
shine of his glory, the character of his substance; That the successors of the
Prophets should describe the Wisdom of God, to be the Word of God that dwelt
in the Prophets, and the Power of God that made all things, being it self
brought forth before all things, that sustaineth and governs all things; to
dwell by the throne of God, as the shine of his light, the miror of his works,
the breath and vapor of his power and glory, and from thence to come and take
possession of the souls of Prophets; and not acknowledge all this to come from
the same fountain? Especially, being persuaded before, as all that are not Jews
must be persuaded, that the same Spirit and Word of God, (qualified as Wisdom
describes it) which, possessing the souls of righteous men, in that measure
whereof each of them was capable, made them Gods Prophets; dwelt in Christ
without measure, according to the fullness of the Godhead, as the Apostles have
told and said, John I. 14, 16. III. 34. Col. II. 9, 10. Truly, if any man say,
as I know it is said, that the same sense may be derived by the Apostles, from
the glory of God in Ezekiel. I. 28. from the attributes of the Messiah Psalm. II.
7. 2 Samuel VII. 14. Esa. IX. 6. from the making of the world by Gods wisdom,
recorded Psalm. XXXIII. 5. CXXXVI. 5. Jeremy LI. 15. X. 12. especially from that
which Solomon has written of Wisdom, being present with God from everlasting,
and doing all his works, Prove. VIII. 11-31. I will not contend with him about
it; Though, in my own judgment, seeing it cannot reasonably be denied, that
these writings, being extant long before, went then with the rest of the Greek
Bible; And, seeing the texts that are alleged do not direct us to understand,
how the Word and Spirit and Wisdom of God, by which the Law and the Prophets
spoke, dwells for ever in our Lord Christ, as these passages of their
Successors do; I do firmly believe, that they signify their allowance of them,
whose doctrine they use. But, it is enough, that it may hereby appear, as it
must needs appear, that they give us good and sound commentaries upon so high a
point of the Prophets doctrine, their predecessors, when the Apostles, that
follow them, hold such correspondence with them in it. Only hereupon, I will
from hence draw the reason, why, the inward obedience to God in Spirit and
truth which the Gospel requires, is so plentifully preached in all those
writings which we call Apocrypha; Whereas, in our Saviors and his Apostles
time, and much more afterward, they promised themselves the kingdom of
heaven, upon the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; That is, upon the
outward and carnal observation of Moses Law, and preciseness in all those
little niceties, which their Masters had fensed it with. For, it is no mervail,
that they, who, under persecution, promised themselves a part in the
resurrection of the righteous, cleaving to God and his Law; should find
themselves tied to that obedience, in spirit and truth, which God, who is a
Spirit, sees and allows. But less mervail it is, that, having attained the
carnal promises of the Law, in the possession of the Land of Promise, they
should fall away from the like zeal, and yet promise themselves the world to
come, upon that form of godliness which they observed, being destitute of the
force and power of it.

As an argument, that this consideration is well grounded and true, I will here
add the authority and practice of the primitive Church, prescribing these
books to be read by the Catechumeni; or, those that professed to believe the
truth of Christianity, and offered themselves to be instructed in the matter of
it, in order to Baptism, and being made Christians. For, seeing these might be
as well Jews as Gentiles, this signifies, that the doctrine of them was held by
the Church, a fit instruction toward Christianity, even for those, that were
already acquainted with the doctrine of the Prophets. S. Athanasius then, in
Synopsi, testifies, that these books were read to the Catechumeni. To the same
purpose it is read in the Constitutions of the Apostles, though the place is
not at hand at present. And that which the last Canon of the Apostles
prescribes, that, besides the Canonical Scriptures, the book of Ecclesiasticus
be read by the youth, seems to tend to the same purpose. To the same purpose
Dionysius de div. Nom. cap. IV. calls the Book of Wisdom an Introduction to
the divine Oracles. But, let no man think to infer, that the Apostles took
these Books for Scripture inspired by God, because I grant that they borrowed
from them in their writings; Origin has met with this objection, Prol. in
Cant. where he observes; That the Apostles have borrowed some things out of
Apocryphal Scriptures, (as S. Jude out of the books of Enoch, and the departure
of Moses) and yet adds, that we are not to give way to the reading of them,
because we must not transgress the bounds which our Fathers have fixed.
Where, you see, he distinguishes those books which the Church did not allow
to be read, under the name of Apocrypha, from those which it did allow to be
read, and are therefore more properly called Ecclesiastical Scriptures, (which
name has particularly stuck, by way of excellence, upon the Wisdom of the son
of Sirach) though I contend not about names, when we call them Apocrypha,
because I see that S. Jerome has sometimes done it. And, if S. Paul have
alleged Aratus, Menander and Epimenides, heathen Poets, he did not thereby
intend to allow the authors, but the matter which he allegeth.

If these things be so, I shall not desire to abridg any man's liberty, from
arguing against the matter of these Books, to prove them not inspired by God,
because not agreeing with those, which, we know, and agree to have been
inspired by God: But I shall warn them that take upon them thus to argue, first
to look about them, that they bring not the unquestionable parts of Scripture
into an undue suspicion, for agreeing in something, for which they have
conceived a prejudice, that these Books are not to be received. The design of
Judith, and her proceeding in the execution of it, is charged not to agree with
Christianity, neither is it my purpose here to maintain that it does. But, I am
more than afraid, that those who object this, do not know how to distinguish it
from the fact of Jaell the wife of Heber the Kenite, in the book of Judges,
which the Spirit of God in Deborah the Prophetess so highly extolleth. The
like is to be said of the like passages, questioned in the book of Tobit and
the Maccabees, and namely, the fact of Razias, killing himself, least he
should fall into the hands of persecutors, which seems to be related with
much approbation, 2 Mac. XIV. 41-46. For, to distinguish this fact from
Samsons, it will not serve the turn to say, that Samson did it by inspiration
of Gods Spirit, supposing before, that it was contrary to Gods declared Law to
do it. The difficulty being greater, in saying, that the declared Law of God is
violated by the motion of Gods Spirit, when as, the Spirit of God is not
granted to any man, but upon supposition of acknowledging Gods declared Law.
For howsoever Saul, or Caiaphas, or Balaam may be moved by the Spirit of God,
to speak such things, as, by the Scriptures inspired by God, we learn that
they did speak; Yet, that God should employ upon his own Commission, (as the
Judges, of whom it is said, that the Spirit of God came upon them, were
manifestly employed by God) whom he favored not, is a thing which cannot agree
with the presumption which all Christians have, of the salvation of the
Fathers. As for the passage of Eccles. XLVI. 23. which seems to say, that it
was the soul of Samuel the Prophet, and not an evil Spirit assuming his habit,
that foretold the death of Saul; I do not understand, why all this may not be
said, according to appearance, not according to truth: For, it will still make
for the honor of Samuel, that the King, whatsoever opinion he had of this
means of fore-knowledg, should desire to see Samuel, as him, whom, in his life
time, he found so unquestionable. But, if it be said, that this cannot
satisfy the leter of the Scripture, yet can it not be said, that, as Saul, a
wicked man, did believe, that he might see Samuel, so, a good man at that time
might not have the same: Being then no part of the truth, which true piety
obliged all men to acknowledge. In the book of Tobit, there are several things
besides, questionable. But, they that imagine conjuring, in the liver of a
fish, to drive away an unclean Spirit, do not consider those exorcisms,
whereby, it is evident, both by the Gospels and Acts of the Apostles, besides
diverse of the most ancient Fathers of the Church, that the Jews, both in our
Lords times and after, did cast out unclean Spirits. For, what force could they
have, but from the appointment of God, from whom, at first, they were
delivered, for a testimony of his residence among his people? Which makes me
stick to condemn that relation of the Jews in the Talmud, extant also in
Suidas, that there were admirable remedies delivered by Solomon, which he
caused to be writ upon the walls of the Temple; though they commend King
Ezekias for causing them to be done out, when it appeared, that the virtue of
them was such, that the people forgot their recourse to, and dependence upon
God, because they knew so ready help elsewhere. And truly it is nothing strange
to me, that the Jews, living under the Persian Empire, and seeing, that there
were seven chief Princes which had the great credit in it next the King, the
successors of the seven (...), (that is, those seven that killed him that
usurped after the death of Cambyses as sometimes I have conceived; who, having
the privilege of perpetual access to the King, as Herodotus testifies, are
therefore said to see the Kings face, Esther I. 10, 14 -- Esther VII. 14.) I
say it seems not strange, that, expressing and thinking of God as of a great
Prince, (as does the whole Scripture, speaking in those terms that men are most
apt to conceive) they should attribute unto him the like attendance of seven
Angels, as his principal Ministers, the book de Mundo under Aristotle's name,
comparing him also with the King of Persia. And yet I will not grant, that the
seven Spirits before the Throne of God in the Revelation I. 4. IV. 5. V. 6. are
those seven Angels, because there are seven virtues of Gods Spirit recounted in
Esaias XI. 2, 3. which the seven Spirits before Gods Throne may well serve to
express; The seven Angels that blow the seven Trump^ts, Revel. VIII. 2. being
only that number of Angels, (whether the principal of Gods Ministers or not)
who appear seven, to represent the plagues of the Trumpets and Vials in seven,
as the seals of the Book before. Neither is there any hope or fear, that any
matter of historical truth can be discovered in them, which may justly charge
them with imposture; as if the authors of them could be thought ignorant of the
state of Gods people, living, as they did, so high in time. In vain it is to
imagine, that, when Judith VIII. 6. is said to have kept, not only the
Sabbaths, New Mons, and Festivals of the Law, but also the days before, which,
by the Talmud Doctors we know, were afterward in use among the dispersions of
the Jews; He who writ this book forges, when he says they were so anciently
in use. For, either he must prophecy, or they must have been in use when the
book was writ: And whether in use or not, when the story is said to have come
to pass, will be of no consequence to him that believes it to be of no
consequence, whether a Parable or not. As for the pretense of superstition,
which, the credit thereof may be said thereby to maintain; if it be no
superstition, for the people to whom our Lord preached to observe all that the
Scribes and Pharisees enjoined them, because they sat in Moses his chair, much
less shall it be superstition for Judith, or for those that lived when the
book of Judith was penned, to have served God two days, by the appointment of
those that sat in Moses chair, when as Gods Law named but one. And so, when
the history of Susanna says, that the Jews were allowed in their dispersions,
to judge matters of life and death among themselves; though this perhaps was
otherwise under the Chaldeans, and, that, he who penned it mistook in that
circumstance; yet justly and certainly might it have been presumed, (though
Origin had never interposed to justify a thing, which, upon better, because
anciente^ credit of this author, had been justified before) that such a power
had been exercised at some times by the Jews, in their dispersions.

Before I go further, it will be requisite to answer an objection, which, I
must confess to be material, but withal, apprehended for more dangerous than
it need; To wit, that some part now received for Scripture of the New
Testament, (the Epistle to the Ebrews, and that of S. James, by name, the
Revelation of S. John, and some other small pieces) have been sometimes
questioned, and since are received, in that nature. And what, then, should
hindet those books that sometimes have been questioned, whether of the Old
Testament or not, to be now received for such upon the decree of the Council of
Trent? I say then, that is manifest to him, that will take the pains to
consider it, that the writings of the Apostles were first deposited with those
parts of the Church, upon occasion, and for use whereof they were first penned;
As, for the purpose, their Epistles, with those Churches to which they were
sent, (where Tertullian, in his prescription against Heretics, testifies, that
the authenticks and originals of them were extant) and the Revelation of S.
John with the seven Churches. Neither is it to be imagined, that the
Collection, which now we call the New Testament, was then any where extant.
Nay, it is manifest by the beginning of S. Luke, there went about certain
Gospels, which Origin, and S. Ambrose upon that place, following him, says,
were afterward disallowed. Adding, that the gift of discerning Spirits,
mentioned by S. Paul 1 Cor. X. 10. was then extant in the Church, (as in the
Synagogue, when it was to be discerned whether true Prophets or not) that the
Church might rest assured of the writings of those whose commission had been so
verified. It is therefore reasonable to think, that those writings, that had
been received by some Churches, upon the credit of their Authors, known to have
been inspired by the Holy Ghost, gave others an umbrage of something not
agreeable with Christianity; (as the Epistle to the Ebrews, of refusing
Penance, the Revelation, of the Kingdom of a thousand years) when they came
first to know them, which from the beginning they had not done, much less, the
doubt, whether inspired by God or not. Neither is the case otherwise, excepting
terms of scorn which may have been used, either in Luthers refusing S. James
his Epistle, or, when the Epistle to the Ebrews is questioned by Erasmus, or
Cardinal Cajetane; as that of S. Jude of late by Salmasius. But there is
always means to redress any part of the Church, or any Doctor of it, in any
such mistake, so long as there remains means to certify them, from what hand
they have been received, to wit, from persons, in whom the Church was
certified, that the Holy Ghost spoke. Which being certified, reason would,
that, not only particular persons, but Churches lay down their jealousies, by
understanding such words as cause jealousies, so, as they may best agree with
the common Christianity. But what is all this to the writings of those, who can
by no means be supposed to have written by the Holy Ghost? Shall any act, any
decree of the Church, create them the credit of writings inspired by Gods
Spirit, which before that act they had not? And therefore, the case is not the
same which the writings, which, we know, never could nor can be received,
standing the evidence, that no evidence can ever be made, that they were
inspired by Gods Spirit, or, that the authors thereof ever spoke by the same.
And, with this resolution, the testimonies of Ecclesiastical writers will agree
well enough, if we consider, that, to prove them to have the testimony of the
Church, to be inspired by God, it is not enough to allege, either the word or
the deed, either of Writers or Councils, alleging the authority of them, or
calling them Holy, Divine, or Canonical Scriptures; Nothing but universal
consent making good this testimony, which, the dissent of any part creates an
exception against. For, if those, to whom any thing is said to be delivered,
agree not in it, how can it be said, to be delivered to them, who protest, not
to have received it? Wherefore, having settled this before, that no decree of
the Church inforceth more, than the reason of preserving unity in the Church
can require; we must, by consequence say, that, if the credit of divine
inspiration be denied them, by such authors, as the Church approves, no decree
of the Church can oblige to believe them for such; though, how far it may
oblige to use them, I dispute not here. It shall therefore, serve my turn to
name S. Jerome in this cause. Not as if Athanasius in Synopsi, Melito of Sardis
in Eusebius, S. Gregory Nazianzene, abundance of others both of the most
ancient Writers of the Church, and of others more modern, who justly prefer S.
Jerome in this cause, did not reject all those parts, or most of them, which
the Church of England rejects: But because, were S. Jerome alive in it, there
could be no Tradition of the Church for that, which S. Jerome, not only a
member, but so received a Doctor of the Church, refuses. For, it will not
serve the turn to say, that he writ when the Church had decreed nothing in it;
who, had he lived after the Council of Trent, would have writ otherwise: The
reasons of his opinion standing, for which no Council could decree otherwise.
He would therefore have obeyed the Church, in using those books, which it
should prescribe; But, his belief, whether inspired by God or not, he would
have built upon such grounds, the truth whereof, the very being of the Church
presupposes. Nor will I stand to scan the sayings of Ecclesiastical Writers,
or the acts of Councils, concerning the authority of all and every one of these
books, any further in this place. There is extant of late, a Scholastical
History of the Canon of the Scripture, in which this is exactly done; And upon
that I will discharge my self in this point, referring my Reader, for the
consent of the Church, unto it. And what imports it, I beseech you, that they
are called Sacred or Canonical Scriptures? As if all such writings were not
holy, which serve to settle the holy Faith of Christians. And though it is now
received, that they are called Canonical, because they contain the Rule of our
Faith and manners, and perhaps are so called in this notion, by S. Augustine,
and other Fathers of the Church; Yet, if we go to the most ancient use of this
word Canon, from which the attribute of Canonical Scripture descends, it will
easily appear, that it signifies no more, than the list or Catalogue of
Scriptures received by the Church. For, who should make or settle the list of
Scriptures receivable, but the Church that receives the same? it being
manifest, that, they who writ the particulars knew not what the whole should
contain. And truly, as I said before, that the Church of Rome it self does not,
by any act of the force of Law, challenge, that the decrees of the Church are
infallible; So is it to be acknowledged, that, in this point of all other, it
does most really use in effect that power, which, formally and expressly it no
where challenges; Proceeding to order those books to be received with the like
affection of piety, as those which are agreed to be inspired by God, which, it
is evident by express testimonies of Church writers, were not so received from
the beginning by the Church. So that, they who made the decree, renouncing all
pretense of revelation, to themselves in common, or to every one in particular,
can give no account, how they came to know that which they decree to be true.
So great inconveniences, the not duly limiting the power of the Church
contrives even them into, that think themselves, therefore, free from mistake
in managing of it, not because they think they know what they do, but because
they think they cannot do amiss. It remains therefore, that, standing to the
proper sense of this decree, importing, that we are to believe these books, as
inspired by God, neither can they maintain, nor we receive it: But if it shall
be condescended, to abate the proper and native meaning of it, so as to
signify only, the same affection of piety moving to receive them, not the
same object, obliging Christian piety to the esteem of them; it will remain
then determinable, by that which shall be said, to prove, how these books may
or ought to be recommended or enjoined by the Church, or, received of and from
the Church.

CHAP. XXXIII. Only the Original Copy can be Authentic. But, the truth
thereof may as well be found in the translations of the Old Testament, as in
the Jews Copies. The Jews have not falsified them of malice. The Points come
neither from Moses, nor Esdras, but from the Talmud Jews.
AS to the other point, it is, by consequence, manifest, that the Church has
nothing to do to enjoin any Copy of the Scripture to be received as authentic,
but that which it self originally received, because it is what it is, before
the Church receive it. Therefore, seeing the Scripture of the Old Testament was
penned first, and delivered in the Ebrew Tongue, (for I need not here except
that little part of Esdras and Daniel, which is in the Chaldee, the same reason
holding in both) that of the New in the Greek; there is no question to be made,
but those are the authentic Copies. Neither can the decree of the Council of
Trent bear any dispute, to them who have admitted the premises, if it be taken
to import, that the Church thereby settleth the credit of Scripture, inspired
by God, upon the Copy which it self advances, taking the same away from the
Copy which the author penned; That credit depending merely upon the commission
of God, and his Spirit, upon the which the very being of the Church equally
depends. But it is manifest, that it cannot be said, that the said decree
necessarily imports so much; because it is at this day free for every one to
maintain, that the Original Ebrew and Greek are the Authentic Copies, the
Vulgar Latin only enjoined, not to be refused in act of dispute, or question;
which hinders no recourse to the Originals, for the determining of the meaning
which it imports. He that will see this tried, need go no further, than a
little book of Sorbonne Doctor called Valerianus de Flavigny, Professor of the
Ebrew in the University of Paris, written in opposition to an opinion, vented
in the Preface to the great Bible lately published there, in disparagement of
the Ebrew Copy of the Old Testament. Where he shall see that opinion refuted
with that eagerness, and the contrary attested by the opinions of so many
Divines, of so great note in the Church of Rome, since that Council, that no
man that sees them can deny, that, notwithstanding the decree, it is free for
every man to maintain, the original Copies to be authentic. And truly, he
that should affirm, the credit of the Scripture to stand upon the decree of the
present Church, or upon the testimony of the Spirit; must, by consequence, have
recourse to the same visible decree, or to the same invisible dictate,
whenever it shall be necessary to accept or refuse the reading of any text of
Scripture, with that faith, which, if it be false, the whole truth of
Christianity will be forfeit. What Rushworth and his possession would do, to
evidence, what reading of the Scripture is indeed authentic, when as it does
not appear what is the reading which the Church is truly in possession of, let
him advise. For, in that case he must expressly avow the consequence of his
position, that the Scripture is not considerable in resolving Controversies of
Faith: Because the Church is not in possession of the certain reading of any
Scripture. For, if he say, he has made short work in that question, having
discharged the Scripture of being necessary to the Church, and therefore
acquitted himself of any necessity to show, how we may come by true Scripture;
and in stead thereof, and all other means of deciding Controversies in the
Church, established the tradition presently in possession; First, it will be
easier for me, to verify the short Rule of Faith, by the Scriptures
interpreted according to that, which, by records, may appear to have been from
the beginning of force in the Church, than it will be for him to show, what is
the Tradition which the Church is in possession of at present: And that, this
being showed, I shall not need to fear any great danger that he may object,
from the variety of reading which may be found in several Copies, the necessity
of salvation being secured. And then, in the next place, to say; That the
Scripture is not necessary, though not for the salvation of every Christian,
yet, for the salvation of the Body of Christians, which is the Church; Though,
that faction which separation ingenders will suffer no opinion to be plausible,
but those which are in extremes. Yet I hope, the malice of Satan has not yet
debauched the ears of Christians to endure. And thus, as before it was settled,
that the whole Scripture is received for the word of God, upon the credit of
Tradition; so, of every part and parcel of it, wherein the credit of several
Copies consists, it is consequently to be said, that nothing can oblige the
faith of a Christian, to receive it, unquestionably for the word of God, the
Tradition whereof is not unquestionable.

But, thus much being settled; That, what was originally delivered in Greek and
Ebrew, is to be received for the authentic Word of God; What was originally
delivered in Greek and Ebrew, may still remain questionable. That is to say,
this being agreed, it may still remain questionable; what Copies they are, that
do contain that, which was originally delivered in Greek and Ebrew. How
probable it is, I need not yet say; but, any man of common sense must say, that
it is possible, through the changes that time is able to produce, that the
translations shall prove better than the originals, and that the Scriptures
shall be truer read among those that have received, than among those that
delivered them. And this is indeed the true state of the question, which is now
come to be disputed, upon due terms, as it seems; To wit, whether the Ebrew
Copies which now we have from the Jews, and the Greek Copies of the New
Testament now extant, contain that Scripture, which all Christians are bound to
receive upon their Christianity, not only in opposition to the Vulgar Latin,
which the Council of Trent injoyneth, and to the authority of the present
Church, (thinking that it is concluded in that decree) but in opposition to
that Tradition, which other ancient Copies, either original or translated, may
and do contain and evidence. In which point, I shall in the first place
profess, as concerning the Old Testament, that I find it no inconvenience,
but a great deal of reason to grant, that, at what time those books were made
up into a Body, and consigned unto the Synagogue, the reading which we have
received from them was not delivered as unquestionable, (so that it should be
any prejudice to the Law of God to suspect it) but as the most probable, and,
by admitting whereof, no prejudiee to the said Law could follow. And, the
safety of this position, both Jews and Christians will witness with me. For
if the Jews rruly acknowledge, and insist, that their Judaism is sufficiently
grounded and witnessed by the leter of the Old Testament which we have; the
Christians, that their Christianity is as sufficiently to be evidenced, by the
Copies we have, as Christianity was intended to be delivered by the Scriptures
of the Old Testament; Is it possible, that it should be a matter of jealousy
for me to admit, that, in that Body of the Old Testament which the Christians
have received from the Jews, there may be found some passages, the reading
whereof was not received as unquestionable, when the Body of the Old Testament
was consigned to the Synagogue, from whence the Church receives it? I say not
when this time was, nor would I have that which I affirm here, to stand upon a
circumstance so disputable. I do believe the Jews, when they tell us of the men
of the Great Synagogue, after the return from the Captivity; from whom, and by
whom, the Scriptures, they believe, were settled and delivered to their
posterity. I do also believe, that this Assembly might and did endure, whilst
the Grace of Prophets had vogue, and was in force among Gods people. For, if I
believe them when they tell me, that there was such a company of men; I cannot
disbelieve them, that the Prophets Haggai, Zachary, and Malachi, the Scribe
Esdras, (the same with Malachi, as they tell us, for any thing I know; for why
should I not believe, Malachi, being appellative, and signifying my messenger,
to be Esdras his surname, given him from that which is prophesied Mal. III. 1?)
Mordecai, Nehemias, Josue the son of Josedok, and many others of that time were
of it. But, shall I believe, that their Prophetical grace was employed to
decide the true reading of the Scripture? shall I believe, that a new
revelation was given, to notify how every leter and syllable was to be read,
when, neither the consequence of the matter required it, and, sufficient means
had been given to certify common sense how to proceed? I know the good Father
S. Irenaeus was made to believe, that the Scriptures were quite lost during the
Captivity of Babylonia; and, that the Copies we have, contain only that,
which Esdras, by inspiration of Gods Spirit, writ anew for the books of the Old
Testament. I doubt not there are enough that find this unreasonable, which
cannot hear without a great grain of jealousy, that Esdras, (supposing him the
man, that made up and consigned the Body of the Old Testament to the Synagogue)
should deliver any thing, but upon such credit, that, if any syllable of it
should be admitted questionable, the Law of God it self must become
questionable; To wit, because Esdras is supposed to have been endowed with Gods
Spirit, though it cannot be supposed to what purpose. For, otherwise, why
should it seem so dangerous to believe, that there are faults in the reading of
the Jews Copies of the Old Testament which we use? That excellent Humanist
Joseph Scaliger has maintained, that there are corrupt readings in the Copies
that we use, more ancient than Esdras. Ludovicus Capellus at this day
maintains, that the Ebrew Copies may be mended, not only by other texts of
the Old and New Testament, but by the Translations which have been made, before
those corruptions might prevail. I can neither pretend here to maintain, nor to
destroy that which either of them has said. I will say further to the same
purpose. The Syriack of the Old Testament, which is a translation made by
Christians, out of the Original Ebrew, seems to have followed another reading
than that which we find in our Ebrew Copies, and that many times
considerable. I will give you a few instances. Genesis II. 2. It has been thought
so strange, that God should finish the work that he had made upon the seventh
day, who is said elsewhere to have made heaven and earth in six days; That the
Jews have reported, that the Greek translates it the sixth day, least the
Gentiles should stumble at it. But, when we see the Samaritane and the Syriack
follow the Greek, shall not the credit of them balance the credit of the Ebrew
Copies? Genesis XLIII. 28. -- we are brought in, that he may roll himself upon
us, or, fall upon us. (...) is read many times in the sense of casting down a
man's self prostrate. That it can signify simply, falling, I do not believe any
Ebrew can justify. Read but with the Syriack (...), changing only (...) into
(...), and the sense will be as proper as the Ebrew, to put tricks upon us.
Number. XXXI. 28-47. according to the Ebrew, the spoil being divided in two, the
army are commanded to consecrate one of five hundred to God, the Congregation,
one of fifty: In the Syriack, both, one of fifty. And the numbers specified
afterward, differ accordingly. Now, whereas these are consecrated to God as
the first fruits of the spoil; it is manifest, that one of fifty was the legal
rate of first fruits, which, any man might exceed, but no man was to go less:
As S. Jerome upon Ezekiel, agreeing with the Talmud, witnesses. Which is the
reason why I must account this reading considerable, notwithstanding the Ebrew.
1 Samuel XVII. 12. And the man went among men for an old man, in the days of
Saul. Translate; And the man in the days of Saul was old and stricken in
years; Reading with the Syriack (...), not with the Ebrew (...); And then, let
any man that understands Ebrew and sense tell me, which is the more proper
Ebrew, which is the more proper sense. 2 Kings X. I. Jehu writ and sent leters
to Samaria, to the Princes of Jezreel, the Elders, and to those that brought up
Ahabs children. Here is a great question, which all that maintain the Ebrew to
be without fault will have much ado to answer; How should Ahab, sending to
Samaria, send to the Elders of Jezreel? And the Syriack assoils it not,
according to the Paris Copy. But, in the readings of the Great Bible it is
noted, that our Copies read it not. And truly he that would say, that we are
to read the Elders of Israel for the Elders of Jezreel, might have much to say
for himself. But that the Elders of Samaria should be the Elders of Jezreel
cannot be reasonable. 2 Kings XVIII. 27. Rabshakeh said unto them; Has my
master sent me to speak these words to thy master and to thee, or to the men
that sit upon the wall, that they may eat their dung and drink their piss with
you? So we read it. But, in conscience, were it not far better sense to
read it with the Syriack; That they may not eat their dung and drink their
piss with you? For, how could he have said a fitter reason to make the people
mutiny, then by telling them, that his master had sent them that good counsel,
that they might not, by standing out the siege, be put to eat their own dung
and drink their own piss, with Ezekiah and his Counsel? I might have brought
more than these, but it is a work by it self, for him that would try what that
Translation would afford, and this may serve for an Essay. And therefore, to
me it seems far safer to yield that it may be so, than utterly to ruin the
credit of Gods Law, in the opinion of those men, who, being told, that no
tittle thereof can be questionable, without granting that it came not from God,
do nevertheless find sensible reason, to doubt of the reading of some passage.

This being said, in the next place, I shall as freely profess, that I find
no reason in the world to suspect, that the Ebrew Copies which we now have
from the Synagogue, are maliciously corrupted and falsified by the Jews. I
grant, that precious Saint of God Justine the Martyr did so believe, and so
charges them Dial. cum Tryphone: and Eusebius Eccl. Hist. IV. 18. is bold to
pronounce, that the Jews were convinced by him in this point. But without
disparagement to the great merit, wherewith that blessed Martyr has obliged
Christ's Church, it may and must be yielded, which I said before; that a person
so curious in all things which he could inquire out, tending to the advantage
of Christianity, has suffered himself to be imposed upon, in diverse
particulars of historical truth, concerning that purpose. And, that this is one
of them, I shall, for proof, need no more, but to send them to the place, and
desire them to consider, whether those passages which he alleges to have been
falsified by the Jews, were indeed so read as he recites them, in the true
Greek Copies of the Old Testament, at that time: Or, whether he was imposed
upon to believe, that they were true Copies which read them as he does,
though indeed they were not. Neither do I find, that the Christians after him
have thought themselves obliged to follow that reading, which he, as falsified
by the Jews, professes to restore. And truly, though (in regard of the bloody
hatred of the Jews, which the Christians, at that time, when their departure
was fresh, might justly impute the greatest persecutions to, that they endured)
no suspicion upon them but may seem just; yet I would have this limited, so
far as there appears reason to believe that it may be true. For, from the time
that the study of Gods Law was in request among them, that is, as I conceive,
from the return from Captivity, (where, it seems, they were settled in a deep
detestation of Idols, and took in hand the teaching and learning of the Law, as
God had commanded in it) I say, from that time, they seem to have been
possessed with a disease on the other hand, of a superstitious esteem of the
very leters and tittles of it. Which r^nders it a thing no way credible, that
they should make it their design, to fal^^fie those which they held in so
superstitious a reverence. And truly, he that considers, how necessary the
preserving of the Old Testament entire must needs be, to the propagation of
Christianity which God had designed; will easily say, that this perverse zeal
of a thing to the leter of the Law, was purposely employed by the providence of
God, to work his Gospel the freer passage, by presuming the leter of the Law
unquestionable. S. Austine therefore calls the Jews capsarios Ecclesiae, as
those that keep the records, and carry those books for the Christians, which
serve to cut their own throat. And, had it been their design to falsify the
Scriptures, would any reason allow, that they should practice it in such
places, as concerned Christianity little or nothing, rather than in those which
they challenge most interest in? For, without doubt, it is hard to name any
place controverted between the Jews and Christians, for the reading of it, that
is of consequence to the truth of Christianity. I confess the reading of the
Christians Psalm. XXII. 17. (...) is true, and not that of the Jews (...); for
what good sense can they make of it? But I do not therefore see they intended
to falsify the true reading of it, who have, of themselves, set a mark of a
doubtful reading upon the place. So, in Esa. IX. 5. the modern ^brew reads
(...) the Latin seems to have read (...): but, any man that knows the Ebrew
will allow me, that the first reading will bear the sense of the later, and
his name shall be called: So far there is no evidence of falsifying, as the
end of it appears not to be obtained, by admitting that reading, which you
pretend forged. How far it concerns either the credit of S. Paul, or the truth
of Christianity, that Psalm. XIX. 5. we read (...) as Romans X. 18. not, as we
have it this day in our Copies (...) I am willing to referr unto judgment;
Knowing that, whatsoever be decreed will not be of force, to conclude so great
a presumption as we have in debate. For, suppose we, that they had never so
much mind to do such a wickedness; and consider on the other side, that the
separation of Christians from Jews was not made in a moment, but that, so long
as there was hope to winn the Jews, they conformed themselves to serve God with
them, and without doubt, carried a greater or a less party in all Synagogues,
where Christianity found entrance, (which, how soon it found entrance into the
whole Empire, the very writings of the Apostles may serve to assure us) I say
sup^osing all this, we cannot doubt, that, at the separation, the Christians
were possessed of Copies which the Jews warranted, in so many parts of the
Empire. And will any common sense allow, that it should be possible for them,
to corrupt their own Copies, whether in Ebrew or in Greek, and the Christians
not convict them of it? knowing them both able, and willing, and obliged so to
do.

Seeing then we must conclude, that, what fault soever may have come into the
Copies which the Jews at present send us, it cannot be presumed to have come
upon prepensed malice, but upon such casualties, as the propagating of all
records is subject to; it will be fit, as a furzher step to our proceeding, to
inquire in the next place, whether the points, signifying the vowels whereby
the sense of the Old Testament is now determined, are from the Spirit of God,
or invented by man, and allowed by the Synagogue. A conceit as eagerly
maintained by some, that would magnify their profession of the Ebrew, as if
the credit of the Scripture, and by consequence of Christianity, were to stand
or fall with every jot or tittle of the Jews Copies, as, of the Law, our
Savior says it does. Which, he that considers the intent of the Old
Testament to serve principally for a motive, to introduce Christianity, (but,
to determine the matter of it, no otherwise, than first the meaning thereof
shall be determined by the New) will never grant; Though freely allowing the
utmost of our Saviors meaning, that every tittle of the Law continues in force
under the Gospel, to the effect whereto it was intended, not of the Leter, but
of the Spirit. Those that would have these points to carry the credit of Gods
Word, do faintly maintain that, which the Jews as familiarly ^ffirm, as they do
believe all their Constitutions to be Gods Law by word of mouth; to wit, that
they were delivered to Moses in Mount Sinai. But they seem to insist
peremptorily, that, if not delivered by Moses, at least they were settled by
Esdras, and his companions of the Great Sy^gogue, or Assembly, which I spoke of
so lately. And truly, there is no question to be made, but this must have been
done while the Spirit of God was among them: But this being granted, he that
should thereupon presume, that the Spirit was given to this effect, of settling
the meaning of the Scriptures, must demand it gratis, or rather for less than
naught, considering what appearance I have made, that the Copies were settled,
not by inspiration of the Holy Ghost, but by Tradition of historical truth.
Yet, not insisting upon this, I must profess, I cannot but mervail, what
probability any man can imagine, that this method of determining the reading
and sense of the Ebrew of the Old Testament, which, according to the nature and
custom of the Eastern Languages, originally consists of consonants only;
should be as ancient as Esdras his time. I make no question, that there must be
a certain method of reading things written by consonants only, otherwise, they
had not, in that estate, means to understand one another in writing. But this,
in matters of common sense and effect, the mere use of speaking would easily
furnish all that had practice of writing and reading with. For, what great
difficulty could remain in reading that, which was of it self understood? The
necessity of this method in writing, is the difficulty of understanding; that
is to say, a capacity of being determined to several senses, in those writings,
to which it is applied. Suppose now, that to be true, which I showed before to
be probable, that, from the Captivity, the study of the Law, came in request
according to the Law; From that time it must be known amongst them, how the
Scriptures were to be read. And truly, from that time, the Scribes were much
more in request; though I have showed elsewhere, that their profession began
under the Prophets, being nothing else but their Disciples, which we read of
in their writings. I have also showed, that the profession extended from the
Judges of the Great Consistory, to Schoolmasters that taught children to
read, and Notaries that writ Contracts. These men's profession consisting in
nothing else but the Scriptures, (for what learning had they in writing
besides?) is it strange, that children could be taught by Tradition to read
it, though the vulgar language was somewhat changed? This supposition indeed
will infer, that the reading could not be so precisely determined, for all to
agree in the same: But it will also infer, that, the more the study was in
use, the more precise determination they must needs attain. Now I desire the
indifferent Reader to consider two points, both of them certain, and resolved
in the Tradition of the Jews; The first, that this method of points is part of
the Law delivered by word of mouth; as appears by the Tradition in the Gomara,
that he that has sworn, that such a one shall never be the better for him,
may teach him the Scriptures, because that they may be done for ^ire, but he
may not teach him the points, because the Law by word of mouth, must not be
taught for hire. The second, that it was never held lawful to commit this
civil Law to writing, till the time of R. Juda, that first writ their
Misnaioth, or repetitions of the Law, upon a resolution taken by the Nation,
that, the preservation of the Law in their dispersions did necessarily require,
that it should be committed to writing; as Maimoni, the Key to the Ta^mud, in
the beginning, and diverse others of the Jews do witness. He that would see
more to justify both these points, let him look in Buxtorfius his answer to
Capellus I. 2. where he has showed sufficient reason to resolve against his
own opinion; That, all the Jews say of the points delivered to Moses in Mount
Sinai, is to be understood, of the right reading and sense of the Law, which
must be delivered from hand to hand, but was unlawful to be committed to
writing before the beginning of the Talmud by R. Juda: To wit, with authority;
For, it was lawful for Scholars to keep notes of their lessons. Upon these
premises I infer, that there were no points written in the Jews Bibles before
this time; and that, upon this decree, they began to busy themselves in
finding a method by points, and applying the same to the Scripture; though, it
is most agreeable to reason, that it should have been some ages before it was
settled, and received by a Nation so dispersed as they were. And herewith
agrees all the evidence which the records of that Nation can make. Though I
repeat not here the testimonies in which it consists, having been so
effectually done already in books for the purpose.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the anci^n est Translations of the Bible into Greek first;
With the Authors and authority of the same; Then into the Chaldee, Syriack, and
Latin. Exceptions against the Greek, and the Samaritane Pentateuch. They are
helps nevertheless to assure the true reading of the Scriptures, though with
other Copies; whether Jewish or Christian. Though the Vulgar Latin were better
than the present Greek, yet must both depend upon the Original Greek of the New
Testa^ent. No danger to Christianity by the differences remaining in the Bible.
THe first turning of the Bible into Greek, the common opinion says, was done
by the authority of the High Priest and heads of that people resid^nt at
Jerusalem, and by men sent on purpose, (VI of every Tribe, in all LXXII, called
therefore by the round number for brevities sake, the LXX Translato^s) to
Ptolomee Philadelphus. But this relation suffers many difficulties, that have
been made of late years, and indeed, seems to come from a writing pretending
the name of Aristeas, a Minister of the said Prince, from whence Philo and
Josephus seem to have received the credit of it; Who, being of those Jews that
used the Greek tongue, may very well be thought to cherish that report which
makes for the reputation of their Law, with them that spoke it. Josephus, we
know, in other points, has related Legends or Romances, for historical truth;
as that of the acts and death of Moses, and that of the third of Esdras,
concerning the dispute of the three Squires of the Body to King Darius. As for
Philo, we have S. Jerome, who has made sport of the legend, he ^ells of this
business: To wit, how that, being shut up every man in a several room, at the
end of so many days, they gave up every man his Copy, translated all in the
same words to a tittle. Which rooms, Justine the Martyr, couzened by the Jews
of Alexandria, reports, were extant in his time, and that he had seen them; in
his dispute with Trypho the Jew. But the particulars are too many to find a
room in this ab^idgment. Those that would be further informed in this point,
may see what Scaliger has said against this Tradition, in his Annotations upon
Eusebius his Chronicle, and what Morinus and others have said for it. But,
though we grant the book of Aristeas to be a true History, not a Romance,
which ^^w will do that read it, (for the roughness of the Greek makes it
rather the language of some obscure Legendary, then of a Courtyer at
Alexandria) though we grant, that there were LXXII sent from Jerusalem to
Philadelphus, and did translate him the Law; because, besides the agreement of
all other Jews and Christians, Aristobulus a learned Jew of Alexandria, writing
to P^olomee Philometor, (in Eusebius de Praepar. Evang. XIII. 7.) an exposition
of the Law, some CXXX years after, averrs it; yet will not that serve the turn,
to make this Copy which we have their work. Because the same Aristobulus,
together with Josephus and Philo, the Talmud Jews besides, and S. Jerome among
the Christians, do agree, that those LXXII that came from Jerusalem translated
only the five books of Moses, as you may see them alleged in a late discourse
of the late Lord Primate of Ireland, de LXX. Int. Versione, Cap. I. Now it is
most evident, that the Copy which we have is all of one hand, and, that it can
by no means be thought, that the five books of Moses, which are part of it,
were translated by any body, but by him that translated the rest. Therefore,
we are as much to seek for the author of this Translation, as if we did not
grant, that ever the Law was translated by LXXII persons sent from Jerusalem to
Philadelphus. And therefore, I make no difficulty to grant, that this
Translation, (which cannot be ascribed to those LXXII) was made by the Jews of
Alexandria, or Egypt, where the Jews enjoyed great liberties from the first
Ptolomees time, flourishing in learning, and neglecting their own language for
the Greek, whereupon they were called (...), that is to say, Jews that spoke
Greek. But I say withal, that I do not understand, why the reputation of this
Translation should be ever a whit the worse, than if it had been made by LXXII
sent from Jerusalem to Alexandria on purpose, supposing it to have been done by
the Jews of Alexandria. The reasons why I think it was made by the Jews of
Alexandria, supposing the translating of the Law by the LXX, I confess are but
probabilities, but which, finding the truth balanced by the difficulties
premised, seem to way down on that side. First, in Caninius his Hellenismus, at
the Imperfect Tense, (...) Boeotice and Chalcidice (...). Quae forma LXX Int.
frequens. Nam Asianis etiam vernacula. Lycophron, (...). For (...), the
Boeotick and Chalcidick says (...), which form the LXX Translators frequent.
For it is the Asiaticks mother language. Lycophron uses (...). That which he
says of the Asiatick Greeks I have not yet found. All that use this dialect,
so far as I have observed, are the Greek Bible, the books we call Apocrypha,
and Epiphanius; Excepting Lycophron, who was born at Chalcis in Euboea,
standing upon the confines of Boeotia; but lived at Alexandria: And therefore,
I conceive, Canini^u should have counted it Alexandrian, and not Boeotick or
Chalcidick. The like I say, when, for (...) in the second Aorist, or indefinite
tense, he makes the Boeotick to say (...). For, in the same authors, namely,
the Greek Bible, the Apocrypha, Epiphanius, and Lycophron, you shall find the
like, and in some of them, if my memory fail me not, (...) for (...), and
(...) for (...); which dialect, Caninius also alleges, out of some Grammarians.
Now I have not found this Greek used by any author that lived in Palestine,
where Epiphanius, though he conversed much, yet cannot well be thought to have
learned his Greek. And therefore it is to me a mark, that an Alexandrian
rather than a Palestine Jew should make it. Secondly, whereas by Josephus
Antiq. III. 9. by S. Jerome, Hesychius, and many others, it is manifest, that
the Jews Shekel was equal to the Attick tetradrachme, or piece of four
drachmes, it is always translated by them (...), or piece of two drachmes. A
thing which has bred strange opinions in some men's fancies, and caused whole
books to be written, that the Jews used two Shekels; and, that the Shekel of
the Sanctuary was double the vulgar. Whereas all this difficulty vanishes, if
we say, that they translate it (...), by the Alexandrian dram, because that
was indeed double the Attick. For first, Julius Pollux Onomast. IX. 6.
affirms, that the Talent of every Greekish State consisted of VI M drachmes,
of the same coin, as the Attick Talent contained VI M. Attick drachmes. Then,
Festus in the word Talentum says, that the Alexandrian Talent contained XII M.
Attick drachmes. Which cannot otherwise be true, unless the Alexandrian
drachme be double the Attick. Now, it is no less improbable, that Palestine
Jews, though translating at Alexandria, should translate according to the value
of that coin which was current at Alexandria, (all other Writers testifying,
that in Palestine they accounted otherwise) then it is probable, that
Alexandrian Jews should do it. So long then, as I am peremptorily barred, from
believing, the Translation which we use to be the work of any LXXII sent from
Jerusalem, I shall accept of these inklings of historical truth, that entitle
the Egyptian Jews, who first took up the Greek, to it. For, as for the
difference of Copies, which, I grant, is very great, in the Greek Bible, I
suppose, no man in his right senses will argue, that it is derived from any
other Copies than one, which, by the wantonness of Copyists having suffered
some change in less matters, discovers the same plainsong, by variety of
descants that are framed upon it.

As for the credit of this Translation, why should it be thought ever a whit
the worse, coming, from the Egyptian Jews, than, those of Palestine? My reason
is; I demand what there is to be found in all the writings of that Nation since
the Prophets, of like consequence to Christianity, with that which the Jews of
Egypt have transmitted to us: Why the Greek Bible should not be as well
thought of, coming from them, as if it came from LXXII men sent from the High
Priest at Jerusalem. For, here I set aside all prejudicate fancies, and reports
of inspiration, by which it is said, that there LXXII all translated the Law in
the same words, as mere fables. I go to issue, upon evidence of that which
appears in this translation, compared, both with the present Jews Copy, and
other translations which the Church uses of many ages. Only I question, why
it should not be of as good credit, coming from the Jews of Alexandria, as from
LXXII sent from Jerusalem. The prejudice that is alleged against it, is an
addition to the Book of Esther in the Greek, which says thus; (...) In the
fourth year of the reign of Ptolomee and Cleopatra, Dojitheus, calling himself
a Priest and Levite, and Ptolomee his son, brought the foresaid leter of
Phrurim, (which you have in the Greek Bible, after Esther VIII. 12.)
translated, as they said, by Lysimachus son of Ptolomee, of Jerusalem. This
Ptolomee and Cleopatra are those, by whose permission, Onias and Dositheus,
(whether he that is here named, or another of that name) Jews, having
faithfully served them in their wars, built a like Temple to that of
Jerusalem, in the Country of Heliopolis in Egypt, as Josephus contr. Ap. II.
and Ant. XIII. 6. testifies; Incurring thereby the like crime of Schism, as
the Samaritanes had committed, in setting up their Temple on Mount Gerizim; and
undertaking to serve God there, after Jerusalem was lawfully chosen, for the
place to which the Law confined Gods service. And so, this translation is
supposed to come from the Jews of Egypt, when they were under that Schism, and
the sacrilege of it. To which I answer, that, neither it does appear by this
addition to Esther, (which, in one of these two Copies, which the late Lord
Primate of Ireland has published out of the Earl of Arundels Library,
appears not at all) that, therefore, the whole translation was made then,
when it says this leter came; Nor that, if it were then made, it had any
relation to, or dependence upon their Schism, or the sacrilege of it. For,
though Josephus says, that Onias found Priests and Levites of his mind to
serve God there; and though he says elsewhere, that Onias did this out of
contention, which he had with the Jews at Jerusalem, having banished him;
Thinking to draw the multitude from them, to the Temple which he had built de
Bello Jud. VII. 37. yet, these are rather arguments, that the Body of the Jews
at Alexandria did not submit to his premises whatsoever, his credit with the
King might oblige them, to permit particular men to do. And Josephus Ant. XIII.
6. immediately after the building of this Temple, tells us of a trial between
the Samaritanes and Alexandrian Jews, before the same Philometor, whether the
Temple at Jerusalem, or that on Mount Gerizim were according to Gods Law. And
that those Jews were so zealous in the cause, that they consented, what side
were cast, those that pleaded for it to be put to death; Which, accordingly,
was executed upon Sabbaeus and Theodosius, that pleaded for the Samaritanes.
Now, though Josephus say not, that this, which he relates presently after the
building of the Temple, came to pass after it in time; yet it is utterly
incredible, that those, who had showed such zeal for the Temple at Jerusalem,
should, the next day as it were, that is, in the same Kings reign, run into the
same crime, whereof they had convicted the Samaritanes. Certainly, when the
addition to Esther says, that the leter which he had inserted was translated
into Greek by Lysimachus son of Ptolomee a Jew of Jerusalem, it is no sign,
that there was any pretense of Schism, between the Jews of Jerusalem and those
of Alexandria, on foot. And therefore, this aspersion takes away nothing from
the credit of the Greek Bible.

I am further confirmed in this opinion, by considering the writings of Philo
the Alexandrian Jew, though I am not moved by them to think he was a
Christian, but only to conclude, that he cannot be convinced to be no
Christian. Three things I allege out of him, as steps which he has made,
beyond the rest of the Jews, toward a Christian. The first; That he has
followed the Gospels, in reproving the Tradition of the Elders, for which they
neglected to honor their parents, as the Law commands. The Tradition was
this, as we find by him, in his book (...); If a man vow, that his Father or
Mother shall never be the better for any thing that is his, it shall not be
lavvfull for him to maintain them out of his goods. For, Korban signifies
anathema; And, he that said, Be it Korban, whatsoever thou may be the
better for, of mine; In his anger, to Father or Mother; said in effect; Be it
ana^hema; That is, be he accursed that touches it. In this point then, Philo
follows the doctrine of Christ, against the Tradition of their Elders. The
second is his exposition of Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 46. The stranger that is within thee
shall get above thee more and more: And thou shall come under him, more and
more: in his book (...). The stranger truly, lifted aloft with good success
shall be gazed at, as admired and counted happy for two the greatest
excellences; That, having turned to God, he has received the most proper
reward, a firm rank in heaven, not lawful to be expressed. But the right born,
imbasing and counterfeiting the coin of his birth, shall slide down till he
come to the very depth of darkness; That all men, seeing these examples, may
grow sober, considering how God accepts that virtue which springs from an enemy
stock, bidding the root farewell, but the shoot welcome, that is grown to a
stock, because by tillage it is changed to bear good fruit. For, how would a
Christian expound this text against the Jevv, in the mystical sense, but by
making the Christian the stranger, whom this text prophesies of, that he
shall have the upper hand of the Jevv; as Origin more than once, if my memory
fail me not, out of this place of Philo, has done? The third consists of
those things which he has said, in so many places, concerning the Word of
God, agreeable to those passages of the Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus,
and Baruch, which I compared before with the doctrine of the Apostles,
concerning that Wisdom of God which is his Word; of which you have enovv in
Grotius his annotations upon those texts, but much more might be produced. For,
whosoever compares them together, shall find, that he who said them was not
far from the Christian Faith. For, if it be objected and said, that there is no
evidence, that ever this Philo professed Christianity, without which, he
cannot be counted a Christian; It may reasonably be ansvvered, that, during the
time when the Synagogue was at a bay, whether to receive Christianity or
not, (at what time it is plain they did not persecute it) nothing can be said,
why it might not be professed, by any Jevv of those Synagogues which stood so
affected to it; not only without any mark of apostasy upon him among his
fellows, but even with that trust, which, we know this Philo had among
the Jews of Alexandria, being deputed by them to Caligula, in business
concerning their whole subsistence. For, if those who were baptized by John
the Baptist were not thought to depart from the Law, why should those who
were baptized into Christ; whether the effect of both Baptisms were the same
or diverse, the Law continuing in practice long after that time?

I must therefore profess, to allow the opinion those, that will have this
work to have been done by the Jews of Alexandria, of which, we know, there
was a very great Body, from the time of the first Ptolomee; who, having taken
up the Greek in stead of their Mother tongue, necessarily required, that they
should have the Scriptures in it. It is then agreeable to reason, that this
translation, being made so soon after the study of the Law came in request, and
so far from Jerusalem; should acknowledge more difference of sense, arising
from the diverse ways of determining those words that are written without
vowels, than those that are of a later date, when the reading was better
determined by custom and practice. Which, accordingly, we see, is come to
pass. For, the translations into the Greek that were made after the time of our
Lord, by Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, (no Christians) and, the Chaldee of
Onkelus and Jonathan, who, whatsoever time they were made in, are later than
so; though we cannot say that they do always and in all things agree, either
with one another, or with the Ebrew Copies which we use; yet must we needs
say, that there is a great deal more agreement between them visible, than there
is between the Greek of the LXX, and any of them, judging of Aquila, Symmachus,
and Theodotion, by the remains of them recorded by the Fathers of the Church.
As for the Syriack and Vulgar Latin, both made by the Christians, and the
former justly challenging as great antiquity, (and therefore as great credit)
as the early coming of those parts to Christianity, (and thereupon, the
necessity of having the Scriptures) inforces; it is manifest, that they were
translated out of Copies, which were had from the Jews, and yet that the sense
was not determined in those Copies, as it is by the vowels determined in the
Ebrew Copies we use. Whether that, in S. Jeromes time, the method of points
was not complete, and written into their books, or whether they would not
suffer such Copies to go out of their hands, for the use of Christians. I
confess, I have met with a passage in the Gemara, Brachoth cap. ult. that
seems to argue the contrary. It is reported there, that R. Akiba, (about Adrian
the Emperors time) decreed, that they were not, (saving your presence) to wipe
the backside with the right hand, because it shows the accents of the Law
(...). For, if there were then accents to be showed, certainly there were
vowels. But, the Gloss of R. Solomon Jarchi clears the meaning of the passage
to be no more than this; that, by holding the right hand up or down, they
signified how the lessons of the Law were to be sung, according to that,
whether Music, or howling, which still, it seems, they use in their Synagogues.

Now, to come to the resolution of the point propounded; I think it not unfit,
to divide from the rest, the Greek and Samaritane Copies, because a reason is
pretended, why they should never be taken into consideration, when there is any
question of the true reading of the Old Testament; whatsoever account is to be
had of the rest. By the Scripture of 2 Kings XVII. we understand, that the
Samaritanes, at their first planting, were Idolaters, and worshipped God as the
God of that Country, not as the one true God that made heaven and earth; In
which worship there must needs be as much Idolatry, as in the Athenians
worshipping the unknown God, among innumerable Idols: Though that title yielded
S. Paul an argument against Idols. When the Temple and City came to be
restored, under Esdras and Nehemias, they offered themselves to assist the
work, pretending, that they they worshipped the true God only, Esdras IV. 2.
And what reason can we have to doubt, that they said true in it? For when, in
opposition to the Jews, they had built themselves a Temple upon Mount Gerizi^^,
and sacrificed there, as the ten Tribes did at Bethel and Dan from Jeroboams
then, there can no question be made, but that they sacrificed to the true God,
though not, according to the true intent of his Law, at Jerusalem, but as
Schismatics, where they pleased themselves. Whatsoever then was the reason,
why, under Esdras and Nehemias, they were not admitted to build the City and
Temple with the Jews; (as just there might be, and no doubt was, though we
suppose them not to have been Idolaters) from the time that they were thus
rejected, I make account, we may clearly say, that they have been and are
Schismatical Jews, professing the Law, but according to a Copy of their own,
which, for a rar^ monument of antiquity, is printed in the Great Paris Bibles,
and so extolled, by those that pretend to oblige the Christian world by
publishing the same, as if it were the true Copy of Moses. As for the rest of
the Old Testament, seeing it cannot be said, that ever they admitted either the
writings of the Prophets, or the Resurrection and world to come, which under
them was more and more declared; I leave to those of better skill to consider,
whether this were not the reason, why they were refused the communion of the
Jews under Esdras and Nehemias. This is the original credit of this Copy of
Moses Law, which cannot be greater than the credit of those that use it: But it
is alleged, over and above, out of an extract from Eulog^us Patriarch of
Alexandria, in Photius, that this Copy was falsified by Dositheus, a Doctor of
such credit among the Samaritanes, that Origin upon S. Matthew XXIV. informs us,
that he pretended to be the Messiah, whom the Samaritanes, as Jews, did
expect. As for the Greek of the LXX. it is alleged, that, by comparing it with
the original, (which is the most effectual conviction of common sense) it may
appear, that they who made it, never intended to translate the Ebrew which they
had before them, but to enlarge, abridge, and change the sense and matter of it,
as best pleased their own fancies, though, to what purpose, it is hard to
affirm. This is alleged to be visible in the Book of Job, the Proverbs, Esther,
and, I know not whether any other parts of the Old Testament. Supposing these
exceptions made to those two, the ancientest Copies, (besides the Ebrew) that
the world has, I will not enter into the dispute concerning the true Copy of
the LXX, which, every man knows, what difficulties it becomes liable to, by the
diligence and industry of Origin; who, that it might appear at one view, what
the difference was between the Greek and Ebrew Copies, first, set a mark upon
every word, which the Greek of the LXX had ex^r^ss^d, more than the Ebrew
contained; then, under another mark, added to the same Copy, that which, being
found in the Ebrew, was not found translated in the Greek of the LXX. For,
those marks being afterward left out, by the neglig^n^e of Copyists, there
came into the common use of the Church, a mixed Copy, of the Greek, according to
the LXX, and that which the Ebrew had more than the Greek, according to
Theodotion, whom Origin had stuck to in that business. Whereby, and by several
Copies, corrected and ordered by Luciane, Hesychius, and others, to set a
period to this disorder, it is become impossible to say, what is the true Gr^ek
of the LXX, or Alexandrian Jews, in abundance of places. But this dispute, I
conceive, I shall not need to enter into, having nothing to do here to say, how
well or how ill the Church has been served, by the multiplying of several
Copies, which is a far diverse point, that may come to hand in due place; But,
only supposing things to be as they are, what means we have, to assure our
selves of unquestionable Scripture, in order to the deciding of difficulties in
matter of Religion, which not only ordinarily, but universally, have their
beginning from some uncertainty in the meaning of the same. But, supposing the
Greek and Samaritane liable to these exceptions, supposing that we have a very
^n^ient translation of the Old Testament, into that language which the Jews
from the Captivity used, (for, what can be the reason, why the Jews should turn
it into Chaldee, but for the vulgar use of their people?) that we have the
vulgar Latin, and that ancient and worthy Christian translation into the
Syriack, is there any body will undertake to say; Either, that, having these
helps, we cannot assure our selves of the Scripture which God delivered to the
Church, so far as the necessity of the Church requires to be assured of it;
Or, that nothing but the Copy, which now we have from the Jews, is to be
regarded, God having provided us so many helps over and above? For, suppose the
Samaritane Copy of the Law to have been f^l^ified by Desitheus, must it not
needs have been falsified upon some certain design? And will one certain design
require, or will it endure, that all should be falsified, whether it concerned
that design or not? So, suppose those Jews of Alexandria, who turned the Old
Testament into Greek, gave themselves liberty to make the Book of Job, the
Proverbs, more of the Old Testament if more can be alleged, not what the
original contained, but what themselves fansied would be handsome; shall we
therefore say, the whole work is not a translation but a Romance, which, we
see stick so close to the original, in the most of the Scripture? Surely, the
very great antiquity of both Copies, and the experience, which, all that study
the Scriptures with an intent to clear the meaning of them, have, of the great
advantage, which the comparing of the Greek advances, more and more every day,
to that design, will no way endure, that it should be counted no translation of
the Old Testament: Or that, though a man pretend not to build upon the credit
of either of those Copies alone, in opposition to the Ebrew which we now use;
Yet, the agreement of them with other Copies, together with the reason, and
consequence, or pertinence of sense enforced by the text of the Scripture, may
give him just ground to assure himself, and the Church, of the true reading of
the Scripture, yea, though the present Ebrew should not agree with others.

For, I shall not need here to say, what or how great faults may be found in
our Ebrew Copies, who had rather be assured that there were none at all to be
found, greater or less; But that we, (who neither rely upon the dictate of
the Spirit, to them that are able to conclude the Church, nor, much less, to
particular Churches, for assuring the true reading of Scripture) are not bound
to resolve our faith in it into the present Tradition of the Synagogue, having,
over and above, so considerable helps to the verifying of the same. For,
magnifying first the providence of God, in that the Jews, having Christians in
utter hatred, should nevertheless, neither be willing, for their interest, nor
able for their malice, to falsify those things in their own books, which bear
witness against themselves; Seeing God has given the Church, that most
ancient Greek Translation, which is commonly ascribed to LXX Interpreters sent
from Jerusalem, but more justly to the Jews of Alexandria, besides that Copy of
the Law which the Samaritanes still use; Since we have considerable remains of
those Greek Translations made by Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, the Bodies
whereof, to the great loss of the Church, have perished with the worthy labors
of Origin, in joining them in columes to the Ebrew; Since we have those
ancient translations into the Chaldee, which the Jews make so much esteem of;
Since we have the Syriack and Vulgar Latin made by Christians, (to say
nothing of the Arabic, whether made by Jews or Christians, or of any other
though ancient translations, which have not had the like use and credit in the
Church) So far am I from giving way to that unreasonable demand, so destructive
to the being of Christianity, that we cannot assure our selves that we have
any Scripture; That in all that I have to say, or shall have said, concerning
the dispute on foot in England about Religion, I shall neither undertake to
assure men that will be content with reason, that I allege nothing for
Scripture which I cannot justify so to be, or else, undertake to resolve that
which shall come in debate, without the help of that which I cannot assure to
be such. Not intending, in that which follows, to allege any more evidence
hereof in the particulars, than I have done in the premises; But, building my
self upon the resolution premised, and intending, that there shall be nothing
to be objected, from the true means of questioning and settling the true
reading of the Scriptures, that may breed any considerable scruple, concerning
the truth of those Scriptures, which I shall employ to my purpose.

As for the part of the difficulty which remains, concerning the true reading
of the New Testament, it is in vain, to maintain the decree of the Council of
Trent, by pretending, that the Greek Copy, out of which the Vulgar Latin was
translated, was more entire, and of better credit, than the Greek Copies now
extant: Understanding that decree, to make that Copy authentic in point of
faith, by virtue of any gift of Infallibility intailed upon the decrees of the
present Church, For, if it be only made authentic, because the use and credit
of it is not allowed to be questioned in the Church, it is another question, as
I have said already, which I pretend not to touch in this place. For,
supposing the Copy from which the Vulgar Latin was translated, to have been
better than any Greek Copy now extant, the credit of the Vulgar Latin is not
to be ascribed to the decree of the Council that decrees this, any more, than
the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom of England were the fundamental Laws
thereof, by virtue of any Act of Parliament, by which they were not
constituted, but declared and acknowledged to be such. And, if the credit of
the Vulgar Latin be derived from the Greek Copy, out of which it was
translated, then is it no further authentic, than, as it expresses the
authentic reading, which then was found in the Greek, out of which it was
translated. And so, the whole credit of the Scripture is resolved into the
credit of the Originals, whereof we stand possessed, in the translations of them
that remain, in whatsoever Language. So that the question comes to be the very
same that remained before, concerning the authentic Copy of the Old Testament,
and the resolution clear, that the Original Greek is the authentic, the
reading thereof being first assured, neither by the dictate of Gods Spirit, to
any persons enabled to oblige the Church by their decrees, nor to any never so
good Christian, much less by the Tradition of any particular Copy which the
Church stands possessed of, but by that Tradition which is justified and assured
by all Copies, wherein the leter of the Scripture is recorded to the Church.
For, though I do, for disputation sake suppose, yet do I not grant for a truth,
that the Copy out of which the Vulgar Latin was translated, is to be held of
better credit than that, out of which that excellent translation into the
Syriack, which, to the great benefit of Christianity, these last ages have
brought into Europe, was made. The antiquity of this later, and the eminent
helps which it has contributed toward the understanding of the New Testament,
being so great, as the Vulgar Latin, though very learned, and therefore very
helpful, can never outshine. And yet will I never grant, that either one or
both of them, and that, with the help of the Arabic and other the most ancient
Translations which the Church beside may have, are not to give account to the
consent of many Copies now extant, nay, to the credit of some one, if it should
so fall out in any passage, that the sense of the Scripture, which cannot be
made out by the rest, is clear to common reason, according to that one: Whether
such a case do ever fall out in any part of the Scripture or not; The assurance
of Christianity not standing in this, that either this or that is, or must
needs be true, but in this, that the Church is assured in all cases. But, by
this it may appear, how innocent, the resolution of the authentic Original of
the Old Testament, which I have premised, is, and how safely I ground my
self, not upon the credit of the Jews Copy, but upon all the records whereby
the Church assures the Tradition of the Scripture; In that it is freely
confessed, that the difference of reading which can become questionable,
notvvithstanding the superstitious diligence of the Jews in preserving their
Copy, is neither so frequent, nor any thing so weighty, as in the New: Which,
how much more considerable it is toward the upholding of our common
Christianity, is plain enough, to him that shall have perused but the premises.
And surely, were it not true, as has been premised, that a certain Rule of
Faith was from the beginning delivered to the Church, it would seem strange,
that we cannot deny, that there have considerable differences crept into the
reading of the New Testament, so much more nearly concerning our salvation than
the Old, in the reading whereof, through the diligence of the Jews, there
remains no considerable difference. But if we remember, that S. Paul makes the
ministry of Preaching the Gospel, to be the ministry of the Spirit, in
opposition to the ministry of Moses in giving the Law, which was the ministe^y
of the leter, we shall find, that Faith, the receiving whereof qualified
Christians to be endowed with the Holy Ghost, to be of such sufficience, that,
remaining entire, we need not think the Church disparaged, if the records
thereof suffer decay, so long as the effect of them remains written by the Holy
Ghost, in the hearts and lives of Christians. Always, it being unquestionable,
that there are considerable differences remaining in the reading of the New
Testament, it will be a very great impertinence, to forecast any danger, in
granting, that some question may be made to the Jews Copy of the Old Testament,
though neither so frequent nor so considerable. And all that has been said
has issue in this consequence, to justify, and to recommend to the world, the
usefulness of the design lately set on foot in London, for printing the Bible,
with the most ancient and learned Translations in columns; most agreeably to
the design of Origin in his Te^rapla, Hexapla, and Octapla, that is, Old
Testament of four, six, and eight columns, recording the several numbers of
Translations or columns, whereof his several Editions consisted. For in a word,
this furniture, and that, which serves to the same purpose, (for who will
undertake that one book shall contain all?) is the Instrument I appeal to, for
evidence of the Scripture which we have. And further, here is the original
means of determining the sense of the same, though, besides this, I have
claimed many other helps to be requisite to that purpose.

The end of the First Book.
LAUS DEO.
OF THE COVENANT OF GRACE.
The second BOOK.
CHAP. 1. Two parts of that which remains. How the dispute concerning the Holy
Trinity with Socinus belongs to the first. The Question of justification by
Faith alone. The Opinion of Socinus concerning the whole Covenant of Grace. The
opinion of those who make justifying Faith the knowledge of a man's
Predestination, opposite to it in the other extreme. The difference between it
and that of the Antinomians. That there are mean Opinions.
THE greatest difference that is to be discerned, among those things that
concern the duty of all Christians, consists in this; that some of them concern
Christians as Christians: others, as members of the Church. For though all
Christians, as Christians, are bound to be members of the Church, (in as much
as it is a part of their profession, to believe one Catholic Church) yet,
their obligation, to be Christians, being in order of nature and reason, before
their obligation to be members of the Church, (because the very being of the
Church presupposes all that are members of it to be Christians) that
obligation which is original and more ancient, must needs be presupposed to
that which is grounded upon it. Of what consequence it may be, to distinguish
this difference in the matter of Christian duties, will perhaps appear in due
time. In the mean I shall freely say my opinion, that all the Divines in the
Christian world cannot more pertinently, and to better purpose, comprise the
subject which they profess to be employed about, then by dividing it into that
which concerns Christians as Christians, and, that which concerns them as
members of the Church. For mine own present purpose, it is evident that the
disputes which divide us do concern, either the state of particular Christians
toward God, or the obligation they have to other Christians as members of the
Church. So that, the matter which I propose to my ensuing discourse is
sufficiently comprised in two heads; one, of the Covenant of Grace; the other,
of the Laws of the Church. I know it may be said, that the heresy of Socinus
is of the number of those that have footing among us, and, that the principal
point of it, concerning the faith of the holy Trinity, comes not properly under
either of these heads. And I deny not that it is very dangerous for us in
regard of two points, that have so great vogue among us: The first is the
clear sufficience of the Scriptures, commonly passing so without any limits,
that it seems to follow of good right, that what is not clear out of the
Scriptures to all understandings, cannot be necessary for the salvation of all
Christians to believe: So that no man can be bound, to take that for an Article
of his Faith, against which they can show him arguments out of the Scriptures,
which he cannot clearly assoile. The other is, that they put it in the power of
Christians to erect Churches at their pleasure (though supposing the Faith
which Socinus teaches, and pretending to serve God according to the same)
without communion with, or obligation of dependence one upon another, either in
the Rule of Faith, or service of God according to it, wherein they may seem
elder brothers to those who have put the like principle in practice among us,
though without supposing any other Rule of Faith, then that which every Church
so constituted shall agree to take for the sense of the Scriptures. Now, how
soon it may come into the mind and agreement of a Church so constituted, to
take up the profession of Socinus for the Rule of their Faith, I leave them
that are capable to judge, if yet we have no experience of it. But I have
observed by reading Socinus his Book de Christo Servatore (one of the first, if
not the first of all the Books whereby he declared his heresy) that being
extremely offended at his adversaries opinion, he seems to have been thereby
occasioned to fall upon another extreme, of denying the satisfaction of Christ:
and so, by degrees, his Godhead, as the only peremptory principle to destroy
the satisfaction of Christ, and by consequence as well that reason of the
Covenant of Grace which the Church, as that which his adversary maintains.
Conceiving then, his error about the Covenant of Grace to have occasioned his
error in the Faith of the holy Trinity, I conceive I shall handle the chief
Controversies in Religion that divide the Church at present (according to the
title of my Book) though I maintain not the faith of the Trinity against
Socinus, otherwise then as the maintenance of the Covenant of Grace, grounded
upon the satisfaction of Christ, (as that upon his Godhead) shall require.
Another reason I had, because this Heresy seems to be too learned to become
popular among us, though branches of it may come to have vogue. For though
there has been but too much, either of wit or Learning, employed in framing
the Scriptures to the sense of it, in the chief points of Christianity; Yet is
it hard to make the vulgar understanding not only of hearers, but of teachers,
such as these times allow, capable of that sense, to which they have framed the
most eminent passages of the Scriptures, and the grounds of it, together with
the consent and agreement of the several points of Christianity among
themselves, according to it. Upon this consideration, I charge not my self
with the maintenance of the Faith of the holy Trinity, otherwise then as the
consideration thereof shall be incident to resolve the nature of the Covenant
of Grace, which is the first part of my purpose.

Therefore (that a few words may propose many and great difficulties) from
whence it comes, and what it is, that renders Christians acceptabe to God, sand
heirs of everlasting life, who, as men, are his enemies by sin here, and
^ubjects of his wrath in the world to come; this I conceive to be the sum of
what we are to inquire: Concerning, in the first place, that disposition of
mind, which qualifies a man for those blessings which the Gospel tenders, upon
that condition which the Covenant of Grace requires: and in the second place,
whether this disposition be brought to pass in us by the free Grace of God,
and the helps which it provides, or by the force of nature: that is, by that
light of understanding, and that freedom of choice, which necessarily proceeds
from the principles of man's nature. It is well enough known, how great dispute
there is between them that profess the Reformation and the Church of Rome,
whether a man be justified before God in Christ, by Faith alone, or by Faith
and Works both,* speaking of actual righteousness; or, if we speak of
habitual righteousness, by Faith and Love. For, though the whole Garland of
supernatural virtues concurrs to the habitual righteousness of Christians,
which is universal to all objects and actions: Yet, seeing the reason of them
all is derived from that which Faith believes, and the intent of all referred
to that service of God which love constrains, where Faith and Love are named,
there the rest may well be understood. Whether Faith alone therefore, or Faith
and love, so much the parties must, in dispite of them, remain agreed in, that
there is some disposition, or act of man's mind, required by the Covenant of
Grace, as the condition that qualifieth a man, at least for so much of that
Promise which the Gospel tendreth, as justification imports. But this being
supposed and granted it may and must be disputed, in what consideration it
qualifieth for the same: Which is, to make short, whether the inward worth of
that disposition, whatsoever it shall prove to be, oblige Almighty God to
reward it with that which the Gospel promises: Or whether, in consideration of
the obedience of Christ, performed in doing the message which he undertook, of
reconciling Man unto God, he has been pleased to proraise that reward, which
is without comparison more then can be due to that disposition which he
requires, as the condition to qualify us for the promise.

Here must I relate the position of the Socinians, concerning the intent of
Christ's coming: Not to purchase at Gods hands those helps of Grace which
enable Christians to become qualified, for the promise which the Gospel
tendreth, which the Church, with S. Austin in the dispute with the Pelagians,
calls therefore the Grace of Christ: Not to reconcile us to God, in the nature
of a meritorious cause, his obedience being the consideration, for which God
accepts that disposition, which qualifies us for the promise of the Gospel,
as the condition upon which he tenders it: But to yield us sufficient reason,
both to persuade us of the truth of his message, (as by the rest of his works,
so especially by rising again from the dead) and also to induce us to embrace
the Gospel, by assuring us of the fulfilling of that promise to us, which we
see so eminently performed in him, by that height to which we believe him to be
exalted; and then having induced us to undertake the Gospel of Christ to secure
us, both of protection against the enemies thereof here, by that power which he
that went before us in it has obtained for that purpose, and of our crown at
the judgment to come. And all this, not in any consideration of the merits and
sufferings of Christ, but of Gods free Grace, which alone moved him to deal
with us by Christ, to this effect, and to propose a reward so unproportionable
to our performance, which would not redound to the account of his free Grace,
if it should be thought to have been purchased, either by the satisfaction of
Christ, in regard of our sins to be redeemed, or by his merits, in regard of
the reward to be purchased. As for the matter of Justification by Faith alone,
it is to be observed, that Socinus is obliged by the premises to understand
that Grace, for which the Gospel is called The Covenant of Grace, to be no
Grace of Christ: that is to say, not given out of any consideration of his
merits and sufferings, which they neither acknowledge to have been tendered by
our Lord, nor accepted by the Father, to any such effect or purpose. But
nothing hinders him therefore to acknowledge it the Grace of God; that is a
mere grant of his free goodness, whatsoever condition he require thereby, to
qualify him that embraces it for the promises which it tenders, provided it be
such as he that it is tendered to can accomplish. For, that Faith which alone
justifies according to S. Paul, he makes to consist in believing the Truth of
Christianity, and sincerely endeavoring to bring forth the fruits thereof, out
of a grounded confidence of obtaining the said promises. And that in
consideration hereof, those that thus believe are counted righteous before God;
that is treated as if they had been originally righteous, and not sinners
before they came to believe. As for the Sacrament of Baptism, making no more of
a Church, then of an arbitrary Society, of so many as agree to serve God
together in the same Faith, it is no marvel if he make it a mere Ceremony, the
use whereof was during the time of the Disciples of our Lord, and the
conversion of Jews and Gentiles to Christianity by their preaching, to signify
the purifying of them by that Faith, to which they professed thereby to be
converted: which intent ceasing in those, who being born of Christian Parents,
were never tainted with the filthiness, either of Jews or Gentiles, by
consequence, that ceremony, though it may freely be used by Christians, in the
nature of a thing indifferent, yet ought not to carry that opinion, as if any
man's salvation depended upon it.

And having related this opinion, I must relate another opposite to this in
another extreme, which is the opinion of those that hold that Faith which alone
justifies, to consist in believing, that a man is predestined by God to life
from everlasting, as being of the number of them whom Christ was sent to
redeem, exclusively to the rest of Mankind: And that therefore the whole
consideration for which this Faith justifies, is the obedience of Christ,
imputed unto them which are of th^s number, upon no other account, then the
eternal purpose of God to give him for them alone, whereby his sufferings are
theirs in Law, as much as if they had been performed by themselves, the
condition of Faith serving only, to limit a qualification, without which this
purpose avails them not, being limited to take place, from the time that this
purpose of God is revealed unto them, the revelation whereof, they suppose to
be that Faith which alone justifies. Who they are that maintain this opinion,
I will not here dispute, which I intend to show cause, why it is to be thought
so ill of, that I could with, that no man that is called a Christian would own
it: And perhaps many of those, who, either expressly, or in effect do hold it,
do withal hold other points, which indeed and in effect, are contradictions to
it: Neither can I say, that our Presbyterians are parties in it; but this I
say, that this is the opinion, in opposi^ion to which Socinus brought in the
Opinion hitherto described, voiding the Grace and satisfaction of Christ, by
declining to the other extreme, as any man may see, that with a little care
shall peruse the fourth part of his Book De Christo Servator^, Cap. III. IX. X.
And therefore I conceive, I may justly infer, that to maintain this extremity
(which he not consulting the Catholic Church and the Faith thereof, thought
necessary to the voyding of that other extreme, which he found inconsistent
with the principles of Christianity) he proceeded so far, as to deny any
Godhead, any being of Christ, before his birth of the Virgin: taking away, by
consequence, that reason and ground both of satisfaction for sin, and of merit
of Grace which the Church ascribes to his obedience and sufferings, and
places the Godhead of Christ (which he acknowledges so far, as to tender him
the worship that is proper to God, at least in some circumstances) in that
height of eminence to which God has exalted him, for undertaking and
performing the Commission of reconciling Man to God, though bound to it as a
mere man, and Gods Creature before he undertook it. And thus you see, how that
part of Socinus his Heresy, in denying the Faith of the Holy Trinity,
indirectly comes in, to the question of the Covenant of Grace: Seeing it is
manifest to the sense of all men* that had he not questioned the Godhead of
Christ, there had been no pretense, of bringing the Faith of the Trinity into
any dispute.

But of what consequence, this opinion concerning Justifying Faith and the
nature of it is, to the substance of Christianity, it will be time to consider,
when I have showed why it is not true: In the mean, I shall note here another
opinion, differing in somewhat, but agreeing in much with this which I take to
be the opinion of our Antinomians, but shall not be much troubled, if any man
shall dispute that I mistake it. For seeing them so full with a blasphemous
conceit of Gods Spirit, that they would think it a disparagement to it, to be
tied to any dispute of reason, (though upon supposition of the Christian Faith)
to distinguish between principles and conclusions, to infer a certain position
from certain grounds, even of Scripture; I cannot think it any great imputation
to misunderstand them, whose perfection it is not to understand themselves. For
when I name Antinomians, I intend to comprise in, the opinion which I refute,
all our Anabaptists, all our Familists, all our Enthusiasts and Quakers, all
Sectaries whatsoever, that do believe themselves possessed of the Spirit, not
presupposing, not only the belief of that Faith which is necessary to the
salvation of all Christians, but also whatsoever else it shall appear, that the
condition of the Covenant of Grace imports. The having of Gods Spirit, as it
infers a right to everlasting life; so, supposing whatsoever the Covenant of
Grace imports.

But by the noise which they make with the free Grace of God, and the Covenant
of Grace, I conceive, the main of their position lies, in one step beyond that
extreme, which I described even now, in opposition to Socinus; That we are
justified by the obedience of Christ, performed for them, for whom God
appointed it, and therefore imputed to them from everlasting, by virtue of that
appointment made from everlasting, but revealed to them by that faith, whereby
they know themselves to be elected to life from everlasting, not depending upon
the revelation thereof, but the revelation upon the being of it. And, upon this
ground it is, that they say; that God sees not, nor can see sin in his Elect,
that all their sins are pardoned before they are done, and that there is no
mortal sin but repentance, implying the want of saving faith, with which no
sin can stand, nor any thing be but sin without it, and the like blasphemies
innumerable.

I know there are other Opinions of Justification by faith alone among those
that profess it, according to the senses which they may have, of the nature of
justifying faith, and those perhaps of greater vogue, than this which I have
named: Neither is it my intent to involve those that maintain Justification by
faith alone in the blame, which I charge the opinions hitherto described with.
The reason why I mention these opinions here is, because they are in the
extremes, and therefore the mention of them seemed to propose the state of that
question, which I pretend to resolve. For my way shall be, in the first place,
to answer the question proposed, concerning that disposition which the Covenant
of Grace requires the mind of him to be formally affected with, that will be
qualified for the promises which God thereby tendreth: Making this account, that
the treating of it will give us an overture, into the consideration, both of
the effective cause, that produces it in those that have it, and also of the
meritorius cause that moves God, both originally to grant the said effective
cause, and consequently to accept the effect thereof, for a competent
qualification of them that have it, for the promises which God by his Gospel
tendreth those that receive it*

CHAP. II. Evidence what is the Condition of the Covenant of Grace. The
contract of Baptism. The promise of the Holy Ghost annexed to Christ's, not to
John's Baptism. Those are made Christ's Disciples as Christians that take up his
Cross in Baptism. The effects of Baptism according to the Apostles.
TO proceed to as brief and as clear a resolution of that point as I can
propose, I say; That a sincere and resolute profession to undertake
Christianity, and to live according to it (believing as our Lord Christ has
revealed, and living as he has taught) consigned to God in the hands of his
Church, by the Sacrament of Baptism, is that condition which the Covenant of
Grace requires, to qualify us for the promises which it tendreth. This
resolution is directly against the Antinomians, and those that believe that a
Christian is justified by the obedience of Christ, imputed from everlasting to
them whom he came to save; Which indeed nullifieth the Covenant of Grace, and
converteth it to a mere promise on Gods part, requiring no condition on man's
part to be performed by him, to qualify him for it. But, this resolution
opposing that conceit so roundly, as positively to express the condition which
I intend to maintain; It will serve, both against the conceit of Socinus, that
justifying faith is nothing but a firm belief, that those who believed the
Gospel purposing to live as God requires, are accepted by him as righteous,
Baptism into the profession of Christianity not included. But also of those,
that will have it to consist in the knowledge of our being predestinate to life
from everlasting, revealed by Gods word, and sealed by his Spirit. The proofs
of it I will divide into three heads: For, consisting of so many branches as
you see, it cannot be expected, that those Scriptures which shall serve to
evidence it, should every where express all the parts of it. It is enough if
the several parts of it, out of which the whole results, be demonstrable by
several ranks of Scriptures. The first of those Scriptures that concern the
profession which God, by our Lord Christ, requires (and he by his Apostles,
and the Church after them to the worlds end) of them that will be qualified for
the Promises which the Gospel tondreth: which I put in the first place,
expressly, because they seem to contain the most visible and express arguments,
that the principles and practice of Christianity can yield, to enforce this
truth. The second shall be taken from the nature of faith, and the attributes
ascribed to it by the Scriptures, in justifying, saving, regenerating, or
adopting us for sons, giving us the spirit of Gods sons, remitting our sins,
and the rest that we expect at Gods hands by virtue of his Covenant of Grace.
The last shall be from those passages, of the Apostles chiefly, and
consequently of other Scriptures that they expound, wherein it is denied, that
we are saved, or justified by Works, or by the Law; but affirmed that we are
saved and justified by Grace and by faith: The due sense and intent whereof is
the thread, to guide us through the intricacies of this whole dispure. Though,
when this is done, I shall not wish any man to resolve himself, in this, or in
any other point of the whole book, till he has gone through the whole, and
considered what resolution this general infers, to all other branches or
dependances of it; And therefore shall think he does nothing, that goes about
to disprove any part of it, without showing the resolution, which his opinion
infers, to those other points or dependances, that the Reader may have the
choice before him, which he thinks most consequent, in reason, to the
principles of Christianity received on all sides.

I will begin with the words of the Apostle, 1 Pet. III. 20, 21. where this
seems to be couched in terminis: He says, that the long suffering of God
waited in the days of Noe, while the Arc was making, in which a few, that is,
eight souls, were saved: the antitype whereof, Baptism, now saves us, (not the
laying down of the filth of the flesh, but the having of a good conscience
toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. The water of Baptism saves
us through the temtations of the World, as they were saved through the deluge:
And what can be done more then to save us? let no man think to defeat this. by
striving about words, that, to save, and to justify, is not the same: If
Bap^ism import the condition of the Covenant of Grace which saves us, our
justification will necessarily be wrapped up in the same packet, though to
justify and to save be several conceits. And is it not strange that any man
should be persuaded, that there is nothing said or meant of the Baptism of
water in all this passage, but of the Baptism of the Spirit, as that which
moves a good conscience to profess Christianity? For, how can Baptism by the
Holy Ghost and fire be the antitype of the waters of the deluge, as the Baptism
of water is, and as that Baptism which the Apostle speaks of is? The
correspondence between the types of the Old, and the antitypes of the New
Testament, by virtue of the premises consists, in the correspondence between
the temporal deliverance of that time and the spiritual deliverance of this,
both in order to the everlasting deliverance of the World to come. Now it is
certain, that the visible Ceremony of Baptism signifies the temptations of this
World, out of which we escape, by the means of that Sacrament, as he that is
baptized rises out of the water again. According to that of the Psalm LXIX. 1,
15. Save me, O God, for the waters are come in even unto my soul. And, Let not
the water-stood drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up: And let not the
pit shut her mouth upon me. And XLII. 9. One deep calls another, because of
the noise of thy water-pipes: All thy waves and billows are gone over me.
Whereupon S. Paul Romans VI. 3, 4, 5, Know ye not, that as many as have been
baptized into Christ Jesus, have been baptized into his death? We are therefore
buried with him by baptism into death, that as Christ was raised from the dead
by the glory of the Father, so we should also walk in newness of life. For if
we have been planted into the like death of his, then shall we be also into the
like of his rising again. For when he says again, Romans X. 7. Who shall go down
into the deep; to wit, to bring up Christ from the dead? He shows plainly,
that by the waters of the deep, he understands death: whereby I suppose it
appears sufficiently, that the water of Baptism, not the fire of the Holy
Ghost, is the antitype to the waters of the deluge. Besides, the Baptism of the
Holy Ghost is not called Baptism, but by resemblance of the fire thereof
infusing it self into all the soul, as the whole body is drenched in the waters
of baptism. Therefore it is not called absolutely Baptism, but with an addition
abating the property of the sense, the Baptism of the Holy Ghost and fire.
Therefore where the term Baptism stands without this addition, or any
circumstance signifying the same, it cannot be understood. Again, the
interrogating of a good conscience, (...) signifies, as all men of learning
agree, metonymically, or by Synecdoche, the answer, or rather the stipulation,
consisting of the interrogatories of Baptism, and the answer returned by him
that is baptized, undertaking to believe and to live like a Christian. For it
is manifest, that it Fath been always the custom in the Church of God, as
still in the Church of England, (which S. Peter here shows that it comes down
from the Apostles) to exact of him that is baptized, a solemn vow, promise, or
contract, to stand to that which he undertaketh. And this it is which the word
(...) here signifies, whereof he that doubts, may see enough in Grotius his
Annotations to make him ashamed to doubt any more. When therefore S. Peter
says, that Baptism saves us, not the doing away the filth of the flesh, but
the answer of a good conscience toward God, he does not intend to distinguish
the Baptism of water from the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, in opposition to the
same; But to distinguish in the Baptism of water, the bodily act of cleansing
the flesh, from the reasonable act of professing Christianity, which, being
done out of a good conscience toward God, he says, saves us; And that by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ: By virtue whereof S. Paul also says, that, if we
planted into the like death to Christ's death, we shall also be planted into the
like resurrection of Christ's; Supposing that whosoever is baptized takes upon
him the profession of Christ's Cross, that is the bearing of it, when his
Christianity calls him to it. For when our Lord says in the Gospel, I have a
Baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished?
Luke XII. 50. And again to the sons of Zebedee, Mat. XX 22. Are ye able to be
baptized with the Baptism which I shall be baptized with? He shows sufficiently
that his Baptism is his Cross. In consideration whereof, that is, of
undertaking to bear it, out of a good conscience, as Christ was raised from
death to life again, by the Spirit of Holiness, which dwelt in him without
measure; So those that are planted into the likeness of Christ's death in
Baptism, are promised the Grace of Gods Spirit to dwell in them, and to raise
them from sin here, to the life of Grace; and from death hereafter to the life
of Glory in the world to come, as I showed you in the first Book. So that S.
Paul's argument proceeds not upon consideration of the Ceremony of Baptism, and
the natural resemblance it has with the duty of a Christian, to rise from
sin, because he professes to die to it: For that were to think, that the
Apostles have but weak argumens to enforce the obligation of Christianity with,
when this prime one is made to signify no more then an indecorisne,
impertinence, or inconsequence in, signifying and professing that by our
Baptism, which by our lives we perform not. But, makes Baptism the
protestation of a solemn vow and promise, to God and men and Angels, to live
for the future, as the profession of Christians imports. And is it possible
to show man, overtaken in sin, a more valuable consideration to expect
salvation upon, (and therefore a stronger means to enforce the performance of
what he has undertaken) then his own engagement upon such a consideration as
that? We are therefore baptized with Christ unto death, because we have
undertaken, upon our Baptism, to mortify our selves to the world, that we may
live to Gods service: And upon that condition, we promise our selves, that we
shall be raised from the dead again, though by virtue of Christ's rising again:
Being buried with him in Baptism, wherein ye are also risen with him, by faith
of the effectual working of God, which raised him from the dead, says S.
Paul, Col. II. 12. For, by obliging our selves to the profession of
Christianity, from a good heart and clear conscience, we obtain the promise of
the Holy Ghost, whereby God effects the raising of us to a new life of
righteousness, necessarily consequent to the mortifying of sin.

Besides these, how many and how excellent effects are attributed to Baptism,
in the writings of the Apostles? which, without S. Peter's distinction, might
seem strange, that they should depend upon the clensing of the flesh; but, that
they should, by Gods appointment, depend upon that engagement, whereby we give
our selves up to Christ for the future, according to his distinction, not at
all. For, that this engagement should not be effectual, till consigned unto
the Church at Baptism, cannot seem strange to him that believes the Catholic
Church to be, as I have showed, a corporation founded for the maintenance and
exercise of that Christianity, to which we engage our selves by Baptism.

When the Jews were pricked in heart to see our Lord, whom they had crucified,
to be risen again, and asked the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall we do?
Acts II. 37, 38. Peter says unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of
you, unto remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.
Which, if it depend upon Baptism, what promise of the Gospel is there that does
not? To the same purpose, Heb. VI. 6. It is impossible for them that have once
been enlightened, and tasted the heavenly gift, and become partakers of the Holy
Ghost: Where you see, that upon inlightning, that is Baptism, we become
partakers of the Holy Ghost. And this consideration utterly voides the only
reason why our Lord, when he says to Nicodemus. John III. 5. Verily verily I
say unto thee, unless a man be born again of wa^er and of the Holy Ghost, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; should not seem to speak of the Sacrament
of Baptism. For at that time. neither was the Sacrament of Baptism instituted,
nor the promise of the Holy Ghost annexed to it. The Holy Ghost, that is to
say, the gift of the Holy Ghost, is no where promised before the ascension of
Christ. For, besides that which I alleged in the beginning, to show, that it
presupposes Christianity; When it is said, John VII. 37. The Holy Ghost was
not yet, because Christ was not yet glorified: The dependence thereof, upon the
glorifying of our Lord is plainly expressed. And that according to S. Paul,
Ephesians IV. 8. 12. Showing out of Psalm. LXVIII. 18. that the graces of the Holy
Ghost, by which the Church is united and compacted into one Body, are sent down
by God, as a largess, in consideration of the advancement of our Lord to the
right hand of God, as in honor of that triumph: Wherewith agrees S. Peter,
Acts II. 33. Being then exalted to (or by) the right hand of God, and having
received the gift of the Holy Ghost, (as it is also called, Acts X. 54.) he
has shed forth this, which ye now see and hear. Now let any man say, that
these visible operations of Holy Ghost, (whereby the world was to be convinced
of the presence of God in the Church of Christians) these indeed depend upon
the ascension of Christ: But, without the invisible operation of the Holy Ghost
no man ever to salvation from the beginning; (supposing this for the present,
but not granting it, if any man that is a Christian demand proof for it) Though
this be true, yet it was not expressly promised by God, nor expressly Covenanted
for by man, till the publishing of Christianity upon the ascension of Christ.
Therefore, the Baptism of repentance which John preached, was without question
effectual, to the remission of sins, as the Gospels propose it, Mark I. 4.
Luke III. 3 For if I maintain the salvation of those, who, living under the
Law, understood the Covenant of Grace to be folded up in it, by the preaching
of the Prophets, much more easily can I maintain the salvation of those, who
have embraced the Baptism of Repentance for remission of sins. which Jo^n
Preached, provided that they came to Christ, to whom John Baptist sent his
Disciples so soon as the command of Christianity should take place, and not
otherwise. But, not by virtue of the Covenant of Grace published, which it was
not to be till the ascension of Christ, but by virtue of the Covenant of Grace
veiled under the Law, which was not unvailed as yet, during the time of passage
from the Law to the Gospel, when the baptism of John might take place. Neither
was the baptism of John in the name of the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost,
which baptism our Lord never established till after his rising again, Mat.
XXVIII. 19. but in the name of him that was coming, as S. Paul says to the
Disciples Acts XIX. 4. John truly baptized the baptism of repentance, saing to
the people, that they should believe on him that was coming after him, that is
in Christ Jesus: which words, some have endeavored to set upon the rack, and
to pull them from those which follow; but they hearing this, were baptized in
the name of the Lord Jesus, as if they were not S. Lukes words, but S. Paul's
speaking of S. John's hearers, that they were baptized by him in the name of
the Lord Jesus. A thing altogether unreasonable to imagine, that the Disciples
of John should make a question, whether our L. Jesus were the Christ or not, as
Mat. XI. 2. Luke VII. 18. if they had been from the beginning baptized in his
Name. And the words might have served to repress this conceit, in them that
had submitted to take the meaning from the words, For it is, (...), not (...),
which their meaning (were it the meaning of the text) would require. Nor is it
strange, that they who had been baptized into the profession of admitting him
that was coming for the Christ, in hope by him to have remission of sins, as
their Fathers had always hoped, acknowledging our Lord Jesus not only to be
the Christ, but further, sent by the Father to send the Holy Ghost, should be
baptized again in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For the
receiving of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of S. Paul's hands, which follows
in S. Luke, is sufficient evidence, that it is the baptism of Christ, and not
of John Baptist, whereof he speaks.

Let us hear, then, the Commission of our Lord Christ to his Apostles, Mat.
XXVIII. 19. Go make Disciples all Nation; babtizing them in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. (...) in Greek, in the Syriack (...) from
(...) and (...), if we insist upon the property of the word must necessarily
signify make Disciples. But who are Christ's Disciples? Those that take up his
Cross to follow him: Those that will do whatsoever he commands: Those that
bear much fruit: Those of whom our Lord says, John VIII. 34. If ye abide in my
Word, then are ye truly my Disciples. As I showed you before, speaking of the
profession of Christianity. This before Christ's death, and the institution of
Baptism. Afterward, who are his Disciples, Acts XI. 26. It came to pass that
the Disciples were first called Christians at Antivchia. First at Antiochia;
but afterward, all over that Book, as well as before, they are oftener called
Disciples then Christians. Neither is the name given to any but Christians,
saving those Disciples which I spoke of just now, who, under the baptism of
John, had given up themselves to our Lord Jesus as the Christ, but through
invincible ignorance, knew not yet that the gift of the Holy Ghost presupposed
Christ's Baptism, being ready, as we see, to receive it, so soon as they
understood it, by the means of S. Paul. Now there is nothing more manifest,
than, that the gift of the holy Ghost is promised by our Lord in the Gospel to
supply the want of his bodily presence, and therefore, when he declared unto
them his departure, and not much before it. Which things, if they be true, of
necessity the promise of the Holy Ghost is annexed to the precept of being
baptized, given by our Lord at his departure, and from that time to take place.
Neither is the meaning of his commission in the words alleged, that they
should first teach, and then baptize; (though teaching that which Christianity
professes is necessarily presupposed to baptizing, namely, that Catechizing
which I spoke of before) but that they should make men Disciples, by baptizing
them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, limiting thereby, the
quality of Disciples, to which the Holy Ghost is promised, to those who should
have received the Sacrament of Baptism, and so been made Disciples. Seeing then
it appears so plentifully, that the Gift of the Holy Ghost, promised by our
Lord, a little before his departure, to supply his bodily presence, is limited
by him to the Sacrament of Baptism, Of necessity, that new birth by Water and
the Holy Ghost, which our Lords words to Nicodemus require, of all that shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaheaven, depends upon the Sacrament of Baptism,
whatsoever Nicodemus might understand by the term of water, at the time when
our Lord spoke them, and this promise was not published. Of which I shall have
occasion to say more in another place. Neither will is be to the purpose, to
object, that it is the actual assistance, and not the habitual gift of the
Holy Ghost, that regenerateth (supposing for the present, but not granting that
which all that pretend to Christianity do not acknowledge) and therefore that
the promise of the Holy Ghost, to succeed upon Baptism, no way obliges us to
understand that water, which, with the Holy Ghost, regenerateth, of the water
of Baptism; For, the actual assistance of the Holy Ghost, regenerating a man
to become a Christian, may well be understood to go before the habitual gift
of the Holy Ghost, upon Baptism. And in my opinion is to be understood, when
our Lord goes on and says; That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that
which is born of the spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee; ye
must be born again. The wind blows where it lifts, and ye hear the noise of
it, but cannot tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes: so is every one
that is born of the Holy Ghost. And therefore what shall hinder water and the
Holy Ghost to signify one and the same thing in this place, the cleansing
virtue and operation of the Holy Ghost, being often signified under the figure
of Water in the Scriptures? So that Water and the Spirit may well stand here
for no more than the Spirit that cleanses; I say all this will not serve the
turn. For, the habitual gift of the Holy Ghost, being promised Christ's
Disciples upon his departure to enable them to make good what they undertake by
being h^s Disciples: it is manifest, that the actual assistance of the holy
Ghost, regenerating to Christianity, only prepares the way for it. Seeing then,
that the gift of the Holy Ghost depends upon the Water of Baptism, it is
manifest, that the cleansing virtue of Gods Spirit, in the new birth of
sinners, comes not to effect without the same.

I will further draw into consequence those texts of Scripture which I alleged
in the first book, to show, that there was a certain Rule of Christianity
delivered by the Apostles, and acknowledged by them that undertook to be
Christians, for there are some of them that signify plain enough, that this
acknowledgment was made at their baptism, as the condition which it
praesupposed. When S. Paul thanketh God for the Romans that they had obeyed
from the heart that form of Doctrine which had been delivered them, Romans VI.
17. What is this obeying from the heart, but that answer, or stipulation of a
good conscience toward God in Baptism, which S. Peter says, saves us, as you
have seen? And S. Paul to Timothy. 1 Timothy VI. 12. 13. Fight the good fight of
Faith, lay hold of eternal life, to which also thou wast called, and made a
good profession before many witnesses. I charge thee before God that quickens
all things, and Christ Jesus that witnessed the good Profession under Pontius
Pilate, that thou keep the command unspotted and blameless, unto the appearing
of our Lord Jesus Christ. What profession was it that our Lord died to
witness, but, that he was ordained by God, the King of them whom he was sent
with the Gospel to save? in regard whereof he is called by the Apostle Hebr.
III. 2. the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession; Because he bore the
Cross before us, to witness that righteous cause* which we are to maintain by
bearing the same. And what is that profession which Timothy made before many
witnesses, but that of bearing Christ's cross when he was baptized? And what is
the commandment which he is charged to keep unspotted and blameless, but that
Christianity which he became charged with at his Baptism? Wherefore when S.
John alleges an Unction from the Holy one, even our Lord Christ, which
teaches Christians all things, so that they need not be taught to avoid the
Heresies of that time, because they knew the truth; hut withal charge them
to abide in that which they had learned from the beginning, and in that Unction
which teaches them all things: He shows us manifestly, that the Unction of
the Holy Ghost is granted by our Lord Christ to teach us all things which we
have learned; To wit, that we be not seduced from that which we have learned
from the beginning of our Christianity. Now, as it has appeared, that this
Christianity was then learned and acknowledged in order to Baptism, so
likewise, that the gift of the Holy Ghost depends upon the same. Otherwise,
what shall we say to S. Peter ascribing remission of sins to Baptism, Acts 11.
38? What shall we say to Ananias exhorting S. Paul, Acts XXII. 16. Arise and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord? What shall
we say to S. Paul, affirming that, as many as have been baptized into Christ
have put on Christ. Gal. III. 27. and that those that are baptized into Christ,
are baptized into his death, Romans VI. 4. Which is to say, that God on his part
grants them power to perform that which they on their part profess to
undertake? And again Ephesians. V. 25, 26. Christ gave himself for his Church, that
he might sanctify it, by cleansing it with the laver of water through the
Word. And again, Titus III. 5, 6. Not by works of righteousness which we had
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the laver of regeneration and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he powered upon us plentifully, through our
Savior Jesus Christ. And the Apostle to the Hebrews X. 21, 22. Let us draw
near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts cleansed
from evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, let us hold fast
the profession of faith, without declining from it. what starting hole is here
left for him that had a mind to prefer his own prejudices before the Word of
God, to avoid the evidence of these testimonies, for the concurrence of Baptism
to the qualifying of a Christian for the promises of the Gospel? What room is
there left, so to interpret and understand Justificatification by Faith alone,
or the nature of that Faith which alone justifies, that a man may be thought
to be ingrafted into Christ by a living faith, before and without being
baptized? He that admits S. Peter's distinction shall not need to marvel,
that God should appoint the cleansing of the soul to depend upon the washing of
the body, seeing the profession of true Christianity, obliging him that is
baptized both to God and to his Church (the power of baptizing into which is
the power of remitting sins by the keys of the Church, as I proved in due
place) by the same appointment annexed to the same. And upon this ground it is
that S. Paul says, 1 Timothy V. 8. that he who provides not for his own,
especially for his Family, has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel.
Because that Christianity to which he is tied by his baptism obliges him to it.
And the Apostles Jude 4. 2. Pet. II. II. affirm, that the Gnostics did deny
the Lord Jesus Christ that bought them: who certainly renounced not the
profession of Christians which they counterfeited, but lived not according to
it. Whereupon we read in S. Paul of those that retain a fashion of godliness,
but deny the power of it, 2 Timothy III. 5. And that profess to know God
(doubtless as Christians, if of Titus his charge) but deny it by their works,
Titus I. 16.

CHAP. III. The exhortations of the Apostles, that are drawn from the patterns
of the Old Testament, suppose the same. How the Sacraments of the Old and New
Testament are the same, how not the same. How the New Testament and the New
Covenant are both one. The free will of man acts the same part in dealing
about the New Covenant, as about the Old. The Gospel a Law.
BEsides all this, I argue the same from the Old Testament, as the passages of
it are employed and expounded by our Lord and his Apostles in the New. S. Paul
inforceth the observing and fulfilling of our Christian profession, specially
not to communicate in the worship of Idols, thus: 1 Cor. X. 6. 11. These things
came to pass for patterns to us, that we should not lust for evil things, as
they also lusted: Nor be Idolaters, as some of them; As it is written; The
people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play. Nor go a whoring, as some
of them did, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Nor tempt Christ,
as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed by Serpents. Nor murmur, as
some of them also murmured, and were destroyed by the destroyer. Now all these
things happenned to them for figures, and are written for our warning, on whom
the ends of the world are come. If these things fell out to the Fathers, that
they might be figures for Christians, and that they were punished for
transgressing the Covenant which they had made with God, is it not manifest,
that the punishments which the Apostle threatens Christians with, must come,
for transgressing the second Covenant of Grace, which the Gospel introduces
(consider again the Apostles argument Hebr. III. 7-13. Wherefore, as the Holy
Ghost says, to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as at
the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness, where your
Fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty years, wherefore I was
wroth with that generation, and said, They always err in heart, and know not
my ways, So that I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my
rest. take heed, brethren, that there be not in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God: But exhort one another every day,
while it is called to day that none of you be hardened with the deceit of sin.
It is manifest, that his intent is, to warn them of the crime of Apostasy, in
renouncing Christianity, for the persecutions which the Jews then followed
them with, as the whole Epistle witnesses, and here the very terms of an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God, do evidence. And therefore
in the end of the Chapter; Who did he swear should not enter into his rest, but
those that were disobedient? And we see they could not enter for unbelief.
(...), those that were disobedient to Gods Law, which they had plighted their
Faith to keep, could not enter into his rest of the Land of Promise, (...), for
unbelief, or unfaithfulness whether you will. Therefore they that depart from
God, having undertaken the profession of Christianity, shall not enter into his
everlasting rest of the Kingdom of Heaven, whether for unbelief, or
unfaithfulness, For, as they are disloyal to their Promise, so, by Apostasy,
they fall into the condition of Infidels. Can this Argument proceed upon any
other terms? And, proceeding upon these, does it not suppose an engagement
claiming loyalty? Is not the rest of Christians, which he mentions, as
clearly the Kingdom of Heaven, as the rest whereof the Psalm speaks was the
Land of promise? wherefore he infers upon the words quoted; For we are
become partakers of Christ, if we hold the ground of our confidence, or the
principle of our expectation firm to the end. The ground of a Christians
confidence, or, that from whence his expectation of the promise commences,
which he calls (...), being nothing else but the condition which he undertaketh,
upon supposition of Gods promise. Wherefore S. Paul thus infers the warning
before rehearsed, 1 Cor. X 1.-5. Now I would not have you ignorant. Brethren,
that our Fathers were all under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and
all were baptized into Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and all ate the
same spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink. For, they drank of
the spiritual Rock that followed them: now the Rock was Christ. But with most
of them God was not well pleased; For they were felled in the Wilderness. Did
you ever read in the Old Testament that the Israelites were baptized, because
they passed the Sea, under the Cloud, without a drop of water to wet them with?
But, this we read, that God, by Moses, had delivered them, and thereupon they
agree to leave Egypt under his conduct. Hereupon infucs the drowning of their
enemies in the red Sea, while they are protected thereby, with the Cloud also
over their heads. This therefore was the beginning of that Peoples engagement
to God, under the conduct of Moses; Which though by and by they departed from
at Marah, and elsewhere, mutinying against Moses, yet being reconciled to God
by his patience and goodness in fulfilling their desires, they also took upon
themselves to obey him, and to keep the the Sabbath, Exodus XV. 25, 26. XVI. 27,
28, 29. Until being come to Monnt Sinai, they received the Decalogue, and
afterward the whole Law, as it was renewed by Moses a little before his death,
though, in effect, they had submitted to whatsoever should be required in Gods
name by Moses, when they passed the red Sea, under his conduct. Only it is to
be observed, that the Covenant of Circumcision, which God had made with
Abraham, when he gave him the Land of Promise, remained for their Title to it,
when the promise thereof became limited by the Law; Which limitation, because
they submitted to by leaving Egypt under the conduct of Moses, and, being
shadowed by the Cloud, saw their enemies drowned in the red Sea, therefore are
they elegantly said by S. Paul, to be baptized into Moses, in the Cloud, and in
the Sea. For if, being redeemed from the Egypt of this world, we undertake to
leave it under the conduct of our Lord Christ; If, hereupon, our sins be
drowned in the waters of Baptism; Were not they baptized in the same sense, as
we pass the red Sea at our coming out of Egypt? But both upon supposition of
the correspondence between the two Testaments, without which, all this argument
could neither have force nor relish. And therefore I cannot but admire, to see
men learned in the Scriptures to maintain by this place, that the Sacraments of
the Old Testament are the same with the Sacraments of the New; Not
distinguishing, whether immediately, or by way of correspondence. For, if you
make the Kingdom of Heaven and the Land of Promise all a thing, then is
Baptism, and the passage of the red Sea all one. But then, it will be all one
to believe in Christ, and to submit to his conduct to Paradise, as to believe
in Moses, (as the Israelites did hereupon, Exodus XIV. 31.) and to put
themselves under his conduct to the Land of Promise; Which is my Argument. But
if, setting aside the correspondence, you make their engagement to God under
Moses for obtaining the Land of promise, one thing, and our engagement to God
under Christ, another; Certainly, the immediate assurance of this, and the
immediate assurance of that, (which by means of the correspondence becoms also
the assurance of this) are several things. And, if there be, between the Old
and New Covenant, that correspondence, which makes that the figure of this,
they may as well be said to be one and the same, (and, by consequence, the
Sacraments of them) as a man's Picture is called by his name, when, seeing the
Pictures of our Princes, for example, we say, This is H. the eight, and this
Queen Elizabeth. But to say, that the Sacraments of the Old Law do immediately
figure or assure the same thing, which the Sacraments of the Gospel do, is the
same thing as to say, the rest of the Land of Promise, and the everlasting rest
of the Kingdom of Heaven are both one and the same. Let us now see, by what
right, that is, upon what ground S. Paul argues that, concerning the Gospel,
from the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. XIII. 11.-14. which is manifestly said by him
concerning the Law; Romans X. 6.-10. The righteousness that is of Faith says
thus: Say not in thine heart; who will ascend into Heaven? To wit, to bring
down Christ: Or, who will go down into the deep? To wit, to bring up Christ
from the dead: But what says it? The Word is near thee, in thy mouth, and in
thy heart. That is, the word of Faith which we Preach; That if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with thy heart, that God
raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart a man
believes to righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation.
The argument is this; If Moses duly warn the Israelites, that they have no
excuse for not obeying the Law which he had put, as it were, in their mouths,
and into their hearts, so plainly had he taught it them: then cannot those that
hear the Apostles Preach the Gospel excuse themselves in not obeying it, being
so plainly showed; That, if they profess Christ with their mouths, believing
with the heart, that God raised him from the dead, they should be saved; That
this word of Faith is put, as it were, in their mouths, and in their hearts.
Can this be made good to be Moses his meaning, not supposing that the Spirit of
God intended the Gospel by the Law? Or can it be denied so to be, supposing it?
If therefore the profession of an Israelite tie him to the Law of God, given
the Jews, shall not the profession of a Christian tie him to the Law of God,
given the Jews, shall not the profession of a Christian tie him to the Law of
God given the Christians? Shall not the professing of Christ, which the Apostle
speaks of, be the undertaking of it? For S. Paul, by saying, that they were
baptized into Moses under the Cloud and in the Sea, plainly shows, that, as
their undertaking to march under the conduct of Moses toward the Land of
Promise through the red Sea, was rewarded by God with the drowning of their
enemies, and the overshadowing of the Cloud: So our undertaking to follow
Christ toward that Kingdom, which he obtained by his Cross, is rewarded with
the extinguishing of sin and the refreshing of the Holy Ghost, in our travel to
the world to come. And therefore, the engagement of the second Covenant being
inacted and settled upon us, by the Sacrament of Baptism, the promises of the
Covenant must needs depend upon the same.

What else shall the name of a New Covenant, or a New testament signify, if we
will not have them to signify nothing? Some man perhaps may marvel whence it
comes, that the agreement between God and his ancient People being always
represented in the Old Testament, in the nature and terms of a Covenant, the
New is, by the Apostle, proved to have the nature of the last Will and
Tessament of our Lord Christ, Hebr. IX. 16, 17. But, if this Testament be also
a Covenant, (as the same Apostle says, Hebr. VIII. 9. He has obtained a more
excellent Ministry, by how much he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which
is inacted upon better promises) there will be no cause to marvel. The Greek
word (...), in ordinary Greek, signifies no more, than a man's last Will and
Testament; But, in the use of the Jews that spoke Greek, such as are the
Apostles, the translators of the Old Testament into Greek, and others, it
fignisies also a Covenant. If further it pleased God, that our Lord Christ
should die, to assure us of everlasting life on his part, which thereby he
purchased, obliging God on his part to give it to those that shall be found
qualified for it, well may the Apostle affirm, that it is the last Will and
Testament of him who died to make it irrevocable; (because men's Wills are not
so till death) But it contains nevertheless a Covenant, because men become
not Sons of God by birth, but by choice, accepting the adoption which is
tendered, being also their New Birth. Whereupon it follows, Hebr. IX. 18.
Whence, neither the first was dedicated without blood. Making the first
Covenant a Testament also, because the sacrifices which it was dedicated with,
signified the death of Christ, whose Testament the New Covenant is. Now every
Covenant, every Contract whatsoever is a Law, which the parties intercbangeably
tie themselves to, being free before: Neither can it be a Covenant that imposes
nothing upon one of the parties. I know; the promise of God, not to destroy the
World any more by water, is called many times, his Covenant, and the Rainbow
the sign of it, Genesis IX. 9.- 17. whence it may be argued, that nothing hinders
a Covenant to be no more then a bare Promise. And truly it is properly (...),
that is, a disposition, though by free promise, it is (...), or a choice,
according to them that will have that to be the original of the Word. He that
would be contentious, might have ground to dispute, that this promise of God
was not without a condition annexed unto it. For the tradition of the Jews is
now generally received by men of Learning^ that God gave Noah and his Sons
seven Precepts to observe, which were visible during the time that his People
lived in the Land of Promise, as being the condition, upon the undertaking
whereof, strangers were protected by Gods Law among them. Which if it be true,
it can no way seem unreasonable to say, that the undertaking of these precepts
was the condition, upon which it pleased God to secure them from the waters of
another deluge: reserving himself nevertheless the liberty of destroying the
world by fire, when that Covenant which was to succeed this, and all the
additions to it, under Abraham or Moses, should have wrought the effect for
which it was tendered, in the salvation of Mankind. And thus it might be said,
that the name of a Covenant is properly attributed to this promise, because of
the condition annexed, though not remembered in the Scripture. But, seeing the
word Covenant is manifestly used in the Scripture, to signify a decree of God,
or the declaration of it, as when it speaks of Gods Covenant with the day and
the night; I shall not need to ground my self upon any such nicety as this,
provided and understood always, that the annexing of a condition necessarily
determines and limits it to signify a Contract, not a bare decree or promise.
Which easily appears in the Covenants whereof we speak, because they are
treated. For, to induce a man to embrace a promise, which, being of advantage
brings no burden within it, is not for the wisdom of God to send his Son to
do, because none but a mad man can refuse it. But, where God sends his Son to
tender mankind terms of reconcilement, where he suffers death, to undergo and
execute his Commission, where he sends his Disciples, authorized by the
evidence which his Spirit gives, that he sent them, but obliged to undergo
death in testimony of the same; There, I suppose, there is such a condition
annexed, which, they that have reason to be satisfied of the truth of the
message, may doubt, whether to make themselves parties to, by embracing the
profession of it.

Hear the Apostle 2 Cor. V. 18, 19, 20. All is of God that has reconciled us
to himself by Jesus Christ, and given us the Ministry of reconcilement: As,
that God was about reconciling the World to himself by Christ, not imputing to
them their transgression. and placing in us the Ministry of reconcilement. We
are therefore Ambassadors in Christ's stead; As if God did exbort by us; In
Christ's stead we beseech you, be reconciled to God. If all that is said in the
Bible, of the second and New Testament, or Covenant of Grace, imported no more,
but a bare promise, was mankind so void of reason, as to need all this, to
persuade him to embrace his own happiness tendered without any reputed
disadvantage? For though, to forsake the world and our selves be really an
advantage to the most noble parts of humane nature; yet, because that is not
seen but by Faith, not embraced without disadvantage, in regard of the present
world, that which is really a difficulty to the embracing of Christianity, I
admit, as in the reputation of them to whom the Gospel is preached, to be a
disadvantage. And therefore, with them to whom the Gospel is preached, the case
is the same as with Cain, when God said to him, Genesis IV. 5. If thou do well
shall thou not be accepted? but if thou do not well, sin lies at the door:
As with the Israelites, when God said to them Deuteronomy. XXX. 15. Behold, I have set
before thee this day life and good, and death and evil: Whereas I command thee
this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his
commandments, and statutes, and judgments, and thou shall live, and increase,
and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the Land whither thou go in to
possess it; In fine, as with them to whom it is said, Ecclesiasticus XV. 14,-
17. He made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his own
Counsel; Keep the Commandments and faith, if thou will; To do things
acceptable to him. He has set before thee fire and water, stretch forth thy
hand to whether thou will. Life and death is before man, and that shall be
given him which he likes. That is to say; so manifest as it is, that God, when
he tendered the Law to the Israelites, tendered them their choice, whether they
would undertake to live according to it, upon condition of obtaining the
promises tendered with it; So evident is it, that God, tendering the Gospel in
the same terms, to all that are invited to undertake Christianity, tendreth it
upon condition of living according to it. And therefore, that, as well in
matter of Christianity (in the imbrac^ng or rejecting, in performing or failing
of it) the choice of free will is evidently seen and exercised in, as any thing
else wherein one man contracts with another; The nature and consideration of a
Covenant holding as fully in this, as in humane contracts.

Which if it be true, we must not be nice in allowing the Gospel of Christ; the
name and nature of a Law, though the name of the Law (being already possessed by
the Law of Moses) when it is put with some addition incompetent to the Law of
Moses, cannot be understood of any thing else. For, if every contract be a Law
to the parties so soon as it is inacted, then can it not be denied, that the
Covenant of Grace is a Law to them that engage in it, unless we would have God
tied by his promise, and Christians free from any obligation, yet nevertheless
entitled to the same. For, what is a Law, but the condition, by observing
whereof, every man maintains his estate in the Commonwealth whereof he is?
Which, he that would not have Christianity to be, in regard of the world to
come, what would he have Christians to be but Libertines and Rebels? True it
is, God imposes it not, as upon his subjects; but tendreth it as to his
rebels, for the condition upon which they may become his subjects instead of
his rebels; And that is a just reason why it is called a Covenant, rather than
a Law; And that reason justly reproves the Leviathans imagination, that it can
oblige neither more nor less than the Law of Nature. For, being positive, as
tendered by the mere will of God, and upon what terms he pleased, (as the
Precepts thereof, which are Gods Laws to his Church, and the institution of the
Church it self is merely positive) there is no reason at all to presume, that
the moral Precepts which are in force under it are bounded by the Law of
Nature. Though, whether it be so or not, I undertake not here to determine.
But, we know what S. Paul says, Romans III. 27. Where is boasting? It is shut
out. By what Law? Not by the Law of works, but by the Law of Faith; That is, by
the Gospel, which requires that Faith, of which, I am inquiring wherein it
consists, for the condition of obtaining the promises which it tendreth. And S.
James 11. 8. 12. If ye fulfill the Royal Law, which says; Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, ye do well. And, So speak ye, and so do ye, as being to
be judged by the Law of Liberty. For, the liberty of being Gods subjects, and
under Gods royal Law, the Gospel gives. Neither is S. Paul otherwise to be
understood, when he says, Romans VIII. 2. The Law of the Spirit of Life which is
in Christ Jesus has freed me from the Law of sin and of death; The embracing
of the Gospel being the Law, that is, the condition, upon which we become
partakers of the Holy Ghost, free from sin and from death. And truly, I cannot
but pity the blindness of error, so often as I remember, that I have heard
Antinomians allege the words of the Prophet Jer. XXXI. 31,-34. quoted by the
Apostle to show the difference between the first and second Covenant, Heb.
VIII. 8,-11. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will settle with
the house of Israel, and the house of Judah a new Covenant, not according to
the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, when I took them by the hand, and
brought them out of the Land of Egypt, (for they abode not in my Covenant, and
I neglested them, says the Lord) For, this is the Covenant which I will make
with the house of Israel, after those days, says the Lord; Putting my Laws
into their mind, I will also write them upon their hearts, and I will be to
them for their God, and they to me for my people. Neither shall they teach
every man his neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying; Know the Lord; For,
they shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest; I say I cannot
but pity them, that, upon these words ground themselves, that the Covenant of
Grace is a mere free promise, not only freely made, for so I say it is free,
(for what but Gods goodness moved him to tender it?) but freely, without
condition contracted for at their hands. For, cannot God by his Prophet,
foretell the effect of the Covenant of Grace, but he must be presumed, to set
down the terms of it? And, if he express them not there, is he the less free to
demand them when he tenders them? Especially, the Covenant it self being to
remain a secret. till Gods time to reveal it? I say then, that this Prophecy
has taken full effect in the lives of those, who, submitting themselves to the
terms of Christianity, have received of God the gift of the Holy Ghost, to
understand their profession, that they might live according to it; But, that
this gift of the Holy Ghost, that is to say, the habitual assistance thereof,
neither was due, nor bestowed, but upon supposition of Chnstianity professed by
baptism, which God, by our Lord Christ has revealed, to be the condition
which he requires of them that will enjoy the same.

CHAP. IV. The consent of the whole Church evidenced by the custom of
chatechising. By the opinion thereof concerning the salvation of those that
delayed their Baptism. By the rites and Ceremonies of Baptism. Why no penance
for sins before, but after Baptism. The doctrine of the Church of England
evident in this case.
BUT I am now come to the argument, that is to be drawn from the practice of
the universal Church, to my purpose. And truly, he that shall consider, for
what reason, the Apostles should require those whom they had converted, to be
baptized, will find himself entangled in rendering it, unless he settle the
ground of it upon the obligation of professing true Christianity: And the
effect of it, in admitting to the unity of the Church, which may require the
performance, and maintain the exercise of it. And the consequence thereof, they
that are, or shall be employed by the Church, to preach to unbelievers, will
find to be such, that either they must insist upon the terms which I hold with
them, or, they shall make them but aequivocall Christians; That is, such as may
wear the Cross of Christ, to man for a cognizance, but not in the obligation of
their hearts to God, rather to suffer death, than, either to profess or act
against that which he has taught. The next point, in the visible practice of
the Catholic Church, is the custom of catechizing: The circumstances whereof,
for time and manner, though no man can mantain to have been the same in all
Churches, yet it may be argued, to have been generally a time of trial, for
them that had been won to believe the truth of Christianity how they were
likely to apply themselves to live like Christians, and what assurance or
presumption the Church might conceive, that they would not betray the
profession thereof. And therefore I appeal to the common sense of all men,
whether they that exercised this course did not admit men to Christianity and
baptism, upon the condition of professing and undertaking so to do. Besides
those things which I alleged in the first Book, in the Constitutions of the
Apostles, in the most ancient Canons of the Church, and generally in all Church
writers we read of Missa Catechumenorum, and Missa fidelium; In English, the
dismission of Scholars, and the dismission of Believers: Because, during the
Psalms, and during the reading of the Scriptures, and expounding the same,
reason was that learners should be present, as well for their instruction in
Christianity, as for discharge of their ^uty, in the praises of God, and
prayers to God: Though, the same prayers were not to be offered to God for
Learners, as for believers, but they were to be dismissed with peculiar prayers
of the Church for their particular estate, such as yet are extant in the
ancient Offices of the Church. I say there was reason for these orders,
supposing that Scholars were to be admitted Christians upon this presumption;
Otherwise none. And, hence it comes, that the assembly of the Church, being
first by a Synecdoche called in Latin Missa, from the dismissing of it which
it ends with, (as in Greek (...), in Latin Collecta, for the assembling of it)
the word Missa Latin, as (...) in Greek, is now come to signify the Sacrament
of the Eucharist, (which came after the dismissing of Learners, but went before
the dismissing of believers) being the principal office for which the
Assemblies of the Church were held. But I will remit those that would
understand the weight of this argument, to that which they may read in Clemens
his Poedagogus, where they shall find the conversation which the Church
required of those who professed to be Scholars of Christianity, and to stand
for baptism, described in all the parts of it. Perhaps somewhat in the way of
Plato his Commonwealth, or Xenophons education of Cyrus, expressing many times
what should be, rather than what was: But still, what the Church, on the
behalf of God, required at their hands, till being come to the end of the
book, he who had approved himself by his conversation likely to make a good
Christian, is, in the end of it, inducted by the Chatechist into the Church, to
demand that baptism, which, by this time, he has learned what it charges him
with. And if this be not argument enough, what the Church in Gods behalf
demands of them that would be Christians, it will be in vain to apply reason,
to argue any thing that is questionable.

For it is visible, that the time of any man's continuing Catechumenus, or a
Probationer in Christianity, was required upon no other ground, nor to any
other purpose, but that the Church might be reasonably or legally (that is,
according to custom) assured, that the party pretending to baptism was really
resolved to stand to that, which Christianity should require at his hands.
This, the conversation of several years for trial, the frequenting of Gods
service in the Church, the hatred which he needs must undergo from the enemies
of the Church, Jews and Gentiles, must needs signify, supposing Christians to
be reasonable people. But that exception which I alleged out of the
Constitutions most clearly: That if any man's zeal to Christianity should be
found so fervent, that there was no reason to suspect his sincerity, then the
regular time of continuing in the state and rank of Catechumenus, or a Scholar
of Christianity, might be abridged by the Church. For this is the same
confideration, which takes place, in many penitential Canons of the Church
afterward: That if any man should demonstrate that zeal and eagerness, in
detesting the offenses through which he had failed, which might ground a
confidence of his sincerity for the future, the regular time of his Penance,
might be abridged. The ground whereof is to be seen in the example of S. Paul,
abating the rigor of his censure, upon the incestuous person at Corinth, though
not only in consideration of the persons own zeal, but of the Churches
submission, to acknowledge themselves parties to his crime, for bearing him out
against the censure due to it before. And this indulgence, consisting in the
releasing or abating of regular penance, is without all quession, according to
the will and word of God.

Consider further another custom of the Church, during this primitive estate.
Many men that were convicted in their judgments of the truth of Christianity,
finding d^fficulty in undergoing the Cross of Christ, and persecution for
Christianity, at least, willing to avoid it, though they went so far as to
profess themselves Probationers in Christianity, yet went not so far as to
pretend to Baptism, least, by being admitted to it, they should make themselves
liable to persecution as Christians. These men, if any thing fell out to make
themselves liable to persecution as Christians. These men, if any thing fell
out to make them think their lives to be in danger, would, nevertheless, desire
to be baptized in their beds of sickness. Neither did the Church make any
question of granting it, presuming that those, who, by the hand of God had been
driven to demand it, would prove true to that, which, by such an exigent they
had been driven to seek. Nevertheless, these are those Clinic^. whom we read of
in the ancient Records of the Church, of whose salvation though there were that
presumption, in regard whereof they were admitted to baptism, yet not without
some scruple. Upon what account? Not because they were not so well drenched
with water, being baptized in their beds, as others: But because their
resolution, to abide by the Christianity which they professed at their
baptism, was counted more questionable than theirs, who had frankly without
reservation, abandoned themselves to it. Tertullian in his Book De Bapt. cap.
XIX. argues, that none should make have to Baptism, that are not provided of
that resolution, which the performance of that which they undertake by it
requires. And, upon this account, he advises to delay the baptism of Infants to
man's estate, nay, of single persons, because of the temptations to which they
are subject, till they resolve to serve God, either in the state of virginity
and widowhood, or of wedlock. What the consequence hereof is, in the matter of
baptizing Infants, his reason must determine. And that sufficiently appears to
be, upon the profession which Baptism undertaketh; For, that which he
apprehends is, that, not having well understood and digested what it is they
undertake, they should fail in making it good. And truly let any man tell me,
why there should be so much doubt made of the salvation of those that died
before baptism in the ancient Church, notwithstanding that they had professed,
not only to believe the truth of Christianity, but also, that they intended to
undertake the profession of it, and were indeed of the rank of Catechumeni,
Scholars or Probationers in it? For it is manifest, that, aster persecution was
ceased, there were many and many, who, professing Christianity, forbore
nevertheless to be baptized, sometimes many years, sometimes till death. (as
we see by the great Constantine, who having professed so long before the
belief of Christianity, was not baptized, nevertheless, till a while before
his death) sometimes therefore were prevented by death, and died unbaptized, of
whose salvation there was some difficulty made in conceiving full assurance, as
it appears by the arguments, wherewith S. Ambrose comforts himself in the case
of the Emperor Valentiniane, and his brother Satyrus. Not that there could
remain any doubt in the salvation of those, who, having resolved to undertake
and profess Christianity, by being baptized, should be intercepted and cut off
by inevitable casualties of mortality, not procured by those delays, which the
want of zeal in that resolution had brought to pass: For, it is clear, that
those who suffered death in the profession of Christianity, left no doubt in
the mind of any Christian, whether they should be saved or not, suffering for
Christ before they were baptized. But because those who might have had means
and opportunity to be baptized, at such times, and upon such occasions as the
rules and customs of the Church furnished, by neglecting the same, ministered
some ground to presume, that they had not in them that resolution to undergo
the Cross of Christ (in, and for the performance of that which baptisin
undertakes) in consideration whereof he grants those promises which his Gospel
proclaims. And, having said this, I conceive, I need say no more, to show the
necessity of Baptism, according to the doctrine and practice of the whole
Church, which I proved before by the Scriptures. For, if those who professed to
believe Christianity, and had resolved to enter into that estate and life which
it required, came under a doubtful repute, as to their salvation, among
Christians, where they were intercepted by death before they were Christened by
baptism; well may the unavoydable casualties of mortality dispense in the
necessity of an act, the means whereof may depend upon something else beside
his will that wants it; But it appears therefore a necessary ingredient, in the
condition which qualifies for the promises of the Gospel, when the desire of
having it. if it were possible, appears absolutely undispensable. And this
shall save me the labor of producing the testimonies of Church Writers, to
evidence the sense thereof in all ages. For the sense of the Church cannot be
so effectually evidenced, by the sayings of particular persons, of what
authority soever in their own Churches, as it is evident by the customs really
in force, which it appears, that particular persons held themselves obliged
to follow. And therefore to the opinions presently on foot; Of the Socinians:
That baptism was necessary under the Apostles, to profess that purity of life
which Christianity promises, when men were converted from Jews or Gentiles to
Christians, but indifferent for those that wear that profession, by being born
and brought up under Christian parents; And of some Enthusiasts among us, who
think it a mere mistake to baptize with water into Christianity, the Baptism of
John being the Baptism of water, but the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, the Baptism
of Christ, (of which Opinions you shall hear more by and by) I say, to these
opinions, it shall serve my turn to say: That, the necessity of the Baptism of
Water stands evidenced by the same means, that convince the World of the truth
of Christianity; To wit, by the Scriptures hitherto alleged, and by the
consent of all Christians. For it will be impossible to allege, not only any
Writer that has been allowed and credited by the Church, but any man that has
passed for a Christian in the Church, that ever undertook to persuade himself,
or any man else, to presume, that he should be saved neglecting Baptism. For
what reason and upon what ground, I leave to those that shall neglect S. Peter's
distinction hitherto pleaded, to allege.

As for the next point, which is the manner of baptizing, from the
circumstances and ceremonies of it, I shall but relate here what I alleged out
of S. Peter in the beginning, of the solemn questions propounded of course to
those that demanded Baptism, whether they did believe the truth of
Christianity, whether they would undertake to profess it, and to fight against
the flesh, the World and the Devil, for the observing of it, whether he desired
to be baptized upon these terms? Neither shall I need to allege the
testimonies of Church-Writers, for the use of the same ceremony, which, at this
day is in force in the Church of England. And, though there be those that are
liberal enough in censuring it as impertinent, now that all are baptized
Infants, and though this be not the place to consider such exceptions, yet I
will here take notice, how the contract thus executed concerns ^he salvation of
Christians, that so it may be judged, how it concerns the Office of Baptism,
that, what so concerns the salvation of Christians be expressed in it. To the
same purpose I will here allege the putting on of white robes after Baptisin:
Whereupon the Sunday after Easter Day is still called Dominica in Albis, The
Lords day in Whites, (which first they had put on at Easter when they were
baptized) which custom seems to have been in use in the Church, when S. Paul
said Romans XIII. 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for
the flesh, to fulfill it in the lusts thereof. And Gal. III. 27. As many as are
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. And Joh. IV. 22. 24. To put off the
old man, and put on the new man, which, after God, is created in righteousness
and true holiness. And Col. 3. 10. Having put off the old man, with his
actions, and put on the new man that is renewed unto knowledge, according to
the image of him that made him. For all these expressions seem to be allusions,
to that which they saw done and practiced before their eyes. But, those that
yield not so much, cannot refuse to grant, that the custom was taken up by the
Church, to signify the profession of that which the Apostle injoyneth all
Christians, in those that were baptized. The same thing signified, by signing
those that were baptized with the sign of the Cross: Which S. Augustine
expounds very well, by the custom of the Roman Empire, to set a mark on the
bodies of those that were listed Soldiers, and upon slaves, by which they
might be known and brought back, if they should run away, or depart from their
colors. For, though the sign of the Cross, made upon him that is baptized,
remain not visible upon him, yet being done publicly and solemnly, and, as S.
Paul says of Timothy, under many witnesses, he is notwithstanding to be
challenged by it of what he undertook. And he that observes this mark to be
called by the ancient Church sigillum, the sign or seal, must think of S.
Paul's words, 2 Cor. I. 21, 22. But he that establishes us with you into
Christ, and anointeth us, is God, who has also signed us, and put the earnest
of his Spirit into our hearts. And Ephesians. I. 13. In whom also having believed,
ye were signed with the Holy Spirit of Promise. And IV. 30. Grieve not the Holy
Spirit of God, by whom ye are signed to the day of Redemption; I say, he must
think of these words of S. Paul, as I said of those, concerning the white robes
of them them that were baptized; That they are either allusions to that which
men saw done by the appointment of the Apostles, or occasions of taking up
these ceremonies by the primitive Church. I might here argue from the custom of
Undertakers (which now are called, Godfathers and Godmothers) to the same
purpose. For, if it were requisite, that the Church should be secured, by some
of theit own body, that they who demanded Baptism were no counterfeits, but
would stand to what they undertook, it ought to be an Argument, that they were
to undertake that, which they give the Church security to perform. And indeed,
this custom being nothing else but an appertenance, or consequence of the
Interrogatories of Baptism, I need say no more, but, that it appears thereby,
what those that were admitted to Baptism undertook, when they were to have
Sureties to undertake for them, that they dissembled not in that which they
undertook.

But, in the next place, I will allege the constitution of the Church, and all
the authority of it; Grounded, (as by the means which I have employed to make
evidence of it appears) upon supposition and presumption, that, by being
baptized into the visible communion thereof, we attain invisible communion in
the promises which the Gospel tendreth. There are some that take upon them to
censure the ancient Church, for the abuse which I spoke of even now, in
delaying of Baptism. These men, if they will go always by the same weights and
measures, must call S. Paul to account, why he makes this demand, 1 Cor. V. 12,
13. What have I to do to judge those, that are without? do not ye judge those
that are within? But those that are without God shall judge. For, those who
professed only to believe Christianity, though obliged to learn how to behave
themselves like Christians, (for with what face could they demand Baptism
otherwise?) yet, to speak properly, were not Christians, were not of the
Church. Therefore Clemens Alexandrinus in the end of his Paedagogus, brings
in the Word, that is, our Lord Christ, or his Gospel, (which he calls the
Paedagogue, for governing these Children and Novices in Christianity in their
way to the Church) giving up this Office to himself, (as being to become for
the future their Doctor, and Master, and Bishop^) at their entrance into the
Churcch. The passage is remarkable. (...). But it is not for me to teach these
things further, says the Paedagogue. We have need of a Doctor to expound these
holy Oracles, and to him we must go. And truly it is time for me to give over
my Office of Paedagogue, and for you to become the Doctors Hearers. He,
receiving you bread with good government (having behaved themselves well during
the time of their trial) shall teach you these Oracles. And in good time here
is the Church, and the only Doctor the Bridegroom, the good mind of a good
Father. Christ, or the Gospel of Christ, is the Paedagogue that guides and
governs Children in Christianity, to the School, that is, to the Church, to
demand baptism, having behaved themselves well by the way, during the time of
their trial. When that is done, he teaches them no more as children are taught
by a Paedagogue; But, as a Master teaches his Scholars, so Christ those that
are become his Disciples by being baptized. Therefore afterward; (...). The
Paedagogue, having set us in the Church, hoth recommended us to himself the
Word, the Doctor and Bishop of all. And this is our Lords Commission to his
Apostles to make them Disciples, that should take up his Cross, by baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Then to teach them to
observe all that he had given them in Charge. The same is the ground of
Cassanders observation, which is much to my purpose. That the Church puts no
man to penance, whatsoever his life may have been, for any thing done before
Baptism. Zosimus thinks he lays a great imputation upon Christianity, in
pretending that Constantine, finding no means to come clear of the blood of his
Wife Fausta, or his Son Crispus, gave ear to Christianity, because it pretended
to wash away all sin. That Constantine should seek those means which
Heathenism pretends to purge sin with, may well be thought to proceed from
the malignity of the Gentiles, against the first Christian Prince. For the
rest, not disputing of his doings before Baptism, because the Church judges
not that those are without, (though he professed Christianity when they were
done) it would be a disparagement to that Fountain which God has opened for
Juda and Jerusalem, that there should be any sin which it cannot cleanse,
supposing the change sincere, which the undertaking of Christianity professes;
If not, God is his Judge. But, though the Church refuse no man Baptism,
because, professing Christianity, he had delayed his Baptism; yet, as it
appeared sufficiently, by the scruple that was made of the salvation of those
that died in that estate, that the Church disallowed it; so, when they were
come into the Church, a mark of the authority of the Church was fastened upon
them, in that, those that were baptized in their beds were made incapable (by
one of those Canons which I spoke of in the first Book, that were in force
before the Church had any Canons in writing) of being promoted to the Clergy.
For this you shall find objected to Noratianus, by Cornelius in Eusebius
Eccles. Hist. VII. 43. That, by the Canons, he ought not to have been promoted
to any rank in the Clergy, because he had been baptized in his bed of sickness,
having delayed his Baptism for fear of persecution, till he found himself in
danger of death. And, though the Church put no man to penance for his life
before Baptism, (because Christianity it self pretends a total change in
him that imbraceth it, and that the Church judges not, but presumes of the
truth of that change, which is pretended by him that is without, yet it
fasteneth a mark of the authority which it purchases upon Christianity) by
providing that no man, who had been ever put to penance, should be promoted to
any rank of the Clergy. The reason is expressed in those words of Clemens his
Epistle to the Corinthians, page 54. speaking of the Apostles; (...). Preaching
over Countries and Cities, they made the Firstfruits of them (whom they had
converted) Bishops and Ministers of them that should believe. The learned
Bloudell will have these First Fruits to signify those that were first
converted to Christianity. A mistake more suitable to the prejudice which he had
undertook to maintain, then to the rest of his learning. For, who knows not
that First Fruits are the best, the flower, the cream of the whole? And, if no
man that dared not to profess Christianity, no man that had been put to
penance for failing, having professed it, is to be of the Clergy, you see why
they are called the First Fruits of Christians. In the mean time, if the Church
judge not those that are without, does it not judge those that are within,
according to S. Paul? Show me any thing that ever was called a Church; that is,
show me the time when, and the place where Christianity was ever settled, and
exercised according to order and rule, where, those that had received Baptism
were not under a discipline of penance, failing of that which they had
undertaken by it. What is reformation in the Church, and what is not, is the
subject of this present dispute; therefore I cannot here grant, that which some
of the reformation may have done, to be well done. Otherwise, I am secure; no
man will choke me with naming a Church, that had no discipline of penance. But
that so it was, I refer my self to that which I have said in the first book. I
demand here, what is the ground and reason, that so it must be? For, supposing
the Keys of Gods Kingdom exercised in the first place, in limiting the terms
upon which baptism is granted, not in ministering of it; Of necessity it
follows, that, in the second place, it be seen and exercised, in limiting the
terms, upon which, those that have failed of that which they undertook at their
Baptism, may be restored to the visible communion of the Church, upon
presumption, that they are restored to the invisible communion of those
promises which the Gospel tendreth. Not supposing this, there is no reason why
it should signify any more than a scene acted upon a stage, as it is taken to
signify by those who understand not this.

Lastly, I will mention here the express Doctrine of the Church of England, in
the beginning of the Catechism, declaring three things to have been undertaken,
in behalf of him that is baptized: That he shall forsake the Devil and all his
works, the pomp and vanities of this world, and the evil desires of the flesh,
and not to be seduced by him, either from believing the faith of Christ, or
from keeping Gods Commandments. And again, in the admonition to the Sureties
after Baptism, you must remember, that it is your parts and duties, to see that
these Infants be taught, so soon as they shall be able to learn, what a solemn
vow, promise and profession they have made by you. For, all that come to
Christianity believing, what promises they get right to by it, and being
admitted to it upon those terms, there can remain no question, upon what terms
they attain the said promises: Nor can or ought any Doctrine of that Church, to
what purpose soever cautioned, be interpreted to the prejudice of that, wherein
the salvation of all consists. But further, in the Introduction to the Office
of Baptism: For as much as all men are conceived and born in sin, and, that our
Savior Christ says; None can enter into the Kingdom of God, except he be
regenerate and born anew of water and of the Holy Ghost, I beseech you to call
upon God, that these children may be baptized with water and the Holy Ghost,
and received into Christ's holy Church, and be made lively members of the same.
Proceeding to pray; That they coming to thy holy baptism, may receive
remission of their sins by their spiritual regeneration. In the exhortation
after the Gospel; Doubt ye not therefore, but earnestly believe, that he will
likewise favorably receive these present Infants, that he will embrace them
with the arms of his mercy, that he will give unto them the blessing of
eternal life, and make them partakers of his everlasting Kingdom. Again; Ye
have heard also, that our L. Jesus Christ has promised in his Gospel, to grant
all these things that ye have prayed for. And after the Sacrament; Seeing now,
that these children be regenerate and graffed in the body of Christ's
congregation. And again; We yield thee hearty thanks, that it has pleased
thee to regenerate this Infant with thy holy Spirit, to receive him for thine
own child by adoption, and to incorporate him into thy holy Congregation. All
this can leave no doubt of the communion of the Church of England with the
whole Church, in this point, so nearly concerning the salvation of all
Christians.

CHAP. V. The Preaching of our Lord and his Apostles evidenceth, that some act
of Man's free choice is the condition which it requires. The correspondence
between the Old and New Testament infers the same. So do the errors of
Socinians and Antinomians concerning the necessity of Baptism. Objections
deferred.
THe whole tenor of the Scripture would afford matter of Argument to enforce
this consequence; But it shall be enough, to have thus far pointed out the
ground, upon which the meaning of the rest is to proceed. The reasons of this
position, from the principles of Christianity, can be no other, than those
which have been touched, upon occasion of treating the passages of Scripture
hitherto alleged. Yet to make the consequence still more evident, I will here
repeat, first, the consideration of Gods sending our Lord Christ, to show the
world sufficient motives, why they should embrace his Gospel, as well as to
teach them what it is, and wherein it consists. I will not here insist upon
any supposition, of the clear sufficience of the Scriptures, or the necessity
of Tradition besides the Scriptures. But I will appeal to the common sense of
all men, to judge, whether it be within the compass of reason, that our Lord
Christ should come to preach, and to exhort men to acknowledge him to be come
from God, and to take up his Cross; should show them reasons to believe, that
all which he preached is true, that so they might be persuaded willingly to
follow him; Should give certain proofs of his rising again from death, to
enforce the same; If men have no will, no choice, no freedom to do what he
requires them, or not to do it; whether, in other things, they, have it or not.
The same to be said of his Apostles and Disciples, who were strange Creatures,
to expose their lives, for a Warrant of the truth of what they said, if they
had not willingly and freely embraced that profession themselves, which they
pretended to induce the world, with the like freedom of choice to embrace.
Thus far then we are assured by common sense, that the condition required by
the Covenant of Grace, on our part, must be some act of man's free choice, the
doing whereof, at Gods demand, must qualify us for those promises which it
tenders. But this is not all that may appear to common reason, by the
proceeding of our Lord and his Apostles. The preaching of the Gospel-premises,
for a supposition, upon which it proceeds; That mankind are become enemies
unto God through sin, and subjects of his wrath: Proposing therepon the terms,
upon which they may be reconciled to God, and entitled presently to, and in due
time possessed of everlasting happiness. Suppose these terms purchased by the
satisfaction of Christ, though not granting it, (because all that call
themselves Christians in the West do not) is it possible to imagine, that they
who declare all mankind to be Gods enemies for sin, should have commission to
declare them heirs of his Kingdom, not supposing them turned from sin to that
righteousness, which shall be as universally according to Gods will, as their
sin is against it? As on the contrary supposing this, do you not suppose them
qualified for Gods promises, as fitly as men overtaken in sin can be? And is
not this that which Baptism supposes, when S. Peter says, Acts II. 38. Repent
and be baptixed every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, unto remissin of
sins? The Baptism of John indeed was the Baptism of Repentance unto remission
of sins, Mat, III. 11. Mark I. 4. Luke III. 3. But our Saviors theme as well
as John Baptists, when they began to preach, was; Repent and believe the
Gospel: Or, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Mark I. 15. Mat.
III. 2. IV. 17. Therefore the Baptism of Christ, as well as the Baptism of
John, presupposes repentance, only the promise of the Holy Ghost is proper to
the Baptism of Christ; because that remission of sins which John's Baptism gave,
presupposed not the Covenant of Grace inacted and published. And therefore it
is no marvel, that the Baptism of John is called The Baptism of water, when
our Lord says, Acts I. 5. John indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost before many days. For, it will not follow any
more, that therefore the Baptism of water is not Christ's Baptism; then it will
follow, the Baptism of John was not the Baptism of repentance to remission of
sins, because Christ's Baptism was so; And, because it had the promise of the
Holy Ghost, which John's had not. It is then to be considered, that the
repentance of him that has been qualified for the Gospel promises, may be only
conversion from some particular sin, supposing one sin of that weight as to
void that title. But, the repentance of him that is wholly enemy to God, such
as the Gospel declares Jews and Gentiles to be, (as you find by S. Paul in the
beginning of his Epistle to the Romans) necessarily signifies conversion from
all sin to all righteousness. The repentance therefore of him, who, finding
himself overtaken in sin, has recourse to Christianity for the cure of it,
being necessarily a motion from all sin, the term wherein it rests, being
Christianity, is necessarily a resolution of all righteousness for the future.
Which is all that my position demands; only this, that whereas the profession
of this resolution is also required, therefore it be not thought sufficient, to
profess for Christianity, that which every man that reads and believes the
Scriptures may take to be Christianity, but that which the Church, (being
trusted with the maintenance of that Rule, the profession whereof is required
to salvation by the Gospel) has always required to be professed of them, who
are baptized into the Church.

And that the condition, without this particular is not complete, may further
appear by assuming for granted that which has here been proved by the
premises, wherein I have demonstrated, that the first Covenant which God by
Moses made with the Children of Israel, was, and was intended by God to be the
figure of the second Covenant, which, by our Lord Christ he has established,
for all that will embrace it by undertaking Christianity: The correspondence
between them consisting in this; That, as God, by the first, tendered them the
happiness of the Land of Promise, upon condition, of governing themselves
according to the Law, which he gave them by Moses; So, by the second, he
tenders everlasting happiness in the world to come, to all those, that shall
undertake to profess the faith of Christ, and live according to that which he
has taught. Which being no more questionable, then it can be questioned by
those who profess themselves Christians, whether or no, the New Testament was
intended and designed by the Old; Whether Moses writ of Christ or not; Whether
Judaisme was to make way, or to give place to Christianity or not; And, seeing
it can no more be questioned, whether or no the Jews were to take upon them the
Law of God as their King, for the condition upon which they were to expect the
Land of Promise; It is plain, there wants nothing that can be required, duly
to infer, that the condition, the undertaking whereof intitles Christians to
life everlasting, is the profession of Christianity: And the performance
thereof, that which is rewarded, by the performance of all the promises which
the Gospel tenders, as the performance of the Law was that, which secured the
Israelites in the possession of the Land of Promise against their enemies round
about. Now we know, that, when the Covenant of God with Abraham for the Land of
Promise came to be limited, as to the condition required by God, to the law of
Moses, that Circumcision which God had required of all Abraham's seed became a
condition limiting the same to Israraelites; the want whereof, at eight days
old, was a forfeiture of that promise. For, The waters of the Red Sea, which
saved them, and drowned the Egyptians, the Cloud that overshadowed them, the
Manna which they eat, and the Waters of the Rock which they drank, though
(according to S. Paul) Sacraments answerable to the Sacraments of the Church,
were so but for the time of their travel through the Wilderness. If therefore,
by virtue of these, the Israelites were entitled to the Land of Promise, (which
of Circumcision is evident) then must the Sacrament of Baptism be necessarily
requisite, to the right of a Christian in the heavenly Inheritance. This is the
first reason, drawn from that which seems most evident in Christianity, and
that which I have been able to infer, and to premise from the same.

But I will add another reason, though it seems to be of the same nature with
these that go before, which comes from the necessity of Baptism. How much
soever the licentiousness of this time may have debauched this wretched people
from the Christianity which they were dedicated to, by the Church of England,
no pretense of Socinians, or Antinomians, has yet prevailed, to make them
believe, that it is not necessary for men to be Christened, that intend to be
Christians. There has been indeed, among the fruits of this blessed
reformation, a Pamphlet seen under the title of The doctrine of Baptismes, the
intent whereof, is, by a studied discourse to prove, that it was never the
intent of our Lord and his Apostles, that the Baptism of water should be used
to make men Christians with, Being a legal rite used by John the Baptist, to
continue, so long as the use of Moses law was tolerated after the publishing of
the Gospel, but to cease therewithal, when the Baptism of the Spirit, which
is the Baptism of Christ, had succeeded the same. This Pamphlet, attributed to
the Master of a College in one of the Universities. How that University will
wash their hands of acknowledging, as master of a Coledge, one who cannot pass
for a Christian among Christians, supposing him the Author of this Book, is not
for this place to enquire. This is visible, that this opinion proceeds upon the
common presumption of Antinomians, Enthusiasts, Quakers, and the like, that
they have the holy Ghost, though they presuppose not in themselves the
profession of that true Christianity which the Catholic Church teaches, and
whether baptized or not; Whether supposing themselves praedestinate to life
from everlasting upon the dictate of the same Spirit, or justified by that
faith, which consists in revealing to them their praedestination from
everlasting; Always supposing they have the Spirit in consideration of the
merits and satisfaction of Christ, without supposing the truth of that
Christianity which they profess, as a condition required by God in them whom
he gives his Spirit. But the opinion of the Socinians, (having in detestation
this unchristian as well as unreasonable Principle) acknowledges the gift of
the holy Ghost to be granted by God to those, who, believing our Lord Jesus to
be the Christ, resolve to live according to all that he has taught, but
denies any consideration of the merits and satisfaction of Christ, either in
his sending the Gospel, or in his giving the holy Ghost to enable a man to
perform that which it requires. Only acknowledging the free grace of God, in
sending those terms of reconcilement which the Gospel imports, and the free
choice of man in accepting or refusing the same; But upon the accepting or
refusing of them, concluding the promises of the Gospel to be necessarily due.
And therefore presuming, that it is altogether unreasonable, to make them still
to depend upon an outward ceremony of Baptism by water, the consideration upon
which they are tendered being already performed. And therefore, construing the
proceeding of the Apostles, and the Scriptures wherein they are mentioned, upon
such presumptions as these, they conclude, the reason and intent of the
Baptism which they gave, according to the Commission of our Lord, to be
particular, to the condition of those, who being Jews or Gentiles before, were
thereby to acknowledge their uncleanness in that estate, and to profess a
contrary course for the future. So that, the reason ceasing, why they did
Baptize, the obligation also of their Baptism must necessarily cease. But in
this great distance between the grounds upon which these extreme opinions
infer the indifference of Baptism, it is easy to observe something common
to both; Namely, that neither of them acknowledges any Catholic Church, or
any presumption of the visible unity thereof, limiting that part of the
Doctrine taught by the Scriptures, which it is necessary to the salvation of
all Christians that they profess, as received from hand to hand by the
Churches of the Apostles founding, to be exacted of them whom they Baptize into
themselves. For, this being set aside why should not Enthusiasts persuade
themselves, that they have the Spirit of God, and a title to all the promises
of the Gospel depending upon it, by Christ, if the Socinians can persuade
themselves, that they may have it by the mere act of their free will, accepting
the tender of the Gospel, by believing that our Lord is the Christ, and
resolving to live as he has taught, without any consideration of his merits
and sufferings; Both being persuaded, that for their salvation, they are to
make what they can of the Scriptures, without any regard to the Church, for
securing the intent and meaning of it. What shall hinder them indeed, supposing
the way plained to them both, by admitting the necessity of Baptism to be
such, that all the effects and consequences thereof may be thought to be had
and obtained before and without it? Certainly the waving of those grounds, upon
which the necessity of Baptism may appear to be consistent with the undoubted
efficacy of that Christianity which the heart only feels, is the breach that
has made a gap for these Heresies to enter into Gods Church. For, if no man
can be thought to have right to be baptized, that has not true and living
Faith, which true and living faith alone qualifies any man for Remission of
sins and salvation, (whether it consist in believing, that our Lord Jesus is
the Christ, (because he who believes that is obliged to live as he teaches)
and the Scriptures, according to the Socinians; Or, in believing, that we are
praedestinate to life in regard of our Lord Christ, dying for us, according to
the Enthusiasts) what remains for Baptism to procure, that is not assured
already, before a man be Baptized?

And therefore, I conceive, I demand nothing but reason. For, all the gain
that I demand from all this is no more, but that it be freely acknowledged,
that, justification by faith alone, and that faith which alone justifies be
not so understood, as to make the promises of the Gospel due before Baptism;
to which the Scripture, interpreted by the consent and practice of the whole
Church, testifies, that Baptism concurreth. A thing which can by no means be
obtained, but by placing that faith which alone justifies, as well in the
outward act of professing, as in the inward act of believing; This profession
containing an express promise, or vow to God, whereby we undertake to live as
those who believe the Gospel of Christ are by Gods Law to live; And, that
promise or vow to be celebrated and solemnized by the Sacrament of Baptism,
appointed by our Lord Christ to that purpose. For, seeing the professing of
Christianity, and not the believing of it, is that which brings upon the Church
that persecution, which the Cross of Christ, the mark of a disciple signifies;
neither can it be reasonable, that God should allow the promises of the Gospel,
to any quality that includes it not, nor unreasonable that he should make them
depend upon it. And, seeing it is not the profession of any thing that a man may
call Christianity, (though perhaps, grounded upon an imagination that he has
learned it from the Scriptures) which God accepts, (whatsoever a man may
suffer for the maintenance and affirmation of it) but of that which himself
sent our Lord Christ to preach; It is no marvel, if God who esteems nothing
but for that affection of the heart wherewith it is done, should
notwithstanding, accept no disposition of the heart toward the profession of
Christianity, but that which is executed and solemnized by such an outward
ceremony, as himself has limited his disciples and their successors to
celebrate it with. For, supposing that God has founded the unity of his
Church, upon supposition of professing that Christianity which he gave his
Apostles Commission to preach, consisting in the visible communion of those
offices which God is served with by Christians, it will be evident, why God,
who esteems the heart alone, has not allowed the promises of his Gospel to
any but those who profess Christianity, by being admitted to Baptism by the
Church; Because, as it is not any belief or resolution that may be called
Christianity, but that which the Church has received from the Lord and his
Apostles, that qualifies a man for those promises which God tenders by the
Covenant of Grace: So it is not the profession of any belief or resolution,
that qualifies a man for Communion with the Church by Baptism, but of that
which the Church professes to have received from our Lord and his Apostles:
And this is the true ground of the foundation of the Church, and the Society
thereof, whereof so much has been said: To wit, that God, giving his Gospel
for the salvation of mankind, did think fit to trust the guard and exercise of
it to men once instructed by those, to whom, at the first he had given
immediate Commission to publish and establish Christianity; Rather then leave
them to expect at his hands, every day new revelations and miracles, for
introducing that, which had once been sufficiently declared. And also, rather
then leave every man to his own head, to make what he can of the Scriptures,
and think he has salvation by living according to it. For, supposing that
Christianity which is delivered by the Scriptures, once subject to be
misunderstood and corrupted, (of which we have but too much experience) an
effectual course to preserve it will be, to found a Corporation or Society of
the Church, the members whereof, each in his own rank, should remain
entrusted by God (but, by the means of their predecessors from whom they
received Christianity) to preserve, both the profession of Christian truth, and
the exercise of Gods service inviolable.

Nor is it effectual to say, that the unity of the Church may fail, being
divided by Heresies and Schisms, insomuch that, that Baptism which is visibly
valide and good, shall be void of that invisible effect which it pretends.
For, it is not requisite that God should provide such means of salvation as
may be undefeisible; It is enough that they are reasonable. He that is Baptized
into a profession destructive to that which all Christians are bound, upon
their salvation, to believe, perishes for want of Faith, setting aside the
unity of the Church which his Herisie violates over and above. But, if the
unity of the Church be of such advantage to the maintenance of our common
Christianity, as it was before the dissolving of it, it is no marvel, if the
Baptism of Schismatics, though valide and good for the visible form, become
void of effect to them, who, by receiving it, make themselves parties to the
breach of the unity of the Church. We agree that the Power of the Church of
Rome is the occasion of many abuses in the Church. What they are, it is my
present business to enquire. He that bounds the interpretation of the
Scriptures, within the sense of the Catholic Church, shall not transgress the
Law of Gods truth in that inquiry. He that accepts the bounds of his own fansy
in stead of them, is it not just with God, if he die? If once common
Christianity, and the maintenance thereof depend so much upon the unity of the
Church, is it not reason that the benefit of it should depend upon the same? he
who, having attained the true Faith, and according to the same seeking the
unity of the Church, fails of it without any fault of his own, (if he who so
seeks it can be supposed to fail of it) has the difficulty of overcoming
his own ignorance to plead for his excuse. But, for them who have the consent
of all Christians from the beginning, to oblige them to undertake the
profession of Christianity by Baptism, but, out of hatred to the present
Church and the abuses of it, neglect baptism, upon presumption, that they have
the holy Ghost without it, or that the reason why the Apostles Baptized is now
ceased; I say, that for them, I suppose, there remains no just plea, seeing
that, by the unity of the Catholic Church, they ought to have been guided in
judging what is of the abuse of the present Church and what is not. And thus
that consideration which some seem to be, not without cause, scandalized at,
(when these effects of Christianity, the power whereof must necessarily consist
in an unfeigned heart, are made to depend upon an outward ceremony of Baptism
which the Church gives) is utterly voided, by that reason which the Apostle
insinuates when he says, that Baptism saves us, not the laying down of the
filth of the flesh, but that profession to God, which is made with a good and a
sincere conscience. Whereas those, that distinguish that faith which alone
justifies, from the profession thereof which baptism executes, oblige
themselves to make Baptism a ceremony, not whereon the promises of the Gospel
depend, but to signify that they are had and obtained without it. But to whom
signify? not to God, who gives them. Not to him that has them, and by his
faith knows he has them; Not to the Church, which can never be certified that
he has them indeed, and demands only to be certified that he wants nothing
requisite, to presume him to be such. So that, Baptism being required, only
to presume that a man is a Christian, and that presumption being legally had,
by any act, the Church or any that call themselves the Church can require, as
well as by being Baptized; If that be all, there is no reason to be given the
Sociniant, why Baptism should be necessary to the salvation of Christians, and
therefore why it should not be in their power to use it or not to use it. And
truly I do much marvel to see the Socinians, that have very well seen the truth
concerning the twofold meaning of the Law, literal and spiritual, (and the
promise of the land of Canaan tied to the carnal observation thereof as that
of everlasting life to the spiritual obedience of it) I say, I do marvel to
see, that in consequence hereunto, they should not infer, that God has
appointed a spiritual people of the Christian Church, answerable to Israel
according to the flesh, and that his spiritual promises should depend upon the
visible imtiation of eve^^* Christian into the body of that people (as the
right of his temporal promises depended upon their initiation into the body of
carnal Israelites) not according to birth but according to promise. Only,
when I consider on the other side, that, without regard to the Article of the
Catholic Church, which Christians make a part of their Creed, they rest in
such a communion, as their private persuasion of the sense of the Scriptures
shall be of force to produce; I do not marvail to see them not own the
consequence of their own principles, when they see it not stand with other
prejudices, which they have embraced.

I know there are two things will be objected here, the one is a mere
prejudice, that, by maintaining of free will, (by maintaining the Covenant of
Grace to consist in an act of it) we shall incur the Heresy of Pelagius: The
other, that, if the condition of the Covenant of Grace be an express
profession, vow and promise, to live, as well as to believe, according to what
Christ has taught, and that, without the use of reason, no such promise can be
of force or take place, then infants cannot be baptized, who cannot make, or
are tied to any such promise. To these I say no more but this, that, it is one
thing to answer arguments, and to give grounds of a contrary truth, another
thing to object difficulties, which, even the truth is not clear of, especially
that which comes by revelation from without, as Christianity does: Because, to
the verifying of revealed truth it is not necessary, that all things should be
alike clearly revealed, that are necessary to the clearing of objections; The
obligation of sticking to that which is revealed taking place no less, though
something belonging to the clearing of it be not so clearly expressed. And
generally, that which is evident, is never the less evident, because there is
something else evident, the evidence whereof I cannot reconcile with it. But,
this I say not, as though I meant to dismiss these difficulties, without that
which I conceive ought to satisfy; But, because I have learned of Aristotle,
that it is the fashion of the unlearned, to demand at once, both the grounds of
the truth, and the clearing of difficulties. A thing which might be done here,
but so, that another place would require it to be done again, and not without
balking the order which I intend. My design will bring me in due time to speak
with the Pelagians first; and afterward with the Anabaptists: To those points,
I will, remit the answer to these objections. Only, for the present, to the
former of these doubts I would say this; That all that has been said hitherto
concerns only that disposition, which, he that will come to salvation by
Christianity must be firmly qualified with, as the condition which the Covenant
of Grace requires. All which being supposed, it may and does still remain
questionable, how and by what means, in the nature of an effective cause, a
man becomes qualified with the disposition so required; To wit, whether by the
mere force of free will, or by the help of Gods Grace: And that being resolved,
upon what consideration, in the nature of a meritorious cause, those helps of
Gods grace are furnished; To wit, whether by the free Grace of God, or in
consideration of the merits and satisfaction of Christ, provided by Gods free
Grace, as the reason for which, and the measure by which, the helps of his
Grace are dispensed. To the latter of them I would only say here; That I
conceive, I have here maintained that reason for the necessity of Baptism to
the salvation of all Christians, upon which the necessity of the Baptism of
Infants is to be tied. Which is to say, in plain English; That I have by the
premises, re-established that ground for the necessity of Baptism in general,
the unsetling whereof, was the only occasion to make the necessity of
Baptizing Infants become questionable.

CHAP. VI. Justifying Faith sometimes consists in believing the truth.
Sometimes, in trust in God grounded upon the truth. Sometimes in Christianity,
that is in embracing and professing it. And that in the Fathers as well as in
the Scriptures. Of the informed and formed Faith of the Schools.
NOW; for those Scriptures wherein the nature of justifying faith is described,
by those effects, which the promises of the Gospel tender, I must here observe
that which all observe, that faith is many times made by the Scriptures, to
consist in believing the truth of Christ's Message which he came to preach;
Otherwhiles, nevertheless, in a grounded trust and confidence in the goodness
of God declared through Christ. For what is more manifest then that of S. Paul,
Romans X. 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe
with thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Where
first, that which the heart believes is the rising of Christ from the dead,
(signifying by one Article the rest of the Faith) then, that which the mouth
professes is nothing but the same truth. Therefore, neither the inward nor the
outward act of faith reaches any further, then the acknowledgment of the said
truth. So the Apostle 1 John V. 15. 10. Every one that believes that Jesus is
the Messi as is begotten of God. Who is he that overcomes the World, but he
that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? He that believes in the Son of
God has the witness in himself. He that believes not God has made him a
liar, because he believes not the witness which God bears of his Son.
Where, it is plain that no difference is made, between believing God, and
believing in the Son of God; and (...), is no more then to believe Gods
witness. Mat. IX. 28. Jesus faith to the blind; Believe you that I am able to
do this? They say unto him; yea Lord. Then touched he their eyes saying;
according to your faith be it unto you. That faith which consisted in believing
that he was able to do it. So of John the Baptist, our Lord Mat. XXI. 32. John
came to you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not, but the
publicans and harlots believed him; Which you seeing, repeated not afterward
that ye might believe him. And sure, they obtained the grace of Christ, that
believed John the Baptish. Our Lord to the father of the Lunatic, Mat. IX. 23.
24. If thou caust believe, all things are possible to him that believes. And
straight the father of the child crying out said; Lord I believe, help my
unbelief. If thou can believe that I am able to do this, as before. Mat. XI.
23. 24. He that shall say to this mountain, be thou removed, and cast into the
sea, and doubt not in his heart, but believe, that, what he says comes to
pass, is shall come to pass to him as he says. Therefore I say unto you,
all things that ye ask by prayer believe that ye shall receive, and they shall
come to pass to you. John V. 24. He that hears me and believes him that
sent me, has eternal life, and comes not into condemnation, but is passed
from death to life. XX. 31. These things are written, that you may believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believeing ye may have life
through his Name. Acts VIII. 37. Philip said to the Eunuch; If thou believe
with all thy heart thou may be baptized. He answered and said; I believe
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Upon which faith he is baptized. Romans IV.
3. Abraham believed God, (saying to him, Thy seed shall be as the stars of
heaven. Genesis XV. 5.) and it was imp^^^ed to him for righteousness.

On the other side, it is no rare thing to find faith described by trust and
confidence in God, and the effects of saving faith ascribed to it, as in the
description of the Apostle. Heb. XI. 2. Now faith is the substance of thing
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. That which he calls (...), is that
which the Hebrew expresses by (...) or, (...) both which are sometimes
translated in the Greek of the Old Testament, (...), signifying confidence, ^s
the resolution of Horatius Cocles, not giving way to the enemy, is called by
Polibius, (...), and in Livy, subsistere ^oste^^, is to stand the enemy. So
Heb. III. 14. (...) is the first confidence of Christians. and 2 Cor. VIII. 4.
(...) confidence in bosting. So Romans III. 25. Whom God has proposed as a
Propitiatory through faith in his blood. The propitiatory was set before the
Israelites to assure them of Gods help, according to the Law: So is Christ,
faith the Apostle, to them that have recourse to him with confidence, alleging
for themselves his blood shed for us. So, Jam. 1. 6. 7. But let him ask in
faith nothing doubting; For he that doubts, is like the sea waves tossed, and
stirred with the winds. Let not such a man think that he shall obtain any
thing of God. Where, the efficacy of prayer is ascribed to an assured
confidence of obtaining that which is desired, and therefore that belief
which, according to the words of our Lord Mar. XI. 23. 24. seems properly to
consist in this assurance, obtaines all prayers. And, not supposing S. Paul to
speak of the common faith of all Christians, when he faith; 1 Cor. XIII. 2. If
I have all faith, so as to remove mountains; yet, as he insinuates, that this
is done by that particular assurance and confidence, which that grace gives
him that has it; So must the conquest of the World by the common faith of
Christians be ascribed to that assurance and confidence, with which all
Christians expect Gods promises. And truly, through the manifold indifference
of signification, which words will afford them that will use them to their
purpose, it cannot be denied, that, to believe God, and to believe in God, is
sometimes all a thing. Yet it is very hard to believe that they are intended,
by the Scripture, to signify always the same thing, being so frequently and
ordinarily used with a difference. For if we consider, that, in very many texts
of the Old Testament, the nature of Faith is expressed by (...) and (...) with
the particle (...) by which speeches, trusting and confidence in some body, or
some thing, (particularly in God, when the speech is of religion) is signified
as well by (...), which signifies believing in God, it will be impossible to
imagine that all such expressions import no more, then barely believing those
things to be true, which God or man says, though sometimes believing God, and
believing in God may signify all one. The Apostle Hebr. XI. 33, 34, 35. thus
reckons the marveilous things, which through faith came to pass to the
Fathers of the Old Testament: Who by faith subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the
force of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, recovered of infirmities,
prevailed in war, put to flight armies of strangers, women received their dead
raised again, others were beaten to death, not expecting deliverance, that
they might obtain a better resurrection. And can it be reasonable to impute
these effects to the bare belief of Gods power or goodness, or whatsoever else
can be thought requisite for them then to believe, when as, that trust and
confidence in God which supposes that belief, is, both by the nature thereof
nearer to these effects, and, apt to dispose them to undergo those trials,
under which they found such deliverances? For, of them all we may say as the
Apostle of Elias, James V. 17, 18. Elias was a man subject to like passions
with us, and he earnestly prayed that it might not rain, and it rained not
upon the land for three years and six months: And again he prayed, and the
heavens gave rain, and the earth put forth her fruit. The confidence which
Elias had grounded upon Gods presence with him, made him first pray for
drought, and then for rain, which came to pass according to his saying, 1
Kings XVII. 1. that there should be neither dew not rain for those years but
according to his word; And so, the trust which the rest there mentioned had in
God, to obtain so great things as the Apostle says befell them; that, rather
then the belief of Gods power and goodness, or whatsoever else they were to
believe, chalenges so great effects to be ascribed to it.

I must now observe a third notion, which this word faith signifies, especially
in the writings of the Apostles, from whence this difficulty is in the first
place to be derived, which you shall find Hebr. X. 39. We are not of apostasy
to destruction, but of faith to the saving of the soul. What is opposite to
falling from faith, but perseverance in it? or what does all this Epistle, but
learn the Jews that were Christians, not to forsake Christianity, for the
persecutions raised against them by those of their kindred? So here, Faith is
Christianity, as apostasy the renouncing of it. Then S. Paul, when he says
that his Apostleship was for the obedience of faith in all nations, Romans I. 55.
and Romans XVI. 26. that the Gospel is made known to all nations for the
obedience of faith; must needs signify that submission, which those that
render themselves Christians do undertake, for the performing of that
condition, whereupon the Gospel tenders everlasting life; Of which he says
again Romans III. 27. that boasting is not excluded by the law of works, but by
the law of faith. For every law being a condition upon which a man enjoys some
benefit, in some society whereof he is a part, the law of faith must needs be
that condition, the undergoing whereof intitles all men to the common claim of
all Christians, which is their Christianity. So, when S. Paul exliorteth them,
Romans XII. 3. 6. to think of themselves unto sobriety, according as God has
divided to every one a measure of Faith; As again; If any man had the gift of
Prophecy, according to the proportion of faith; It is manifest that his
meaning in the latter text is; If any man had profited so far in
Christianity, that God thereupon, had bestowed on him the grace of prophesying.
For, though it is well known that God sometimes gave that grace to those, whom
he loved not to life, as Saul, and Balaam, and Caiaphas, and those who shall
say once, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, Mat. VII. 22? (which
notwithstanding, under Christianity, is limited to the profession thereof, as I
showed you in the beginning) yet it is as certain, that those whom God
imployeth to his People and Church, upon those commissions that require such
graces, those he uses to choose for their proficiency in true Godliness; The
prophets of the Old Testament being so ordinarily assumed out of those, that
had lived in the study of godliness under the discipline of the Prophets their
masters, that Amos VII. 22. alleges it as a strange thing, that God had made
him a Prophet of an heardsman, and that therefore he could not but do his
message: And is Saul among the Prophets? became a riddle rather then a Proverb,
not to be resolved but by another question, And who is the father of them? that
is, that God, the Father of all Prophets, could give his Graces where he
pleased, without means 1 Samuel X. 11. 12. And therefore at the election, of S.
Matthias to the office of an Apostle, to which this grace belonged, the
disciples pray; Acts I. 24. Thou Lord that know the hearts of all, show
whether of these thou have chosen: showing, the Christianity of the heart to be
the foundation of that choice. And when S. Paul exhorts to think soberly of
themselves, according to that measure of Faith which God had divided to every
one; it is manifest, that, this measure of faith extends to all graces, the
thought whereof may carry a man beyond the bounds of sobriety; That is, a'l
wherein Christianity consists. So that, the measure or proportion of Faith,
is the measure and proportion of Christianity, which being given by God, though
seconded with graces which all had not, he forbids them to be puffed up with.
Again, when the same Apostle hops that the faith of the Corinthians, being
increased, should be magnified abundantly through them, by his preaching the
Gospel to the parts beyond them according to his own rule 2. Cor. X 15 16. What
is that increase of faith, but the settling of them in their Christianity, which
when it were done, he hoped by their means, to find access to preach to their
neighbors. I do confidently challenge to this signification, that text of S.
Paul. Gal. V. 6. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith that is acted by love; Because I know, that no man
that understands Greek can deny, that (...) is in this place passive, and
because it cannot be understood without violence, how faith should be acted by
love, but when that profession, which we make at our Baptism, is performed for
no other motive but that of God and his love. What is then that work of the
Thessalonians faith which S. Paul commends, 1 These. I. 3. which he prays
God powerfully to fulfill, 2 These. II. 11. but the doing of that which they
undertook to do when they were made Christians? And what is the ministry of the
Philipians faith, Philip. II. 17. but the service which S. Paul did God, in
laboring to make them good Christians? And what is the faith in which he would
have the Corinthians to stand 1 Cor. XVI. 13? Wherein He and Barnabas exhort
the Churches to continue, Acts. XIV. 22? The bare profession of Christianity,
or the liabituated resolution of living according to it? By which reason,
whenever the profession of Christianity is signified by the name of Faith, in
the writings of the Apostles, (in which sense it stands as frequently there as
in any other) this habituated resolution is presupposed, because, upon
presumption thereof men are made Christians to the Church, as well as to God.
For, that no man is really and naturally a Christian to God, until he be so
legally to the Church; unless it be, when the effectual purpose of being so
is prevented by that necessity, which reasonably cannot be prevented. And
hereupon it is, that, though men believe the truth of Christianity, before they
are made Christians by being baptized, yet, even in the Scriptures themselves,
believers and Christians are many times all one. 1 Timothy V. 8. 16. If any man
provide not for his own, and especially those of his household, he has denied
the faith, and is worse then an infidel. If any believer, he or she, have
widows, let them support them, and let not the Church be charged. VI. 2. Those
servants that have believing masters, let them not despise them because they
are brethren, but serve them the rathe^ because they are faithful and beloved
Titus, I. 6. If any man be blameless the husband of one wife, having children
that believe, not blamed for riotousnesse, or disobedience. Apoc. XVII. 14.
They that are with the Lamb, are such as are called, and choice, and believers.
And hereupon, when the Apostle faith, John III. 5. (...); His meaning of,
necessity, is this; Beloved, thou shall do like a Christian what thou shall do
for the brethren and strangers: Because no private trust, but the common tie of
Christianity, obliges to do good to Christian travelers, of whom he speaks
there. And therefore Acts II. 38, 44. S. Peter having said to those that were
pricked in heart, upon conviction of the resurrection of our Lord; Repent ye
and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, unto remission of sins; And this
being done, it follows; But all the believers were together, and had all
things common,

Here I must not forget the style and language of the most ancient Fathers of
the Church, who, deriving from and referring all their studies to the
Scriptures, must needs speak in the same style with them in matters of
Christianity. I do not intend therefore to say, that they do not use the word
Faith, to signify the belief of those things which the Gospel declares to be
true; and that trust and confidence in God, through Christ, which the truth
thereof naturally tends to produce; Having showed, that both these
conceptions are frequently signified by the term of faith in the writings of
the Apostles, their masters: But I say further, that, it is oftentimes used by
them in this third sense which I spoke of last, to signify Christianity, that
is the profession thereof, presumed by the Church not to be counterseit. This
is very visible in Tertullian, in whose language. Faith and Baptism are many
times the same thing; de exhortatione castitatis, Cap. I. Nec secundas post
sidem nuptias permittitur nosse. And is not permitted to know any second
marriage after Baptism. De Pudicitia. Cap. XVI. Quae amisso viro Fidem
ingressa. She who entered into the faith having lost her husband; Is, that
became a Christian. Ibid. Cap. XVIII. Ante fidem and post fidem; Signifies,
before and after Baptism. Therefore in his Scorpiace, Cap. VIII. Talia a
primordio and pr^cepta and exempl^ debitricem Martyrii Fidem ostendunt. Such
precepts, such examples from the beginning show, that Faith is indebted in
Martyrdom. For it is Baptism that obliges a Christian to Martyrdom rather
then renounce the Faith. So S. Cyprian, following his master, Epist. ad
Antonianum. Si fidei calor praevalet. If the heat of faith prevail. And
De^opere and Eleemosyna; Credentium fides novo adhuc fidei calore fervebat. The
faith of believers was servent with the heat of faith being yet new. For so
Tertullian had said of Morcion in the place alleged in the first book, Cont.
Marc. IV. 4. In primo calore Fidei Catholicae; In the first zeal of the
Catholic faith; That is of his professing it, being reconciled to the Church.
for these things are properly attributed to the profession of Christianity: But
to barely believing that it is true, afar off, and at a great distance.
Cornelius in his letter to Fabius Bishop of Antiochia concerning Novatianus in
Eusebius Eccles. Hist. VI. 43. Thus describes Celerinus, having been
persecuted for the Faith, (...) A man who, having most stontly, through the
mercy of God, passed through all tortures, and confirmed the weakness of his
flesh by the strength of his faith; which strength is not in the mind that
judges Christianity to be true, but by the resolution of the will to stick to
it. Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. II. alleges Plato; that in civil commotions
the greatest virtue a man can meet with is Faith; To wit, in him whom a man
trusts, though the greatest happiness be Peace which makes it needless.
Inferring thus; (...) Whereby it appears, that the greatest of wishes is to
have peace, the greatest of virtues faith. Which he would not have alleged for
the commendation of the Christian Faith, had he not understood it to consist in
that trust which a man sincerely engages, as well as in that credit which a
man gives. Whereby we may understand, why, in another place, he will have the
title of (...) or the faithfall, for Christians, to hold the same reason with
that of Theognis; (when he commends a faithful friend; (...) That he is worth
gold and silver, in a civil dissension.) Because, he places the faith of a
Christian in the obligation of Christianity which he undertakes, when he
expresses that the honor, which it imports lies in the performing of it. As
Lydia when she entreats S. Paul in these terms Acts XVI. 15. If ye judge me
faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there; presses him, if he
think her a true Christian, (as she had professed her self) That is, faithful
to God and his Church, which she must be obliged to upon the trust that she
had taken upon her, in becoming a Christian. Therefore disputing not long before
against Basilides and Valeutinus the Heretics, who made men's faith to depend
necessarily upon the frame of their natures; (...) Therefore is faith no longer
the achievement of choice, if it be the advantage of nature, nor shall he that
believes not be justly recompensed being blameless, he that believes being no
cause: Nor shall the property, or otherwise, of faith or unbelief be subject
to praise or dispraise. And by and by; (...) But where becomes the repentance
of unbelievers, through which comes remission of sins? So that neither shall
Baptism be any more reasonable, nor the blessed seal (the gift of the holy
Ghost by Baptism) nor the Son, nor the Father. (from whom it is expected)
Only the distribution of natures according to them, will be found utterly
without God, not having, for the foundation of salvation, voluntary Faith. So
the voluntary engagement which Baptism expressly inacteth is that Faith whereby
a Christian claims the promises of the Gospel. I know the words of S.
Augustine may here be objected Enchirid. Cap. XXXI. De hac enim fide loquimur
quam adhibemus cum aliquid credimus, non quam damus cum aliquid pollicemur. Nam
and ipsa dicitur fides; Sed aliter dicitur non mihi habuit fidem; Aliter non
mihi servavit fidem. Nam illud est, non credit quod dixi: Hoc non fecit quod
dixit. For, says he, we speak here of the credit which we give, when we
believe something, not of that which we engage when we profess something. For
that also is called Faith. But a man meants one way when he says, he did not
give me Faith: Another way when he says, he kept not faith with me: For that
is, he believed not that which I said: This, he did not what he said. As if the
consideration of trust to be kept or not to be kept, were utterly impertinent
to the nature of justifying faith. For why were those that were not yet
baptized never called Fideles, or Believers, in the primitive Church, though
they professed never so much to believe the Christian faith, but only
Catechumeni, Hearers or Scholars, or at the most, Competentes or Pretenders,
when they put themselves forth actually to demand their Baptism? Why? but to
signify that the Church had not yet conceived confidence of their
Christianity, because they had not yet engaged themselves in the profession of
it. Which having solemnized by Baptism they were thenceforth called Faithful,
the Name signifying as well trusty as Believers, having proceeded so far as
to engage themselves to live as Christians, because they believed believed
Christianity to come from God as it pretends. There would be no end if I
should go about to produce the Fathers for this name of Christians. one place
or two shall serve for example. Tertullian De Exhort, castitatis, Cap. IV.
Spiritum quidem Dei etiam fideles habent, sed non omnes fideles Apostoli. Ergo,
qui se fidelem dixerat, adjicit postea; Spiritum Dei se habere, quod nemo
dubitares etiam de fideli. And truly even Christians have the Spirit of God,
yet are not all Christians Apostles. Therefore (S. Paul.) having called
himself faithful, (or a Christian) he adds afterward, that he has the Spirit
of God, which no man would question in a Christian. Whereupon in his Book, De
Jejuniis, Cap. XI. you find an Antithesis, or opposition between Spiritualis
and Fidilis; or a mere Christian, and one that had extraordinary indowments of
Gods Spirit. As on the other side, de praescript. Cap. XII. Quis Catechumenus;
quis Fidelis incertum est. Speaking of the heretics, among them, It is
uncertain who is a Professor, who a Scholar.

And truly he who considers all virtue to consist in the affection of the will,
not in the perfection of the understanding; Considering withal, that faith is
according to Clemens Alexandrinus where before, (...) a voluntary assent of the
soul; Or, (...) a voluntary presumption and assent unto piety; Shall find great
reason to consider what affection of the will it is wherein he places the
virtue of faith in a good Christian. Especially experience on the one side
showing, that heretics, schismatics, and badde Christians, (who cannot be
thought to be endowed with that faith which recommends good ones) do really and
truly believe all that truth, which their Sect or their lust is consistent
with; And reason on the other side showing, how the believing of it becomes
reconcilable with the interest of their sect, or of their lust. I suppose,
here, that the reason which makes the motives of says, though sufficient, to
become defeisible, is the Cross of Christ, attending the profession of
Christianity in time of persecution, but the performance of it always, because
always difficult and laborious, always the following of Christ with his
Cross on our shoulders. When the powers of the World profess Christianity,
then is the scandal of profession taken away, because they must cherish, (so
far must they needs be from persecuting) that which they profess; But the
scandal of the Cross in performing of it remains so much the more difficult
to be avoided, by how much a man is more subject to be tempted by evil
example, to hope for salvation without performing it. Therefore, as I showed
you asore, those who profess to believe the truth of Christianity many times
delayed their Baptism in the Primitive Church, whether as loath to retire to
that strictness of life which it required, or as sensible of their own
weakness, and desiring to find confidence of themselves, that they might walk
worthy of it, before they undertook it. Whereupon Tertullian, as I showed you,
advises to defer it, till a man were settled in a state of continence or
wedlock. And because the reason of this delay was doubtful, therefore there
remained in the Church some doubt of the salvation of those that died in this
estate. But to him that should resolve to wear the profession for a quality
rendering him capeable of the privileges of a Christian, by the laws of
Christian powers, but to fulfill it no further then the law should require, to
him is the scandal of Christ's Cross quite voided, though by as great a
scandal as that which diverts from Christianity, namely, that of Simon Magus,
who became a Christian for gain. He that expressly resolves not this within
himself, but, in the effect of his life and conversation has no more regard
to the reason of his Christianity then if he had expressly resolved it, is
necessarily of the same form, and all that care not to perform what they
undertake, according to the rank and degree of their negligence, reducible to
it. But besides it is manifest, that, during the heat of persecution, those
that believed not the whole faith of a Christian, that is heretics; those who,
for matters not concerning the Faith, broke the unity of the Church, that is
schismatics; were many times ready to suffer death for their sect, and for
that part of Christianity which it allowed; So far were they from dis-believing
it. Shall we say that any of these had in them the virtue of faith? Let us
consider what might move them to believe, and it will appear, first, that they
might be moved to believe that for their own sake; which a Christian believes
for Gods sake, then, that it can be no part of the virtue of Faith, to believe
the truth for a man's own sake and not for Gods. If sensuality can move a
worldly man to believe the truth, so long as the advantages of the world attend
it, well may it be said to be the grace of God that gives him sufficient reason
to believe (supposing for the present, not granting, that these reasons are the
helps of Gods free grace to bring men to believe) but, that he sets himself in
Gods stead, in believing that for his own advantage, which he should believe
out of obedience to God, and for his service, is not grace but wickedness, be
it never so true, never so holy that he believes. He that dis-believes part of
that which it is necessary to salvation to believe, he that breaks the unity
of the Church, upon true grounds though not necessary (for who can make a sect
without some pretense in our common Christianity?) he has the fulfilling of
his own will and singularity for his reward, and cannot claim that faith to be
a grace of God, which God rewards not. Nor is this to say, that the least
beginning of Faith is to be had without Gods Grace; (supposing for the present,
but not granting that the work of Salvation, is the work of Gods praeventing
Grace, from the very beginning of it) But, that there may be a real belief of
Christian truth in the understanding of him, that has no part of good will to
be a true Christian; The V^article of the Council of Orange providing only
Initium fidei ipsumque credulitatis affectum; That the beginning of Faith, and
the very inclination to believe be thought to come; Per inspirationem spiritus
sancti, corrigentem voluntatem nostram ab infidelitate ad fidem, ab impietate
ad pietatem; By inspiration of the Holy Ghost, correcting our Will from
unbeleefe to faith, from ungodliness to godliness. For, though, when first a
man is showed reason to believe, both these reasons, and the least inclination
to follow them be ascribed to Gods Grace, (because the scandal of the Cross
is to be overcome, to which all that inclination tends) yet when that
scandal is voided by falling upon as great, the assent of the understanding
remains the effect of humane discourse upon the sufficience of reasons
proposed, all the goodness that otherwise must have been ascribed to Gods
Grace in the inclination of the will, being void and dead. And all this, though
properly said of those that are converted to Christianity, at years of
discretion, seeing the difference between the cases, is punctually true in them
that are bred Christians, supposing them to have the Grace of the Holy Ghost,
by being baptized infants, and to have destituted the same afterward. The
belief that remains in them being merely the effect of humane discourse, upon
the motives of Faith (which are indeed helps of Grace) without us, without any
respect of submission to the will of God, for the effect of them within us;
which who gives, cannot be so wanting to the Grace of God, as we suppose these.

But, this being said, I shall now leave it to the Reader to judge, whether
this may have been the occasion; or, upon what other occasion it may be thought
to have come to pass, that, in the Doctrine of the School, the inward act of
believing, without the inward resolution of outwardly professing, has been
taken for the whole virtue of Faith; I say, without including that inward
resolution of the heart, whence, that outward profession proceeds when it is
true, and is always presumed by the Church to proceed, when the contrary
appears not: And that, from hence have proceeded the disputes concerning faith
without form, (which they will have to be that dead faith without works, which
S. James II. 17, 19, 20. compares with the faith of devils, that believe and
tremble) And faith informed by the love of God, which they will not have to
add any thing to the nature of it, so that it shall consist in any thing else
then in believing the truth of the Gospel; but, to qualify it, to justify him
that before was a sinner to God, as containing in it all the righteousness of
a Christian. But, though at the present, I determine not, what is true in this
position, what not; I must determine as to the point in hand, that the nature
of that faith, to which the Scriptures of the Apostles, and the most ancient
Fathers of the Church ascribe remission of sins, and that righteousness which
the Gospel holds forth;, together with other promises of the same, is no way
declared by this resolution, but darkened. For, it is manifestly requisite, for
a due account of the sense, as well of the most ancient Fathers as of the
Scriptures, that the nature of faith be understood to consist in that, to which
the said promises may duly be ascribed; which in both are so often, so plainly,
and so properly ascribed to faith, not to any thing which may stand with it, or
necessarily follow it. Now, though no man can resolve to profess Christianity,
without true love to God above all things, yet the Scriptures of the New
Testament plentifully show, that the holy Ghost, the Spirit of love is not
given to reside habitually with any but those that are baptized and so become
Christians, however necessary the actual assistance of the same holy Ghost is,
to go before and to induce them to become Christians, by undertaking what that
profession requires. Therefore, it will be necessary to distinguish not only
the faith, but the love, but the hope, the fear, the trust in God, and all
other graces begun in him, that begins to believe the Gospel to be true, but
is yet not resolved to undergo the profession of it, and the condition which it
supposes; From the same as they are in him, who, upon such resolution, is
become a Christian. And, if any man, upon this distinction, will say, that the
faith which he believed with before is faith without form, but formed
afterward, he shall easily have me to concur with him in it; Always
provided, that, whatsoever it is the Scripture attributes the procuring of the
promises of the Gospel to, that be understood to belong to the nature of that
faith which alone justifies, according to the Scriptures.

CHAP. VII. The last signification of Faith is properly justifying Faith. The
first by a Metonymy of the cause: The second of the effect. Those that are not
justified do truly believe. The trust of a Christian presupposes him to be
justified. All the promises of the Gospel become due at once by the Covenant of
Grace. That, to believe that we are Elect or Justified, is not Justifying Faith.
FOR, now it is time, to draw the argument which I purposed at first from these
premises, and to say; That the name of faith, by the effects which by virtue of
the Gospel promises it produces, being attributed, first, to the bare belief
of the Gospel, secondly, to that trust, which a Christian enters into by being
Baptized, and lastly to that trust in God through Christ which Christianity
warranteth; And the second of these naturally presupposing the first, as the
third both of them, the reason can be no other then this; Because the middle is
that which entitleth Christians to the promise of the Gospel, in respect
whereof, both the name of Faith, and the effects of these promises, are duly
and reasonably ascribed both to that which it supposes, and to that which it
produces, both to the cause, and to the effect of it. For, in all manner of
language, it is as necessary to use that change of words, and the sense of
them, which is called Metonymy by Humanists, and, by some Philosophers and
Divines of the Schools denominatio ab extrinseco, as it is impossible for any
man, to express his mind without that change of speech, which they call a
Trope, in any manner of Language. It is not to be imagined, that those fashions
of speech are only used, for ornament and elegance of language; The Humanists
themselves having taught us, that they are as our clothes, as well to cover
nakedness, as for comeliness. For, as long as the conceits of the mind may
be infinitely more then the words that have been used, it will be absolutely
necessary to strain the use of customary speech, as the conceit is not
customary which we desire to express. It will not, therefore, be strange, that
the name of faith should be used to signify three conceptions distinct, but
depending one on the other, so long as there are more conceptions then words;
It will not be strange, that the effects of that trust which a man enters
into, by undertaking the profession of a Christian, should be attributed, both
to that Faith which believes the Gospel to be true, (being a thing necessarily
presupposed to induce a man to undertake that engagement) and to that
confidence which a Christian has in God through Christ, being a thing
necessarily ensuing upon the undertaking of it, with a sincere and effectual
purpose.

But this would be strange, and no just reason to be given for it, were it not
granted that the second, to wit, that sincere undertaking the trust of a
Christian, is that, which really intitleth him to the promises of the Gospel.
For, is it not manifest to all Christians, that there are too many in the
world, whom we cannot imagine to have any due title to those promises, and yet
do really and verily believe the faith of Christ to be true, and Him and His
Apostles sent from God to preach it? If therefore we will have these Scriptures
which ascribe the promises of the Gospel to believing the truth of it to be
true, we must understand them by way of Metonymy, to be attributed to it, as of
right belonging to the consequence, which it is naturally apt to produce. Nor
is there any reason, that convinces me in this point more, then that which
Socinus gives, why justification should be attributed to that act of faith
alone whereby a man believes the Gospel to be true. His reason is because, he
that thoroughly believes the true God and his providence, which will bring all
men's doings to judgment, and render them their due reward of life or death;
that believes, our Lord Christ truly tendereth everlasting happiness to all
that take his yoke upon them, and draw in it, as long as they live; must needs
stand convict, that he is to proceed accordingly. I say no less; And I say,
that the preaching of the Gospel tenders motives, sufficient to convict all the
world of so much. But I say further, that, so long as, notwithstanding
sufficient conviction tendered notwithstanding a man's faith engaged, and his
own sentence past against himself if he fail, we see men, either not embrace
Christianity, or not perform it having embraced it; So long, right to Gods
Promises cannot be ascribed to this belief, though, in reason, whosoever is
convict of the truth cannot deny, but he ought to engage in Christianity and
hold it. The reason is, because we see men not always do that which resonably
they ought to do; And therefore, it is not enough to have submitted to
conviction what we ought to do: And the promises of the Gospel are not properly
ascribed to the belief of those truths, which convince men what they ought to
do, but to the consequence thereof, which, naturally and reasonably they are
apt to produce, but do not necessarily produce.

Again, on the other side; Trust and confidence in God, through Christ,
obtaines the promises of the Gospel, who denies it? But is this trust always
well grounded and true? Is it not possible for a man to imagine, his title to
the promises of the Gospel to be good when it is not? I would we had no cause
to believe how often it comes to pass; I grant, that, at the first hearing and
believing the Gospel, all the world have ground enough for that confidence,
that may save them from despairing to attain the promises of it: But, has he,
that has ground not to despair of being justified by faith, ground to
conside, as justified by faith? Or, is that all one, as to have ground enough
for that confidence, that they have right to the said promises? I suppose there
is a great gulf between both. For, when the preaching of the Gospel convinces
a man that he is lost unless he accept it, upon whatsoever condition it
tendereth; it is enough to keep any man that is in his wits, from dispairing,
to know, that there is a condition tendered by God, the accepting whereof will
entitle us to his promises: Because being sincerely tendered in Gods name, there
can be no bar, but on our part to the accepting of it. But, to have a well
grounded confidence of our own right and just title to the promises, it
behooves, that the Spirit of a man, which is in him, know, that there is in him
a sincere resolution of accepting the conditions; Which, how much the better it
is grounded and settled, so much more shall his confidence be secure. And, to
this confidence to bring a man from this former confidence, is as great a work,
as to induce a man that believes the world to come to prefer it before this.
For, I demand. Is he that sins against God, for love of this world, enemy to
God, as the Apostle says, James IV. 4. or not? Are not all men enemies to God,
when the Gospel calls them to become his friends? If not, why may they not be
saved without it? If so, can they have confidence in their enemy, by being
discovered to be his enemies? Indeed, the Gospel tendering conditions of peace,
they have confidence, that they may become friends with God, by embracing the
same. But, the confidence of friends, till they have embraced them, they cannot
have. It is therefore a dangerous a imposture, to invite an unregenerate man,
so soon as he is descovered so to be, to the confidence of a Christian in God
through Christ; As, not to invite him to that confidence, who may be a
Christian, is, to drive him to despair. For not presupposing his conversion
from sin to God, it is necessarily carnal presumption, not the confidence of
a Christian. And, if the Spirit of God should seal to any heart the promises of
the Gospel, not presupposing this ground, it were not possible for any man, to
discern the illusions of the evil Spirit from the dictates of Gods; The
conscience of our submission to those terms, being the only test, by which the
difference is discernable. For, all they that trust in thee shall not be
ashamed, but such as transgress without a cause shall be put to confusion.
Psalm. XXV. 2. To transgress without a cause, and, to put trust in God, are
terms incompetible. So that, wheresoever we are bid trust in God, (being
implicitly forbid trust in the world, or our selves, which, all that love the
world, or themselves, not in order to God, necessarily do) there is supposed
the ground of this trust, inconsistent with the conscience of sin. And though
this ungrounded confidence imports carnal presumption, yet may it occasion
despair. For, when the guilt of sin in the conscience, stronger then all
prejudicate opinion, and imposture of false doctrine, discovers that there is
no ground for the confidence of a Christian; and prejudice on the other side,
admits no recourse to that condition which is the ground of it; no marvel if
it seem impossible to attain peace of conscience, which appearance is the very
horror of despair. Seeing then, that, trust in God as reconcilable, and, for
the attaining of remission of sins, is the immediate fruit of the Gospel
believed, but, trust in God as reconciled, which is confidence of remission of
sins obtained, is necessarily the consequence of that faith which justifies,
(the justification of a Christian, being a sinner before a Christian,
necessarily implying remission of sins) what remains, but that the professing
of faith to God, for the undergoing of Christianity, be the condition upon
which the promises of the Gospel become due, that is to say, that faith which
alone justifies.

For, it is true, the Gospel tendereth several promises, remission of sins
in the first place, because the first thing, a man convict and sentenced to
death seeks, is his discharge; But, no man can have this discharge, but, upon
the same terms, he must become the son of God, (whether as regenerate by
grace, or as adopted to glory, that is, to the right and title of it) and, upon
the same terms be sanctified by the holy Ghost, which, as I showed before is
promised as a gift, that is, (habitually to be possessed) only to Christians
and to all Christians; And therefore, it is impossible to imagine a man
discharged of his sins, that is not, for the very same reason, and therefore
at the same instant, of nature as well as of time, regenerate, adopted, and
sanctified. It is indeed to be granted, that justification signifies something
different from all these promises, in as much as it is manifest, that in the
language of the Scriptures, it imports, not making of a man righteous, but
declaring him and accounting him righteous, treating him, and dealing with him
as righteous: All this is true; And yet I shall not grant, that it is so
properly understood to be the act of God, as sitting upon his throne of
judgment (whether according to mercy or justice) as, the act of God
contracting with m^n for everlasting life, upon condition, of submitting to the
Covenant of Grace and the terms of it. Indeed, the preaching of the Gospel
premises the general judgment to come, as tendering the way to come clear of
it, to wit by Christ, whom it declares judge of quick and dead. For S. Paul
thus proposes it to the Athenians, Acts, XVII. 30, 31. God, who eversaw the
times of ignorance, now charge all men every where to repent: Because he has
appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world righteously, by the man whom
he has appointed, making faith hereof to all, by raising him from the dead.
And, of the overture thereof which he made to Felix, S. Luke says, Acts XXIV.
25. As he discoursed of righteousness, and temperance, and judgment to come.
And S. Paul speaking of the Gospel Romans 1. 18. The wrath of God is revealed
from heaven, upon all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, that hold the
truth in unrighteousness. For, the preaching of the Gospel is that revelation
which here he means. And by S. Augustine, de Catechizandi Rudibus, we
understand, that, by the order of the Church, there was no instruction in
Christianity without conviction of the judgment to come; as that which
obliges to have recourse to Baptism for the avoiding of it. But when God
condescends to tender to those, whom he holds liable to his justice, terms of
reconcilement, plainly he comes down from his Throne of judgment, to deal
with his obnoxious creatures upon equal terms, or rather terms of
disadvantage, supposing what no Christian can deny, that the Gospel tenders
terms of our advantage. Nay he is content to go before, and to declare himself
tied before hand, if we accept; expecting our choice, whether we will be bound,
by accepting, or not, which is a difference, between the Law and the Gospel,
not unworthy to be observed. For, the Covenant of the Law was struck once for
all, with all those whom it concerned, to wit, the whole people of Israel at
once, their posterity, being by birth, subject to it. But when the Gospel is
preached, the Covenant of Grace is tendered indeed, but not inacted till some
man consent to become a Christian; and therefore, God first binds himself to
stand to the terms which he tenders, expecting whether man will accept them or
not. And though it be called the Covenant of Grace while it is but tendered,
yet it is not a Covenant, till it be inacted, between God and every one that is
baptized.

Seeing then, that no justification of sinners takes effect, but by virtue of
the Covenant of Grace, and that the act of Gods mere Grace inacts and gives
force to that Covenant, manifest it must needs be, that justification imports
the act of God, admitting him for righteous, who, setting aside that Covenant,
could not challenge, so to be held and dealt with. But if justification import
this act of God, shall it not therefore imply, shall it not suppose some
condition qualifying him for it? For, what challenge can he, whom the Gospel
overtaketh in sin, pretend, for reward by it, being engaged by Gods law, to
the utmost of his power otherwise? shall a man's conversion, from sin past, to
righteousness to come, challenge both the cancelling of his debts, and a
reward beyond all proportion of that which he is able to do, being obliged to
do it? But, shall that Gospel, which pretends to retrive righteousness into
the world, allow the reward of righteousness, without any consideration of it?
How then shall it oblige man to righteousness, being a law, that derogates
from any law of God that went before it, allowing all the promises it tenders
without any consideration of righteousness? For, I will not here stand to
dispute, whether the Covenant of Grace be a law or not; because, every contract
is a law to the parties, and this being between God and man, and supposing the
transgression of Gods Original law, necessarily abates the extent and force of
it. But, I will demand, what is, or what can be the righteousness of a sinner,
but repentance? Which, as it is part of righteousness, so far as it is
understood to be conversion from all sin; so, as it is understood to be the
conversion of sinners to Christianity, is all righteousness, because all
sinners are called to Christianity. Only with this difference, that, repentance
is the way to that end, which is righteousness; Repentance in fieri,
righteousness, in facto esse, according to the terms of the School And, is it
not righteousness for a sinner, to desire, to purpose, to resolve to be
righteous, for the time to come? Or can he, that is truly qualified a sinner,
be any other way truly qualified righteous? Therefore that resolution of
righteousness, which, he that sincerely undetakes Christianity must needs put
on; (the first part whereof is the profession of God, by Christ, the author and
rewarder of it) This, I say, is that which qualifies a Christian for the
promises of the Gospel, but always, by virtue of Gods free act in tendering the
Covenant of Grace, not by any obligation, which his creature can prevent him
with. And this is manifestly S. Paul's sense in Romans IV. 3, 11, 22, 23, 24.
where he alleges Moses, that Abraham's faith was imputed to him for
righteousness, and David, pronouncing him blessed unto whom God imputes no
sin; To show, that the Gospel declares Christians to be justified by faith
no otherwise, then the Fathers understood men to become Righteous, by Gods
grace, accepting that, which nothing could oblige him to accept, for
righteousness. For no man is so wilfully blind as to imagine, that the
Apostle speaks here of our Lord Christ the object, not of the act of faith;
whose words are; That Faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousness, and,
blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes not sin: And sin, as I take it,
stands not in opposition to the object of faith. And, when the Scripture says,
Psalm. CVI. 30, 31. Then stood up Phineas, and exercised judgment, and so the
Plague ceased: And this was imputed to him for righteousness, among all
posterities for evermore; It is manifest, that doing vengeance upon malefactors
is accounted a righteous thing for Phineas to do, though by Gods command, yet
without process of law. And, 1 Mac. 11. 52. Was not Abraham found faithful in
temptation, and it was counted to him for righteousness? And, shall not faith
be said to be imputed to him for righteousness, in the same sense, as we see
evidently, enduring temptation is imputed to him, and doing vengeance to
Phineas, for righteousness? That is to say, that the act of faith, not the
object of it (which act, what it is, and wherein it consists, I suppose is
decided by the premises) is imputed to Abraham, and his Spiritual seed for
righteousness.

I have said nothing all this while concerning that opinion, which makes that
faith which alone justifies, to consist in believing, that a man is justified,
or predestinate to life, in consideration only of Christ's obedience imputed to
him. And truly, having said so much, why it cannot consist in having trust and
confidence in God through Christ; I do not think I need say much more to it.
First, whether or no a Christian can have the assurance of faith, that he is
for the present justified, or, that he is from everlasting predestinate to
life, is a thing that I intend not here, either to grant, or to deny; Nothing
hindering me, supposing for the present, but not granting, that such assurance
may be had, upon that supposition to dispute, that he is not justified by
having that assurance, but, that, by being justified he obtaines it. For, were
it not the strangest thing in the world, that any knowledge should produce the
object of it, which it supposes? Can any reason allow the effect to produce
the cause, or any thing to depend upon the consequence of it? No more can
Christianity allow; the assnrance of this truth; I am justified (supposing it
to be true) to be the ground why it is true? And if any man say that justifying
faith is not the assurance of this truth, I am justified, but of this truth, I
am ^redestinate to life, (the reason being; Because the obedience of Christ,
appointed for the salvation of the elect alone, is imputed to him once for all
to life, not only for the present to righteousness) can any reason be given,
why this reason should not take effect from everlasting, but depend upon the
knowledge of it, wherein justifying faith is said to consist? For, if the only
consideration that intitles him to the promises of the Gospel be the obedience
of Christ, why shall not that right take place from the same date, from which
the consideration tendered for it takes place? Why should not the opinion of
the Antinomians, at least, that which I make to be ground of that Heresy take
place, rather then this of Presbyterians? For, both of them being equally
destructive to the Gospel of Christ, that which agrees best with it self, (the
several assumptions whereof, are most consistent with, and consequent to one
another) is doubtless the more receivable.

Now, whether we make justification, (granted from everlasting to the elect for
whom alone Christ was sent) to go before faith, as the object goes before the
knowledge and assurance of it; Or, whether we make it to depend upon faith,
(though passed merely in consideration of the obedience of Christ, deputed for
the salvation of the elect alone) there will remain no obligation upon the
elect to perform any obedience to God, being entitled to, and assured of
salvation, before it, and without it. For, the Gospel is the last Law of God,
derogatory to any declaration of his will antecedent to it, and not suffering
any other to take place, further then is provided by it; So that, supposing
that God has published salvation to the elect merely in consideration of
Christ, without requiring any terms at their hands; Well may it be said, that
notwithstanding, he may determine them to do those things, which he would have
them do that shall be saved; But it cannot be said, that he can oblige them to
any condition, to be performed of their free choice; Or, consequently, that
there can remain any difference between good and bad in the doings of them,
who are free from all obligation to the means, because entitled to the end
without them. And truly it is more modesty to say, that the actions of the
elect, to which God determines them upon these terms, are not good, then to
say, (as, by consequence it must be said) that the actions of the reprobates
are bad, which upon these terms, are not their actions but Gods, nor imputable
to any will of theirs, but to his. But, this inconvenience being unavoidable,
whether we make justification to depend upon that faith, which consists in
assureing us of the same, (and that is to make an object to depend upon the act
which it produces) or that faith to depend upon it, as included in
predestination to li^e; both of them being destructive to Christianity, it is
but a poor plaster, by contradicting a man's self, to seem to salve so great an
inconvenience. And truly it is much to be wondered at, how those that profess
nothing but Scripture could ever persuade themselves of an imagination, for
which there is nothing to be alleged out of the whole tenor of the Scriptures.
Whatsoever can be produced out of the Old Testament, for that trust, which the
people of God might, or ought to have in God, for the obtaining of his
promises; whatsoever out of the New, for that peace and security with which
Christians may and ought to expect the world to come, (supposing but not
granting, all that can be pretended thereby) do but demand where it is said
that, a man has this trust, this peace, this security by having it, and all
will be mute. And therefore, having showed, that the trust and peace of a
Christian supposes that ground upon which he is justified, I will spend no
more words to show, that the knowledge and assurance of justification or
predestination supposes the being of it, and that, the ground whereupon it
takes place.

CHAP. VIII. The objection from S. Paul; We are not justified by the Law nor by
Works, but by Grace and by Faith. Not meant of the Gospel, and the works that
suppose it. The question that S. Paul speaks to, is of the Law of Moses and
the Works of it. He sets those works in the same rank with the works of the
Gentiles by the light of nature. The civil and outward works of the Law may be
done by Gentiles. How the Law is a Pedagogue to Christ.
THE last reason, whereby I prove my intent, consists in the assoiling of that
Objection, which is alleged from the disputes of S. Paul's Epistles, arguing,
that a Christian is not justified by the Law, or, by the works of the Law, and
therefore, by Grace, and by Faith: For, he that is justified by engaging
himself to profess Christianity, and to live according to the same, must needs
be justified by performing his engagement; Unless a man would say, that he is
justified by making a promise which he never observes, and which it concerns
him not to keep, being once justified by making of it. And truly, having said,
that God admits a man into the state of his Grace, in consideration of the act
of undertaking this profession; I do not only grant, but challenge for my
privilege to maintain, that he hold him in the same state, in consideration of
the act or acts whereby he performs the same. And therefore to the Objection,
I return this in general: That I do not grant any man to be justified by any
thing that supposes not of the Gospel of Christ, since the publishing of it;
That is, not by such works as can be done by him, that has not yet admitted
and embraced the Gospel of Christ, and that by virtue of that Grace of God,
which sets on foot the Covenant of Grace. For, the Law going before the Gospel,
and being unable to produce that obedience which God would accept in lieu of
the World to come, further then, as containing in it self the Gospel, and the
effects of it; It is manifest, that righteousness cannot be attributed to the
Law, nor the works of the Law. And yet, if we consider, that the Gospel it self
is a law of God, whereby he ties, at least himself, to certain rerms, upon
which he declares, that he will be reconciled with his enemies; There is no
reason to understand when S. Paul says, that a man is not justified by the
Law, or the works of the Law, that he means to deny, a Christian to be
justified by doing according to the Gospel, which is the law that God pretends
to introduce, in stead of that law, by which the Apostle denies any man to be
justified. For, all Christianity acknowledges, that the Gospel is implied in
the Law, neither could the justification of the Fathers before and under the
Law, by Faith, be maintained otherwise: And therefore it is no strange thing to
say, that, under the Law, there were those that obtained that righteousness
which the Gospel tendereth, though not by the Law, but by the Gospel; which
under the Law, though not published, was yet in force to such, as by means of
the Law, were brought to embrace the secret of it. But it cannot theretherefore
be said, that they were justified by the Law, or by the works of it, but by
Grace, and by Faith, though the Law was a means that God used, to bring them
to the Grace of Faith.

And therefore, when the Apostles inferences are employed, to fortify this
argument; To wit, that, if a Christian be justified by works depending upon the
Covenant of Grace, then he has whereof he may glory, which Abraham, that was
justified by Faith, had not; Then has he no means to attain that peace and
security which the Gospel tendereth, all having the conscience of such works as
do interrupt it; I do utterly deny both consequences. For, I say, that the
works that depend upon the Gospel are neither done without the Grace of God,
from whence the Gospel comes; neither are they available, to justify him, whom
the Gospel overtakes in sin, of themselves, but by virtue of that Grace of
God from whence the Gospel comes. Now, I challenge the most wilful
unreasonable man in the world, to say, how, he that says this challenges any
thing, whereo^ he may glory without God, who acknowledges, to have received
that which he tenders from Gods gift, and the promise which God tenders in lieu
of it, from his bounty and goodness: To say, how a man can be more assured,
that he is in the state of Gods grace, then he can be assured of what himself
thinks and does. For not to decide at present how, and how far a man may be
assured of Gods grace, whatsoever assurance can be attained, must be attained,
upon the assurance which a man may have of his own heart and actions, and that
as S, Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. 10. No man knows what is in a man but the Spirit
of a man that is in him. For, if it be said; that this assurance is from the
Spirit of God, and therefore supposes not so much as the knowledge of our
selves; I must except peremptorily, that which I premised as a supposition in
due place, that no man has the Spirit of God but upon supposition of
Christianity; And therefore no man can know, that he has the Spirit of God,
but upon supposition, that he knows himself to be a good Christian, otherwise,
it would be impossible for any man, to discern in himself between the dictates
of a good and bad Spirit, seeing it is manifest, that, among those that
profess Christianity, many things are imputed to the Spirit of God which are
contrary to Christianity. Now, of the sincerity of that intention wherewith a
man ingages to live like a Christian, a man may stand as much assured, as he
can stand assured of his own confidence in God, or that he does indeed believe
himself to be predestinate to life. And therefore, it is no prejudice to that
security and peace of conscience which the Gospel tendereth, that it
presupposes this engagement, and the performance of it. This answer, then,
proceeds upon these two presumptions; That the grace of Christ, which is the
grace of God through Christ, is necessary to the having of that faith which
alone justifies; Which the heresy of Socinus denies with Pelagius And, that it
justifies not of it self, but by virtue of that grace of Christ, that is, the
grace which God declares in consideration of his obedience. These presumptions,
it is not my purpose to suppose gratis, without debating the grounds upon which
they are to be received, having once purposed to resolve wherein the Covenant
of Grace stands. But I must have leave to take them in hand in their respective
places, and, for the present, to dispatch that which presses here, which is to
show, that the intent of S. Paul, and the rest of the Scriptures, which he
expounds most at large is this; That a Christian is not justified by the Law of
Moses, and those works that are done precisely by virtue thereof, not including
in it the Gospel of Christ; but by undertaking the profession of Christianity
and performing the same, (which is in his language, by faith without the works
of the Law) and therefore, consequently, by those works, which are done by
virtue of this faith, in performance of it.

And first, I appeal to the state of the question in S. Paul's Epistles, what
it is the Apostle intends to evict, by all that he disputes; And demand, who
can or dare undertake, that he had any occasion to decide that which here is
questioned, upon supposition that a Christian is justified by the Covenant of
Grace alone, which the Gospel tendereth; Whether by Faith alone, which is the
assurance of salvation, or trust in God through Christ; Or by Faith alone which
is the undertaking of Christianity, and living according to the same? For, it
is evident in the Scriptures of the Apostles, how much ado they had to
persuade the Jews, who had received Christ, that the Gentiles which had done
the like were not bound to keep the Law, which they, it is evident, did keep;
These had no ground, had they understood, from the beginning of their
Christianity, that their righteousness and salvation depended not upon the
keeping of it, under the Gospel of Christ. It is evident, that the trouble
which Jewish Christians raised, in the Churches to whom those Epistles are
directed, which dispute this point fullest, upon occasion of this difficulty,
was the subject and cause of directing the same. What cause then can there be,
why these Epistles should prove, that a Christian is not justified by such
works as suppose the Covenant of Grace, when as the disease they pretend to
cure, consists, in believing to be justified by the works of Moses Law, which
supposes it not? For, it is evident, that had it been received as now, that
Moses Law is void, the occasion of this dispute in these Epistles had ceased,
what ever benefit besides might have been procured by them, for succeeding ages
of the Church. Is it not plain that the pretense of S. Paul, in the Epistle to
the Romans, is this, that neither the Gentiles by the Law of Nature, nor the
Jews by the Law of Moses, can obtain righteousness, or avoid the judgment
of God, and therefore, that it is necessary for both to embrace Christianity?
He that reads the two first chapters, cannot question this. In the fourteenth
chapter, together with the beginning of the fifteenth, you shall find him
resolving, upon what terms, these two sorts of Christians were to converse with
one another; And through the body of it, upon what grounds the Gentiles are
invited to the Covenant of grace, which the Jews began then to refuse.

This being the business of the Epistle, the drift of it is manifest, whether
righteousness and salvation come by the Law or the Gospel, by Judaisme or by
Christianity. The subject of the Epistle to the Hebrews is this. The Jews being
privileged by the laws of the Empire in the exercise of their Religion,
disclaiming those of their nation that had professed Christianity, found means
by the power of the Romans, to constrain them, by persecution, to return to
Judaisme. The question is, whether they can obtain salvation turning Jews
again, which, they persuade themselves they might obtain being such, before
they embrace Christianity: That this is the question, let him that will take
the pains to compare the proposition of it, in the the beginning of the II.
Chapter, and the reasons which it is pursued with until the sixth, with the
conclusion of the dispute in the thirteenth; (Considering also that discourse
which follows, of the intent and effect of the Law;) Let him, I say, give
sentence. If he refuse me, I will be bold to say of him; That no man is so
blind as he that will not see. With the Churches of Galatia, when S. Paul writ
to them, the case was somewhat otherwise. It is manifest that they consisted
partly of Gentiles partly of Jews. The words of the Apostle require it; Gal.
IV. 8, 9. But then truly, not knowing God, ye served those, which indeed are no
Gods; But now having known God, or rather being known of God, how turn ye back
to those weak and beggarly elements, to which ye desire to be in bondage
again. For, neither could they serve those that were not Gods indeed, unless
Gentiles, nor unless Jews, return to those elements. It is manifest, that,
to avoid persecution for the profession of Christianity, those whom S. Paul
writes against would have them be circumcised; and so, conform themselves so
far to the Law, that, those who raised that persecution might be satisfied at
their hands. Those that would make a fair show in the flesh, constrain you to
be circumcised, only that they may not be persecuted with the Cross of
Christ. For, neither themselves that are persecuted do keep the Law; But would
have you circumcised that they may glory in your flesh: Says S. Paul, Gal. VI.
12, 13. And again, Gal. V. 11. But I brethren, if I still preach circumcision,
why am I still persecuted? For then the scandal of the Cross is void. And is
not the question then between the Law and the Gospel, between Judaisme and
Christianity, whether of them intitles to salvation and righteousness? And
shall the excluding of the Law exclude those works which suppose Christianity,
or rather include what ever the Gospel includes or inferres?

Consider what opinion the Jews had then entertained, to alienate them from
Christianity then, and to divide them from it ever since. So long as the nation
stood, it is manifest, how much ado there was to hold them to the worship of
the true God, which was the ground of that Law by which they held the Land of
promise. Being carried to Babylon, and seeing the menaces of the Law come to
pass, and revolving within themselves those things, which Isaiah and other
Prophets had preached against the worship of Idols (upon that occasion it
seems, but certain it is (they never departed from the worship of one true God
afterward. But then, with the study of his law, after their return from
captivity came in a curio^ity of learning and keeping all punctillos, which the
observation of it could require; As supposing the wisdom of the Nation, which
the Law it self magnifieth, Deuteronomy. IV. 6, 8. together with their righteousness
and holiness to consist in these niceties; Whereas this was, indeed, but the
civil and outward observation of those precepts, of the external worship of
one God, and civil conversation among themselves, to which the civil happiness
of the land of promise was tied, as I showed in the first book. Hereupon our
Lord to his disciples, Mat. V. 10. Unless your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the
kingdom of heaven. And again, to show, that the disease began long before,
though then it was come to the height, he reproves his hearers with these words
which the Prophet Esaias had charged upon his time, Es. XXIX. 13. In vain they
worship me, teaching for doctrines the Traditions of men. Mat. XV. 9. Mar. VII.
7. Where he instanceth, in the washing of cups and pots according to the Law,
of brass vessels, and beds, of the hands before meat, and after they came from
market, according to the tradition of the Elders, which the Apostle 1 Pet. I.
18. calls, their vain conversation delivered from their fathers. This is
manifestly that righteousness whereof S. Paul says, Romans X. 3. That the
Jews, not knowing the righteousness of God, and willing to establish their
own righteousness, were not subject to Gods righteousness. For, as it is
evident, that, not to be subject to the righteousness of God, is neither more
nor less, then, to refuse the Gospel of Christ; So their own righteousness,
which they would establish, in opposition to the same, must needs be that
righteousness which they might be possessed of by virtue of the Law. And indeed,
it is not possible to imagine that the Jews should so punctually and
superstitiously reverence all these nice observations, traditions, and
customs, which the Scribes and Pharisees brought in, to limit the generality
of Moses Law, and to determine every clause, circumstance, and tittle,
according to which it should be observed, (which now that vast bulk of their
Talmud contains) if they did not think, that true wisdom and righteousness
before God, is placed in the nice keeping of these curiosities. Nor can it be
doubted, that the undervaluing of them by reason of Christianity, is that which
first occasioned them to take offense at the Gospel, and to this day maintains
them in contradiction to it.

It can therefore by no means be doubted, that this is the Law, and therefore
the works which S. Paul means, when he argues, that we are not justified by
the Law, nor the works of the Law, but by grace and by Faith. For, it is most
manifest, that he instances diverse times in those precepts which are not of
the law of nature, nor can the works of them be counted to belong to the
inward obedience of God, and his worship in Spirit and truth; But merely
forms, which God had tied them up to his service with, that they might have no
occasion to seek after strange Gods; And customs, whereby he had so limited
their civil conversation to one another, that, being divided thereby from other
nations, they might have no occasion to learn their Gods. So S. Paul, Gal. IV.
9. 10. But now having known God, or rather being known of God, how turn ye back
again to those weak and beggarly rudiments to which ye desire to be in
bondage again. Ye observe days, and months, and seasons, and years. For,
the observation of legal Festivals, according to the months and seasons of
the years, is indeed obedience to that God, by whose Law the difference is
made. But, when their conceits of themselves transports them to imagine, that
God esteems them for these things, whereby he has differenced them from other
nations, and, that it cannot stand with that esteem, that he should receive the
Gentiles into favor upon undertaking that spiritual obedience which Christ
publishes, not tying that to the same; Worthily are they called by the
Apostle, weak and beggarly rudiments, that did only prepare them to this
obedience, by tying them to the true God and his outward service. And is not
the precept of circumcision, in the first place, which obliges to all the
precepts, and intitles to all the promises, of this nature? Hear S. Paul to the
Philipians, III. 3. 6. among whom this leaven began to spread^ We are the
circumcision, says he, that serve God in the Spirit, and glory in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. Though I have confidence in the
flesh also; If any other man seem to have confidence in the flesh, I more.
Circumcised the eighth day, of the race of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an
Hebrew of Hebrews, also concerning the Law a Pharisee, as concerning zeal, one
that persecuted the Church, as concerning righteousness that is by the law,
blameless. Are not all these privileges of that nation by virtue of Moses
Law, and of circumcision, which obliges to it? And is not that confidence of
righteousness which is by the Law, which S. Paul disclaimes, (though he claim
as good a title to it as any Jew beside) I say, is not that it which moved the
Jews, out of zeal to the Law, to persecute the Church? And, can that
righteousness which moves to persecute Christianity be thought to presuppose
it? Therefore, what S. Paul means by confidence in the flesh we must learn
from the Epistle to the Hebrews IX. 9. 10. Where the tabernacle is called a
Parable, or figure for the then present time, in which gifts and sacrifices
were offered, which could not profit him that ministered as to conscience, being
only imposed upon meats and drinks, and several Baptismes, and
righteousnesses of the flesh, until the time of reformation came. Where,
(...), are those carnal and bodily rites, which obtain that carnal
righteousness, which answers the carnal and earthly promises of the Law;
and were mistaken by them, for means of obtaining resurrection unto life, and
the world to come, which, under the Law so given, they had nevertheless just
cause to expect, though not in consideration of such observations.

Another argument hereof we have from S. Paul, which to me seems peremptory, in
that he opposes that grace and faith, whereby Christians are justified, to
those works, which Gentiles, by the Law and light of nature were able to do;
Which works, certainly, do not suppose Christianity. Ephesians. II. 8, 9. For, by
grace are ye saved through the Faith, and that not of your selves, it is Gods
gift. Not of works, least any man should glory. There is nothing moremanifest,
then, that the Church of the Ephesians, when S. Paul wrote this Epistle, was
gathered of those that had been Gentiles, as you may see by Ephesians. II. 11, 12.
III. 1, 6. Wherefore, when S. Paul says to them, being presently Christians,
that they were not saved by works, least they should glory; it is manifest,
that his meaning is, that their conversation before the Gospel came, could not
move and oblige God to provide them the means of Salvation which it tendereth.
Again, S. Paul exhorting Timothy to suffer hardship for the Gospel, according
to the power of God, who, says he, has saved us and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose, and the
grace that is given us in Christ Jesus before everlasting ages; 2 Timothy I. 9.
speaks of the same Ephesians whose Pastor Timothy was at that time. But most
fully Titus III. 4, 7. But when the goodness and love to men of God our
Savior appeared, not of works which we had done in righteousness saved he
us, but, according to his own mercy, by the laver of regeneration, and renewing
of the holy Ghost, which he shed upon us richly, through our Savior Jesus
Christ, that being justied by his grace, we might become heirs of everlasting
life, according to hope. For, that those whom Titus had in charge were
Christians converted for the most part of Gentiles, appears by the Apostles
words, Titus I. 10. For there be many and those rebellious, vain talkers and
cheaters, especially they of the circumcision, whose mouths must be stopped.
And in the words that go next before the passage alleged, there is a lively
description of the conversation of the Gentiles; For, of Jews he could not
have said; We also were once foolish, disobedient, wandering out of the way, in
slaved to diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and
hating one another. Titus, III. 3. Seeing then that it concerns the Gentiles as
well as the Jews, which the Apostle argues, that men are not justified by
works, but by grace and by faith, it is manifest, that he means such works as
the Gentiles might pretend to no less then the Jews, and that while they were
Gentiles, because he speaks of that estate in which the Gospel overtook them;
And therefore, when S. Paul denies that men are justified by works, he means
those works which men are able to do before they are acquainted with the
preaching of the Gospel, whether by the light and Law of nature, or by the
mere instruction of Moses Law.

For, though the law of Moses contain in it many moral precepts of true, and
inward, and spiritual obedience, the observation whereof is indeed the worship
of God in Spirit and in truth; Yet we must consider, that the same precepts are
part of the law of nature, written in the hearts even of Gentiles. And we must
consider further, that these precepts may be obeyed and done two several
ways; First, as far as the outward work, and the kind and object of it
goes; and further, as far as the reason of it, derived from the will and
command of God, and the intention thereof directed to his honor and service.
Which purpose of heart cannot be in any man, but him that loves God above this
world, making him the utmost end of all his actions. I say then, that of those
moral precepts of Moses law, which are parts of the law of nature, the outward
and bodily observation goes no further then the observation of other rituall
and civil precepts of the same law; And therefore, is to be comprised in the
account of those works of the Law by which S. Paul denies, deservedly, that we
are justified before God. But, the inward and Spiritual observation of them,
(at least, the purpose and intention of it) as it depends upon the grace of
Christ, which the Gospel publishes, so must it necessarily be included in that
faith, which, in opposition to the works of the Law, qualifies Christians for
those promises which the Gospel tendereth.

But that which must remove all doubt, of the Apostles meaning, in this point,
must be the removing that difficulty, which held the Jews then, and still
holds them in the opinion, of obtaining righteousness and salvation by the
Law. For certainly, could S. Paul have persuaded them, that the ancient
Fathers from the beginning, of whose salvation theyh could not doubt, though
under the Law, yet obtained not salvation by the law, but by the Gospel, it had
been an easy thing for him to have persuaded them to it. The Apostles intent
therefore is, to persuade them to that, which, because it was hard to persuade
them to, therefore they continued Jews, and refused to become Christians. Now
let us suppose that which I have premised, that the Law expressly covenanteth
only for the worldly happiness of that people in the land of promise,
requiring, in lieu of it, only the outward and civil observation of the law.
But, the sum of that outward observation thereof, which is expressly
covenanted for, consisting in the worship of one God (whose providence, in the
particular actions of his creatures, it presupposes, maintaining also a
Tradition of the immortality of man's soul, and of bringing all men's actions to
account) shall not all that are born under this Law, stand necessarily convict,
that they owe this God that inward and spiritual obedience, wherein his
worship in Spirit and truth consists? And seeing the same God tenders them
terms of that reconcilement and friendship, which maintains them in that state
of this world, whereby they may be able and fit to render him such inward and
spiritual obedience, punctually making good the same to them; Have they not
reason enough to conclude, that they shall not fail of his favor and grace,
so long as they proceed in a course of such obedience? How much more, having
the examples of the ancient Fathers, the doctrine which they delivered by word
of mouth, the instructions of the Prophets, (whom God raised up from time to
time, to assure them, that this was that principal intent of Gods law, though
it made the least noise in it) how much more, I say, must they needs stand
convict, both of their own obligation to tender God this obedience, and also.
that, tendering it, they could not fail of Gods favor toward them, even as to
the life to come. Though this cannot be said, to be the Gospel of Christ
because it contains not the dispensation of his life in the flesh, nor the
express tender of the life to come, in consideration of the profession of his
Name, and of living according to his doctrine; Yet, if it be truly said, that
the Gospel is implied and veiled in the Law, either this signifies nothing, or
this is the thing that it signifies. For upon this ground, it is manifest, that
there was always a twofold sense and effect of Moses Law, and, by consequence,
a twofold law; By virtue of which difference, whereas it is said, Heb. VII. 16.
That the legal Priesthood stood by the law of a carnal precept; And the
precepts thereof are called, (...), as I said before; And the blood of bulls and
of goats, and the ashes of the red heifer, are said to sanctify to the
cleansing of the flesh. Heb. IX. 10. 13. On the other side, S. Paul says, that
the Law is spiritual, and that the commandment was given to life, and
therefore discovers concupiscence to be sin. Romans VII. 7, 10, 14. And S.
Steven says to his people, of Moses, that he received living oracles to give
unto us, Acts VII. 38. And S. Paul of himself and his fellow Apostles,
delivering the doctrine of the Gospel; Which things we speak, says he, not
with words taught by man's wisdom, but taught by the holy Ghost, comparing
spiritual things with spiritual things; 1 Cor. II. 13. that is the spiritual
things which the Gospel expresses, with the same spiritual things implied by
the law; As I showed before, that the same S. Paul's meaning is, that the man of
God is perfectly furnished to every good work, when he is able to make the
Scriptures of the Old Testament useful, to instruct, reprove, teach, and
comfort Christians in Christianity. 2 Timothy III. 16, 17. And truly, whatsoever
is said in the writings of the Apostles, or the sayings of our Lord Christ,
(supposing the difference between that which is Spiritual, and that which is
carnal or literal in the Scriptures) must be expounded upon this ground of
the Apostle, that all the promises of God are yea in Christ, and in him amen,
as S. Paul says, 2 Cor. I. 20. That is to say, that the temporal promises of
Moses law were intended for, and fulfilled in the eternal promises of Christ's
Gospel. For, upon this ground, there is a Jew according to the letter, and a
Jew according to the Spirit, that is a Christian. Romans II. 28, 29. There are
sons according to the flesh, and sons according to promise. Romans IX. 8. and he
that was born of the bondmaide, was born according to the flesh, and persecuted
him that was born of the free woman according to the Spirit; Gal. IV. 23. 29.
For this reason it is said; That the Fathers all eat the same spiritual meat,
and drank the same spiritual drink, as we Christians do; For they drank of the
spiritual rock that followed them, which rock was Christ. 1 Cor. X. 3, 4.
Because, as Christianity was intended by the law, so was Christ by the figures
of the law; neither is there any other reason to be given, why the letter
kills, but the Spirit quickneth, as S. Paul affirms, 2 Cor. III. 6. but
this; Because, as the law in the literal sense, provides no remedy for those
that fall into Capital crimes, but leaves them to the justice of the law; So
the Spiritual sense of it was not available to bring men to life, though
available to convict them of sin; So that the Jews, (whom S. Paul pursues as
guilty of sin, by the conviction of the law) stand noverthelesse convict,
that they were never able, however convict of sin, to attain righteousness by
the help of it alone; and therefore, that they are no less obliged to have
recourse to the Gospel, and to embrace Christianity, then the Gentiles
themselves, who had no other pretense to avoid the judgment of God which the
Gospel publishes.

This is the intent of S. Paul in the first chapters of his Epistle to the
Romans, which he recapitulates in this general inference, Romans III. 9. We
have pleaded before, that Jews and Gentiles, both are under sin. And again,
Romans XI. 32. God has shut up all under disobedience, that he might have mercy
on all. And, out of the same consideration he argues, Gal. III. 10, 13. That as
many as are of the works of the Law are accursed. For it is written; Cursed is
every one that continnueth not in all things that are written in the book the
Law to do them; And again; Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us. For it is written; Cursed is every one that hangs
on a tree. For, though the Law provided remedies for many transgressions, the
use whereof might, and did restore men to the benefit of those temporal
promises, which it tendered; Yet in as much as there was no remedy against
capital transgressions by the Law, (in as much as no remedy against death,
which is the punishment allotted to the transgression of Gods original Law) in
so much it is justly said; That, by the law, there was sufficient conviction of
that spiritual death, to which, those that retired not themselves under the
Spiritual Law of God were necessarily liable; Though that Spiritual Law were
never published, till Christ, by submitting to the literal curse of the law,
had established the same. To this purpose truly says S. Paul Gal. III. 18, 19.
That the inheritance being allowed Abraham by promise, the Law was added
because of transgressions; That is, because there was no relying upon the good
nature of that people, (whose benefit, the promises made to Abraham did
concern) that, because they professed the true God and acknowledged his
providence, and judgment to come, therefore, without constraint of temporal
punishments, they would abstain, even from those sins whereby eivil society is
violated. And therefore the Apostle adds; That God has concluded all under
sin, that the promise might be given those that believe, by the faith of
Jesus Christ. But, before the faith came, says he, we were guarded by the law,
as shut up to the faith which was to be revealed. So that the law is our
Pedagogue to bring us to Christ, that we may be justified by faith. The office
of a Pedagogue in S. Paul's sense, according to the custom of those times, is
not that which most men understand, as I said before. A Pedagogue is not the
master of a School, but a governor, such as Fathers then appointed their
sons, (out of their slaves for the most part, in whose discretion they had
some confidence, to trust their children with them) for the conducting of them
to School, and for the over-seeing of them when they were dismissed by their
masters again. So that, when he says; the Law is our Pedagogue to bring us to
School to Christ; The sense is most fit and proper according to my intent;
That, discovering the conviction of sin by the punishments, wherewith it
guardeth and shuts men up from offending, it leads us to the engagement
which Christ requires of us, that we offend no more. And, upon this ground,
and to this effect it is, that S. Paul inferrs, out of the passages of the old
Testament which he had there premised, Romans III. 19, 20, 21. What the Law says
it says to those that are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and
all the world become guilty to God, thot no flesh should be justified before
him by the works of the Law: For, by the Law is the knowledge of sin. But now
the righteousness of God is manifested without the Law: being testified by the
Law and the prophets. For, how is the righteousness of God witnessed by the
Law, (which ministers conviction of sin) and by the Prophets; but in regard
the Law affords sufficient arguments of the truth of the Gospel, by which, that
righteousness which God accepts to everlasting life is tendered: And because
the Prophets, succeeding the Law, do clear and publish the same more and more.
And again, Romans IV. 15, 16. For the law works wrath: Because, where there is
no Law there is no transgression. Therefore of says, (is the promise) that it
may be according to grace; that the promise may be firm to all the seed, not
only that which is of the Law, but that also which is of the faith of Abraham,
which is the Father of us all. For, if there be a twofold seed of Abraham, one
according to the Law only, which works wrath, the other according to the
promise; then is there also a twofold Law, because that promise inferres a Law
of God, by virtue whereof, those that are of faith are justified by the
promise. Now, if the restraining of that people from gross offenses, by those
punishments, which the Law threatened them with, were a considerable means to
prepare that people to submit themselves to the Gospel when i^ should come to
be preached; It will necessarily follow, that, during the time that the Law was
to stand, it was appointed by God, to bring them to true spiritual
righteousness, who, apprehending the secrets of their own hearts open to God,
(whom the Laws ties them to acknowledge) and liable to his judgments, in
confidence of the goodness which he prevented them with, should engage the
resolution of their hearts, to worship him in spirit and in truth

Seeing then, that all the arguments, whereby the Law and the Prophets do bear
witness to the truth of Christianity, are grounded upon the correspondence,
between the temporal promises of the Law and the spiritual and everlasting
promises of the Gospel, (whereupon follows the correspondence between that
carnal obedience which the Law, and that spiritual obedience which the
Gospel requires) it follows necessarily; that though there was then no
express publication of any will of God, to be engaged to give life
everlasting, to those that should take upon them to yield him that inward and
spiritual obedience, which the Gospel now covenanteth for; yet
notwithstanding, this will of his, darkly intimated by the dispensation of the
Law, was effectual to make those that embraced those intimations, to yield him
such obedience: and yet the number of them so slender, as made the coming of
Christ, and his Gospel, no less necessary to the salvation of the Jews, then
of the Gentiles. And this is that equivocation of the word Law, which Origin,
in his exposition of the Epistle to the Romans, and in his Philocalia,
oftentimes complains to be the occasion of the obscurity of that and other of
S. Paul's Epistles. The same in a word, which made the Jews stumble at the
counsel of God, in voiding that Law, to which he had brought them up, and so
well accepted their zeal for it. Only this we must take along with us, that,
whatsoever is here said to be intimated by the Law, and made good under it,
concerning the reward of everlasting life to the inward obedience of Gods
spiritual Law; is to be understood, by virtue of those promises, upon which
the Gospel is established; Which the Fathers from the beginning were bred up in
the expectation of, according to that of the Apostle Heb. XI. 13, 16. These all
died according to faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them
afar of, and being persuaded, and having saluted them, and confessed that
they were strangers and pilgrims upon earth: for they who say such things
declare that they seek a country; And, had they been mindful of that which
they were come out from, they might have had time to turn back: But now they
desire a better, that is an heavenly; Whereupon God is not ashamed to be called
their God: For he had prepared them a City. And again, 39, 40. These all being
witnessed by faith, received not the promises, God having provided some better
thing for us, that they might not be perfected without us. Where it is plain,
that they, according to the Apostle, expected the kingdom of heaven by virtue
of that promise, which is now manifested, and tendered, and made good by the
Gospel, whereof our Savior says, John VIII. 98. Your father Abraham leaped
to see my day, and saw it and rejoiced: And again, Mat. XIII. 17. Verily I say
unto you that many Prophets, and righteous men have desired to see the things
ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear the things ye hear, and have not
hard them.

CHAP. IX. Of the Faith and Justification of Abraham and the Patriarchs,
according to the Apostles. Of the Prophets and righteous men under the Law.
Abraham and Rahab the harlot justified by works, if justified by Faith. The
promises of the Gospel depend upon works which the Gospel injoyneth. The
Tradition of the Church.
HAving thus showed, that the interest of Christianity, and the grounds
whereupon it is to be maintained against the Jews, require this answer to be
returned to the objection; it remains that I show, how the apostles
disputations upon this point do signify the same. Of Abraham then, and of the
Patriarchs, thus we read, Heb. XI. 8, 10. By faith Abraham obeyed the calling,
to go forth unto the place he was to receive for inheritance, and went forth
not knowing whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as
none of his own, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the
same promise: For he expected a City having foundations, the architect and
builder whereof is God. Is it not manifest here, that, both parts of the
comparison are wrapped up in the same words, which cannot be unfolded, but by
saying; That, as Abraham, in confidence of Gods promise to give his posterity
the land of Canaan, left his country to live a stranger in it; So, while he was
so doing, he lived a pilgrim in this world, out of the faith that he had
conceived out of Gods promises, that he should thereby obtain the world to
come? And is not this the profession of Christians, which the Apostle, in the
words alleged even now, declares to be signified by the pilgrimages of the
Patriarchs? And is not this a just account, why they cannot be said to have
attained the promises by the law but by faith? Therefore, that which follows
immediately, of Sarah, must needs be understood to the same purpose; By faith
Sarah also her self received force to give seed, and bare beside the time of
her age, because she thought him faithful that had promised. Therefore of one,
and him mortified, were born, as the stars of heaven for multitude, and as the
sand that is by the sea shore innumerable. For S. Paul declares, Gal. III. 16.
IV. 22 -- Romans IX. 7, 8, 9. that the seed promised Abraham, in which all the
nations of the earth shall be blessed, is Christ, and the Church of true
Spiritual Israelites, that should impart the promise of everlasting life to
all nations. And this promise you saw even now, that Abraham, and the
Patriarchs expected. Sarah therefore being embarked in Abraham's pilgrimage, as,
by the same faith with him, she brought forth all Israel according to the
flesh, so must it needs be understood, that she was accepted of God as
righteous, in consideration of that faith, wherewith she traveled to the world
to come. Neither can it be imagined, that S. Paul's dispute, of the
righteousness of Abraham by faith, can be understood upon any other ground, or
to any other effect then this. What then shall we say that Abraham our father
got according to the flesh? says he; Romans IV. 1-5. For, if Abraham was
justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not toward God. For, what
says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness. But, to him that works, the reward is not reckoned according
to grace but according to debt. But to him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the wicked, his faith is imputed for righteousness. The
question, what Abraham found according to the flesh? can signify nothing, but,
what got he by the Law? (which is called the flesh in opposition to the Gospel
included in it, which is called the Spirit) Did he come by his righteousness
through the Law or not? For, had Abraham been justified by works that should
need none of that grace which the Gospel tendreth for remission of sins, well
might he glory of his own righteousness, and not otherwise; For, he that
acknowledges, to stand in need of pardon and grace, cannot stand upon his own
righteousness. Now Abraham cannot so glory toward God, because the Scripture
says, that his faith was imputed to him for righteousness, which signifies
Gods grace in accepting of it to his account, not his claim as of debt.
Whereupon the Apostle infers immediately the testimony of David, writing
under the Law, in these words; As David also pronounces the man blessed to
whom God imputes righteousness without works; Blessed are they whose
iniquities are remitted, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man to
whom the Lord imputes not sin. What can be more manifest, to show that the
Apostle intends no more, then that the Fathers pretended not to be justified by
those works, which claimed no benefit of that Grace which the Gospel
publishes? Especially, the consequence of David's words being this; Psalm.
XXXII. 2. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin, and in whose
spirit there is no guile. For, the Prophet David including the spiritual
righteousness of the heart in the quality of him, to whom the Lord imputes
righteousness without works; the Apostle must be thought to include it in the
Faith of him, to whom the Lord imputes it for righteousness. Now when S. Paul
observes in Moses, that Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness; Upon the promise of that posterity which he expected not. Genesis
XV. 6. It cannot be said, that Abraham had not this faith before; Or that it was
not imputed to him for righteousness till now: Because, the Apostle to the
Hebrews has said expressly that he had the same faith, and to the like effect,
ever since he left his country, to travail after Gods promises; And certainly,
it was but an act of the same Faith, to walk after the rest of those promises,
whereby it should please God, further to declare the purpose for which he
brought him from home. That faith therefore which was imputed for
righteousness to Abraham, (not as the Jews challenge righteousness, by doing
the Law, but as Christians expect it, by remission of sins) includes in it an
engagement, of travailing that way that God points out, to the land of promise,
upon the account whereof, that faith, which was imputed to the Patriarchs for
righteousness proceeds. Now, when S. Paul proceeds further to argue, that,
this imputation of Abraham's faith to righteousness came to pass, while he was
yet uncircumcised, and no way subject to the law; and that by virtue of Gods
promise, (which proceeded upon consideration of this righteousness) and not of
the law, the title of his inheritance stood; (which promise, he argues further
Gal. IV. 18, 19. that the Law, coming four hundred and thirty years after,
could nothing derogate from) I challenge all the world to say, how all this
inferrs any more; But, that the righteousness of Abraham comes not by virtue
of the Law, (by doing whereof the Jews pretend righteousness) but by Gods
free promise, whereby Christians expect remission of sins. To the same effect
therefore, S. Paul concludes, Romans IV. 23, 24. But it was not written because
of him alone, that it was imputed to him, but because of us, who believe in him
that raised up our Lord Jesus from the dead, to whom it is to be imputed. For,
the example of Abraham's faith in the promise of God to give him such a
posterity by Sarah, and that it was imputed to him for that righteousness,
whereby he became qualified for the promises upon which he left his country, is
written for the instruction of Christians, upon this account; Because, so sure
as we believe, that the New Testament, was intended by the Old, so certain we
are, that the faith whereby we undertake to follow God, and the way to the
world to come, which he by Christ points us out, qualifies us for the same. But
he that will have S. Paul upon these reasons to infer, that Christians are
justified by believing that they are predestinate, or by trusting in God, not
supposing that trust grounded upon that obligation which our Baptism
professes, in plain terms, he makes S. Paul use arguments that do not
conclude. For, if Abraham cannot brag of his righteousness before God,
because of Gods account, not of debt; If David count happiness not to stand
upon any title of purchase, but by remission of sins; If faith were reckoned to
Abraham for righteousness before he was circumcised; If the inheritance were
due by virtue of Gods promise; Then that righteousness which intitles
Christians to the world to come, stands by virtue of the Gospel, (which
publishes remission of sins to all whom it overtakes in unrighteousness) and,
by Gods grace, (in acceping their undertaking of Christianity, and living
according to it, as qualifying them for everlasting life) not by doing the law,
without having recourse to that means which the Gospel tendereth, for
remission of sins, and right to the world to come. But, it is in vain to
infer from any of those assumptions, Therefore Christians are justified by
that faith, in which, no obligation of bearing Christ's cross, or any
consideration thereof is included.

With this, which has been said of that faith whereby Abraham was justified,
let us compare that which follows of the faith of Moses Heb. XI. 24, 25, 26. By
faith Moses, growing great, refused to be called Pharaohs daughters son;
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a time, counting the reproach of Christ greater riches,
then the treasures of Egypt: Because he looked upon the reward to be rendered.
The faith by which Moses was justified, consists in this, that he renounced his
quality in the Court of Egypt that he might have a share in the promises made
to Gods people. And this the Apostle justly calls, undertaking the reproach of
Christ, because it was the same thing in effect to the people of God then, as
now is the bearing of Christ's cross, which Christians at their Baptism
profess; and because the promises which the Fathers looked after are fulfilled
in Christ, as I showed before. And herewith let us compare the faith of Enoch,
Heb. XI. 5, 6. By faith Enoch was translated not to see death, and was not
found, because God had translated him, for before his translation, he is
witnessed to have pleased God. But without faith it is impossible to please
God. For, he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he rewards
those that seek him. Well may we conclude from hence, that Enoch was not
justified by the Law, nor by the works of it, but by that perswation, upon
which he sought God; as Christians, by obliging themselves so to do, not by
that faith, which includes not, nor supposes any resolution and obligation so
to do. Compare now herewith the conclusion of the whole dispute, concerning the
righteous men and Prophets under the Law, Heb. XI. 32. 37. And what shall I say
more? For, the time will sail me to tell of Gideon and Barak, and Sampson, and
Jephtah, and David, and Samuel, and the Prophets; Who by faith conquered
kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of
Lions, quenched the force of fire, escaped the edge of the sword. recovered of
weakness, became strong in war, put to flight armies of strangers, women
received their dead raised to life again, others were tortured to death, not
expecting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection, others
had trial of mockings and scourgings, and besides, of bonds and imprisonment,
were stoned, sawne asunder, tempted, died slain by the sword, went about in
sheeps and goats skins, in want, afflicted, distressed, wandering in deserts,
and mountains, and caves and holes of the earth. Will this conclude, that all
these were justified by that faith, which neither includes nor presupposes a
resolution and obligation to righteousness; who, out of the hope of Gods
promises to his people, acted against the enemies thereof, or suffered for
righteousness, the same things, in that state of Gods people, which Christians
now suffer and do, for the profession of Christ's Cross, into which they are
baptized? In fine, the whole dispute of the Apostle here, and of S. Paul, in so
many of his Epistles, concerning faith, and the righteousness that Christians
have by it, is the same with that which the Fathers of the Church maintained
against the Jews, that Christianity is more ancient then Judaisme; That, as the
Fathers before the Law obtained not that right, (which both Christians and Jews
allow them) to the promises of the world to come, by the works of the Law; So
the Prophets and righteous men under the Law had not that hope, by doing it,
but by the assurance, which, under the dispensation of the Law they had
conceived, (as of reason they ought) that God would not fail them in the world
to come, that should heartily and faithfully serve him in this: Which, (adding
to it the profession of the Name and warrant of Christ, as the Author of that
contract, whereby we undertake so to do) is Christianity.

I have yet said nothing of the passage of S. James II. 14 --, where he
disputes expressly, that faith alone justifies not, but Faith with works, for
it seems to make a general argument by it self, though in truth, the reason
which he brings that Abraham was justified by works, necessarily depends upon
the true reason why S. Paul says; That Abraham was justified by faith; Which
reason they that will not admit, deserve to crucify themselves everlastingly,
to find, how he can be truly said to be justified by works, that is justified
by faith alone without works before; were it not pity, that the Scriptures
should be set on the rack, to make them confess a meaning, which the words in
no language, by any custom of humane speech will bear. For, if the Faith of
him that has no good works will not save him, not justify him, as the Apostle
expressly affirms, can the works that are said to do this be said to do it
Metonymical^y because, they are signs or effects of Faith which does it, when
it is said that faith without them does it not? And though, by the way of
Metonymy, the property or effect of the cause may be attributed to the effect
of that cause; Yet when that property or effect is denied the cause, and
attributed to the effect, will any language endure, that it should be thought
properly to belong to the cause which is denied it, and attributed to the
effect only by Metonymy, that is, in behalf of the cause that is denied it? Is
there any need to come into these straits, when, by saying, that a man is
justified by faith alone according to S. Paul, (meaning by undertaking
Christianity) a man will be obliged to say, that he is justified by works also,
according to S. James, (to wit, by performing that which he undertaketh)
unless you will have him justified by undertaking that which he performs not?
For, when it is said, that a man is justified by undertaking Christianity, it
is supposed, that he undertakes it sincerely and heartily; Which sincerity,
containing a resolution of all righteousness for the future, justly qualifies
him for those promises which overtake him in sin, so that, for the present,
he can have nothing to justify him but the righteousness of this faith alone,
which the Gospel tells us that God accepts: But for the time to come, just
ground is there to distinguish a second justification, (which proceeds upon the
same consideration, but supposes the condition undertaken to be performed) from
that first, which, though done by faith alone, infers the necessity of
making good what is undertaken, that it may be available. Is not this that the
Apostle says James 11. 15, 16, 17. If a brother or sister be naked or want
daily food, and one of you say to him; Go in peace, be warmed and fed, and yet
give them not things fit for his body, what is he the better? So also faith, if
it have not works, is of it self dead. Where lies this comparison but in this,
that he who professes Christianity, but does not according to it, is like him
that professes love to his brother, but relieves not his necessities. And so,
when it follows; But a man may say; thou have faith and I have works, show me
thy works by thy faith, and I will show thee my faith by my works; For he
that lives like a Christian, it is plain he shows his Faith by his works,
which is evidence that he professes Christianity sincerely; but he that only
professes, is: yet to make evidence by his works, that his profession is
sincere. As for the example of Abraham, the Apostles words are these, Abraham
our Father, was he not justified by works, when he offered Isaac upon the
altar? Thou see that faith wrought with his works, and by works was his
says perfited. And the Scripture which says; Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness; was fulfilled, and he was called the son
of God. What is this, but that which we read, 1 Mac. 11. 52. Was not Abraham
found faithful in trial, and it was counted to him for righteousness? For it
was counted to him for righteousness, that, not being weak in says, he
considered not his own body already mortified, as being a hundred years old,
nor the mortification of Sarahs womb, nor doubted through want of belief in
Gods promise, but was strengthened in faith giving glory to God, and being
satisfied, that he is able to do what he has promised; As S. Paul says Romans
IV. 19, 20, 21. And therefore, much more must it needs be counted to him for
righteousness, that, by faith he offered Isaac when he was tempted, and that
he who had received the promises offered his only begotten son of whom it
had been said; In Isaac shall posterity be counted to thee. Reckoning that God
was able to raise him from the dead. Whence also he received him in a parable;
As the Apostle says, Heb. XI. 17, 18, 19. For here, as I showed before, it is
the act of faith, and not the object of it that is imputed to righteousness:
And, in that obedience whereby this temptation was overcome, though there was a
good work, yet there was an act of that faith: And therefore the Apostle
deservedly adds, that his faith wrought with his works; But the faith that
moved him to travail after Gods promise, was perfected by this work, wherein
that faith moved him to tender God obedience. And therefore the Scripture was
fulfilled which says; Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness; Because that which Moses had said, that God counted Abraham
righteous for his faith, was made good, and proved not to have been said
without cause, but that he was righteous indeed, (as righteous he must be, whom
God so accounts) that obeyed God in such a trial as this. So, that which S.
James adds of Rahab; Likewise Rahab also the harlot, was she not justified by
works receiving the messengers and sending them out another way? How shall it
agree with that of the other Apostle, Heb. XI. 31. Through faith Rahab the
harlot perished not with the unbelievers, receiving the spies in peace; But by
virtue of the same reason; that, having conceived assurance of the promises of
God to his people, that she might have her share in them, she resolved to
become one of them upon such terms as the case required, wherein certainly, the
preservation of their spies was required? So, if by Faith, then by Works, if
by Works, then by Faith.

I must not leave this point till I have produced another sort of Scriptures,
in which the promises of the Gospel are made to depend upon works which
Christianity requires; AS namely, when forgiveness of sinners is promised
upon condition that we forgive our brethren their offenses against us; Mat. VI.
14. 15. Our Lord rendering a reason why he had taught his disciples to pray;
Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us; For if
it forgive men their sins, your heavenly Father will forgive you also: But if
you forgive not men their Transgressions, neither will your Father forgive your
Transgressions. And the Apostle, James II. 13. to the same purpose; Judgment
shall be without mercy, to him that shows not mercy. And the foot of our
Saviors Parable, Mat. XVIII. 35. So also shall your bravenly Father do to you,
if from your hearts ye forgive not every one his Brother their transgressions.
So Mar. XI. 25. 26. And Luc. VI. 37. 38. Judge not and ye shall not be judged,
condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned, pardon and ye shall be pardoned
give, and there shall be given to you, good measure, crowded and shaken, and
running over, shall be given into your bosom, for, the measure that ye mete
with, shall be measured to you again, And again Luke XI. 41. But give Alms
according to your power, and all things shall be clean to you. So Solomen,
Prove. XVI. 6. By mercy and truth shall inquity be expiated And Daniell to
Nebuchodonosor, Dan. III. 5. Redeem thy sins by righteousness, or, Alms
deeds, and thy iniquity by showing compassion upon the afflicted. For the verb
(...) can signify nothing but, Redeem in the Caldee, though there is a figure
of speech in the Prophets Language, intending, redeem thy self from thy sins
as I shall have occasion to say in another place, and therefore it is in the
Greek; (...). And from hence come those sayings, Tobit IV. 11. (...). And
again Tob. XII. 9. (...). Alms delivers from death, and suffers not to
enter into darkness. And; Alms delivers from death, and purges away all
sin. And Ecclus. III. 33. Water quenches flaming fire, and with alms shall
he make prepitiation for sins. And XXIX. 15. Shut up alms in thy store
houses, and they will deliver thee from all afflictions. And, the words of the
Apostle are plainest in this sense, I Pet. IV. 8. Charity shall cover a many
sins. The Prophet also to the same purpose, Isa. I. 17. For they that make
that filth which alone justifies not to include, or presuppose that condition,
to which Baptism tieth Christians, must needs crucify themselves, and set the
Scriptures upon the rack, to find another meaning for them then the words
bear; By which, that which God has made due without and before any condition,
may turely be said, to be given in consideration of it; Which, reason and the
common sense of all men abhors. But supposing that faith which only justifies
to include the profession of undertaking Christianity, as the condition upon
which the promises of the Gospel are to be expected; So certain as it is, that
this will not be due if the condition be not fulfilled, so necessary and so
proper it will be to say; That, whatsoever that condition includes, is the
consideration upon which the promise comes, though, not by virtue of the thing
done, but by virtue of Gods tender, and the Covenant of Grace, and the promise
which it contains, and the free goodness of God which first moved him to
tender that promise. And therefore you shall find those that suppose it not,
always tormenting themselves, to force upon the Scriptures such a meaning as
the words of them do not bear.

And in the last place, concerning the consent of the Church, though the
Fathers are free, in acknowledging with S. Paul, justification by faith alone;
yet notwithstanding they are, on the other side, so copious in attributing the
promises of the Gospel to the good works of Christians, that it may truly be
said, there is never a one of them, from whom sufficient authority is not to be
had for evidence thereof; Which will amount to a tradition of the whole Church,
in this point. In particular, S. Augustine (to whom appeal is wont to be made,
in all parts of that dispute which relates to the Heresy of Pelagius) has so
clearly and so copiously delivered the answer which I maintain, to those texts
of S. Paul, where he denies that Christians are justified by the works of the
Law; that those that challenge him in other points of this dispute, concerning
the Covenant of Grace, do not pretend to be of his mind in this. Though the
ground of this answer, consisting in the twofold sense of the Law, deserved as
I conceive, to be further cleared, even after S. Augustine and the rest of
ancient Church-writers.

I would therefore have the reader here to understand, that I account all the
rest of this second book, to be nothing else, but the resolution of those
difficulties, the answer to those objections and demandes, which arise upon the
determination here advanced. The chief of them is that which follows in the
next place; How the promises of the Gospel can be said to be the effects of
Gods free grace, requiring our Christianity, as the condition, upon which they
become due and not otherwise. But there are also others, concerning the
possibility of fulfulling Gods Law, by the new obedience of Christians;
concerning the goodness and perfection of it; concerning the force and effect
of good works, either in making satisfaction for sin, or in meriting life
everlasting; Which I shall allow that consideration, in due time, which the
model of this abridgement will bear. As for the sense of the Fathers,
evidencing the Tradition of the Church, I am yet to learn, that there ever was
any exception alleged to infringe the consent of the Church, in the necessity
of good works, to the obtaining of salvation for Christians: But only the
case of those, who, being taken away by death upon professing Christianity,
have not time to bring forth the fruits of it. And how good works can be the
necessary means to procure the salvation of Christians, but by virtue of that
Law, or condition for obtaining salvation which the Gospel now expressly
enacteth, and always did covertly effectuate, no sense of man comprehends.
For, that the ancient Church agrees, in allowing the force of satisfaction for
sin to works of Penance, of Merit for the world to come, to works done in
the state of Grace, none of the Reformation, (which either disowneth or
excuses it for so doing, according to the respect they have for it) can make
questionable. And therefore, though this be not the place to justify the
ancient Church in these particulars, yet this is evident, that those, who
maintain more then my position requires, do agree in that which it contains.
I shall therefore content my self for the present with producing some special
passages of the Fathers, expressing in my opinion, the marks of my position,
and the reasons whereupon it proceeds; As limiting the position between faith
and works, in the matter of justifying, to those works which go before faith,
(that is before baptism) and are done without faith, not to those that issue
upon it; and therefore, placing that faith which alone justifies, in the
profession of Christianity by Baptism: and that justification which insueth
upon it, not in effecting that faith, but in those rightes which God allows
him that has it, upon the account of it. S. Jerome upon that of Zach. VIII.
10. There was no reward for man or beast. Priusquam fidem Christi quis
recipiat, and in eo Spiritus Sancti fundamenta radicantur, nullus audire
poterit; Est merces operi tuo; Sive ille Judaeus sit, sive Haereticus, sive
Gentilis, quiequid boni operis fecerit, nisi in Christi nomine fecerit,
mercedem sui operis non habebit. Videmus Haereticorum virgins, Philosophorum
rigorem, Judaeorum in escarum varietate observantiam, and tamen dicimus, juxta
Aggaeum, quod comedant and non satientur, bibant and non inebrientur,
operiantur, and non calescant, and qui mercedes congregat, mittat eas in
sacculum pertusum. Before a man receive the faith of Christ, and the
foundations of the Holy Ghost be laid in him, no man shall be able to hear;
There is a reward for thy work. Be he Jew, or Heretic, or Gentile, whatsoever
good work he shall do, not doing it in the Name of Christ, he shall have no
reward for his work. We see the Virgins of Heretics, the rigor of
Philosophers, the scrupulosity of Jews in diversities of meats, and yet we say
according to Aggai; They eat and are not filled, they drink and are not merry,
they are clothed, and not warmed, and he that gathers wages puts them into a
purse with a hole in it. Upon Galat. III. 2. Consideremus autem diligenter,
quid non dixerit; Vtrum ex operibus Spiritum accepistis; Sed adjecerit ex
operibus Legis. Sciebat enim and Cornelium Centurionom, Spiritum ex operibus
accepisse, sed non ex operibus Legis, quam nesciebat. Si enime contrario
dicatur; ergo and sine eruditione fidei accipi Spiritus Sanctus potest, nos
respondebimus; accepisse quidem eum Spiritum, sed ex auditu fidei, and naturali
lege, quae loquitur in cordibus nostris bona quaeque facienda, and vitanda
mala, per quam dudum quoque Abraham, Mosen, and caeteris Sanctos justificatos
retulimus, quam augere deinceps potest operum observatio, legis quoque notitia,
non tamen carnalis legis quae praeterit, sed spiritualis, quia lex spiritualis
est. Neque vero quia sidem praeferimus, legis opera destruimus, aut dicimus,
secundum quosdam; Faciamus mala donec eveniant bona, quorum damnatio justa est;
Sed servituti gratiam anteponimus, dicimusque, quod Judaei propter metum
faciunt, id nos facere propter charitatem: Illos cogi ad bonum, nos bonum
sponte suscipere. Non igitur ex fide Christi licentia nascitur delinquendi, sed
ex dilectione fidei voluntas boni operis augetur, dum bona ideo facimus, non
quia judicem formidamus, sed quia scimus ei placere in quem credimus. Now let
us diligently consider, that he says not; Whether have ye received the spirit
by works, but adds, by the works of the Law. For he knew that even Cornelius
the Centurion received the spirit by works, but not by the works of the Law
which he knew not. For if it be said on the other side; That then the holy
Spirit may also be received without the hearing of faith; We will answer; That
he received the Spirit, but by the hearing of faith, and the Law of nature,
which says in our hearts that all good is to be done, and evil avoided,
whereby we told you before that Abraham, and Moses, and the rest of the Saints
were justified; which the observation of works succeeding may increase, and
knowledge of the Law, but not the carnal law which is past, but the Spiritual,
because the law is spiritual. Nor do we destroy the works of the Law, because
we prefer faith, or say, according to some, let us do evil till good come,
whose damnation is just: But we prefer Grace before bondage, and say, that we
do for love that which Jews do for fear; That they are constrained to that
good which we do of our own accord. Therefore there rises no license to sin
from the faith of Christ, but from the Law of Faith the lust of well doing
increases, while we do good, not because we are afraid of the Judge, but
because we know it pleases him in whom we believe. Here, the difference which I
make between works, and works of the Law, is S. Jeromes. Here, the
righteousness of the Fathers under the Law of nature is ascribed to Faith, out
of which they submitted themselves to it; as also Cornelius his title to that
grace of the holy Ghost which the Gospel promises. Here the reason is set
forth, why the works of the Law justify not, because the preaching of the
Gospel supposes that the Law can effect no more then an outward and carnal
obedience to the precepts thereof, for fear of punishment; Whereby it
appears, that those works which justify not, are not only those of the
ceremonial Law, but all that goes before the preaching of Faith, whether as
under Christianity, or as before it, according to S. Jerome. The Gospel, both
requiring and effecting that inward and spiritual obedience, which love
constrains. I am not afraid, after this to name the short commentary upon S.
Paul's Epistles, which usually goes with S. Jeromes works, though I will
suppose it to be Pelagius his, upon Gal. III. 10. Quaeritur sant hoc loco, si
fides sola sufficiat Christiano, and utrum non sit maledictus qui praecepta
Evangelica contemnit. Sed fides ad hoc proficit, ut in promitiis credulitatis
accedentes ad Deum justificet, si deinceps in justificatione permaneat; (lege
permaneant) caeterum sine operibus fidei non Legis mortua est fides. Qui enim
non credunt mandatis, and qui precepta Evangelica contemnunt, maledictos esse
and servator edocuit, dicens; Discedite a me maledicte in ignem aeternum. Et
Jacobus Apostolus unius mandati transgressorem omnium reum esse ostendit. Here
forsoeth, it is questionable, whether faith alone be enough for a Christian,
and whether he be not accursed, that shall neglect the praecepts of the Gospel.
But faith avails so far, as, in the beginning of belief, to justify those
that come to God, if they abide in justification thenceforth. But without the
works of Faith, not of the Law, Faith is dead. For that those who believe not
the commandments, and neglect the precepts of the Gospel are accursed, even our
Savior has taught, saying; Go ye cursed from me into everlasting fire. And
the Apostle James shows, that he who transgresses one commandment is guilty
of all. Again, upon 1 Timothy II. 15. Notandum quod sola fides ei, qui post
Baptismum supervixerit, non sufficiat, nisi sanctitatem mentis and corporis
habeat, quae sine sobrietate difficile custoditur. It is to be noted, that
faith alone is not enough for him that survives after Baptism, unless he have
the holiness both of mind and body, which without sobriety is hardly
preserved. Here you have S. Jeromes distinction between the works of Faith and
of the Law, and Baptism the boundary of righteousness by Faith alone, without
the works of Faith. And if any man be so impertinent as to suspect S. Jerome
for a Pelalagian, wherein he agrees with Pelagius, S. Austine may persuade him,
that Pelagius is no Pelagian in this, but speaks the sense of the Church.
Sermon. LXXI. De Tempore. Quomodo fides per dilectionem operatur? Et quomodo
justificatur homo per fidem absque operibus legis? Quomodo, intendite fratres.
Credit aliquis, percepit fidei Sacramenta in lecto, and mortuus est: Defuit
illi operandi tempus. Quid dicimus? Quia non est justificatus? Plane dicimus
justificatum, credentem in eum qui justificat impium. Ergo rite justificatus
est and operatus non est. Impletur sententia Apostoli dicentis; Arbitramur,
justificari hominem per fidem sine operibus Legis. Latro qui cum Domino
crucifixus est, cord credidit ad justitiam, ore confessus est ad salutem. Nam
fides quae per dilectionem operatur, etsi non sit in quo exterius operetur, in
cord tamen illa fervens servatur. Nam erant quidam in l^ge qui de operibus
Legis gloriabantur, quae fortasse non dilectione sed timore faciebant, and
volebant se justos videri, and praeponi Gentibus quae opus legis non fecerant.
Apostolus autem praedicans fidem Gentibus, cum eos qui accedebaut ad Dominum
videret justificaetos ex fide (utram quia crediderant been operarentur, non
quia been opetati sunt credere mererentur) exclamavit securus, and ait; Quia
potest justificari homo ex fide sine operibus Legis; Vt illi magis non fuerint
justi, qui quod faci^bant timort faci^bant. Cum fides per dilectionem operetur
in cord, etiamsi foris non exit in opere. How works Faith by Love? And how is
a man justified by Faith without the works of the Law? Brethren mark how. A
man believes, receives the Sacraments of Faith in his bed, and dies, wants time
of working. What shall we say? That he is not justified? Plainly we say he is
justified, believing in him that justifies the wicked. So he is justified but
wrought not. The saying of the Apostle is fulfilled; I suppose a man is
justified by Faith without the works of the Law. The thief that was crucified
with our Lord, believed with the heart to righteousness, and confessed to
salvation with the mouth. For Faith that works by love, when there is nothing
to work upon outwardly, remains nevertheless fervent in the heart. For there
were those under the Law that boasted of the works of the Law, which perhaps,
they did not for love but for fear, and would seem righteous, and be preferred
before Gentiles, that had not done the work of the Law. But the Apostle,
preaching the Faith to the Gentiles, and seeing those who come to the Lord
justified by Faith, (so that they did well because they had believed, and not
merited to believe by well doing) cries out securely and says, that a man may
be justified by says without the works of the Law: So that, they who did what
they did for fear of the Law rather, were not righteous; Whereas faith may work
by love in the heart, though it go not forth in any work. Again, Libro
quaestionum LXXXIII. quaest. LXXVI. Si quis cum crediderit mox de hac vita
discesserit, justificatio fidei manet cum illo; Non praesentibus bonis
operibus, quia non merito ad illam sed gratia pervenit; Nec consequentibus,
quia in hac vita esse non sinitur. If a man depart out of this life straight
after he has believed, the justification by faith remains with him, good
works neither accompanying, because he came not to it by merit but by grace,
nor following, because he is not suffered to live. The reason being the same,
for which, those who depart without Baptism, if not by their own fault, are
held to be saved: In regard whereof S. Bernard Epist. LXXVII. thinks, that the
Gospel, Mark XVI. 16. Having said; He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved; Does not repeat, He that is not baptized shall be demned; But only, He
that believes not shall be demned.

Here, the only case in which a Christian can be saved without good works is,
when time obliges him not to bring them forth. And the only reason why the
works of the Law justify not, is; Because the Spiritual obedience of the Law
presupposes faith, the knowledge of the Law according to the letter, reaching
only to produce the outward work, without that inward disposition, which only
Christianity effects, as well as requires; A thing which S. Austine, in the
dispute with Pelagius, so often repeateth. De Spiritu and Litera, Cap. VIII.
and XXIX. Contra duas Epistolas Plagianorum, III. 2, 7. De Gratia Christi and
peccato Originali, I. 13. II. 24. De Gratia and lib. arbitrio Cap. XII. Origin
in Romans III. Libro III. Indulgentia namque non futurorum sed preteritorum
criminum datur. Igitur, ut ad praepositum redeamus, justificatur homo per
fidem, cui ad justificationem nihil conferunt opera Legis. Vbi vero fides non
est, quae credentem justificet, etiamsi quis opera habeat ex lege, tamen qui^
non sunt adificata supra fundamentum fidei, quamvis videantur esse bon^,
operatorem suum justificare non pessunt, si eis deest fides, quae est
signaculum little qui justificantur a Deo. For faith grants indulgence of
s^nnes past, not to come. He therefore is justified by Faith, to return to our
purpose, to whose justification works of the Law contribute nothing. But where
that faith which justifies him that believes is not, though a man have works
according to the Law, yet, because they are not built upon the foundation of
Faith, though they seem good, they cannot justify their workers, wanting
Faith, which is the ma^ke of those that are justified by God. The same Origin
in the same book, brings in the example of the thief upon the Cross, and of
the woman that had been a sinner but was saved by her Faith Luke VII. to the
same purpose. And I will not omit the words of S. Jerome upon that of Isa.
LXIV. 5. All our righteousness is like a menstruous ragge. Libro XVII. In quo
considerandum, quod justitia quae in Lege est, ad comparationem Evangelic^
puritatis immunditia nominetur. Etenim non est glorificatum quod prius
glorificatum suit, propter excellentem gloriam. And by and by; Si quis igitur
post Evangelum Christi, and adventum filii Dei, Paedagogae Legis observat
ceremonias, audiat populum consitentem quod omnis illa justitia panno
sordidissimo comparetur, cui and Esther diadema suum, quod erat regiae
potestatis insigne comparat. Where it is to be considered, that the
righteousness which is in the Law, in comparison of the purity of the Gospel,
is called uncleanness. For that which was counted glorious, is not glorious,
in regard of that glory that excels. And, If any man then, after the Gospel
of Christ, and the coming of the Son of God, observe the ceremonies of that
Pedagogicall Law, let him hear the people confess, that all that
righteousness is comparable to a most filthy ragg^; Wherewith also Ester
compares her diadem, though the ensign of Royal Power. The Prophet brings in
the Synagogue confessing it self destitute of righteousness. The Apostles
show, that the Church only furnishes that righteousness through faith, which
the Synagogue, by the Law, cannot have. And shall we say that S. Jerome abuses
the Prophet in limitting that uncleanness, which the Prophet acknowledges
even in their righteousness, to that which is to be had by the Law? For, though
he name only the works of the Ceremonial Law, yet is all the righteousness
that is to be had by the learning of the Letter of the Law, of the same nature,
not attaining to be done with that disposition of the heart, which only the
Gospel produces. O Ecumenius upon James II. 14. speaking the sense of some
Fathers, has expressed all the points of my position in these terms; (...).
But some of the Fathers have thus judged of this business. For they say, that,
distinguishing Abraham by times, he is the pattern of both Faiths; Whereof one
going before Baptism, requires no Works, but only Faith, and the profession
of salvation, and the word whereby we are justified, believing in Christ: The
other is coupled with works. So the Spirit that spoke in the Apostles, shows
no contrariety; The one justifying him that approaches by profession alone, in
case he presently depart this life: (For such a one has no works, but the
cleansing of Baptism is to him a sufficient passeport to salvation) The other
demanding of him that is already baptized, that he should show good works. He
had proposed before another way of reconciling the Apostles, by distinguishing
several significations, in the term of Faith, which in that effect and
consequence, falls in with this. S. Gregory, In Evang. Hom. XIX. Quod cum it a
sit, fidei nostre veritatem in vitae nostre consideration^ debemus agnoscere.
Tunc enim veraciter fideles sumus, si quod verbis promittimus operibus
complemus. In die quippe baptismi, omnibus nos antiqui hostis operibus, atque
omnibus pompis abrenunciare promisimus. Itaque unusquisque ad considerationem
suam mentis oculos reducat, and si servat post baptismum, quod ante baptismum
spopondit, certus jam quia fidelis est, gaudeat. Which seeing so it is, we are
to acknowledge the truth of our faith in the consideration of our life. For
then are we truly faithful, (or believers) if we accomplish by works what we
promise by words. For at the day of our Baptism, we promise to renounce all
the works, and all the pompes of our ancient foe. Let every man therefore
turn the eyes of his mind to the consideration of himself, and if he observe
after baptism, that which he promised before baptism, being now assured that
he is faithful, (or a believer) let him rejoice.

He ascribes that justification which requires good works, to the fulfilling
of that promise, which our Baptism presupposes. To the same purpose, the
commentary upon S. Paul's Epistles that goes under S. Ambrose his name, upon
Romans III. 8. Manifest beati sunt, quibus, sine labor vel opere aliquo
remittuntur iniquitates, and peccata teguntur, nulla ab his requisita
poenitentiae opera, sed tantum ut credant. By and by; Quemadmodum autem ad
paenitentium potest pertinere personam, cum dicit; Beati quorum tectasunt
peccata; Cum constet, paenitentes labor ac gemitu peccatorum remissionem
acquirere? Aut quomode Martyrio congruit, quod dicit; Beatus vir cui non
imputabit dominus peccatum; Cum sciamus gloriam martyrii passionibus and
pressaris acquiri? Propheta autem tempus foelix in adventu servatoris
praevidens, beatos nominat, quibus sine labor, vel aliquo opere, per lavacrum
remittuntur, and teguntur, and non imputantur peccata: Manifestly they are
happy, whose iniquities are remitted, and whose sins are covered, without the
labor of any work, not requiring of them any pains of Penance, but only to
belivee. And; But how can it belong to the person of Penitents, when he says,
Blessed are they whose sins are covered: Seeing it is manifest, that Penitents
attain remission of sins by labor and groans? Or, how agrees that which he
says with Martyrdom: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin;
Seeing we know, that the glory of Martyrdom is attained by sufferings and
pressures? But the Prophet foreseeing a happy time at our Saviors coming,
names them blessed whose sins are remitted and covered, and not imputed by the
laver of Baptism, without the labor of any work. Whether or no this
opposition between remission of sins which Baptism alone, and that which
Penance and Martyrdom gives: he pertinently here alleged, and like a Divine
(for Baptism is the undertaking of Martyrdom if God require it, and Penance
is the voluntary undergoing of it, when sin requires it) evident it is, that
Baptism is here the boundary of that justification which faith alone
promises. And upon Heb. IV. 16. he says that God gives requiem sempiternam
fidem habentibus, eam tamen quae per dilectionem operatur, non credentibus
poenam perpetuam. Ne forte relicta pollicitatione quam dedimus Deo in baptismo,
iterum revertamur ad opera infidelitatis quae, abdicamus coram multis testibus.
Everlasting rest to those who have faith, but that which works by love,
perpetual pain to those who believe no. Least peradventure, abandoning the
promise which we made to God at our Baptism, we return again to the works of
infidelity, which we renounce before many witnesses. Where the damation of a
Christian is imputed to the transgressing of that promise which he makes to God
in Baptism. And the true S. Ambrose when he says, lib. 1. Epist. 1. Nec enim
fides sola ad perfectionem satis est, nisi etiam baptismatis adjiciatur gratia,
and sanguinem Christi redemptus accipiat. For, neither suffices faith alone to
persection, unless the grace of baptism be added, and be that is redeemed
receive the blood of Christ; Clearly compriseth the Sacrament of Baptism
(after which, the baptized always received the Eucharist in the ancient
Church) whereupon S. Augustine before mention Sacramenta fidei, in the plural
number, the Sacraments of faith, within that faith which alone justifies. But
the same S. Ambrose Offic. II. 2. Habet ergo vit^m aternam fides, quia
fundamentum bonum est, habent and bona facta, quia vir justus and dictis et
rebus probatur. Therefore faith has eternal life, because the foundation is
good: And so have good works because a man is tried, to be righteous, by both
saying and doing. That is, by doing as he says: By doing these works, which,
by his Baptism he undertakes to do. S. Basil, De spiritu sancto, cap. 12.
(...). For faith is perfected by Baptism, and Baptism is founded upon faith,
and both are fulfilled by the same names: For as we believe in the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, so are we baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. And profession goes before, introducing to Salvation, but
baptism follows, sealing up our assent; Not only to the demand; do thou
believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? but when it is further demanded,
will thou be baptized upon these terms? And this profession so sealed is that
which saves him that departs upon it, not him that survives to falsify it. S.
Chrysostom in Romans IV. 2. Hom. VIII. makes a long comparison to show that man
glorisies God more by believing, then by keeping his commandments; Which
certainly proceeds, not not can hold in those works, that presuppose faith,
having in them all that whereby faith glorifyeth God and more: And therefore is
to be limited to works done before faith. And therefore of those works is S.
Chrysostme to be understood, when he says, as often times he does, that a man is
justified without works, by Faith or by Grace, in Gal III. 12. In Romans III.
27. Homil. VII. In Ephesians. II. 10. Homil. IV. The reason being always that of
Theodoret upon Galat. III. 22. (...). The Seripture of God convinces both
those that were before the Law, and under it, as transgressors, as well these of
Moses Law, as those of the Law of Nature; Offering the salvation that is
promised by faith, for an antidote, both for these and for those. If the Law of
Moses were not of force to justify, much less the Law of Nature. Now the
Gospel supposes both Jews and Gentiles under sin, and liable to Gods wrath,
till the Gospel come, as S. Paul, in the beginning of his Epistle to the
Romans, declares. Not as if no man had been saved under the Law, or before
it; But because they who then were saved belonged not to the Law of Moses, or
that of Nature, but to the Gospel, as saved by the means of it. So said S.
Jerome before, that they were saved by the preaching of Faith, under the Law of
Nature. And thin was the number of them who thus were saved, that it was
requisite the Gospel should come, least the means which God had used to
restore man before might seem to have been employed to no purpose. So, to be
saved by faith and not by works, is the same with S. Paul, according to the
Fathers, as to be justified by being a Christian, and not by being a Jew, by
the Gospel and not by the Law. So Tertullian, cont* Marc. V. 3. Ejus ergo Dei
erit fides, in qua vivit justus, cujus and Lex in qua non justificatur
operarius. Pro^nde, si in Lege maledictio est, in Fide benedictio. Therefore,
that faith whereby the just lives, shall be the same Gods whose the Law is,
whereby he that works is not justified. Accordingly, if the curse come by the
Law, then the blessing by faith. For that Faith, which properly stands in
oppostion to the Law, is Christianity. S. Hilary In Mat. Can. VIII. Movet
Scribas, remissum ab hommine peccatum; Hominem enim tantum in Jesu Christo
intuebantur, and remissum ab eo quod Lex laxare non poterat. Fides enim sola
justificat. The Scribes are moved that sin should be remitted by a man; For
they looked upon Jesus Christ as a mere man, who remitted that which the Law
could not loose: For Faith alone justifies. Faith only justifies, in
opposition to the Law which remitteth no sin; Therefore faith is Christianity.
Clemens Alexandr. Strom. II. To learn is to obey the commandments, which is to
believe God. Because, forsooth, to profess the Faith, is to undertake to live
by Gods commandments. Strom. IV. (...) He therefore plays false with God, that
believes not God. But he that keeps not the commandments, believes not.
Again; (...). All therefore, whatsoever ye do, do to the glory of God,
whatsoever it is permitted to do, under the rule of Faith. Here, that part of
Christianity, which prescribes a Christian, what he is to do, what not, is
called the Rule of Faith; Because he believes that God requires it at his
hands, though he undertake more then to believe it. Strom. VII. (...). He is a
believer, (or faithful) that receives the commandments upon due consideration,
and keeps them. Pelagius upon Romans X. 4. Talis est ille qui in Christum
credidit, die qua credidit, qualis ille qui universam legem implevit. Such is
he that believes, the day that he believes as is he that has fulfilled the
whole Law. In the day of his Baptism, that is, if he lives not to transgress
it. His title to heaven is as good, as if he had done whatsoever the Law
requires. I showed you before, that Pelag. in the matter of justification
departs not from the Church. Clemens of Rome S. Paul's Scholar, whom I will end
with, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, p. 13. (...). Abraham who was called
friend, was found faithful in that he became obedient to the word of God. p.
40. (...). Wherefore was our Father Abraham blessed? was it not because he did
righteousness and truth through Faith? p. 41. (...), They were all, therefore,
glorified and magnified, not by themselves, or their own works, or just
actions which they had done, but by his will. And therefore we who are called
by his will through Christ Jesus, are not justified by our selves, or our own
wisdom, or understanding, or works that we have done with holiness of heart:
But by faith, whereby Almighty God has justified all from the beginning of the
world. The Fathers were not justified by their own works, but because, being
called by the will of God, as we to Christianity through Christ Jesus, they
were found faithful, in doing righteousness and truth through faith, as he
said of Abraham before. For, the works of Faith cannot be counted our own
works, which we had never done, had not Gods call gone before. That Faith then
which alone justifies imports as great and as real a change in the
jugdement and resoution of him that attaineth it, from unrighteous to
righteous, as the difference between the Law of all righteousness and the Law of
all unrighteousnes signifies For, upon other terms can no man profess himself
a Christian. And as great and as real a change it is that succeeds, upon that
change, between the relation, which he that is so changed did hold toward God
before, and now holds afterward, as the difference between the heir of Gods
wrath and of his kingdom imports. But, supposing that change which
justifying faith imports, already in being, that change which the effect of
it, in justifying imports, is of necessity, merely moral, and consists
only in the difference, between that remission of sins and Gods kingdom,
which the promise of his grace, and the debt of punishment, which the sentence
of his justice declares. Whether therefore justifying faith be Gods work or
not, (which here I dispute not, because here I cannot resolve) for the cause of
it. the effect of it in justifying, which here I debate, will signify no more
then an attribute due by right to him that has it, upon Gods promise;
importing no change in him, but that which it supposes, how much soever it
import his salvarion, that his relation to God be so changed. For, I may safely
here suppose that, which the title of this dispute, and the very name of the
Covenant of Grace attributed to the Gospel of Christ involveth; That Faith
justifyeth not by virtue of the work naturally, but morally, by that will and
appointment of God, by virtue whereof the Covenant of Grace stands. And this
necessarily holds in the sense of the Church, when it ascribes justification
to faith alone, in opposition to the works of the Law.

A necessary consequence whereof is this; That the forgiveness of our sins
will presuppose and require of us, that we forgive others their offenses
against us: Because we hold the forgiveness of our sins by the title of our
Christianity; Whereof, seeing it is one point, that we forgive other men their
offenses against us, of necessity, failing of the condition required on our
part, we fail of the promise tendered of Gods. Therefore the Fathers also, as
the Scriptures before, attribute remission of sins to Charity, to alms deeds,
and to forgiveing of offenses against us. Clemens in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, p. 65. (...). Happy were we if we did do the commandments of God
in the concord of Love. that our sins might be forgiven us through Love. The
Apostolical constitutions VII. 13. (...). If thou have, give by thine own
hands, that thou may act to the redemption of thy sins: For by alms and
truth sins are purged away. Lactantius, VI. 12. Magna est misericordiae
merces, cui Deus pollicetur, peccata se omnia remissurum. Si audieris, inquit,
preces supplicis tui, and ego audiam tuas: Si misertus laborantium fueris, ego
and in tuo labor miserebor. Si autem non respexeris, nec adjuveris, and ego
animum contra te geram, tuisque te legibus judicabo Great are the wages of
mercy, which God has promised, that he will remit all sins. If thou hear,
says he, the prayers of thy suppliant, I also will hear thine. If thou take
pity on them that are in pain, I also will take pity upon thy pain. But if
thou respect not, nor help them, I also will carry a mind against thee, and
judge thee by thine own Law. S. Chrysostom. Tomo VI. Orat. LXVII. (...). But
there is another way of cleansing sin, not inferior to this, not to remember
the malice of enemies, to contain wrath, to remit the sins of
fellow servants. For so, those which we have done against our Lord shall be
forgiven us. Behold also a second way to purge sins. For if ye forgive says
he -- And by and by; (...). But if you will learn a fourth, I will name alms:
For it has great force and not to be expressed. For to Nabucodonosor, being
arived at all kind of wickedness, and going over all goodness, Daniel says;
Redeem thy sins with almsdeeds, and thy transgressions with pitying the
poor. To the same purpose the same S. Chrysostom. makes forgiving of injuries,
giving thanks in affiction, mercy in helping our neighbors, the cure for
sin, as well as humility, confession, and prayer. In 2 ad Corinth. Hom. II.
Because thereby a Christian retires to his promise in Baptism, expecting
remission only from Gods promise in the same. So also, In Epist. ad Romans Hom.
XXV. S. Ambrose, De poenitentia II. 5. David beatum praedicavit and illum, cui
peccata per Baptismum remittuntur, and illum, cujus peccata operibus teguntur.
David proclaims for blessed, both him whose sins are remitted by Baptism,
and him whose sins are covered with works. So charity covers many sins
done after Baptism. Caesarius of Arles, Homil. I. Quoties infirmos visitamus,
in carcerem positos requirimus, discordes ad concordiam revocamus, indicto in
Ecclesia jejunio jejunamus, hospitibus pedes abluimus, ad vigili^s frequentius
convenimus, eleemosynam ante ostium praetereuntibus pauperibus damus, ini^icis
nostris quoties petierint indulgemus, istis operibus and his similibus minuta
peccata quotidie redimuntur. As often as we visit the sick, seek those that are
put in prison, reduce those that fall out to agreement, fast when a fast is
published in the Church, wash the feet of strangers, assemble more frequently
to wakes, give alms to the poor that go by the door, pardon our enemies as
often as they demand, by these works and like to these, small sins are every
day redeemed. S. Austine. Libro L. Homil. Hom. L. Cap. VIII. Non enim ea
dimitti precamur, quae jam in Baptismo dimissa sunt, and nisi dimissa credimus,
de ipsa fide dubitamus: sed utique de quotidianis peccatis hoc dicimus, pro
quibus etiam sacrificia eleemosynarum, jejuniorum, and ipsarum orationum and
supplicationum quisque pro suis viribus offerre non cessat. For we pray not for
the pardon of those which are already pardoned in Baptism, which, if we
believe not that they are pardoned, we call the faith it self in doubt: But
this forsooth, we speak of daily sins, for which also no man cease to
offer, according to his power, the sacrifices of alms, and fasting, and even
of prayers, and supplications. S. Gregory, In Psalm. II. Poenitent. Habent enim
sancti viri aliquid quod in hac vita operire debeant: Quia omnino est
impossible, ut in loquutione, aut etiam in cogitatione nunquam delinquant.
Student igitur viri Dei, oculorum and linguae culpas tegere meritis vita,
student pondere bonorum operum premere immoderata verborum. For holy men have
something in this life which they ought to hide: Because it is altogether
impossible that in speech, or at least in thought they should never fail.
Therefore the men of God study, to cover the faults of the eyes and tongue,
with the merits of their lives: They study to press down immoderate words,
with the wait of good works. And by and by, Quia hoc quod tegitur, inferius
ponitur, and aliud aliquid superducitur, ut quod est subterpositum tegatur,
tegere peccata ducimur, quae, quasi subterponentes, abdicamus. Quibus nimirum,
quasi tegmen superdicimus, dum bonorum operum nos indumento vestimus. Peccata
itaque tegimus, si bona facta malis actibus superponamus. Because that which is
covered is laid beneath, and something drawn over it to cover that which lies
beneath; we are said to cover those sins which we give over, as laying them
beneath; Over which we draw a kind of covering, when we invest our selves with
the covering of good works. Therefore we cover sins if we lay good deeds
over evil works.

CHAP. X. What Pelagius questioneth concerning the Grace of Christ, what
Socinus further of the state of Christ before his birth. The opposition between
the first and second Adam in S. Paul, evidenceth original sin. Coucupiscence
in the unregenerate, and the inability of the Law to subdue it, evict the same.
The second birth by the holy Ghost evidenceth that the first birth propagateth
sin.
NOW, though all agree, that we are justified, not by the Law, nor by Works,
but by the Gospel, and by Grace, (because it is the mere Grace of God that
moved him to send our Lord Christ, by him to convince the World, that the
Gospel is true, and ought to be embraced) yet, that the Grace of Christ; that
is, those helps of grace which God gives in consideration of his merits and
sufferings, are requisite to enable those to whom this conviction is tendered,
to embrace it and to persevere in it, neither Pelagius of old, nor Socinus at
present will yield; Nor, that Abraham should have any thing to brag of, if he
should pretend to be justified by those works, which the free will of him,
whose understanding is convict that the Gospel is true, is, without other help
able to produce; Or, that, in consideration of any such help, the Gospel is to
be counted Grace, which if the helps it requires should be purchased by
obeying, it were not to be counted of free Grace. The words of Pelagius are
well enough known, remaining upon record in S. Austine, De Gratia Christi, 1.
7. Adjuvat enim nos per doctrinam and revelationem suam, dum cordis nostri
oculos aperit, dum nobis, ne praesentibus occupemur, futura demonstrat, dum
Di^boli pandit insidias, dum nos multiformi and ineffabili dono gratiae coelest
is illuminat. For he helps us by revealing his doctrine, while he opens the
eyes of our heart, while he shows us things to come, least we be busied about
things present, while he lays open the ambushes of the Devil, while he
inlightens us with the manifold gift of heavenly grace. And again, Cap. X.
Operatur in nobis Deus velle quod bonum est, velle quod sanctum est, dum nos
terrenis cupiditatibus diligentes, and mutorum amantium more tantum praesentia
diligentes, futurae gloriae magnitudine; (...) praemiorum pollicitatione
succendit, dum, revelatione sapientiae in desiderium Dei stupentem suscitat
voluntatem, dum nobis suadet omne quod bonum est. God works in us the willing
of that which is good and holy, while he inflames us, being addicted to earthly
lusts, and loving only things present, like mute creatures, with the promise
of great reward of glory to come, while by revealing of wisdom, he raises the
dull will to the desire of God, while he persuades us to all that is good.
Where, besides the Grace of God in making us reasonable creatures, he
acknowledges also the grace of the Law, meaning thereby the doctrine and
motives of Christianity, whereby says he, the mind is enlightened to understand
the difference between things transitory and everlasting, and the will is
inclined and persuaded to prefer true good before that which is counterfeite;
Which being said by a Christian, though, I see no express mention that he
makes of the Gospel of Christ, necessarily infers, that notwithstanding, he
supposed the same with Socinus; To wit, that, the conviction which the motives
of faith tender to all men that are made acquainted with it, as it is
necessarily the production of Gods mere Grace, so is it enough to enable a
reasonable man (being so convict, how much the world to come is to be preferred
before this) to embrace, and to persevere in that course by which a man stands
convict that he may attain it. And though Socinus has more expressly
maintained that, upon the embracing of Christianity, the holy Ghost is given to
enable Christians to prefer that which their profession imports; Yet, as I
find the truth thereof so manifestly laid down in the Scriptures of the New
Testament, that I cannot see how he should pretend to be a Christian, that
should deny it; So can I not remember that Pelagius ever went about to deny it.
On the contrary, there is appearance enough, that Pelagius acknowledges the
grace of the holy Ghost, whether in bringing a man to be, or to persevere unto
the end a Christian. His own words are yet extant upon 1 Cor. 11. 10. To us who
by believing have deserved to receive the Spirit of God, which shows us his
will; Nobis, qui fide meruimus Sp. Dei accipere, qui voluntatem suam nobis
ostendit; Has God revealed it. And by and by; Sensum Domini, qui est in viris
Spiritualibus, sine Spiritu Dei nemo cognovit. No man knows the meaning of God
which is in spiritual men, without Gods Spirit. And upon Romans IV. 17. Quare
multa peccata donavit abundantia donationis Sp. Sancti? Quia multa sunt dona.
Ipsa enim justitia donatur in baptismo, non ex merito datur. Why has the
abundant gift of the holy Ghost pardoned us many sins? Because Gods gifts are
many. For righteousness it self is given in Baptism, not rewarded as of merit.
For why might not Pelagius as well as Socinus, make it the purchase of man's
free will, upon the tender of Christianity, which is Gods Grace. For, the
appearance is sufficient and evident, that Socinus was so disgusted with the
opinion; That justifying faith consists in believing that a man is predestinate
to everlasting life, in consideration of the obedience of Christ imputed to his
account, because given for him and the elect, in opposition to the rest of
mankind; that, supposing the tender of the Gospel, the accepting of it he
places in the mere act of free will, upon which the gift of the holy Ghost,
necessary to the performance of that which Christianity professes depends, as
due debt by Gods promise; Who, having prevented mankind with that promise,
has suspended that which follows upon this compliance.

It is further to be considered, that Socinus also acknowledges the Grace of
the holy Ghost preventing the undertaking of Christianity on our part, under
the title of the Spirit of patefaction, as you may see by Volkelius Instit.
III. 14. Signifying hereby as it seems, that conviction which the Spirit of
God tendereth by the motives of Christianity, to manifest the truth of the
Gospel, preventing the will with help to enable it, but not effecting either
the outward act or the inward resolution to do it, as you may see S. Augustine
distinguish upon his own words, related out of his Books of free will. De
Gratia Christi. I. 41. This I here lay forth on purpose to show, that I cannot
come clear of that which I have undertaken to resolve, concerning the Covenant
of Grace, nor any man be satisfied in the difficulties that concern it, without
taking in hand the whole dispute concerning the free will of man, and the free
Grace of God. For having, by the premises, showed, that the condition which the
Covenant of Grace requires on our part, is an act of free will: (Though such an
act as compriseth the engagement of a man's whole life to Gods service:) Unless
it appear, that the grace of the holy Ghost, which God found requisite for the
performance of Christianity, can never be ascribed to the free will of man as
due to the right useof it, it will not sufficiently appear, how the Gospel may
be called the Covenant of Grace.

But, before I go further, I must not omit to observe a great difference
between Socinus and Pelagius, and how that difference seems to reflect upon the
present dispute. For Socinus, first had conceived such disgust, as I said, of
that predestination, which appoints men to life, merely in consideration of the
obedience of Christ, as their own for whom it was appointed. Then considered
well, that free will serves not, so long as the helps, whereby we are enabled
to embrace Christ, and to persevere in Christianity, may be attributed to the
obedience of as assigned by God to the consideration and recognizance of it.
And therefore found it the only clear course of establishing that force of
freewil, that he had imagined, without consulting the proceediugs of the Church
against Pelagius, to say; That the merits and sufferings of Christ were not
valuable for such a purchase, as being a mere man, from his birth, only, that
he was conceived, not by the way of humane generation, but by the holy Ghost of
the blessed Virgin: And that afterward, being thirty years of age, or
thereabouts, according to the time that John the Baptist began to preach, he
was taken up into heaven to God, and there made acquainted with his message of
the Gospel to mankind, which he undertaking, upon the peril of all the
hardship which he was to endure at the Jews hands for it, it pleased God to
advance him for his obedience, (though due as to God from his creature) to be
God, to the true power and worship of God, though, in dependence upon himself
originally God. For, the obedience of Christ being thus over rewarded in his
own person, it remains, that the gift of the holy Ghost, howsoever requisite
to the performance of Christianity, be ascribed to the mere goodness of God,
which moved him to propose the promise thereof, to those who should embrace the
Gospel, as a recompense for so doing, not as any grace of Christ, that is, any
help of grace given in consideration of Christ, resolving a man to embrace it.
It cannot be said, that Pelagius had any hand in this part of Socinus his
Heresy, who could not have been heard in the Church at that time, had he once
advanced any such ground as this, though so pertinent to his position as you
see by Socinus. But, as Pelagius thought of no such thing when he began first
to dispute against the grace of Christ, so can it not be said that his
followers never thought of having recourse to this plea, as the only clear
ground for their position to stand upon, could it be made good. But for the
truth hereof, there being no cause why I should swell this Book with those
things that have been said already; I will remit the reader to Jansenius his
August, where he shall find what remains in the records of the Church, how the
Pelagians went about to join with the Nestorians, and to make our Lord Christ
to have purchased his Godhead, by the actions and behavoiur of his humane
nature, and how, in this regard they remain involved in the condemnation of
Nestorius at the council of Ephesus. Though, whereas the beginning of this
error is there ascribed to Origin, it is easy to observe a vast difference
between this pretense and that conceit which is found at present in his books
(...), (but whether resolutely deliverd by him may be questioned) that the
humane soul of Christ was chosen by God for the word to be incarnate in, in
consideration of that which it had done in the other world. For, this supposes
the Godhead of Christ before his incarnation, and the truth of it, which
Socinus his opinion, (to which these relations make the Pelagians to have
inclined) destroys. And so it is manifest, that, according to Socinus, there
can be no such thing as the Grace of Christ, according to Pelagius there is
not. But, that which is common to both, proceeds upon a supposition common to
both; That man is presently, in the same state of free will in which he was
created, that the fall of our first parents did no harm to their posterity,
neither can their children, that are baptized, be baptized into the remission
of sin, when they have none of their own; Though for Socinus his part, he
laughs at the baptizing of infants, who allows the baptizing of men that have
sinned themselves, but as a ceremony of indifference, which Pelagius, though he
be content to allow and require, yet, not to the purpose of remission of sin
in infants. Now the Church of God, in which the Baptism of infants has been
practiced ever since the times of the Apostles, always understood the
Gentiles, (that had been left to themselves to fall away to the worship of
Idols) to be wholly under the power of Satan, by virtue of that advantage which
he had of our forefathers: And the Jews who had retired themselves to the
worship of one true God, so little able by that Law, to withdraw themselves
from under sin, that few of them were vouchsafed Gods Spirit: acknowledging
therefore all this to proceed from the leaven of the first sin, they
acknowledged the necessity of Christ's coming for the cure of it, the
sufficience of the cure in his Godhead, from everlasting, and the obedience of
our flesh, wherein it was incarnate. This being the state of the dispute, it
appears, that the intent which I propose obliges me, not to dispatch,
without maintaining the eternal Godhead of our Lord Christ; Though not so as
to consider the whole controversy of the holy Trinity, but only that of the
person and natures of Christ, how far it is declared to us by the Scriptures,
and original Tradition of the Church. Knowing nevertheless, that, this being
resolved, the rest of the controversy concerning the holy Trinity necessarily
falls to the ground of it self, as having nothing whereupon to subsist, when
the everlasting Godhead of Christ is once maintained before. Now, the ready way
that I can think of, to go through so great a dispute as briefly as is
possible, is to take in hand first the point of original sin, in which, the
dispute between Pelagius and Socinus on the one side and the Church on the
other side is grounded. For, therefore, I hope, it will appear the shortest way
to dispatch the whole dispute, because, that being decided, (together with that
which depends upon it, as incident to it, concerning the state of our Lord
Christ before his coming in the flesh) the rest will appear to consist, either
in controversies of Divines, or in mistakes and disputes about words.

I begin with S. Paul, because he it is, who, having laid forth the necessity
of Christianity to the salvation as well of Jews as of Gentiles, in the
beginning of his Epistle to the Romans, and in the fourth chapter, by the
Example of Abraham confirmed the same; Or, if you please, answered the
objection concerning the salvation of the Fathers, before and under the Law;
proceeds in the fifth Chapter to lay forth, both the ground upon which it is
effectual, which is the death of Christ, and the ground upon which it was
necessary, which is the sin of Adam. Thus then says S. Paul Romans V. 12, 13,
14. Therefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
and so death passed upon all, in whom all sinned. For, until the Law sin
was in the world; Now sin is not imputed where there is no Law; And yet death
reigned from Adam until Moses, even upon them that had not sinned after the
likeness of Adams transgression, who is the figure of him that is to come. It
is said, that the words, (...), are to be translated in as much as all had
sinned; To signify, that Spiritual death came, after Adam, upon all that had
sinned as Adam did, inasmuch as they had sinned: For, as for bodily death, they
believe not, no more then Pelagius, that it was the punishment of Adams sin,
but the condition of man's birth; Only the troubles, the cares, the sorrows by
which men come to their graves, these, as they acknowledge to be consequences,
as of Adams sin, so, of all those sins whereby men follow and imitate Adam;
so, they think to be meant by the sentence; In the day wherein thou eatest
thereof shall thou die the death. But this is no less then to deny the
literal sense of the Scripture, which the Church has received for one of
Origens errors, in the interpretation of the beginning of Genesis. What is it
else to say; That Adam was liable to bodily death by nature, but to spiritual
death by sin? For it is manifest by the premises, that through all the Old
Testament, the second death is no otherwise preached, then under the figure of
the first death; and that, by virtue of the ground laid from the beginning that
the Covenant of Grace, which tendreth life and death everlasting, was only
intimated under the Covenant of nature, (which the Law only received, and
limited to the happiness of the land of promise, as to the Israelits) tendering
expressly only blessings and mercies of this life, to the civil and outward
obedience of Gods commandments. And can it be imagined, that, in the very first
tender that God made to man, of life in consideration of obedience, and death
of disobedience, this life and this death must be understood to be the second,
when the obedience was only in abstaining from the forbidden fruit? What was
then that fruit of the tree of Life, by eating whereof they might have
preserved themselves from death? I ask not what it signified, but what it was.
For, all reason will require, admitting the premises, that it signified that,
whereby the soul escapes spiritual death: But the same reason will enforce,
that it must be the fruit of a tree, which, so long as they eat not of the tree
of knowledge, they were licensed to eat, to preserve them from bodily death.
Neither is there any difficulty in that they ask; How all the posterity of
Adam should have come by the fruit of that tree, that grew no where but in the
garden of Eden; For, I suppose it had been as easy, to have planted all parts
of the world with the same tree, as with the posterity of Adam, had he
continued in obedience: Who, being not driven out of Eden, as upon his
disobedience, but sending his posterity, to do that, in the rest of the world,
which he did there; had made all the world Eden, by placing the Paradise of God
wheresoever innocence dwelt. In this case, I see not why any man should take
care for the tree of Life, that no posterity of Adam might die. No more, then,
what should become of that innocent posterity, which, when it had so planted
the World, the counsel of God, concerning the propagation of man kind, may well
be thought to have been come to ripeness. The Socinians indeed do allege
Josephus, who, speaking of the tree of life, does not say, that it should have
made man immortal, but only, that it should have made him live to very great
years. But that is of no consequence; In regard that it is not expressed in
the Scripture, that God would have had man live everlastingly upon the earth,
had he lived in obedience. For, supposing that it was a question among the
Pharisees, (to which sect it appears Josephus inclined most) whether so, or,
whether God would translate them to a heavenly life after a time of obedience
here, (which, to the Pharisees that acknowledge the resurrection and the world
to come, must needs seem credible enough) it is no marvel, that Josephus
should say; That, by virtue of the tree of life, they had lived to a very great
age, though, in case not translated, they might as well have lived always by
virtue of it.

But let us hear S. Paul. 1 Cor. XV. 21, 22. For, since by man came death, by
man also came the resurrection of the dead. For, as by Adam all died, so by
Christ shall all be made alive. Is there any rising from bodily death but by
Christ? I say not any rising, in the quality of those, in whom the Spirit of
Christ dwells, of whom S. Paul says, that He who raised Christ from the
dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, through his Spirit dwelling in
you. Romans VIII. 11. But, setting aside this quality, it is the coming of
Christ, and his trump, that raises again, even those that shall rise to
judgment. And can it, for all this be doubted, whether that life was lost by
Adams fall, which the rising of Christ shall restore? And supposing, that
Christ raises only those that are Christ's, as S. Paul speaks, it is their
bodies that he raises at last, and that from that death which came by Adam.
Seeing then it cannot be doubted, that S. Paul, when he says that by one man
came death, means the death of the body, and seeing death passed upon all, it
is manifest, that, Adams sin passed upon all, upon whom the death passed, which
it brought after it. For, otherwise how can it be said, sin came into the
world by one man? Is it possible to imagine, that all men should propose to
themselves to imitate the sin of Adam? Not possible. Supposing all Adams
posterity sinners to God, they may be understood all to have imitated their
first Father Adam, two ways: For, in as much as they sin against God as he
first did, they may be said to imitate him in doing the like of that which he
did, though they had no knowledge of what he did, much less propose to
themselves his example, to do that wherein they are said to imitate him, in
sinning against God. This I confess may truly be said, but not to S. Paul's
purpose; Who intends not to say, wherein sin consists, as to say, in doing
what Adam did: But, from whence it proceeds, that from thence he may show how
it is taken away. Now if it be said, that all men in sinning do imitate Adam,
as proposing his example to themselves in the nature of a motive, so that,
therefore, it might be said, that sin came into the world by one man and
death by sin, which the Apostles discourse requires; This would be evidently
false: In as much as the greatest part of the sins of mankind, are and have
been committed, by them that never knew what Adam did, so far from proposing
to themselves, to do the like. So that it cannot be avoided, that, by the sin
of Adam all sin came into the world, as well as all death. And therefore,
(...), seems to signify in whom, that is, through whom, all have sinned, as
Acts V. 16. (...), through the faith of his name. 1 Cor. VIII. 11. (...); shall
perish through thy knowledge. For, if it be said, that it is not a handsome
manner of speech that (...) in whom, should relate to (...) by one man, which
it stands in such a distance from; Let him be sure, that there is nothing more
ordinary in S. Paul's language, then such transpositions. And seeing death,
which I have showed the Apostle speaks of, has equally passed upon all
mankind, it would be very impertinent to say; that it passed upon all men, in
as much as every man had sinned, And truly though (...), may signify in Greek,
in as much as all had sinned, or, so far as every man had sinned. or, because
all had sinned, to wit in Adam; by the same reason as (...), or, (...) in the
language of the Poets, signifies the same, (as in the beginning of Homer,
(...)) yet it seems to me evident, that the sin which S. Paul speaks of,
when he says; that, Through the disobedience of one man sin came into the
world, and death by sin; is the sin that every man does in the world; And
therefore when it follows (...); the meaning must be, through whom all men
have sinned those sins which themselves do. For, seeing there was mention of one
man before, by whom sin came into the world, it is more reasonable, that (...)
should be personal, relating to that one man through whom all have sinned,
then real, to signify because all had sinned. And so it is not said by these
words that all Adams posterity did commit the sin of Adam, in his committing
of it, But it is said, that all the sin that Adams posterity commits comes by
the means of Adams sin, that is, original sin is not expressly, but
metonymically, not formally, but fundamentally signified, in that all sin is
affirmed to come from that of Adam, and evicence also, in that death, is said
to come by it.

That which has been said makes me stand astonished, to see a Doctor of the
Church of England acknowledge no further signification of the Apostles words;
As by one man sin came into the world, and death by sin, and so sin
passed upon all, in whom all have sinned; But this; That Adam sinned first, and
so all his posterity after him: So that by one man sin came into the world,
because, coming upon all, it must needs come first upon the first; Not because
his sin had any influence upon others to cause their sins. For, seeing
Pelagius, whom it concerned so much to maintain, that Adams sin did no harm
to his posterity, having made it the ground of his Heresy, could not neverthe
less put off the force of these words without a shift of imitation, though so
pitifully ^ame, that it could not reach the far greater part of his
posterity; It may justly seem strange, that he who pretends not to go any thing
so far as Pelagius, should not allow that sense of them which Pelagius could
not refuse. But if he oversee that which obliged Pelagius to grant, that they
intend to set forth the means by which sin came into the world, the
observing of it will be enough to exclude his devise. For, to let pass that
which is peremptory in them, the comparison between the first and second Adam,
(by whom this Doctor will not deny the righteousness of Christians to come
otherwise then as the first righteous, whatsoever Pelagius or Socinus do)
because I cannot void that issue in this place; The very process of S. Paul's,
dispute having first convicted both Jews, and Gentiles of sin, then Chap. IV.
showed, how that faith which he preached promises righteousness, requires us
to understand, that he comes now to set forth, by what means this sin on the
one side, and this righteousness on the other comes into the world. Neither
will the words of the text be so satisfied, wherein we find the same sense
repeated in diverse expressions, which are not all capeable of that equivocation
whereof these words, by one man's disobedience are. For S. Paul says not only
(...) by one man, but, (according to the reasons premised) (...), through whom
all have sinned, and, (...), by, that is, through the transgression of that
one, and, (...), judgment to condemnation out of one, besides on the
otherside, (...), the gift through Grace, Romans V. 12, 15, 16. And this shall
serve for the present to show how unable this conceit is to stand against the
evidence of the words; Reserving that which is most peremptory in the matter,
and the consequence of it, till I come to show that our Lord Christ, the second
Adam, is the means of our righteousness, and therefore by that likeness of
reason which S. Paul's discourse proceeds upon, the first Adam the means of our
sin.

And to this purpose speaks that which follows; For, when the Apostle
argues, that, whereas sin is not imputed when there is no Law,
notwithstanding, death reigned upon all those that had not sinned as Adam did;
That is, by transgressing such an express law of God as Adam did transgress;
(Observing, that the Fathers, who walked with God, whom Adam offended, tasted
nevertheless, of that death which Adam incurred) he infers to us, that the
effect of Adams sin, remains in the whole kind of his posterity, to which
death, the punishment thereof belongs. And, I beseech you, of whom speaks
S. Paul but of all mankind, when he writes thus? Romans VII. 5-13. For when we
were in the flesh, the passions of sin which were by the Law were exercised
in our members, to bear fruit unto death; But now are we voided to the Law,
that being dead by which we were held, that we may live in the new Spirit, not
in the old letter. What shall we say then? Is the Law sinful? God forbid. Nay,
I had not known sin but by the Law. For, I had not known concupiscence, had
not the Law said, Thou shall not covet. But sin taking advantage by the
commandment, wrought in me all concupiscence. For, without the Law sin was
dead. Now I lived sometime without the Law. But the commandment coming, sin
revived and I died. And, that commandment which was for life, to me was found
to death. For sin taking advantage by the commandment, deceived me, and slew
me by it. So the Law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just and good. Did
then that which was good become death to me? God forbid. But sin, that it
might appear sin, wrought me death by that which was good, that sin by the
commandment might become sinful above measure. For, though S. Paul's speech
here be concerning a Jew, in the person of one, that of a Jew was become a
Christian, yet, seeing the proposition of the Apostle bears, that the Gentile
is much more involved in that condemnation, to which the Jew is liable; that
which belongs to every Jew that comes to Christianity, will be true much more a
fortiori, of the Gentile, all mankind being then completely divided into Jew
and Gentile. And therefore, let no man think, that my present purpose shall
engage me, before I can make use of this Scripture, to decide the question now
on foot among Divines, whether S. Paul here speaks, in the person of an
unregenerate man or regenerate, which notwithstanding, in another place I may
be engaged to decide. For the present, it is enough for my turn, that an
unregenerate man, admitting S. Paul, cannot refuse his own case to be that,
which S. Paul here sets forth to be this; That, being in the flesh, the
passions of sin were exercised in his members, and so forth. For, I know it
is said, that, to be in the flesh is to be in the custom of sin; But what
difference makes that in the case, when all to whom the Gospel first comes, are
in the flesh, excepting those who, under the Law, though not by the mere Law,
came to that state of Grace in which the Fathers stood? And therefore it is to
me of no consequence, whatsoever the meaning of the Apostle may be, when he
describes those sinful passions, which he says were exercised in their
members, to be those that were through the Law. I see there are two opinions of
his meaning, when he says afterward; That sin, getting advantage by the
comandment, (without which it was dead, but, the man alive, and when it came,
sin revived and he died. So that the Law which tendered life, became to his
death, because sin by advantage of the Law slew him deceitfully) wrought in him
all concupiscence. For, one opinion says; That, when an unregenerate man
becomes convict, that the Law of God takes hold of his inward inclinations,
which he finds to be evil, the inbred corruption of nature, not submitting
thereto upon this mere conviction, flies out into utter defiance of God and his
Law, in all disobedience to it, whereby the concupiscence that is opposed may
be satisfied. The other says; That the Law of Moses, in the outward and
literal sense thereof requiring only civil obedience, answerable to that
temporal happiness which it tendereth; It is no marvel, that Jews, being
tied to the letter of the Law, as their study and business, should think the
outward and civil observation thereof to be the utmost intent of it, which we
see, to this day, to be the error that detaines them from Christianity: And
therefore it is properly said, according to this opinion, that sin, taking
this advantage by the Law, slew me by deceit. But, to me this dispute is of no
consequence; Or rather, both opinions are to be admitted, in relation to the
two several senses of the Law, which I have advanced. For, as to the literal
sense of the Law, (which the Gentile could have nothing to do with) it is
manifest this might be. For it is manifest that it is become a scandale to the
Jew, to make him think, that he stands right in Gods Court, without any Gospel
of Christ, and thereupon, to induce him to defy it. But, as to the spiritual
sense of the law (in which the Gentile also has his interest, as concerning
things) written in the hearts of all men whatsoever the occasion is, by which
it becomes revived in the heart, in which at any time it may have been dead,
(because it neither gives rule to the actions thereof, nor binds it over to
judgment) most certain it is, and most evident the meaning of S. Paul, that
when it comes to convict a man of his duty, and, by consequence what he is
liable to upon the faileure, the Law that is for life will prove to death: That
is, if Grace help not, sin will overcome. For, if the help of the Law,
convicting of one true God, his providence and judgment, even upon the secrets
of the heart, were not able to reclaim those that were bred under it to
spiritual righteousness; much less shall that conviction, whereby the light
of nature evidences the same, be of force to the same purpose.

And this is that which S. Paul intimates Romans VIII. 3, 4. For, whereas the
want of force in the Law was weak through the flesh; God, sending his son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, and concerning sin, condemned sin in the
flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, that walk
not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit. For, if the doctrine
of Moses Law, (which, as I have showed, gives so really eminent advantages
toward the choice of true righteousness) was uneffectuall to the Jews, by
reason of the flesh; of necessity, the light of nature must needs become
uneffectual to the Gentiles, in the same regard, of the flesh; Which is
therefore the common principle, by means whereof true righteousness can take
no place, without the Gospel of Christ, neither in Jews nor Gentiles. And
therefore, that which follows in S. Paul's discourse Romans VII. 14 --, (leaving
for the present the dispute, how far it takes place in the regenerate) in all
opinions must take place in the unregenerate, upon a principle common to all
mankind; Which is this, that as the Law of God is spiritual, so, man is
carnal, and by consequence sold under sin. For, in whom there is a
contradiction to the Law of God, and that righteousness which it requires of
man, from the inward motions of the heart, so soon as the understanding becoms
convict, that, this it requires, ^n him there is, unquestionably, a principle
of rebellion against God, for something that he is inclined to desire for
himself, without, and against all respect of God. Now, by the process of S.
Paul's discourse, all Christians that admit S. Paul must allow, that it
supposes such a principle, in all that come to Christianity, whether or no it
infer the like, in those that are already come to it; To wit, not to do what
they like, but what they hate, and, approving the Law to be good that forbids
it, to do the evil which they would not do, not the good which they are willing
to do: So that, though there be a Law of God which in their judgment they
approve, yet there is another Law in their menbers, which prevails against it,
to captive them to the law of sin. Which law, be it the custom of sin as
much as you will, provided that this custom have passed over all mankind, all
that the Gospel is tendered to; Seeing it is the choice of no man, no nation,
but common to Adams posterity, it must needs be derived by propagation from his
sin, whom his posterity not knowing, could not purpose to imitate.

The words of S. Paul Gal. V. 16, 17. are to the same purpose. Now I say; Walk
in the spirit, and fulfill not the desires of the flesh. For the flesh Iusteth
against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh, and these are opposite to
one another, so that ye may not do that ye would. For, supposing the same
dispute, whether they be meant of Christians, or of the unregenerate; at least,
when Christianity is tendered, when men are exhorted to embrace it, then is
there in man a principle opposite to that, which the spirit of God, bringing
the Gospel, and brought by the Gospel, requires: And that inferrs the same
consequence as before. But I must not forget the passage of S. Paul Ephesians. I. 1,
2, 3. And you, being dead in trespasses and sins, in which once ye walked,
according to the age of this world, according to the Ruler of the dominion of
the air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience; among
whom, all we also conversed once in the lusts of our flesh, doing the desires
of our flesh, and thoughts, and were by nature the children of wrath as the
rest also. For I must observe, that Paul, writing to a Church of Gentiles
converted to be Christians, himself of a Jew, first concludes the Gentiles to
be under the power of Satan; And then, least it should be thought that the
Jews, of whom himself was one, were invited to be Christians upon other
terms; he infers of them, that, we also among them Gentiles, were by nature
children of wrath. Where it is plain, that S. Paul, having expressed the
sins of the Gentiles, in which he says they were dead, and having aequalled
the Jews to them, for walking according to their lusts, cannot possibly be
understood to speak of the common birth of all men, when he says we were by
nature the children of wrath as well as others. Whosoever shall peruse
Epiphanius, a Christian Writer, but in such a style, as those that were not
bred to the learning and elegance of the Greeks language may be supposed to
use, (and therefore much resembling the style of the Apostles, and of very good
use for them, who would inwardly be acquainted with their language) he shall
find this word (...) very ordinarily used by him, not to signify as commonly
it does, by nature, or, by birth, but truly and really. Which signification,
how well it suits with the words of S. Paul, when he says; We Jews were
(...), really the children of wrath, as also the rest that were Gentiles; Let
any man that can judge of learning judge. So, I insist not upon this word
(...), but upon S. Paul's discourse: and upon the ground hitherto persuaded, I
argue; That, Jews as well as Gentiles, being thus concluded under the
necessity of the Gospel, which is the grace of Christ, the ground of it can be
no other, then the corruption of all the posterity of the first Adam which
only the second Adam can cure.

I come now to our Saviors instruction to Nicodemus, when, of a Doctor of the
Jews, he became first a disciple of Christ, John III. 3, 5, 6. Verily, verily,
I say unto thee; Unless a man be born again, that is, of water, and of the
holy Ghost, he cannot see, or enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born
of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit. Marvel
not that I said to thee; We must be born again. And to the same effect S. John
himself speaking in his own person of our Lord Christ, John I. 12, 13. But as
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the children of God, to
wit, to those that believe in his name: Who were not born of bloods, or of the
will of the flesh, but of God. In these words I acknowledge a very considerable
difficulty, though, perhaps, it is not that which most men do forecast; But I,
that do maintain, that the Baptism of Christ was not instituted when these
words were said; having said already, that the Baptism of Christ is that, to
which the promise of remission of sins is allowed, must needs find it hard to
answer, what our Lord meant when he said; Unless a man be born of water and of
the holy Ghost. For, if the Sacrament of Baptism were not then instituted,
when our Savior spoke these things to Nicodemus, how shall we say, that
original sin is signified by these words, wherein there is no mention of the
cure of it? Surely, upon the ground before settled, that the second birth is by
the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost given, in consideration of the profession of
Christianity, by being baptized. For this being settled, it may remain
questionable, what Nicodemus could then understand by the name of water; but,
it cannot be questionable, that there is no regeneration without the holy
Ghost, and no holy Ghost without that condition upon which the gift of the holy
Ghost is due, that is, without Baptism. To answer this question then, which,
we are thus secured, that it cannot be answered to the prejudice of the Church,
and the faith thereof; It will be worth the while to compare the discourse of
our Lord, to the company that followed him to Capernaum, in the sixth of John,
with this to Nicodemus. For, no man can be so unreasonable as to imagine, that
the Sacrament of the Eucharist was instituted by our Lord, at the time of that
discourse, or by virtue of it, of the institution whereof we have so due
account in the Gospells, before the suffering of our Lord. And yet it would be
a strange thing to imagine, that all that long discourse of our Lord should
have no relation to that Sacrament: Especially, seeing it is so agreeable to
all reason, that our Lord should deliver unto his disciples the effect of his
Gospel, in such terms as suited best with the ceremony of that Sacrament,
wherewith he intended to establish the same. For supposing, the eating of the
flesh of Christ crucified, and the drinking of his blood, to be the
consideration of his passion, tending to a resolution of taking up his Cross;
we have in it the sum of Christianity, consisting, in the bearing of Christ's
Cross, that is, in conforming our selves to his sufferings. Report we this to
the discourse of our Lord with Nicodemus, and it will seem strange to me, that
any man should marvel, that, when the Sacrament of Baptism was not yet
instituted, our Lord should propose his Gospel to him, upon this ground, that
no man born of the flesh could attain to the kingdom of God, without being
born again of water and the holy Ghost. Seeing that, whether he understood or
not, what our Lord meant by water, it is enough, that the Spirit, which
renews the old birth of the flesh, depends upon that which it signifies,
whatsoever it is. Whether Nicodemus, for the understanding of our Lord, betake
himself to the consideration of the several Baptismes of the law, or to the
Baptism of John the Baptist, or to the Baptism by which proselytes were made
Jews, which diverse learned men have both declared and alleged, to the
clearing of this difficulty, to very good purpose; certain it is by the
premises, that the condition of salvation is the profession of Christianity, by
baptism; that the gift of the holy Ghost is not promised upon any other terms.
Therefore, the Sacrament of Baptism being instituted, there is no assurance of
salvation without it, where the precept thereof takes place, therefore the
first birth of the flesh is liable to original sin.

CHAP. X. The Old Testament charge all men as well as the wicked to be
sinful from the womb. David complains of himself as born in sin, no
less then the Wise man of the children of the Gentiles. How Leviticall Laws
argue the same. And temporal death under the Old Testament. The book of
Wisdom and the Greek Bible.
BUt it is requisite that we look into the Old Testament, to see what arguments
of the same will discover themselves there, provided that we be advised, not to
expect, the reasons upon which the necessity of the Gospel is grounded, clearly
expressed there, where the Gospel it felf is but intimated. Those that will not
admit the Faith of the Church, without such proofs as themselves require, may
with the Jews, disbelieve the Gospel, if our Lord will not prove it by such
miracles as they would have, and when and where they would have them done. But,
admitting the truth of Christianity upon such reasons as God has made
effectual to subdue the world to it, it will be consequently necessary, that
there should be arguments of original sin in the Old Testament, but darker
then those which have been, and shall be propounded out of the New. Certainly
it deserves much consideration, that Moses says, Genesis VI. 5. And the Lord saw
that great was the evil of man upon earth, and every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart only evil all the day long. And again, Genesis VII^. 8.
Upon smelling Noah's sacrifice, God says to himself; I will no more curse the
earth for man, because the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth.
For, first God declares himself, as a severe judge, to take vengeance upon the
sins of mankind by the deluge, because the world was overflowed with sin:
And afterward, either for the same reason, (because sin cannot be washed
out, no not with the waters of a deluge, so long as mankind is in being upon
the earth) or, notwithstanding it, he declares, that he will curse the earth no
more for man's sake. Here it will be impossible, to render a reason of that
deluge of sin (which first, brought a deluge of waters, but could not
overcome Gods goodness for mankind) without a principle common to all mankind.
Such variety there is in their fancies, such contrariety in the inclinations
which they produce, that it is impossible that they should agree in mischief,
were they merely of Gods making. And therefore Solomon having premised a hard
word for women; That, seeking account one by one, he had found a man of a
thousand, but a woman of all these he had not found; infers, Eccl. VII. 29.
Only this, behold, I have found that God made man right, but they have found
out many devises. Where, I suppose he summoneth all men to infer, that
between the uprightness in which God made man, and the many crooked devises
which they have found out to themselves, there must something have fallen out
to create a common principle, to which those many inventions may be imputed.
But the act of Adam, which passed away so soon as it was done, had it left
nothing behind it, could have born the blame of it self alone, and of nothing
else. When God commands the Israelites to put a fringe upon the corners of
their garments, he gives this reason for it; Numb. XV. 39. And ye shall see
it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord and do them: And not look
after your hearts, and your eyes, after which ye commit whoredom. Surely, when
he sets the lusts of their eyes and the imagination of their hearts in
opposition to the commandment of God, he justifies the words of our Lord, Mat.
X. 36. taken from the Prophet. Mich. VII. 6. to be fulfilled in every man's
heart; A man's enemies are those of his own house. And Solomon's taunt to the
young man, Eccles. XI. 9 Walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the light of
thine eyes; But know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee to,
judgment. Gods complaint by the Prophet Ezekiel. VI. 9. I am broken with their
whorish heart, which has departed from me; and with their eyes, which go a
whoring after their Idols: Leads us (for the reason and ground of both) to
that of the Apostle, 1 John II. 16. For whatsoever is in the World, the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father
but of the World. But what is there between God and the world, but the old
serpent, and the leaven which he has poisoned man with? And this is that venim
which we read of, Psalm. LVIII. 4 5, 6. The wicked are estranged from their
mothers womb as soon as they are born they go astray and speak lies: They have
venime like the venime of a serpent, like the deaf addar that stops his
ear; That will not hear the voice of the inchanters, that inchant with charms
cunningly.

For, if it be said, that all this speaks only of the wicked, which, of their
own choice have addicted themselves to sin, and that, by being bred to it by
their Fathers, and predecessor, and so debauched from their own natural
innocence; I shall presently appeal to David himself, and his confession, with
which he pretends to grace, Psalm. LI. 7. 8. Behold I was formed in wickedness,
and in sin did my mother conceive me. But behold, thou requirest truth in the
intrailes, and shall make me to understand wisdom secretly. I know it is said,
that this is nothing but an hyperbolicall expression of the Prophet, whereby he
charge himself with sin even before he could understand what sin was,
and that, from the time of his conceiving in the womb, were that possible, he
has been liable to sin, and so left, without mercy. And to this purpose is
alleged that of the Pharisees to the blind man. John IX. 34. Thou wast wholly
born in sin, and do thou teach us? To argue that among the Jews, it was an
ordinary expression to aggravate a man's sin, by saying; That he was borne in
sin. And truly, what the Jews of that time might conceive, of the coming in
of sin, is not altogether so clear, in regard of the Apostles words to our
Lord, upon the occasion of the same man, when they asked our Lord; whether he
was born blind for his own sin, or for the sin of his parents, John IX.
2. Which our Lord answering: for neither, but for a particular intent, of
showing a particular work of God upon him; Denies not the common taint of our
nature, when he affirms; That, particualr works of providence upon particualr
persons, have particular reasons and ends, for which God will have them come to
pass: But shows, that there were several opinions in vogue at that time
through the nation, and, that there might be a conceit, of men's souls sinning
in other bodies, or, before they came into these bodies, according to the
position of Pythagoras, or the conjecture of Origin; (Though, the opinion of
Herod concerning John the Baptist, that he should be alive again in our Lord,
Mat. XIV. 2. does not appear to proceed from any such presumption as this, but
from an imagination, that dead men's souls might come and live again in the
world, whether in the same or other bodies) From this opinion then, the
reproach of the Pharisees to this man, that he was born in sin may well seem
to proceed. And their error will not prejudice the truth, that all men are
indeed born in sin.

But I observe further, that the people of God, as they were totally divided
from the worship of Idols, so from the consequences thereof, which Paul, in the
first of the Romans, shows to have been all sorts of uncleanness in the
first place, and then, the rest of those evils, which, toward the end of the
Chapter he qualifies the Gentiles with. For, it is manifest, that uncleanness
which contained no civil in justice was counted but an indifferent thing with
all the Gentiles. Let him that would be satisfied of this peruse what the Wise
man has said of the seed of the Gentiles, which he compares with the Jews
whom they persecuted, all along his whole work, Wisdom III. 12-IV. 1-6. Where
it is manifest, that he sets forth the posterity of the Gentiles, as defiled
with the uncleanness wherein they were bred and born. And this is most
certainly the reason why S. Paul says of Christians married to Gentiles 1
Cor. VII. 14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband; Else were your children
unclean, but now are they holy. To wit, that a heathen husband or wife,
consenting to dwell in wedlock with a Christan, is sanctified by a Christian
husband or wife, by whose means he is brought to this engagement. For, when S.
Paul advises the Christian party to continue in wedlock contracted with an
Idolater before Christianity, he presupposes, that the Gentile shall be
willing to forbear the vulgar uncleanness of the Gentiles, for the love of a
Christian yokefellow. Otherwise it could not be honest, nor for the reputation
of a Christian among the Gentiles, having power of divorcing, (as both parties
had in the Roman Empire) to continue in wedlock with him that acknowledged not
Christian, but only civil wedlock; That is, the wife to be tied in regard of
the issue, but the man free to all uucleannesse, which the Roman Laws no way
restrained. And therefore their children so far from being unclean, according
to the manners of heathen parents, that they are holy, upon presumption, that
they shall be bred in the instruction of Christianity, by the means of that
party which was Christian. I observe again that the Prophet David, speaking of
his wicked enemies, (the figure of the Jews, whom thereby he designeth
aforehand to be the enemies of our Lord and his Church) applies the same
expression to them, (being of the carnal people of God, but far from Jews
according to the spirit) which the people of God other whiles use concerning
the Gentiles; when he says, that they are estranged from the womb, and, as
soon as they are born, go astray and speak lies. For, it is manifest, that he
calls them (...) Psalm. LIX. 6, 9. which, by the title, appears to be written
of the Jews his enemies. And so Psalm. XLII. 2. Which word commonly stands in
as ill a sense with the Jews, as (...), Gentes, and, Nationes to the
Christians, not for people, (...), or, (...) but for Ethnicks or Gentiles, that
is to say, Idolaters. And so to this day the Jews call us Christians (...),
that is to say Gentiles. And upon these observations I am induced to believe,
that the Pharisees, and those of the Consistory, (out of the confidence they
had of their own holiness, which they presumed of upon the Curisity which they
kept the Law with) did judge of those that pretended not to the same, as of
people once removed from Gentiles, and so sinners from their birth, by the
grossness of those manners in which they were bred. But when David comes to
confess of himself that he was altogether born in sin, and conceived by his
mother in wickedness; It is not possible that any such reason should take
place, but rather such a one as may make good whatsoever can be attributed to
the spirit of God, speaking of Gods own people, in the mouth of David.

And without doubt, as Idolatry was the original of the most gross customs of
sin, as appears by the premises; So can there be no greater argument of the
corruption of man's nature, then the departure of all nations, from the worship
of one true God, to the worship of they knew not what. That all nations coming
of one blood, from one God, which at their first apostasy was so well known to
them, and not able to blot out of their own hearts the conscience of the
service they ought him, should imagine themselves discharged of that
obligation, by tendering it to what they pleased, (saving a small part of
mankind, whom he reserved to himself, by making them acquainted with himself,
through the familiarity which he used them with) if all other arguments, of a
common principle of corruption, in our common nature, were lost, is enough to
make the apostasy of our first forefathers credible, which the relation of
Moses makes truth. Wherefore, when David attributes to himself by nature, that
which the people of God attribute to the Gentiles, it must needs be understood
in regard of a principle common to both, which the Grace of God suffers not
to come to effect, but preventeth in his people. And when he attributes the
same to his malicious enemies, Jews only by the first birth, he warranteth us
to say the same of those that are Jews by the second birth, so far as the
birth of both is the same.

I will not forbear to allege here the Law of Leviticus, that appoints a time
of impurity for women that have brought forth, as no less fit to signify, the
evil inclination, to which our nature by the fall of Adam, is become liable,
then the ceremonies of the Law are fitly used by God, to shadow the truth of
the Gospel. Not that I make any doubt, that this impurity, of it self, is but
legal, as the impurity contracted by touching a dead man, or a living creature
that was unclean, or that of the leprosy, or by the custom of women, or the
like; Which, I am resolved, amounts to no more, then an incapacity of freely
conversing with Gods people, or an obligation to a sacrifice, which is there
called (...), or, (...), because it purged this incapacity, which in regard of
that positive Law, may be called sin. But this being granted, and these
Legal incapacities being, by the correspondence of the Law with the Gospel, to
signify the cause for which men are incapable of heaven; As the leprosy of
the body, and the touching of a dead man, or a living creature that is unclean
by the law, necessarily signifies that incapacity, which comes by the custom
of sin; So that uncleanness which arises from those things which come from
our own bodies seems, by necessary correspondence, to signify that
incapacity of coming to heaven, which arises from the inward inclination of
our nature to wickedness. Neither will I omit to allege the saying of the
Prophet David, alleging the reason of Gods compassion to his people in their
sins, to be their mortality, Psalm. LXXVIII. 40. For he considered that they
were but flesh, and even as a wind that passes away and comes not again. And
Psalm. CIII. 14-17. For he knows our frame, he remembers that we are dust.
The days of man are as of grass; as the bud of the field so springs he. For
a wind passes upon it and it is not; And the place knows it no more. But the
goodness of the Lord is from generation to generation upon them that fear him,
and his righteousness upon childrens children. For, having showed, that the
bodily death to which Adam was sentenced, implied in it spritituall death, and
supposed the same according to S. Paul, I may well say, that he could not
express that reason, which Christians allege to God for his compassion upon
their infirmities, more properly to the time and state of the Law, then by
alleging the death which our bodies are subject to, as an argument of sin
which it is allotted to punish. And the antithesis which follows between our
short life, and the continuance of Gods mercies to his servants of their
posterity, comes corespondently to set forth the grace of the Gospel, though
sparingly signified, as under the Law. And here I must not forget the Wise man's
exhortation Wisdom I. 12 --. Affect not death, through the error of your life,
nor purchase destruction through the works of your hands. For God made not
death, nor takes pleasure in the destruction of the living. For he made all
things to endure: And the beginnings of the world were healthful, and no deadly
poison among them, nor any dominion of hell upon the earth. For righteousness
is immortal. But the wicked with their words and works purchased it. And,
thinking it their friend, decayed, and made a covenant with it, because they
are worthy to be on the side of it. Here it is evident, that the speech is of
temporal death, but so, that by it is intimated spiritual death, according to
that which has often been observed, and will often come to be observed, that the
mystery of Christianity, intimated in the old Testament, begins more plainly to
be discovered in these books, then in the canonical Scriptures. And therefore,
though the purchase of death is attributed to the evil words and works of the
wicked; yet, seeing it has taken place over all the world, contrary to the
first institution of God, thereby he leaves us to argue the corruption of
nature, which moves mankind to take pleasure in those works by which death
takes place. Last of all, I will allege, not the authority of the Book of Job,
which is not questionable, but the authority of the Greek Translation of it. Be
the author thereof who may be, be the authority thereof what it may be, it is
manifest how ancient it is, and that it came from the people of God, while they
continued the people of God, and has passed the approbation of the Apostles.
When therefore it is said, that no man is clear of sin, no not the infant of
one day old upon earth; It remains manifest, that this was the sense of the
then people of God. As it appears also by Philo; (...) (...). That to sin,
is a property born with all that are born, in as much as it is come to birth.
And diverse sayings of the Heathens might be alleged, as obscure arguments of
that truth which the Gospel is grounded upon: But that I conceive, the
disorders of the world, the greatest whereof that can be named, is that which I
named even now, of the worship of Idols, are greater and more evidences of the
same, then any sayings of Writers; Which therefore, it will not be requisite to
heap into this abridgement.

CHAP. XII. The Haeresie of Simon Magus the beginning of the Gnostics. That
they were in being during the Apostles time. Where and when the Haeresie of
Cerinthus prevailed, and, that they were Gnostics. The beginning of the
Encratites under the Apostles. It is evident that one God in Trinity was then
glorified among the Christians, by the Fulness of the Godhead which they
introduced in stead of it.
I Should have propounded that evidence for original sin which is drawn from
the necessity of the Grace of Christ, before that which is drawn from the Old
Testament, had it not been for that exception which the Socinians make to it,
by questioning the state of our Lord Christ, before his coming in the flesh; In
regard whereof, I hold it the shortest course to void this issue first, and
then see what witness, the necessity of the Grace of Christ renders to
original sin. And because that Tradition of historical truth, which
remains in the records of the Church, evidences that meaning of the Apostles
writings, which I shall advance; I shall not make difficulty to propound in the
first place, some things upon undeniable record, in the Fathers, that may serve
to argue the intent of the Apostles in this point. I say then, that it is a
thing undeniable to common sense, that, what time the Apostles writ, there were
diverse Hereses in being, whether openly divided from the church, or lurking
within it, under the common profession, to get opportunity to pervert the
simple, and in fine, to withdraw them from the Church. The first whereof was
that of Simon Magus, who, being discovered by the Apostles, to have only
counterseited himself a Christian, to get the power of doing those miracles
which the Apostles did, that he might draw followers after himself; fell away
from Christianity, to declare himself, among the Samaritanes, (who expected
the Messiah no less then the true Jews) to be the Christ, whom the Apostles
preached our Lord Jesus to be. But withal it is certain, that he taught his
disciples, that he alone could reveal unto them God, whom their Fathers knew
not, for that the world had been at first made by Angels, in opposition to him,
who also gave the Law, and brought in among men the difference between good and
bad, which he, by that knowledge of God which he professed, undertook to teach
how men should become free from, and by this freedom attain the fellowship of
God in the world to come. It cannot then be said, that the author of this
heresy continued any longer in the Church, because when S. Peter says to him;
Acts VIII. 22. 23. Repent thee of this thy malice, and beseech God, if perhaps
this devise of thy heart may be forgiven thee; For, I see thou art in the gall
of bitterness, and the bond of unrighteousness; Though he answer; Pray ye to
the Lord for me, that none of the things which you have said come upon me. For
we find not, that his after behavior deserved that he should be admitted to
penance and reconcilement with the Church. And when he declared himself to be
the Christ, (as did after him his disciple Menander (witness Iren^us
Epiphanius and Theodoret) when he being dead and gone, his pretense appeared
vain) then was he of necessity, at defiance with the Church and all
Christians. But this must be said, (which upon the faith of historical truth
is averred by the same witnesses) that of him, and the seeds of his doctrine,
came afterward many Sects, the authors whereof, not pretending themselves to
be the Christ, pretended all to make known God, otherwise unknown, to their
disciples, and by that knowledge, to save them in the world to come, through
abandoning them to all licentiousness in this; Which sects, were therefore
called by the common name of Gnostics, or, knowers, though, there was one of
those Sects, which had no other particular name besides. Among these one was
set up by Nicolas one of the seven, Acts VI. 5. Or at least, under his name.
For, though some, in Clemens Alexandrinus, seem to hold him an holy man, yet no
man doubts that there was a sect of Gnostics, which, either because raised by
him, or by others upon mistake of some things that he had taught, bore his
name. Which, though it be not requisite here to decide, yet it is evident by S.
John Apoc. II. 6. that then the Sect was on foot. And though we dispute not the
time when Bas^lides at Alexandria, Saturninus at Antiochia, Valentine at Rome,
or in Cyprus and Egypt, Carpocrates, Mark the Magician or others set up, (so
as to affirm that they were in being when the Apostles writ) yet it is
evident, that under the Apostles there were such as counterfeited themselves
Christians, with an intent to withdraw the simple sort of Christians to this
doctrine, which these Fathers of Heretics in their several times were the
heads of, whosoever then set them on work.

I will use but two arguments to evidence this. The first is, the common
infection which they brought in every where, of eating things sacrificed to
Idols, that is to say, of worshipping Idols. For, the feasts and entertainments
of Idolaters consisting of those things, which had been sacrificed to their
Idols, to feast with them was to communicate in their Idolatries. This cannot
be more evident then it is evident by S. Paul, 1 Cor. X. 7. Nor be ye Idolaters
as some of them were as it is written; The people sat down to eat and drink,
and rose up to play. The Idolatry of the Israrlits consisting in the feast, as
well as in their sacrifices: And by Moses, Exodus XXXIV. 15, 16. Least thou make
a league with the inhabitants of the Land, and they go a whoring after their
gods, and sacrifice to their gods, and invite thee, and thou cat of their
sacrifices: And thou take of their daughters, to thy sons, and their daughters
go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.
Which you see how punctually it came to pass in the business of Baal Peor,
Number. XXV. Now it is manifest, by the most ancient Writers of the Church,
Justine the Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Iren^us, Tertulliane. Origin, that
the Gnostics did generally communicate in the Idolatries of the Gentiles,
whose testimonies have been produced by Doctor H. Hammond in diverse of his
writings. And the reason is plain, by that old observation; That the gods of
the heathens are good fellows, but the true God only a jealous God: That is to
say; That false gods never grutched one another the worship of God, because all
set up by the devil, to whose service that worship redounded. For the Gnostics
being themselves Idolaters and Magicians, it is no marvel, that they
communicated as freely in the Idolatries of the Gentiles, as they in one
another Idolatries. But it is no less manifest, that these Heresies, which
the Apostles writ against, agreed all in teaching to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, and to communicate with Idolaters. For, the way of Balaam, in which they
are by the Apostles charged to go astray, Jude 11. 2 Pet. II. 15. Is
interpreted Apoc. II. 15. That then were in the Church of Pergamus, those that
held the doctrine of Balaam that taught Balak to lay a stumbling block before
the children of Israel, to eat of things offered to Idols, and to commit
whordome. So have thou, says he, those that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitanes; Which by and by, is attributed to Jezabel the Prophetess.

The second argument is, that both S. Peter and S. Jude, in the places
alleged, do manifestly show, that the doctrines which they writ against,
tended to reconcile the licentiousness of the flesh with the hope of the world
to come, which, I have showed, was the pretense of the Gnostics; And makes it
very probable, that the same Heretics found access to those Christianes to
whom S. James writes, and intimated to them hope of salvation through the bare
profession of Christianity, without those works whereby it is fulfilled; which
is the occasion that he takes James II. 14. -- to lay down those terms of the
justification of Sinners which I have declared in due place.

For, consider the terms in which S. Peter writes; Many shall follow their
corruptions, for whom the way of truth shall be blasphemed. For what can this
signify, but that which is witnessed by so many of the Fathers, that the ill
opinion which the Gentiles had of Christianity, was unjustly occasioned by the
vilainies of the Gnostics, who, though holding in secret a faith utterly
destructive to Christianity, nevertheless counterfeited themselves Christians,
to withdraw Christians to themselves. Again, Those that go after the flesh
through the pollution of concupiscence. And; Thinking it pleasure to revel it
by day, spots and stains, making good chere in their deceit^, when they feast
with you, having eyes full of adultery, not to be quieted from sinning. And,
they beguil with the lusts of the flesh those who had truly escaped those that
live in error, promising them liberty, but being slaves to corruption
themselves: For by whom a man is subdued his slave he becoms. 2 Pet. II. 2, 10,
13, 14, 18, 19. And S. Jude, These dreaming defile the flesh. And, the things
which they know by nature as bruit beasts, in them they corrupt themselves.
Comparing them to Sodom and Gomorrah, who went a whoring in like manner as
these, following after strange flesh. Jude 7, 8, 10. Which, he who compares
with the vilainies of the Gnostics related by Irenaeus, Epiphanius and others,
either he has lost his right senses, or (knowing by Iraeneus, that all the
Gnostics sprang from Simon Magus, and that Simon Magus pretended to show how
to attain the world to come by loosing the raines to all vilainy) must needs
allow, that they are of this train whom these* Apostles writ against. Nor is
the testimony of Hegesippus related by Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. III 32. to the
contrary. He says indeed that the Church had continued a pure Virgin under
the Apostles and their hearers, he says that it began to be defloured in the
next age; Not by the coming in of Antichrist, as some imagine, (unless they
will have Simon Magus to have been Antichrist, which though true, is not for
their turn) but by the coming in of the Gnostics. For, though it appear by
the writings of the Apostles, that they were very busy during their time, in
seducing Christians by counterfeiting themselves the like; yet may it well
stand good that the Church continued a Virgin by casting them out, according
to the precept of S. Jude, which I spoke of before But, that aster the death of
them and their hearers, they prevailed so far, that they might be said to
have defloured the maidenhead of Christianity, for the number of Christians
whom they had seduced. Besides, it is easy to take notice, that the relation of
Hegesippus concerns particularly the Church of Jerusalem, as following upon
the martyrdom of Simeon, and the confession of our Lord Christ to Domitian
made by his kindred according to the flesh; For so Eusebius expressly affirms.
And truly, having related before the Heresies of Simon Magus, and Menander, of
Ebion, of the Nazarites, and of Cerinthus, he must have given himself thely,
had he intended to say, out of Hegesippus, that the Gnostics, began under
Adriane, though being the time when Saturninus, Basitides, Valent ne, and
probably others set up for themselves. But I will wish the enemies of this
light, which the knowledge of good learning (that will surely be revenged of
them who neglect it) tenders to the obscure passages of the Apostles, no worse
punishment, then to be bound to expound them without it: For, make use of it,
and all is plain and smooth before you, unless it be a small circumstance,
that they tremble not to blaspheme glories. 1 Pet. II. 10. Or as S. Jude 8.
that they despise dominion and blaspheme glories; Whereas, if you put it out,
you will necessarily reason of the Apostles discourse as blind men do of
colors. And in truth there are two several passages of Hegesippus related by
Eusebius the former whereof I have quoted, assigning this deflouring of the Church
to the time of Simeons martyrdom. But the other, though related by Eusebius,
IV. 22. at the time of Hegesippus, assigns it unto his beginning, immediately
ensuing upon the martyrdom of S. James, and the choice of Simeon for Bishop of
Jerusalem, and that by a very express mark of the author thereof, one
Thebulis, (so R. Stevens copy reads it not T^ebuthis) that missed the
Bishopric there, and upon that attempted to deflour the Church which they
called then a Virgin, says Hegesippus expressly there. Now it is manifest that
the martyrdom of James was before the war which the Romans, the same year
that Festus left the Province, as you have it in Eusebius, II. 23. at which
time it may be a question whither either the second Epistle of S. Peter, or
that of S. Jude were written at all, or not. Wherefore it is manifest, that
Hegesippus assigns the deflouring of the Church to the time of Simeons
martyrdom, when none of the Apostles remained alive: But so that Thebulis
began to deflour it from the death of S. James, and the beginning of Simeon;
That is, the Church of Jerusalem, because he was refused the Bishopric of it.

But I must not forget Epiphanius his relation of Cerinthus, that he was one of
those that first contended with S. Peter, about admitting Cornelius and his
company to baptism, that afterward raised the contention about Circumcision in
the Church of Antiochia, (which we see decided by the Apostles Acts XV.) and,
that afterward, it was he, or his disciples, that troubled the Church of
Corinth, and the doctrine which S. Paul had taught it. For the argument is
undeniable, that, the things done under the Apostles have in them express
marks, of that which the succeeding Heretics, did and taught afterward.
(...), says he, (...). For those men, stepping aside, and becoming false
Apostles, and sending other false Apostles, as I said before, in thebeginning to
Antiochia, and other places, saying, that unless ye be circumcised and keep the
Law of Moses, ye cannot be saved; there came no small trouble, as I said before,
and these are they, that in Paul, are called false Apostles, deceitful workers
transforming themselves into Apostles of Christ. For here Epiphanius,
distinguishing two kinds of false Apostles, one that pretended to be sent by
our Lord Christ, another by his Apostles, applies unto them the words of S.
Paul, 2 Cor. XI. 23. by virtue of that, of the Synodicall Letter of the
Apostles, Acts XV. 24. to whom we gave no such charge; and says, that,
whatsoever they pretended, they were neither sent by our Lord Christ, nor yet
by his Apostles, commission from Christ.

Herewith agrees, all that which the Apostle writes, against eating things
sacrificed to Idols in the VIII. and X. Chapters of this first Epistle. For
there is no question to be made, that the Sect of Cerinthus was one of the
Gnostics, because it is expressed in Epiphanius, that they also taught the
unknown God, whom they pretended to make known. And therefore, when S. Paul
says in the beginning of that eighth chapter; As concerning things offered to
Idols, we know that we all have knowledge: knowledge indeed puffs up, but
charity edifieth; It is manifest that he civily reproves that pretense of
knowledge, which some weak Christians were then in danger to be carried away
with, to believe; That those who knew the true God, (whom their masters
pretended to teach) and, the Idols of the Gentiles to be nothing, might,
without scruple of conscience, communicate in the worship of those whom they
scorned and thought to be nothing; Intending in the X. Chapter to protest, that
they could not communicate in the same without renouncing their Christianity:
And if any man say, that Cerinthus, according to Epiphanius, says; That our
Lord Christ is not to rise again till the last day, and therefore, that the
opinion of those that deny the resurrection which S. Paul disputes against, 1
Cor. XV. can neither be imputed to Cerinthus, nor the C^rint^ians: It is
answered, that Epiphanius himself declares, that the Cerinthians were not all
of a mind. Some of them denying the resurrection of Christ, and by consequence
of Christians* against whom the maine of that Chapter argues; Others affirming,
that Christ was not to rise again till all should rise again at the worlds
end. And truly I see not why S. Paul should argue that it is necessary that we
should believe the resurrection of Christ, saying; If Christ be not risen
again, then is our preaching vain, and we are found false witnesses, then is
your faith vain, and y^ are yet in your sins, 1 Cor. XV. 14-17. Unless,
among those whom he argues against, the resurrection of Christ had been
questioned, which is Epiphanius his argument. And, I would feign hear, who can
give a better account of that everlasting difficulty in S. Paul's words, that
follow, 1 Cor. XV. 29. For, what shall those that are baptized for the dead do,
if the dead rise not again? why are they baptized for the dead? then
Epiphanius gives according to this supposition, and that upon the credit of
Historical truth, not of any conjecture of his own; (...).. For, in this
country, I mean Asia and Galatia this Sect flourished much. Among whom a point
of Tradition is come to us, how some of them dying before Baptism, others are
baptized for them in their name, that, rising at the resurrection, they may be
liable to no sentence of punishment, as not having received Baptism, and
become obnoxious to the power of him that made the world. Where, by the way,
you see the Cerinthians were Gnostics, because, by baptism, they pretended to
free men from the bad principle which made the world; This being the doctrine
of the Gnostics.

Now, if it be true, as Epiphanius understood, that the Cerinthians in Asia and
Galatia baptized others for those that were dead without baptism, shall we
think it strange, that those false* Apostles, who transformed themselves into
Apostles of Christ, as Satan into an Angel of light, should teach the
Corinthians to do the same? And what need S. Paul stand to condemn this,
condemning all their impostures, by the dispute of both Epistles.

Neither is it more difficult, to discern, those whom S. Paul disputes against
in the second Chapter of his Epistle to the Colossians, to be of the same
stamp, if we observe two points of his reproof; The one, the worship of
Angels, the other abstinence from certain meats, and from women, which S. Paul
couches in these words, Colos. II. 21. Touch not, taste not, come not nigh
those things, which all tend to perish in the using. This you may perceive by
the warning he gives Timothy of the like men, who afterward should depart from
the faith, giving ^eed to deceiving spirits and doctrines of devils, who should
forbid marriage, and injoyne abstinence from meats, which God has made, to be
received of those that know him, with thanksgiving, 1. Tim. IV. 1, 2, 3. I know
there is a plausible opinion abroad, that, these doctrines of devils, as I
translate it, are the Traditions which have crept into the Church, for the
worshipping of the souls of holy men departed; which some Christians have
brought into the rank of those secondary gods, which the Gentiles call
daemones, or daemonia. But this opinion cannot be true. First, because it is
plain, that the second, (...), serves to interpret the first, (...). Now it is
manifest, that by seducing spirits, S. Paul can mean nothing but those
inspirations, (true or pretended) which the devil and his ministers corrupted
Christianity with. And therefore, when he declares himself further, by adding,
and doctrines of devils; He means doctrines taught by devils. Secondly,
because the word daemones, or daemonia, is never used in a good sense among
Christians, as it is among Pagans. For those that knew not the difference
between good spirits and bad, but in effect, as S, Paul says, 1 Cor. X. 20,
21. worshipped devils, it is not to be expected, that they should express a
meaning to scorn or detest those whom they worshipped. And whatsoever
opinions, those Philosophers which followed Plato and Pithagoras had, of the
vulgar Idolatries of their countries; seeing there is so much appearance, as I
have showed in another place, that they were Magicians, it is no marvel, that
they make not the difference between good and evil spirits, which Christianity
alone fully declares; The Jews themselves not having sufficiently discovered
it, in and by the Scriptures of the Old Testament. But, as the word (...), an
Idol, signifying, of it self indifferently any image or representation, to
Christians and Jews who understand the Gentiles to worship false gods,
signifies the image of those Gods in an ill sense; So, to those that understand
the devils to put themselves upon the world, to be worshipped for gods, the
doctrines of devils must needs be those which, men guided by devils do advance.
I must here suppose further, that which I read in Epiphanius that Marcion and
Tatianus, with his Scholars the Encratites, (who enjoined their disciples to
abstain from women, and certain kinds of meats, as not of Gods making) had
their beginning from Saturninus, he from Simon Magus, as Iraeneus, I. 30.
affirms. Whereby it cannot seem strange, that their doctrine should be in
vogue during the time of the Apostles. I demand then, what reason can be given
why they, who taught the worshipping of angels, should also injoyne abstinence
from women, and meats, were there not in the case an opinion, that marriage
and those creatures come not from God, but, by some failleur of his, as Simon
Magus said from the beginning, from the Angels? To which purpose we must
observe, that S. Paul gives them warning of Philosophy. Col. II. 8. because it
is certain, that these sects took their rise from the writitings of Plato and
Pythagoras, and their followers, whom Tert^llian^, therefore, styles the
Patriarchs of Heretics.

But the words of Irenaeus deserve here to be considered. Having promised to
refute Marcion in due place; Nunc autem necessario meminimus ejus, ut scires
quoniam omnes qui quoquo modo adulterant veritatem, and praeconium
Ecclelaedunt, Simonis Samaritani Magi discipuli and successores sunt. Quamvis
non con^i^eantur nomen magistri sui, ad seductionem reliquorum attamen illius
sententiam docent; Christi quidem Jesu nomen tanquam irritamentum praeferentes,
Simonis autem imp^etatem vary introducentes. But it was necessary that we
should remember him now, that thou might know, that all those who any way
adulterate the truth, and wrong that which the Church preaches, are the
Scholars and successors of Simon the Magician of Samaria. Though to deceive
others they profess not their masters name, yet they teach h^s sense;
Pretending indeed for a Stale the name of Christ Jesus, but diverse ways
introducing Simons impious doctrines. And by and by; Vt exempli gratia dicamus,
a Saturnino and Marci^ne qui vocantur Continentes* abstinentiam a nuptii^
annu^ciaverunt, frustrantes antiquam plasmationem Dei* and oblique accusantes,
eum qui and masculum and foeminam ad generationem hominum fecit, and ^orum quae
dicuntur apud eos animalium abstinentiam induxerunt, ingrati existentes ei qui
omnia fecit Deo. To speak for example, from Saturninus and Marcion, those that
are called Encratites, preach abstinence from marriage, frustrating that which
God framed of old, and indirectly blaming him that made male and female for the
procreation of mankind, and introduce abstinence from those which they call
living creatures, being ungrateful to God that made all things.

If Marcion and Saturninus had this doctrine from Simon Magus, of necessity it
must have been on foot during the time of the Apostles. Only, here will ly a
difficult objection from that which I showed a little before, that Simon Magus
baited his doctrine with the pleasures of sensual concupiscence, as the means
to gain followers, if, in stead of the hardship of Christ's Cross, he could
persuade them, that, believing the secret knowledge, which he taught, the free
use of them was the means to attain the world to come. And of Cerinthus in
particular, he that shall peruse what Eusebius has related out of Cai^s and
Dionysius of Alexandria, Ecclesiast. Hist. III. 28. shall easily perceive the
whole aim of his Sect to have been the enjoying of sensual pleasure, So that
the saying of those whom Saint Paul writes against, 1 Cor. XV. 32. Let us eat
and drink for to morrow we shall die; exactly fits his followers. And so does
the pretense of those who seduced the Galatians to observe the Law, though
themselves kept not the Law that they might not be persecuted with the Cross
of Christ. Gal. VI. 12, 13. That is, that would have them comply with the Jews
in keeping the Law, so far as might save them from being persecuted by the
Jews; as well as with the Gentiles in their Idolatries, to save them from
persecution at their hand. According to the common principle of the Gnostics,
that it was a folly to suffer for professing the Faith.

To this it is easy to answer; That the devil might have several baits for
several qualities of persons, even in the same common principles of Simon
Magus; whereof, if we see some sects embrace some, others those that seem
inconsistent with them, being certified, that both spring from the same source,
it is no ways incredible that the seeds of all of them were sown in his
common doctrine. That Carpocrates, that Prodicus and the Gnostics that
followed Nicolas, according to Epiphanius, should be remarkable for unnatural
uncleanness, having the way plained for them by Simon, how can it be strange?
that refined spirits should be taken with such gross pretenses as brutish
people are apt to be seduced with, would be strange on the other side. And that
Magic which Simon and Menander, with the Basilidians, and Carpocratians
frequently practiced, (whatsoever the rest did) had always pretenses of
austerity in discipline, not only as a means to obtain influence from powers
above, but to seduce the simple with a color of severity and abstinence.
Seeing then that Saturninus, upon Irenaeus his credit, derived this discipline
from the doctrine of Simon Magus, how can it seem improbable, that during S.
Paul's time some branch of the same doctrine should spread over the parts of
Asia concerned in S. Paul's Epistles to Timothy and to the Colossians. Whether
by Cerinthus or by whom besides him, I need not dispute. There is no doubt
indeed, but, according to Epiphanius, his Heresy had vogue in these parts; As
in Galatia, besides Epiphanius, Sirmondus his Praedestinatus says, that it is
condemned there by S. Paul's Epistle. And Gaius in Eusebius III. 28.
testifies, that Cerinthus pretended revelations by Angels, and Tertulliane,
contra Marc. V. that those who seduced the Colossians did the like. But whether
Cerinthus, or some other branch of Simon Magus, the source of his doctrine is
plainly from the same principle with Marcion and the Eucratites afterward.

Now, if any man demand, what all this may conduce to the understanding of
those Scriptures which speak of our Lord Christ; let it be but considered, that
Simon Magus, pretending to be the Christ, and to seduce Christians, from our
Lord Jesus, to himself, and withal, and to be worshipped with honors due to
God, does hereby effectually suppose, that our Lord was effectually so
worshipped by Christians from the beginning. Irenaeus says further, of the
doctrine of Simon Magus, I. 20. That he was glorified of many as God, and
taught that he was the man who had appeared among the Jews as the Son, (that
is, the Messiah) had come in Samaria as the Father, but to the rest of the
Gentiles, as the holy Ghost. So that being indeed the sovereign power of all,
that is, the Father, he was content nevertheless, to be whatsoever they called
him. Hic igitur a multis quasi deus glorifi catus est, says Irenaeus, and
docuit semetipsum esse qui inter Judaeos quidem, quasi filius appar^erit, in
Samaria autem quasi pater descenderit, in reliquis vero gentibus quasi Spiritus
sanctus adventaverit. Esse autem se sublimissimam virtutem, hoc est, eum qui
sit super omnia Pater, and sustinere vocari s^ quodcunque ^um vocant homines.
Where pretending first to be both Father and Son and holy Ghost, Secondly to
be worshipped for God, it is manifest, that, setting up himself in stead of our
Lord Jesus, for the Messiah, whom the Samaritanes expected as well as the Jews,
he had no other reason to pretend to be also the Father, and the holy Ghost,
but because he knew our Lord, whom he counterfeited, had taught that he is one
and the same with the Father and the holy Ghost. And so, by what the
counterfeit would be, it appears what the truth is, and taught himself to be;
To wit, the Son of God, to be worshipded as one God with the Father and the
holy Ghost. For, we are not to think that Epiphanius contradicts his Master
Jrenaeus, when he says, that Simon, who praetended to be the Father among the
Samaritanes, (as the Son among the Jews) made his concubine Selena to be the
holy Ghost, whom he called also the Ennaea, or, Conceit of him the Father,
whereby he made the angels that made the world and mankind. But rather to
understand that, intending to adulterate the Christian Faith by bringing in a
counterfeit imitation of it, on purpose he pretended himself and his Conceit to
be both one, because he knew, that, according to the Christian faith, both
Father and Son, (both which he pretended to be, as you have heard) are one
and the same God with the holy Ghost; which, he pretended his Conceit to be,
according to Fpiphanius, but himself among the Gentiles, according to Irenaeus.
The Heresy of his Scholar Menander is thus described by Irenaeus L. 21. Qui
primam quidem virtutem in^ognitam ait omnibus, se autem ^um esse qui missus sit
ab invisibilibus salvatorem pro sal^te hominum. Mundum autem factum ab Angelis,
quos and ipse similiter ut Simon, ab Enn^a emissos dicit. Who says, that the
first Power is unknown to all, and that himself was the Savior that was sent
by the invisible Powers for the salvation of men. But that the world was made
by the Angels, whom he also, like as Simon, says, were put forth by the
Fathers Conceit. Where you see, above the Angels, whom he makes Creator of the
world, the unknown Father, whom he pretends to make known, his Conceit from
whence the Angels came, and the invisible Powers, that sent him for the Savior
of the world. Both these then, pretending to be that which our Lord Christ
indeed and in truth is, did make themselves one ingredient or parcel of that
unknown and invisible Godhead, from whence they so made the angels to proceed,
that nevertheless, banding a faction against the same, they make the coming of
a Savior necessary for this end, to deliver mankind from the servitude of
these Angels that made the world. As for Saturninus, pretending the father of
all to be unknown, (otherwise then as he pretended to make him known) it
appears why he is among the Gnostics. But he pretends that two sorts of men
were made by the Angels: One by the good; being an Image of the Power which is
above, which being infinitely taken with, they said; Let us make man after our
image, because it was instantly with drawn from their sight. But so that it had
not come to life had not the power above struck a spark of light into it. The
other by the devils, which the Savior, who is indeed unknown, only seemed a
man, came to subdue. So Irenaeus l. 22. But Basilides; Vt altius aliquid and
veri^imilius adinvenisse vid^atur, in immensum extendit sententiam doctrinae
suae, ostendens, Nun primo ab i^noto natum Patre. ab hoc autem natum Logon,
deinde a Logo Phronesin, a Ph^onesi autem natas Sophian and Dynamin, a Dynami
autem and Sophia Virtutes and Principes and Angelos, quos and Primos vocat,
says Irenaeus l. 23. He, that he may seem to have added some higher thing, and
more likely to their invention, extending the meaning of his position beyond
all bounds shows, that Nus (or Meaning) was first born of the Father who was
not born: Of him Logos, (Reason or the Word) of him Prudence, of it Wisdom and
Power, of them Virtues Princes and Angels, whom he calls the prime on^s. Where
you see manifestly, the fulness of the Godhead is made to consist of the
Titles and Attributes of our Lord Christ. Which Valentinus after these makes to
consist in XXX. Aeones, or intelligible worlds, which he derives from the
unknown Father, and silence, or his conceit and Grace, ( Bythos or the bottom,
and Charis Ennaea or Si^^) in whom he placed the first source of this Fullness.
And it has been observed already, that his number of XXX. is the same that the
heathen Gods are contrived into by He^iod^ Theogonia. Much to my purpose. For
S. Cyril. Catech. V. calls Valentine (...). The Preacher of the XXX Gods. This
fulness of the Godhead which they taught being the deity which they
worshipped. As did also not only Ptolemaeus and Secundus who followed
Valentine, and changed what they thought fit in his design, or, the Gnostics
which followed Nicolas, as you may see by Epiphanius; But the rest from Simon
Magus, whose followers worshipped him and his Trull Selene* under the images of
Jupiter and Minerva, says Irenaeus expressly. For Menanders first Power, and
the Ennaea or Conceit thereof, and the invisible Powers by whom and from whom
he pretended to be sent for the Savior of mankind, show, that this was that
fulness of the Godhead in which he taught his followers to believe. And when
Ep^p^^nius, confuting Saturninus, says, that according to him, (...); The^e
shall be found no fulness in the Power above; It is manifest that he taught
his followers to worship that fulness which Epiphanius refuses Simon Magus
himself meant the like when he said, according to Epiphanius; that the Angels,
though they proceeded from his Ennaea, or Conceit, yet were without the
Fulness, that is, not comprehended within it.

As for C^^inthus, whom all agree to have made our Lord Jesus the Son of
Joseph and Mary, born as other men are, Epiphanius says further of his sense;
(...); But, that after Jesus was grown a man, who was borne of the seed of
Joseph and Mary, the Christ came down upon him from the God that is above,
that is the Holy Ghost in the shape of a dove at Jordane, and revealed to him
the Father that was unknown, and by him to his disciples, whereby, after the
power came down upon him from above, he did miracles. And that, when he had
suffered that which came from above fl^w up again from Jesus. So that Jesus
suffered, and rose again, but the Christ which came upon him from above flew
up again without suffering, which is that which came down in the shape of a
dove, and that Jesus is not the Christ. Where, you see, he makes the coming of
Christ to be nothing else, but an escape made by the Holy Ghost, when he came
upon our Lord, out of the Fulness of the Godhead, to return thither again
when he had suffered. Now it is agreed upon, that Cerinthus had spread his
Heresies in Asia, when Saint John writ his Gospel: And though Epiphanius
report, that it was Ebion whom Saint John met with in the bath, and refused to
come in it so long as he was there, calling away his Scholars with him; Yet it
must be resolved, that it is a mere mistake of his memory, because himself
testifies, as before, that the Heresy of Cerinthus flourished in Asia and in
Galatia, and because Eusebius after Irenaeus, (who conversed with Saint John's
Scholar Polycarpus) reports it of Cerinthus. As for the Heresy of Ebion, it is
manifest by Epiphanius himself, in his Heresy that it sprung up first, and
flourished most in the parts of Palestine, beyond, or besides Jordane, which
they called Peraea, what time the Church of Jerusalem had forsaken the City, to
remove themselves to Pella, where God had provided for them at the destruction
of it. So that it appears not that Saint John saw the birth of it, being
probably, removed into Asia before that time. I shall therefore need to say
nothing of the Heresy of Ebion, having Saint Jerome in Catalogo to witness,
that the Gospel of Saint John was written at the request of the Bishops of
Asia, in opposition to Cerinthus: But, the stock of that evidence which I
shall bring out of the Scripture, for the state of our Lord Christ, and his
Godhead* before his coming in the flesh, lying therefore in the beginning of
that Gospel which was writ on purpose to exclude it; I shall refer the rest
of that which I shall gather out of the New Testament, to the sense and effect
of it.

CHAP. XIII. The Word was at the beginning of all things. The apparitions of
the Old Testament Prefaces to the Incarnation of Christ. Ambassadors are not
honored with the honor due to their Masters. The Word of God that was
afterward incarnate was in those Angels that spoke in Gods Name. No Angel
honored as God under the New Testament. The Word was with God at the beginning
of all things, as after his return.
THE Gospel of Saint John then begins thus; In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; The same was in the beginning
with God. In which words, the Socinians will not have the beginning to be the
beginning of all things, but the beginning of preaching the Gospel; That is to
say, when John the Baptist began to preach; And the Word to be the man Jesus,
so called, because, he was the man whom God had appointed to publish it. So
that, in the beginning was the Word, is, in their sense; When John the Baptist
began to preach, there was a man whom God had appointed to publish the Gospel.
And truly, I cannot deny, that the beginning here, might signify the beginning
of the Gospel, by the same reason, as in the Scripture, and in all Languages,
words signify more then they express. But that reason can be no other then
this, because a man speaks of things mentioned before in discourse, or, of that
which is otherwise known to be the subject of his discourse. So, words signify
more then they express, because something that is known need not be repeated
at every turn. What is the reason then why this addition, not being expressed,
is to be understood? Forsooth, Saint Mark begins his Gospel thus; The
beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God. As it is written in
the Prophets; Behold I send my Messenger before thy face, that shall prepare
thy way before thee. The voice of him that cries in the wilderness: Prepare
^e the way of the Lord, make his path plain. John was baptizing in the
wilderness. Is not this a good reason? Because, in one Text of Saint Mark,
you find the beginning of the Gospel to be the preaching of John, therefore,
wheresoever you read the beginning, you are to understand by it the beginning
of the Gospel? At least, in the beginning of S. John's Gospel we must seek no
other meaning for it? But who will warrant, that the word Gospel in S. Mark
signifies the preaching of the Gospel, as sometimes it does, or, this book of
the Gospel, which S. Mark takes in hand to write? The words, it is manifest,
may signify either, and therefore it cannot be manifest, that the word
beginning, without any addition is put to signify the one and not the other.
For, if you understand the beginning of the book of the Gospel, when S. John
says; In the beginning was the Word; Their turn is not served. As for the
title of the Word, which scarce any of the Apostles but S. John attributes to
our Lord; Look upon the beginning of his first Epistle; That which was from the
beginning, which we have heard and seen, and our hands have handled of the Word
of Life, (for the Life has been manifested, and we have seen and bear
witness, and declare unto you that everlasting Life which was with the Father
and has been manifested unto us.) That which we have heard and seen declare we
unto you. Here, it must be a man that S. John calls the Word, when he speaks
not only of hearing, but of seeing and handling the Word of Life; But when he
says, that the Word was with God from the beginning, and since has been made
manifest to us, is there nothing but the man, and his office of preaching the
Gospel to be considered, for the reason why he is called the Word? What meant
then the Apostle Ebr. IV. 12, 13? The Word of God is quick and active and
cutteth beyond any two edged sword, and comes so far as to divide between
the soul and the spirit, to the joints and marrow, and judges the thoughts and
conceits of the heart. Neither is any creature obscure to it, but all things
naked and bare to the eyes of him whom we have to do with; Where you see, he
begins his discourse concerning the Gospel, but ends it in God: And therefore
attributes to the gospel under the name of the Word, those things which only
God can do; because, to the Author of it, under the Name of the Word, he
attributes the knowledge and governing of all things.

For the reason, then, why our Lord is called the Word, we must have recourse
to that which the most ancient Fathers of the Church, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Tertulliane, Origin and others, with Justine the Martyr have taught us; That
God spoke unto the Fathers of the Old Testament, by the ministry of the same
second person of the Trinity, by whom in our Flesh the Gospel was intended to
be published, in the last ages of the world; And that therefore our Lord Christ
is called the Word of God. The Socinians think they have said enough, to refute
and renounce this advantage, which Christianity has always used against the
Jews, when, with the Jews, they have alleged, that all those apparitions,
which those Fathers believe, were ministered by our Lord Christ, were the
apparitions of mere Angles, among whom one, as principal in the Commission,
represented the person of God, and, in that regard, is both called by the
propper name of God not communicable to any creature (which we, I know not by
what right, translate Jehovah, seeing it is a thing manifest, that our Lord
Christ and his Apostles did not pronounce it, as it is certain the Jews among
whom they lived, did not at that time, and also worshipped with the honor that
is properly due to God alone. And truly, that it was always some angel, that
is called by the proper name of God, and worshipped as God by the Fathers in
their apparitions, is a thing so manifest, through the Scriptures that I will
not undertake any unnecessary trouble to prove it. Neither do I think this any
thing prejudicial to that which the Fathers of the Church teach. For, when they
deliver, that these apparitions were of the nature of prefaces, and preambles
to the apparition of the Word in our flesh, it seems to be supposed, that, as
the Word at the last assumed our flesh wherein to appear, which afterward he
was never to let go again, (according to the saying of divines after S.
Gregory Nazianzene, quod semel accepit, nunquam dimisit) so, at the first he
was wont to assume some Angelical nature, wherein he might appear, to deal
with men; though, not to retain it for ever, but to dismiss it, the business
for which it was assumed being done. Neither is that any thing difficult which
may be objected, that these Angels did take unto them usually the bodies of
men, in which they might converse with men; And therefore that, when they are
called by the name, and worshipped with the honor of the only true God, there
being something visible to which these things cannot be attributed, they must
be ascribed to the invisible nature of the Angels; Not for it self, (which were
Idolatry) but in regard of God, whose person they represent as Ambassadors, and
therefore are honored with the honor due to the Prince whom they represent,
as the Jews, and with them the Socinians do understand those titles,
wheresoever, in the Old Testament, they are attributed to Angels. This were
some thing indeed, if it were not manifest, that the proper name of God is
attributed to those Angels, by whom God deals with men, without assuming to
them men's bodies. There is nothing of this kind more eminent then that of
Moses, Exodus XXIII. 21, 22, 23. Behold, I send an Angel before thee to keep
thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared. Look
to thy self because of him, and hear his voice, provoke him not, for he will
not pardon your apostasy, for my name is in the midst of him. But, thou shall
hearken to his voice, and shall do all that I shall speak, I will be an enemy
to thine enemies and persecute thy persecutors. For, afterward, when they had
sinned, and God proffers to send an Angel with them to drive out their enemies,
because if he should go himself among them, and they rebel again, he should
destroy them; It is manifest, that Moses is not content, till he has obtained
of God, that himself would go along with them. For before, when Moses had
pitched the Tabernacle without the camp, he spoke with God face to face there,
and the people worshipped toward that quarter: But afterward, by his prayer
he obtains that Gods face should go with them to give them rest, having
otherwise no desire to venture upon the voyage, Exodus XXXIII. 2, 5, 9, 10. 11,
14, 15, 16. Whereby it is manifest, that, the face of God, in this place is the
same, that is called in another place, the Angel of Gods face, because he
represented the person of God, and therefore is called by the name of God, and
the name of God is said to be in him, and Moses is said to talk face to face
with God, because he had conference with this Angel in the name of God, who is
called God, face to face: Whereas, when God proffers barely an Angel, he is not
content, but insists upon this. And for this reason it is, that, whereas it is
certain, that the Law was given by the ministry of Angels, nevertheless it
is said, that God spoke all the ten commandments; Because that Angel that had
the commission, and is called God, spoke them. And before, though it is certain,
that it was the Angel of God, who went before the camp of Israel in a pillar of
a cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night (because it is said Exodus XIV. 19.
And the angel of the Lord that went before the camp of Israel removed, and came
behind them, and the pillar of cloud removed from before them, and stood
behind them) yet it is said Exodus XIII. 20. that it was the Lord that went so
before them. It is therefore manifest, that the Name and Worship of God is
given to the Angels, that represent God, as well when they assume to themselves
no bodies as when they do.

As for that which the Jews, and with them the Socinians allege, that it is
because Ambassadors represent the persons of the Princes that send them, and
therefore are honored with the honor that is properly due to them; It is
ridiculous, and against common sense. For certainly, it is one thing to say,
that Ambassadors are honored in consideration of the Princes from whom they
come, another, with the same honors. Ambassadors are strangers where they come
Ambassadors, and therefore, for their own sakes, must be respected where they
come, otherwise then at home, otherwise then their aequalls, where they come:
much more in respect of the Princes from whence they come. But that any Prince
should honor the Ambassador of any Prince with the same honor wherewith he
would honor his Master if he were there, is ridiculous to imagine. Much less
the Ambassador of God, between whom, and any creature that he can employ upon
any Embassage, there is incomparably more distance, then between any Prince,
and any subject he can use. Honor, inwardly, is nothing but the esteem a man
has of that which he honors, outwardly, nothing else but the signs whereby
he expresses it. And, though, the conceit which a man has of God, is
comparable with that which he has with his creature, as both are
representations to man's mind, and therefore in themselves, of the same nature;
yet the one represents God, incomparable to that which the other represents,
concerning the creature. As for the outward signs of honor, though they may
be equivocall, and ambiguous, yet there wants not means to determine, whether
a man intend to express that esteem which is incomparable to any he can have
of any creature, or not. This is the esteem which the propper name and worship
of God signifies, which, if they who know not God should tender to a creature,
they must be thought Idolaters; If they which know God, they must know, that
God is in that creature as Christians know that God is in Christ, whom
therefore they worship for God. When, therefore, we find the Fathers of the Old
Testament worshipping the apparitions they had, for God, when the Scriptures
call them God, it is because God was in them for the time, as for ever in
Christ, after whose coming, we do not find any angel called God, or worshipped
for God. Not that before his coming all angels that come from Gad are called by
the name of God; But that, where they are so called, so it was. For, I need not
stand here to show, how many apparitions of Angels are mentioned in the Old
Testament, of whom there is none called by the proper name of God, or said to
be worshipped by the Prophets, whom they deal with. It is true, S. John in the
New testament, two several times, tenders the Angel that appears to him that
worship which he refuses; Apoc. XIX. 10. XXII. 12. But though, he says, in
refusing it, worship God; yet does it not appear, nor is it of it self any way
credible, that S. John should be so surprised, as to honor and esteem the
Angel as God, whom he knew to be sent by God. For, to bid him reserve unto God
that honor which he refuses, is to bid him reserve unto God that honor, which
is incomparably more then that which he refuses. And who is it that can say or
imagine, that Cornelius intended to worship S. Peter for God, because he
tenders him that honor which S. Peter refuses, Acts X. 26. Saying; Arise, I
also am a man; Being one whose Religion was to worship the only true God,
whose servant be thought S. Peter to be. And therefore I shall not need to say
that, which otherwise I should have said; That S. John knew not this difference
between the dispensation of God in the Old and New Testament, nor the reason why
the Fathers worshipped those Angels that dealt with them in Gods Name, which,
out of this difference, may be observed; To wit, because the Word of God (who,
at this time had assumed our flesh, in the womb of the Virgin, subsisting
therefore by the Word which assumed it, and not to be dismissed any more)
formerly assumed an Angel subsisting before, to deal with man by, and therefore
dismissed him again when the business was done

Let us now compare that sense which these words create, according to Socinus,
with that which follows from the premises, and then I will be willing to
leave it to the reader to choose. For, is it not a great secret which the
Evangelist discovers by these words, in his sense, that, when S. John Baptist
began to preach, there was such a man in the world, as he whom God had
appointed to publish the Gospel? Is it that which he needed tell them, that
knew all before, that there was six months between their ages? Or, did it not
concern them to know, that the same Word of God, which dealt with the Fathers,
which, by and by, he means to tell them, was incarnate, the same was from the
beginning; that is to say, to the confusion of Arrius, no less then of
Socinus, from everlasting? Was it not to the purpose, to settle that which
Cerinthus undermined, upon the same credit, upon which they were Christians?

Proceed we now to that which follows, and we shall find, that, if we admit
Socinus his sense, when S. John says; The Word was with God, and afterward;
The same was in the beginning with God; I say if we admit the sense of these
words to be this; That, what time S. John Baptist preached, Jesus was with God
in heaven; We shall not give an account of those things which he says of
himself in the Gospel pertinent to Christianity; Which, according to the sense
of the Church, we shall do. John III. 11, 12, 13. Our Savior says to
Nicodemus; Verily, verily, I say unto thee; We speak that we know, and we
witness what we have seen, but ye receive not our witness. If I have said to
you earthly things and ye believe not, how will ye believe if I tell you
heavenly? And no man is gone up into heaven, but he that came down from heaven,
even the Son of man that is in heaven. Again, John V. 19, 20, 30. Our Lord,
giving a reason why he bad the man whom he had cured take up his bed and walk,
Answers and says to them; Verily verily I say unto you; the son can do
nothing of himself except he see the Father do something: For, what he does the
same does likewise the Son. For, the Father loves the Son, and shows him
all that he does: And will show him greater things then these, that ye may
marvel. And to the same effect, our Lord says to the Jews, John VIII. 38. I
speak what I have seen with my Father, and therefore ye do what ye have seen
with your Father; Or, at your and my Fathers house; (...). So John VI. 46, 50,
51, 58. 62. Not that any man has seen the Father, but he that comes from God;
He has seen the Father. And; This is the bread that comes down from heaven,
that a man may eat of it and not die. I am the living bread that is come down
from heaven. And again; This is the bread that is come down from heaven. And
last of all; What, then, if you see the Son of man go up thither where he was
before? Finally, when our Lord, now ready to leave the World, tells his
disciples, John XVI. 29. I came forth from my Father and came into the World:
Again, I leave the World and go to the father; I demand of all the World that
read, and believe by these words, that our Lord going back to the Father,
stays there for everlasting; whether they can understand, when he affirms in
the same form of words, that he came from the Father, that he means only,
that he had been with the Father since the Baptist began to preach? Or that he
had been there from everlasting before? When he says; What if you see him go
up thither where he was before? That he had been there before while the Baptist
was preaching, or that he had been there before, a while answerable to that
while that he shall stay there, after his going hence? When he says; That they
will not believe him when he tells them heavenly things; Because none of them
have been in heaven, as the Son of man, who, being come from heaven,
notwithstanding remains in heaven; Whether he mean only; That, having been
there in heaven, and learnt the effect of his commission, and, being still
there in heart as all Christians are, he can tell them things from heaven which
they will not believe? Or, that having been in heaven, and not having forsaken
it for his coming into the World, he knows the truth of all that he witnesses
here, by seeing the counsels of God there; even while he is here? And, that
these are those things which he has seen in his Fathers house; to wit, those
counsels, which the Father out of his love to him* had made him acquainted
with, and taught him to execute, even as they had learnt in the devils shop,
their Father, to execute his designs? For, can any man imagine, that his being
only born of the Virgin by the power of God, (which is, they say, the holy
Ghost) is a sufficient reason, why God should not only show him what he meant
to do for our salvation, but join him with himself in the work, and that
honor for it, whereof no Angel, that is the highest creature is capeable? Or,
that all this is such an expression as manhood can bear, of that participation
of Gods counsels, which the Word having been acquainted with from
everlasting, was no stranger to, while, being in the World, he was executing
the same? Surely, when our Lord says, that he is to leave the world, to go
back to the Father, he declares an intent to abide in heaven for everlasting.
Therefore when he says; he came forth from the Father to come into the world;
To understand only, that he left the private life he had lived before he began
to preach, to appear publicly to the World in his Office; might justly be
accounted a piece of frenzy, if there were not haeresy in it: The opposition
between heaven, where the Father is, and the world, being so manifest in the
words, that nothing but the vain glory of maintaining a party could cause it
to be overseen.

If these things be true, we shall not need to go far for the sense of our
Lords words John XVII. 5. And now glorify thou me, O Father, with that glory
which I had with thee, before the foundation of the World. Because we see how
many times in this Gospel, by being with the Father, our Savior expresses
(not his being in heaven when the Baptist began to preach, but) his being in
heaven from the beginning of the World, till he was born upon earth. For, can
any doubt be made, that the glory which he had with the Father from the
beginning, is that which he was to be exalted to at his rising again? As for
that answer of his to the Jews, that demanded of him (having said; Abraham your
Father desired to see my day, and saw it, and rejoiced) Thou art not yet fifty
years old, and have thou seen Abraham? To which Jesus answered and said;
Verily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am; John VIII. 56, 57, 58.
I perceive the World is ashamed to hear, what Socinus is not ashamed to answer:
That the sense of the words is, and so they ought to be translated, Before
Abraham become Abraham: Or, before he become Abraham, I am: Meaning, that, here
you see me, before the calling of the Gentiles, whereby the Prophecy of
Abraham's name Father of a great people, is fulfilled. For the words, (...);
make, both the name of Abraham, to go before the Verb in sense, and the verb
to signify the time past,: So that there must have been another (...) after
(...), as well as this that goes before, and if there had been so, it must have
been translated, before Abraham was Abraham, or, before he was Abraham; not,
before he become Abraham. But for our Lord to say; before Abraham was, I am; to
wit, in the purpose of God; is no less impertinent to their question, then to
say; I am here before the calling of the Gentiles. And to imagine, that our
Lord would give an answer utterly impertinent to their question, I know not how
it can stand with his profession; though, not to declare all that truth, which,
for the present, they were not able to bear, may well stand with it.

CHAP. XIV. The Name of God not ascribed to Christ for the like reason as to
creatures. The reasons why the Socinians worship Christ as God do confute their
limitations. Christ not God by virtue of his rising again. He is the Great God
with S. Paul, the true God, with S. John, the only Lord, with S. Jude. Other
Scriptures. Of the form of God, and of a servant in S. Paul.
BUT the Apostle adds still more and goes forwards, saying; And the Word was
God: Though here the Socinians think they have enough to plead, when they can
say, that the name of God which is here used, is not proper to signify God
himself, which the name of four letters (...) so signifies in the Old
Testament, that it is never attributed to any creature but by abuse; That is to
say, as employed to express the sense of such men as believe not in the true
God alone, but attribute his honor to some of his creatures. For it is very
well known, and granted on all hands, that the name (...), which the Greek
(...) here translateth, is attributed first to Gods Angels, then to Gods
ministers in governing his People. The reason whereof I take to be this, that,
having entered into covenant with God, to have him for their sovereign, and to
live by his Laws, they must needs be bound to acknowledge and to honor those
who had commission from him, whether immediately or mediately to govern his
people by the said Laws, in stead of God himself; as deputies, Commissioners,
or Ambassadors represent the persons of those Sovereigns from whom they come.
This, I suppose, is a general reason why this name of God in the Old
Testament, is communicated to the Governors of Gods people, which the
Socinians cannot with any reason refuse: Neither can I imagine how it should be
more evidently justified then by that of God to Moses, Exodus VII. 1. Behold I
have made thee Pharaohs God, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet. For
Aaron is made Moses his Prophet, to publish his Orders to Phara^h because he
was a man of a ready tongue; which Moses was not, Exodus IV. 14, 15, 16. Prophet
being no more then Interpreter, or Truchman, as Onkel^s translates it. And
therefore Moses is called also here Aarons God, because he was to give the
Orders which Aaron was to publish. But Pharaohs, God, as Ruler and Prince over
Pharaoh (who was Ruler and Prin^^ of all Egypt) as to those things which God
should by him command Pharaoh to do.

I suppose then, that we cannot come to a more peremptory issue with the
Socinians, then by putting to trial, whether this name of God be attributed to
our Lord Christ,* to signify such a quality as is incompetible to a creature;
no^ that be more peremptorily tried, then by evidencing what is the honor and
esteem, which the name of God imports in our Lord Christ, and in Gods
creatures. For, seeing that honor inwardly, is nothing else but the esteem
which a reasonable creature bears in mind of that which it honors,
outwardly, the signs of that esteem; And, seeing the distance between the
nature of God and that of the creature is so unvaluable, that it is impossible,
that he who believes, that there is that which deserves the name of God,
should ever imagine that there is more then one; It must remain, no less
impossible, that, whosoever takes God for God, should ever take any creature of
never so great eminence, for the same. Indeed, that inward honor which I found
in the esteem of the mind, is a thing of a finite and moderate nature, whether
it represent God or his creature; the understanding in which it is, not being
capable of any thing, that is not proportionable to it: Which notwithstanding,
nothing hinders a finite conceit, in the mind of a creature, to represent an
infinite perfection in that which it represents, if any true conceit of God
can be found in any of his understanding creatures. It is then manifest, that,
(I say not among the Socinians, but) among those who, upon misunderstanding the
grounds of Reformation, have fallen away from the most holy Faith of the Church
concerning the ever blessed Trinity, there has fallen a difference whether our
Lord Christ is to be worshipped as God or not; Socinus being now in appearance
the head of that party which would have it so. And therefore I shall not much
need to dispute that, but only for satisfaction of the reader, repeat some of
those texts of Scripture, which they seem to have stopped the mouths of their
adversaries with. For, when the Apostle says; Heb. I. 6. When he brings his
only begotten Son into the World, he says; And let all the Angels of God
worship him; Supposes he not, that men should do that, which Angels by Gods
authority do? And our Lord discourses, John V. 22, 23. that God has given the
power of judging to the Son; That all may hanour the Son as the Father. He
that honors not the Son, honors not the Father that sent him. And* This
is that will of God, the knowledge whereof moves Angels and men to fall down
before the Lamb that was slain, and give him honor and glory, Apoc. V. 8-13.
Nor can any Christian deny, that he was worshipped in any other sense or
quality, either by the blind man whom he had restored to sight, John IX. 39. or
by others, whom we find to be accepted of him, as those who had been well
instructed of him and by him in that which they owed him. Luke XVII. 5. Lord
increase our Faith. Mar. IX. 24. Lord uphold my unbelief. Mat. XX. 30. Have
mercy upon us, O Lord thou Son of David. Luke XVII. 13. Jesu Master have
mercy upon us. And; Lord save us we perish. Therefore our Lord says to the
Angel of Laodicea, Apoc. III. 18. I advise thee to buy of me gold tried from
the fire. For what should he buy it with, but the worship of God by prayers?
And the Apostle, Heb. IV. 14, 15. We have not an high Priest that cannot
compassionate our infirmities, but who was tempted in all things like us
without sin. Let us therefore go to the Throne of his grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace for help in time. Again, S. Paul, Romans X. 12,
13. The same Lord is rich to all that call on him. For, whos^ shall call upon
the Name of the Lord shall be saved. For, that the worship of the only true
God goes with the name of the Lord, ascribed to the Lord Jesus in the New
Testament, no question can be made So says S. Luke, of the first of Martyrs
Acts VII. 59, 60. And they st^ned Stephen praying and saying; Lord Jesu receive
my Spirit. And, kneeling he cried with a loud voice, saying, Lord, lay not this
sin to their charge. Every Christian can tell by what he does, whom Stephen
calls Lord. And that is enough to show, how ridiculous they make themselves,
who, when S. Stephen, says, (...), would have it understood, that he calls
upon the Lord of Jesus, not upon the Lord Jesus. For when S. Stephen offers to
Christ the same prayer, which Christ had offered to the Father, and David to
God, Luke XXIII. 46. Psalm. XXXI. 6. Is it not the same honor, whereof God
alone is capable? For they that should say, that S. Stephen prayed this, not
because all Christians are to pray so, but because he saw our Lord Christ at
the right hand of God; Should make that, which would have been Idolatry
otherwise, to become acceptable service to God, upon an accident depending on
the free will of God. And, what else did S. Paul, when he said, 2 Cor. XII. 8,
9. Therefore besought I God thrice, that it might depart from me: But he said
to me; My Grace is sufficient for thee: For my power is effectual through
weakness. Most willingly therefore will I glory in my weakness, that the
power of God may dwell in me. And S. John, when he prays; Come Lord Jesus,
Apoc. XXII. 20. prays to him whose coming he desires, that is, whose strength
is effectual through weakness. And whom else prays S. Paul to when he says,
1 These. III. 11, 12. But God who is our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ
prosper our Journey to you. And, 2 These. II. 16. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself,
and God our Father, who has loved us, and given everlasting comfort, and good
hope through grace, comfort your hearts, and strengthen you in every good word
and work. For there being here no difference between the worship tendered to
God and to Christ, I must needs infer, that it is the same which S. Paul
signifies, when he intitles his Epistle to all that call upon the name of the
common Lord, 1 Cor. I. 2.

It is true, they that allege all these arguments, do likewise caution, that
this worship, and these prayers, which are tendered to God absolutely, are
tendered to Christ, with limitation of some certain circumstances, which being
supposed, it becomes due to Christ, being always due to God. But if the
difference between God and his creature be not acknowledged, it is impossible
Christianity should stand. If, the difference between the worship due to God
and to his creature be not acknowledged, it is impossible the difference
between God and his creature should stand; Because worship is nothing else but
the acknowledgement of this difference: Therefore, where the worship of God is
tendered to his creature, either the creature is made an Idol, or truly
supposed to be God. Therefore our Lord argues, that the Father judging no man
himself, has given the power of judging to the Son; That all may honor the
Son as they honor the Father; Because he that honors not the Son honors
not the Father. John V. 22. 23. To wit, since the settling of Christianity.
Whereby we may see how easy it is to answer the objection that is made from
the words o^ S. Peter, Act. II. 36. Let all the house of Israel know assuredly,
that God has made this Jesus whom ye crucified, Lord and Christ; As if this
honor and worship were due to our Lord Christ upon the title of being raised
from the dead by God; And so much signified by S. Paul, when he tells the Jews
of Pisidia, Act* XIII. 33. That God has fulfilled the promise made to the
Fathers, to them and their children, raising up Jesus, as it is written in the
second Psalm; Thou art my son this day have I begotten thee. For, when the
Apostle argues, that Christ is become so much superior to the Angels, as he
has inherited a more excellent name: Because to whom of the Angels was it ever
said; Thou art my son this day have I begotten thee? Heb. I. 4, 5. It is
pretended that, (not the title of Son of God, which at present I speak not
of, but) the honor and worship due to him that wears it, is due by Gods
raising him from the dead, to the estate of sitting at his right hand. Then
which nothing can be more unjust. For, as it is truly said by our Lord after
his rising again, Mat. XXVIII. 18. All power is given to me in heaven and in
earth; So it is no less truly said Mat. XI. 27. All things are delivered to me
by my Father: Neither knows any man the Son but the Father, nor knows any
man the Father but the Son, and whomsoever the Son will reveal him to. And
therefore not disputing at present, what the power given the Son by the
Father is, it shall be enough for my pupose, that it is the same which was
given him when he rose from the dead; To wit, that which all Christians
acknowledge, when they Worship him for God. For, how should any man understand
that the man Jesus, by being raised from the dead, by being taken up into
heaven to the Throne of God, by any thing that his humane nature can be endued
with, should be worshipped for God, had not this worship been due to him from
the time of his being man, as I have showed you, those who make this objection
do acknowledge it to have been due? For, it is our Lords argument, that the Son
is to be honored as the Father, because his Father has given him the Power of
raising the dead to life, and of judging the quick and the dead, John V. 25,
30. even then when he argued with the Jews.

Therefore, when S. Thomas, being satisfied that our Lord was risen from the
dead, cries out, my Lord and my God, John XX. 28. There can be no more cause, to
understand any abatement in the notion of God or Lord, then when David, or our
Savior upon the Cross, cries out, My God my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Psalm. XXII. 1. For, if David, or S. Thomas, were such men as believed those to
be God which were not, it would be necessary to say, that their God is not
absolutely God. But supposing them to acknowledge the true God, we cannot deny
him to be the true God, whom they so acknowledge. In the words of S. Paul, Romans
IX. 5. Of whom is Christ according to the flesh, who is over all, God blessed
for evermore; there is some pretense made, that Erasmus finds not the word God
alleged by S. Hillary, and S. Cypriane. And Grotius, I know not upon what
mistake, has said; That it is not in the Syriack: For, he that shall read the
Syriack will find it there, as plain as any thing else that is there. And,
supposing it not there, he that considers what the Jews (with whom S. Paul
having been bred, never fell from their God) understand by the Blessed, will
never understand him to be called any thing less then God, that is called
blessed for evermore. Now when S. John says, 1 John V. 20. We are in the true
God, in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God and eternal life; When S.
Paul says, Titus II. 13. Expecting the blessed hope and glorious appearance of
the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ; When S. Jude says of the heretics
whom he writes against; Denying that only Lord God and our Savior Jesus
Christ, Jude 9. It is stoutly insisted upon by the Socinians, that God and
Christ are spoken of here as several persons, and so, that these attributes,
belonging to God, concern not Christ. And, examples are brought to show, that
it is not unusual, and therefore not unreasonable, that, in the words of S.
John, This he is the true God, should have reference, not to the Son Jesus
Christ, mentioned next before, but, to the true God, which is the Father,
mentioned at more distance; That in the words of S. Paul and S. Jude, though
the article is not repeated, when they say; (...); Yet this does not argue the
same Christ to be meant by both titles referred to him by the same article; But
is only a bare want of the article in the second place, of which they give us
examples enowe. But all this can prove no more, then that these texts might be
so understood, if there were any thing in the words to argue that so they must
be understood, which here appears not. On the other ^^de* for the text of S.
Jude, if we compare it with S. Peter, who (writes the same things with S. Jude,
of the same Heretics) we shall find, that, in the beginning of the chapter, in
stead of the words quoted out of S. Jude, he puts only, that they deny the
Lord, or the Master that bought them: In the end of it, he signifies manifestly
that he speaks of Christians that fell away, 2 Pet. II. 1, 20, 21, 22. Whereby
it may appear that it is our Lord Christ Jesus whom he calls the only Lord
or Master, because he redeemed us from the State of captives, and therefore
that it is the same whom he calls God. And truly, as I showed before, that S.
John in his Epistle to the seven Churches in the Revelations, writes against
the same heretics, so can there no question be made, that they are the same,
of whom he says 1 John II. 22, 23. Who is the liar but he that denies that
Jesus is the Christ? This is the Antichrist, that denies the Father and the
Son. Whosoever denies the Son, neither has the Father; Though we suppose
this Epistle to be written to the then Christian Jews. For, whereas they all
pretend to hold God the Father, whom, as Jews originally, they acknowledge; the
Apostle argues, that, bringing in another Christ, not the Son of God who made
the world, they could not rightly say, that they held God the Father. So that,
his argument, being proper against them, demonstrates who they are. And this is
the reason of that which went before; And ye have an unction from the holy one,
and know all things. I have not written unto you because ye know not the truth,
but because ye know it, and that no ly is of the truth; And of that which
immediately follows; Let that therefore which ye have learned from the
beginning remain in you. If that remain in you which ye have heard from the
beginning, ye also shall remain in the Son and in the Father. For, because
they knew what Faith they had embraced when they became Christians, no man need
tell them, that they who would not have our Lord Jesus to be the Christ were
liars, and the holy Ghost, which good Christians receive upon the hearty
profession of Christianity, he justly presumes, will maintain them in it. This
for the text of Saint Jude.

But I say further, that the Name of the true God, the great God, the only
God, which all of them attribute to God, is attributed to him in equivalent
terms, not only in those texts of the Old Testament, (when the proper name of
God is given to the Angels that spoke in the person of God) which I spoke of
before: But also in those, where the name attributes an action of the only true
great God are given to the Messiah, which, we agree, is our Lord Jesus. And
therefore that there can be no cause to bring in unusual figures of speech to
expound these texts, for fear they should say that, which is so many times said
in the Scriptures. S. Paul Romans XIV. 10, 11. We shall all stand before the
judgment seat of Christ, says he; For it is written; As I live says the
Lord, unto me shall every knee ^ow, and every tongue give praise to God. Which,
any man may see, is said of God, by his Prophet, Isa. XLV. 23. And therefore I
marvel, it should seem strange, that the same person should be called the
great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, Titus II. 20. when the appearance there
mentioned is not the appearance of the Father, but of Christ, who shall appear
judge at the last day, though he have from the Father the glory wherein he
shall appear.

Again, when he says, 1 Cor. II. 8. Had they known, they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory: It is manifest, that he ascribes unto Christ, the
title of the only true and great God in Psalm. XXIV. 7, 8, 9, 10. So the
Apostle Heb. I. 10. affirming that to be said of Christ, which we read, Psalm.
CII. 25, 26, 27. Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundations of the
earth, and the heavens are the work of thine hands: They shall perish, but thou
shall endure; They all shall wax old as does a garment: And as a vesture shall
thou fold them up, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy
years shall never fail. For, whereas they grant, that the end is of Christ,
where he speaks of ending the world at his coming to judgment: But not the
beginning, where he speaks of making the world, because there he is called by
the proper name of God; I call all the world to witness* what there is in the
words to argue, that he speaks not still of the same person, of whom he began
to speak. What will they not do to rack the Scriptures, and force them to say
what they never meant, that are not ashamed to advance pretenses, in which
there is so little appearance, rather then confess what all the Church of
Christ maintains? So, when the Prophet says, Mal. III. 3. Behold I send my
messenger, and he shall sweep the way before thee, and suddenly shall the
Lord, whom ye seek, come to his Temple: It is so manifest, that he ascribes the
title of the only true God to the Messiah* that Grotius, who is so much
carried away with the Socinians exposition of diverse texts in this point, could
not forbear to say, that the hypostaticall union is signified by this: And
therefore it is manifest, what Lordship we are to understand, where Zachary
says to the Baptist his Son; Thou shall go before the face of the Lord to
prepare his ways, Luke I. 46.

So when the Prophet David says of the Messiah, Psalm. CX. 1. The Lord said to
my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool:
And the Apostle infers upon it, Heb. I. 13. To which of the Angels said he
ever; Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool? He
remitts us, for his meaning, to that which he had premised there of Christ.
Heb. I. 3. that having merited by himself the cleansing of our sins, he sat
down on the Throne of Majesty in the highest heavens. And again, Heb. VIII. 1.
We have such an high Priest, as is set down on the right hand of the Throne of
Majesty in the heavens. For, the Majesty of God, being presented in the
Scripture, by that which is most glorious upon earth, of a King upon his
Throne, as king of heaven and earth, whose commands all the Angels stand about
the Throne ready to execute; To seat our Lord Christ upon the same Throne, is
to commit the highest degree of treason against the Majesty of God, by
challenging for him the honor due to God alone, if he be not the same God, on
whose behalf those words challenge it. Ask any Jew, that has learned God from
the Old Testament, what (...), The Thron of Glory, is, or rather, what he is
that sits on it, and see if he do not refuse our Lord Christ that privilege,
because he must allow him to be the only true God, if he do not

But, why should I be troubled to fit him with the title of the only true God,
woe expressly challenges to be esteemed aequall to God. John V. 21, 22, 23.
For, as the Father raises and quickneth the dead, so also does the Son
quicken whom he please. For neither does the Father judge any man, but has
given all judgment to the Son, that all may honor the Son as they honor
the Father; He that honors not the Son honors not the Father that sent
him. Which is as much as if he had said, he that honors not the Son as he
honors the Father; having said before; That all may honor the Son, as they
honor the Father. As for that answer of his, John X. 32-36. The Jews answered
him saying; For a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, and because
thou being man make thy self God. Jesus answered them; Is it not written in
your Law, I have said ye are Gods? If he called them Gods, to whom the Word* of
God came, and the Scripture cannot be voided; Tell you him whom the Father has
sanctified, and sent into the world, thou blasphemest, because I said I am the
Son of God? Where, they say, it is manifest, that he challenges not the
title of God properly, but as it is communicated to creatures, as here to the
Judges of Israel. It is to be granted, that our Lord here imployes that which
S. Chrysostom often calls (...), that is, good husbandry or sparing^esse in
his language; Expressing in more reserved terms, that which he intends not to
renounce. For, seeing the Jews ready to stone him for that which they
understood by it, no marvel if he abated his plea without quitting it,
arguing from the less, if they to whom the Word of God came are called Gods,
much more he that is sanctified and sent into the World by the Father, may call
himself so, and plead this reason too, without disclaiming the property of the
title, because of that which immediately follows; If I do not the works of my
Father believe me not. But if I do them though you believe not me, believe the
works: That ye may know and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him.
Where, it is plain, he holds up his claim, by pleading the evidence of it. As
for that of S. Paul Phil. II. 6-11. Let the same mind be in you as in Christ
Jesus: who, being in the form of God, made it not an occasion of pride, (or, of
advantage) that he was equal with God: But emptied himself, having taken the
form of a servant, and become in the likeness of men: And being found in
figure as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient to death* even the death of
the Cross. Wherefore God also has overexalted him, and given him the name
that is above every name: That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both
of things in heaven, and upon the earth, and under the earth, and every tongue
confess, that J. Christ is the Lord to the glory of God the Father. Here I
admit with Grotius, the speech to be of Christ incarnate, that the man Jesus is
said to have emptied himself, and taken the form of a slave, becoming obedient
to death. For, this man it is, who, when he so emptied himself, was presently
in the form of God, of which he emptied himself, thinking it no occasion of
pride (so I allow him to translate it, though some words of Eusebius make me
think it more properly translated advantage) that he was ^qual to God; but,
condescending so far to dissemble what he was, as to be crucified. But
supposing this, I demand, how came Jesus to be in this form of God, before he
humbled himself, and wherein it consisted? For, if they say, that, in
consideration of his undertaking the message of God, (when, being thirty years
old, he was taken up to heaven, as they say) he was exalted to it, then can
they not say that he was endowed with it from his birth, as being conceived by
the H. Ghost. But if as S. Paul says, he was so, when he emptied himself of
it, then it is to be demanded, by virtue of what he was so; For, by virtue of
being conceived by the H. Ghost, and born of a Virgin, according to them, he
will no more be so, then the first Adam, being formed of Virgin earth, and the
breath of God breathed in him. But if, by virtue of the power and glory of God,
that is, of God dwelling in him, according to Grotius, then by virtue of the
hypostatical union, which before, you saw, he confesses. But the name above
every name, at which all things in heaven and earth and under the earth bow,
importing the honor that is proper to God, which no man can give to any
creature without making it God, though given to the man Jesus, yet signifies,
the reason for which it is given to stand in the Godhead, that is communicated
to his manhood; And that always due since he was man, though not declared to
be due, nor published to the world while he was in it, till he was overexalted
to it, upon his rising again, and the holy Ghost sent to enable his Apostles
to preach it.

CHAP. XV. Not only the Church but the World was made by Christ. The Word was
made flesh in opposition to the Spirit. How the Prophets, how Christians, by
receiving the Word of God, are possessed by his Spirit. How the title of Son
of God imports the Godhead. How Christ is the brightness and Image of God.
THis is the next argument, which the next words of S. John point out to us,
when he says; All things were made by him, and without him was nothing made.
Which, because they are peremptory in this cause, so long as they are
understood as all Christians have hitherto understood them; (That the World was
made by that word of God which, we believe to have been incarnate in our Lord
Christ) Socinus has played one of his Masteerpeeces upon them, to persuade us
to believe, that they mean no more, but that our Lord Christ is the Author of
the Gospel, whereby Christians are, as it were, new made, and created a
Church; Seeing it is manifest that the Prophets do often describe the
deliverances and restorings of Gods people, by comparing them to the making of
a new World, with a new Sun and Moon and Stars, and all Creatures new. But when
rhey do so, it is first understood, that they speak as Prophets, for whom it is
proper to express things to come in figurative speeches, because it is not the
intent of Gods Spirit, that the particulars signified should be plain
aforehand, that the dependence of Gods people upon him and his word may be
free* Then, by the consequence of the Prophesies, compared with the events,
argument enough is to be had, that these speeches are not properly but
figuratively meant. As for example, when the Prophet Esaias says; Behold I make
a new Heaven and a new Earth; In that very addition, of new, there is argument
enough to conclude, that he speaks by a prophetical figure, which if a man
read on, he shall find still more to conclude. But had he said; Behold I make
Heaven and Earth; Either we must understand make, for have made, or that he
means to make indeed such as these are: And that, supposing these destroyed; In
as much as, these abiding, those that might be made, could not be called Heaven
and Earth, but a Heaven, and an Earth. Now, in these words, there is nothing
added to intimate any abatement in the proper signification of all things: And
therefore S. John, speaking in such terms, as he that writes dogmatically
would be thought so to use, as not to be mistaken, must needs be understood to
mean, that the World was made at first by Gods word, which, by and by he will
tell us that it was incarnate. Especially, that we may not make him to spend
words to tell Christians such a secret as this; That Christ is the first Author
of the Gospel, and Founder of his Church, which they that believe not might
know by seeing Christians spring from his Doctrine. Neither is that which
follows any thing less clear; He was in the World, and the World was made by
him, and the World knew him not. Though Socinus has used his skill to darken
it with a strange devise of three senses of this one word World, in this one
sentence; which he conceives will be an elegant expression, if we understand
the World, when it is said, He was in the World, to signify his new people:
when it is said; The World was made by him; The Church, that is, all
Christians: When it is said; The World knew him not; the unbelievers. And truly
I believe, most Languages will justify, the people among whom a man lives, to
be called the World. The ordinary French says; Il y a beaucoup de monde d^ns
ceste ville. There is a great deal of World in this Town; word for word: But
that, in the two clauses following, the World should stand, first for
Believers, then for unbelievers; is such a figure, without any thing added to
give occasion so to understand it, as nothing can be added to make it passable,
though something might be added to make it to be understood. Besides, consider
what follows; He came to his own, and his own received him not. For, are the
Jews his own people only because he was of that people? Are the Jews no
otherwise his own then the English may be called mine own, because being
English, I bring that which here I have written to the English? Surely S. John
meant to aggravate their fault more, then by charging them to have refused a
Countryman of their own: To wit, him that had made them, and whose they were
upon that score. Consider what went before; This is that true Light that
lights every man that comes into the World. For, unless we understand this to
be every man that comes into the Church (which will be to deny that Christ
gives any light to unbelievers, at least to be signified by these words, and to
make them import no more then the same great secret, that Christ is the Author
of Christians) we must understand by it, (as the truth requires it to be
understood) That our Lord came into the world because he came to live among
that people, called the world, by that most ordinary figure of speech, that is
called (...); That the World so properly called (and therefore all that it
contains, that is, the World (...) so called, to wit that people) was made by
him; and that nevertheless, this world, being the body of that people, knew
him not, that is owned him not being his own, as all people are whom he
enlightneth.

And what means the Apostle when he says of the Son Heb. I. 2, 3. Whom he
made heir of all things, by whom also he made the Worlds. And; Who bears or
moves all things with his powerful word. For, if any man attempt to apply the
same salve to this wound also, what will he have these worlds to be, but those
of which he says again, Heb. XI. 5. By faith we understand that the worlds
were made by the Word of God: To wit, the world of invisible things, and this
visible world, which, by the Jews writings we understand, that their ancestors
were wont co call this world, and the world to come, because they expected to
live in it after this; Whereupon the same Apostle says again, Heb. II. 5. For
he has not subjected the world to come to Angels; meaning the invisible world
of Angels, which to us is to come. As for that which follows, whether he
sustain or whether he move all things by his word, seeing it is his word that
does it, the same is Gods Word that made all things, called his word also,
because incarnate. And what is it less for him to move all things, then that
which S. Paul says of God, Acts XVII. 28. that in him we live move and have
our being?

And S. Paul Col. I. 16. For in him (or rather through him) were all things
created that are in heaven* and that are on earth, visible things and
invisible, whether dominions, or magistrates, or powers, all things were
created by him and to him. For what has Christ done for the angels, that he
should be said to have made them? suppose the redemption and reconcilement of
mankind make a new world with us, is the reconciling of the Angel to us by
reconciling of us to himself, the making of them, as it is the new making of
us? Is the making of him head of them the making of them? If it be, it is not
he that made them, seeing it is the Father that made him head of them. But what
shall become of all visible things, besides man, which are said here to have
been created by Christ, and cannot be made anew? Therefore, it is the whole
world that S. Paul means was first made, not men and Angels that he means
were restored by Christ. And when he says they were made by him and to him,
that is, for him, he bars that snare, which some put upon the Apostles words,
when he says, By whom also he made the worlds; To wit, that he means, for him
he made the worlds; according to a common saying among the Jews, which they
think he points at; That the world was made for the Messiah. I see that (...)
signifies sometimes (...), both serving to signify a mean, which belongs still
to the effective cause. As when it is said that all things subsist (...), Apoc.
IV. 11. that the martyrs overcome (...), Apoc. XII. 11. that the false Prophet
deceives, (...), Apoc. XIII. 14. It is all one whether we understand, For the
will of God; For the blood of the Lamb, and the word which they witness; For
the signs which were granted him to do; Or, by and through the same: because
both import a mean effective cause. But that (...) should signify (...) for the
final cause, is that which no Greek will endure. And in this place, S. Paul,
having said that all things were made (...), through him, and to him, that is,
for him; Leaves no room to understand any thing else by these words. But there
is a further reason in the case, and theme which S. Paul speaks to, whereby it
is evident, that he challenges the making of all things to Christ, because he
challenges to him that worship, which the Heretics, whom he writes against,
tendered to Angels, as those by whom the World was made; Which, I showed before,
was the doctrine of Simon Magus and Cerinthus, both in the Apostles times, and
infers the abstinence from Gods creatures, as proceeding from another
principle, from which also Moses Law came according to their doctrine; the
observation whereof they therefore pressed, not as Moses had delivered it, but
as it was revealed to them by the said Angels; from whom, Tertulliane says,
they pretended to have received those doctrines, which they imposed upon the
Collossians, though according to the Law of Moses. And this is the ground of
those things which S. Paul discourses, as well against legal observations, as
against the worship of angels, Col. II. 16. -- which, if you will survay what
Crotius has noted upon that place, and upon 1 Timothy IV. 1-5. you shall find to
be directly opposed to the doctrines of those Heresies, which had their
beginning even during the Apostles times. So that, the reason why he says,
that They hold not the head, from whom the whole body, furnished and compacted
by joints and bands, grows the growth of God, Col. II. 19. is because they
would not have the Angels and the World to be his work, which therefore S. Paul
must be understood to oppose. And truly when they grant, the passage of the
Psalm noted by the Apostle, and repeated before, Heb. I. 10. Thou Lord in the
beginning have laid the foundation of the earth -- to belong to Christ, where
it speaks of changing the world, but to God, where it speaks of making the
world; (there being no difference imaginable, between the making and the
changing of it) what reason can be imagined, why all, and the proper name of
God with all, should not be said of Christ? Thus much at least, our Lord not
only says but argues, John V. 19 That God has given him such works to do as
himself does, (to raise the dead, for example, and to judge both quick and
dead) that all men might honor him, as they do the Father; which is neither
more nor less, then, to esteem him neither more nor less. And in the place
before named, resuming and reinferring his claim of being equal to God, which,
to divert the fury of the Jews, he had seemed a little to wave, John X. 37,
38. If I do not the works of my Father believe me not* but if I do them, though
ye believe not me, believe the works; That you may know that my Father is in
me and I in him. Where you may see that, by the miracles, which our Savior
showed them, having obliged them to believe that he was a Prophet come from
God, and by consequence that whatsoever he came to teach them is true; By the
works which he foretold, of his sitting down at the right hand of God, sending
the H. Ghost, calling the Gentiles, raising the dead, and judging both quick
and dead, he obliges those that believe him to be Christ, to believe him to be
God, being such things as none but God can do.

Now when S. John says further; And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst
us; And we saw his glory as the glory of the only begotten son of God, full of
grace and truth; It is not to be denied, that the name of flesh intimateh the
weakness of that mean estate, in the which it pleased Christ to come: But
that implying this, it should not express his being man, is a thing which the
bare name of flesh will not endure; The people of God only being acquainted
with spiritual and invisible substances, in opposition to which, man being
called flesh, (or, flesh and blood) the weakness of his nature must, by
consequence be implied, the nature it self being directly understood and
expressed. Wherefore when the Apostle says John IV. 2, 3. Every Spirit that
acknowledges Jesus who is come in the flesh, to be Christ, is of God. And
every spirit that acknowledges not Jesus Christ that is come in the flesh, to
be Christ, is not of God; It is manifest, that he speaks of those heresies,
which would have the Christ to be something else then the man Jesus, belonging
to the fulness of the Godhead, whether it came upon the man Jesus to leave
him again (according to Cerinthus, during the time of the Apostles, and
Valentine, and others afterward) or, whether it never appeared in the person
of a man in the World: For, I have made it manifest before, that these were the
Doctrines, of those Haeresies, whereof he gives them warning. Besides, we must
here recall all the reasons that have been used, to show, that S. John in the
premises, speaks of the state of the Word before the birth of our Lord, and not
before his appearing to Preach: By which it will appear, that we shall not need
to dispute with Socinus, about the signification of the word (...), whether it
may at any time, or whether here it may, or must signify was, or became: The
consequence of the Text necessarily inferring, that, when S. John says, (...);
his meaning is not, that this Word was a mean man, but, that the Word became
man, which it was not before. And therefore, for S. John's meaning, we must look
to the opposition between the Flesh and the Spirit, so often expressed and
signified to be in our Lord Christ, by the Apostles. S. Paul speaking of the
Fathers, Romans IX. 5. Of whom, says he, is Christ according to the flesh, who
is God blessed for evermore: Intimating that he is another way according to the
Spirit. That way he expresses, Romans I. 3. saying that Christ who came of the
Seed of David according to the flesh, is decla^ed, (or as the Syriack
translates it, known to he) the Son of God according to the Spirit of
Holiness, by rising from the dead. Whereupon another Apostle says, 1 Pet.
III. 18. that he was put to death in the flesh, but quickened in or by the
Spirit. Or as S Paul again, 2 Cor. XIII. 4. Crucified out of weakness, but
alive out of the power of God. For in all these speeches, as the flesh, and the
weakness thereof signifies the manhood, so the Spirit the Godhead. For, in the
Gospells, sometimes he professes to do miracles, and cast out Devils by the
power of God; sometimes by the Holy Ghost, Mar. VI. 5. IX. 39. Luke IV. 36. V.
17. VI. 19. Where we hear what the Sin against the Holy Ghost in the Gospel
is; Namely, for those that stood so plentifully convict, that these works were
done by the power of God in him; to say, that they were done by the Prince of
Devils. For, when the Baptist says, John III. 34. He whom God has sent
speaks the words of God: For God gives him not the Spirit by measure; He
makes the difference plain enough, between the fullness of the Spirit dwelling
in Christ (which is the Godhead of the Word incarnate, never to be parted from
the Manhood of Christ) and, that measure of it by which the Prophets spoke,
for the time that they were inspired. As S. Paul says of the Church, that
grace is given it, according to the measure of Christ's gift, Ephesians. IV. 7.
Wherefore the Apostle, having observed before, that Melchisedeck is called a
Priest, not according to the commandment of a carnal Law, but according to the
virtue of indissoluble Life, Heb. VII. 16., thus proceeds Heb. IX. 13, 14.
For if the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkled,
sanctify the polluted to the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the
blood of Christ, who, through the everlasting spirit offered himself to God
blameless, cleanse our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God?
For, though the Soul of Christ raised from the dead have immortality, which is
life indissoluable, yet it has not the virtue of it, which is to be ascribed
to the Spirit, which raised him from the dead as well as us* according to S.
Paul, Romans VIII. 10. 11. If Christ be in you, though the body be dead, because
of sin, yet the Spirit is life because of righteousness. But if the Spirit of
him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised Jesus from
the dead shall quicken your mortal bodies also, through his Spirit that
dwells in you. And whether the cleansing of sin can be ascribed to any gift
bestowed upon the humane Soul of Christ, as here they would have it ascribed
to the immortality thereof, let all the World judge. I deny not indeed, that
Christ offers the Sacrifice of himself to the Father, in the Heaven of Heavens,
as the Priest offered him the blood of those Sacrifices which were burnt
without the Camp, in that Holy of Holies: But, if I should deny, that he
offered himself to God when he was crucified, I might as well deny that the
Priests offered therein Sacrifices to God, when they killed them at the Altar,
and burnt them upon it. So manifest, so certain it is, that the eternal
Spirit, by virtue whereof the blood of Christ, being offered, cleanses sin,
was in Christ before his rising again.

And this is that which S. Paul says, 1 Timothy III. 16. And without
crontroversie, Great is the mystery of Godliness; God was manifested in the
Flesh, justified in the Spirit, preached to the Gentiles, seen of Angels,
believed of the World, taken up into Glory. It is said indeed, that the
Syriack, the Vulgar Latin the Arabic, and the Commentaries under S. Ambrose
his name, all want (...) here, and understand S. Paul to speak of the Gospel
all the while; And that, the Gospel being said to be preached, before it is
said to be taken up into Glory, (...) must be no more, then, that it is exalted
and glorified. As if the order of the words did enforce, that which is first
said to have been first done, or as if (...), or (...) did not signify the
taking of him up to God, but the making of the Gospel famous. Such violence
will a prejudicate supposition offer even to Gods words, rather then to quit an
argument. For, to what sense can the Gospel be said to be manifested in the
flesh, because preached by the man Christ? And, suppose it may be said to be
justified by the Spirit, (as Wisdom is justified by the Children of Wisdom,
Mat. XI. 9. Luke VII. 35.) how much more proper is it to understand, that God,
who appeared in the flesh, should be said to be justified, so to be, in or by
the Spirit, the Works whereof showed him so to be, as before? Neither shall we
need to make any greater doubt of the reading of those words of S. Paul, Acts
XX. 28. Look therefore to your selves, and to the whole Flock, ever which the
Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, to feed the Church of God which he has
gotten with his blood. Though the written Copy at S. James, and the Syriack
read here (...), instead of (...): Because, that the Church over which the Holy
Ghost makes Bishops, it bought with the blood of Christ, is the same with that
of the Apostle before, that the blood of Christ; offered by the eternal Spirit,
cleanses sin. Neither is it so easy to avoid the words of the Apostle* Heb.
XI. 16. as some imagine, For he took not Angels, but the Seed of Abraham he
took. Suppose (...) be to challenge, which is done by laying hands on that
which we challenge: Is the ground therefore void, upon which he challenges
these to life as his own, that through fear of death were in bondage? does not
the whole Epistle argue, that this is done by the offering of our flesh? says
he not expressly, that it behoved him to become like his Brethren in all things,
and that he is not ashamed to call them Brethren, because he that sanctifies,
and those who are sanctified are all of one. Heb. XI. 11. 14. 17. does Christ
vindicate mankind, or the Seed of Abraham? For, though this is written to the
Hebrews alone, yet it was written at such time as all christians understood,
that it belongs no less to the Gentiles. Wherefore it is manifest that the word
(...), (which might seem to signify, Christ's challenging mankind, or vindicating
them into freedom from death, as well here, as elsewhere) is restrained by the
Text and consequence of the Apostles discourse, to signify the assuming of
man's nature, by the means whereof, he won mankind into freedom, and maintains
it in the same.

In fine, when the Apostle says, 1 Pet. I. 11. That the ancient Prophets did
search, against what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ that was in
them did declare and profess the sufferings to come upon Christ, and the
glories following the same; He shows plainly, that the same Spirit, by which
they spoke by fits, dwelt in the flesh of Christ for ever, having once assumed
it: Of which Spirit the Evangelist says, Mark XI. 8. That Jesus knew by the
Spirit how the Pharisees reasoned of him within themselves. For, as I said
before, that when it is said in the Old Testament, that the word of God came to
this or that Prophet, an Angel appeared unto him, speaking in the person of
God, who was therefore vvorshiped as God, because the Word of God (for which
being incarnate, our Lord Jesus is for ever to be Worshipped as God) was in
that Angel at the present for that Service; So I must further note here, that,
upon such Word of God coming to a Prophet, he became inspired, that is
possessed, and acted by the Spirit of God, for the time of that Service, which
God, by such a message employed him about. Not that all Prophets did receive
such Word, by such message from God, before they spoke those things, which, we
believe still they spoke by the Spirit of God. For, there is a great deal of
appearance in the Scripture, for that which the Jews doctors deliver unto us,
Abarbanel by name, (alleging Maimoni for his saying) upon Numb. XI. that there
are inferior degrees of Prophecy, which comes not by apparitions, in which a
man saw one that spoke to him in Gods Name; but sometimes merely by inspiration
of Gods Spirit, inwardly moving either to act, or to speak as God moved. So it
is often said, that the Spirit of God came upon, passed upon, invested either
Judges or Prophets, Judge. III. 10. XI. 29. XIV. 6, 19. 1 Samuel X. 6, 10. Judge.
VI. 34. 1 Chronicles. XII. 18. XXIV. 20. whereupon, it is to be acknowledged that
those Judges were also Prophets, from Joshua the successor of Moses, to whom
that promise of God Deuteronomy. XVIII. 18. -- seems to belong in the first place. Nor
is it therefore requisite, that I dispute here, by what means, these Prophets
were all assured, that it was Gods Spirit, not an evil Spirit which moved them
either to act or speak; Much less, how they were enabled to assure others of
it. Thus much we see in the case of Balaam (who by sacrifices to devils hoped
to obtain of them a commission to curse Gods people) that when he went to meet
his familiars to that purpose, and was met with by God, he knew God so well,
and his message, that he durst not but do it. I showed you before, that those
Angels, by whom God spoke to the Prophets in the Old Testament, did not always
speak in the person of God; and, that in the New Testament the Word of God,
having once assumed the flesh of Christ though we read of diverse apparitions of
Angels, yet we never read that the Angel who speaks in Gods Name is called
God, or honored as God. As for those Prophets which we read of in the Churches
under the Apostles, 1 Cor. XII. 10, 28, 29. XIV. 29, 32, 37. Ephesians. III. 5. IV.
11. as it is necessary to understand, that their Graces were inferior to the
Graces of the Apostles, that it may be true which S. Paul says, 1 Cor. XIV.
32. The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; So can there be no
reason to doubt, that they were of that inferior sort of Prophets that spoke by
the mere inspiration of Gods Spirit, without aparition of any Angel speaking to
them, either asleep or awake, either in the name only, or further in the
person also of God. When therefore the Angel Gabriel appeared to the blessed
Virgin, saying; Luke II. 35. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the most
high shall overshadow thee; And therefore, the holy thing that is born, shall
be called the Son of God. We are to understand that the holy Ghost (who upon
the Word of God delivered to a Prophet, possessed his soul for a time, till he
had delivered Gods Word to them to whom it was sent) upon this message
possessing the flesh of the blessed Virgin, made it a tabernacle for the Word
of God always to dwell in, in which Word, the Spirit of God always dwelt: For
so the difference holds between our Lord Christ, in whom dwells the fulness
of his Spirit, and his servants, that have each of them his measure of it, If
we understand the word incarnate to have in it resident the power of Gods
Spirit, by which our Lord Christ proved himself the son of God; (in
particular, as S. Paul says, by rising from the dead, by the Spirit of
holiness) But the servants of God, to whom this word came, to be possessed and
acted by the same Spirit only, while they were charged with the Word of God,
that is with their message. Neither seems it more difficult to understand how
Christians are possessed of Gods Spirit by the general Promise of the Covenant
of Grace, when the assistance of God is, by Gods appointment, assured them to
all such purposes, as the common profession of Christianity requires.

This is the reason of the alliance which the Scriptures express, between the
Word and Spirit of God in our Lord Christ; in regard whereof, I have thought
requisite to refer those Scriptures which speak of the Spirit of God in our
Lord Christ, to the grace of union, rather then to the grace of unction, as the
School distinguishes; that is to say, rather to the Godhead of the Word
dwelling in the flesh of Christ, (containing always and implying the Spirit)
then to those graces parted out upon his soul which I neither doubt of, nor
that they are expressed in diverse passages of the Scriptures. And this is the
reason why the very name of the Spirit is attributed to the word incarnate, in
diverse passages of the most ancient Church-Writers, which Grotius has
carefully collected, upon the foresaid text of Mark II. 8. And the position of
Cerinthus is very remarkable, that, our Lord Jesus Christ being born as other
men of Joseph and Mary, at his baptism, the holy Ghost (that is Christ) says
he, came down upon him, in the shape of a dove, revealing the unknown Father to
him and to his followers, and that by this his Power, coming upon him from
above, he did miracles. And that when he had suffered, that which came from
above flew up again from Jesus. So that Jesus suffered and rose again, but
Christ that came upon him from above, which is that which came down in the
shape of a dove, flew up again without suffering: So that Jesus is not Christ.
For, hereby, as it is manifest, that they hold with the Church, that Christ is
God (assuring us thereby that it was the original faith of the Church) so they
show that the overshadowing of the blessed Virgin by the holy Ghost imports
the incarnation of the Godhead, to them who believe it, as the coming down of
the holy Ghost at the Baptism, imports the dwelling of Gods Spirit in Christ
till his suffering, to Cerinthus. And the same Epiphanius, telling us of the
Ebionites, that sometimes they contradict themselves; Otherwhiles, says he,
they say otherwise; that the Spirit of God, which is Christ, came upon, and
invested the man that is called Jesus. I will give you here, if you please,
that which goes before in Epiphanius: Some of them say, says he, that Christ
is that Adam, that was framed first, and inspired with the breath of God.
Others of them say, that he is from above, and was made before all things,
being a Spirit, (or the Spirit) and above the Angels, and rules all things,
and that he is called Christ, and has inherited that world, and comes hither
when he pleases: As he came in Adam, and appeared to the Patriarchs, putting
on a body, coming to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. The same say he came these last
days, putting on the same body of Adam, and appeared a man, and was crucified,
and rose, and ascended again. Here you see, that, borrowing from the
Scriptures the correspondence between the first and the second Adam, they force
upon it their own fable, that both was one. You see also by the same reason,
that, their relation of Christ's appearing to the Patriarchs, (as in our flesh
afterward) though corrupted by them, is nevertheless borrowed from the
Tradition the Church. In fine you see, that the rule of all things, the
inheritance of the world, and the principality of Angels, and the Spirit that
is called Christ, here mentioned, argues, that the faith of the Church, which
they corrupted by denying these attributes to the man Jesus, attributed the
same things, to him, which, they denying, were therefore excluded out of the
Church.

When S. John proceeds, saying; We saw his glory as the glory of the only
begotten Son of God; he refers to that which went before; he dwelt among us.
Now, seeing it is so ordinary for the Jews, to call the majesty of God
dwelling among men (...), which is the very word that S. John uses, (...); we
are obliged thereby to understand, that, the majesty of God dwelling among us
in the tabernacle of Christ's flesh bodily, (as figuratively it had done in the
Tabernacle or Temple of the Jews) declared it self, notwithstanding, by those
glorious works which it wrought in his flesh, to be what it was. For the title
of Son of God is given in the Old Testament to the Angels first, and to the
Messiah, when David says, Ps. LXXXIX. 18. I will make him my first born,
higher then the Kings of the earth. Whereby it is evident, that this title in
the Literal sense belonged first to David: Of whom also, he that will
maintain the difference between the literal and the Spiritual sense upon
that ground which I settled before, must maintain those words of David, Psalm.
II. 7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; To be said. Now I
suppose, that those who expected the Messiah to come as a temporal Prince, to
deliver the people of Israel from the yoke of their oppressors, into the free
use of that Law which they had received from God, (as did not only the rest of
the world when Christ came but even his own disciples, before his rising
again) could by no means be informed of that Spiritual kingdom, which, by
the dwelling of the Word in our flesh, was intended to be raised. Which if it
be true, though they called the Messiah the Son of God, as well as the Son
of David, yet is it impossible that they should conceive the same ground for
which he is so called, and by consequence, understand the title in the same
sense, as we do. And this difference of signification is necessary, even in the
understanding of the Gospel. For when the Centurion says, at our Lords death;
Mark XV. 39. Of a truth this man was the Son of God; It is not reasonable to
imagine, that he who dreamed not at all of his rising again, but was a mere
heathen, should call him the Son of God in that sense which we believe: But
either as Heathenisme allowed Sons of the Gods, as some think; or as, by
conversing with the Jews, they had understood them to hold the Messiah whom
they expected to be the Son of God, as Prince raised by God. What shall we
say then of the Apostles demand; Unto which of the angels said he at any time;
Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee? When we find the title of
Sons of God, in the Old Testament, attributed to Angels, Surely it is
necessary to have recourse to that sense, in the which it was then known, that
Christians attributed this title to our Lord; Still known by the honor, which
then and now the Church tendereth him according to it. For, what will all that
Socinus acknowledges avail to make good the Apostles assumption, when he
says that our Lord is the Son of God, because conceived without man by the
holy Ghost in the womb of a Virgin? Is this any more then Adam may challenge,
for which he is called the Son of God, Luke III. 38? For the effective cause
enters not into the nature of that which it produces: Neither imports it
any thing, to the state of our Lord, that he was conceived of the holy Ghost,
if we suppose nothing in him but a soul and a body, which those that are born
of man and woman have. How then is the title of the Son of God, incompetible
to the Angels, which Adam thus far challenges? If you look back upon the
premises, there remains no doubt, nor any way to escape it otherwise. The holy
Ghost overshadowing the blessed Virgin, not only works the conception of a
Son, but dwells for ever according to the fulness of the Godhead, in the
manhood so conceived, as, by the nature of the Godhead, planted in the Word,
which then came to dwell in the manhood so conceived. Therefore that holy
thing, which is borne of the Virgin, being called the Son of God, is made so
much above the Angels, as the esteem which this name imports is above any thing
that is attributed to them in the Scriptures. Therefore is this Son of God
honored as God during his being upon earth, by them that were instructed to
understand the effect of it, though, they that were not disciples, but took it
only for a title of the Messiah, which they knew he pretended to be, perhaps
conceived not so much by it. Therefore, our Lord himself poses the Pharisees,
how they would have David to understand the Messiah to be his Lord, whom they
knew to be his Son, Mat. XXII. 42, 45. Mark* XII. 35, 37. Luke XX. 41, 44.

This is then that which S. Paul says, Col. I. 19. For in him it pleased God
that all the fulness should dwell. And Col. II. 9. 10. For in him dwells
all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. And, Ye are filled through him.
Speaking of Christ. I showed you before, that the heresies of that time, some
whereof it is manifest, were then seducing the Colossians, did all agree in
preaching God the Father of all things to be unknown, together with all that
belonged to the completing of the Godhead, till they made him known. And all
this contrived by the devil to subvert the Faith of Christ, by counterfeiting
something like it in sound, like false coin, to cozen the simple with. Whereas
therefore S. Paul here says, that the fulness of the Godhead dwells bodily
in Christ; And our Lord so often in S. John's Gospel, that the Father dwells
in him, and he in the Father; And the fulness of the holy Ghost dwells in
the Word incarnate, as I showed even now; It is manifest that they labored to
introduce a counterfeit Fulness of the Godhead, of their own devising, into
that esteem and worship, which the fulness of the Godhead contained in the
Father Son and holy Ghost preached by our Lord Christ, and his Apostles,
challenges. And therefore that, the fulness of the Godhead challenged by S.
Paul to dwell in the flesh of Christ, must stand in opposition to that
fulness which these sects worshipped; Being challenged by S. Paul, as
vindicating the Christian Faith from that corruption wherewith these Sects
pretended to adulterate it: And being challenged by those Sects, (in opposition
to S. Paul and the Christian Faith which he vindicateth) to rest in those whom
they severally preached, not in the Son and holy Ghost together with the
Father, as he maintains. For, when the fulness of the Godhead is said to
dwell bodily in the Son, it is to be understood, that the holy Ghost also
dwells in him without measure which with the Father makes up that fulness
that S. Paul understands, in opposition to those which the heresies preached.
For, as it is plain that the Valentinians worshipped their thirty Aeones or,
intellectual worlds, so it is certain, that the rest of their Sects worshipped
that fulness which they preached. Nay those that held the world to be made by
Angels, that fell away from the fulness, worshipped also those Angels, (which
the Christians call devils) as the heathen did, and all Magicians do, as all
ages witness. This also is the reason why S. Paul says further, that the
fulness of the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily; because in the Temple, and
Sanctuary, and Ark of the Covenant and Sacrifices and Ceremonies of that people
(all pledges of Gods presence) it is certain to Christians, that the fulness
of the Godhead dwelt, as the body in the shadow, equally correspondent to it.
For so, I showed you before, that the ark of the Covenant, which in the XXIV.
Psalm is called the Lord of glory, is by the Apostle said to be our Lord
Christ. But, this reason is employed by S. Paul to make opposition against
them, who pretended the Law to be given by those Angels, the worship of whom,
together with the observation of the Law, (or at least of such precepts thereof
as they might pretend the said Angels to have revealed to them) they undertook
to revive, that, by this counterfeit Christianity, they might avoid that
persecution which the Jews, out of their zeal for the Law, brought upon true
Christians. For if it were the fullness of the Godhead which dwelt figuratively
in the ark of the Covenant, as now bodily in the flesh of Christ; then were not
those Angels authors of the Law, nor the observations thereof to be renewed
together with the worship of those Angels. And therefore it is not to be
omitted, that when S. Paul adds; And ye are filled through him, who is the
head of all principality and power: Through whom ye are also circumcised with
that circumcision which is done without hands, by putting off the body of the
sins of the flesh, through the circumcision of Christ; He withdraws them from
the observations of the Law, by declaring, that the intent of them is fulfilled
in good Christians, from the fulness of the Spirit, that is of the Godhead,
that dwelt in Christ. Which is that which S. John intends when he says; That
we saw his glory, as of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth;
That is to say; Of that grace which contained the truth of those figures and
shadows: As it follows by and by; Of his fullness we all have received and
grace for grace: Because the Law was given by Moses, but grace and peace came
by Jesus Christ. For, the Grace of the Gospel of Christ, as it comes in stead
of the grace of Moses Law, and both from the fulness of Christ, which, as I
said before, was resident for the time, in that Angel that delivered the Law to
Moses in Gods Name. In fine* so manifest are those words, that Grotius himself
(who otherwise in expounding this Epistle has warped to the Socinians) could
not forbear to avow, the bodily dwelling of the fulness of the Godhead in
Christ, to signify that, which the Church calls the hypostaticall union of the
natures. Here I argue, that, when S. Paul says, Phil. II. 6, 7. that our Lord
being in the form of God, emptied himself taking the form of a slave; this
emptiness, which he took, is directly opposed by S. Paul to that fulness of
the Godhead which he had, and dissembled, by the emptiness of that state which
he assumed.

For here it is much to be observed, that as S. Paul affirms, the fulness
of the Godhead to dwell bodily in Christ, because the holy Ghost is understood
always to be resident in the Word incarnate; So by the same reason, the Father
also is contained in the Son, as the Son in the Father likewise: God the
Father being so called in the New Testament (where the Son is revealed) in
respect of the Son who revealed it, and whom it reveals. And that in
opposition to that fullness, from which, each of the aforesaid Sects pretended
the Revelation of the Father, otherwise unknown. It is not therefore to be
doubted, that our Lord, when he says, as many times in the Gospel he does,
John X 38. For my works sake believe, that the Father is in me and I in him.
XIV. 7-11. If ye had known me, ye would have known my Father also: And
henceforth ye know him and have seen him. Philip says unto him, Lord show us
the Father and it shall suffice us. Jesus says to him; So long am I with you,
and know thou not me? Philip, he that has seen me has seen the Father, and
how say thou, show us the Father? Believe thou not that I am in the Father
and the Father in me? the words that I speak to you, I speak not of my self,
but the Father that abides in me, he does the works. Believe me that I am in
the Father, and the Father in me. If not: believe me for the very works sake; I
say it must not, it cannot be doubted that our Lord means by these words; not
that he said nothing, did nothing, but by commission from God, which every
Prophet could say, so far as a Prophet; And, the Jews need not to have taken
up stones to throw at him, when he said, John X. 10. I and the Father are one;
had he meant no more, but, that it was his Fathers will which he declared: But,
of necessity, these sayings must import, that as the Word contains the Holy
Ghost, and is contained in it; So is the Son contained in the Father, and the
Father in the Son who reveals him; as the Gnostics hereupon took occasion to
pretend, that the unknown Father was contained in that Fullness, by which the
several Sects of them pretended that he was made known. And therefore, when S.
John says; That the glory of our Lord was seen to be the glory of the only
begotten Son of God; though it be granted, that the title of only begotten
implies and insinuates by way of elegancy dearly beloved, because every only
Son is so, (as you may see it showed by testimonies both of the Scripturs and
other writers in Grotius) yet if this be the reason of that elegance in the
word, the ground of it therefore cannot be denied; And so the question will
have recourse, why the only begotten Son; and, if not because conceived by the
Holy Ghost, then, because in him dwells bodily the fullness of the Godhead. To
which sense, the words of the Apostle John I. 18. are very pertinent; No man
has seen God at any time: The only begotten Son that is in the bosom of the
Father he has declared him. Hear Irenaeus II. 7. Irrationale est autem and
impium adinvenire locum in quo cessat and finem habet qui est secundum eas
Propater and Proarche, and omnium Pater, and hujus Pleromatis. N^c rursus in
sinu Patris alterum quendam dicere tantam fabricasse creationem fas est, vel
consentiente vel non consentiente. Now it is unreasonable and impious to
imagine any place, in which their Forefather and Forebeginning, the Father of
all, and of this Fullness, cease and ends. Nor is it lawful again to say,
that any other in the bosom of the Father, made this great creation, either
with his consent or without it. For here you see, that the Gnostics faigning,
some Principle besides the Father, but resident in his bosom, to have made the
World, are reproved by Irenaeus for adulterating the Christian Faith, which,
maintaining the Son to be in the bosom of the Father, signified him to be no
stranger to the Father but, of his own nature. Whereby we see further, what S.
John means, when he says, that the Word was in the beginning with God, and
came into the World from thence. In fine, when S. John attributes to our Lord
the title of only begotten, of the light, and the truth (which, he that reads
Ir^neus will see, that the Gnostics made several persons, constituting that
Fullness, which several Sects of them did imagine) it must be concluded, that
^^ey, finding these titles attributed by the Christians to our Lord, did, by
attributing them to several persons, of whom the several Sects of them framed
their several Fulnesses, adulterate Christianity: And that he, finding them so
doing, vindicates it to the be true sense, by fixing the said titles, and the
Godhead which they import upon our Lord Christ, where they are due.

Here I allege the words of the Apostle Heb. I, 3. concerning Christ; Who
being the brightness of his glory, and the Character of his substance, and
sustaining, or moving all things; as it follows in those words which have been
already examined. Which words the Socinians think they avoid fairly, by
saying, that; As the words of men are all Images of their minds, so the man
Jesus, being to signify, that is, to resemble the counsel of God to mankind,
is called the image of God, as I said before, that he is called the Word of God
in their sense. And to this they think the words of S. Paul inclinable, 2 Cor.
IV. 4, 5, 6. where he says, that; The God of this World has blinded the
conceptions of unbelievers, that the inlightning of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the Image of God, might not shine on them. For we preach not our
selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your Servants for Jesus sake.
Because it is God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, that has
shined in our hearts, to enlighten us with the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face (or person) of Christ Jesus: Because in these words, which entitle
Christ the Image of God, the preaching of the Gospel is so much insisted upon,
as the reason of it: But, as for the reason, why our Lord is called the Word, I
refer my self to the premises; so, that he should be entitled the Image of his
glory, the character that is printed off from his substance; that in
consideration of the same, he should have purged man's sins, and be set on Gods
Throne, to be honored with Gods own honors, which all follows in the Apostles
words* is too gross for any reasonable man to digest. And therefore, in the
title of Gods Image (as I said before, in the title of Gods Word) there must be
couched and understood a reason, upon which all this may flow; Which is nothing
else, but the fullness of the Spirit, or the Godhead, lodged for ever in the
flesh of our Lord, and rendering him capable as well to redeem all sins, and
to be advanced to the Throne of God, that is to the Worship of God, as to
preach and make good that Gospel, wherein the glory of Gods Wisdom and goodness
so much appears. And thus, and not otherwise the account will be sufficient;
not only why our Lord ^s entitled the Image of God, but how he is preached to
be the Lord, and the Apostles his Slaves, how the glory of God shines off from
his person, or face, upon the hearts of Believers. For I do firmly believe, as
the Apostles writings have always reference to the Scriptures of the old
Testament, to show how they are fulfilled by the new; So, that our Lord is here
called the image of God, as the second Adam, in reference to the first, who is
said to have been made in the Image and likeness of God. But, with that
difference which S. Paul has expressed. 1 Cor. XV. 45. As it is written; the
first Adam was made a living soul, so is the second Adam made a quickening
Spirit. For, having showed, that the Spirit of Life which raised Christ from
the dead, is the fulness of the Godhead hypostatically united to the flesh of
Christ; well may I infer, that it is in consideration thereof, that he is
called the image of Gods glory, and the express character of his substance;
from which will also follow, the expiation of our sins, and his sitting upon
Gods throne, to be worshipped as God. Thus shall the first Adam, made a living
soul in the image of God, be the figure of the second Adam, made a quickening
Spirit in the image of God; Thus shall the Old Testament be the figure of the
new, and the animal life, given by the Word and Spirit of God, the figure of
spiritual and everlasting life given by the same Spirit of God dwelling in the
Word of God incarnate. I will here show you the strange tale that Saturninus
framed out of the relation of Moses, concerning the making of man, related by
Epiphanius, that you may judge thereby, of the truth of that which he
indeavored to disguise. (...) (So I read Epiphanius, in stead of (...), which
makes no sense) (...) -- Because, says he, that same light (which was the
image of the Power above) peeping down, wrought a certain provocation in the
said Angels (by whom he says the World was made) they attempted to frame man
out of the ^ust they had to the image above. For, being in love with the light
above, and taken with the lust of it, appearing and disappearing to them, and
unable to satisfy themselves of the comeliness of that which they were in
love with, because his light flew up as soon as it came at them, hereupon this
Iugler frames the scene, and says, that the angels said; Let us make man; to
wit, According to the image; not, according to our image, because he denies
that man was made after the image of God that made the world, but after the
image of the unknown Father, which peeped down upon them in the Fulness of
the Godhead, and drew back straight; Showing thereby, that the Christian Faith
which he meant to sophisticate, makes the living soul, to which the first Adam
was framed, to be the image of God, because the quickening Spirit, which our
Lord Christ was to become by being incarnate, was figured by it.

CHAP. XVI. The testimonies of Christ's Godhead in the Old Testament are first
understood of the figures of Christ. Of the Wisdom of God in Solomon and
elsewhere. Of the writings of the Jews as well before as after Christ.
BE This then the evidence of the state of our Lord Christ before his coming in
the flesh, out of the Scriptures of the New Testament: The sense of which to
make good, I have been forced to employ two peremptory arguments grounded upon
that reason, upon which we admit the New Testament to have been signified by
the Old. The first, the Name and honor of God alone given to the Angels that
were employed by God to speak to his Prophets in his own person and names as
the forerunner, of our Lord. The second, those passages of the Old Testament
concerning the Messiah, which attribute to him the name, and works, and honor
of God, and, by those that admit the New Testament, cannot be denied to belong
to our Lord Jesus, by the ^ewes themselves, they are most an end acknowledged
to belong to the Me^^^as. And of this I was to put the reader in mind, that he
may expect this truth out of the Old Testament, by evidences answerable to that
declaration thereof, which the Light of that time required. For* I shall freely
avow, that the next argument that I shall use, stands absolutely upon
supposition of that which I delivered in the first book, concerning the
figuring of the Messiah, by those persons, of whom the Prophets of the Old
Testament writ; So that, the sense of the passages which I shall now allege is
in some sort fulfilled and verified in those things which fell out to those
figures; Though, admitting the said ground, it will be requisite to look after
a more perfect and complete verifying of them in our Lord Christ; Whereupon it
cannot be strange, that the meaning of them should appear more full and proper
in him, then it can be maintained in them, of whom, it cannot be denied that
they are meant in the Old Testament. Such is that memorable passage of the
Prophet David, Psalm. XLV. 8, 9. Thy seat O God is for ever; The Scepter of thy
kingdom is a scepter of righteousness. Thou have loved righteousness, and
hated iniquity, therefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows* And Psalm. LXXII. 15. He shall live, and unto him
shall be given of the g^^d of Arabia: prayer shall be made ever unto him, and
daily shall ^e be praised. Of the same kind is that of the Prophet Isaiah, IX.
6, 7. A little one is given us: A son is borne us; On whose shoulder is the
Rule: And his name shall be called the Admirable, the Counselor, the mighty
God, the Father of eternity, the Prince of Peace. Of the greatness of his
Empire and peace there shall be no end: Upon the Throne of David and his
kingdom, to restore and settle it in judgment and righteousness from this
time forth for evermore. And Isa. XI. 12. And there shall come forth a shoot
from the root of Jesse, and a bud shall come up from his stock; Upon whom shall
rest the Spirit of the Lord: The Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit
of counsel and fortitude, the Spirit of knowledge and godliness, and he shall
smell with the fear of the Lord. And, Jer. XXIII. 5, 6. Behold the days come
says the Lord, that I will raise up unto David a sproute of righteousness,
and he shall reign as a king, and be wise, and execute judgment and
righteousness upon the earth. In his days shall Judah be saved, and Israel
dwell safe; And this is the Name by which they shall call him: The Lord our
righteousness: Or, our righteous Lord. For, I do avow and maintain, that all
that will justify, that our Lord is foretold and figured in the Old Testament,
upon true grounds, and consequent to their own sayings, must say; that these
things are verified of some Prince of Gods ancient people. This of Jeremy for
the purpose in Zor^babel, who is called the Sprout, Zach. VI. 12. And King.
Zach. IX. 9. Jer. XXXI. 7. those things of Esaias in Ezekias, as those things of
David, no man doubts to be fulfilled first in Solomon, of whom the title of
Psalm. LXXII. says expressly, that it is intended. Neither will I make any
difficulty to yield the Socinians, that the title of Zorobabel, may well be,
God is our righteousness, or, that the title of Ez^kias, in Isa. VII. 14. may
well be God is with us; No otherwise, then the pillar which Moses erected Ex.
XVII. 15. is called, the Lord my standard: Or, the altar of Isaac Genesis XXXIII.
20. God the God of Abraham. But when it is granted on their side, (which the
Jews themselves cannot refuse) that these things are meant in a more sublime
sense of the Messiah; And that, in respect of Salvation purchased us, and
divine honors to himself (which the Socinians cannot refuse though the Jews
do) those things which are said of God in the Old Testament are attributed to
our Lord Christ in the New; Then will I stand upon it, that, the throne of the
most high God ascribed to our Lord Christ by David, imports no more then when
he says, Psalm. CX. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord sit thou on my right hand,
until I make thine enemies thy footstool: And therefore, that there can be no
cause either to abuse the signification of the Name of God, when the Prophet
says; Thy throne, O God, is for ever: Or to have recourse to that other shift,
that God is said to be Christ's Throne, because the founder of it, when it is
manifest, that the Throne which is spoken of is Gods Throne. For it is to be
considered, that, when it is said; Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever;
using that Name of God which is communicated to his Angels, and to the Rulers
of his people, and therefore, in the first place, to the Messiah, that is to
our Lord Jesus, supposing him to be the Christ; Whatsoever conceit of the
Messiah the Old Testament can allow, when the new declares that our Lord Jesus
is set down at Gods right hand upon his own Throne, it necessarily declares
him the same God, with him, upon whose Throne he sits. In like manner, I do not
deny, but challenge and maintain, that the prayer and praises tendered the
Messiah according to David, may and must be understood to be such as might be
tendered to Solomon an earthly Prince. But, when I can charge all that admit
the New Testament, by their own consent, that it is the honor of the only
true God which Christians tender our Lord Christ, of whom they agree that this
is said; When I can charge the Jews themselves, acknowledging likewise that
this is meant of the Messiah, that the title, and works, and attributes, and
worship of God are ascribed to the Messiah, even by the Old Testament; I need
not be thought to weaken the cause of our common Christianity, by making the
ground of it unremoveable. Neither shall I stick, by the same reason to
acknowledge among the rest of those titles which Isaiah prophesies of Ezekias,
no^, that his name shall be, the mighty God; but that, is as the pillar of
Moses is called, God is my standard, so the title of Ezekias shall be, God is
mighty; Because of the might God should show by him, in doing good to his
people. And, as I will not say that he can be called the Father of eternity; so
I can say, and do, that whosoever will maintain that God intended that Moses
Law should cease, (which is so often said to be given for ever in the
Scripture) must grant that those words which may signify eternity, when the
matter or circumstance of the speech requires, do signify no more then a time,
whereof the term is unknown, in the Old Testament. I say likewise, that the
then people of God were to understand, that Isaiah promised them Gods Spirit,
and the graces thereon, to rest upon their Princes by whom he promises them
deliverance. But, all this being granted, when it is either granted or proved
on the other side, that the name and works and titles and worship of the only
true God are ascribed and challenged to our Lord Christ, by his word of the New
or Old Testament, and the grounds upon which the meaning of it is evidenced*
upon supposition hereof, I will nevertheless, challenge, that sense of these
Prophesies, in behalf of our Lord Christ, by virtue of the subject matter of
the New Testament, and the whole current thereof, determining the capacity of
those words wherein these Prophesies are del^vered, unto it. For, I profess
and maintain, that the difference between the Literal and mystical sense of
the Old Testament (necessary to be maintained, by all that will maintain the
truth of Christianity against the Jews) cannot be maintained, without granting
such an equivocation in the words of it, as the correspondence between the
kingdom of heaven and that of Israel, the Priesthood of Christ and Aaron, the
Prophetical office of Josua and Jesus, in fine, between the land of Canaan and
the heavenly Paradise produces; And that, when this is maintained throughout
the Scripture, then is that great work of Gods wisdom, in making way for the
Gospel by the Law, glorified to the conviction of the Jews, which, when it is
sometimes challenged, and elsewhere waved, becomes a stumbling block to the
obstinacy of that wilful People.

It remains, that I omit not those things which Solomon preaches of the Wisdom
of God, in so sublime and mysterious language, that when we read S. Paul
intitling Christ, The power of God and the wisdom of God. 1 Cor. I. 24. we
cannot refuse to understand them of the Godhead dwelling in his flesh, as the
Church has always done. Wisdom was at the making of all things, was brought
forth before any thing was made, Gods delight, that delights it self in Gods
works, especially in conversing with mankind, Prove. VIII. 23-31. Add
hereunto Prove. IV. 7. (...) Wisdom is the principal, or, beginning, (...); Add
Prove. III. 19, 20. that God made heaven and earth by Wisdom; Add the words of
a Prophet to whom God sends his friends to be expiated and reconciled to God,
Job. XLII. 7, 8. that Wisdom is known to God alone, as that which he looked
upon, when he ordained the creation of the universe, Job. XXVIII. 20-28. Add
the Prophet David signifying the same in fewer words, In wisdom have thou made
them all, Psalm. CIV. 24. that Wisdom which says to all men, by Job* XXVIII
29. by David, Psalm. CXI. 10. by Solomon, Prove. I. 2 IX. 9. Eccles. XII. 15. The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom: In which Wisdom, the whole
business of Solomon's doctrine seems to be* that, the whole happiness of man
consists. Is all this with Socinus but a figure of Rhetoric called
Prosopopaeia, whereby Solomon brings in Wisdom, in the person of Gods
favorite, to signify that it comes from God, and to inflame all men to love
that which Solomon had prayed for to God, to make him a happy Prince, 1 Kings
III. 9, 11, 12. 2 Chronicles. I. 10, 11? Truly this were something for a Jew to
acknowledge, that the wisdom of Gods people, (which Moses) also shows,
consisted in their Law^, Deuteronomy. IV. 6.) came from God, to order their doings to
God. For, from hence it will follow, that, as those that are to give account to
God of the most inward intentions and inclinations of the heart, so are they
obliged to order them, and all the productions of them, according to his will,
and to his honor and service. But for a Christian* that has learnt, the whole
work of the Law to have been preparative to that which our Lord by his Gospel
was to do, and that, before the Law, the Fathers were instructed to live as
Christians now do, or should do, (the Law adding nothing but civil Laws, to
enforce the obedience of them that rebelled against their discipline, and
ceremonies, to figure the Gospel to come) for such a one not to understand;
when Gods Prophets proclaim, that the wisdom by which God made the World
takes delight to converse with mankind, to reduce it from Idols to the worship
of God, to stir up Prophets to preserve them in it, and to foretell Christ to
come; that the same wisdom which did this afterward in our flesh, did it
before without it, is a fault to the Christianity which he professes.

He that writ the Wisdom of Solomon, though no Christian, ^aw more, when he
said Wisd. X. 1, 2. This, Wisdom, preserved the first Father of the World who
was made alone, and drew him out of his sin, and gave him strength to rule
all things: Proceeding to show the same of the Fathers that succeed. The same
author having presaced, Wisd. VI. 23. that he would show how Wisdom was
brought forth, adds, Wisd. VII. 22-27. that description which attributes to
Wisdom the same that the Apostle ascribes to Christ. The image or shine of
Gods glory, and substance, the unstained mirror of his virtue, the breath of
his Power, the flowing forth of the glory of the most High, which sustaineth
all things that he made, and, remaining the same, renew^th, or, makes new all
things, and settling upon holy men's minds, makes them Gods friends and
Prophets. And this, having premised, that the Spirit of God goes through all
the World, and that Wisdom is a Spirit that convinces the secret
perverseness of the heart, Wisd. ^. 5, 6, 7. Then, of the death of the
firstborn in Egypt, XVIII. 14, 15, 16. For when all things were possessed by
still silence, and night was at the middle of her course, thy almighty Word
came from thy Royal Throne in heaven, strong as a man of War, into the midst
of a Land to be destroyed, bringing thy un^ained command like a sharp sword,
and standing filled a^ with death, while reaching to heaven he stood upon the
earth. The like you have in the Wisdom of the Son of Sirach, when he
proclaims that Wisdom which God brought forth, and by which he made all
things, to be the Author of that Wisdom which he teaches. And in the
additions to Jeremy under the name of Baruch in the Greek Bibles, showing the
Israelites, that they were in bondage for deserting that way of Wisdom, which,
unknown to the Idolatrous Nations, he that founded the Earth, and ordained the
rest of the World by Wisdom has seen and made known to them; adds
immediately, Baruch III. 12-15. this is our God, nor shall any other be valued
besides him. He found out the way of Knowledge, and gave it to Jacob his
servant, and to Israel his beloved: Afterward, he appeared on ^arth, and
conversed with men. Which words, I much marvel, to see stand suspected to
some great Scholars, as foisted in by Christian Copyists. For, what do they
import more, then, that the Wisdom of God, which dealt with men by the flesh
of Christ, dealt with them before by the Prophets? Which the Jews themselves,
who deny the Wisdom of God to be incarnate in our Lord Christ, cannot refuse.
This Wisdom of God, this Word of God, this Spirit of God, this image of his
glory, this mirror of his substance, by which he made the World, coming to holy
men by the ministry of Angels, (in whom it was resident for that service) made
them Gods friends and Prophets; as, coming to us in the flesh of Christ (which
he took never to let go) it has made us the children of God, that is,
Christians. This is indeed that great figure* in which the eloquence of the Old
Testament consists, and may be called, as by the Greek Fathers many times it
is, (...), or, good husbandry of language, intimating the way of Gods
dispensing the knowledge o^ himself, which that time was capable of, by such
sparing expressions, as, being expounded by the appearance of our Lord Christ
in the flesh, may well make all doubt of the true intent of them to vanish. And
therefore, I must needs applaude the practice of the Primitive Church, related
before out of S. Atha^asius in Synopsi Scripture, and others, to instruct the
learners of Christistianity out of those books which we now call Apocrypha.
For, by this point, which cantaineth the sum of Christianity, it does appear,
(as also by diverse others it may appear) that the Secret of Christianity
(folded up in the writings of the Prophets, unfolded in the writings of the
Apostles) though the same for substance, yet, (without disparagement to the
Prophets, because the counsel of God required it) is more clearly and plainly
set forth in them then in the writings of the Prophets, as the twilight is a
degree to the light which the sunrise brings with it.

What impressions of this sense may yet be discerned in the Jews writings, I
will not stand to inquire here, where I write to all English, so far as they
are capeable of those things. wherein they are all concerned, whether capable
or not, remitting the Readers that are capable, to those that maintain the
truth of Christianity against the Jews; And to those things, which Grotius
upon the beginning of S. John's Gospel, (whereof hitherto I maintain the true
meaning) and upon other Texts which I have employed to that purpose, has
observed ou^ of the Chaldee Paraphrase, Philo the Jew, and others of that
nation, besides diverse Heathen Philosophers, whose sayings, otherwise
ungrounded, seem to come from the sense of that people. One thing I will
observe, which is very ordinary among their Ancient Doctors, to call the Angel
which speaks to the Fathers under the proper Name, and in the person of God,
Metatron, signifying neither more nor less, then Metator in Latin, as you may
see in Buxtorfius his great Lexicon; that is, an harbinger, or quartermaster of
lodgings. Whereof it is impossible to give so fit a reason as this; That they
understood him to be the forerunner or harbinger of the Messiah, and therefore
the Messiah is our Lord Jesus; The ancient Fathers of the Church having
declared, from the very mouth of the Apostles, that those dispensations were
managed by the Word of God, now dwelling in our flesh, as prefaces and
praeludes to the incarnation of our Lord, making way for it by the Ministry of
the Prophets, as Saint John the Baptist did, at a nearer distance, before his
coming.

CHAP. XVII. Answer to those texts of Scripture that seem to abate the true
Godhead in Christ. Of that creature whereof Christ is the firstborn, and that
which the Wisdom of God made. That this belief is the original Tradition of
the Church. What means this dispute furnishes us with against the Arrians.
That it is reason to submit to revelation concerning the nature of God. The use
of reason is no way renounced by holding this Faith.
I Have, in this defense, given the true meaning to very many texts of
Scripture, that are alleged against the Faith of the Church; Some remain,
which I think fit to repeat, and answer in this abridgment. There be those
that lay a great weight upon that of our Lord, John XVII. 3. This is eternal
life, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent;
But the same exclusive only, or something of the same force is found in many
other places: 1 Cor. VIII. 4, 5, 6. There is no other God but one. Ephesians. IV.
6. One God and Father of all. 1 Timothy II. 5. There is one God, and one Mediator
of God and man, the man Christ Jesus. And, wheresoever we read, the only God,
or, the only wise God, or the like. The rest are not many that I shall name.
Mat. XXIV. 36. Of that day and hour knows no man, nor the Angels of heaven,
nor the Son, but the Father alone. Col. ^. 15. The firstborn of the whole
creature; Seems to rank Christ with the creatures, being of the same birth.
John XIV. 28. The Father is greater then I. For answer to the first, I will not
insist, that the words are to be construed thus; This is eternal life, to know
thee, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, to be the only true God; Or thus;
To know thee only to be the true God, and to know Jesus Christ, whom thou have
sent; For the Greek article, which the Latin wants, the English punctually
answers, determines the words, (...), the only true God, to go together, as
agreeing in the same case with thee, that went before. But this I say, that the
exceptive only, can by no reason be understood, to exclude the attribute of
the true God, which it restraines in these words to the Father, from any, that,
by the sense of him that speaks them, can be understood to be included in it.
And that, the sense of our Lord may be, notwithstanding this only, to include
the Son in the property of this attribute, the true God, I go no further then
the sense of all Christians, who all affirm the father to be the only true
God, but believe the Son to be the same only true God nevertheless. And
that this is his sense, I refer my self to the titles, attributes, works and
worship of the only true God, challenged hitherto from his words. And this
sense, the words of S. John, (the meaning whereof, according to the ordinary
reading I have showed before, not to advantage Socinus) seem to intend,
according to the true reading, which the Vulgar Latin, (justified by the
Marquis of Velez his Spanish Copies, as you may by the readings added to the
Great Bible) preserves. We know that the S^nne of God is come, and has given
us understanding to know the true one: Et sumus in vero filius ejus Jesu
Christo* And we are in his true Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and
eternal life. Whereas it is ordinarily read; And we are in the true One, in
his Son Christ; Or, Through his Son Jesus Christ. 1 John. V. 20. For it
seems, that the Apostle folding up both attributes; of the True one; (that
is, as it follows, the True God) and the True Son of God, in our Lord
Christ; points at the words of our Lord, recorded by himself alone, John
XVII. 3. This is eternal life, to know thee the only true God, and whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ; Challenging for him, that, he is no more to be
excluded from the Title of only true God, then, from that of author of
eternal Life. If it be said; This cannot be; Because there would be, then,
more then one only true God: The answer is ready, that this is not an argument
from the force of these words, that this cannot be the sense of them: But from
the light of reason, that this sense cannot be true. I know it is a trick that
Crellius puts upon the Reader, throughout his first Book de Deo Trino and Vno,
that the sense of the Church is not the sense of the Scriptures, because it
contradicts the evidence of natures light. But, when the sense of the
Scripture is in question, the dictate of reason concerning the truth of the
matter is to be set aside, that it may be judged, without anticipation of
prejudice, from evidence planted in the very words of it. And this is the
answer to the rest of those texts, that have the like exclusive, but not in so
strong terms as this.

Now, when our Lord says; Of that day and hour knows not the Son. I know
S. Hilary labors very eloquently to show, that he means no more, then, that
he had not commission to declare it. But this would make the sense of our Lord,
to be the sense of those men, who, when they are asked that which they hold
unfit to declare, and yet would not seem to refuse the civility of declaring it
do answer, that they know not; to wit, so as to hold it fit to be told. I will
not tie my self to maintain this reservation fit for our Savior to use:
Especially, where no circumstance of the case, or the discourse appears to
intimate such a meaning to them whom he discourses with. When he said in the
Comoedy; Tu nescis, id quod scis Dromo, si sapias; If thou be wise, thou
know not what thou know; Every man understands his meaning to be; thou will not declare it: Whether, when the Messiah says; I know not the day of
judgment; Men would conceive that he meant no more then this; That he is not
to declare it; seems to be very questionable. I can by no means comprehend how
it can be prejudicial to the Faith to say, that the humane soul of Christ,
(the knowledge whereof is necessarily limited to the capacity of a creature,
and knows things above nature, by voluntary revelation of the Word and Spirit,
which knows whatsoever is in God. 1 Cor. II. 10, 11.) should be ignorant of
something that is to come. Luke II. 40, 52. It is said; The child grew and
waxed strong in Spirit, growing full of wisdom, and the grace of God was upon
it. And, Jesus improved in wisdom and stature and grace with God and men;
Shall I go and say, that he seemed thus to grow, as boys in the Schools, when
they cannot answer texts of Aristotle, that he speaks there in the sense of
the ancient Philosophers? The School Doctors will have our Lords humane soul
to have known all from the moment that he was conceived, and think him not
^ound in the Faith that doubts of it. But if only original Tradition be
matter of Faith, according to the Principle that is settled, the meaning of
particular texts of Scripture cannot be such: Especially, when it is evident,
that such a meaning is not necessarily consequent to that which is matter of
Faith. And* if you look but upon the sayings of the Fathers that are alleged
by the learned Jesuit Petavius, 1 De Trinitate III. 5-11. You shall easily
perceive how truly it is said by Leontius de Sectis page 546. Speaking of the
Agno^tae, who were a Sect of Eutychians which held that our Lord knows not all
things; (...). But we say, that we are not to stand stiffly upon these things.
Therefore neither did the Synod (of Calcedon) trouble is about any such
position as this, Yet it is to be known, that many of the Fathers* even almost
all say, that he was ignorant. Certainly Irenaeus and Athanasius, if narrowly
examined, demand no more, but that he is ignorant of nothing according to his
Godhead. So that it is so far from being matter of Faith, that it is not in
the Church ever to make it so, whatsoever the Church may do to oblige the
members of it not to declare their judgment to the scandale of others, in a
point so obscure.

Now the words of S. Paul do manifestly distinguish between our Lord Christ and
all Creatures, insisting thus; Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first
born of the whole Creature: For in him were all things created, whether in
Heaven or on Earth. Surely, he, in whom, as by whom all things are said to have
been made, is not intended to be comprised in the number of things made, by
being called the first born of the whole Creature. And therefore I conceive the
word (...), in the compound (...) is to signify according to the Hebrew, not
first, but before. We have eminent examples in the Gospels* John I. 15. the
Baptist says, of our Lord Christ; (...). Because he was before me. Our Lord.
John XV. 18. (...). The world hated you before me. And that endless dispute
among Chronologers, about the words of S. Luke II. 2. (...); I conceive, cannot
be so well composed, as by translating it; This inrolling was made before
Quirinius was Governor of Syria. That is to say, before that which was made
under Quirinius, who was employed diverse years after, to inroll all the Jews
and their Goods when Archelaus was confiscated. For Tertullian, with whom
Josephus fully agrees, says, expressly; That the taxation at which Christ was
enrolled was made under Sentius Saturninus Governor of Syria, and that the
Records of it were then in Rome, extant when he writ. Let then (...) signify
him that was brought forth before all creatures; Or, let it signify by way of
metonymy the Heir of all things, (as the Apostle calls our Lord Christ, Heb.
I. 2. because the first born is heir by Law) and we shall not need to fear,
that our Lord Christ shall become a Creature, by being the first born of the
whole creature. For my part, I should not think I had granted any such thing
should I grant, that the word (...), here may be taken in a general sense, to
signify, as well the production of Gods Word, as the production of his
Creature. I know, how much dispute there has been with the Arians, about the
sense of Solomon's, Prove. VIII. 22. (...)* Nor do I believe it can be computed
by reading (...), which the same seems to require. First, because it must be
(...) not (...). For it is not true that God got wisdom when he made the
World, but was possessed of it. Secondly, because Wisdom Eccles. XXIV. 14.
having spoke of her dwelling with God, as in Solomon, and his appointing her to
dwell in Israel, adds; (...). Before the World from the beginning he made
man, and I fail not for everlasting. And further in the beginning of the
Chapter, according to the Latin Copy; Ego ex ^re Altissimi prodivi,
primogenita ante omnem creaturam: I came cut of the mouth of the most High, the
first born before any Creature. So ^it to the words of S. Paul, that without
doubt he had them in mind when he writ. And again, Eccles. I. 4; 16. (...):
Wisdom was made before all things, and the understanding of prudence from
everlasting: After which there follows in most Greek Copies, (...). Which the
Vulgar Latin renders; Fons ^apienti^ Verbum Dei, in excelsis, and ingressus
illius mandata aeterna. As, if he should say, that, the fountain of Wisdom is
that Word which was with God in the highest, and whereby God has made Heaven
and Earth (as the Psalmist says) By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made
and all the Hosts of them by the breath of his mouth, Psalm. XXX. 6.) and the
proceedings of Wisdom, are the everlasting Commandments: To wit, of the Law,
whereby he instructed his people. But this; by consequence, supposing the Old
Testament to be a Tigure of the New, must be understood of all those ways,
whereby God conversed with mankind, to preserve it from falling quite away
from his truth, from the beginning, as I have showed before; Being nothing else,
but forerunners, and prefaces to the coming of our Lord in the flesh, which
therefore, supposes the being of this Wisdom before the World, by virtue of
that which went before, where he says, that Wisdom was made before all
things. And again, (...). The Lord himself made her, and saw and numbered her:
Which though it may be understood of the wisdom which he poured out upon his
works, as straight it follows, yet when it is said, to have been brought
forth before the world, and before all things; more is said, and more must be
understood.

Now S. Athanasius against the Arians, I know, embraces another sense of
Solomon, as speaking of Christ's taking flesh, to be the beginning of Gods ways
with man redeemed. But I say also, that he produces this other sense that I
speak of, that the VVisdome of God was brought forth by him, before he made the
World by his wisdom; and that this production may be signified by the word
(...), though it commonly signify the production of a Creature, which was not
before, but begins to be in him. The passage of Athanasius is remarkable,
though upon occasion of that of the Apostle, (...), Heb. XIII. 2. Who was
faithful to him that made him; which he handles Orat. II. contra Arrian.
(...). For words extinguish not the nature of things: But rather their nature
draws to it self and changes the words. For, words are not before things, but
things are first, and after them words. Therefore when the being signified is
a thing made or created* then, made, and became, and created, are properly said
of them, (for I read (...)) signifying a thing made. But when the being is a
thing engendered, and a Son, then, made and became, and created, is not properly
put upon it, nor signifies a thing made, but a man uses the word made, for
engendered, without difference. Which proceeding to declare by instances in the
word (...), or made, he shows, that it may as well be said of (...)
created, which he equalleth unto it by the premises. For a little after, he
says, we may understand the same, (...). If he say of himself, The Lord
created me; which are the words of Solomon here questioned. And by and by;
(...). Though Parents say, the Sons that spring from them are made and created,
and come of them, nevertheless, they deny not their Offspring. And again,
Orat. III. (...). For it is the same thing to say, that he is not made, and to
speak of his not being a Creature. Which makes me confident that the word
(...) in S. Paul may so be understood, without prejudice to the Faith. And
surely, when he says Genesis IV. 1. (...) I have got a man with God; As the word
is the same with that which Wisdom uses in the Hebrew, Prove. VIII. 22. (...);
So the sense is the same with the Greek (...); for, she got a Son by bringing
him forth; which is called creare liberos in Latin, (...), in Greek, and to
make Children in other Languages. And this is equivocation is very happy in our
Mother English, when by getting of Children, (which formally and properly
signifies the purchasing of them into the Fathers Power as his own, which is
in Greek (...), in Hebrew (...)) it signifies by way of metonomy the act of
Generation whereby they are brought forth, which is the proper signification
of the Greek word here used, (...), in the same sense with the Latin, create
liberos, as I said.

I know how much dispute there is, that our Lord, when he says, The Father is
greater then I; is to be understood of his humane nature: Which, to me, I
confess seems very hard, that our Savior should tell his Disciples for their
comfort, that God is greater then man, and that therefore they ought to be
comforted, because he was going to God. And having always given this reason,
why the eternal Word of God was employed in redeeming mankind, because it
came from God from everlasting; I find, that the privilege of being the
fountain of the Godhead, which is of necessity proper to the Father alone,
imports that, which the Son and the holy Ghost cannot have; Not as if they
had not the Godhead, which is the same in the Father Son and holy Ghost; But,
because they have it not from themselves, and that it is necessarily more to
give then to receive. Whereupon it cannot be denied, that the Son and the
holy Ghost, though honored with the titles, works, attributes, and worship of
God, are nevertheless expressed and signified by the Scriptures, as depending
upon the Father, and as something of his, namely his Son and his Spirit,
though the same God also nevertheless. And this is without doubt, the true
answer to most of what Crellius brings, in the second part of his first book De
Deo, that our Lord came not from himself, nor to do his own will, or, to seek
his own glory, that he that believes in him believes not in him, but in the
Father that sent him, John XII. 4^. that he was called of God as Aaron, Heb. V.
4. 5. that he received instruction from the Father, that he prays to him, that
his words and works are not his own but his Fathers, and much more containing
one and the very same difficulty, which is assoiled by saying; That wheresoever
the weakness of his humane nature is not signified, by the importance of what
is said, the rest is to be referred to the commission which he undertook to
execute in our flesh, which Commission supposes his coming from the Father of
everlasting, as the ground and reason of his undertaking of it. This is that
which the Prophet David signifies, Psalm. XL. 7, 8, 9. Sacrifice and meat
offering thou desire none, mine ears have thou bored; (Which the Apostle, Heb
X. 9. quotes thus: A body have thou fitted for me; The taking of our flesh
being his giving up of himself for a servant to do Gods message in it, as the
servant that had his ear bored, was to be free no more, Exodus XXI. 5.) Burnt
offering and sacrifice for sin thou acceptest not; Then said I, lo I come:
To do thy will, O God, written of me in the vo^lume of the Book is my desire,
yea thy Law is within my heart. For, his freedom in undertaking this
commission, as it supposes a ground, why it should be tendered, so it
imports that obedience which God rewards. And this is the cause why our
Savior tells his disciples, If you loved me, you would be glad that I go to my
Father, because the Father ^^ greater then I; For, if the Commission came from
him, then is he to perform all that the execution thereof infers: That is,
to exalt our Lord to that estate which his disciples would be glad of, if they
knew what it were. Nor let any man think, that there is any danger of Arrius
his heresy in all this. I confess the reasons I have advanced against Socinus
do not formally destroy the pretense of the Arrians. And the reason is because
I find that I cannot kill those two birds with one stone; Nor make the reasons
that I advance, to evidence the meaning of these Scriptures which are in
question not to be that which Socinus would have, to reach so far, as
expressly and formally to destroy that sense which Arrius pretends. I am
confident, that, who will take the pains to consider, that the Word was in the
beginning when all was made, shall have no ground to say, that there was
another beginning, before the beginning of all things, when that Word was made.
That this word was with God at the beginning, as his bosom counselor; Shall
not s^y when God wanted his counsel. That this Word was God; Shall not say,
that any Christian is to count that God which is made of nothing. That all
things were made by it; That any thing was made by that which is not God. That
the glory thereof in our flesh, is the glory of the only begotten Son of the
Father; shall make any difference between the honor of the Father and the
honor of the Son. And so I count it enough* that the sense of the Scriptures
here pleaded, has in it enough to resist the Arians with, though this
resistance be not here expressed. But, thus much is evident, that, as the
Latin Fathers, especially since S. Augustine, have understood these words to
be meant of our Lord Christ, according to his humane nature; so the Greek
Fathers have understood them to be true even according to the divine nature,
upon that reason which I have declared. And S. Hilary of the Latin Church,
though before S. Augustine, expresses the reason which I have alleged, ab
authoritate originis, because the privilege of being Author and original, in
respect of the Son and holy Ghost, is that which they, in respect of the
Father, can have nothing to countervail.

And this I say, because I am persuaded, that it is a consideration necessary
to the maintaining and evidencing of the Tradition of the Church in this point.
For, those that understand the state of this dispute, must needs know, that the
most ancient writers of the Church, Justine the Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Origin, and the rest that were before the Council of
Nicaea, do speak of the Son of God, as of the Minister and workman to execute
the counsels of God in making and governing of the World. And therefore are
spoken of, by very learned men of these times, enemies enough to those
Heresies, as men to be suspected in the sincerity of the Christian Faith. A
thing not to be marvailed at, in those that believe, the express act and
decree of the present Church to be the reason and ground of believing, For,
upon that account, what hinders that to become matter of Faith, being decreed
by those which are enabled on behalf of the Church, which was not matter of
Faith an hour before? But, those that draw the reason why they believe, from
the evidence, which the society and communion of the church, tender to common
sense, that nothing could be refused by the whole body thereof, but that which
appeared to all, contrary to that which all have received from the beginning;
will count it a violent abuse to all reason, to make the Christian Faith
larger in the stream then it was in the fountain. And therefore, though the
terms of the Scripture, agreeing with those which the most ancient Fathers of
the Church use, may justly authorize and bring into use those expressions which
have not been usual, upon a due understanding of the intent to which they are
used; yet is there no power in the Church, to render those terms, which have
passed for Christian and Catholic in the Primitive times of the Church,
suspected of Heresy in these times.

Origin is strongly charged by the ancient times, in particular by Epiphanius*
as the Seminary of the Arians. And that the Arians might not have advantage by
many of his sayings, were too much to undertake, and that which my business no
way requires. The Socinians have made their advantages of Erasmus his writings.
And is any man so silly as to imagine, that Erasmus was therefore of Socinus
his Faith? Have they not made the like use of Maldonate, and his Commentaries
upon the Gospels? And is there any appearance that his meaning should be that
of Socinus?

I will not therefore deny, that the Cardinal du Perron, in his answer to King
James, page 633. does acknowledge that Arius were able to maintain himself
within compass of Tradition, were he to be tried by the Fathers before the
Council of Nicaea. But I give the Reader notice that this is the consequence
and the interest of that position, which deriveth Tradition of Faith from an
express act of the present Church, supposing the matter of it not to have been
of force, and effectually acknowledged, in all ages of the Church. Which if it
were true in this case, then could no man be obliged to believe the Trinity as
matter of Faith; Though it might remain questionable, whether or no a man may
be obliged to conform to it, as consistent with the Faith and not to scandalize
the unity of the Church, by rejecting the act and decree of it, according to
the Position settled in the first book. I will further acknowledge, that I have
seen an answer to Crellius the Socinians book de Deo, by one Botsaccus, now of
Danzick, I take it, in the end whereof I find a number of exceptions made by
the Socinians, in their writings which I have not seen, against the Faith of
all that writ before Constantine in particular, as inconsistent with that of
Nicaea, the particulars whereof, because I have not seen the books, and
therefore cannot presume to answer particularly, I could not here repeat,
would the model of my book give leave* In general; whosoever will take the
pains, to peruse that which is there alleged shall perceive; First, that
those who allege them fall out among themselves perpetually, sometimes and for
some sayings, challenging Tertulliane for example, or Clement, or Origin for
one of them that believe not the Trinity, otherwise disowning them as those
that helped to introduce the Faith of it: But no where remembering themselves
concerned to make good that which they maintain out of the words of Hegesippus
in Eusebius; that the Faith of the whole Church was defloured presently upon
the death of the Apostles, and to show, that such a change did indeed come to
pass, in the Faith of the holy Trinity. Secondly, that there is no more
difficulty in reducing the sense of their sayings there questioned to the sense
of the Church after the Councile of Nicaea; then, in reducing the sense of
Athanasius, when he allows, that, (...), may be understood of the proceeding
of the Son from the Father, of everlasting; Or, the sense of all these
Fathers, that understood the Father is greater then I, of the privilege of the
original and author, which the Father of necessity has personally, above the
Son and the holy Ghost, the Godhead being one and the same; to the same sense.

One passage of Tertulliane I have thought worth the clearing, because it seems
to contain a remarkable conceit of his, in expounding the words of Solomon in
the Greek, (...), to the sense of the Church, so many years before Arius built
his heresy, in a manner, upon it. The words are in his book contra Hermogenem,
Cap. III. Quia and pater Deus est, and judex deus est, non tamen ideo Pater
semper, and judex semper, quia Deus semper. Nam nec Pater potuit* esse ante
Flium, nec judex ante delictum. Fuit autem tempus, cum and delictum and filius
non fuit, quod judicem, and qui patrem Dominu^ fac^re^. For God also is Father,
and God is judge, and yet not always Father and judge because always God. For
neither could he be Father before a Son, nor judge before sin. But there
was a time when neither sin was to make God a judge, nor Son to make God a
Father. He that reads this only, would think at a blush, that it is the very
mark of Arius his haer^sie, (...); There was a time when the Son was not; But
the answer is in his book contra Praxeam, Cap. V. Ante omnia enim Deus erat,
solus ipse sibi and mundus and locus and omnia. Solus autem, quia nihil aliud
extrinsecus pr^ter illum. Caeterum ne tunc quide^ solus; Habebat enim secum
quam habebat in semetipso; Rationem suam scilicet: Rationalis enim Deus, and
ratio in ipso prius, and ita in ipso omnia. Qu^ ratio sensus ipsius est. Hanc
Graeci (...) dicunt, qu^ vocabul^ sermonem etiam appellamus. Ide^que in usu est
nostrorum, per simplicitatem interpretationis; Sermonem dicere in primordio
apud Deum fuisse; cum magis rationem competat antiquiorem ^aberi, quia non
sermonalis a principio, sed rationalis D^us etiam ante principium. Et quia ipse
quoque sermo ratione consistens, priorem eam ut substantiam su^m ^stendat.
Tamen and sic nihil interest. Nam ^tsi Deus nondum sermonem suum miserat, and
proinde ^um cum ipsa and in ipsa ratione intra semetipsum habebat, ^acite
cogitando and disputand^ secum, quae per sermonem mox erat dicturus. Cum
ratione enim sua cogitans, atque disponens, sermonem eam efficiebat, qu^m
sermon tractabat. For, before all things, God was alone, to himself both
World, and place, and all. But alone, because without, there was nothing
besides him, otherwise even then not alone. For he had with him that which he
had in him, his reason forsooth. For God is reasonable, and reason was in him
before, and so all things. This reason is his sense. This the Greek calls
(...), by which name also we call speech. Therefore our people use, for one
translation, to say, that speech was in the beginning with God; Whereas it is
more pertinent, that reason should be counted more ancient, because God spok^
it from the beginning, but had reason even before the beginning: And because
speech it self, standing upon reason, shows it to be the former, as that
whereupon it stands. But even so it matters not. For, though God had not yet
sent forth his speech, he had it no less within himself, with and within his
very reason, silently thinking and disposing with himself those things, which
he was to utter by speech. Further Cap. VI. and VII. Nam ut primum Deus voluit,
ea quae cum Sophia ratione and sermon disposuerat intrase in substantias and
species s^as edere, ipsum primum protulit sermonem, habentem intra se
individuas suas, rationem and sapientiam, ut per ipsum ^ierent universa, per
quem erant cogitata and disposita, imo and facta jam quantum in Deisensu. Hoc
enim eis deerat, ut coram quoque in suis speci^bus and substantiis
cognoscerentur, and tenerentur. Tunc igitur etiam ipse s^rm^ speciem and
ornatum suum sumit, sonum and vocem, cum dicit Deus; Fiat Lux. H^c est
nativitas perfecta sermonis, dum ex Deo procedit: conditus ab ^o primum ad
cogitatum, in nomine Sophiae, (Dominus condidit me initium viarum) dehinc
generatus ad effectum (cum pararet coelum aderam ei si^^l) exinde ^um patrem
sibi faciens, de quo procedendo filius factus est, primogenitus, ut ante omnia
genitus; and unigenitus, ut solus ex Deo genitus; proprie de vulv^ cordis
ipsius, secundum quod and Pater ipse testatur; Eructavit cor meum sermonem
optimum. Ad quem deinceps gaudens, proinde ga^de^tem in persona illi^^; Filius
meus es tu, ego hodie genui te, and ante Luciferum genui te. Sic and filius ex
sua persona profitetur Patrem in nomine Sophiae dominus condidit me initium
viarum in opera sua For as soon as God pleased to put forth into their own
substances and kinds those things which he had ordered within himself, with the
reason and speech of wisdom, the first he brought forth was speech, having in
it reason and wisdom from which it is unseparable, that all things might be
made by that, whereby they had been devised and disposed, nay made aleready as
to the sense of God. For they wanted only this, to be known and had in their
own kinds and substances. Then therefore even Gods speech it self assumed his
own kind, and dress, sound and voice, when God said; Let there be Light. This
is the perfect birth of speech, as it proceeds from God; First made by him
for a thought devised by him under the name of Wisdom (the Lord made me the
beginning of his ways) then ingendered to effect, (I was together with him
when he prepared the heavens) thenceforth making him his Father (for I read
Patrem sibi faciens, not P^c^m, as I find it promised) by proceeding from whom,
he became a Son, (firstborn; as born before all things; and only; as alone
ingendered by God) from the proper womb of his heart, according as the Father
himself also witnesses: My heart has uttered an excellent speech. To whom
rejoicing according as he rejoices, in the Fathers person he says; Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee; And, before the morning star have I
engendered thee. As the Son also in his person, professes the Father under
the name of Wisdom; The Lord made me the beginning of ways unto his works.
All this, if it be understood as becomes God, will contain nothing
prejudicial to the Faith of Gods Church, (whether it contain the true sense
of the Scriptures or not) through sound and voice and speech, and thought or
devise, if they be understood as they signify in Gods creatures, are
inconsistent with his excellence. But so far it will be from Arius his
heresy, as to answer the very ground of it, by saying; That the Word or
reason, or Wisdom, of God, (which inca^nate, is our Lord Christ) was from
everlasting in God, but not under the notion, quality, or attribute of Son,
till the making of the World* And that, as Tertulliane said in the place from
whence the objection is quoted, accidentis rei mentio the mention of an
accessory, to wit, the declaration of Gods will to make the World, gave him the
denomination of Son, which he bore not before, according to Tertulliane,
(whether he hit the true sense of the Scripture in it, or only endeavor so to
do) though always the same from everlasting. The answer to this difficult
passage of Tertulliane may serve for another, contra Praxeam, Cap. II. unicum
Deum non alias putat credendum, quam si ipsum eundemque and Patrem and Filium
and Spiritum dicat: Quasi non sic* quoquc unus sit omnia, dum ex uno omnia, per
substanti^ scilicet unitatem; and nihilominus custodiatur aeconomiae
sacramentum, quae unitatem in trinitatem disponit, tres dividens, Patrem,
Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum. Tres autem, not s^a^^ sed gradu, non substantia
sed forma, nec potestate sed specie; Vnius autem status, and unius substantiae,
and unius potestatis, quia unus Deus, ex qu^ and gradus isti and formae, and
species, in nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti, deputantur. He thinks
he is not otherwise to believe one God, then saying, that the Father the Son
and the Holy Ghost, are all one. As if one were not all as well, if all proceed
from one; By unity of substance, forsooth, preserving nevertheless the mystery
of that distribution, which disposes the Unity into a Trinity, ordering three,
the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost. But, not three for state but for
rank, not for substance but for form, not for power but for specialty: But of
one state, one substance, one power, because one God, from whom those ranks,
and forms, and specialties are understood. These words, non statu sed gradu,
-- both Cardinal Bellarmine, and Valentia, meeting in a passage of Bullinger,
not naming his author, have charged with Arianisme, being indeed Tertuallians
words, manifestly expressing the Unity of the Godhead, the substance. state and
power of it in the Father Son and holy Ghost, by their personal properties,
characters, or notions, in the terms of gradus, formae, and species, ranks
forms, and specialties, no other being then in use.

In like sort Ignatius, according to the true Copies says (...), Goa was born,
Epist. ad Ephesians. he calls him there, Son of God, and Son of man, (...), God
manifest as man; He calls him (...), The eternal Word that came not forth from
silence. Epist. ad Magnes. Athanasius de Synodis, quotes out of him, We have
one Physician bodily and incorporeal, engendered and not engendered, God in man:
Justine calls him the word of God, indistinct from him in virtue and Power,
and ^^caranate* He makes him the Lord of hosts, and the King of Glory; He
expresses his procession by light kindled from light, and fire from fire;
Irenaeus expressly maintains him one and the same God with the Father, and
true God, and his generation ineffable, without beginning and from everlasting;
Clemens makes him God ^quall to God, as his Son; Origin, not in any work now
extant, that may be questioned, but, as he is alleged by Athanasius, de
decretis Synodi Nice^ae, says of him, that, if there be any image of God who
is invisible, that image must also be invisible, with a great deal more to the
same purpose, where he also quotes Theognostus in secundo hypopseon, affirming
the same at large; to set aside those that are questioned. And, shall we not
think our selves obliged, so to understand their words, which the importunity
of Heresies have made questionable* that they may consist, and agree with those
which remain unquestionable? Especially, all of them agreeing in this; That
the world was made and is governed by Christ; And, that the whole dispensation
of God tending to the salvation of mankind, whether before the Law or under
the Law, as well as since his appearing in the flesh, was executed by him, as a
preface and prologue to his coming in the flesh; (a supposition which all seem
to ground themselves upon, especially against the Jews, in giving account of
our common Christianity.) That our Faith is in the Father, Son and holy
Ghost; That we are to glorify, to worship, and to be baptized in the Name of
the Father, Son and holy Ghost; And in counting all Heretics that denied it.
For, communion with the Church (not communicating with those who believe it
not, because they believe it not) is an evidence which no words of doubtful
construction can obscure, in the judgment of any man that is reasonable. Nay,
among the very heathen, that have made any mention of the Christian Faith, does
not Plinies Epistle concerning the Christians acknowledge, that they sung hymns
to Christ, as to God? Does not Lucian in his Philopatris, manifestly express
the Faith of the Trinity, as the cognizance of Christians at that time? has it
not appeared by these inventions wherewith the Gnostics sophisticated it, that
the Fullness of the Godhead consists in the Trinity, according to the Christian
Faith, as according to the several Sects of them, in their several
inventions. That the Christians honored and worshipped the blessed Trinity, as
those Sects did those imaginatitions of their own, which they call the
Fulness of the Godhead? When Ebion, Cerinthus, Artemon, Theodorus, and after
them, Sabellius, Noetus, Prax^as, and Pa^lus Samosatenus were disowned by the
whole Church, and excluded the communion of all Christians, did not all
Churches, that agreed in refusing them, find themselves possessed of a contrary
Faith, as the reason for which they were refused? Were all Christians, out of
their simplicity, cunning enough to assoile all the reasons, whereby these, and
Arius to boot, did or might argue their pretenses, from texts of Scripture? Or
did they think themselves bound, to rest in the visible consent of the whole
Church, whether they were able to do that or not?

In fine, the learned Jesuit Petavius, in the Preface to his books de
Trinitate, and the beginning of the first, as he has evidently showed, that
the substance of the faith of the Trinity is acknowledged by these ancient
Christians, some of whose words seem to disparage the Godhead of our Lord
Christ; So he indeavoureth to show, that they did it out of a desire to
reconcile the faith, with the doctrine of Plato and his followers. If his
opinion be admitted, there will remain evidence enough for the Tradition of
Faith, even in their writings, whose skill in the Scriptures, goes not the
right way to maintain it; The plain song will be good music, though the
descant transgress. Though, for my part, having seen what he has said, I
repent me not of that which I had conceived out of Tertullian^; That out of a
desire to reconcile the creation of wisdom in the Proverbs, according to the
Greek (not the doctrine of Plato) with the rule of Faith, they conceived this a
supposition fit to do it; That, by Gods proceeding to create the World, his
mind or wisdom, which incarnate is our Lord Christ, attained, not the essence
and being which it had in God from everlasting, but the denomination and
quality of his Word and Son. For you shall find there, that most of them
concur in the speculations of Tertulliane.

Whereby you may see, that this learned Jesuit is not agreed with the
Cardinal du Perron, to deny the reason why we hold the Faith of the holy
Trinity originally, from the decree of the Council of Nic^a, and from that
authority of the Church which maintains it; But from the reason whereupon
that decree was grounded and made: That is, from the meaning of the Scriptures
expressed and limited by the Tradition of the Church. And therefore, not
burthening my self here, with the expounding of all those passages of their
writings, before Arius, which may seem to derogate from the Tradition of the
Church in that point; I shall refer the Reader to those things, whereby he
shows that they do unanimously concur in maintaining the same Faith. For,
if there be amongst them, that have had speculations, tending to reconcile some
Scriptures to it, which are not only ill grounded, (as, I dispute not but this
of Tertulliane is) but also prejudicial to the Faith, as some of Origens, whom
I have mentioned already; That this is to be imputed to the inconsequence of
their several discourses, not to any difference in their common Faith; I remit
you to that which he has said, to judge. Only, whereas he de Trinitate II. 2.
has given you a full account of those Fathers, which expound the words of our
Lord; The Father is greater then I; to be meant of his Godhead, (which I have
only named in gross) I will advise you again hereupon, that many things which
are said of the Son, as inferior to the Father, (as when he is said to
Minister unto the Father in creating the World) may be imputed, not to any
inequality in that Godhead, which is the same in all the Trinity, but unto the
manner of having it, (the Father originally, as the Fountain, the Son and
the holy Ghost as from him) wherein the difference of the persons consists.
To the same Petavius, de Trinitate VIII. 2. I remit them that would be
satisfied of the sense of the Fathers* in that which I alleged, for the reason
why our Lord is called the Word, by S. John; To wit, that the intercourse
between God and man, after the fall, was executed and managed by his Ministry.
Not because I think this name of the Word, unfit to signifiy the original
proceeding of the Son from the Father; much less his concurrence in and to
the creation of all things: But because, believing as I do, that the mystery of
the Trinity is revealed by the coming of our Lord; I find great reason to
conceive, that his Apostle intended thereby to intimate, that the godly of the
Old Testament, were reconciled to God by the means of his Word and Spirit,
howsoever they understood that which is signified by these Titles. I know the
Arians made their advantage of that which Justine and others had said; That God
employed his Son to man, because he was himself invisible; To say thereupon,
that the Father only is invisible and incomprehensible, even by the Son. And
that S. Austine thereupon counts it rashness to say, that all the intercourse
between God and man, was ministered by the Son the Father, and the holy Ghost
not appearing at all in any of these Revelations. That Dionysius acknowledges*
that all of them, Athanasius that some of them, were done by the Ministry of
Angels; The testomonies whereof you may find collected there. And truly that
God the Father was not revealed by these apparitions, were a thing utterly
unreasonable to imagine. That Gods Angels did attend upon his Son, in those
messages, wherein, some one of them caries the proper Name of God, is a thing
which the Scriptures alleged before, will necessarily require. But that,
where^oever God deals with man by the Ministry of an Angel, to whom the proper
name and honor of God is attributed, there the Son of God came to do Gods
Word to man, for a preface to his coming in the flesh; And that whosoever
received this word from God, was withal possessed by his Spirit; as I see it
is very agreeable to the Scripture; so I find no reason valuable, why I should
repent me to have said it.

I know, that Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, has been alleged for an
authority that interrupteth the Tradition of the Church, in the matter of the
Trinity. And I acknowledge S. Basils judgment, comparing him with one, who
dressing plants, and finding one that grows awry, bends it so without measure,
that he sets it as much awry on the other side. For, writing against Sabellius,
and not content to settle the difference of the persons, he says that through
heat of contention. he let fall words that signified also (...), difference of
nature, inferiority of Power, and diversity of glory. Epist. XLI. Whereof,
though I intend not to question any part, I will say, nevertheless, as I have
alleged this passage of Dionysius in evidence, for the unity of the Church, so
here, that I desire no better evidence for the Rule of Faith, which the same
presupposes. Suppose for the present the sense of Dionysius to be
questionable, as it was to these Bishops of Pentapolis his Suffraganes, who
finding themselves offended at that which he had written, gave information of
it to Dionysius then Bishop of Rome, and to his Synod, which Athanasius de
Synodis Arim. and Seleuciae, expressly nominateth. Can there be a greater
argument, that the communion of the Church stood grounded upon the profession
of that Faith, which he seemed to transgress; then the concurrence of Rome,
and the Churches that resorted to Rome, with those which resorted to
Alexandria, in that Faith which he seemed to transgress. Certainly, the
agreement of all Christians in admitting the Scriptures, at this day, is not
able to produce the like. And therefore, granting the writings of Dionysius to
have been an attempt upon the Faith; the opposition, that was so warmly made,
assures us, that doctrine which the authority of a Bishop of Alexandria could
not give passeport to, was inconsistent with the Rule in force. For, the
Satisfaction which he tendered in the Letter recorded by Athanasius, shows what
the sense of the Church was, for satisfaction whereof he was forced to write.
And therefore, I may safely, and do acknowledge some of his words to be more
offensive, then it can be fit for me to excuse: Though his own leter alleges
the similitudes of a plant and the shoot of it, of a well, and the stream
flowing from it, which the Church since Arius has always used to make it
understood. Which may seem to render him reconcilable to the Faith of Nicaea,
by understanding the difference which he signifies to consist, not in the
Godhead, which may be understood to be the same in the fountain as in the
stream, but in the rank and manner of having it, necessarily rendering that
which proceeds, in that regard inferior to that from whence it proceeds. I
know it is said again, that the Council of LXXX Bishops that condemned
Samosatenus at Antiochia, in their Epistle alleged there by Athanasius, do
say, that the Son is not (...) of the same substance with the Father; And
that it is said, that the two parts of a contradiction may as well be
reconciled, as this with the Faith of Nicaea. But, with what judgment, let S.
Hilary speak, Libro de Synodis: Male intelligitur homousion: Quid ad me been
intelligentem? Male homousion Samosate^s confessus est: Sed nunquid melius
Ariani negarunt? Octagi^ta Episcopi olim respuerunt: Sed trecenti dec^m and
octo nuper receperunt. The homousion is wrong understood: What is that to me
that understand it right? Samosatenus acknowledged it wrong; Were the Arians
more in the right in denying it? Fourscore Bishops resused it long since. Three
hundred and eighteen have received it of late. This had been enough to make a
reasonable man suspect an equivocation in the business. But Athanasius would
have told him wherein it consisted, and how, and in what sense Samosatenus
maintained it. His argument was; If our Lord Christ were not made God of man,
which first he had been made, then must he be (...), of the same substance with
the Father; and so there shall be three substances, one principal, that of the
Father, two proceeding from him, of the Son and holy Ghost. And shall not all
that embrace the Creed of Nicaea disdain Consubstantiality in this sense?
Which plainly makes the Father, Son and holy Ghost of the same substance, no
otherwise, then three men are said to be of one substance. I know Gregory of
N^o^aesarea might have been further alleged out of S. Basil, Epist. LXIV.
Where he acknowledges him to have called the Father and the Son (...). And
the Son, (...). But this, in a discourse written to Aelian a Pagan, to
convert him to Christianity, and at the bottom, consisting of nothing but
equivocation of terms; He allowing himself to term the Son the creature and
make of the Father, whom the Greek Fathers commonly call (...) or, the cause of
the Son: And to call them two in notion, but one for hypostasis; because he
takes hypostasis for substance, and notion, for that Character which
distinguishes between persons, which, in the now terms of the School, are
said to be known and discerned by their notions.

But I will go no further in Origens behalf, or in behalf of any Scholar of
Origens; If he have left that which necessarily imports an ill sense (whereof
his Scholars, Dionysius, or Gregory of N^o^aesarea, may perhaps relish) either
it was not publicly taken notice of when it was published, or passed over in
silence for the present, in respect of his merit toward the Church: As it must
be said of his opinion concerning souls flitting into new bodies. As for Eusebius.
of Caesarea* and the author of the Constitutions, which are both charged in
this point; Eusebius, living in the time when the consent of the Church,
overruled the contrary, rather evidenceth then interrupteth that Tradition,
which condemns him if he agree not with it. But the author of the
Constitutions, is not known, at what time he lived, to write, in the name of
Clemens the Apostles Scholar, that which, for his part, he thought most likely
to come from the Apostles. Whether or no he might think it became him, writing
in that name, to use such terms as he found the ancientest Church-Writers use
before the business of Arius; Whether or no he might mistake himself in doing
so, I will not dispute. But, being hard to believe that he writ till the
heresy of Arius and E^n^m^us was down; As I can give my self no good reason*
why he should bring in Arius under the habit of the Apostles; so I see the
suspicion which he has contracted, in a manner as ancient as the credit of his
book in the Church. After all this, if any man marvail, that Alexander Bishop
of Alexandria should think so slightly of Arius his opinion, as, in debating
it, sometimes to side with him, sometimes with his adversaries, according to
Sozomenus, Eccles. Hist. I. 15. Let him consider, that the Ecclesiastical
Historians inform us, that the difference of Arius was commenced at a
Consistory; That is, at a meeting of the Clergy to debate the business: Only
Sozomenus, that there had been diverse meetings about it; In which Alexander had
not declared himself, but spoken sometimes on this side and sometimes on that.
Not because there is any appearance in the story, that Arius himself could have
construed his procedings, as if he had been doubtful which side to choose; But
because any wise man, in his place, would have thought it the way to preserve
his authority over Arius, by not declaring himself party against him till he
appeared, untractable by that reason, which his authority must enforce, when it
self would not serve the turn. As for the great Constantine, who, in his Leter
to the Church of Alexandria declares many times that the question concerned
not the substance of Faith; It must be said; that being no Christian as yet,
nor catechized in the Faith, his information failed, either in matter of fact,
reporting the position of Arius in such terms as might bear a good
construction, (in which what latitude there is, it may appear by the premises)
or in point of right, making that not to concern the substance of Faith, which
indeed does. For, those terms in which all the Ecclesiastical Histories agree
that the debate was stated, are such, as indeed do concern the substance of
Faith. Neither is there any mark, in the writings of the Fathers before this
time, upon which it can be said, that any of them thought that there was a time
when the Word of God, (which being incarnate in our Lord Christ) was not, but
was made by God of nothing after that time; Which are the characters that
distinguish the heresy of Arius. Set aside then the Constitutions, Eusebius,
Origin, and his Scholar Dionysius, as questionable in point of fact, or as
granted, that the sense of their words, is not reconcilable with the Faith in
point of right, the retraction of Dionysius, makes as much more for the Faith,
then his misprision (condemned by Gennadius de Dogm. Eccl. Cap. IV. and
Facundus X. 5.) against it, as the rejecting of Sabellius makes more for the
same, then the doubtful words of Gregory of N^ocaesarea against.

That which is to be said thereupon is, that there can be therefore no reason
to blame the Council of Nicaea for adding to the Creed the term of (...), to
oblige the Arians to the sense of the Church, S. Athanasius, in his Treatise de
Actis Conc. Nicen. has showed us, that it was introduced, to cut off those
equivocations* whereby, they ought to cover their own sense, under those other
words which were propounded as capeable of the Catholic sense. He that will
say, that this course ought not to have been held, or that having taken effect,
it ought not to have been retained, may as well say, that the faith of Christ,
or the Unity of Gods service in that faith is not to be preserved. For, being
once questioned, ther^ must be a Rule and a mark to discern Christians from
Heretics. I observe therefore, likewise, that the troubles which Arius
occasioned in the Church never came to an end, till the word person in Latin
and hypostasis in Greek was admitted, in opposition to the word essence or
nature, included in the word (...), which the Council of Nicaea had introduced
into the Creed, that the difference between the Church and Arius, might be
stated upon the express terms of three persons and one nature. For it is
evident, by S. Jerome, Epist. LVII. that the term of hypostasis for person,
was not then received (who writes to Pope Damasus to be authorized by him,
whether to admit, or to refuse it:) But as, after that time, we hear no further
question of the term, so, under the Emperor Gratiane and Pope Damasus, we find
the dispute extinguished. But I say, nevertheless, that there is no cause
therefore to imagine, that the sense of the Church and the faith thereof has
received any change by the use of new terms, which the necessity of preventing
Heretics has obliged the Church to introduce. And I say as the others said,
that the importance and consequence of the said new terms ought to be reduced
to that force; which the sense of the Church, according to the Scriptures,
allows, or rather prescribes. And that, whosoever shall take upon him* under
pretense of the most unquestionable decrees, that any age of the Church has
produced; to prescribe against that sense which the primitive records of the
Church do enforce, in so doing, sets up the authority of that present Church
against the Tradition of the Catholic. And, after all this, shall the
Socinians be admitted to allege, that S. Hilary, quitt^th a doubt whether the
holy Ghost is to be called God or not? Surely the Socinians cannot be admitted
to allege this, unless they will be content to submit to S. Hilary in the
whole business: Nay, unless they will stand to the Church, to which S. Hilary
stands. But, for those that are not Socinians, and would be satisfied, I will
not use that wretched answer of Erasmus in that excellent preface to S. Hilarys
works; That the Church has since decreed otherwise: As if there were not a
reason why the Church so decreed, or, as if he were not bound to render that
reason for his discharge. But I will say, tha^, as, in the case of the Nicene
Creed and the word (...), it appears, that the Church may be necessitated to
use such expressions, as have not been in use before; and not only to allow
particular persons, as Doctors of the Church to use them, but to give them
pasport and authority in the public service of the Church. And, that people,
or Doctors of the Church should stick at them when they are first frequented,
is no more to be marvailed at, then that the Socinians should marvel that the
Son of God, who acknowledges to come from the Father, and to receive all from
him, should by any man be acknowledged God from everlasting; Unless it be
marvailed, that all that allow it not are not Socinians. For, neither is it any
marvel that men should marvel at the due consequences of those things which
themselves admit: Nor that, marvailing at them, some should be Socinians,
others continue Christians. All this would be good, in case it did appear, that
S. Hilary had any where put any doubt, whether the holy Ghost may be called God
or not. But the observation of Erasmus bears no more then this; That S. Hilary
is no where found to call the H. Ghost God. which who will not laugh at,
unless it could be said that S* Hilary no way says as much as that is? For
shall the Faith of the Church, or, shall the Faith of S. Hilary depend upon the
use of that word? Shall it not serve his turn that he uses words signi^ying
the same? Which, had Erasmus been so diligent to collect, as the Socinians have
been forward to make advantage of his negligence, they had never drawn that
observation into consequence. He that would be satisfied of S. Hilaries Faith,
as well as of the Faith of the Church before S. Hilary in this point; Let him
peruse what Petavius has collected, Dog^atum Theol. 3. de Trinitate VII. 7-15.

I am now, before I leave this point, to consider, what the light of reason
argues against the mystery of the Trinity, which I acknowledge to seem so
strong, that it seems to forbid all use of reason, in them, that admit the
Christian Faith. For, seeing all use of reason supposes this principle, that
those things which agree or disagree in a third agree or disagree one with the
other; And, that the mystery of the Trinity inferres; Though the Father is God
and the Son God, yet that the Son is not the Father; It seems, it cannot be
maintained without disowning the use of reasonable discourse. This difficulty
may be, and is branched out into many difficulties. It is argued, If so; Then
shall there be three Gods, the Father one, the Son another, and the Holy
Ghost a third: Or, three substanc^s of one Godhead; every person being God,
which is the substance of the Godhead: Or, that the same thing, the Godhead,
shall subsist thrice, to wit, in the Father Son and holy Ghost. It is argued,
If so; Then shall every person be three persons; Because every person is God;
that is, Father Son and holy Ghost: That the persons of the Godhead shall be
both really the same and really diverse, or, not the same; Being the same God,
yet several persons. It is argued further, If so; Then shall the Son of God
be his own Son; Because Son of that God, which the Son is. Then may there
as well be more Sons, and then infinite. Then shall he be from everlasting
because God, and not from everlasting, because Son. Then should the Father
and the holy Ghost have been incarnate, because, one with the Son who is in
carnate. Then cannot the Son of God be man, because God before. But all these
consequences contain but one and the same difficulty from which thy proceed;
as the same soldiers are showed in several arms, and the same meats served
with several sauses. For, when the Father Son and holy Ghost, (persons
subsisting before they are distinguished by our understanding) are said to be
one God, the ordinary discourse of reason, and the language that men use
inferres, three substances, each subsisting of it self; that is three Gods,
that is, persons of the Godhead, every one of them, Father Son and holy Ghost
as God is; the same with themselves, supposing one God, not the same, supposing
three persons. Again, the Son being God, (as the Father and the holy Ghost
are) and Son of God, it is no more, then that he should be his own Son.
That he should be from everlasting, and yet Son, and no more Sons then he;
no more, then that he is God, and the Son of God both. That he only
incarnate, never a whit difficult, then that, being the same God, he is neither
Father nor holy Ghost.

To answer then this one though great difficulty; First, I insist, that the
Socinians who object it (which may be said of Arius, or Aetius, or whosoever
may be found to have objected the like) cannot avoid as great inconveniences if
they mean to be Christians. For; the Socinians pretending to honor the Son
as the Father; the Arians the Son and the holy Ghost both; I demand, what
greater inconvenience there can be objected to one that pretends to be a
Christian, then to give the honor due to God alone to his creature? Then, that
the Son of God should be God and a creature both; Then, that he should create
himself, as both God and creature: Then, that being made a man, he should be
exalted to the power and glory of God, whereupon the honor of God becomes due?
If reason and Faith agree both together to assure us that there is a God that
made all things; It is not possible that any thing should be imagined more
impossible, then, that one and the same subject should be truly qualified God
and creature. He that can imagine a greater contradiction, a greater
inconvenience, a greater inconsistence, then that the same thing should
necessarily be what it is, and yet that, of it self, it may be and may not be
what it is; Always actually the same, and yet capable of being what it was not
sometimes; The cause of all things, and yet depending on that cause which it
self is, and so before and after it self; Well may he imagine some greater
inconvenience then this, that our Lord Christ, made a man as other men are,
only conceived by the holy Ghost, without man, of a Virgin, should be made
God, and endued with power and glory, to which the worship and honor of the
only true God is due. But let them that hope, hereby, to remove the stumbling
block of the Trinity in Unity from before the Jews, consider with themselves,
what satisfaction they can hope to give them, or any reasonable creature, by
inviting them, to give the honor of God to a creature, called God, because of
that power and Glory which God has given it above other creatures. For,
seeing, the same power and glory which God has given it, he might have given,
and (setting aside his declared will to the contrary) may yet give, to as many
as the Heathen Idolaters ever counted Gods; how shall he persuade them, that
they are the less Idolaters, because they do it but to one besides God, and
shall never be moved to do it to any more? Whereas, supposing the Father Son
and holy Ghost to be one and the same God, we invite them not to worship any
but God, though we invite them to worship that which they comprehend not, but
believe. And therefore, for a direct answer to the difficulty made, I must take
notice, that there are those that pretend to make evidence to natural reason,
that it is not only consistent with, but necessary to the perfection of the
Godhead, that being one and the same singular being, it has subsistence in
three several persons; Whose opinion and reasons, did I write in Latin, I
should find my self obliged to consider. But the greatest part of those whom I
write to not demanding these metaphysics; I will neither censure them, nor
hold my self liable to their censure for it, that, by not holding up so high, I
betray the advantage of Christianity to the scorn of unbelievers. This I will
say, that, speaking of the Godhead, it is not necessary to maintain that which
I believe to be evidently possible. Which is to say, that I may be bound to
believe that of God, which, I cannot evidence to reason, that there is no
contradiction in it: Because, what the motives of Faith make evident, that it
is revealed, that I am not able to comprehend, how possible or not. For though
reason force me to attribute to God all that is of perfection, and to remove
from God all that is of imperfection in the creature; yet by all that, I
understand nothing proper to God; Those things that are revealed, signifying
nothing else but his proper nature, incomprehensible to man, till he see him as
he is. What is the Word and Spirit of God, besides God, I understand not at
all; But, let not, therefore, to believe that the Word took our flesh, and not
the Father, having in it the holy Ghost without measure, whereof it gives a
certain measure to believers. And, had I a proper conceit of that which they
express, that which seems a contradiction would then appear necessary. In the
mean time, all dispute about essence and persons, and natures, and all the
terms whereby, either the Scriptures express themselves in this point, or the
Church excludes the importunites of heresies from the true sense of the
Christian Faith, improves no man's understanding an inch in this mystery. The
service it does, is to teach men the language of the Church, by distinguishing
that sense of several sayings which is, and that which is not consistent with
the Faith. And if any man hereupon, proceed by dicourse upon the nature of the
subject, to infer what is, and what is not such, his understanding is
unsufferable.

When therefore it is said; The Father is God, the Son God, therefore the
Father is the Son; Here is nothing like the form of an argument. If, to make
an argument in form, you change it and say; Whosoever is God is the Father: the
Son is whosoever is God; (Proving both propositions, because; The Father is
God, (as also the Son) and there is but one God; Therefore, whosoever ever is God
is the Father; Therefore the Son is whosoever is God;) Here you have recourse
to the matter in hand, trusting no more to the form of your argument, but to
this consequence; That, If there be but one God, and the Father he, then,
whosoever is God is the Father. Which fails, because the revelation which
shows the Father to be God, shows the Son to be the same God, which, he
that did understand God would see to be necessarily consequent. Neither is
there cause that any thing that we see in the creature should make us marvel,
why the Father Son and holy Ghost, being three who are God, should not be
three Gods, or three substances of the Godhead; unless a man knew what God is,
and, what the Father Son and holy Ghost import in God. Nor that the same
substance should subsist thrice in three persons, unless he had a proper
conceit of that which person and subsistence signify in the Godhead. Nor,
shall it follow, that every person shall be three persons, because God we know,
by discourse from the creature to be one; But what the persons are, which we
believe to be in God before we think of God, is revealed, because we understand
it not. Nor that the persons can be really the same, because really the same
with the same Godhead; because, not completely the same with it, which though
by reason not to be understood, grounds the difference between themselves. For
the same reason shall it not follow, that the Son is his own Son; because
not Son to the Godhead but to his Father: And therefore but one Son
possible, because, the fulness of the Godhead is revealed to dwell bodily in
Christ, the Father, and the holy Ghost. The Son notwithstanding from
everlasting; (because in God, in whom there can be nothing new) though brought
forth by an operation, no less from everlasting, then incomprehensible.

In fine* the Son alone incarnate, though the Father and the holy Ghost abide
in him being incarnate: Because the Father the Fountain, the holy Ghost the
stream that flows upon believers; In whom, notwithstanding, the Father and the
Son dwell, John XIV. 23. Because they are in the holy Ghost whom the faithful
are endowed with. As for that which was feared, that all discourse of reason,
all Arts and Sciences that have come from it must fail, if we grant not; those
things which agree or disagree with a third, to agree or disagree one with
another; So far it is from holding, that it seems to clear the truth. For, if
it take place in that discourse which proceeds upon general terms, abstracted
from the particulars which we see, then can there be no cause why it should
take place in that which proceeds upon terms revealed from the immediate sight
of God, concerning God, whom we cannot know otherwise. For how should
consequences be framed upon terms, whereby, the things which they signify are
not understood? Therefore, all the dispute that the Schools can have, of the
holy Trinity, and incarnation of our Lord Christ, cannot advance us in the
understanding of those mysteries; but only teach us, by what terms we may
express our selves in them, according to the Faith of the Church. And though
something evident to reason come in argument with that which is so revealed,
yet the effect of the argument must follow the nature of that which is
revealed, and pretend no more then I have said. Where you see, there is nothing
to hinder, that discourse which proceeds upon that which men understand of
things subject to sense, (by considering that wherein particulars differ, and
that wherein they agree) to take effect no less, then if nothing were revealed.

CHAP. XVIII. The necessity of the grace of Christ, is the evidence of
original sin. How the exaltation of our Lord depends upon his humiliation,
and the grace of Christ upon that* All the work of Christianity is ascribed to
the grace of Christ. Gods predestination manifests the same.
THese things thus premised, the evidence which I make for original sin from
the grace of Christ, as for the grace of Christ from original sin, consists
in this proposition; That not only the preaching of the Gospel, but also the
effect of it, in converting us both to the profession and conversation of
Christians, is granted in consideration of the obedience of Christ, for the
cure of that wound which the disobedience of Adam made. Here I must note, that
the conversation of Christians, as it requires and presupposes the profession
of Christianity, so it comprehends all parts and offices of a man's life, to
be guided and lead according to that will and law of God which his word
declares; So that, to prove my intent, it will be requisite to show, that it
is through those helps which the grace of God by Christ, (that is, in
consideration of his obedience and sufferings) furnishes, that any part of a
man's duty is discharged like a Christian; Which otherwise would have been
employed to the satisfaction of those inclinations, which the corruption of
man's nature, by the fall of Adam, has brought forth. This to do, I will begin
as before with the Epistle to the Romans; In the beginning whereof S. Paul
having proved (that which Pelagius and Socinus both allow) that there is no
salvation without Christianity, and, coming to render a reason for the
necessity thereof, from those things which I pressed before, concerning the
disobedience of Adam, proceeds to maintain it by the antithesis of Christ's
obedience, thus, Romans V. 15-19. having begun to say, that Adam is the figure of
him that was to come; But, the grace is not as the transgression. For, if by
one man's transgression many are dead, much more has the grace of God, and gift
through the grace of one man Jesus Christ abounded to many. Nor is the gift as
that which came by one that sinned; For judgment came of one to condemnation,
but the free gift is of many transgressions to righteousness. For, if by one
man's transgression, death reigned through one; much more shall they who receive
the abundance of the grace and the gift of righteousness reign in life through
one Jesus Christ. Therefore, as by the transgression of one, the matter
proceeded to condemnation upon all, so by the righteousness of one to
justification of life. For, as by the disobedience of one many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one many shall be made righteous. Here,
whosoever acknowledges, that righteousness comes by Christ) which the free
gift that brings from many transgressions to righteousness, and the abundance
of the grace and gift of righteousness unto life, manifestly argues) can
neither refuse, the contrary unrighteousness, which causes condemnation and
death, to come from Adams sin, nor yet the grace which voids it (called by S.
Paul the gift which comes through the grace of one man Jesus Christ, that is
that grace which he has obtained with God) to be granted in consideration of
Christ, through whom the Apostle says, they that receive the gift of
righteousness shall reign in life. For, how shall they reign in life through
him, and through the gift of righteousness, but that through him they receive
the gift of righteousness? Therefore S. Paul, lamenting afterward the
conflict between sin and grace, Romans VII. 22.-25. I am content with the Law
of God according to the inward man. But I see another Law in my members,
warring with the Law of my mind, and captivating me to the Law of sin that is
in my members. Wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? I thank God through our Lord Jesus Christ? To wit, because from
God, in consideration of J. Christ, and his obedience, (and not only through
the doctrine which he taught) he had help to overcome in so great a conflict.
Wherefore it follows immediately, Romans VIII. 1-4. There is therefore now no
more condemnation for them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
flesh but after the Spirit. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,
has freed me from the Law of sin and death. For, whereas the inability of
the Law was weak through the flesh, God sending his Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, that walk not after the
flesh but after* the Spirit. Whether you understand the Law of the Spirit of
Life, or Life, to come in, by, or through Christ Jesus, if we be freed from the
Law of sin and death by Christ, then by the helps God gives in consideration of
his obedience. For how is sin condemned in the flesh, but, because it is
executed? And how executed, but, because we are enabled to put it to death? And
how by Christ's death, but by the helps which God grants in consideration of it?
Therefore it follows a little after; If man have not the Spirit of Christ, he
is not his. But if Christ be in you, the body is dead indeed because of sin,
but the Spirit is life because of righteousness. But if the Spirit of him who
raised Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised Christ from the dead
shall also quicken your mortal bodies, through his spirit that dwells in
you. That Spirit, which makes righteousness a Law to us by Christ, shall raise
again these mortal bodies, which shall be destroyed because of sin. So, as
our rising from death is purchased by the resurrection of Christ, so our rising
from sin by his death, which purchased his rising again.

For, consider what S. Paul writes again of our Lord Christ, Phil. II. 5-11.
For, Let that sense be in you that was also in Christ Jesus, who, being in the
form of God, made it no occasion of pride that he was equal with God: But
emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, becoming in the likeness of
man, and being found in habit as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross: Therefore God also has overexalted him,
and given him the name, that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus
every knee should how of things in heaven and on earth, and under the earth,
and every tongue confess to the glory of God the Father, that Jesus Christ is
the Lord. Where, seeing i^ is manifest by the premises, that our humbling of
our selves is, with God, the consideration upon which he promises, to exalt us;
(being, as has appeared, the condition of the Covenant of Grace) it cannot be
denied, that the humiliation of Christ was the consideration for which he was
exalted. Neither is it any difficulty that Christ could not be exalted to any
eminence, that should not be due to him as God in man's flesh, and therefore
that which was due to him, as incarnate, could not be due to his Cross; For,
the assumption of man's nature being a work of God, and not of nature, the state
which our Lord Christ was to assume in our nature was not determinable any way,
but by the voluntary apointment of God and the Father, who ordered it: So that
nothing hindered the effects of the holy Ghost* dwelling in our Lord Christ
without measure, to be exercised in such measure and upon such reasons as God
should appoint; nor the declaration of the fulness of the Godhead, dwelling
in our flesh, to depend upon his obedience and suffering in it. The declaration
hereof is that which S. Paul calls that name above all names, at which all
things bow, which, the giving of the holy Ghost to our Lord Christ, to convince
the world of it, upon his exaltation* is that which effects. So says S.
Peter, Acts II. 33* Being therefore exalted to the right hand of God, and
having received the promise of the holy Ghost of the Father, he has sh^d forth
this which ye now see and hear. For it is true, our Lord promised his disciples
the holy Ghost, John XIV. 16, 17, 18. XVI. 7, 13, 14, 15. But this promise he
received upon his advancement to the right hand of God, being then, and
thereupon enabled to perform it. And therefore, it is that which our Lord
signifies Mat. XXVIII. 18. When he says, All power is given to me in heaven
and upon earth. Go ye therefore, and make disciples all Nations, Baptizing them
in the Name of the Father the Son and the holy Ghost. For the event shows
that this power consists in sending the holy Ghost, whereby the World was
reduced to the obedience of the Christian Faith. So that when our Lord says,
Mat. XI. 27. All things are delivered unto me by the Father; he means, the
right to this power, though limited in the exercise of it, unto the time and
state of his advancement, which gave him right in it: And though it be granted,
as I said before, that the general terms of all power in heaven and earth, and
all things, are to be understood of that which concerns his kingdom; Yet
seeing the ground thereof, consisting in giving such measure o^ the holy Ghost
to his disciples, as the advancement of his kingdom requires, supposes the
fulness thereof to dwell in his own flesh; it imports no disparagement to the
Godhead of Christ, that the exercise thereof in our flesh is limited to that
time, and that state of his advancement, which the Father appoints* S. Paul.
Ephesians. IV. 7-11. writes thus; Now to every one of us is grace given according
to the measure of Gods gift: To wit, in which God pleased to give it. Therefore
he says; Going up on high he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men.
Now, that he ascended, what is it, but that he descended first into the lower
parts of the earth? He that descended is the same who also ascended far above
all heavens, that he might fill all things. And he has given some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors. Where it is
manifest, that he sets forth the ascension of our Lord in the nature of a
triumph, after the victory of his Cross, as Conquerors lead captives in
triumph, and give largesses to their subjects and soldiers. And that which S.
Paul terms giving gifts to men, David, out of whom it is quoted, Psalm. LXVIII.
18. calls receiving gifts for men; Our Lord being his Fathers General, and by
his Commission conquering in his name. Receiving therefore of him who gave him
Commission, the gifts which he bestows at his triumph, can any man doubt, that
he receives them in consideration of the discharge of that Commission which he
undertook? And these gifts are the means, by which the Gospel convicteth the
World, and takes effect in it.

The same appears by the conquest of Christ's Cross, and those Scriptures that
speak of it, Col. II. 15. Disarming principalities and powers, he made an open
show of them, triumphing over them through it; To wit his Cross; to which he
had said just before, that he nailed the decrees of the Law that were against
us. Heb. II. 14. Seeing then that Sons partake of flesh and blood, he also
likewise did partake of the same, that, by death he might destroy him that had
the power of death, even the devil, and free as many, as through fear of death,
were, all their life long subject unto bondage. 1 Cor. XV. 54-57. When this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality, then
shall that come to pass which is written; death is swallowed up in victory.
Death where is thy sting? Hell where is thy victory? The sting of death is
sin; and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be to the Lord, which
gives us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. How does God grant victory by
our Lord Jesus Christ? are we not, and he, several persons by nature? the
conflicts several? what does this conquest contribute to ours, but by inabling
us to overcome? How that, but by the help of God, granted in consideration of
it? How are slaves to the fear of death freed from death, by Christ's death, but
because there is no condemnation for them that live by the Spirit of life,
granted them in consideration of his death? And, what is the triumph of the
Cross over the powers of darkness but this, that, by the means of it, they
are disabled to keep mankind prisoners as before? And wherein consists the
condemning or the executing of sin in the flesh which S. Paul spoke of before,
but in this, that, by the death of Christ, we are enabled to put it to death?
The Parable of our Savior is manifest in this, that, as the branches bear
fruit by being in the vine, that is of it, so Christians by being in Christ,
John XV. 1-8, and that force by virtue whereof they bear it, not being conveyed
but by Gods appointment, why God had appointed the merits and sufferings of
Christ to go before this conveyance, but to procure it, is not reasonable.
Therefore our Lord John VIII. 31, 36. If ye abide in my word, ye shall be my
disciples indeed, and shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.
And again; Verily verily I say unto you, that every man that sins is a
slave to sin. Now the slave abides not for ever in the house, but the Son
for ever. If therefore the Son set you free you shall be free inde^d. The
Son of God sets free the slaves of sin, not as the Sons of men, by the
death of their Fathers, becoming heirs, and granting freedom to whom they
please; but by dying himself, and by his death helping them to their freedom.
And S. Paul, 1 Cor. II. 14. The natural man admits not the things of Gods
Spirit, for they are folly to him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. To wit, by that Spirit, which Christ purchased the gift
of, by his Cross. And, why should the Soul of man take that for folly, which
Gods Spirit reveals, were there not a principle bred in our nature, to
determine all men's inclinations to this general resistance? Again, the same
S. Paul, teaching them not to think of themselves what the word of God allows
not. 1 Cor. IV. 7. For who distinguishes thee? Or what have thou that thou
have not received? But, if thou have received it, why boastest thou, as if thou
had not received it? Here, if it be said, that the speech is of the office of
Apostles, and the like, and the graces requisite to the discharge of them,
which are graces tending to the common benefit of the Church, not to the
salvation of those particular persons to whom they are given; The answer is
evident, that S. Paul speaks not of those graces, but of the right use of
them, as it appears by the beginning of the Chapter; So let a man account us,
as ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. Now in stewards
it is required that a man be found faithful. And this fidelity it is, in which
the Apostle appeals to God, and wishes them not to judge before God, nor, to
think of themselves above what is written, because, as they have it not but
from God, and therefore not to boast of; So they have it not to the purpose,
but, when God discerns and allows it to be in them.

And if it be said, that it is manifest indeed, by innumerable passages of the
Apostles (of which diverse have been produced before) that the holy Ghost is
granted to those that truly believe, to dwell with them, and to enable them to
perform what they have undertaken in professing themselves Christians, And,
before that, the holy Ghost is granted indeed, to those who preach the Gospel,
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, and the like, to enable them to convince the
World, that the Gospel which they preach comes from God, and that it is to be
embraced; But that it is not the holy Ghost, but their own free choice that
determines them to adhere to that, which the holy Ghost, convinces them that
they ought to adhere to; I say, for the present, it is enough for me to show,
by the Scriptures, that, the conviction which the Gospel tenders is from the
holy Ghost, the Gift whereof, the obedience of our Lord Christ has purchased.
There will follow enough to show, that the effect of this conviction, to wit,
conversion, is from the same grace. In the mean time, mark why our Lord
challenges the Pharisees and Scribes, of the sin against the holy Ghost,
Mark III. 28, 29. All sins shall be forgiven the sons of men, and
blasphemies wherewith they shall blaspheme: But whosoever shall blaspheme against
the holy Ghost has no forgiveness, for ever, but is guilty of everlasting
judgment. Because they said, He has an unclean Spirit. Where, not to dispute
at present* why the blasphemies against the holy Ghost, cannot be remitted,
when all other sins are; I challenge this to be evident in the words of the
Gospel, that their blasphemy against the holy Ghost consisted in this that,
though convicted that they were Gods works which our Savior did, yet they
said, that he did them by the devil. I acknowledge it is the same crime, when
they who have tasted the heavenly gift, and are become partakers of the holy
Ghost, and have relished the good Word of God, and the powers of the World to
come, do fall away. Heb. VI. 4, 15. But with this difference, that these are
convict by their profession, the other only by their conscience: God only
knowing that hardness of heart, wherewith they resisted that conviction, which
the holy Ghost in our Lord Christ tendered; These by professing themselves
Christians (who are promised the holy Ghost to dwell in them if their
profession be sincere) acknowledging, that they transgress the dictate of it.
Hereupon S. Stephen, speaking by the holy Ghost, and doing signs and miracles,
to convince the Jews, that so he did, Acts VI. 8, 10. justly charges them Acts
VII. 51. Y^ stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, ye do always
resist the holy Ghost, even ye, as your Fathers. And therefore, our Savior
having said in one place Ap^c. III. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock;
If a man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with
him, and he with me; In another; John XIV. 23. If a man love me, he will keep
my Word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make abode
with him; as it cannot be denied, that the holy Ghost, and in him the Father
and the Son, dwell in him that loves Christ; no more can it be denied, that
Christ knockes at the door of the hearts of them that give him entrance, to
make them so to love him, that he takes up his lodging in their hearts.

Add we now to the premises, the words of our Lord in the parable of the Vine,
John XV. 5. Without me ye can do nothing. The words of the Apostle 2 Cor. III.
4, 5, 6. We have this confidence toward God, not that we are sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God, who
has also made us sufficient ministe^s of the New Testament, not the Leter but
the Spirit. Remembering what I said before, that this extends not only to the
grace of an Apostle, but to the right use of it. Of which right use the same
Apostle 1 Cor. XV. 10. By the Grace of God I am what I am, and his grace
toward me was not in vain, but I labored more then* they all, yet not I, but
the grace of God that was with me And again, of the whole business Phil. II.
11. 12. Wherefore my beloved, work out your salvation with fear and trembling:
For it is God that works in you both to will and to do; To wit, by the holy
Ghost which Christ sends, and his influence, from the beginning to the end of
the work of Christianity. And Ephesians. II. 8, 9. 10. For by grace ye are saved,
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is Gods gift, not of works that
no man may boast: For we are his making, created by Jesus Christ for good
works, which God has prepared before for us to walk in. By the grace of the
holy Ghost; which we receive upon becoming Christians, not by the works of the
Law; (though, it be also the same grace that makes us Christians) by this grace
are we saved. Therefore S. Paul again, Phil. I. 6. Having this very
confidence, that he who has begun a good work in you will complete it unto the
day of Christ Jesus. And our Lord. John VI. 37, 44* Whatsoever my Father gives
me, shall come to me. And; No man can come to me unless my Father that sent me
draw him. And the Apostle, 1 John VI. 19. We love him because he loved us
first. Heb. XII. 2. Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of lights, with whom is no change or shadow of turning. Gal.
VI. 3. If any man think himself something, being nothing, he deceives himself.
Heb. XIII. 22. God make you of one mind in every good work to do his will,
working in you that which is acceptable before him through Jesus Christ. To
wit, by the means of his Spirit. 2 Timothy ^. 9, 10. It is God that has saved
us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but his ow^
purpose, and grace given us through Christ Jesus, before eternal times, but
now manifested by the appearance of our Savior Jesus Christ, having abolished
death, but shined forth life and incorruption by the Gospel. The abolishing of
death and the declaration of eternal life, wherein the calling of men to
Christianity consists, together with the saving of us, which is effected by
means of the Son; how these things come by Christ, we learn from his words,
John XII. 24, 31, 32, 33. Verily verily I say unto you; If a grain of wheat
fall not into the earth and die, it remains alone: But if it die it bears
much fruit. And; Now is the judgment of this world; Now shall the prince of
this world be cast forth: And I, when I am lifted u^ from the earth will draw
all men to me. This he said signifying what death he should die; But, signifying
also, what should be the force and effect of that death. Then those Scriptures,
which make charity to be the gift of God and of the holy Ghost. John IV. 7.
Romans V. 5. 1 Cor. XII. 31. XIII. 1. Gal. V. 22. which holy Ghost our Lord
Christ by his death has obtained for us, as before.

Unto all which I will add, in the last place, those which speak of the
predestination of God, as it signifies no more then the preparation of that
grace from everlasting, whereby we are saved in time. S. Paul indeed, when he
excludes the presumption which the Jews had of being saved by the Law, as the
Fathers, they thought, were; distinguishing between the seed of Abraham
according to the flesh, and according to promise Romans IX. 6-13. (which promise
he supposes to be the forerunner of Christ's Gospel) Manifestly declares no
more, then the question which he is there engaged in requires him to declare:
To wit, that they were not saved by virtue of the Law, but by virtue of that
Grace which now the Gospel openly tendereth. So that, Israel and Esau, holding
the figure of the Jews, (that expected to be saved by the works of the Law)
Isaac and Jacob consequently answer the Christians, who expect salvation, not
by their birth, but by Gods promise, not by works, but by him that calls; To
wit, to the said promise. Whereby it appears, that the words of the Prophet
which he alleges; Jacob have I loved and Esau have I hated; signify no more,
according to the spiritual sense of the Old Testament which the New Testament
yeildeth, but; the accepting of the Church in stead of the Synagogue, of the
Christians in stead of the Jews: And, that this is the purpose of God according
to choice; which S. Paul speaks of immediately before; In as much as God
purposed, from the beginning, (when first he took the seed of Abraham from
among the Nations, to place his name among them) that his choice ones, of
Isaacs posterity as well as Abraham's, should be those that bore the figure of
the Christian Church promised before, and born upon the promise that they should
be beloved. All this being granted (which I count most true and undeniable)
notwithstanding, the purpose of God according to choice, as it expresses a
declaration of receiving the Church in stead of the Synagogue; so it implies,
and presupposes a purpose of God, to make and to build Christ's mystical body,
which is the Church; upon which purpose of God, all those prophesies are
grounded, whereby God foretells of his new people Israel according to the
Spirit, which Christians know to be those children, which he raised up to
Abraham out of the stones. For, we cannot think so slightly of Gods providence,
that, by foretelling this secret, he obliges himself, only to find sufficient
means to convert men to Christianity; But also, those which should take
effect, and bring to pass the conversion of the World to Christianity, by the
Gospel of Christ. Seeing then, that the Church is nothing but the souls whereof
it consists, and that the foreknowing and the foretelling of the Church,
which Christians believe to be fulfilled, consists in foreknowing and
foretelling the conversion of those persons who have constituted and shall
constitute the number of believers, from the preaching of Christianity til the
worlds end; It follows, that this purpose of God, according to election, can
no way stand without an intent of God, to bring the said election (that is,
this multitude of Gods choice ones) to Christianity, whether by the preaching
of the Gospel, or, by the helps which depend thereupon, as it depends upon
Christ's death. And this is most manifest, by S. Paul's answer to an objection,
which follows upon his conclusion of this point; That, if God has mercy upon
whom he pleases, and pardons whom he pleases, he has no cause to complain of
any man, (to wit of the Jews who believe not) because no man can resist his
will; That is to say; because he is able to convert them if he please. Which
inference S. Paul (not denying that God could convert the unbelieving Jews if
he pleased) thus avoideth. Nay, O man, who art thou that disputest with God?
shall the pot say to the potter; Why have thou made me thus? and before; What
shall we say then? Is there injustice with God? God forbid. For he says to
Moses, I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on
whom I compassionate. So, it is not in the willing, nor in the running, but in
God that shows mercy. Rom IX. 18, 19, 20. 15, 16. Where it is plain, that S.
Paul, no way denies the truth of the assumption That God may, if he please,
employ such means, as shall make any man a Christian: How he avoides the
consequence is another matter, and not belonging to this dispute; inasmuch as
it is manifest to all that understand learning, that it is one thing to prove a
truth, another to clear the objections that ly against it. That I shall
endeavor to do, before I leave the business: In this, I shall think thus much
evidenced by the premises; that God, who knew (from the beginning of the
sending of Christ, and inabling his Apostles, and their successors of the
Church to convict the world of it) who should obey the Gospel and who not, did
so order the means, by which this obedience was effected or not, that he might
know, that it would or would not come to pass. And, this preaching of the
Gospel, and the means and consequence of it, being granted in consideration of
Christ* that, the reason why such means was requisite, is to be drawn from the
fall of Adam, and the corruption of man's nature by it. And, to this sense seem
the words of our Lord to belong, John X. 28, 29. I give my sheep eternal life,
nor shall they ever perish, nor any man snatch them out of my hand: My Father
who gave me them is greatest of all, nor can any man snatch them out of my
Fathers hand. Although, it seems, that he inlargeth the same sense to another
effect, John XVII. 6.-12. I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou
gave me out of the world: Thine they were, and me thou gave them, and they
have kept thy Word. Now know they, that, whatsoever thou gave me is from
thee. For, the words that thou gave me have I given them, and they have
received them, and know of a truth, that I am come forth from thee, and thou
have sent me. I ask for them, I ask not for the world, but for those that thou
have given me, for they are thine. And, all mine are thine, and thine mine, and
I am glorified in them. And I am no more in the world, but they are in the
world, and I come to thee. Holy Father keep them in thy Name whom thou have
given me, that they may be one as we. When I was with them in the World I kept
them in thy name: These whom ^hou gave me I kept, nor is any of them lost but
the Son of perdition, that the Scripture may be fulfilled. For afterward it is
said, that our Lord spoke to those that apprehended him, to let his disciples
go; That the word which he had said might be fulfilled, I have lost none of
those whom thou gave me, John XVIII. 9. But all this will not serve to make
us believe, that his then disciples alone were the men that the Father gave to
Christ, he having said expressly afterward, John XVII. 20. I ask not for these
alone, but for those that shall believe in me through their word. For this
shows, that he prays for his then disciples, in the common quality of
disciples, that is of Christians, having other prayers to make for the world,
that is, for those that were not: As we see by and by John XVII. 21. and Luke
XXIII. 34. But, in that he says so often, that the Father had given them him,
from whose appointment, the sufferings of Christ, the power which he is
advanced to, the success of the Gospel which he publishes, depends; In that
regard, I conceive the helps of Gods grace by the second Adam, whereby the
breach made by the first is repaired, necessarily to be implied, in Gods giving
unto our Lord Christ his disciples. And of this sense, much there is expressed
by S. Paul Ephesians. I. 3. 11. Blessed God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavens
through Christ: As he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy and blameless before him in love. Having foreappointed us to
adoption to himself, through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of
his will: To the praise of his glorious grace, whereby he made us acceptable in
the beloved: Through whom we have redemption by his blood, even the remission
of ^^nnes, according to the riches of his grace, which has abounded to us in
all wisdom and prudence; Having made known to us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in himself, at the
dispensation of the fulness of times, to restore all things, both in heaven
and in earth, through Christ, in whom also we have received our lots, appoin^ed
according to the purpose of him that effects all things according to the
counsel of his will. For, not to insist upon the force of those terms and
phrases, which Saint Paul uses, whatsoever blessings, it may be said S. Paul
hereby signifies, to have been appointed to the Ephesians from everlasting as
Christians; I suppose, it cannot be denied, that he presupposes, that they were
also appointed from everlasting to be Christians, to whom by so being, those
blessings, should become due. And all this so many times, and so manifestly
said to have been appointed in Christ, or by Christ, or through Christ, that it
cannot be questioned, that not only the Gospel, by which they were brought to
that estate, but also the means that enforce it, and the consequences whereby
it takes effect, all depend upon Christ, and the consideration of his coming,
to destroy the works of the devil in our first parents.

CHAP. XIX. Evidences of the same in the Old Testament; Of Gods help in getting
the Land of Promise, and renewing the Covenant: And that for Christ's sake. That
Christianity cannot stand without acknowledging the grace of Christ. The
Tradition of the Church; In the Baptism of Infants: In the Prayers of the
Church; In the decrees against Pelagius and other records of the Church.
IT remains now, that I show, how the same truth is signified to us in the
Old Testament, whereof I will point out three sorts of passages, tending to
prove it, and when they are put together, making full evidence of it. The first
is of those, wherein it is acknowledged, that the inheritance of the Land of
Promise, is not to be ascribed to any merit or force of their own, but to the
goodness and assistance of God: Then which nothing can be produced out of the
New Testament more effectual, to show, that, whatsoever tends to bring
Christians to the kingdom of heaven is to be ascribed to the grace of God;
There being the same correspondence, between the helps of spiritual Grace,
whereby Christians overcome their spiritual enemies, and the help of God
whereby the Israelites overcame the seven nations, as between the kingdom of
heaven and the land of Promise: And therefore, all those promises whereby God
assures them of deliverance from their enemies, and maintenance in the
possession thereof, all acknowledgements of Gods free gift whereby they held
that inheritance, argue no less concerning those helps, whereby the children
of the Church (answering to the land of Canaan here) are enabled to continue
true spiritual members thereof, and to attain the land of promise that is
above. I shall not need to produce many particulars of this nature, whereof all
the Old Testament affords good store: That of Moses, Deuteronomy. IX. 3-8. I must
not forget; where, assuring them of God to go along with them, he warns them,
not to ascribe that favor to their one righteousness, (though he
acknowledges that God imployes them to punish the seven nations) but to his
covenant with their Fathers. And, that God enabled them to cast out those
Nations, which were greater and stronger then themselves, it is oftentimes said
there, Deuteronomy. IV. 37, 38. VII. 1. IX. 1. XI. 23. And this David sets forth,
Psalm XLIV. as the ground of the prayer which he makes, that God would show
them the like grace in their present distress, which is the whole business of
the same. And the like you may see Psalm CXLIV. and in many other Psalms, if
the very story of their coming out of Egypt were not evidence beyond all
evidence for this.

But there is besides, in the Old Testament, another sort of sayings, and
sentences, of prayers, and promises, and thanksgivings, whereby the inward and
spiritual obedience and worship of God, (which the Law of Moses covertly
intimates, though expressly it do not covenant for it, as I have showed) is
either on man's part acknowledged to the grace of God, or, on Gods part promised
to men that are qualified for it at that time, under the Law, correspondently
to those dispositions, which qualify us, under the Gospel, for the like
promises. And to say truth, in these intimations, of the worship and service of
God in Spirit and truth, required, assisted, or rewarded in the Old Testament,
lies the effect and truth of that which has been so often said, that the New
testament is contained, though darkly, in it; And those who by the light of
that time were reduced under this obedience, are the men whom S. Augustine
speaks of diverse times, that though they lived under the Old Testament, yet
they belonged to the New: And Eusebius, and diverse of the Fathers besides, when
they insist upon this against the Jews, that Christianity is more ancient then
the Law of Moses. It is neither possible nor requisite, to repeat here all of
this nature, that is found in the Old Testament; Some thing for an essay I
shall produce, that the reader may know by them, what passages of the Old
Testament they are upon which I understand this point of Christianity to be
grounded. I cannot name any thing more eminent then that promise of God by the
Prophet Jeremy XXXI. 31-34. (which the Apostle has expounded of the times of
the Gospel, Heb. VIII. 8 --. but, by the rule before laid and grounded, must
have been fulfilled in the return of the people from the Captivity, though more
perfectly, and in a higher sense, in the redemption from sin) whereby God
promises to make a new Covenant with them, (which is no more then the renewing
of the Old) under which they should not need to be taught to know God, because
they should have his Law written in their hearts; as of a Truth we know they
did not fall away any more unto Idols. The like Promises you have Jer. XXXII.
37-41. XXXI. 1, 2, 3. Isa. II. 1-4. Micah IV. 1-5. Ezekiel. XVI. 60. XI. 17-21.
XXXVI. 21-29. And the fulfilling of them, at least in part, and according to
the measure of that time, in the renewing of the Covenant Neh. X. I must write
out a great part of the book of Psalms, if I would repeat here, the many
prayers and praises of God, which are tendered in it, not only for the
temporal estate of David, and the maintenance of it, against the enemies of
his title to the kingdom; but for the grace, whereby he, and every good
Christian, is either enlightened in the knowledge of Gods Law (to wit, according
to the inward and spiritual intent of it) or guided in it, and enabled to keep
it. The CXIX. alone may serve for the rest. But you read besides every where,
Mine eyes are ever looking to the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of the
net. The Lord orders a good man's going, and makes his way acceptable to
himself. Thy loving kindness shall follow me all the days of my life. And,
much more to the same purpose, the prayer of David at the consecrating of his
and the Princes goods, to the building of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. XXIX. 15-20. For
he thanks God, not only for the gold and silver which they had to bestow, but
for the good heart they bestowed it with: And prays, not only, that Solomon
might build it, but that he might live in obedience to Gods Law.

In the third place, there are some Prophesies concerning the Messiah,
intimating, the kingdom which God designed for him to stand upon his obedience
tendered to God; which is as much, to them that believe this kingdom to consist
in the spiritual obedience which Christians render his Gospel, as, that the
helps which enable them to render this obedience are granted in consideration
of his. Psalm. XLV. 8. Thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity,
therefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows. The anointing of Christ, is his advancement; therefore the oil of
gladness, which he is anointed with, contains those graces which he is
enabled to bestow upon it: The sword which he girds upon his thigh, the
prosperous course in which he rides on, the sharpness of his arrows, entering
into the bowels of his enemies, and the subduing them to him, (which are the
means by which he reigns over those to whom God has anointed him King) must
be imputed to that obedience, for which he is anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows. The like is to be said of the conquest of Christ,
and the conflict whereby it is obtained, Psalm. CX. The Lord said to my Lord,
sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool here is
Christ anointed. But, when it follows by and by; He shall judge among the
Gentiles, he shall fill all with corpses, he shall wound the head over a great
land: He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up the
head; It must needs be understood, that he fights Gods batta^les in all this,
and that therefore he is exalted to the right hand of God, till his enemies be
made his footstool. But there is nothing more manifest then that of Isa. LI^^.
10* 11, 13. When thou shall make him a trespass offering, he shall see a seed,
he shall prolong his days, and the good pleasure of the Lord shall prosper
under his h^nd. He shall see and be satisfied of the travail of his soul, by
his knowledge shall my righteous servant make many righteous: For he shall bear
their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a share among the great ones, and
he shall part the spoil with the strong: Because he poured forth his soul to
death, and was numbered among rebels, and bare the sins of many, and made
intercession for the rebels. This, as it is the clearest Prophecy of the
Cross of Christ in all the O^d Testament, so* it speaks most expressly of the
Christian Church to be raised and gathered, in consideration of the sufferings
of Christ, and the help of that grace, which, they have purchased at Gods
hands, that he should give. And, they who believe all the deliverances of Gods
ancient people to have been figures hereof, and read their bringing out of
Egypt into the land of Promise, and the maintenance of them in the inheritance
thereof (notwithstanding their enemies, yea, notwithstanding their frequent
transgressing of it) imputed to the Covenant with their Fathers; (believing
with S. Paul, that all Gods promises are yea and amen in Christ) they cannot,
consequently, make doubt to believe, not only that they are spiritually made
good to Christians, but also were spi^itually made good to them who lived the
life of Christians, under the faith of Christ to come, during the Law, in
consideration of his merits and sufferings. And therefore, it is not for
nothing that I insist upon this; that, not only the giving of the Law, but the
ambassages by which God dealt with the Fathers and Prophets of old time, were
performed by the same Word of God, which afterward becoming incarnate, is now
our Lord Christ, assuming for the time, the ministry of an Angel, that
represented and bore the person of God in the likeness of man; As prefaces and
preludes to his coming in our flesh not to leave it any more. For if it pleased
God to use this ministry in order to that, which was to purchase of him that
grace which should build the Church; is it marvail, if in consideration of his
Son, by whom this intercourse between God and man was managed, he should
grant those helps at that time, which, (by the means of that knowledge which
that intercourse maintained) were effectual to reduce them to that spiritual
obedience to God, which made them friends to God at that time? And therefore I
marvel not, that the ancient Church, according to that which I said before,
should make use of those books which now we call Apocrypha, for the
instruction of those whom by the name of Catechumeni they prepared for
baptism. For, in as much as we have in them those express testimonies, which
I have quoted, of the Wisdom of God dealing with mank^nd, from the fall of
Adam, to reduce them to the knowledge of God, and to maintain them in it;
insomuch it affords a necessary instruction to inform all that desire to be
Christians, by what means the world was saved before and after the Law, and yet
no salvation but by Christianity; Which they that neglect, will sooner betray
the cause of our common Christianity, then give a good account of so great a
difficulty: The Socinians for certain will want footing against the Jews,
either in showing how the Fathers were saved, or, why they are rejected.

It remains that I give a reason, why the position of Socinus, or of
Pelagius, in denying the grace of Christ as the cure of Original sin, is not
consistent with the grounds of Christianity; which is to say, that the account
which they are able to give, for the coming of our Lord Christ, is not
sufficient not reasonable, because they deny this grace. Socinus liberally
grants the grace of God in sending Christ to publish his Gospel, and to
assure all mankind, that he is ready to pardon the sins of all that receive
it, and to give them eternal life, living here as Christians undertake to do:
That, having provided, that our Lord Christ should be born of a Virgin by the
holy Ghost, of his free grace he has exalted him to the power and honor of
God under himself, thereby, both rewarding his undertaking and performing this
embassage above merit, and assuring us both of the truth of the Gospel, and of
the performance of it, to them that live conformable to Christ's Cross; who
have a man of our own kind, endowed with Gods own power, to deliver us from all
enemies, of our own free will believing his Gospel so tendered, and living as
it requires. But in all this, neither he nor Pelagius (who, as I said in the
beginning, as freely acknowledges that grace of God which consists in giving
the Gospel, besides that free will which we come into the world with) tenders
us any account at all, how it comes to pass that all mankind i^ become enemy
to God, and subject to his wrath; Which, until it be supposed to be true,
there is no cause, why the Apostles and the Church after them, should invite
the world, to undertake so much hardship as Christianity imports; And
therefore S. Paul has had care to set it forth, as the ground of Christianity,
in the beginning of his Epistle to the Romans. For it will not serve the turn
to have recourse to the examples of their predecessors, and the nature of man
apt to imitate them, as a sufficient reason hereof; seeing this reason can go
no higher then Adam, and that there is evidence, that, through the grace of
God, good examples of his posterity, such as walked with God, (if not of
himself, as the book of Wisdom affirms, X. 1. and we have no cause to doubt)
were performed before the eyes of them, who, notwithstanding, imitated the
apostasy which he disclaimed. How then shall we imagine, supposing a good and
an evil branch in his posterity, that the bad example should so be followed,
that all the world should run after strange Gods; Only a few Fathers, by
that intercourse which God granted them of grace, and the doctrine which came
from their Fathers (but to their Fathers by grace) being preserved entire to
God? How comes the same to pass after the flood, in the posterity of so just a
man as Noe, after such a horrible warning as the deluge? Had the light of
reason been such, in discerning the difference between good and bad, as the Law
of Nature, and, by consequence, the state of man's creation requires; had man's
inclination been without any bias contrary to that which the light of reason*
such as it is, shows, how could this have been? How comes it to pass, that
the excellence of man's nature, and the reason that he is endowed with, serves
for a reproach to all mankind, that now follows it? That those who see the
difference of good and bad, when they are alone without witness, when they are
under public engagements, commit those oppressions upon men, whereof they have
no example even from beasts? Does not all the learning, all the experience of
the world thus far give testimony to Christianity; and shall we think fit, to
advantage our selves upon this plea, against those that are not Christians, and
straight to deny the consequence of it to Christians? Especially, having the
fall of Adam, so evident a beginning of it, set forth by Moses, and the coming
of Christ by S. Paul for the cure of it* Thus far then we plead from the
motives of our common faith. But, when we come to measure the grace of Christ,
which is the cure, by the person of Christ; I suppose I have right to demand
for true, that which I have proved, that he is God and man, not by grace, no^
by reward, but by birth: And, give notice to Pelagius, that Socinus, in a more
cunning age of disputing, found it requisite for the maintenance of no
necessity of grace, because no original sin, to deny Christ to be God
incarnate; that so, the grace of God, which the Covenant of Grace pretends,
may consist in Gods sending it, not in Christ's purchasing those helps whereby
it is received and observed. Which, had Pelagius seen how consequent it is to
his saying, he who held the true faith of the holy Trinity would, probably,
never have proceeded to deny the grace of Christ. For, would they have the Son
of God born into the world and suffer death upon the Cross, on purpose to
testify the Gospel to be Gods message? As if the Law had not been received
before without it, being recommended by such miraculous works of God, that the
Jews think, there cannot be the like motives to believe, that it is abrogated
by Christianity. Be their belief false, sure we are, Gods arm was not
shortened, to have no means in store to verify his Gospel, but the death of his
Son, that he might rise again to witness it. For, that it should be done,
to assure them, who are persuaded that the Gospel is Gods message, of the
performance thereof on Gods part, is rather a blasphemy then a reason; In as
much as he who doubts, whether God will perform what he doubts not that he has
tied himself to by Covenant, believes not God to be God. And, that we should be
better assured of Christ's protection, because God has freely bestowed upon him
the honor and power of God, then, because he brought it in time into our
flesh, which he had from everlasting, is a reason which no man can comprehend
to be reasonable. For, whatsoever Grace comes to us by Christ, the more
originally and inseparably that it belongs to him, the better it is assured
upon us. But, one thing I demand of Pelagius as well as of Socinus. For, as
Socinus expressly grants the habitual grace of the holy Ghost, to true
Christians, as necessary to enable them in performing what they undertake by
their Christianity; so I suppose Pelagius, had the question been put to him,
would not have refused it. I demand then, whether a man in reason, be more able
to do the office of a Christian, having undertaken it, or to undertake it, to
wit sincerely, while he is free from the engagement of it. That is, whether a
man's will be able inwardly to resolve, without any help of Gods Spirit, to do
that, which, without the help of Gods Spirit he cannot perform. I suppose, the
inward act, according to all Divines and Philosophers amounts to one and the
same in esteem, with the outward, and the beginning most difficult of all, when
the proposition of Christianity is most strange. For, a resolution upon mature
debate of reason, as in such a case, and, an engagement upon profession
thereof, is a means powerful enough, to carry a man to undergo as much
hardship as Christianity requires, in a thing neither profitable nor pleasant.
If therefore, to the performance of Christianity the assistance of Gods Spirit
is requisite, then, because our nature is averse, then, much more to resolve us
to it. Whereby it appears, that the same gift of the holy Ghost, which, being
purchased by the obedience of Christ, enabled the Apostles to do those things,
and say those words, by which the world stands convict of the necessity of
Christianity; the same it is that effects the conviction of those who embrace
it, and dwelling with them, inables them to live in it, according to the
promise of God to his ancient people Esaias LVIII. 20. And as for me, this is my
Covenant with them, says the Lord; My Spirit which is upon thee, and my words
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor thy seeds
mouth, nor thy seeds seeds mouth from this time for evermore.

With the like brevity will I plead the Tradition of the Church, concerning the
Grace of Christ, evidencing the same by three particulars: The first whereof
shall be of the Baptism of Infants; which as there can be no reason for,
u^lesse we believe original sin; So, I do challenge, that it could not have
come to be a Law to the Church, had not the Faith of the Church, from the
Apostles time supposed original sin: First, negatively, from the proceeding
of Pelagius; He first a Monk in Britain, and traveling thence along to Rome,
afterward, either by himself or by his agent Coelestius, to Constantinople,
and Carthage, through Asia the less and Afric, the East, Egypt and
Palestine, and not finding in all this vast compass, any Church, in which it
had not been accustomed to baptize infants; shall any man be now so mad as to
imagine, that this can be discovered, to have been taken up upon misprision or
abuse, the custom of the Church, having been otherwise before? It is time that
the minds of men, that are possessed of their senses, should be employed about
things within the compass of reason; and not to persuade themselves, that they
see what cannot be, because they cannot answer all arguments, that may be made
against that which is, and is to be seen. Could Pelagius have found any footing
to deny it, he was not such an Idiot, as to suffer himself, at every turn, to
be choked by the Catholics, objecting the baptism of Infants, every where
received in the Church; who might easily have put them to silence, by saying it
was not an original Catholic practice of the whole Church, but the mistake
that of some men, which had prevailed by faction, in some times and parts of
the Church; as I pretend, hereby, to maintain the Reformation against the
present Church of Rome. Since that ingenious and learned heretic, nor any of
his accomplices, has been found to use this plea; all men, that intend not to
renounce their common sense, will justify me, if I challenge positively S.
Austines Rule, in a particular of such moment as this is: That, seeing it is
manifest, that it was a law to the whole Church, that Infants should be
Baptized; and that there can be assigned no original of it, from any express
act of the Church, in Council or otherwise, it is thereby evident, that it
comes from the order of the Apostles. The reason is, the unity of the Church,
the principle upon which all this proceeds; whereby it appears that it is
utterly impossible, that a point of such importance to Christianity could have
been admitted over all the world where Christians were, without any opposition
or faction to overcome the same, had it not from the beginning, been
acknowledged to proceed from the common principle from which all
Ecclesiastical Law is derived; to wit, from the authority of our Lords
Apostles, the founders of the Church. It is not my intent hereby to say, that
the Apostles order was that all should be baptized Infants, whose parents were
Christians before: Against which I find reasons alleged, in Tertullianes book
de Baptismo, which I cannot deny to be considerable: But, that no infant should
go out of the World unbaptized; that is it, which, the great solicitude of
Christians, that no such thing should come to pass, the provision that a Lay
man might baptize in case of necessity, which admitted not the solemnity of
ministers of the Church, the grief and astonishment which followed, if at any
time it came to pass, will enable me, not only to affirm, but to infer,
both the reason of original sin, which the baptism of Infants cures, and
the authority of the Apostles, which it proclaims.

It may be said, that Pelagius himself allowed and maintained the Baptism of
Infants, to bring them to the kingdom of heaven, not to everlasting life. But
this was but to make his own cause the more desperate. For, had any intimation
of the Scripture, any Tradition or custom of the Church justified any ground
of difference, between the kingdom of heaven and everlasting life, he might
have escaped by pleading it. But being disowned in it, he has left a desperate
plea for those that come after him, to question the Baptism of Infants, and by
consequence original sin; which if he, so many hundred years ago, could have
found ground for, he need not have stood in the list of heretics. The visible
ceremonies of Baptism, which are so resolutely pleaded by his adversaries for
evidence of the same are effectual to the same purpose. For, if it was thought
requisite, on behalf of infants, to renounce Satan and all his Pomp, and
angels, and instruments of this world, adhering to God; I^ it were solemn, by
huffing and exorcizing, to use the power which God has given his Church over
unclean Spirits, for the chasing of them out of Infants that were baptized;
Certainly, those that did, it were so far from thinking, that man as he is
born, can be capable of that good Spirit which Baptism promises, that they
thought him to be liable to the contrary. To this argument I will add the
matter of that catechizing, which the ancient Church prepared those for Baptism
who pretended to it, as I begun to show you in the first book; for it is in a
great part repeated in diverse of these ancient forms of celebrating the
Eucharist, which are yet extant under the names of the Liturgies of Apostles
and Fathers, which I have named in my book of the public service of God. The
ancientest of them is that which is recorded in the Constitutions of the
Apostles, VIII. 11. But you find also there VII. 40. the order of Catechizing
those that are to be baptized, providing, that they be instructed in the mercy
of God, that suffered not mankind, being turned from him, to perish, but in all
ages provided means to recall them from sin and error to truth and
righteousness, by the Fathers first, and by the Law and Prophets afterward,
until, all this proving ineffectuall, he spared not at length to send his
Son. And the same is the argument of that Thanksgiving which is premised to
the consecration of the Eucharist, in the place quoted, as also in the same
work before II. 55. and in the Liturgies to which I refer you. An evidence, in
my opinion, very considerable, to show this point to belong to the substance of
Christianity, as the subject matter, both of that instruction which is requisite
to make a man a Christian, and of both Sacraments wherein the exercise thereof
consists.

In the second place, I allege such an evidence for the grace of Christ, as no
point of Christianity can produce better* from the practice of the Church. For
I allege the prayers of the Church, all over, and from the beginning, that
they have always contained three things; The first is, of thanksgivings for
our Christianity; that is, for the coming of Christ, the preaching of his
Gospel, and the effect thereof in converting us to be Christians: The second,
of prayers, that we may be able to persevere in that to which we are so
converted, and, to perform what we undertake by professing our selves
Christians, notwithstanding the temptations of our ghostly enemies to depart
from it. The third and last, in that, these thanks and prayers are tendered to
God in Christ, for his sake signifying the acknowledgment of his grace, in
bringing us to be Christians, and the expectation of those helps by which we
must persevere, from the consideration of his merits and suffering.

For* as for Prayers and thanksgivings in general, it cannot be said that the
offering of them can argue either the decay of our nature, or the repairing of
the same by Christ; because those that acknowledge not Christ; (Jews and
Mahumetans) must and do use them, if they pretend Religion and the service of
God, yea even Pagans according to their sense. But to pray and give thanks to
God to make men, or because he has made men Christians, or, for the helps of
salvation, which, by being Christians, that i^, by Christ we attain to, as by
him we attain to be Christians; must needs appear utterly groundless, unless
we suppose, that there was no other way left for our salvation, which cannot be
understood, by any means, but by the fall of Adam, and the consequences
thereof, to come to pass.

In the last place, I allege the decrees of the whole Church against Pelagius,
together with the consent of those parts of the Church which otherwise cannot
be understood to be concluded by those decrees. For it is manifest, there was
no decree of the whole Church against Pelagius as against Arius; The Councils
of Carthage, and of Numidia, that of Palestine, and in aftertimes that of
Orange, being but particular Councils, not containing the consent of the whole.
But this consideration, in another regard, turns to the advantage of the
Churches cause. For, when those parts of the Church, which are not obliged by
the decrees, do voluntarily and freely join in giving effect to them, (as it
is manifest, they did at that time, by the concurrence of the Bishops of
Constantinople and Alexandria, and the great Council of Ephesus, in Vossius,
Hist. Pel. I. 38, 39, 47. and do since by owning the acts done against them)
there can be no pretense of faction, to sway them to go along with those whom
they are loath to offend; but all must be imputed to the sense of that
Christianity, which hitherto they found themselves persuaded of, and therefore
agreed, not to admit to their Communion, those who acknowledged it not, which
is the effect of all such decrees of the Church. In the mean time, I forget not
the records of the Church in writing, that is, the testimonies of those
writers, who, going before Pelagius, and giving testimony against him, cannot
be thought to join in faction, to oppress any truth which he preached. And
upon this evidence, I challenge, both the belief of original sin to be
necessary to the acknowledgement of the grace of Christ, which Christianity
professes; and also, that the grace of Christ is that which inables us, to
begin, continue, and finish the good work of our Christianity; (and therefore
to every part of it) and by consequence, that this grace is not given us in
consideration of any thing that we are able to do, toward the obliging of God
to bestow it upon us.

But I will not take upon me to inflame this abridgment with rehearsal of the
testimonies of Church Writers that went before Pelagius, in both these points.
The testimonies of Fathers that went before him, which S. Augustine has
produced, are enough to put those to silence, which would have original sin to
be a devise of his. But, Vossius in his History of the Pelagians, having
comprised as well these as the rest; concerning original sin, libro 11. part
1. These. VI. and those which concern the necessity of Grace, libro III. part
I. These. I. and II. it will not be to the purpose to do any part of that which
has been sufficiently done already, over again. To me indeed it seems very
considerable, that Pelagius, acknowledging for Grace; first, free Will, and the
Law which teaches the difference between good and bad; after that, for the
Grace of Christ, his doctrine and example first, then, the illumination of the
mind by the Holy Ghost; Yet always maintained, that man, without the help of
Grace, is able to love God above all, to keep his Commandments, and resist the
greatest temptations to the contrary; And in all these points was condemned by
the Church, as you may see there, libro. III. part II. These. I-VIII. For
certainly, there is a vast difference between the doctrine of Gods Laws
(absolutely necessary to the doing of his Will, even for Adam in the state of
innocence) and the preaching of the Gospel, convincing mankind, that they are
under Gods wrath by sin, tendering pardon to them that embrace it, assuring of
everlasting life or death, according as they observe the profession of it, and
showing the way by our Lords example: All which, the Scriptures ascribe to the
coming of Christ, as granted in consideration of it. How much more, when he
grants the illumination of the Holy Ghost, to show what is to be done, must
he needs transgress his own position, which says, that there is no difference
between that state in which we are born, and that which Adam was made (saving
his example) but the difference between a man and a Babe? For, were we born as
Adam was made; what needed Christ to have purchased by his death, the gift of
the Holy Ghost to enlighten us inwardly in doing that, which without it, man is
born able to do? And, having granted, the reasons and motives upon which
Christians act as Christians, to be showed them, both outwardly and inwardly,
by the Grace of Christ; to deny the necessity of the said Grace, to the acts
which proceed from the same, can have no excuse* but one, that Christ came only
to evidence the truth of his message, leaving the embracing or rejecting of it
to every man's choice. Which to maintain, if Socinus was fain to make our Lord
Christ a mere man, that there might be no more in his rising after death, then
a miracle to assure it; Pelagius, acknwledging the Trinity, will be straightened
by S. Paul's consequence: If righteousness come by the Law, then is Christ dead
in vain; supposing the death of Christ to bring that help of Grace, which a
miracle, by evidencing the truth of the Gospel, does not. And, seeing God could
not be moved by any thing that man could do, to give our Lord Christ, and the
helps which his coming brings with it, there will be no more left for
Pelagius to say; But, that these helps are not granted of Grace, but received
by the works which men prevent it with. The foundation therefore of the
Christian Faith, consisting, in Gods-sending our Lord Christ of his pure free
grace, by virtue whereof, all the effects of it are works of the same Grace:
Necessary it was, that Pelagius should be condemned for the denying of the
necessity of Grace, to all acts of Christianity, and for affirming that Grace
is given according to man's merits, as you see there, Thesi. IX. and XI. that he
was. Both upon the doctrine of S. Paul premised before, that God was not moved
by the works either of Jews or Gentiles, to send them those helps to
salvation, which the Gospel tendreth.

Nevertheless, the preaching of the Gospel, and all the help which it brings
toward the embracing of it, is no less the Grace of Christ, because Pelagius
was forced, for the better coloring of his Heresy, to acknowledge it. Only,
it is not therefore to be said, that it is all the help which the Grace of God
by Christ furnishes, toward that salvation which Christianity tendreth: But,
to be left to further dispute, what further help is granted by God, before, and
without any consideration of man's merit, to bring to effect those acts, in
which the discharge of our Christianity consists. Excluding therefore the
pretense of Pelagius, that, Moses before the godly Fathers pleased God by the
mere strength of nature, and that salvation was to be had under the Law, by the
same; Besides the good works of the Gentiles, wherewith God was pleased,
according to Pelagius, whom the Church condemned in this Article also, as you
may see there, These. X. And truly, Pelagius, acknowledging the Gospel to be no
more then the declaration of that Will of God by which man is to be saved after
Christ, as the Law before Christ; utterly overthrows the plea of the Church
derived from the Apostles, that the Fathers were saved by faith, before and
under the Law, that the New Testament was in force under the Old, by virtue of
that commerce, which God, by his word, (which afterward being incarnate, was
our Lord Christ) held with the Fathers; His Spirit, as naturally planted in the
word, going along to procure the efficacy of it. Whereas Socinus, though he
acknowledges the difference between the literal and mystical sense of the Law,
yet, making our Lord Christ a mere man, the virtue of whose death could not
extend to the salvation of those who lived before his coming, destroys the
ground of that which he acknowledges; This supposition, that Christianity is
more ancient then Juda^sme, being necessary to the maintaining of the Church
against the Synago ue. Which is verified, by Gods designing of a Church for the
spouse of his Son, before the Fall, figured by the marriage between Adam and
Eve, according to S. Paul, Ephesians. V. 22-33. But, presently after the Fall, that
Word, which being incarnate in our Lord Christ, having declared enmity between
the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent, saying; It shall break thy
head, and thou shall bruise the heel of it; The first Adam became the figure of
the second, according to the same S. Paul, Romans V. 14. Whereupon, the Spirit of
the second Adam, in those Preachers of righteousness, to whom the Word of God
came, in that Angel whom the Fathers worshipped for God, strove form thence
forth, to recover man from the labor of sin, (to which, when he became
mortal, he was condemned) to Paradise, from whence he had been expulsed. And
therefore our Lord Christ, according to S. Peter, 1 Pet. IV. 18, 19, 20. going
out of the world, by that Spirit whereby he was made alive when he had been put
to death in the flesh, to wit, speaking in his Apostles, preached to the
Spirits in prison, that had been disobedient in the days of Noe; Converting the
Gentiles, by the gift of his Spirit granted upon his sufferings, who had
refused the same in Noe the Preacher of righteousness. 1 Pet. II. 5. When God
said, My Spirit shall no more strive with man. Gen VI. 2. For, the pilgrimage
of the Patriarchs, the Promise of the Land of Canaan, the Law given by Moses,
was all but the further limitation, and rule of that outward and civil
conversation, under which, the traffic of Christianity was then driven by
Prophets, who spoke by Gods Spirit. This Reason Socinus being obliged to
miskenne, by making our Lord Christ a mere man, cannot give that account of the
grace of Christ, before his coming, which the Church does. Acquiting thereby my
position; That the Law covenanteth expressly only for the Land of Promise, of
all suspicion of compliance with his intentions.

By this you see, that Pelagius and Socinus both are carried out of the way of
Christianity, because they will not acknowledge the decay of mankind by the
fall of Adam, and the coming of Christ to repair it. But, those of Marseilles,
and the parts adjoining in France, that formalized themselves against S.
Augustines doctrine of Predestination and effectual Grace, freely and heartily
acknowledging Original sin; seem to have justified only upon the true interest
of Christianity, in that free will, which the Covenant of Grace necessarily
supposes, though, mistaking their way, out of humane frailty, they failed of
the truth, though they parted with Pelagius. They made faith, or at least the
beginning of faith, and of will to believe, to repent, and to turn unto God,
the work of free will, in consideration whereof, God, though no way tied so to
do, grants the help of his Grace and Spirit, to perform the race of faith.
Most truly maintaining, (according to that which has been professed in the
beginning of this book) that the act of true Faith, is an act of man's free will
which God rewards with his free Grace; To wit, with the habitual gift of his
spirit, inabling true believers to go through with that Faith, which thereby
they undertake, as I have showed you both these elsewhere; Most expressly
acknowledging the preaching of the Gospel going before, in which, whatsoever
help the coming of our Lord Chirst has furnished to move and win the world
to believe, is involved: But, miskenning the grace of the Gospel granted by God
in consideration of his obedience, to make him a Church that might honor him
for it. If Pelagius acknowledged no more in the coming of Christ, then to make
his message appear to be true, so that the embracing of it might oblige God to
grant his grace, by preventing it with an act of free will complying with it:
The reason was not, because this very tender, being the purchase of our Lord
Christ's free obedience, could be subject to any merit of man; But, because he
was engaged to maintain, that we are borne in the same estate in which Adam
was made, needing nothing but Gods declaration of his will and pleasure,
toward the fulfilling of it. But, for them who acknowledge the decay of our
nature, by the fall of Adam, and the coming of our Lord to repair the breaches
of it, to ascribe the grace which God furnishes those that believe with, for
the performing of that which by believing they undertake, to the act of
freewill in believing, which themselves acknowledge to be prevented by so many
effects of Christ's coming, as the preaching of his Gospel necessarily
involveth; and which the Scriptures so openly acknowledge, to be prevented by
the Grace of his Spirit, purchased by his sufferings; must needs argue a great
deal of difficulty in the question, which, the worse divines they appear, must
needs justify them to be much the better Christians. And indeed, there is
great cause to excuse them, as far as reason will give leave, in a case
wherein the Fathers that went before Pelagius seem to be engaged with them. For
it is ordinary enough to read them exhorting, to lay out the indeavovrs of free
will, expecting the assistance of Gods Grace, to the accomplishment of that
which a man purposes. And, besides S. Augustine, who acknowledges, that* before
the contest with Pelagius, he did think faith to be the act of free will, which
God blesses with Grace to do as he professes; It cannot be denied that S.
Jerome, so great an enemy to the Pelagians, with some others, have expressed
that which amounts to it. But it is true on the other side, that the same
Fathers do frequently acknowledge the beginning, as well as the accomplishment
of our salvation, to the grace of God. Which is not only an obligation, so to
expound their sayings, when they set free will before grace, as supposing the
cure thereof begun by Grace; But also a presumption, that, those who express
not the like caution, are no otherwise to be understood: Especially, supposing
expressly, the motives of faith provided by the holy Ghost, granted in
consideration of our Lords sufferings; in virtue whereof, the resolution which
is taken for the best, must of necessity proceed, though, by the operation of
the same Spirit, whereby they are advanced and furnished. It is therefore, no
doubt, a commendable thing, to excuse the writings of that excellent person
John Casiane, so far as the common Faith will give leave, as you may see the
learned Vossius does, as speaking ambiguously, in setting grace before free
will sometimes, as well as other whiles free will before Grace. For Faustus his
book De libero arbitrio, I cannot say the same, though I must needs have that
respect for his Christian qualities which the commendations that I read of him
in Sidoius Apollinaris deserve. For, besides that the style of it is generally
such as seems to make free will the umpire between the motions of grace and of
sin, (which ascribes the ability of well doing to God, but the act to our
selves) that the Fathers under the Law of nature, were saved by free will, he
delivers expressly with Pelagius. An oversight gross enough in any man that
shall have considered, upon what terms Christianity is to be justified against
the Jews, out of the Old Testament. There is therefore appearance enough, that
the II Council of Orange, which finally decreed against the heresy of
Pelagius, was held expressly, to remove the offenses which that book had made.
And evidence enough, that the articles of it are justified by the tradition of
the whole Church. For, those prayers of the Church, that way and subject of
Catechizing which the Church tendered those who stood for Baptism, the subject
of that Thanksgiving which the Eucharist was consecrated with, do more
effectually evidence the common sense of Christians, in the matter of our common
Christianity, then the sayings of divines, being solicitous, so to maintain
the grace of God, that the free will of man, (which the interest of our common
Christianity equally obliges us justly to maintain) may suffer no prejudice.
How much more, when it is to be justified, that those sayings of divines,
expounded by other sayings of their own, and principles evidently acknowledged
by themselves, can create no other sense then the necessity of preventing
grace; might the Church be able, and obliged to proceed to those decrees?
Though, as for the persons (whom we do not find involved in any further
censure, then the mark set upon their writings by the Sea of Rome) as there is
cause to think, that respect was had to them, because their principles did not
really engage them in any contradiction to the faith of the Church; So is there
cause to think, that, being better informed in it by the treaty of that
Council, they surceased, for the future, all opposition to the decrees of it.
For the evidence of that which has been said, in the point of fact, I remit
the reader to my author so often named, with these considerations* pointing out
the consequence of each particular: His ingenuity, learning and diligence, is
such, that I have neither found my self obliged to quarrel at any thing that he
has delivered in point of historical truth, nor to seek for more then he has
laid forth.

And, by that which has been said, we presume, not that the preaching of the
Gospel is not the grace of Christ, which Pelagius acknowledged necessary to
salvation; but that the determination of the will to embrace that grace, which
the grace of the gospel tendereth, is not effected by the will alone, without
those helps of grace which are granted in consideration of Christ, though
depending upon the preaching of the Gospel, and the reasons and motives which
it tendereth, to embrace it. Here then, you see I might have made a great book,
to set for^h those things which are commonly alleged, by those that write of
the great dispute between grace and free will now on foot, to show what the
Church insisted upon, and what reasons it did proceed upon against Pelagius:
But, because there is no question made of all this, by those that deny the
consequences of it; it shall serve my turn to have pointed out the reasons of
those consequences, and now to take notice of this great dispute, which is come
in my way so cross, that it is not possible for me to void the difficulties
which I have undertaken, concerning the Covenant of Grace, without voiding of
it. For having first showed, that the condition, which the Covenant of Grace
requires, on our part* consists in an act of man's free will, to embrace and
persevere in Christianity till death; And now, that man is not able to perform
this condition without the help of Gods grace by Christ; The question is at the
height, how the act of free will depends upon Gods free grace, and a man
becomes entitled to the promise, for doing that, which, without the help of
Gods grace, he cannot do. And this the greater, because, if the help of grace
determine the free will of them that embrace and persevere in Christianity, so
to do, then it seems, the sin and damnation of those that do not so, is to be
imputed to the want of those helps, and Gods appointment, of not giving them to
those that have them not.

CHAP. XX. Wherein Original sin consists; What opinions are on foot. That
it is not Adams sin imputed to his posterity. Whether man were at the first
created to a supernatural end, or not. An estate of mere nature, but innocent,
possible. Original sin is Concupiscence. How Baptism voids it. Concerning
the late novelty in the Church of England about Original sin.
THIS inquiry must begin with the question about original sin, wherein it
consists; because thereupon depends the question of the effect and consequence
thereof, which is to say, what is the estate wherein the Gospel of Christ
overtakes the natural man. For, it is well enough known, that there is a
question yet on foot in the Church; Whether Original sin do consist in
Concupiscence, or in the want of Original righteousness, which, having been
planted in our first parents, their posterity ought to have. And whosoever
thinks there can be little difficulty in this dispute, little considers the
difficulty that S. Augustine found in satisfying the Pelagians, how
Concupiscence can be taken away by Baptism, which all Christians find to
remain in the regenerate; Seeing there can be no question made, that Original
sin is taken away by Baptism: Christianity pretending to take away all sin,
and Baptism being the solemn execution of Christianity, that is, the solemn
profession of the Christian faith. This is, evidently, the only difficulty
that drives so many of the School Doctors to have recourse, not only, to S.
Anselms devise, of the want of original righteousness, but to another more
extravagant speculation of a state of pure nature, which God might have created
man in, had he not thought more fit, of his goodness, to create him in a state
of supernatural grace; that is to say, endowed with those gifts and graces,
that might enable him, to attain that happiness of the world to come, which
is now promised to Christians. This state of pure nature they hold to be liable
to concupiscence, as the product, by consequence, of the principles of man's
nature, compounded of a material and spiritual, a mortal and immortal
substance, and originally inclined, the one to the sensual good of the body,
the other to the spiritual good of the soul here, which the eternal good of it
is consequent to, in the world to come. The nature of man, liable to this
condition, they say, was prevented by supernatural grace, as a bridle, to rule
and moderate the inclination of nature, not to come into effect so long as so
overruled; But so, that* this grace being forfeited by the rebellion of Adam,
consequently it came into effect without more ado; and that, by consequence,
original sin cannot consist in this opposition between the inclinations to
sensual and spiritual good which man has, but in the want of that grace from
whence it proceeds. This controversy, Doctor Field in his learned work of
the Church, counts to be of such consequence, that he maintains, all the
difference which the Reformation has with the Church of Rome about
Justification, free will, the merit of good works, and the fulfilling of the
Law, and the like, to be grounded upon it, so that there can be no cause of
difference supposing it to be set aside. His reason is, because the opinion of
Justification by inherent righteousness, supposes, that the reluctation of our
sensual principles, to spiritual good, can no way impeach it, as coming from
the constitution of our nature, supposing the ornaments and additions of grace
to be removed. The opinion of the fulfilling of Gods Law by Christians,
supposes, that the remains of concupiscence in the regenerate, and the
immediate effects thereof, in the first motions to sin, which cannot be
prevented, are not against Gods Law, but only besides it. From whence it will
follow, that he, who of his free will embraces Christianity, and perseveres in
the good works which it injoyneth, meriteth of justice the reward of the Life
to come. And truly, for my part, I cannot deny that all this is justly pleaded
against those that are of this opinion, and cannot by them justly be answered.
But, that this opinion is enjoined by the Church of Rome, I cannot understand,
seeing diverse learned Doctors of the Schools alleged by Doctor Field, for the
opposition which he makes to this opinion, and that very truly and justly,
showing infallibly, that the contrary opinion is allowed to be maintained in
the communion of the Church of Rome, And, that nothing has been done since the
authors whom he alleges, to make this unlawful to be* held amongst them; I
suppose it will be enough to produce the decree of the Council of Trent, since
which it is evident, that it is lawful among them to maintain, that
concupiscence is original sin. For, though the decree declares, that the
Church never understood concupiscence in the regenerate to be truly and
properly sin, but to be so called, as proceeding from sin, and inclining to
sin; Yet, in as much as it is one thing to speak of concupiscence, in the
regenerate, another in the unregenerate; and, in as much as it is one thing to
declare the sense of the Church, according to the opinion of the Synod,
another, to condemn the contrary sense as opposite to the Faith; it is
manifest, that this declaration condemns not those that hold original
concupiscence to be original sin, but only shows that they could not
answer the difficulty of original sin in the regenerate.

On the other side, it cannot be justly said, so far as I understand, that
those of the Reformation do affirm, that the grace given to Adam at his
creation was due to his nature, in this sense and to this effect, as if they
did intend to deny that he was created in such an estate, and to such a
condition of happiness, as the principles and constitution of his nature do
not necessarily require: But only this; That the gifts which by his creation
he stood endowed with, were necessary to the purchase of that happiness which
he, that is to say his nature, was created to, whereupon they are justly called
the indowments of nature.

Here I must not omit the opinion of Catharinus in the Council of Trent; That
Adam received original righteousness of God, in his own name, and the name of
his posterity, to be continued to them, he obeying God: Whereupon his
disobedience, i^, in Law, their disobedience, though in nature only his, and
the act of his transgression, imputed to them, is their original sin, as
personal as the penalties of it: No otherwise then Lev^ paid Tithes in
Abraham. Many passages of S. Augustine he had to allege for this, as also a
Text of the Prophet Osee, and another of Ecclesiasticus. But especially the
express words of S. Paul; That, by the inobedience of one man many are made
sinner^: And, That, by sin death came into the world; which surely came into
the world by the actual transgression of Gods commandment. Alleging; that Eve
found not her self naked till Adam had eaten the forbidden fruit; Nor had
original sin been, had the matter rested there. And, by this reason, he
thought he avoided a difficulty not to be overcome otherwise, how the lust of
generation can give a spiritual stain to the soul, which must needs be
carnal, if it come from the flesh. And, by this means, nothing but an action
which transgresses Gods Law shall be sin, which all men understand by that
name. This opinion, the History says, was the more plausible among the
Prelates there, as not bred Divines, but Canonists, or versed in business, and
so best relishing that which they best understood; to wit, the conceit of a
civil contract with Adam, in behalf of his posterity, as well as himself.

To give a judgment of this opinion, I shall do no more, but remit the reader
to those Scriptures which I have produced, to show that there is such a thing
as original sin; concluding, that the nature of it, wherein it consists,
must be valued by the evidence of it, whereby it appears that it is. It will
then be unavoidable, that, when death is the effect of sin, because
righteousnese is the cause of life, as Adams sin is the cause of his death,
so the death of his posterity depends upon their own unrighteousness. Why else
should Christianity free us from death, as has been showed? Why should S. Paul
complain of the Law that he found in his members, opposing the Law of
righteousness? why should the flesh fight with the Spirit, and the fruits of
the flesh be opposite to the fruits of the Spirit, but that the same opposition
of sin to righteousness is to be acknowldged in the habitual principles, as
in the actual effects which proceed from the same* As for that only text of
S. Paul, in which he could find any impression of his meaning; if the reader
observe the deduction, whereby, I have showed, that S. Paul's discourse obliged
him, to set forth the ground, whereupon, the coming of Christ and his Gospel
became necessary to the salvation both of the Jews and Gentiles; he will easily
find, that the question is, of the effective, not of the formal cause, that S.
Paul is not engaged to show wherein that source of sin which our Lord Christ
came to cure, consists, but from whence it proceeds. True it is, when the
posterity suffers loss of estate and honor for the Fathers treason, it may
properly be said, that the Fathers crime is imputed to the posterity: Not
because any reason can endure, that what is done by one man should be thought
to be done by another; but because the effect of what one man does may justly
be either granted to, or inflicted upon another, whether for the better or for
the worse. As in a civil state: suppose the Laws make treason to forfeit lands
and honors, which every man sees are held by virtue of the Laws; that
posterity, which has no right to them but from predecessors, and the
obligation which they had to maintain the state, should forfeit them by the
act of predecessors, is a thing not strange but reasonable: Though so, that the
forfeiture may transgress the bounds of reason and humanity, if the Law should
not allow posterity or kindred, to live in that state to which predecessors
have forfeited, when there is so much cause to believe, that the forfeiture may
be an instruction to them, if once they believe that it was by just Law. This
justice then, and the ground of it, is the only reason why the predecessors
fault is truly said to be imputed to his posterity. But, between God and
mankind in the forfeit of Adam, by the precept given him, there cannot be
understood any contract, by virtue whereof, posterity, that did not the act,
can be liable to the punishment of it.

And therefore we must distinguish between the imputing of one man's sin to
another formally, so as to punish a man for another man's sin, which, if he
concurred to the act, may be just, otherwise not; And effectively, in the
nature of a meritorious cause, (which reduces it self to the effective) when,
in consideration of one man's sin, another is made subject to that evil which
he should have been free from otherwise. And according to this distinction,
though the posterity of Adam is liable to much evil in consideration of his
sin, yet is not this evil properly the punishment of it, but the effect of the
same will of God in propagating mankind with the stain of concupiscence, which
takes place in maintaining understanding creatures to do all that sin, which
God might have hindered them from doing, had he not thought it better to draw
good out of evil, then utterly to prevent it. And this is no more, then the
correspondence between the first and second Adam, which S. Paul proceeds upon
Romans V. infers. For, I have showed already, that the righteousness of
Christ is not imputed to any man formally and immediately, so as to say; that
any man is justified by Gods deputing our Lord Christ, for his benefit
personally, excluding those for whom he was not deputed: And I have showed
again, that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to all Christians
effectively, and in the nature of a meritorious cause; In as much as have
showed, that those helps of grace, without which no man is able to embrace
Christianity as it is to be embraced, are granted by God in consideration of
his merits and sufferings, laid out to that purpose. And that which remains
for me to show in due place is this; That, that disposition which qualifieth
for the promises of the Gospel, being brought to pass in any man by those
helps, obliges not God, to grant those promises which the Gospel rewards it
with, by any worth in it self, but by virtue of Gods grace, in consideration of
Christ's merits and sufferings, laid out to that purpose. By which
correspondence it may appear, that those who can persuade themselves, that the
posterity of Adam are bound to answer for the sin of his fall, as their own
act, cannot stand bound to acknowledge a Christian (to whom the merits of the
sufferings of Christ are imputed upon the same terms) obliged to any condition,
upon which his right to the promises of the Gospel can depend, being once due
to him by virtue of Christ's merits and sufferings, deputed to be personally
his. As, on the contrary, those that acknowledge the merits and sufferings of
Christ to be justly imputed to the persons of those, whom he was sent to
redeem, cannot stand bound to acknowledge the posterity of the first Adam to be
liable to concupiscence by his fall; seeing the coming of Christ, for the
redemption of those, whom God thereby should please to exempt from the common
imputation thereof, would be no less effectual to the voiding of that
condemnation which it contracted, then supposing, what ever disease of our
nature, concupiscence, coming in by his fall, may signify. So that supposing,
the immediate and personal imputation of the fall of Adam to all his
posterity, of the merits and suffering of Christ to all those for whom they are
appointed; the evil which mankind suffers by the means of Adams fall, is
properly the punishment of his sin, the good which it receives by the means
of Christ's sufferings is the reward of it; nor can have any dependence upon any
act of his free will; Otherwise, then as that which God works by him, not as
that which he requires at his hands. But, supposing the meritorious imputation
of Adams fall and Christ's righteousness, the evil which his posterity lies
under by means of it, will not be properly the punishment of sin (because,
not the recompense of the evil which a man does, by the evil which he suffers)
though properly a penalty, because an evil inflicted in consideration of sin.

Now, supposing that Adam understood the precept; In the day thou eatest
thereof shall thou die the death; to condemn his posterity as well as himself;
it is manifest notwithstanding, that the obligation thereof was not by virtue
of his accepting of it, and contracting upon it, but original, by virtue of
that being which God had bestowed, and therefore taking hold of all his
posterity, on whom he meant to bestow it. Wherefore, though it is handsomely
called, by S. Augustine and others, a Covenant of God with mankind, which,
being transgressed by Adam forfeited the benefit thereof to his posterity; Yet
to speak properly, it was the mere appointment of God, in that which lay in his
power and right to appoint, that the uprightness wherein Adam was created
should descend to his posterity, he continuing in it, otherwise, the
propagation thereof should be maintained, the uprightness failing.

Nor can any man think strange, that Christianity should oblige us to believe
this, if we consider the many and strange extravagances, which those, who
either acknowledge not Christianity, or have fallen from it, do run into by
not resting in it. The Epicureans, and as some think the Peripateticks denying
Providence, the Stoics Free Will, and so the same providence. The
Pythagoreans, (whom the Platonicks are entangled with, and the ancient
Gnostics, Marcionites, and Manichees, manifestly imitate) setting up two Gods,
one, the author of evil, the other of good; the Heathen worshipping in effect
the devil, whom those Sects set up under the Name of author of evil; the Jews
and Mahumetanes, (if they have any thing to say to the original of evil in
mankind, to whose use God has commended the world) being obliged to say, that
it comes from the fall of Adam: Pelagians and Socinians not confessing what
Jews and Mahumetanes cannot deny, but not able to give any account, why the
noble creature of mankind should be so overspread with evil, coming from a good
God, and accountable for his own actions. The question thus stated, and
Christianity tendering, first, the fall of bad angels, and the seducing of Adam
by their malice, and in consequence thereunto, of the greatest part of mankind,
to the worship of evil angels by whom they were seduced; (excepting those, whom
God dealt with by his word ministered by angels first, then by his Son whose
Gospel now is preached) I suppose there is nothing wanting, to evidence either
the truth or obligation of it, though those that preach it are not enabled to
evidence, why God pleased to suspend the uprightness of Adams posterity upon
the condition of his obedience, when as it is evident enough that it was in his
power to have done otherwise. And this account being rendered, it will be easy
to say, why Eve found not the effect of her transgression, before Adam had
eaten the forbidden fruit. To wit; Not because she should never have found any,
had not he sinned: But because the effects of it do not necessarily follow
instantly at all times, and in all things, and that, in tempting Adam, which
was the next thing she did, they did instantly appear. As for the great
difficulty, how the spiritual substance of the soul should receive a taint
from the carnal concupiscence, whereby it comes to be united to the body; I
will here challenge the benefit of that principle which I have once
established; That which once was not matter of Faith can never by process of
time, or, any act the Church can do, become matter of Faith; Though we may
become more obliged to believe it, not by the general obligation of
Christianity, but by having studied the reasons by which it is deduced from the
principles of Faith; Besides that light of reason which Faith presupposes:
And, by the same reason, the Church may justly injoyne it to be received, that
is to say not openly contradicted* For, such is the matter of the propagation
of man's soul, whether by transplanting, as part of the Fathers hold, or by
immediate existence from God, in the body which nature prepares for it: Which,
having been manifestly disputable in S. Augustines time, I hold it very
consequent to that which I have done in the point of the Trinity, whether it
may be made evident to reason or not, to leave it without producing any man's
reason, by which I pretend to maintain, that it is either tra^uced or created,
A ways supposing, that no reason can be receivable, which provideth not for
the immortality of it, which no man questions. Lastly, it is manifest, that
actual sin ^s first called by the name of sin, because first subject to
sense; but so, that the displeasure of God, and by consequence, the name of
sin, is no less real against habitual sins: So I will confess further,
(as before of the terms of essence and person in the mystery of the blessed
Trinity, that they were brought into the Church to prevent the malice of
heretics, and to settle a right understanding in that which was necessary to
be received by Christians) So now, that the term of Original sin was first
brought in by S. Augustine* and the Church of his time, to express that ground
upon which the Church had from the beginning maintained the grace of our Lord
Christ, and the necessity of it. But, that th^s ground is not to be maintained,
unless we acknowledge, besides those habits of sin which we contract, an
habitual inclination to sin bred in our nature from the fall of Adam, which
may be called sin, in regard of the likeness and correspondence of it to and
with other inclinations to sin contracted by custom.

Having thus set aside this opinion, before I come to decide the difficulty
proposed, I hold it necessary to debate that which both parts seem to take for
granted, neither of them having expressed any reason, to oblige us so to take
it: That is; whether Adam were created to supernatural happiness (which is
that which Christians now expect, in the presence of God for everlasting) and
therefore, endowed with those graces, which might make him capable of it: Or
only in a state of natural happiness, consisting in the content of this life
only, and supposing perfect obedience to God in the course of it. Were it but
for the the repute I have of Grotius, for his skill in the Scriptures, (who, in
one of his Annotations upon Cassander, has declared this opinion for part of
his judgment, I should count it worth the debating. But I have found it
further maintained by reasons, which seem to me considerable, and no way
prejudicial to the Faith. Which notwithstanding, I do not intend to propose
for mine own, engaging my self to maintain this; but, to confront with the
reasons brought for it, what I find reasonable to be said on the other side,
that in a nice and obscure point, the discreet reader may choose, what he shall
think most fit to allow. Now, all the argument, that can be drawn into
consequence on either side, arising from the relation of Moses compared with
such texts of the New Testament as may give light to it; It is first argued,
That seeing God first framed man of the dust of the earth, and breathed into
him the breath of life, and man became a living soul; It seems evident that
he was made in a state of natural life only: S. Paul having said, in
comparing him with Christ, 1 Cor. XV. 45. So also it is written; The first man
Adam became a living soul; The last Adam became a quickening Spirit. Meaning to
say; That as Moses says, that Adam became a living soul; So, (not that Moses
says, but that Christians may say; that) Christ is become a quickening Spirit.
For, hereupon it follows in S. Paul, that, as that which is spiritual was to
follow, so that which is natural or animal was to go before. But to this, on
behalf of the other part, me thinks it may be said; That Moses, as all the Old
Testament, speaks only of the state of our natural life, but intends by the
correspondence between material and spiritual things, as the figure and that
which it figures, to signify to us, that which belongs to that spiritual life,
which the Gospel introduces: Of which intent, all that I have produced, to
settle that difference between the litterall and mystical sense of the Old
Testament, is evidence. So that, Gods breathing the breath of life into man's
nostrills is the figure of his breathing the spiritual life of Grace into the
soul, which diverse ancient Fathers of the Church have understood to be
signified by the same words; and that, according to the true ground and rule of
expounding the Scripture, if they suppose the breath of natural life,
signified first by the same words to be inspired, as a figure of the spiritual
life of grace. To which agrees well enough that which follows; That man became
a living soul; in correspondence to the second Adam, who is become a quickening
Spirit, according to S. Paul. For, Christ is become a quickening Spirit, because
he shall raise the mortal bodies of those in whom his Spirit dwelt here: But
Adam, though we suppose him to be made a living soul in respect of the life of
Grace, yet had that life from the Spirit of Grace, the fulness whereof dwelt
in Christ. On the other side it is argued, that seeing man was made in the
image of God, and his likeness, Genesis I. 26, 27. IX. 6. and, that the image of
God consists in that righteousness and true holiness to which Christians are
regenerated by grace, Ephesians. IV. 24. Col. III. 9, 10. Therefore, man was first
created in that righteousness and true holiness to which Christians are
renewed, which renewing is called therefore the new man by S. Paul. To this it
may be answered on behalf of the other part; That the dominion over the
creatures belonges to the image of God in man, according to the words of Moses:
Let us make man after our image and likeness, and let him bear rule over the
fishes of the Sea -- and, therefore God requires a man's blood of his brother,
and of beasts, because he was made in the image of God, Genesis IX. 6. So that,
the image of God remains, true righteousness and holiness being lost. And
therefore it seems, that, according to the natural state of man, he is made
according to Gods image, in regard of this dominion over the creatures: But,
according to that spiritual estate which the Gospel calls us to, much more,
in regard of the dominion over sin and concupiscence, which the spirit of
righteousness and true holiness brings with it: Though both derivative from
the image of God in Christ, to whom the Apostle Heb. II. 6-9. ascribes that
dominion, as to the second Adam, which the Psalmist sets forth in the first;
Psalm. VIII. 5-8. And if it be said, as I said it may be, that the precept given
to them, forbidding the fruit of the tree of knowledge, is manifestly carnal,
and concerning their nature, it is easy to say on the other side, that the
garden, and those trees, and therefore the precept concerning them, are not
understood, if they be not taken as Symbolicall, and mystical, to signify
that, which S. Augustine, in two words of free will and Christ, comprehends;
That, as the source of death is, to satisfy the appetite of our own
particular profit or pleasure, so, to satisfy the appetite of that true
goodness, which that Word or Wisdom of God, which now incarnate is our Lord
Christ, teaches, is the fountain of Life. Not as if there were not two such
fruits, one granted to preserve life, the other forbidden on pain of death;
But because they not only did signify, (which the other opinion may grant)
but also were understood by Adam to signify more, as I have said.

As for the giving of names to living creatures, which is commonly made an
argument of more then humane wisdom in Adam, to wit, from Gods Spirit; I
conceive the other side may say; That no names can signify the natures of
things, but some sensible properties, by which they are known and discerned: So
that, to give names ingeniously, argues no more then taking due notice of those
things, which sense discovers, to be most remarkable in each kind. And that
not above the pitch of nature. But when Adam says; This is bone of my bone and
flesh of my flesh; And; Therefore shall a man leave father and mother and
cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh; And S. Paul thereupon,
Ephesians. V. 30. This mystery is great, but I mean, as to Christ and the Church;
There is appearance, that the Fathers have reason to suppose Adam a Prophet,
not only to say the words which foretell the coming of Christ, and the effect
of it, but also to understand the meaning which they contained. Not as if he
foresaw the incarnation of Christ, which supposed his own fall: But because, by
that word of God which spoke to him in his transe, he understood, that his
posterity should be united and married to God. And yet, on the other side it may
be said without prejudice to Christianity; that, though this is certainly the
mystical sense of these words, yet it is no more necessary that Adam, when he
spoke them, should understand it, then, that the rest of those who were figures
of Christ, by their actions in the Old Testament, did understand that they were
so, much less wherein that figure consisted. Last of all, it seems strange,
that Adam should so easily be cast down, with so slight a temptation, supposing
that he was endowed with that divine wisdom which Gods Spirit gives; which
will be no such marvel, if we suppose him to know no more, then the conduct
of his natural life in Paradise might require. Which notwithstanding, this is
no such advantage as it may seem. For, as the description of Paradise, and the
two trees, and the precept concerning them, so is also the temptation delivered
in Symbolicall terms, under the figure of that which concerned the preservation
of their life, representing all that may move the Sons of the first Adam to
fall away from God. And whatsoever be the reason that it is called the tree of
knowledge; to be like unto God, and that by a way of such knowledge as should
not depend on Gods will, but their own choice, may easily be understood to be
the most dangerous temptation, that an estate of so much advantage was capeable
of, how difficult so ever it be to understand by the words, how they might
believe it to depend upon eating the forbidden fruit. And, as the state of mere
nature, (requiring the knowledge of so few things as the leading of such a life
in obedience to God required) must needs infer that simplicity and innocence,
that made them more liable to be tempted; So, a state of supernatural
knowledge by the Spirit of God withdrawing their consideration from inferior
things of this world, to be conversant about the matters of God, they might be
exposed to temptation as well by not attending, as by not apprehending the
things of the world. As, on the other side, they were fortified against it, no
less by that innocence and simplicity which made them not sensible of that
which provokes it, then by that resolution of Gods Spirit which set them above
it.

These being the considerations which appear to me, in those things which the
Scriptures propose unto us of this estate, I will not stick to say, that I hold
the common opinion to be the more probable, for two reasons: The first, Because
it seems to me far more consequent to the effect of man's fall, (which is
the loss and want of spiritual grace, necessary to the conduct of him in his
spiritual life here, to eternal life in the world to come) that he should
have transgressed and forfeited the means thereof, then only that innocence
that should have enabled him to yield God obedience only in an estate of mere
nature, and to the purpose of it. Secondly, because I find it to be received by
the Fathers of the Church after S. Irenaeus, who seems to have delivered it
in express and clear terms. And yet I must say, on the other side, that I find
it no reason to count it a matter of Faith, but only the more reasonable
supposition among divines; So that, the matter of Faith, concerning original
sin, is more easily understood to depend upon it, and more reasonably
inferred from it, and maintained by it. Not only, because you see the reasons
out of the Scriptures so balanced; But chiefly, because I see the subject of
the dispute to be all upon the literal and mystical sense of these
Scriptures: Without the knowledge whereof, I am confident the Faith of a
Christian is entire, though the skill of a divine is nothing. And, for the
consent of the Fathers, how general soever it be after Irenaeus, I have the
authority of the same Irenaeus, backed by his reason, (in that excellent
Chapter, where he distinguishes between the Tradition of Faith, and the skill
of the Scriptures) to resolve me, that neither this point, nor any other point
which depends upon the agreement between the Old Testament and the New, as this
does, can belong to the Faith of a Christian, but only to the skill of a
divine. But now this being premised and settled, it will be easy for me to
infer, that a state of mere nature is a thing very possible, had it pleased
God to appoint it, by proposing no higher end then natural happiness, no
harder means then Original innocence, to man whom he had made. The reasons
premised sufficiently serving to show, that there is no contradiction in the
being of that, which there is so much appearance that it was indeed.

But I must advise you withal, that I mean it, upon a far other supposition,
then that of the School Doctors; They, supposing that man was created to that
estate of supernatural happiness to which the Gospel pretends to regenerate
Christians, hold that it was Gods mere free grace, that he was not created with
that contradiction between the reason and appetite, which the principles of his
nature are of themselves apt to produce. Whereupon it follows, that
concupiscence is Gods creature, that is, the indowment of it; signifying by
concupiscence, that contrariety to reason, which the disorder of sensual
appetite produces. A saying that has fallen from the pen of S. Augustine, and
that after his business with Pelagius, Retract. I. 9. allowing what he had
writ to that purpose against the Manichees, in his third book de libero
arbitrio, which he mentions again, and no way disalloweth, in his book de
Dono perseverantiae, cap. XI. and XII. but seems utterly inconsistent with
the grounds which he stands upon against Pelagius. For, supposing contrariety
and disorder in the motions of man's soul, what is there in this confusion which
it has created in the doings of mankind, that might not have come to pass
without the fall? Unless we suppose, that a man can be reasonably mad, or,
that concupiscence which reason boundeth not, could be contained within any
rule or measure, not supposing any gift of God, inabling reason to give bounds
to it, or preventing the effect of it, which the supposition of pure nature
allows us not to suppose. For, the very state of mortality, supposing the
immortality of the soul, either requires in man the conscience of integrity
before God, or infers upon him a bad expectation for the world to come. And
therefore, though the sorrows that bring death might serve for advantage to
happiness, were reasonable to govern passion in using them; yet not being
able, they can be nothing but essays of that displeasure of God which he is to
expect in the world to come. And therefore this escape of S. Augustine may seem
to abate the zeal of those, who would make his opinion the rule of our common
Faith.

That which my resolution infers is no more then this; That, supposing God
did not create man in an estate capable to attain the said supernatural
happiness, he might nevertheless, had he pleased, have created him in an
estate of immortality without impeachment of trouble or of sorrow; but not
capable of further happiness, then his then life in Paradise upon earth
imports. Not that I intend to say, that God had been without any purpose of
calling man whom he had created in this state unto the state of supernatural
grace, whereby he might become capable of everlasting glory in the world to
come, as Christians believe themselves to be. For, the meaning of those that
suppose this, is, that God purposed to exercise man first in this lower estate,
and having proved him and found him faithful in it, (supposing Adam had not
fallen) to have called him afterward to a higher condition, of that
immortality which we expect in the world to come, upon trial of fidelity, in
that obedience here, which is correspondent to it. Whereupon, it is reasonably,
though not necessarily consequent, that, this calling being to be performed by
the Word of God, which, being afterward incarnate is our Lord Christ, and the
Spirit which dwelt in him without measure, our Lord Christ should have come in
our flesh, though Adam had not fallen, to do this. And this is alleged for a
reason, why, afterward, the Law that was given to Moses covenanted expressly
for no more then the happinnesse of this present life; though covertly, being
joined with that discipline of godliness, which the people of God had received
by tradition from their Fathers, it afforded sufficient argument of the
happiness of the world to come, for those who should embrace the worship of
God in spirit and truth, though under the paedagogie and figures of the Law.
For, they say it is suitable to the proceeding of God in restoring mankind,
that we understand him first to intend the recovering of that natural
integrity in which man was created, by calling his people to that uprightness
of civil conversation, in the service of the only true God, which might be a
protection to as many, as, under the shelter of such civil Laws, should take
upon them the profession of true righteousness to God; Intending afterward,
by our Lord Christ, to set on foot a treaty of the said righteousness, upon
terms of happiness in the world to come. But these things, though containing
nothing prejudicial to Christianity, yet, not being grounded upon express
scripture, but collected by reasoning the ground and rule of Gods purpose,
which concerns not the truth of the Gospel whether so or not; I am neither
obliged to admit nor refuse; So much of Gods counsel remaining always visibly
true; That he pleased to proceed by degrees, in setting his Gospel on foot; (by
preparing his people for it by the discipline of the Law, and the insufficience
thereof, visible, by that time which he intended for the coming of our Lord
Christ) though we say that man was at first created in a state of supernatural
grace, and capable of everlasting happiness: For still, the reason of Gods
proceeding by degrees will be, that first, there might be a time to try how
great the disease was, by the failing of the cure thereof by the Law, before so
great a Physician as the Son of God came in person to visit it.

This only I must add, because all this discourse proceeds upon supposition,
that man might have been created in an estate of mere nature, if endowed with
uprightness capable to attain that happiness which that estate required;
That therefore, supposing man created to supernatural happiness, the
supposition of pure nature, with that concupiscence, which, the principles
thereof, not prevented by any provision of Gods to the contrary, would produce,
is no way allowable. For who shall take upon him to charge God, with laying an
obligation of attaining supernatural happiness upon him, whom, by inbred
concupiscence, he should make utterly unable to attain it?

This being said, for the fuller understanding of the said opinion, I may now
further take upon me, not only, that, by the resolution premised, that
endless dispute about the indowments which Adam was first created with, is
easily determinable; but also there is a firm ground laid, upon which the
difference between natural and supernatural may be settled among divines. For
always, a state of mere nature being understood to be possible, (whether we
believe that man was actually settled in it or not) it is no hard matter to say,
that whatsoever was requisite to enable man to live in obedience to God, for
the attaining of immortality in it, all this and nothing else, is to be
understood to be natural; As requisite to the indowment of man, supposed to be
set in that state: That supernatural, which is requisite to the advancement of
him to supernatural happiness, by inabling him, to tender unto God that
spiritual obedience of righteousness and true holiness, to which he stands
obliged by so high a calling. Whereupon, as, supposing that man was created to
this happiness, it cannot be doubted, that he stood endowed with capacities
proportionable to that obedience which it requires; So, in as much as those
capacities were not absolutely due to his nature, (which might have been
created in another estate) they are absolutely to be counted supernatural and
of grace. But, in as much as they depend upon a former grace of God, which is,
that gracious purpose of advancing man to a capacity of supernatural
happiness, they may be counted due to his nature, not as necessary
consequences of the constitution thereof, but of that estate, which the free
and gracious purpose of God designed for it. In the mean time, the
contradiction between reason and sense being so consequent to the constitution
of man's nature, that it was notwithstanding, in Gods appointment, to prevent
the coming of it to effect; and, the obedience of God requiring that it should
be prevented, (man being otherwise unable perfectly to perform it, whether in
the state of mere nature of grace) requisite it is, that the rebellion of the
sensual appetite against the reason be accounted the consequence of his fall,
not the condition in which he was created. And, upon these terms, it is easy to
assign the difference between original uprightness and supernatural grace
in Adam, supposing that he was created to supernatural happiness, and
therefore in supernatural grace. For, seeing man might have been created in an
estate of mere nature, in which, though destitute of grace, yet he had not been
destitute of righteousness; Though we suppose, that he was indeed created in
the state of grace, yet may we easily distinguish, between that uprightness,
which his nature necessarily required, and that spiritual holiness whereby it
stood advanced to that capacity of true happiness, which Gods free Grace
designed for it. And howsoever these terms may have been used among divines;
yet, the occasion of misunderstanding them being thus cleared, nothing hinders,
the free gift by which it was advanced to be signified by the name of grace,
the necessary uprightness of nature, by the term of original righteousness.

These things premised, it will be no difficult thing to resolve, that it is
all one, whether we say, that original sin is concupiscence, or, that it is
the want of original righteousness with concupiscence. For, as in all actual
or habitual sins (which, as more subject to sensible experience, are much
better known to us) there is a want of straightness or uprightness, wherein
their being sin consists, because the Law of God traces us a straight way
to walk, which they transgress; But there is also some action or habit wherein
this crookedness is understood to subsist, though indeed, consisting in the
mere want of uprightness, it subsisteth not at all, but is mere nothing; So it
is necessary to conceive something positive, to which the want of original
righteousness may be attributed, neither can the nature of sin be understood
in the state which we are born to, otherwise. And, seeing the nature of
original sin is necessarily habitual (because we have excluded the imputation
of Adams first sin) it remains, that the appetite, or inclination of nature
to that which appears to be good, be the subject to which this perverse^esse
is attributed, as subsisting in it. Now, the appetite or inclination which we
have, to that which appears to be good, is not called concupiscence at large,
unless we understand further, that it tends to enjoy that which of it self
is good, out of order, and without measure. For, this inclination of the
appetite, as no man will deny to be against Gods Law, that supposes it to be a
straight rule, no more will ^e deny, that, upon these suppositions, it is
properly called concupiscence. So that this one term of concupiscence
expresses as much, as the want of original uprightness with concupiscence,
and gives not that occasion of mistake which the using of more words does; In
as much as, he that hears of the want of original righteousnsse with
concupiscence, has occasion to understand the want of uprightness and
concupiscence to be two things, whereas indeed, as has been said, there can be
no more in the matter, but only a positive inclination to things that appear
good, deprived and destitue of that order and measure which the Law of God
requires. And herewith agrees that description of Original sin in the
confession of Ausburg, which has been the subject of so much debate among the
Divines of the Empire; That this want of original righteousness is an
horrible blindness and disobedience; Which is, to be destitute of that light
and knowledge of God which should have been in man's nature remaining entire, to
be destitute of that uprightness, which consists in perpetual obedience, in
true, pure and sovereign love of God, and the like gifts of entire nature.
For, let no man think them so simple as to imagine, that Original sin
consists in actual ignorance, and actual hatred and disobedience to God,
which are themselves no ways original, but acknowledge a source from whence
they proceed. But, desiring to make their meaning more palpable to gross
understandings, they were not afraid to incur an exception, which the
captious might make; as if they understood no difference, between those
consequences and productions, whereby it becomes visible, and the sourse of
them, which the question properly concerns. For, as concerning ignorance, and,
being destitute of that light and knowledge of God, which the state of
uprightness must have enjoyed; I find no necessity to think, that Adam, upon
his fall, was actually deprived of the habitual knowledge of those truths
which were settled in his mind, concerning God, or of those images in the
mind, or conceptions of the mind, wherein that knowledge did consist, as all
knowledge does. It is enough, and more then enough, that the poison wherewith
his inclinations and appetites stood now so perverted, suffered not that truth
which enlightened his mind to have effect in his actions; according to that
which Christians, being by the grace of God restored to the like light, do find
in themselves by sad experience. And when, in process of time, his posterity,
notwithstanding the instruction which they received of him for above nine
hundred years together, and, notwithstanding the preaching of the godly
Fathers, (which S. Jude in his Epistle exemplifieth, of Encch, and S. Peter of
Noe 2 Pet. II. 5.) fell away, not only to oppression and wickedness, but to
the worship of false Gods; Then it appeared, how natural this blindness is to
the posterity of Adam having departed from God, concupiscence prevailing, to
make such strange and horrible ignorance take place in the minds of them, who
had such certain and evident information from their predecessors, of God that
made them, and all the world for their benefit, of his severe judgment upon
the fall of Adam, and mercy promised, and judgment preached against them that
should refuse it. To the difficulty, then, which causes this whole dispute, I
will answer otherwise then they which have not been able to take it away have
done; That, all sin being a transgression of Gods Law, if there be several
Laws by which God deals with mankind, there must be also several rules and
several measures, by which, that, which is sin according to the Original
Law, may not be sin according to the latter Law, which necessarily derogateth
from that which went before. The original rule of righteousness, which, the
light which man was created in obliged him to, must needs detect and convince
all habitual inclination of concupiscence, and much more, the very first
motions of the same, to be sin against God. And, seeing the very same motions
are seen, in that conflict between the flesh and the Spirit, which the most
regenerate find in themselves, though by the grace of Gods Spirit in them they
prevail not; (so that there is no difference for nature and kind, but only
for efficacy and strength, between the concupiscence which remains in the
regenerate, and that which rules in the unregenerate) there can no controversy
remain among Christians, that there is an original Law of God, which this
defect of original righteousness violateth. And, seeing Christianity obliges
to mortify concupiscence, and to prevent rather then to suppress the first
motions of it; of necessity, the rule of our conversation is grounded upon that
uprightness, in which, or to which Adam was created. But not therefore the
rule of Gods proceeding with us, whose salvation his mercy designeth, supposing
concupiscence. And if there be a latter Law of God, derogatory to that
original Law, according to which he deals with those that are under it, by
embracing the Covenant of Grace; it cannot be said, that the transgression of
Gods Original Law, is any sin against it, being tendered to those, whom God
knows, that, so long as they live in the world, they cannot be void of
concupiscence. So that, by virtue of that Law, according to which God by his
Gospel, declares that he will de^l with those that embrace Christianity, well
may it be said, that original sin is utterly defaced by Baptism: Though in
relation to that original rule of righteousness, which man's uprightness
obliges him to, it is most truly said, that concupiscence is original sin.
And though, supposing this answer, it seems to me evidently unnecessary, if not
evidently contradictory to it self, and, to the justice, goodness, and
holiness of God; to have recourse to a state of mere nature, as if man might
have been created in it, supposing him designed by God to a state of
supernatural happiness; Yet it is as evident to me, that it is no error of
the foundation of faith, but only in the knowledge of the Scriptures, and the
skill of divines. For, supposing the belief of original sin on the one side;
on the other side, remission of sin by the profession of Christianity, which
Baptism executes and solemnizeth; he that fails in giving account how these
things may stand together, and be both true at once, cannot be thought to fail
of that faith, which he maintains not with good success. There may be as
great a fail^ur on the other side, in not believing the efficacy of
Christianity, in the remission of sin. Neither can the decree of the Council
of Trent, couched in the proper and formal terms of S. Augustine (that
concupiscence in the regenerate is not truly and properly sin, but so called,
because proceeding from sin, and tending to sin) be condemned as absolutely
false, so long as there is a new Law of God, which is the Covenant of Grace,
against which it is no sin, being tendered, and made after it, and supposing
it. Nor could the mouth of Pelagius have been stopped, when the efficacy of
Baptism in the remission of sin was received among all Christians, according
to the Primitive and original truth of Christianity; were there not some true
and just ground, upon which it may be said, that the opposition of
concupiscence after Baptism to the Law of God remains no more. And yet that
is no less true, which the same Augustine in diverse other places affirms,
either expressly, or by good consequence, that concupiscence, which remains
after Baptism is original sin; To wit, according to the original Law of
God, tendered to the original institution of man's nature. If therefore that be
true which Doctor Field says, that all the errors of the Church of Rome,
concerning the Covenant of Grace, have their original from this error
concerning the state of pure nature, (as perhaps, they may better be said to
proceed from not distinguishing the several consequences of Gods several
Laws) it will nevertheless be very fit to be considered, whether those errors
which are grounded upon a mistake in divinity, do amount to any denial of the
Foundation of Faith.

For, supposing for the present, though not granting the supposition of mere
nature, (that is, that God might have made man, though instituted to
supernatural happiness, with concupiscence) to be possible; it may be
nevertheless, and is, without doubt, utterly useless, for a reason, why the
righteousness of a Christian is accepted by God, as the fulfilling of his Law,
toward the reward of everlasting happiness, notwithstanding concupiscence;
For which, it would be very impertinent to allege, that God might have made
man with concupiscence, and therefore accepts the obedience of those that are
under it: Because it is manifest, that, the perfection to which Christianity
calls, is that to which Adam was instituted in Paradise. It is therefore, by
consequence, no less impertinent to the nature of Original sin, that God
might have made man from the beginning with concupiscence. For Original sin
must, of necessity, be that evil which we are born with in consideration of
Adams sin. And therefore whatsoever we might have been born with seeing that
actually, and de facto, we are born with concupiscence in consideration of
Adams sin, who otherwise should have been born with that uprightness in
which he was made; Original sin must needs be that which we are now born
with, though supposing that we had been originally made with it, it had not
been Original sin. For, the absurdity of this consequence tends to show,
that the supposition of mere nature is impossible, and presses not me, which
believe it so to be.

And now, to that novelty in the doctrine of the Church of England that has
caused so much offense, (because, allowing some points of it not to prejudice
the common ^aith, it is requisite, that I freely distinguish my self from that
which I allow not) I say briefly; That, if that excellent doctor, and those who
find themselves offended at his doctrine, will give me leave to interpret one
point, to distinguish one term of his opinion, I shall heartily wish that the
offense thereof may cease. It is in that he says, that concupiscence was
before the fall, though much increased by it; And I would have it said, that
all the inclinations of the sensual appetite were before the fall, but the
disorder of them, seeking satisfaction without rule or measure, by it; The word
Concupiscence being capable of both significations. For it is manifest that
Adam, as we do, consisted of flesh and Spirit, (taking flesh, for the
substance, not the perverse inclination of the flesh, and Spirit, for the
substance of his own, not the grace of Gods Spirit) of soul and body, of a
spiritual and carnal substance; The appetite of the principal part tending to
that which is excellent by nature, but the baser part having an appetite proper
to the nature of it, whereof reason, from which all order rule and measure
proceeds, is no ingredient. But it is necessary to say, that God, who requires
the sensual appetite to be subject to the principal part of the soul, as the
reason to God, had provided such an estate for such a creature, wherein it
might be in the power of reason, to give order rule and measure to the motions
of the sensual appetite. Otherwise, the mortifying of concupiscence being the
work of Christianity, it will necessarily follow, that the coming of Christ was
to furnish that grace, by which Christians may mortify that which God had
created, which our common faith admits not. And therefore it is no otherwise
to be admitted, that concupiscence is increased by the fall of Adam, then, as
that may be said to be increased, which, being moderate before, is since become
immoderate. For, seeing that concupiscence, being once free of the command of
reason, and the rule and measure which it might have from thence, can have no
other bounds then those, which in this estate, it acknowledges; (which is, to
be utterly boundless, so far as it is consistent with it self, and, as the
satisfaction of several passions appears not incompetible) there is no reason
why it should be ascribed to the fall, once granting it to be the condition of
Gods creature; Which, without the fall, must needs have profited to that
horrible confusion in humane affairs, the contrariety whereof to the
excellence of man's nature reason discerns; and therefore, religion reasonably
introduces the fall, to give a reason for it. If the supposition of pure nature
would endure, that man, though created liable to concupiscence, by virtue of
some contrary indowment might be preserved from the effect of it; And that the
effect of Adams fall were to make that frustrate and void; I should not think
that supposition any way prejudicial to the Christian Faith. But* in regard
that the supposition admits no such indowment, (because it must be a gift of
grace, which would destroy the supposition of mere nature) therefore it is
denied, that God, supposing that integrity in Adam which the Christian faith
requires, could create him in this state of mere nature. If this Doctor had
said, or could have said; That concupiscence, being a natural consequence of
man's composition, was prevented of coming to act and effect, by eating the
fruit of the tree of life, ordained to that purpose; That the leaves thereof
were, in this regard, healing to the nations; And that the grace of Christ was
dispensed by that means, in that estate, as now by the Sacrament of the
Eucharist; I might say, this were a novelty among divines, but I could not say
that it were destructive to the Faith. But if the coming of Christ be not to
repair the fall of the first Adam, I cannot see how the Faith is secure.

As for the term of sin, when he denies that this concupiscence can be
properly sin, which is neither the act of sin, nor any propensity created by
custom of sinning, but bred in our nature, whereof there is no other instance
but it self; I confess, when the question comes to the signification of words,
and the property of it (which may always be endless, because the question is
only, whether my sense shall give Law to your language or your sense to mine,
which it is not necessary to insist upon, when the faith is secured on both
sides) I count it always hard, to charge an error in the substance of Faith.
Now, whether we say this concupiscence is sin or not, the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ his coming, and the end of it remains always the same, and so,
the necessity of his grace is settled upon the right bottom. And truly, if we
recollect the language which is used by the Greek Fathers, and those that lived
before Pelagius* comparing it with that which has been used since S. Austine,
we shall not find the term of Original sin so frequent as the ground of it.
For, not only death and the sorrows that bring it, but, even the inclination of
our nature to actual sin, is by them ascribed to the fall, who use not the
term of Original sin. As every one, that peruseth but the terms of those
passages of the Fathers, which this Doctor has produced, may easily perceive.

Upon these terms Clemens Alexandrinus is no interruption to the Tradition of
Original sin, in that difficult place Strom. III. that made Vossius say, he
understood it not. He speaks against those that condemned Marriage. (...). Let
them test us where the Child that is borne committed whoredom, or how it fell
under the curse of Adam that had done nothing? It remains, as it seems, that
they say, that the Generation is evil, not only of the body, b^t of the Soul,
for which the body is. And when David says, I was conceived in sins, and in
iniquities did my Mother lust with me; like a Prophet he calls Eve his Mother,
But Eve was the Mother of the living: And though conceived in sin, yet was not
be in sin, or sinful. But, whether every one that turns from sin to Faith,
turn from sinful custom, as from his Mother, to life, one of the twelve
Prophets will be my witness, saying; shall I give my firstborn for impiety,
the fruit of my belly for the sin of my Soul? He traduceth not him that said,
Increase and multiply; but he calls the first inclinations from our birth, by
which we are ignorant of God, impieties. He says, most truly, that they cannot
render a reason how we are born under Adams curse, but by charging God. He
grants actual sin in conception, but that, not the sin of the Child that is
conceived. He says, the custom of sin may be our Mother Eve, in the mystical
sense of David; But he ascribes it to those first motions from our birth,
which make mankind ignorant of God, till they turn to Christianity. Whether
this be my plea or no, let him that has perused the Premises judge. This same
is to be said of S. Chrysostom in his Homily ad Neophytos; denying that
Infants are baptized, because they are polluted with sin. To wit, that he
appropriateth the name of sin to actual sin. But, as Clemens acknowledges the
first motions that we have from our birth to tend to ignorance of God; So S.
Chrysostom, Hom. XI. in VI. ad Romans Hom. XIII. in VII. ad Romans clearly
ascribes the coming in of concupiscence to Adams sin, or rather to the sentence
of mortality inflicted by God upon it, wherein he is followed by Theodoret in
V. ad Romans observing, that the want of things necessary to the sustenance of
our mortality provokes excesses, and that sins. If this reason can generally
hold, so that all concupiscence may be said to be the consequence of mortality,
Christianity will be sound, the necessity of Christ's coming for the repair of
Adams fall, remaining the same. But this is the reason why the same S.
Chrysostom, Hom. X. in VI. ad Romans when S. Paul says; By one man's
disobedience many are made sinners, understands by sinners, liable to death;
Concupiscence, wherein Original sin consists, as I have showed, being the
consequence of mortality, according to S. Chrysostom. As for those that
censure books at Oxford, if they like not this, I demand but one thing, what
they think of Zuinglius his Writings. For I suppose, none of them believes,
that Zuinglius holds original sin to be properly sin, or that infants are
damned for it; (though, whether they come to everlasting life or no,
notwithstanding their concupiscence which they are born with, I find not that
he says) Let them therefore choose whether they will censure Zuinglius his
books, or profess, that they have the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with
respect of persons.

And therefore, I do not understand why I should make any more of this
difference of language, then of that which was on foot in the ancient Church,
about the terms of hypostasis, in the blessed Trinity, among those, who ha^tily
adhered to the Faith of the Church. And, I conceive, I may compare it with the
difference between the Latin and the Greek Church about the procession of the
Holy Ghost, whether from the Father and the Son, o^ from the Father by the
Son. For, though I do believe with the Western Church, that he proceeds
from both; Yet, the Eastern Church acknowledging as it does, from the Father by
the Son, If it had been in me, the matter should never have come to a breach
in the Church about that difference. Even so, the term of Original sin
being received in the Western Church, to exclude the heresy of Pelagius; I do
not intend to take offense at the using, or give offense by the refusing of it.
But I shall not therefore condemn those times or persons of the Church that
used it not, as unsound or defective in the Faith, the Tradition whereof is not
to be derived, but by that which all parts agree in professing.

As for the punishment of everlasting torments upon infants that depart with
it, it is a thing utterly past my capacity to understand, how it concerns the
necessity of Christ's coming, that those infants, who are not cured by it,
should be thought liable to them. Would his death be in vain, would the Grace
which it purchases be unnecessary, unless those infants that have committed
no actual sin go into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
angels? Shall the corruption of our nature by the fall of Adam be counted a
fable, unless I be able to maintain, that infants are there, or show where
they are if not there? Or will any man undertake to show me that consent of the
whole Church in this point, which is visible, by the premises, as concerning
that corruption of nature* which I challenge to be matter of Faith? It is not to
be denied that S. Augustine, and enough after him, have maintained it, and
perhaps thought, that the Faith cannot be maintained otherwise. But can that
therefore be the Tradition of the whole Church, which Doctors allowed by the
Church do not believe? In this, as in other instances, we see a difference
between matters of Faith and Ecclesiastical doctrines, of which you have a Book
of Gernadius entitled d^ dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis. For, such positions as
pass without offense, when they are held and professed by such as enjoy the
communion of the Church, (or more then so, rank of authority in it) must
necessarily be counted doctrines of the Church. And yet, if it appear, that the
contrary has been held other whiles and else where, they do not oblige our
belief as matters of Faith. As for the article of the Church of England, which
ascribes the desert of Gods wrath and damnation to Original sin; ^ conceive
it is always the duty of every son of the Church, so to interpret, so to
limit or to extend the acts of the Church of England, that is, the sense of
them, that it may agree with the Faith of the Catholic Church: Because all
such acts serve, and are to serve, only to maintain the Church of England a
member thereof, by maintaining the Faith of it. How much more at this time;
that unity and communion, which these acts tendered to maintain amongst our
selves, being irrecoverably violated, by men equally concerned in the
cherishing of it? For, admitting the Faith and the Laws of the primitive
Church, what can any Church allege, why they are not one with us? Not admitting
them, what can we allege why we are not one with others? It follows
therefore of necessity, that the wrath of God and damnation, which Original
sin deserves, according to the Article of the Church of England, be confined
to the loss and coming short of that salvation, to which the first Adam being
appointed, the second Adam has restored us; There being no more to be had,
either by necessary consequence from the Scripture, or by Tradition from the
whole Church. For, to require me to believe them to be in the torments prepared
for the devil and his angels, because I cannot say where they are, were a
reason too unreasonable for a Christian.

CHAP. XXI. The opinion that mak^s the Predetermination of man's will by God the
sourse of his freedom; And wherein Jansenius differs from it. Of necessity upon
supposition and absolute. The necessity of the Will following the last dictate
of the understanding is only upon supposition, As also that which Gods
foresight creates. The difference between indifferent and undetermined.
These things thus premised, as concerning that estate wherein the Gospel
overtaketh the will of man to whom Christ is tendered, being under original
sin, I say that it finds him not void of that freedom of choice, in doing or
not doing this or that, which stands in opposition to necessity; But, that
which stands in opposition to the bondage and servitude of sin. This position
is intended to contradict an opinion, which seems to be very ordinary among
Divines, as well of the Reformation as the Church of Rome, though more
ingeniously professed and maintained by these; Who, pretending to derive the
efficacy of Gods Predestination, and the grace which it provideth, from that
decree of his Will, whereby he determines the will of his creature to do or
not to do watsoever is indeed, don or not don, in order of nature before it
determine it self; do consequently profess, that, notwithstanding this
Predetermination of the will is no less effectual then Gods omnipotence,
(whereof it is the immediate and indefeasible consequence and effect) yet,
there is no freedom in the creature, no contingence in the effects of it, but
that which follows upon this will of God, determining understanding Creatures
to do that which they do freely, as it determining understanding Creatures to
do that which they do necessarily. This position, though I intend not to admit,
yet I count it a point of ingenuity in them, who think they free themselves of
great dificulties by supposing it, expressly to maintain the truth of that
supposition, whereof they make so much advantage. For they, who, not daring to
encounter the difficulties wherewith it is chargeable, do claim the
consequences of it, without premising the express supposition of it, do as
good as say nothing, where they advise not the reader of those difficulties,
which the prime principle that they proceed upon is burdened with. But he that
sees, how particular instances depend upon general principles, shall not stick
to judge of their positions, by the dependence they have upon this supposition
so soon as they are informed of the credit which it deserves. Now this
predetermination* Being the immediate effect of Gods omnipotency, as for the
cause of it; as for the nature of it, troubles very much those that maintain
it to say wherein it consists: as indeed it may very well trouble any man to
say of what color a Chimaera is, being, in rerum natura, just nothing. For, if
they say it is a principle infused by the immediate work of grace into the
Will, it is straightwaies evident, that the having of it is not to make the
Will able, which all habitual indowments tend to, but to make it actually to
work. It must therefore consist in a certain motion or impulse, immediately
wrought by God in the Will* which though it is not in the will to have,
depending merely upon the Will of God yet, that neither good nor ill can be
don without it, being necessary, as they think, to the effectual determining
of the will upon two accounts; First, as the will is a secondary cause, that
cannot work unless moved by the first cause: Secondly, as the Will, not being
determined of it self, cannot be determined to any act but by the same first
cause. But these two accounts seem to me both one, For, nothing can determine
the will to act, speaking of that which determines it formally, or in the
nature of a formal cause, but the act of it. For, supposing the will to act,
and excluding whatsoever else might be considered, the will remains
determined: Not suposing that, it may further be questioned what determines it,
The question then being only what it is that determines the will in the nature
of the effective cause, the difficulty that causes the question is but one,
because it is presumed that the second cause can not act, if not acted, that is
determined to act, by the first. The nature then of this motion, received and
lodged in the Will, is imagined nevertheless to be successive, such as is the
being of colors in the air, when they go to the eye, or that impulse which a
handicraft-man moves his tooll with. And the necessity of it stands upon a
general account, not of original sine, but of Gods creature (such as the will
in all estates is requisite to the acts of the will) because nothing can be don
by the creature, but that which God shall determine it to do.

But there is of late an other opinion started in the Church of Rome by
Jansenius, in his Augustinus, which maintains, that the Will, in all actions
that are go^d according to Christianity, is determined by grace, effectually
inclining the will by the love of true good, preventing not expecting the
motion thereof, and producing that influence of the will whereby formally it
acts. The nature of it then, consists in that very act of life, whereby the
reasonable creature exercises its choice no ways requisite to the actions of
nature, which man is able to do under original sin but merely upon that
account, as the cure of it, restoring the due command over that concupiscence
wherein original sin consists, and not extending to the state of innocence.
Which notwithstanding the will is no less naturally determined by it, then by
that principle which the other opinion advances. For they say both, that the
will is not determined by the object, howsoever proposed, but morally, as he
that outwardly advises or persuades determines him that resolves, upon that
consideration which he advances, to that which he proposes, And therefore
this determination, both agree, satisfies not that efficacy of grace, which the
scriptures proposed in the premises require. Therefore, as the former opinion
determines the will naturally, by a principle really lodged in the nature of
the will so this, by the very vital act of vvilling, really subsistng in the
nature of the Will, though produced by God a cause above nature, which when the
delight in good which it imports is so great as to swallow up all
contradiction, it determines to the same, preventing the determination of it
self; when otherwise acknowledging, that, though of the same nature with that
which overcomes, it is never the less defeasible. From this ground there
flows an other difference between these two opinions, we go further from the
fountain head, still more visible. For the former, admitting free will to be a
faculty, able to act, or not to act, supposing all that is requisite to enable
it, in particular the helps of Gods grace; assoiles all dificulties, by
distinguisting the compound sense of those sayings, which express
contradiction between predetermination and freedom, from the divided sense of
the same. For example, if it be said; That to which the Will is predetermined
must needs come to pass; Therefore the will cannot be free to choose whether
it shall be done or not; the answer is; That the will is able to do otherwise,
in s^nsu diviso non in sensu composito, dividing it from the determination of
it, that is, not being determined, but not putting it and the determination of
it together, that is, being determined. So the will has as they say,
simultatem potentiae, not potentiam simultatis; That is, in their barbarous
latin; a power of doing this as well as that, at one and the same time, not a
power of choosing or acting both this and that, at one and the same time; For,
the ability of doing may well stand with the actual choice of not doing, but,
actually at the same time to choose to do and not to do, are terms
inconsistent; as it may be truly said, that a white wall may be black, though
not, supposing it continue white. This distinction I cannot see how Jansenius
can employ, though he think he may, whether it serve or the other opinion to
any purpose not. For, or that in difference wherein the first opinion
maintains the very nature of freewill to consist, at least in words, (whether
they signify any thing or not) the second maintains to be so far from the
nature of it. that the freedom of the Will is not to be had and obtained,
without either abating or extinguishing all indifference in it; The will being
free from sin and slave to righteousness, (which is an addition making the
slavery of the will no slavery, but the freedom thereof perfect freedom) or
else free from righteousness and slave to sin, (which slavery is perfect
slavery, but imaginary freedom) according as it grows, of in different,
determined to righteousness or to sin* which he pretends to be the only
freedom whereof it is capable. And how then should Jansenius employ the
distinction premised, to salve that in difference of the will which he
disavoweth? And therefore, in consequence hereunto, they can neither admit,
that any help of grace is sufficient that is not effectual; (and so, that he
who keeps not the covenant of grace was ever able: to keep it) Nor that our L.
Christ shed his blood for any but them who are and shall be actually saved by
it. As for those of the Reformation (amongst whom it is manifest that this
great question of the agreement between Grace and freewill is as hotly disputed
as in the Chapter of Rome) upon the whether of these opinions they ground
themselves who reject Arminius and the Lutherans, it is not so easy to say, as
it may clerly be said, that they must choose the one or the other, if they will
speak things consequent to their own principles. It is manifest, that Doctor
Twisse has embraced the former; which he that should say that any of the rest
have forborne to employ, either because they could not make it popular to the
capacity of vulgar understandings, or because they found not themselves able to
manage it, perhaps should not conjecture much amiss. But we have of la^e a
work of one Doctor Strange, late of Glascowe, De voluntate and actionibus Dei
circa peccatum, wherein he maintains at large, against Doctor Tuisse in
particular, that it makes God the author of all sin, and by consequence plucks
up all Christianity by the roots. For the rest, professing to embrace the
opinion of Jansenius, as concerning the predetermination of man's will to all
works of supernatural Grace, though, not undertaking to maintain it, he has
added unto it that wherein it is certainly defective; To wit, an account how
evil can be foreknowne by God, not determining the will of the creature to act
it. For, this being done, the same account will serve to reconcile the freewil
of the creature, both to the activity of providence in general, and to the
efficacy of predestination in matters concerning the world to come. Which how
securely soever Jansenius pass by; he may think that he has secured the point
of faith concerning the grace of Christ, but he cannot think that he has
satisfied any divine, that the rest of the question can be resolved according
to his opinion, as the reason of Christianity requires. I am much in fear
that our Puritan Preachers when they swagger over the Arminians in their
pulpits, do neither inform them, how great a part of the reformation as all the
Lutherans make is on their side (neither the Church of England nor that of Rome
having given sentence in the whole question) nor what difficulties their own
opinion is liable to; which it would make their hearts ache to overcome. For my
part, finding the determination of the Synod of Dort against Arminius not to
reach the whole question, (concerning the reconciling of man's freedom, as well
to Gods foreknowledg and providence, as to his predestination and grace) I have
thought best to propose the opinion of predetermination (which pretends to do
it, but does it not, as I suppose) together with that wherein Jansenius varies
from it, to make such a resolution as I am able to propose in so difficult a
business, the better to be understood.

Now, for that which I propose, that the will of man, though under Original
sin, is free from necessity, though not free from bondage (which is to say,
that, neither as a second cause, nor upon the account of Adams fall, it is
determined to do or not to do that which indeed it does) I must distinguish,
that, necessity upon supposition, is not that necessity which the will of man
is free from, and which the contingence of the effects thereof is opposite to.
For, if any thing be said to be necessary, upon supposition, not of the cause
which necessarily produces it, but of it self which is supposed to be, well
may it be said necessarily to be, because it is upon necessity, as every thing
that is must needs be, because that you suppose that it is. In like manner, if
you suppose any thing which implies the being of another thing, (as if a man
see London-stone, because no man sees that which isnot) this supposition
inferres not that necessity which destroys freedom because it imports the
being of that which you suppose that it is. That necessity that destroieth
freedom and contingence is antecedent to the being of contingencies, in the
nature of an effective cause, though not always absolute. For he which will
speak properly and safely must not call any thing absolutely necessary but God
alone, and his perfections, from whose freewill, all the necessity that is
found in his creatures proceeds. But, in regard that we see the Sun rise and
set always in one constant order, the fire always burn, and the earth always
keep the place, truly we distinguish these things as necessary, from those that
come to pass either so or otherwise, as having a presumption, from so much
experience of the will of God, which all things must obey, already part upon the
course of their nature, bythe causes, which, being thereby produced, cannot,
but by the same will, be defeated. But of this, I do not see what question can
remain.

One kind of determination, I shall grant upon the premises, that the will of
man is liable to that necessity which it infers, not prejudicing the freedom
of it. I grant that the will necessarily follows the last and ultimate
dictate of the practick understanding; setting this grant aside, as impertinent
to the question in dispute imports more then a judgment that it is best to do
or not to do this or that: For the last dictate of the understanding that
advises about doing or not doing this or that, or, that it ought to be done, or
not don, by him that will do as he ought. For it is manifest, that a man many
times does not do that which he is resolved that he ought to do. And so it may
fall out, that such a dictate or sentence shall not be the last or ultimate
dictate of the understanding* because, falling to advise anew after that
sentence, it may find some new consideration, whereupon it may resolve to
proceed otherwise then before. Therefore, the last or ultimate dictate of the
understanding cannot be understood to be any other then that which is
effectual, that is to say, when it is supposed, that the effects follow upon
it. And upon these terms I grant, that the will is necessarily determined, by
the last dictate of the understanding; in as much as it is supposed to be,
necessary, that the will be determined by some judgment of the understanding,
either expressly pronouncing, or implicitly resolving, that this or that is
for the best to be done or not done. So that he that says, that the will is
necessarily determined by the last judgment of the understanding, says no
more but this, that the will is necessarily determined by that judgment which
determines it. For, supposing it is the last, you suppose that the will
proceeds to action upon it: So that the necessity which all this inferrs is no
prejudice to freedom or contingence, being only the necessity of that which
must needs be, because you suppose that it is.

The like is to be said of the foreknowledge or foresight which God has, of
whatsoever shall at any time come to pass, and the necessity, which though it
causes not, yet it infers. For no man can know that which is not true, nor
see that which is not in being; neither can that be foreseen, which is not to
have being at that time when it is foreseen to come to pass: And therefore
all foresight necessarily implies a supposition of the future being of that
which is foreseen. A thing necessarily true, howsoever we suppose the will to
be determined to do whatsoever it does; that is to say, whatsoever we suppose
to be the ground of Gods foresight. For, supposing that God from everlasting
foresaw that S. Paul. should be converted at such a moment of time, because he
had a purpose from everlasting, to determine his will, freely to embrace Christ
at that moment of time; yet was not S. Paul converted because God foresaw that
he should be converted, but, because he was to be converted, therefore God
foresaw that he should be converted. Indeed we are to distinguish three
instances, in the knowledge of God concerning future contingencies. In the first
he sees what may come to pass; In the second what shall come to pass; In the
third, what is come to pass. The first by the perfection of his nature, The
second by the decree of his will, giving stedy order to things of themselves
moveable, as Boethius says, that is, to contingencies. For, we suppose
contingence to stand with providence, and we inquire how that consistence may
appear. The third by the act of freedom, seen from everlasting, before the
will that does it have being, in those very decrees, in the execution whereof
providence consists. There is in an architect, or survayor of buildings, a
certain knowledge of that which he designeth, before he go to work, consisting
in a certain Idea or form, which his business is to copy out of his mind into
the materials. But when his work is done, he sees that in being before his
eyes, which he saw in his own design before. The wisdom of God is that
soverain art which directed him in making heaven and earth. and ordaining
whatsoever comes to pass in both. The decree of his will, (whether immediate
or mediate) distinguishes between that which may be, and that which is at the
present, and therefore in the same sort, between that which may be and that
which shall be for the future. But, though his knowledge increase not when he
sees that in being which formerly he saw was to be, because he goes not beyond
himself for the knowledge of it; yet to see that it supposes the act of the
freedom which does it, past, to see that it shall be, to come. In like manner,
therefore, whilst the act of the creature appears to God as to come, he sees
what shall be. But, if all future contingencies be present to God from
everlasting, then consequently, he sees also from everlasting the act of that
freedom which produces them, as don in the due time of it; and in this sight
consists the effect of the same presence of future contingencies in and to
Gods eternity, from everlasting. There is therefore in God a certain kind of
knowledge of that which is to come, which Divines call scientiam visionis,
whereby God sees from everlasting thegreatest contingencies to come to pass at
that moment of time, when we see them come to pass; which, whatsoever is the
ground of it, whether it be posible for us to say how it is possible or not,
yet this we must say of it, that it presupposes the future being of that which
it foreseeth, and therefore is no way the cause of it; Though the future being
thereof presupposes also that knowledge in God, which directs that freedom
which brings it to pass. So that the Fathers of the Church had cause to
insist (against those Heretics that derived the ^ourse and original of sin
in the world from some other cause then the freewill of the creature, and the
abuse of it) that future contingencies come not to pass because God foretells
that they will come to pass; But, that God foretells that they will come to
pass, because they are future contingencies, that is, things which, though
contingent, yet, shall come to pass; and therefore, that Gods foresight infers
no necessity in those things which he foresees shall come to pass by the free
choice of the creature. For, though there remains yet a further question,
concerning the ground of this foresight, how that can be other then necessary
which is certain, because the knowledge of God that foreteis it cannot be
uncertain; yet would it be no less evident, that the foresight of God which
supposes the future being of that which it evidenceth, causes no necessity in
that which it supposes, though I could give no account, how the future being
of that which is contingent can be certain. And, as it is not requisite to the
maintenance of Christianity, to be able to answer all questions that the
enemies of it may make; So were it very impertinent, not to allege that which
is evident in behalf thereof, because there hangs an other question at the end
of it which I cannot so evidently resolve. And upon these terms, I set aside
that necessity which Gods foresight of future contingencies infers, as
impertinent to the question in hand; being merely, the necessity of that which
must needs be, because you suppose that it is; all foresight necessarily
supposing the future being of that which is foreseen, as all sight supposes
the present being of that which is seen.

Further when I say; That, the freedom which the Covenant of Grace supposes,
in man to whom it is tendered, requires, that his will be not determined by God
before it determine it self, to wit, in order of nature; I do not therefore
require that it be always indifferent, that is, no more inclined to do then
not to do this or that. I have learned out of Aristotle's Moralls, that a
drunkard may choose whether he will be drunk or not, though it is not possible,
that he should in an instant, change that inclination to which he is
habituated, and that, as the world is, it cannot in discretion seem possible
to come to pass, that some opportunity of bringing that inclination to effect
shall not come to pass, before the inclination of his habit be changed into
the contrary, by frequence of practice. But this I say; That, in this latitude
and variety of man's inclination, he is not determined by any of them, presently
to satisfy and execute it, having so many to please besides; And that God,
without determinnig immediately, by his omnipotence, the will which remains
not determined by its own inclination, is able to bring to pass whatsoever
his providence shall order, by wills of men left at large to their own choice,
though not in a state of actual indifference, (without biasse inclining them
to do rather then not to do this rather then that) yet in a capacity of
becoming actually indifferent, by change of judgment (and, by consequence, of
inclinations) which frequent acting according to another judgment shall
produce; In the mean time not determined by God, otherwise then, as they
determine themselves. It is not therefore my meaning to say, that the will
proceeds immediately from a state of indifference, to determine it self, by
choosing that whereon the man's happiness depends. For it is manifest, that all
choice is determined by the appearance of good in the object, to reason that
sees it, nor can proceed without it. It is manifest, that all virtues and vices
are mere determinations of indifference in the Will, to some thing chosen for
a chief good. It is manifest by experience, that the proposing of an object
determines many times the Will to choose it. It is received in Philosophy, that,
from that which is indifferent, as indifferent, no action can proceed: That the
same remaining the same can never do but the same: That nothing can come to be
anew of it self, without some cause. And how shall the will, from mere
indifference, proceed immediately to do this rather then that? How shall
indifference prefer doing this, before doing that, or not doing this? My
meaning is this; That, without appearance of reason sufficient to convict the
mind what is good to be don, there is no freedom in the Will that can
determine to choose it: That, when there is no appearance of reason to the
contrary, (as in the general nature of good) there is no freedom to refuse:
That all habit of virtue or vice tends to determine indifference to the object
and act of it, and effects so much in this life, that morally, and, speaking
of that with experience and discretion will allow, it is as impossible that
some man should do any thing that is good, as some other revolt from all
goodness. And therefore do allow a kind of freedom in the blessed, as well
as in the damned, who are arrived at the full determination of the will, for
the better or for the worse, and are past deliberating any more, to which side
they shall adhere for everlasting, But their estate I account impertinent to
the question in hand, concerning that freedom in this life, the use whereof is
every man's title to the world to come, and his own share in it. As also the
estate of the blessed Angels and Devils whom all allow to be as effectually
derermined to evil or to good, upon their fall or settlement, as men are upon
the performing their race here. But as I have granted, that no man can desire
that in which he sees no reason why it is good for him* So, seeing sufficient
reason, he is not thereby immediately determined to act, but only enabled to
act according to it. The coherence of true good with the utmost happiness of
mankind is so dark, the coherence of counterfeit good with his utmost misery
so remote, that, as the apperance of counterfeit good may interpose, to defeat
the prosecution of that which sufficient reason convinces to be true, so may
the appearance of true good interpose, to deseate the prosecution of that which
is counterfeite. So that the race of this life is a continual deliberation
about the necessity of the means, even in them that have made choice of their
end. It may be disputed indeed, that when, after resolution and choice, we have
experience of great debate within us what to do, it is not the will, the
subject of freedom, that is the seat of this debate, but it is the sensual
appetite, that makes opposition to the resolution of reason; and that this
opposition is mere violence to the natural exercise of freedom, not
pretending to introduce a contrary resolution, standing the first, but hindering
execution, by degrees, upon contrary information, to reverse the sentence. But
the determination which we suppose sufficient reason had produced remains
always ineffectuall; and therefore the question must needs have recourse, what
determines the Will, till answer be made, that it proceeds effectually,
inwardly to choose and outwardly to act, by that choice, determining all
capacity of indifference in it self, which, redounding to every man's account
at the general judgment, must needs be the act of the will, that is, of the
person that does it.

By that which has been said, I conceive, I give account, why, having hitherto
established the necessity of Grace upon the account of Original sin, I now
advance a proposition tending to reconcile, as well the activity of Gods
providence generally in all things, as the efficacy of his predestination and
grace in supernatural actions, leading to the happiness of the world to come,
wiith our common freedom. For it is manifest, that this opinion of
predetermination proceeds not upon any supposition of original sin, but merely
of the nature and state of a creature; and intends to affirm, that, whether
Adam had sinned or not, the will of man must have been determined by God, to do
whatsoever it should do, as unable to determine it self, otherwise then as
every creature moves, when God moves it. And therefore I am here to acknowledge,
the answer is l^rger then the question, at least then the occasion of it, and
the resolution then the ground of the doubt: The necessity of the grace of
Christ being grounded only upon the fall of Adam, and that bringing on the
dispute, what freewill has to do where the freegrace of God cannot be spared,
and herefore what freewill it is* that remains to be freed from the bondage of
sin by grace. But, as the general comprises necessarily all particulars, it is
no esse destructive to the covenant of grace, that the freedom of the will
should be denied upon the account of the constitution of nature, then of
depravation by sin. And therefore I find my self bound to answer, in what
estate the covenant of Grace overtakes man borne in original sin, whether upon
the account of Original sin, or merely of Gods creature. But I do purposely
observe this, to all them of the Reformation, that I believe their own
consciences will tell them all, if passion or faction give leave; that all the
controversy advanced against the Church of Rome about freewill in the works of
Salvation, was grounded upon the supposition of the necessity of grace
occasioned by Original sin, from which so much is derogated as is arrogated to
freewill without i^; and therefore the controversy never needed about all kind
of works but those only that tend to salvation, the means whereof became
necessary upon the account of Original sin. Which if it be true, then cannot
the Interest of the Reformation consist in any opinion, concerning all manner of
human actions without difference, whether in the state of uprightness or sin;
Nor can any thing but the spirit of slander, impute the maintaining of Gods
grace without or against such opinions, to any inclination toward the abuses
of the Church of Rome, but to the conscience of Gods truth, without respect of
persons. For further evidence whereof, I shall make good use of the evil of
faction, if not of division, now on foot upon occasion of this dispute, as
well among those of the reformation as in the Church of Rome. For, seeing that
both parties are divided about it, though in the Reformation only the matter
has proceeded to a breach, first, between Lutherans and Calvinists in the
Empire, then in Holland between these and Arminians; he that goes about to cast
the aspersion of Popery, upon that opinion which the Papacy injoyneth not,
though it aloweth, must first answer, whether the popery of the Dominicans and
the rest of them that hold predetermination, whether the Popery of Jansenius
and his followers be Popery or not. With all, I shall think the way made
toward the proof of my position, by observing, that the ground upon which I
shall proceed to make evidence of freedom from necessity under original sin,
will necessarily take place, against the predetermination of the Will by God,
whether under Original sin, or in the state of uprightnesie. And, upon that
ground, I shall freely affirm, that this position is not only intended to
contradict, but also effectually contradicts the opinion of the
predetermination of the will by the immediate operation of God.

CHAP. XXII. The Gospel finds man free from necessity, though not from
bondage. Of the Antecedent and Consequent Will of God. Praedetermination not
the root, but the rooting up of Freedom and of Christianity. Against the
opinion of Jansenius.
THE ground which I speak of may be branched out into particulars, as large as
you please. But it shall be enough for me to say; That, whatsoever is read from
one end of the Bible to the other, concerning a treaty tendered by God to man,
concerning an alliance or covenant contracted upon it, concerning an
inheritance, or assurance of an inheritance upon that alliance, concerning
exhortations, reproves, promises, threats, inducing to observe that contract
and not to transgress it; all this, and whatsoever else may be reduced to this
nature, evidenceth that, neither freedom from necessity is lost by original
sin, nor the will of man determined by the immediate operation of God, to do,
or not to do this or that. I must further mention here, that difference between
the antecedent and the consequent, the conditional and the absolute will of
God; (the first, suspended upon some act of man's free will, the second
resolute, as supposing the same past, or not requiring it) not because the
divines, as well of the Eastern as of the Western Church have embraced it, but
because they all found, that they could not discharge their account of the
Scriptures without it. But I must not forget to mention withal, the rewards
and punishments, expressed in the Scriptures, to be brought upon the compliance
with, or resistance of those helps, which the antecedent and conditional will
of God requires, whether he choose it or not. In the Old Testament, you have
the contestations of Moses in Deuteronomy, often warning Gods people, that he
had set before them the good and the bad for them to make choice; You have the
Prophet Esaias V. 3-6. contesting with Gods vineyard, that he had done what he
could do for it, and that, having born wild grapes in stead of good fruit, it
was therefore just with him to destroy it. You have the Psalmist protesting,
the cause why he gave over his people to their enemies and to famine to be
their disobedience, Psalm. LXXXII. 9-17. You have the Prophet Ezekiel XVIII. 30,
31, 32. thus reclaiming them; Return and repent of your transgressions, and
wickedness shall not be to you a stumbling block: Cast from you all your
transgressions which you have transgressed with, and make you a new heart, and
a new spirit, for why should ye dye ye house of Israel? For I delight not in
the death of him that dies, says the Lord God; but repent ye and live. For,
is not this to say, of my self I desire not your death, but because of your
obstinacy in rejecting my Prophets? By whom he so often protests, that he had
risen betimes to send them from age to age, if by any means he might reclaim
them to his Law, and so preserve them in the inheritance of the Land of
Promise. In like manner our Lord in the Gospels Mat. XXIII. 37, 38. Luke XIII.
34, 35. Jerusalem Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent thee, how often would I have gathered thy children as a hen gathers
her chickens under her wings and ye would not? Behold your house is left unto
you desolate. And S. Steven, Acts VII. 51. Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in
hearts and ears, you do always cross the holy Ghost, as did your Fathers. And
the Scribes and Pharisees in the Gospel, made void the counsel and purpose of
God toward them, Luke VII. 30. But, above all, you have the purpose of God
manifested by the Gospel, of sending our Lord Christ for the salvation of the
World as John the Baptist says, John I. 29. Behold the Lamb of God that takes
away the sin of the World. And our Lord to Nicodemus John III. 16, 17. God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him may not perish but have life everlasting. For, God sen^ not his Son into
the World to condemn the World, but that the world by him might be saved. And
S. Paul commands Timothy, that prayers be made by the Church for all men,
even for the Powers of the World, then their enemies, as a thing pleasing to
God, Who, says he, would have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of
the truth: For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus, who gave himself an expiation for all to be witnessed in his own
time, 1 Timothy II. 4, 5, 6. And if there be any other passages of the New
Testament, as others there are, to witness that Christ is given by God for the
reconciliation and salvation of all mankind.

One I will not omit, because the mistake which is alleged to divert the sense
of it is remarkable, 2 Pet. III. 9. God slacketh not his promise, as some men
count slacknesse, but is slow to wrath in our regard, not willing that any
should perish, but all come to repentance. Which they will have to signify,
that he would have none of us, that is, of the elect to perish, because it is
said, (...), he is patient toward us the elect. They might have seen that this
is not the meaning of the words, by Luke XVIII. 7. Shall not God avenge his
elect that cry to him day and night, though slow to wrath in regard of them? I
tell you he shall avenge them speedily. (...), though slow to take vengeance in
regard of them, upon their oppressors; Is here, (...), slow to take vengeance
upon our oppressors for us, which he has promised to take. (...) in Syriack,
(...), in the Greek of the New Testament; signifying, the delaying of
vengeance, (due to them that oppress Christians, as you see by S. Luke) the
Apostle attributes to the desire of saving those whom he spares. Nor will I
stop here to show you the insufficience of those expositions, which, in despite
of the words, are fastened upon these texts, to avoid the difficulties which
they create to prejudicate opinions. For it is manifest, that the consequence
of them is no more, but the very same that arises from any Scripture, that
testifies, the means which God uses for the good of any man to become
frustrate through his fault; In consideration whereof, that God shall call them
to account at the last day, who either being convict of the truth of his
Gospel, or having means offered to be informed of the same, embrace it not, or
having embraced it, notwithstanding persevere not in it, by living as Christ
requires. Or on the contraty, that he shall reward them who embrace it, and
persevere in it. Which being so many that they are not to be avoided, without
setting a great part of the Scripture upon the rack; I count it not worth the
while to insist here, that S. Paul's meaning is not, that God would have some of
all estates to be saved, or, that he would have many to be saved, or, those
that are saved to be saved, or, upon any other of those lame expedients, which
have been applied, to plaster the wound which these plain texts do make: But I
insist upon this, that the meaning of them cannot be; That God would have those
only to be saved that shall be saved; Having such a swarm of Scriptures to
evidence, how many things there are which God would have done and are not done;
having all the importunities and complaints which God uses by his Prophets to
assure us, that he would have found that obedience at the hands of his ancient
people which he found not, all the preach^ng of his Gospel, all the motives of
believing, all the exhortations to accept and perform the Covenant of Grace in
the New Testament, ready to witness, what men are to give account for at the
day of judgment. All which must be satisfied, before there can be cause to
balk the plain meaning of S. Paul's words, which cannot seem inconvenient in any
other regard, but because they make God to will that which comes to pass, all
the Scripture witnessing. that all that shall be condemned shall be condemned
for not doing that which God would have them do. For, wheresoever Gods justice
punishes, there is it of necessity, that man had sufficient means to do
otherwise; Where it rewards, there was possibility of transgressing, there was
a capacity of indifference, and a will actually undetermined to do or not to do
this or that, notwithstanding original sin.

But, first to declare what I understand this antecedent will of God to be, I
must distinguish, with some divines, that God must not be said to will this
because of that, or for that, but may be said to will that this be because of
that, or for that, Deus non vult hoc propter hoc, sed vult hoc esse propter
hoc. When I say, because of that, or for that, I extend the observation to two
kinds of causes; To the final cause, for which a thing is said to be done,
and to the motive or impulsive cause, because of which a thing is said to be
done, when we speak of the doings of understanding and free causes. For, these
having something in consideration to move them to do what they do, this motive
which they consider, holds on the side of the effective cause, in as much as
there had been no proceeding without the consideration of it. Though it is also
true, that the motion which consideration produces, (being so called, but out
of that resemblance which it holds, with the motions which natural things
are visibly transported with) imports no more, then the appetite of some good
thing, the want whereof they apprehend, which is nothing else but the effect of
the final cause. So that the motive cause is no other then the final cause in
respect of that effect, which it has indeed moved the effective cause to
produce. So then, when I say, that God wills not this for that, or because of
that, I say, that God can have no ends upon his creatures, being from
everlasting possessed of all that he can desire, and therefore, not to be moved
with the desire of any thing which he has not, to procure it. But when I say,
God will have this to be for that, I say, that God has appointed not only his
creatures, but, whatsoever he bestows upon his creatures for that, as for
their end; which therefore if it fail, it is not God that fails of his end,
but the creature that fails of the end that God appoints it. And indeed the
doubt is vain, though to many it seems difficult, that God should fail of his
end, if we should say, that he would have any thing come to pass which indeed
comes not to pass. For, if God would have it come to pass immediately by his
own operation, and absolutely, it were indeed a faileure of his omnipotence, if
it should not come to pass: But, that he would have it to come to pass by the
operation of his creature, and reserving a condition, if it do as it should do,
supposes his omnipotence, in making the creature able to do or not to do, this
or that, but destroys it not, by the faileure of that which it is not employed
about. So also, when I say, God does this because of that, to wit, in the
nature of a motive or impulsive cause, I say no more but this, that God from
everlasting determined that it should come to pass, in consideration of that,
because of which it is truly said to come to pass. Which no way signifies any
motion of desire impressed in his own excellence, but that he orders the reason
of all things that come to pass. The antecedent then or conditional will of
God, consists in appointing all that he bestows upon his creature, or acts
toward it, for several and proper ends; But, supposes a possibility in those
ends to be brought to pass* grounded upon an ability in the creature to bring
them to pass; In so much as God, otherwise, cannot be said to treat with men as
men, nor they ground a conscience of duty, from themselves to God, but
supposing him to mean that which his words signify from them by whom they come,
and that, whosoever grants promises, commands, threatens any thing, upon an
impossible condition, neither grants, threatens, promises, or commands it, but
says right nothing. I will give you my daughter in marriage if you touch the
stars with your little finger; That is, says the Civilian in the Roman Law,
I will not give you my daughter in marriage. I say not so much: But, that God
under an impossible condition, signifies no part of his own intentions.

This antecedent will of God, they that understand not in S. Paul's words, when
he says, Christ gave himself a ransom for all, do think it enough to
distinguish, between sufficient and effectual, and that, granting the blood of
Christ to be a sufficient ransom for mankind, it will be true that he gave it
for all, though no way intending it for any but those who are saved: Which is
far otherwise. For, that which is not true without an addition abating the
proper signification of the words, is absolutely untrue, unless the addition,
not being expressed, may, by due construction of reason be found to be implied.
Now, to say; That Christ's blood is only sufficient to redeem all, but intended
to redeem only some, is to say; that it was not given for all, as S. Paul
affirms, though being a price sufficient to redeem all, it might have been
given for all; which is not enough to make good, that he gave it for all, as S.
Paul affirms. And, that it might have been given for all, being sufficient to
redeem all, is no sufficient reason to infer S. Paul's injunction of praying
for all men, even for Princes, and the Powers under them, then no friends to
Christianity; so that, whether for them or not, was more questionable then
whether for others or not. For, it follows not, because Christ's blood is
sufficient to ransom all mankind, therefore we are to pray for the salvation of
all mankind, not supposing it given for their ransom. Therefore, this addition
of abatement can by no construction of reason be found to be implied in the
words; But we must have recourse to that antecedent will of God, by which
Christ intended to pay that which was sufficient for all mankind: though, not
intending to oblige God to do the utmost of that which his justice will allow,
to bring all to salvation in consideration of it; but only what his own
wisdom should think fit to be done, in that consideration, for that purpose.
Which allows, not only a possibillity of salvation, but also a sufficience
of means to bring all mankind to it, provided by God, as purchased by Christ;
whatsoever may interpose to defeat the effect thereof, which God, not being
obliged to hinder, thinks fit in his secret wisdom to permit. Neither can this
secret will of God be any way reconciled to his declared will, (that is,
neither can this declared will of God which comes not to effect, be ever
maintained to be the will of God, as the Word of God calls it, or to be truly
declared) upon those terms; But only, to be a declaration or sign that God
would have that come to pass, which indeed he would not have come to pass, as
not coming to pass because he would not have it come to pass. But if God have
put no bar to the salvation of any man, antecedent to the death of Christ,
but has, by Christ's death, provided all means sufficient to save all, then it
is truly said John III. 16. So God loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
life everlasting; though God does not what he might do, but what he thinks fit
to do, to make the ransom which Christ gave for all effectual to the salvation
of all. Nor is this infringed by saying; that the conditional will of God is
not absolutely the will of God, but with a term of abatement, his will upon
condition which, without that addition, abating the proper sense of Gods will,
it were not. A thing which I have professed already, by premising, that God
wills not any of those things which come not to pass, as his own end, but as
the end of those means which he provides to bring them to pass. For, the
question is not about the act, but the object of Gods will, (which the Apostle
also means when he says; This is the will of God, even your holiness. 1 These.
IV 3.) when it is disputed whether all signify some, and the world the elect,
when the Scripture says, that Christ gave himself for all, and for the World,
and therefore that God would have all to be saved and none to perish. The act
of Gods antecedent will is as properly expressed by that which God would have
done, as, of his consequent will, by, that which God will do. Nor is there any
figure in saying; That God would have that done, which he will not do, because
he knows sufficient reason to the contrary, whether he declare it or not, but,
setting that reason aside, would have done; Or, that he would have that done,
which he provideth sufficient means to bring to pass. But, that all should
signify some, and the world the elect, because God will not do all he can to
save those whom he would have to be saved, is a figure in Rhetoric called
Mendacium, when a man denies the Scripture to be true. The same is the
difficulty, when our Lord Christ, who says to the Father, John XVII. 9. I ask
for them, I ask not for the world, but for them whom thou have given me, for
they are thine; prays upon the Cross; Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do. For, though he ask not that for the world which he asks for his
disciples, yet he would not have prayed for that, which he knew not that God
would have done; His prayer being the reason moving God, to grant means
effectual to bring to pass that which it desires. But, had there been in
God* a purpose to exclude the Jews from the benefit of Christ's death,
considering them as not having yet refused the grace which Christ prayed for,
it could not have been said, that he would have our Lord Christ die, or pray for
them, and therefore, that he would have them to be saved.

This is then my argument, that the will of man, is, neither by the original
constitution of God, determinable by his immediate operation, nor by man's
original sin, subject to a necessity of doing or not doing this or that.
Because God treats with the posterity of Adam, concerning the Covenant of the
Law first, and since, concerning the Covenant of grace, no otherwise, then
originally he treated with Adam, about not eating the forbidden fruit. For, in
conscience, were it for the credit of Christianity, that infidels, whom we
would persuade to be Christians, should say; True, if you could show me that
God, by his immediate act determines me to do as you require me, without which,
you tell me, I cannot do it, and with which, I cannot but do it: Or, that, by
the sin of Adam, I am not become subject to the necessity of doing or not
doing this or that; But, supposing either of these, if you move me to do what
you profess I cannot do, you are either a mad man your self, or take me for
one. Do they take their hearers for men and Christians, or for beasts, who,
having first taught, that man can do nothing but what God determines him to do,
infer thereupon, that they must endeavor themselves to do what God commands,
and what their Christianity requires? Or, that they are obliged by their
Christianity to do that, which their corruption from Adam necessitates them not
to do? Is it for the honor of Gods justice that it should be said, that he
intends to damn the most part of men, for that, which, by their original
corruption, they were utterly unable to do, without giving them sufficient help
to do it; no help being sufficient, which, the determination of the will by the
immediate operation of God makes not effectual, as they think? Do they not
make the Gospel of Christ a mockery, that make it to require a condition
impossible to be performed, by any whom God determines not to perform it,
having resolved not to determine the greatest part of them that know it, to
perform it? Certainly, this is not to make the secret will of God contradict
the declared will of God, but to make the declared will of God a mere falsehood,
unless the declaring will make contradictions true: For to will, that this be
done for an end, which God that wills will not have come to pass, makes
contradictions the object of that will and that, for the same consideration,
and at the same time God from everlasting determining merely in consideration
of his own will, that the condition of that which he would have to come to
pass conditionally, will not come to pass. What is it then, to declare all
this to the posterity of Adam already lapsed, without tendering help sufficient
to enable them to embrace what he tendereth? For, it is manifest, that Adam had
sufficient grace to do what God commanded, and it is as manifest, that God
tenders, both the Law to the Israelite, and the Gospel to the World, in the
same form as he tendered Adam the prohibition of eating the forbidden fruit: Nor
can it be denied, that this prohibition contained in the force of it, all the
persuasions, all the exhortations, all the promises, all the threatenings, which
either the Law or the Gospel, to their respective ends and purposes can be
enforced with? It must therefore be concluded, not that they suppose in Adams
posterity an ability to do what they require, as did the origiginall
prohibition of eating the forbidden fruit, but that they bring with them
sufficient help to perform it, not supposing any thing that may bar the
efficacy thereof, till the will of him to whom it is tendered makes it void.

And truly, speaking of that which the natural indowment of freedom
necessarily imports, in the reasonable creature, it is utterly impossible that
any thing should determine the will of man to do or not to do this or that, but
his own action formally, or in the nature of a formal cause, which therefore,
in the will, cannot be the action of God, nor be attributed, imputed or
ascribed to him, to whom it were blasphemy to impute that, which his creature
is honored with. That God should immediately act upon the soul of man, or his
will, is no inconvenience; Because that act must end in the will or soul, and
not attain that effect which the imperfection of the creature brings to
pass. Ending therefore in the creature, and not in that which the action of
the creature produces, it leaves the same, of necessity, in the state wherein
God first made it. And, I may well suppose here, and will suppose, that Gods
act of creation continues the same for all the time that he maintains the
creature in that perfection of being, (that is to say, in that ability of
acting) which from the beginning, he gave it.

This discourse, I confess, extends to the voiding of the immediate
concurrence of God to the actions of his creature, which my purpose necessarily
requires me not to maintain. For, concurrence-supposeth the creature to act
without help of God that concurreth, and therefore cannot be requisite on
behalf of the cause, being supposed to act of it self, but on behalf of the
effect wherein it ends; Which having a being, is supposed necessarily to
require immediate dependence upon the first being, which is God. A strange
subtlety, acknowledging the creature able to act, and supposing it to act of it
self, to imagine, that this act can end in nothing, as that which it effects,
without Gods concurrence. Which, immediately attaining the effect, in which the
action of the creature ends, will enforce, that God is as properly said to
give light as the sun, to burn as the fire, to do that act which is
essentially sin, as the man that sins: And therefore at once, not to sin,
because we suppose his concourse tied by the original Law of creation, to the
determination of his creature; And to sin, as producing immediately
whatsoever is in that action, which is essentially sin. For, unless the
species or nature of the act, importing generally no sin, were a thing
subsisting by it self, as by the understanding it is considered, setting aside
the sin which the particular that is acted implies, (as Plato is supposed to
have maintained his ideas) it is impossible that he who does the act which is
essentially sin should be said truly not to sin. The Law of concurring to
the doing of sin, and producing the act which essentially imports it,
necessarily drawing the imputation thereof upon him that freely tied himself by
settling it. Let it once be said therefore, that God made the fire able to burn,
the sun able to shine, the will of man able to make a free choice, as he is a
reasonable creature, and it will be very impertinent to require any action, but
that of the fire to the consuming of wood, but that of the sun to the
dispelling of darkness, supposing God to maintain, or rather to issue every
moment, the ability of burning or shining once given his creature, from his own
spring head of being, so long as his creature indureth. And therefore, if ever
God made the will able to choose the doing or not doing of this before that,
upon the direction, (not of right reason which directs not to sin, but
always) of reason, (for all choice supposes reason to direct it) it is
impertinent to suppose any thing requisite to the exercise of this freedom of
choice, but the maintenance of reason, issuing from the fountain of Gods
Wisdom, so long as the man continues a reasonable creature.

If the immediate concurrence of God to the action of his creature make the
actions wherein the perfection of his creature consists, (much more the
imperfections and faileurs of it) a stain to his excellence; much more shall
the act of determining the choice of his creature, (free before it be
determined) impute to God whatsoever it imports for the worse, the imputation
whereof, or the better, is a stain to his excellency. And is it possible that
God, by making the creature capable of such imputations, should depose himself
from the Throne of his Godhead, and set up his creature in his stead, in making
it able to act that, either naturally, without his immediate concurrence, or
morally also, by determining that freedom (by the use of his own reason and
choice) which he in no instance before determines? Certainly they consider not
what they grant themselves, when they suppose, that God made it able so to do,
when they make the abilities which he gives unable to do their work, till he
determine them so to do, so that, being so determined before they determine
themselves, they cannot do otherwise? And, suppose it a contradiction that the
will should choose that, which, no reason why it should choose appears;
certainly, when reason pronounces the motive that appears to be sufficient,
the action that insueth cannot be said to proceed from a cause indifferent to
act or not, though the determination thereof be not peremptory till the act
follow. Now, is there any necessity, why God should interpose to determine the
indifference of the cause, otherwise then as inabling it to determine its own
indifference? Suppose then a sentence past in the Court of Reason, importing
not only; This is to be done; But, This shall be done; Do we not see every
moment protestations made by the sensual appetite, and acts entered of them by
the judge? Indeed, if the matter of them do not bear a plea, the sentence
remains; But is it therefore necessary that execution follow? Witness those
that act against conscience; Witness Aristotels dispute of incontinence,
placing the nature of it in doing the contrary of that, which, the judgment is
resolved, ought to be done, as if the one could be absolutely the best, the
other the best at this time. Witness Medea in Ovid, when she says, Video
meliora, proboque, deteriora sequor, I see the better, but I do the worse. For,
the mouth of conscience is to be stopped, with a pretense of repentance to
come, and so, present satisfaction is clear gain by the bargain. If at length
it come to execution of the sentence, I demand what it is, that makes the
resolution from thenceforth peremptory, but the same reason that determined the
choice before, unless we suppose new matter advanced in plea first, and
afterward voided? If that which was sufficient before prove not effectual till
now* it is not because any thing was wanting, without which, the will was not
able to proceed, but because reason to the contrary appeared considerable
before. I grant there be those, that have so far determined the indifference
of their own inclinations, that no reason to the contrary appears
considerable, to delay execution of the sentence past long since. But this
appears by experience to take place, as well in those who have degenerated to
devils incarnate, as those who have improved to saints upon earth. And
therefore cannot be attributed to the force of true good, acting beyond the
appearance which it creates in the mind, because Gods immediate act directs
it; But, partly to the habitual grace of the holy Ghost, with the resolution
of Christianity, presenting true good as lovely and beautiful as indeed it is:
Partly to the custom of doing even those acts, which, without the assistance
of God Spirit, our nature cannot do. Upon which, as the habitual indowment of
the holy Ghost follows by Gods gracious promise; So, there follows naturally
a facility of doing even supernatural actions which men habituate themselves
to, by the mere force of custom, excluding the consideration of all that
reason to the contrary, that has proved abortive and addle long since. Which
notwithstanding, the choice remains free, by virtue of that original freedom
which determined the indifference of every man to those actions, the
frequenting whereof has created an habit. And this is the ground of that
account which we owe, that, God showing sufficient reason why we ought to be
Christians, and the world to the contrary, our choice has followed for the
better, or for the worse. For, the efficacy of the said reasons on either side
implies, beside the sufficiency of them, only a supposition of that which
comes to pass, which the same reasons determine a man to do, that remain
uneffectuall till the execution of sentence. But, if the will of God interpose
to determine the will before it determines, there can be no more ground for any
account, why it acts or acts not, then the earth is to give why it stands
still, or the heavens why they move. For it is not the nature of heaven and
earth that makes them stand still or move, but the will of God that made it
their nature, and creates all the necessity that follows upon it, as I said
before. If therefore a man can do nothing till God determine him to do it, and
cannot but do that which he determines him to do, then is there the same
necessity for that which he does, as for the heavens moving or the earth
standing still.

Here a difficulty is made in regard of the merits of Jesus Christ, who for the
joy set before him, underwent the cross, despising the shame, and sat down at
the right hand of God. Heb. XII. 2. And; Humbled himself, becoming obedient to
death, even the death of the Cross, Wherefore God also has over-exalted him.
Phil. II. 8, 9. As if, because the merits of Christ are the acts of a will, by
the hypostaticall union, utterly determined to the will of God, it were not
requisite that the promises of the Gospel should be obtained by performing the
Covenant of Grace, when a man might not have performed it. The answer is not to
be cleared more then the mystery of the holy Trinity is to be comprehended;
For, of a truth, how should it be understood, how the will of God the Father
freely tendered, how the same in the Son undertook to assume our nature, and
to perform the work of our redemption in it? But, upon this freedom depends the
consideration which makes the Grace of Christ due, by Gods promise. For, though
the will of man in Christ were utterly determined to that which the will of God
should choose; yet, because it became so determined by the divine will in
Christ, freely assuming our nature, the influence of that freedom, into all
that he freely did, in virtue of that choice, makes the acts thereof
meritorious of the rewards of his Cross.

Nor is there any use to be made of the distinction between the compound and
divided sense of any propositions, but those that speak of that necessity which
follows upon a supposition of the being of those things, which are said to be
necessary; That necessity, and only that it reconcileth with contingence.
Necesse est praedestinatum salvari; Non necesse est praedestinatum salvari; In
English, (for we must suppose the property of each language) it must needs be,
or, it is necessary that he who is predestinate should be saved; It is not
necessary, not of necessity, it must not needs be that he who is predestinate
should be saved. Compounding, or twisting in your mind the quality of
predestinate with salvation, that is, supposing a man to be predestinate, the
affirmative is true, necessity is attributed to the salvation of a man so
qualified; dividing them, that is, not supposing the man to be praedestinate,
the negative; Because Christianity supposes praedestination to preserve
freedom and contingence. But if you say in Latin; Praedestinatus necessario
salvatur; In English* He that is praedestinate is saved necessarily, or by
necessity; it must be utterly denied for the same cause. The same distinction
may be used, when the necessity is not upon supposition of the being of that
which is said to be necessary, but to no purpose. For, it is necessary that the
fire burn, or the Sun show us light; if wood be put to it, if it be above
our hemisphere; It is not necessary if otherwise; But this makes not that which
is necessary upon such a supposition ever a whit the more contingent: Nay it
were ridiculous to express it, because a limitation so unnecessary may be
understoode. No less necessary will that act of the will be to which God
determines, though otherwise, the being of it were not only not necessary, but
impossible. Nor will it be true to say, that he who does what God determines
him immediately to do, has power to do the contrary, at the same time, though
not to do it at the same time, simultatem potentiae ad oppositum, not potentiam
simultatis; For if the will cannot act still so determined, it were a
contradiction to say, that it has power to do that which you say it cannot do.

Wherefore if God, from the beginning, ever gave the reasonable creature a will
actually not determined to do or not to do this or that, the same will by which
God does this continuing for all that time that he maintains it, there is no
more room left, for a will of determining the same, in God, until by virtue
of his first will, it determine it self; then there is room in God, not to
will that which actually and presently he wills. It is therefore too late to
say; That God, determining, as well the manner by which all things come to
pass, as, what shall come to pass, can as well determine the acts of his
reasonable creatures to be done freely, as the acts of natural things to be
done necessarily; Having supposed before, that he determines these acts, by
determining immediately the will to do them. For though I count it necessary to
grant, that God by his providence determines all future contingences, for the
reason to be showed in due time; yet, should he determine the will to do them
without supposing it to determine it self, there could remain, neither
contingence in the effect, nor freedom in the cause. And therefore I say, that
God determines those things that come to pass freely and contingently, so to
come to pass; but he cannot determine this, by destroying freedom and
contingence: Therefore, not, by determining immediately the will of man to do
or not to do this or that. For, this determination produces not that
necessity which stands upon supposition of an act freely done, (and therefore
contingent, as that which need not have been done) or, of the foresight of
it, or, of effectual means to bring it to pa^^e, (which cannot be defeated
because they are supposed to take effect) but, that which stands only upon
supposition of the cause, which being the determination of God, and therefore,
indefeasible, the necessity which it produces, whatsoever it be for the kind,
will be stronger then any necessity, that is antecedent to the being of any
thing in the creature. And, though I said before, absolutely, that the action
of the creature cannot be imputed to God; yet upon an impossible supposition as
this, I can and must infer, that nothing can be imputed to the creature as
good or evil, to reward or punishment, but all to God; Which is a consequence
that Christian ears must not endure. For I suppose, no Christian ears can
endure to hear, that God should infuse any inclination to malice into the
heart of his creature; because, when it comes to effect, the effect will be
imputable to God, and because; before it comes to effect, the work of God must
be called evil, as inclined to evil. How then shall we endure to hear it
said, that God, by his indefeasible omnipotence, determines the creature to do
all the evil that it does, and, that, without this determination, no evil can
be done, with it, no evil can but be done? For, alas the covering will be too
short^^ to say, that God produces only the positive action of sin, the
malice incident to it (consisting in the mere want of conformity to the rule
which it ought to follow) proceeding from the imperfection of the creature.
For, the difference, between the action of sin, and the sin which it
acts, consists merely in the conceit of man's understanding, not
apprehending at once all the particulars, wherein the action consists: (No
action possibly being so badde, that, in some general considerations, common
to those which are good, it may not be counted good) But, those general
considerations express not the particular act, which is supposed to be sin;
So soon as the nature thereof is sufficiently expressed, so soon it will
appear to be essentially sin. Therefore, if God determine the creature to
the act or sin he determines it to sin. And though, upon these terms,
there can neither be sin, nor virtue, good nor evil, Law nor Gospel,
providence nor judgment to come; yet, upon these terms, the actions of the
creature will be imputable to God alone, though not as good or badde, or, as
the actions of God, yet, as the actions of him that is supposed to be God in
words, but denied to be God in effect. As for that which was said, as if
otherwise the efficacy of Gods praedestination, and that grace, which by it he
appoints for those that shall be saved could not subsist, or, as if otherwise
God could not be maintained to be the first cause, I will say no more now then
what I said, of the ground for Gods foreknowledge of future contingences; That,
when I come to say how God determines future contingences, I will do the best
I can, to render such a reason, as may maintain him to be the first cause, and
so to foresee all future contingences, by the same means, by which he
determines that they shall come to pass; without giving just ground to
infer, that there is neither contingence in the effect nor freedom in the
cause, no providence, no judgment, no Christianity appointed by God. But if I
fail of giving such a reason, I disclaim it here before I give it: and will
rather allege that I have none to give, and yet believe, both Gods effectual
providence, and the freedom and contingence of men's actions; then believe, the
determination of man's will by the immediate operation of Gods providence to be
the sourse of freedom and contingence, which, I have showed, leaves no room
for contingence, or providence.

And now I may freely grant, that Jansenius has avoided the charge of telling
what it is, that comes between the last instance of deliberation and the first
of resolution, by the immediate act of God, to enable a man to do that, which,
he that is able to deliberate and act both, is not able to bring to pass.
Which is the same Chimaera, with the imagination of infallibility in every
sentence of the present Church, when it comes to pronounce; though the premises
upon which it proceeds do not appear, even to them that pronounce,
infallible. Nor will I envy him the advantage that he may make, of the
distinction between the sense of that which is said to be necessary including
this praedetermination, and not necessary setting it aside. For, having showed,
that it is to no effect, but to destroy contingence, that is, Christianity, and
to multiply contradiction to that common sense which all own, I may well bid
much good do it. But I am not therefore bound to believe that it will serve his
turn (proceeding upon the account of indifference in the creature, and the
necessary effect of a secondary cause) who stands upon that necessity of
Grace which Original sin introduces. For how shall he say, that, setting
aside Gods praedetermination, the Will may have Grace sufficient to do the work
of Grace, including the same, it cannot but do it, who makes the will utterly
unable to do it, till it be determined to do it? And therefore takes away all
difference between effectual and sufficient Grace, all intent of Christ's dying
for them that shall not be saved? Indeed, if he extend his opinion to the
reconciling of man's free will with Gods Providence, in matters not concerning
the work of saving Grace, he may make use of praedetermination in giving
account how sin is foreknown, and the rest which hitherto he resolves not.
But, grounding himself upon the exigence of Original sin, it were not
wisdom for him to scandalize his own opinion, by making sin as necessary by
Gods act, as he makes the work of Grace. There is extant a brief resolution of
the whole question, by that learned Gentleman Thomas White, where he concludes
Paragr. X. That God determines every man so to determine himself in whatsoever
he does (by the love of good infused, and the causes which his Providence uses
to represent it desirable) that he cannot do otherwise. How he would answer
concerning evil, is not so plain by his words. He says, indeed, it is not the
same thing to determine and cause to determine, as for the Ammonites and David
to kill Vrias. But, if the murder be duly imputed to David for procuring
means toward it that might have failed, would he have God procure means that
cannot fail? It cannot be allowed, but thus, that, though of themselves they
might fail, yet, supposing the foreknowledge of God that imployeth them, that
is, supposing them to take effect, (which supposition, all the experience in
the world concludes, cannot be cleared till the effect follow) they cannot
fail. And the nature of freedom, the ground of the account to come consists
in this, that, determining a man to act, he might not have acted till the act
was done. For certainly it were a contradiction to say, that which determines
the will to act, (speaking, not of the thing without, but of the consideration
thereof in the mind) may not be extant when a man determines himself in virtue
of it. Nay, were this consideration, whereby God determines, indefeasible of
its own nature, (for, as employed by Gods Providence, that is, supposing the
effect to follow, it is) it were that very predetermination which I have
infringed by the premised discourse, coming from God, in order of reason,
first, and, in the very next instant, producing that choice wherein the
determination of the will formally consists. I will therefore conclude, that,
wheresoever, through the whole Bible, God calls any man, or his ancient people,
or by the Gospel all people, to yield him that inward obedience and worship in
spirit and truth which Christianity requires, (all this proceeding supposing
the corruption of man's nature, by the fall of Adam) there he will take account
of his disbursements, by that which the creature shall have done, not finally
determined to do it, by any thing preceding the choice. Putting you in mind, to
add to the evidence for this, all that I said in the beginning of this book,
to show, that the condition of the covenant of grace implies a resolution
generally to obey all that Christianity injoyneth. For, whatsoever delight in
the true good God may prevent and determine the will with, (as prevent it he
may and does, so as to take most certain effect) it must have in it the force
of choice upon deliberation, that makes God, in stead of the world, the utmost
end of all a man's actions. And, in virtue of this choice, whatsoever is done in
prosecution of it, consists in the like freedom of preferring it before the
difficulties that impeach it; which therefore he that will may follow and fail
of his purpose. He that might have transgressed and did not, his goods shall be
firm says Ecclesiasticus, XXXI. 10. 11. Christianity then supposes free
choice as well to do rather then not to do, as to do this rather then that.
But Christianity cannot suppose this freedom, till it can suppose, the reason
why every thing is to be done, to appear. For, that is it which must determine
the indifference of man's will to proceed. And therefore, if there be any
thing, which, without Christianity, a man under Original sin stands not
convinced that it is to be done; though, supposing Christianity, his freedom
may extend to it, yet, not supposing the same it does not. This is that which I
come to in the next place.

CHAP. XXIII. A man is able to do things truly honest under Original sin.
But not to make God the end of all his doings. How all the actions of the
Gentiles are sins. They are accountable only for the Law of nature. How all
men have or have not Grace sufficient to save.
NOw, to the second part of my position, I say, that, though, notwithstanding
the inclination of Original concupiscnce, a man is able to do any kind of
act, toward himself, toward all other men, or toward God, yet is he not
able to do any, for that reason for which it is indeed to be don; And
therefore that he is by his birth slave to sin, and without the grace of
Christ, cannot become free of that bondage. The first part of this position
stands upon the words of S, Paul, Romans XI. 14, 15. For when the Gentiles, that
have not the Law, do by nature the things; of the Law, these, not having the
Law, are a Law to themselves; who show the work of the Law written in their
hearts, their consciences bearing witness with them, and their thoughts
afterward, interchangeable accusing or excusing. I know, S Augustine, Prosper,
and Fulgentius, will have this to be said of the Gentiles, that had been
converted to Christianity. But having showed, that the interpretation of the
Scripture is not subject to the authority or judg^ment of particular Doctors;
and knowing that the tradition of the Church neither went before them* nor has
followed after them, to make the position upon which their interpretation
proceeds a point of faith; I follow p^remptory reason from the process of S.
Paule^ discourse. Who, having conclued the Gentiles to be liable to Gods
judgment in case they embrace not Christianity, and comeing to do the like,
for the Jews, upon a supposition, which he takes to be evident upon
experience, (as appealing to their own consciences in it) that they kept not
Gods Law, by which they hoped to be saved; Procee^s to compare with them the
Gentiles whom he had convicted before, that he may prove the Jews to have as
much need of the Gospel, as he had proved the Gentiles to have. He says then,
that the Gentiles have also a law of God, which is, the sense of Gods will
which nature works in their hearts. And that, as the Jews did many things
according to Gods written Law, so did the Gentiles according to the Law of
nature: But, if they could say, that the Gentiles kept not the law of nature,
as hitherto he had proved; No less might the Gentiles say, that they kept not
the Law by which they pretended to be righteous before God. This, you shall
easily perceive to be S. Paul's business, if you compare that which he writes
Romans XI, 12, 13. 17. 24. concerning the Jews, with that which went before from
Romans I. 18. concerning the Gentiles. Indeed, when the Apostle afterward,
compares the circumcision of the heart which makes a spiritual Jew with the
Gentile, who, in his uncircumcision, does the same righteous things of the Law,
which the said spiritual Jew does, Romans 11. 25, 29. as I acknowledge, that
there is no spiritual Jew by the letter of the law, but by the grace of the
Gospel, (which, though covertly, had course and took effect, though in a less
measure, under the Law:) so I must acknowledge, that none but the Gentiles
converted to Christianity can be compared to him. But, it is no prejudice to
the Apostels argument, to say, that the Gentile is capable of that, by the
Gospel, which, the Jew could not boast of by the Law, but, by the grace of the
Gospel under the Law. Whereas, if the apostle do not convict the Jew to have
need of the Gospel by showing the Gentile to beer the same fruits by the Law
of nature, which the Jew brought forth by the law of Moses; be leaves him
utterly unconvicted of the necessity God had, to bring in the gospel, for the
salvation of the Jew, as well as of the Gentile. And therefore when S. Paul
names, the things of the Law, he comp^^^eth as we^l ^hoseduties that concern
God, as those which concern our selves and our neighbors. Agreeing herein
with the experience of all ages, and nations, which allows religion toward
God to be a Law of all Nations, as well as the ^ifference between right and
wrong in civil contracts, between honest and sh^mefull in men's private
actions, to be impressed by God upon their hearts, and from thence expressed in
their Laws and customs.

And truly it can by no means be denied, that the difference of three sorts of
good things, honesta, utilia, ^ jucunda, things honest, useful, and
pleasurable, is both understood and admitted amongst heathen nations; That is
to say, that heathen nations do acknowledge, that there are some things, which,
of themselves agreeing with the dignity of man's nature, are more worthy to be
embraced, then those which present us, either with profit or pleasure, without
consideration of what beseemes us otherwise. ^o which, assuming this, as
evident by experience of the world, that* the reason of that which is honest or
honorable, as suitable with the dignity and worth of man's excellency, is not
always contradicted, in occasions of action, either by profit or pleasure;
there will be no possible reason for any man to deny, that, notwithstanding
Original concupiscence, a man may be led, by reason of honesty, to do that
which it requires. Whereof we have invincible evidence, not only in the
Philosophy of the Greeks, and the Civility of the Romans, but in the works of
mercy and virtue, which every Christian may receive at the hands of the Jews
and Mahumetans, so often as they are not overswayed by their passion or
interest. But now, for the reason which their actions do or ought to follow,
whereas it is certain, that the reason of all men's actions is derived from the
end, which they propose themselves, and, that the end which they ought to
propose themselves is the service of God; It is as certain on the other side,
that, through the original corrup^ion of nature, a man is not able to resolve,
to make God the utmost end of his actions, and, that, not resolving this, he
cannot become free of the bondage of sin. This remains already proved by the
necessity of the Grace of Christ demonstrated before, and stands perfectly
verified, by the experience of all ages, and Nations, alleged even now. For,
though there is in all men conscience to prefer that which is honest, and
more honorable, before either profit or pleasure; notwithstanding experience
shows, that the world is never without occasions, wherein it cannot be
obtained, together with profit or pleasure: And the same experience will show,
that the motives of profit and pleasure, (which Christians therefore call
temptations, because they know from whence they proceed) easily prevail over
the conscience of that, which were, according to the due worth of our manhood,
more honorable for us. This, if we take every man by himself, considering
him, as not engaged in society, and communion with others: But, if we suppose
him prevented with such relations, it is admirable to consider, but evident to
be observed, that men are more Wolves to men then Wo^ves are to Wolves, and
that, by those oppressions and cruelties, whereof there is no example in the
wildest of beasts, men m^ke themselves way to the greatest glory that the world
can raise. This is that which Macchiavell observes that the world esteems great
things, whether they be good or not and magnifying those that follow them,
shows, that it is not for want of will, but for want of means and
opportunities, that the* most do not do the like. Nay, they that have the
best resolutions, when they are alone, when they ing^ge themselves but in
company, do proceed as if they thought it civility, to offend God, for love of
them whom they converse with. These are the temptations of the flesh and the
world, that hold men obnoxious to the bondage of sin, notwithstanding that
conscience, which prefers honesty before profit or pleasure. And in regard of
this bondage our Lord said in the Gospel John VIII. 31, 37. If ye abide in my
words ye are truly my disciples, and shall know the truth, and the truth shall
set you free. And when they answer, that, ^eing Abraham's Sons, they were never
slaves; Every one that commits sin, is a slave of sin, Now the slave abides
not always in the house, but the son abides always. If therefore the son set
you free, then shall you be free indeed. And S. Paul hereupon, Romans VI. 17, 18.
thanks be to God, that being slaves to sin, ye obayed from the heart that form
of Doctrine that was delivered you, And, being freed from sin ye became slaves
to righteousness. For, out of the sense of this bondage he cries out again,
Romans ^II. 24. Wr^t h^d man that I am, who shall diliver me from the body of
this death? Which if it be said of the unregenerate man, expresses the estate
of all such: If, of S. Paul, concludes the unregenerate to be in that estate
much more. And, indeed, Original concupisence having brought into the world
the ignorance of that truth, which the Fathers had received from God,
concerning God, as I said before* it cannot be imagin^d, that men should be
induced by that sl^nder light which remains, of one God and his providence*
and that suspicion which was left, that he will one ^^y take account of man's
actions, to balke the temptation of profit and pleasure, out of a resolution,
to do all things which the light of nature might con^^ce them to be according
to Gods Will, for no other reason, but to obey him, and to do him service,
though otherwise convict, that all is due to him, whatsoever they are able to
do for his service. Hence came the worship of Idols, even among them, whom S.
Paul affirms to have known the majesty of one true God. Rom I. 20. And, hence
came those sins, which he has showed us, in that first Chapter of his Epistle
to the Romans, to have been the native consequences of the worship of Idols.
Hence came all counterfei^ Religion into the world, in as, much, as they that
know themselves to be liable to some Religon, are, nevertheless, unwilling to
embrace that which obliges them to resign themselves to the service o^ God* so
long as any can be showed them, which may tender them plausible p^rswasions of
pe^ce with God, reserving their own passions and interests: And that very
Religion, which God had tied his own people to, (for a means to bring them to
understand the difference between the civil obedience and the outward service,
to which he had promised the happiness of the land of promise and that
spiritual service of God to which he intimated the promise of the world to
come,) became so darkened by the same common corruption of nature* that in a
manner, the whole body of that people, when they had retired themselves from
the worship of Idols, to the observation of the Law, was carried away with an
opinion of righteousness before God, in consideration of the outward
observations thereof, consisting in those works, which by the force of common
nature, I have showed, they were able to do, without troubling themselves with
the true reason from which they are to be deriveed, and the right intention to
which they are to be levelled, which, here I show, that only the grace of
Christ inableth us to set before us.

By that which has been said, a difficult objection may be answered, which
arises from the consideration of those Philosophers and Heretics, who have
not been* ^or are afraid to lay down their lives, for the maintenance of their
Sect or Religion, by testifying the truth of it; as we read in S. Chrysostom
that many of the same Marcionists would do. For, if they can endure this,
(which is the utmost that they can endure) without the help of God, who
requires it not at their hands, what should hinder other men, to lay down their
lives for God, and, by consequence, to overcome less difficulties, which
hinder them to follow the true goodness which God requires* This is answered
by the terms* of my position, that there is no kind of act which a man o^
himself cannot do, but the reason of Gods will, and the intent of Gods
service, of himself he cannot do it for, though he may think that he does it
for no thing else. For evidence whereof I must have recourse to that which I
said before, in resolving, whether there is any such faith to be ^ound, as is
not the virtue of a Christian. For, accordingly, I will distinguish, that faith
is either the belief of the gospel and Christianity, or the profession of it,
whether sincere or counterfeit. I say then, that, the sincere resolution of
professing of* Christianity, (being the condition, to which all the promises of
the Gosple are due as I have showed*) is the work of that grace, which the
obedience of Ch^^ath purchased for us. In order whereunto, though the preaching
of the Gospel contains sufficient motives to convince the world of the truth
of it; yet, seeing the publishing of those motives, by the Apostles of
Chr^st^^^ the purchase of his blood, and seeing, those motives, being, though
sufficient, yet, not demonstrative, are resisted by the greater part, it is the
work of Gods grace, wheresoever they become effectual, to move any man to
believe that Christianity is true, in order to the resolution of embracing it.
Notwithstanding, in as much as, the profession of Christianity, when it is
pro^ected by the powers of this world, is no disadvantage, but a privilege,
(especialy where there is difference about Christianity, and a man professes
what the Secular Power professes) it is easy to see, that there is reason
enough in this world, to move a man to profess Christianity for his own sake,
and not for Gods. Much more to believe the truth of it, for which he ha^^
sufficient reason besides. But, this Faith not being that which is called Faith
absolutely, but with an addition of abatement, we are absolutely to conclude,
with the council of Orange, that to believe as a man ought, is not the work of
freewill, but of Gods grace; The limitation of, as a man ought, serving to
exclude such counterfeit faith as I have described. Now, though this reason of
professing Christianity for advantage of this world, be the most ordinary and
visible, when Christianity is protected by the Laws, and Powers of the world;
yet may it as well come to pass and effect otherwise, or at least, that which
countervailes it. For Aristotle observes unto us in his Morals, that all men
are not carried away, either with the profit of this world or the pleasure or
honors, there are those that prefer virtue whether speculative, or active;
Though this active virtue, he describes to consist in that mean, which the
discretion of the world determines. For, he often repeats this for his
principle, in that work, that the difference of good and bad must be taken for
granted, from that which the civility of the world accknowledges. But, how easy
it is for them, who have addicted themselves to the profession of that
civility, of that knowledge, which the world pretends not to, to embrace and
profess opinions which the world allows not, and, having made it their
business in the world, rather part with their lives, then be constrained,
either to believe, or, not beleiving, to profess otherwise? How much more, in
the knowledge of God, and the hope of happiness, (which we suppose
Christianity truly to promise) may a man, that pursu^s not the truth of it with
that humility which it requires, by the judgment of God, fastening upon false
principles, by virtue of them be induced to embrace those conclusions, which he
shall rather part with his life, then refuse, and yet for his own sake, not
for Gods, who teaches them not?

And upon these premises we may determine, whether all the actions of the
Gentiles, and unregenerate, are sins or not; at least, so far as it is
requisite to determine any thing in it. For, on the one side, it is evident,
that, seeing it is imposible, that they should, by nature, attain to a
resolution of doing all that they do in obedience to the will of God and with
an intent of his service; It is not possible, that their actions should have
that utmost end which they ought to have. On the other side, seeing it
appears, that nothing hinders them to do things for the mere regard of
honesty, or of doing good to others, without making themselves positively and
expressly the end of what they do; It is manifest, that the next end which
they intend by them may be good, and that the things which they do are such,
as, of their own nature, may be ordered and directed to the service of God,
though by them not so intended. And therefore, when it is said, that
unregenerat men do all for themselves as their utmost end, we must distinguish
in themselves, the seeds of virtue; which the common notions of difference
between good and bad contain* from the cor^tion of orignall concupiscence.
For, well may we say, when they are moved with regard of honesty to do any
thing, that they do it for themselves, because it is the native worth of their
manhood which moves them to do it. But when it is said; That, adicting
themselves to the riches, or honors or pleaof this world fro which they addict
them selves to, love of themselves, they make themselves their utmost end; This
must be understood, as in Moral matters, for the maine part of their doings;
The love of riches, honor, or pleasure* much less of civil virtue, not
disabling them, or, so swallowing up all consideration of that, which of it
self suits with the worth of man's nature, but that, without any other regard,
they may many times choose to do it* And therefore, having made good the grounds
aforesaid, I shall leave it to the readers own judgment, whether he will hold
all their actions to be si^s, because they are not positively directed to the
utmost end of Gods honor and service, or, those which are don for honesties
sake to be virtues, because they are positively directed to that next end that
is according to Gods will, and might have been directed to his service:
Assuring my self, that no interest of Christianiny obliges either me or him,
to determine this or that.

And now, before I leave this point, I infer again here from the reasons
which I have used, to prove the capacity of in^^fference in the will of man,
excluding the actual determination of it, before he determine himself; That
all this is not to say, that indifference is requisite to all freedom, but to
the freedom of man alone, in this state of travail and proficience* For, my
ground is, Gods ^en^^r of a treaty and conditions of peace and reconcilement
together with those precepts and prohibitions, those promises and threats,
th^se exhortations and dehortations which it is enforced with. So that it is
^^^^^ly impertinent, to allege here the freedom of God and Angels, the
freedom of the ^a^^s in the world to come, the freedom of our Lord Christ's
humane soul, to prove, that this indifference is not requisite to the freedom
of man, because it is not found in that freedom which they are arived to; to
whom no covenant is tendered, no precept requisite, no exhortation useful, as
being either the cause of all rule of goodness, or so united to it, h^^ they
cannot fail of it. And, though the perfection of their estate admits no
possibility of failing, yet it is no ways prejudicial to the honor of God, to
provide men here of such an estate, as is necessarily capable of failing; His
perfection being such, as is necessarily capable of improvement. And therefore,
it is no disparagement to God, that he should create a possibility of sinning
in that crea^ure, in which, if there were now not a posibility of sin^ing,
there could not be a posibility of attaining happiness by not sining.

These things thus settled, it remains that we inquire, whether that sufficien^
grace, which the difference between the an^ecedent and consequent will of God
settles, be granted indifferently to all mankind or not. And my answer is
briefly this* That God has provided for all mankind that grace, which, at a
dist^nce is sufficient to save all mankind: But, that grace which i^^^mediately
sufficient to save, he has not immediately provided for all mankind, but has
trusted hi^ Church to provide it for the rest of mankind, having left them
means suffic^ent, to do it. My reason is this, because, where God sends
immediately means sufficient to save by converting to Christianity, there, he
will d^mand an acount of the neglect of that means which hetendreth. For, I
suppose from that which I said in the first book against the Leviathan, that,
as many as come to the knowledge of Christianity are obliged to receive it.
Certainly, he that believes the Christian faith must needs believe, that God
has don enough to oblige all that come to know the truth of it, to submit
themselves to it otherwise to remain liable, not only to those sins which they
are under when they come to know it, but to the guilt of neglecting so great
salvation, provided, and tendered by God. Now, that those who never heard of the
gospel of Christ, and remain destitute of all means, to be informed of the
truth of Christianity, shall not be ju^ged, either for neglecting, or
transgressing that will of God which it publishes, will appear, by manifest
consequence from the express w^r^s of S Paul concerning the judgment, which,
the Jews and Gentiles, before the ^os^ell, remain subject to, Romans XI. 12.
16. For, as many as have sinned without ^^^ ^^w* al perish without the law, and
as many as have sinned under the Law, shallbe (...) by the Law, For the hearers
of the law are not just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be
justified, For when the gentiles, not having the Law, do by nature the things
of the law, these not having the law, are a law to themselves, who show the
work^ of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also witnessing with
them, and their thoughts interchangably accusing or excusing, in the day that
God shall judge the secrets of man according to my gospel. Some const^ue these
words thus; As many as have sinned without the law shall perish without the
law, in the day that God shall judge the secrets of men according to my gospel.
If those that sin without the Law shall perish without the Law, it is manifest,
that they shall not be condemned for transgressing the law which they never
knew: And, if the ground why they perish be the law that is written in their
hearts, to which their conscience bears witness, when their thoughts accuse
or excuse them; Whether this be at the day of judgment or not; it is plain,
the conscience can never accuse a man, (nor, by consequence, God condem him)
for transgressing the will of God which he never knew. And if God proceed not
with the Gentiles, upon the Law which the Isralites only knew, but upon the
light and law of nature, by which, not knowing the Law, they found themselves
obliged to do that which it commanded; Then shall he not proced upon the
Gospel, with them who never had means to know it, but upon the light of
nature, and the conscience of what they have don or not don, according to it,
or against it. And indeed, the words of our Lord are plain enough* John III.
17-21. God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but, that the
world through him might be saved. He that believes on him shall not be
condemned but he that beleiveth not on him is condemned already, because he
believed not in the name of *the only begotten Son of God. And the
condemnation is this; that light is come into the world, and men love darkness
better then light, because their works are evil. For every one that does evil
hates the light, and comes not to the light, that his works be not reproved:
But he that does the truth comes to the light, that his works may be manifest,
that they are done in God. For, he tha^ is condemned for not believing, because
he hates the light, must first see the light before he hate it, and so,
positively refuse to believe, because his works will not endure the light. And
no man could do the truth, and that in God, but he that was under the law of
God: Who, if he did not the truth which the Law requires, would consequently
hate the truth which the gospel preaches. So, he that is condemned for not
beleiving, is he that hears the gospel and receives it not. And to this
reason we must refer the words of S Paul Act XIV. 16. Who, in by past ages,
suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways; And again, Acts X^II. 3^. God
therefore, who did oversee the times of ignorance now injo^^r^h all men every
where to repent. And, Romans III. 25. 26. Whom God has proposed for a
propitiatory through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, because
of the passing by of sins that went before: To declare, I say, his
righteousness at this present time. For, we cannot imagine, that he will not
demand account, of the sins that have been done from the beginning of the
world, of whom Enoch, the seventh from Adam prophesied saying; Behold the Lord
is come with the ten thousands of his holy Angels, to do judgment upon all,
and to rebuke all the ungodly of them, of all the ungodliness which they have
committed, and of all the bad words they have spoken against him, wicked
sinners; Jude. 14. 15. And it is not for nothing, that God, when he let the
Gentiles alone to walk in their own ways, no withstanding, left not himself
without witness, doing good, giving us rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness, as S. Pa. proceeds Acts
XIV. 17. Nor, that he made of one blood all Nations of men to dwell upon the
face of the whole Earth determining times appointed before to the bounds of
their dwelling, that they might seek the Lord, if by any means they might
find him by groping, though not far distant from each one of us; For in him we
live, and move, and have our being, as some also of your Posts have said; For
we are his offspring, As the same S. Paul had premised Acts XVII. 26. 27. 28.
For, to what serves his witness; but to inform the process of his judgment?
But God is said to have let them alone, passing by their sins, because, by
tendering them his gospel, he did not aggravate their judgment in case they
should refuse it, nor require of them that obedience which it infers:
Whereas, by the Gospel, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven upon all
ungodliness and unrighteousnes of men that hold the truth in unrighteousnes,
as S. Paul says Romans ^. 18. 19. Because, says he, that which may be known of
God is manifest in them; for God has manifested it to them by his works, as it
follows there; So that the Gospel, as it declares the judgment of God upon
those sins that are done under the light of nature; so it declares so much
heavier vengeance, against those, which are done under and against the light
which it shows. Which is the reason why, so many times, in the Psalms, the
bringing in of the gospel is prophesied, under the figure of Gods coming to
Judgment, Psalm L. XCVI. XCVII. XCVIII. And indeed there is necessary reason
for this, if we believe that God will judge every man according to his works at
the last day. Which, as I showed you, in the dispute concerning justifying
Faith, that it is a principle of our common Christianity, an Article of our
belief, which no man can be saved, that holds not; So I may, thereupon further
say; That all men that are under the Gospel shall be judged according to that
obedience which the gospel and Christianity requires* For, if S. Paul had
only said; Romans XI. 12* 16. As many as have sinned without the Law shall
perish without the law: And, as many as have sinned under the law shall be
condemned by the law, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men
according to my gospel* by Jesus Christ, As the construction which I spoke of
even now requires; He had only said, that the gospel declares, that God
shall judge the secrets of men by Christ: Which is that which the apostles
witnessed, as from our Lord Christ, to move men to embrace it. But having said
also, that, the Law is not given to the righteous, but to the lawless and
disobedient, to the ungodly and sinful to -- and if there be any thing
opposite to the sound doctrine which is according to the glorious Gospel of
the blessed God which I am trusted with; 1, Tim. I, 9, 10, 11. He shows us
also, that those who have been under the preaching of the Gospel, shall be
judged according to that obedience which the Gospel requires; To wit,
according as they have either performed or neglected it. The reason, because, I
have showed, the Gospel not to contain a mere promise of Gods part, but a
covenant with man, by which he must stand or fall, as he has performed the
terms of it or not But to neglect the gospel, or to transgress it, cannot
have been any part of their works, that never heard of it; and therefore, they
cannot be judged by it, but, by the work of Gods law which is wri^ten in their
hearts by virtue whereof, their conscience bearing witness of the works that
they have don or not don, the thoughts thereof shall accuse or excuse them
before God, as S. Paul says of the gentiles during the Law. But, had they been
tendered that grace which is sufficient to save, without doubt they must have
given account to God of it, the account being grounded upon that which a man
receives, as our Savior shows by the parable of the Talents. And, that
servant which knows his masters will and prepares not, and does according to
his will, shall be beaten with many stripes; But he that knows not, and does
things that deserve stripes, shall be beaten with a few; Says our Lord, Luke
XII. 47. 48 Not as i^ any servant knew nothing of his masters will, as I have
showed, by the light of nature; For, how should he then do that which deserves
stripes? But, because, many know not that will which our Savior preaches,
and, not knowing it, are not under account for it.

Indeed God, for his part, has provided, that grace, which is sufficient for
the salvation of all mankind, by providing our Lord Christ whose obedience and
sufferings have purchased the coming of the Holy Ghost upon his disciples, and
enabled them, both by the works which he had given them to do, and, by the
interpretation of the old Testament concerning our Lord Christ, to tender the
world sufficient conviction of his rising again, and of the faith of those
promises, which he has made to all them that take up his Cross, to become
conformable to his sufferings. But, these promises are so great, that whosoever
stands convict that they are true, must needs stand convict, that he is in
reason bound to embrace the condition upon which they are tendered, unless he
can make a question, whether the world to come is to be preferred before this
or not. And this I affirm to be sufficient grace, contained in the preaching
of the gospel, which tendreth this conviction to all mankind; supposing that,
no immediate act of God is requisite, to determine him that stands so
convict, to embrace it, but, that it must be the act of his own free choice,
that must resolve him to it. And all this of the mere free grace of God, in as
much as, nothing but his own free grace could have moved him to provide this
means, which, only the coming of our Lord Christ could furnish. And, though,
for the glory of his goodness, this means is common to all mankind, in as
much as the motives of faith, wherein it consists, are of the same force and
virtue toward all; yet is it no less the grace of Christ, being the purchase
of his obedience and sufferings. For, if it be said, that the work of
embracing the Christian faith is supernatural, in as much as it tends to
supernatural happiness; It is to be answered, that all the means that God
uses, to induce us to embrace the same, are also supernatural, being provided
by Gods immediate act, beyond all the force of nature, and therefore
proportionable to the work which they require. And, if it be said; That the
difficulty thereof, in regard of original concupiscence, is such as no reason
can overcome; It is answered; That, as these motives are the productions and
instruments of Gods spirit, accompaning his word, whereby it knocks at the
hearts of them to whom this conviction is tendered; so they carry with them a
promise of the habitual assistance of Gods spirit, to move them that yield
themselves to it, to perform that which they undertake, notwithstanding
Original concupiscence.

In the mean time, these being the grounds of this sufficience, it is
manifest, that, as many as are utterly destitute of these means, and that by
no fault of their own, in neglecting opportunities of being informed, cannot be
said to have had that grace, which is immediately ^ufficient to save them. For,
if Christ immediately preached is only grace immediately sufficient, then have
not they, to whom Christ is not immediately preached, that grace which only is
immediately sufficient. So that the motives of Christianity, (the last whereof
is the fulfilling of all Prophesies concerning the calling of the gentiles,)
being absolutely provided, that grace is provided for all, which is sufficient
to save all at a distance. But, the preaching of Christ to all, not being
immediately provided by God, but recommended to his Church, under that
obligation which he has laid upon it to that purpose; that grace which is
immediately sufficient to save all, is not immediately given all, being given,
by that will of God, the effect whereof he has trusted to the ministry of his
church, and, by consequence, left the gu^^t of making void his counsel in it,
not upon those that never heard of any such counsel of his, but upon the
causers of intestine divisions in the Church, of corruption in the faith, and
in the manners of the Church. For, it is utterly impossible, that, without
unity in the faith, without living conformably to that which we profess, that
Faith which is destroyed by them that profess it, should prevail over the
enemies of it. In particular, let no man think, that I allow, that preaching of
the gospel, which I maintain to be sufficient grace, to consist in never so
many declamations, or rather exclamations out of the Pulpits, to return to the
ways of Christianity; cautioning, in the mean time, that all the promises of
the gospel are due, by the immediate and personal imputation of the obedience
of Christ, unto the elect alone; God, in his time, immediately determining
their will to embrace Christ, as the wills of the reprobate to cast him away.
For if the true motives of Christianity, represented by the Church as they are
delivered by the Scriptures, be sufficient grace to save all men; then is it a
peremptory bar to the sufficience thereof, to make those motives inconsistent
with the common sense of all men, in the conviction whereof this sufficience
consists. And they who preach so, how much soever they call themselves
ministers of the gospel, are not the ministers of Gods word but their own.

CHAP. XXIV. Though God determines not the will immediately, yet he
determines the effect thereof by the means of his providence, presenting the
object so as he foresees it will choose, The cases of Pharaoh, of Solomon, of
Ahab, and of the Jews that crucified Christ. Of Gods foreknowledg of future
conditionalls that come not to pass. The ground of foreknowledg of future
contingencies. Difficult objections answered.
Now that I may resolve you, what it is that makes this sufficient grace become
effectual, I say that, though God determine not, by his immediate act, the
freewill of man, to do or not to do this or that, yet he has determined from
everlasting, the events of all future contingencies, by determining the
objects, whether inward or outward, which all men, in all occasions that shall
come to pass, shall meet with; knowing, that the considerat on of them, will
move them, effectualiy to resolve upon doing or not doing that which they shall
do or not do. Outward objects I call the things themselves, that present
themselves to man's senses: Inward, the representations of them laid up in the
storehouse of man's mind, (whether for the fansy or understanding) the
consideration whereof, may tender him that which comes under deliberation,
under the appearance of good, whether true or counterfeit. And my meaning is,
that the providence of God, in determining the objects which every man shall
meet with, to move him to resolve this or that, proceeds, either upon the
original right of God toward his creature, in presenting it with that,
whereupon, he knows, a man will resolve to do either good or bad; Or, upon
the reason of reward or punishment, which, the foregoing actions of every man
and the impressions and inclinations to good or evil which they have left in
him, shall discern: Saving, what his own free grace shall disburse of mere
bounty, over and above that, which his merciful justice, (that is to say,
those promises, which of his free goodness he has made to man.) does any way
require at his hands. For, as it is Gods free grace to enter into covenant with
man, so it is a part of Justice in him, according to the scriptures, to make
good his promises, even unto them, who by the terms of the covenant, which they
so often transgress, can challenge nothing at his hands. My position is
averred, by all those scriptures, which declare, how God brings to pass his
counsels declared a fore. In rendering the sense whereof, I shall not need to
suppose that, which, having proved already, I may of right suppose; That God,
by his immediate act, determines not the will of man to do this or that, or
not to do; Because, by the true course, which, the Scriptures express God to
hold in bringing his purposes to effect, that course will appear to be false,
over and above, what has been said.

I being with Pharaoh. When God intends to deliver the Isralites out of his
hands, when God suffered the Magicians to do the three first plagues, was it
because he, that suffered not Balaam to curse Israel, when he sacrifised thrice
to his Devils, to put a curse against Israel in his mouth, Number. XXIII. 2-17-34
could not have hindered their acts to take effect? Or, because he had deserved
by oppresseing Israel* to be given up to their temptations; which, because God
knew they would prevail over him it is truly said, both that God ha^^ned
Pharaohs heart, and, that Pharoh hardened his heart, or that his heart was hard.
Ex. VII. 3. 13. VIII. 10, 15, 28. IX 7. 12. 34. X. 11. 20. There is an other
passage of the story very much to be observed, because the sense of it lies in
the ^^gh^ translation of the original words, which, how unusual soever it
seem, is very manifest, by the consequence of the text, Ex. IX. 14. 15. 16.
For, at this time, I send all my plagues upon thine heart* and thy servants,
and thy people, that thou may know, that there is none Like me in all the
earth. For, already had I sent my plague, and struck thee and thy people with
the Pestilence (which had destroyed the cattle before, Ex IX 6) and that had
been destroyed from the earth* Only for this have I preserved thee, to show
thee my power, that my name might be spoken of all over the earth. It is
manifest that God means to say, that he had destroyed Pharao a^^re, had it not
been to show a greater work. And, he that considers, that the Hebrew has
nothing but the indicative to signify all moods and tenses, will mak^ no quest
on of it. The Greek plainly expresses it, (...), And the Chaldee of O^kelus
(...). Nunc enim aderat mihi ^t mitterem, For it was now near me to stretch
forth my hand. That is, I was near doing it; Perhaps signifies neither more
nor less And if S. Paul translates part of i^ word for word (...); For this
cause have I raised thee up, that I might s^ew my power upon thee; Yet is that
nothing to the sense; of that which went before, nor, to argue any intent in S.
^aul, to give occasion for those horrible imaginations, that have been framed
upon these words, as if God made Pharo, and all in his case, on purpose to show
his power, and get glory, by damning them to everlasting torments. For, it
follows a little after in S. Paul; What if God, wi^ling to show his wrath, and
make known his power, have borne with much long ^uffering the vessels of
wrath, fit for destruction: And that to make known the riches of his Glory
upon vessels of mercy, which he had prepared for glory. In which words it is
manifest, that God spared the life of Pharao, in the plague of pestilence,
though then fit for destruction (For, by this discourse it appears (...) here
signifi^s Fit of themselves, not fitted by God,) out of his long suffering,
though willing, that is, determining to make his power known by destroying
him, proving utterly obdurate. But this out of an intent, by the consideration
of what they had seen come upon him to win his own people from the Idolatry of
Egypt, to submit to his law. As, when S. Paul writ, by the judgments of God
upon the Jews, for rejecting Christianity, he called the gentiles to it. For
this is the inference that S. Paul makes in the next words; Which are even we
whom he has called, not only of the Jews but of the Gentiles. Introducing in
the same words, that comparison between the Jews whom he then called to the
Law, and the Gentiles whom he was now calling to Christianity, which the
correspondence between the Old and New testament imports, And so, the sense
of S. Paul is the same with that which S. ^eter said in the words quoted before;
that God delays his wrath in taking vengeance upon the oppressors of his
people, because he would have none of them perish, but all come to repentance.
The sense which I deliver you have in Grotius his Annotations, and, before the
publishing of them in a book of Miletrius concerning this subject, since, in
the late Annotations, and, before any of them came forth many years, I had
declared it for my sense of these words. By which you may see, that Pharao,
seeing himself and his people not cut off, when their cattle were destroyed by
the pestilence, did not believe that it came from God; And also, when God had
declared his purpose in preserving him alive to terrify him the more, and,
when he had caused the plague of Hail to cease, which then he moves him with,
is (by the love of rule over those, whom, by right he had nothing ^o do with)
persuaded to break his promise of letting them go, when it should cease,
Moses having told him that he would break it. Ex. IX. 27-35. And because God
knew that these temptations would prevail over Pharao, therefore he had
foretold the plagues, and the deliverance of his people upon them Ex. III. 19.
VI. 2. an^ therefore, it is truly said, both, that God hardened Pharos heart,
(to wit, by causing him to meet with these considerations, which made him
neglect the plague. For, that which, elsew^e^e, is called hardening of his
heart, (is called not setting his heart upon the plague, ^x. VII. 23.) and*
that Pharao hardened his heart, or, that his heart was hard, Ex. VII. 3. 13.
VIII. 10, 15. IX. 7. 12, 34 X. ^. v 20. Lastly observe, that, when Pharao had
let the people go, God led them not by the way of the land of the Philisti^s,
which was the nearest, because God said, lest the people repent them when they
see war, and return into Egypt: But made them go about, by the way of the
wilderness of the Red Sea, Ex XIII. 17. 18. And again Ex. XIV. 1-5* God spoke
to Moses, saying; speak to the children of Israel, and let them return and
incamp against P^^hahiroth, between Migdol and the Sea, before Baalsephon, even
against it shall they incampe, beside the Sea And Pharao will say of the
children of Israel, they are entangled in the land, the wilderness has
enclosed them: And I will harden Phara^hs heart, and he shall pursue them, and
I will get glory upon Pharao and all his host, and the Egyptians shall know,
that I am the Lord. And they did so. And it was told the King of Egypt, that
the people ^led. For, it is to be observed, that God had not yet required of
Pharo, that he should let them free for ever, though he had made him let them
go, without any promise of return. When, therefore, he sees, on the one side
that the meaning of God was not that they should return any more, (which made
him so unwilling to let them go, as always supposing it) And, on the other
side, that, by their undiscreet march, as he thought, (which God had provided
for another cause) there was hope to bring them back^ ^^ is old thoughts
revived, that all these plagues come not from God, but otherwise, that he might
yet b^^ng them under his rule. Whereby, it is most evident. First that the
destruction of Phara^ was designed by God, through these means, in
consideration; First, of oppressing his people, then, his impenitence upon
these extraordinary trials: Then that it appeared to him that they wou^d take
effect, when he says; Pharao will say they are entangled in the land, and that
this is the hardening of Pharaos heart by God And, hereupon depends that
which is said of the Egyptians, Wisdom XIX. 1, 2. But wrath without mercy
pursues the wicked unto the end, because he also had foreseen what they should
do in time to come. To wit, that, repenting themselves, they would straightway
pursue those whom they should have le^ go, diligently entreating them to
depart. Seeing the impeniten^e and unbelief of their obdurate hearts to have
been such, that there by it appeared to God how, upon the first overturne, they
would return to their first hope of reducing the Israelites to their bondage.

See the like in the enemies that God raised Solomon, to punish his idol a
tries 1 Kings. XI. 14-23-26. Hadad the Edomi^e having escaped into Egypt, every
man know^s, that jealousies between neighboring Princes makes them ready to
entertain their Neighbors Enemies, though under color o^ relieving of the
oppressed, even when the cause is no^ clear. And though ^adad were never so
wel^ome in Egypt, yet, every man knows, what diff^rence there is between
r^^^ng at home, and cour^ing Pharao in Egypt. And, can there remain any
question, how God raised Hadad for an enemy to Sl^mon? H^w, but by providing
that state of things, which, he knew, would be effectual to persuade a man* in
the ca^e which h^ knew to be his? By the like means, God foreseeing the
rebellion of Rez^n against his master Hadar^zer King of Zobah and the succ^sse
thereof, in setting up a Kingdom at Damascus, out of a conspiracy of Banditi,
might foresee, that he must needs inherit his masters hostility with the
I^ralites. As for Jeroboam, God, having app^^nted A^iah the Sh^lonite to
prophecy to him the apostasy o^^en Tribes to his government, knew* that he
might do as David had done, to expect the issu^ of Gods p^rpo^e from his
providence, without any attempt u^^n his S^v^ra^gne, and he might do as Hazael
did afterward, 2. Kings X. 14, 15. To murder his master, that he might
reign ^^ his st^ad, as E^^sh. had Pr^phesi^d. And, was it not possible for
God, that knew Jeroboam^ heart, to know what he would do, when the Isralites
had pr^vately persuaded him to return from ban^shment, upon R^h^^oam answer to
the petition, which it seems he had procured? Certainly, he that believes the
Scriptures, can no more doubt, that God designed the punnishment of Solomon's
Idolotries by these means, then, that he designed the ^vent it self of it,
though by the malice of the parties. Consider now the vision of the Phophet
Micajah, concerning the enterprise of Ahab upon Ramoth G^^^ad, 1. Kings XXII.
23-26. I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the host of heaven
standing aside him, on his right hand, and on his left: And God said, who shall
seduce Ahab, to go up and fall at Ramoth Gilead? And one said this, and another
said that. And a spirit came forth and stood before the Lord, and said, I will
seduce him. And the Lord said, wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and be
a lying spirit in the mouths of all his Prophets. And he said, thou shall
seduce him, and also prevail; Go and do so. God, who showed his counsel to
his Prophet in this manner, knew well enough what Prophets Ahab delighted in,
and what they were that ^ought favor at his hands. Shall we imagine* that,
when he lets the evil spirit loose, (whom he knew to be, of himself,
officio^s enough to the ruin of Gods people) and sa^es, go and prevail; that
he considers not their inclination to take fire at his temptation, for
obtaining favor at Ahabs hands: Or Ahab, to make use of their credit, to win
the good King Jehosaphet to his pretenses. If these things were in
consideration, as the means to bring about Gods design upon Ah^b, (here you
must pardon me, if, speaking as a man to men, I can express the matters of God
no otherwise, then the scripture does, in the likeness of an Infinite wise
Prince, though ^ssured, that one act of Gods wisdom, which is God* attaines
and contains all this) which the text plainly expresses; did God go by
guess, or, does the Scripture, condescending to our infirmity, speak* of him
in the style of the Sons of men, as the Jews say, and represent to us the
order which he designs in those things which he brings to pass, in the
fashion of a Prince, taking counsel with his servants and vassails what
course to take? But let us not forget the greatest work of Gods providence,
that ever the sun ^aw, in procuring the redemption of mankind, by the malice of
Satan and the Jews, in putting our Lord Christ to death. The words of S. Peter
are very express, Acts II. 23. Him being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledg of God, ye have taken, and, through wicked hands,
crucified and killed. And again Acts III. 17. 18. And now, brethren, I know
that you did this ignorantly; as also did your rulers; But God has thus
fulfilled those things, which he had foretold by the mouth of his holy
prophets, that Christ should suffer. What was the ignorance of the Rulers, we
learn by the vote of Caiaphas, that swayed the coun^aile Ioh XI. 49. 50. Ye,
knowing nothing, nor argue, that it is expedient for us, that one man die for
the people, rather then that the whole Nation perish; Ratifying the reason
propounded before; If we let him alone thus, all will believe on him, and the
Romans will come, and take us, and this place, and the Nation away What was the
ignorance of the people, we learn by S. Paul, Romans X 3. Not knowing the
righteousness of God, and willing to establish their own righteousness, they
were not subject to the righteousness of God. And again, 1 Thessalonians. II. 15.
16. he thus qualifieth the Jews; Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own
Prophets, and please not God, and oppose all men: Forbiding us to speak to the
Gentiles that they may be saved: To the fulfilling of their sins always. For
wrath is come upon them to the end. The Scribes and the Pharisees had got
^ossession of the peoples hearts, by persuading them, that God accepted them as
righteous for the outward observation of the carn^ll Law of Moses, given for
the condition, by which they held the land of promise. They then persuaded them
to demand our Lord to death, for the same reason, for which their predecessors
had put their prophets to death* because they preached to them that inward
spiritual righteousness, which our Lord demands, as the condition of
obtaining the world to come: And, for the same reason, their successors
persecuted the Apostles, because, not intayling^ his righteousness upon them,
as the s^ns of Abraham, they showed the gentiles how to become as righteous as
^hey thought themselves. The Priests and Rulers and Elder^, who, by the means
of the Scribes and Pharisees, carried the people, and were not willing to part
with their power by receiving Law from our Lord Christ, (as not believing, that
he preached his Gospel, with an intent to establish them in their power* but
to take it out of their hands, as belonging to the Messiah) made it their
business, to per^wade the people, that it would be the ruin of the Nation to
acknowledge him for the Messiah. If God has assured us, that these were the
inclinations, that brought to pass this godly murder of our Lord, shall we
believe, that he himself had them not in consideration, when he designed the
redemption of mankind, by the means of it? Or, that, having them in
consideration, he foresaw not what effect they would have in the Jews? being
abandoned to the malice of Satan that procured it, If we will learn the
determinate counsel, and foreknowledg of God from the Scriptures, we must
have recourse to those means, by which, the scriptures teach us, that it came
to pass; For truly, it was never d^signed, nor did God foresee that it would
come to pass, by other means, or otherwise then indeed it came to pass, It
is a conceit that deserves reverence for Ignatius his sake, a disciple of S.
John; W^o, in one of his Epist^es informs us, that the birth of our Lord, and
the manifestation of his Godhead in the flesh was so husbanded, that the
deviles themselves, (though, when they were const^^ined to ob^y him, they cried
him up the Son of God, yet) should not loose the ho^e of destroying him. Can we
think, that God immediately designed such a stratagem upon Satan, and had not
regard to the ^^linations of his ministers, or knew not what effect those
considerations would have, which should arise in them upon those objects, which
his providence presented them with?

By this we may see, why our Lord upbraides the Cities in which he did his
greatest miracles, Mat. X. 21, 22. Woe to thee Corasin, woe to thee Beth^aida:
For, had the migh^y works that have been don in thee, been done in Tire and
Sidon, they had long since repented in sackcloath and ashes: And thou Capernau^
that art ex^lted to heaven, shall be cast down to Hell: For, had the mighty
works that have been don in thee, been don in S^dome and Gomorah, they had
stood till this day. I do so respect the learning and judg^ment of Grotius and
Janseni^s that I will not take upon me to censu^e them, when they make these
words signify no more, then, that, in probability, Sodom and Gomorah had
repented at the sight of such miracles. But I find no good reason to infer as
our Lord does, that* positively, Corazin Bethsaida and Capernaum shall be
tormented more then Tire and Sydon, then Sodom and Gomorah, because probably.
Sodom and Gomorah would have repented at the sight of such miracles. The same I
say to others, who would have ou^ Lord say only this; That had those miracles
been don in Tire and Sydon, they would have repented, but not from the heart;
Because, miracles are not able to convert any man to God from the heart. For,
in conscience, is there reason that Corazin and Bethsaida should fare worse
then Sodom and Gomorah, because Tire and Sydon would have repented as
hypocrites, continuing no less sinners then they that repented not? But, to
say as others do, that, had God ordained those miracles to be done at Tire and
Sydon, at Sodom and Gomorah, he would have determined their wills, by his
immediate act, to be converted; is to say, that our Lord, by a mental
reservation, says that, whereof he expresses not the reason, and so cozens
them, that satisfy themselves with the reason which he expresses. I know
these answers are brought to avoid the heresy of Pelagi^s, that outward
calling, without inward grace, is enough to convert a man. But there is no
necessary to grant the consequence. The miracles of Christ, supposing his
doctrine, import the inward grace of the spirit to make it prevail. Why else
are they, who said they were don by Belze^ub, guilty of the sin against the
Holy Ghost? And this means being sufficient, to convert them* had been
effectual, had they found men better d^spo^ed. What was the difference? They
had found men not zealous of their own righ^^ousnesse by the Law, who,
therefore, had not resisted the righteousness of God, which Christ teaches,
with mir^cles ^ufficient to convict them that he was a true Prophet. Upon these
grounds, God, who knew all their hearts, might comprehend the event. The case
of David at Keila is so near this, that I must not mention it any where else,
1. Sam. XXIII. 11. 12, 13. And David said O Lord God of Israel, thy servant
hears for certain, that Saul is coming to Keilah, to destroy the City for my
sake: Will the men of Keilah shut me in his hand? Will Saul come down as thy
servant hears? O Lord God of Israel show thy servant. And the Lord said, He
will come down. And David said; Will the m^sters of Keilah shut me and my men
into Saul's hands? And the Lord said, they will. What escape is there here, when
God, out of his knowledge of the secrets of their hearts, foretells what they
would do, if Saul should come against the City? Nor will I forget that of the
wise Hebrew, for he drew at the foun^aine head of the Prophets, though he
spoke not by their spirit: It is th^ught to be said o^ Enoch according to that
which we read of him, Genesis V. 24 Heb X *5 but the a^gument is the same,
whether so or not Wisdom IV. 10. 11. 14 He pleased and was beloved of him, so
that, whereas he lived among sinners, he translated him. He was taken away,
least wickedness should alter his understanding* or de^eit beguile his mind.
For his soul pleased God, therefore hasted he to take him away from
wickedness. For, if God knew such occurrences as would deceive Enoch, or one
in his st^te, then by those occurrences be foresees the decree. If he knew
none, unless himself determine his will to be deceived, then can it not be
aid, that God translated him least wickedness should deceive him, but least
God should appoint him to be deceived by wickedness. The same author thus
command h the mercy of God in destroying the Canaani^es by little and little,
Wisdom XII, 10. But, chastising them by little and little thou gave them
room of repentance, though knowing their p^rverse disposition to be such, that
they could not repent. That is, knowing that this gentle dealing of God would
not be eff^ctua^l, notwithst^nding all that he had done to assure his people of
the land of promise, ^o move them to embrace the true God: Upon which
condition, they might have been suffered to live as slaves to the Israelites,
if not as strangers among them, as Rahab the harlot was suffered to do among
her kindred, because she alone embraced those terms. So that, the precept of
the Law that commands the seven Nations utterly to be destroyed, stands upon
supposi^ion of this impen^tence thus foreseen.

To the same purpose speak those texts of Scripture in which it is said, that,
or such or such a thing be not done, such or such a thing will come to p^sse.
As Genesis XI. 6. Behold the people is one, and their language the same, and
having begun this, they will not give over whatsoever, they have thought to
do. Acts XXVII. 31. Unless these remain in the ship, ye cannot be saved.
^say. I. 9. Rom X 20. If the Lord of hosts had not left us a seed, we had been
as Sodom, we had been l^ke Gom^rah. Mat. XXIV. 22. Had not those days been
shortened, all flesh would perish 'But for the elects sake, those days shall be
shortened. For there is no necessity to say, that God could not have prevented
these effects by any other m^anes; (The build^^g of the Tower of Babel, for the
purpose, by any other mean but by dividing their language: The saving of the
elect at the destruction of Je^u^al^m, but by shortning their time: ^he saving
of S. Paul's fellow travelers, but by the mariners abiding on shipborde) But,
that God knew, that they would go to build the Tower of Babel, that, the time
not being shortened even the elect would perish that if the mariners le^t the
ship* the rest would be cast away should not G^d otherwise interpose. As the
Prophet ^say, showing how great a mercy of God it was, that any of the
Israelites should escape that vengeance which he foretells, and, alleged by
S Paul, to show how great a mercy of God it was, that any of them should be
saved by the Go^pell from the vengeance to come, declare, that God foresaw this
ruin would come to pass. it he did not interpose. But to say, that God
foresaw this, because he foresaw, that himself had resolved, by his immediate
act to determine the wil^s of those men by which they were to come to pass, to
bring them to pass, is to say, that all those means, by which it is
signified, that he saw they would come to pass, are alle^ged by the Scripturs
impertinently, and to no purpose. It follows therefore, of necessity, that
God foresaw that those things should come to pass, by the cases which he saw
stated, and the wills of those men whom he saw concerned, in stating the same.
And, by the same reason that holds which is said, Ex. III. 19. I know that
the King of Egypt will not give you leave to depart, but by a mighty arm; Upon
which the saying of the wise man alleged before is verified; That God knew,
that the Egyptians would repent themselves, and attempt to bring them back into
bondge, whom they had just before entreated to be gone.

In fine, all the scriptures which say; This or that was don, that such things
as had been foretold might be fulfilled, prove the same without answer. John
XIX. 24, 36. They said then to one another; let us not rend it, but cast lots
for it whose it shall be: That the Scripture might be fulfilled which says;
They shared my garments among them, and for my coat they cast lots. And again,
These things came to pass that the scriptures might be fulfilled; A bone shall
not be broken of it. Did God provide that Christ's coat should be seamelesse,
that, there being loss in sharing it, the reason of casting lots for it may be
unanswerable Did he provide, that our Lord should have visibly breathed out his
last, that there might be no reason to break his legs, as the legs of the
rest; that, having provided all this, he might, at length, determine them to
do what they did? which had he intended to do, it was impertinent whether he
provided all this or not. Mat. XI. 17. 18. Then was fulfilled that which was
said by Jeremy the Prophet, saying; A cry was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and
weeping and great mourning: Rachel, weeping for her children* and would not be
comforted, because they were not. Herod was become jealous of the King of the
Jews that was borne, and would have taken him away alone: But, when he could
not hear of him by the wise men, resolved to take away all under two years
old, that he might not escape. Did God know, that his bloody humor would
resolve this wickedness upon these occurrencs; or did he first provide the
occasion, and then determine him to do that, which, without providing the
occasion, being so determined, he would have done nevertheless? All the
scriptures in which this is said argue as much. I must not omit that which is
said of Abiathar, 1. Kings II, 26. And Solomon drove Abiathar from being high
Priest to the Lord. To fulfill the word of the Lord whIch he had spoken against
the house of Ely in Shil^h. Had God provided all that had befalne Abiathar, and
in the end, according, to his unquestionable justice, the occurrences, that
resolved him to be of the conspiracy of Adon, that the prophesies against Ely
and his house, 1 Samuel II. 30-^6. III. 11-14. might come to effect, which, no
reason could be given, why so rather then otherwise; if after all this, he must
interpose his immediate act to determine Solomon to fulfill it, by setting
Abiathar aside? If God, thus, by his justice and his mercy, in consideration of
man's bypast actions, ordain the occurrences, whereof he knows what the
issue will be; shall it seeem strange, and that, out of his original right in
his creature, having set Adam in Paradise, with those abilities, that, all
agree, he might have stood if he would, he checked not the malice of the rebel
Angels, nor taught him that cunning which his simplicity had not needed, had he
loved to continue, (as was elegantly said) simplicior quam ut decipi posset,
simpler, or more an innocent then to be cousened? Or, can we say, that, He
might have stood had he would, who, by Gods immediate act, as we see, was not
determined to stand; who could not have stood, had he not been determined by
God to stand; and, had he been determined, could not but stand? None of which
follows, if we say, that God, seeing the state in which he had placed him a
sufficient bait, to resolve the apostate Angels to tempt; seeing the
temptation so strong, that Adam would not resist it; for the reasons, which he
in his secret counsel saw best, resolved to maintain both in acting their
own inclinations, and, himself to make the best of that which should be done.
And, this precedent being resolved, can it seem strange, that he should order
all men to come to the years of discretion, when first they begin to act to
their own account, with those impressions received from their education,
which, he sees how they well incline them to the better or to the worse? seeing
also, that they do not resolve them either for the better or for the worse,
but by the means of their own free choice; can it seem strange, I say, that he
should order them to meet with those occurrences, which, suting with the merit
of their by passed actions, he sees will determine their choice for the better
or for the worse, in those things, which, he sees that it was in them, though
perhapS with much more dificulty, and so, for more advantage, to have
determined otherwise.

But, to leave the rest of this discourse till I can go through with it; for
the present, the reason of this position seems to me demonstrative, (if any
thing in this subject can be demonstrative) supposing that which has been
proved, that God, by his own immediate act, does not determine the will of man
to do this or that For, seeing that Christian faith presupposes, that God
knows from everlasting whatsoever future contingencies shall come to pass,
during every moment of time whilst the world shall endure, and that it is
evident, that, whatsoever is known must be knowable before it is known; (and,
therefore, certain, or determined, not by being known, but, by being capable
of being known) what ground can we imagine, in contingencies, to make them
capable of beingknown? For, of their own nature, we transgress the very
notion of contingencies which we suppose, and evidently contradict our selves,
if we say there is any thing in them, of themselves, to determine this to come
to pass, rather then that, supposing the cause to be no more determined to do
this then that, which the supposition of free will necessarily requires.
Certainly Aristotle's resolution, that they are sure in the alternative, but
that, neither part of it can be certain; (That is to say, that Peter, being
tempted, shall either deny his master or not? but that, being, contingent, it
can neither be certain that he shall, nor that he shall not,) is utterly
inconsistent with that particular providence of God over all things, which
Ch^^stianty supposes; and renders that great mast^r (as a man too cunning not
to see ^he con^equence of his own position) very sususpicious in a point so
nearly concerning the belief of Gods providence. Now, future contingencies, in
the notion of contingencies that are not yet come to pass, being in themselves
nothing, (that is to say, being only understood to be posible,) cannot reduce
themselves to the nature and state or future contingencies, in the notion of
contingencies that shall come to pass; such, as we believe all contingencies
that have or shall come to pass to the worlds end, were to God from
everlasting. It is therefore a mere contradiction to imagine, that
contingencies, either by the possibilty of their nature, or by the capacity of
the cause, (that is, of it self, utterly undetermined to do rather then not to
do, to do this rather then that) can be an object capable of being known, by
that knowledge, upon which they may be said to be certain, and future as things
that shall be, not as things that may be, not as (...) but as (...), to
distinguish with Aristotle. There are indeed those who undertake that, when it
is said, Peter shall deny his Lord, Peter shall not deny his Lord; (the one of
which sayings must needs come to pass) seeing this necessity must needs be in
the object before it be in the saying, (because the saying is true or falls by
reason that the matter of it is so or otherwise before) therefore, that part
which appears true in time was true from everlasting: But that, they suppose,
cannot be by virtue of any or all causes, least the effects should no more be
contingencies; Therefore, by virtue of the things themselves, because, of a
contradiction, the one part must needs be true the other false. And this being
of future contingencies, they imagine, it is, which the knowledge of God
attaining, is therefore called sight, because it reaches that which is in
being, and therefore present to it. But this imagination is a mere
contradiction to common reason, which is able to tell any man, that
possibilities differ only in this from nothing, that there are such things as
can bring them to pass; And therefore, have no being at all, but in the
ability of their causes. Whereas, suppose them in being before their causes
bring them to pass, what remains for their causes to do, which would have
nothing to do, if that which they bring to pass were in being before they
bring it so to pass? And what contingency could then remain, seeing
whatsoever is, must needs be while it is? For, this position prevents any
supposition that may be made, concerning the being of that, which is said to
be, before you can suppose, or understand it to be. And, where is the
difference between the being of God, and that of future contingencies, both
being of themselves? Surely, supposing the necessity of this their being,
because God could not see them otherwise; they would be not only objects,
denominating that knowledge of God to be sight, which reaches the present
being of them, but causes, on which the sight of God must depend, as our sight
depends on the object that causes it. The future being, therefore, of
contingencies, necessarily supposes the determination of their causes; The
contingence of them that th^s determination is from their causes themselves,
freely determining themselves: The certainty of them, from the infinite reach
of Gods understanding, comprehending the resolution of the Creature, by the
present inclination thereof meeting the considerations which it is presented
with. Wherefore, as it is impossible, that the will should act unless the
understanding go before, and, the resolution of the will, to do, or not to do
this or that, necessarily depends upon some act of the understanding, showing,
by sufficient reason an end sufficient to move the will to proceed and resolve;
So does not the will effectually proceed, until the understanding shows that
reason, which effectually moves it to proceed. Now, these reasons proceeding
from those appearances, which the objects that every man meets with cause in
his mind, either at the present, or, by comparing that which outwardly appears
at the present, with that which is laid up in the storehouse of the mind: And,
God having provided what objects every man in every moment shall meet with, to
resolve him what to do, in every case that may come in debate; It cannot be
imagined, that he provideth this, and knows not, by the means which he
provi^eth, what will be the issue, supposing that he knows it not by his own
resolution, to determine a man by his own immediate act, to do whatsoever he
does. And indeed, God comprehending what considerations a man every moment is
moved with* and what be his own inclinations that is moved with the same; it
cannot seem strange, that by this means (seeing it appears impossible that by
any other means) he should comprehend what will so come to pass; though
knowing, that he that acts had, or might have had sufficient reasons to have
done otherwise. Wherefore, if any man ask me, whether God know what will come
to pass, if any case should be put, which he knows shall never be put; which
is now called in the Schools Gods middle knowledge, because it has on the one
side, that knowledge whereby he comprehends the natures of all things, and
the possibilities of all events; on the other side, the view which he has from
everlasting, of all things that have been, are, or shall be, for that tract of
time which they endure; (because, I seem to say, that this is it which directs
Gods providence, in resolving what course to hold; by which resolution* it
appears to him what shall come to pass) I shall not answer nevertheless without
distinguishing, That God comprehends not the issues of those future
possibilities, which men can imagine to themselves; and yet comprehends the
issues of these future possibilities, whereof we suppose him to determine all
the circumstances. For, let a man infinitely endeavor, to limit, by his
understanding, all that he can consider in the case of any man left to his
freedom, he shall never be able to express that consideration, which shall be
effectual, certainly to determine him that is presented with it: Because it is
manifest, that, infinite considerations more may present themselves, to move
him to do nothing, or otherwise. But, when the word of God speaks of these
means, which, being provided by God, determine effectually the resolution of
him that is moved by them, to wit, by the means of his own choice: Though, it
is impossible, that, speaking to men, it should express all that God
considers, to ground his fore knowledge; yet by that which it expresses, it
obliges us, to understand all that appears, either to man, to determine his
choice, or to God, to ground his foreknowledge: Which, though proceeding from
his effectual providence, yet, supposing man's freedom, cannot be understood
any way to impeach it. And upon these terms it may be understood, how future
conditionals may be subject to the infinite capacity of Gods understanding, in
as much as knowing, what a man with these inclinations, being moved with these
considerations will do, he must needs know what he would have done, had either
his inclinations, or the consideration presented been other then they are; God
comprehending those which might have been, no less then those which are. And
thus propositions concerning future possibilities may be said to be known to
God, whether true or false, supposing the terms of them to intimate whatsoever
may appear to God, in the cases whereof they speak, which no terms that man
can use can express.

And therefore, the like cannot be said of possibilities proposed to depend
upon impertinent conditions: As who should say; If the Turk take Candy the
Pope will condemn Iansenius; For what possibility can depend upon a condition
that is supposed not to come into the consideraion of him that must effect it?
It is alleged, indeed, that Elias says to Elizeus, 2 Kings II. 20. If thou
see me when I am taken from thee, it shall so come to pass to thee, if not,
it shall not. But it is no marvel that Elias, knowing, that, both his Scholars
desire, and his seeing of him as he was going up into heaven should come to
pass; should seem to suspend the one upon the other, not because God had
appointed any such dependence, but to signify, that he must be content to
expect for the present, and that, when he saw him part, he might rest assured
of it. But* it is alleged also, that Elizeus said to King J^ash, 2 Kin. XII.
19. Thou should have stuck, the Earth with thine arrow, five or six times,
then should thou have smitten Aram till they had been destroyed. To which I
answer, that is a Prophesy; and that God had revealed to his prophets, that the
Israelites should overcom the Syrians, as many times as the King should strike
the earth. Not meaning that, if more or less then three, the number of the
victories might be other then three; But, knowing that he would strike thrice,
and having intended them so many victories. Therefore the Prophet is angry at
the King for strikeing but thrice, because he might have expected, (knowing no
more then I have said) that the Israelites should have utterly destroyed the
Syrians, knowing that they should overcome them as often as he should strike.
And this sense agrees well enough with the Hebrew, (where theindicative servs
for all the moods) tra^slating it* Then mighst thou have smitten Aram till he
had been destroyed: Because the revelation which he had would have borne it,
not because God had suspended the event upon acondition so impertinent. For, in
conditionals, neither the truth of the condition, nor of that which is inferred
is requisite to make them true, but only the truth of the inference,
consequence or dependence. If the Sun rise not at such an hour, we shall not
have day. It is a certain truth. Not because the Sun will not rise at his
hour, or, that rising, we shall not have day; But because the consequence is
necessarily true. And therefore he, who, by pronouncing a conditional
affirms a dependence between the parts of it, when as indeed there is none,
speaks not only an impertinence but an untruth. If there be a dependence
between them, though God only knew it, he says true, If none false, If it be
requisite, that D^vines may understand one another the better, to call this
Gods middle knowledge, be it so called if you please, upon terms, I contend not
In the mean time, let me say, that God, not only sees from everlasting,
those contingencies, which shall come to pass, every one in their several
times, but also foreseeth that they shall come to pass; Which, though all a
thing, yet, are grounded upon several reasons. For, all sight implying the
being of that, whereof it expresses the presence to that which sees; the view
which God has of future contingencies ^mplyeth, that they are present to him
in his indivisible eternity, in that difference of time the whole succession
whereof, the instant of Gods Etern^ty, without succession answers Bu^ when God,
by resolving to produce that state of things which he chooses, comprehends what
will follow; this knowledge* being the ground upon which he sees what will come
to pass, cannot be that knowledge* which, representing it to him as present,
must needs presuppose, and not produce the b^ing of it. And upon these premises
I know what to say to the opinion of some of the School, that the ground of
Gods foreknowledg of future contingencies stands, in their being present, to
his eternity from everlasting, though in that, difference of time which they
hold, in the succession which the world is to endure; which whole succession,
the one indivisible moment of Gods eternity, answers. For, though it is not
to be denied, that God sees all future contingencies, as thus present to him,
from everlasting; yet is it still to be demanded, what is the ground of this
their presence, and how they come to be present to God: seeing they neither
could bepresent to him, not first supposing them to have being. nor could have
being, of themselves, as capable of notbeing as well as of being, for this is
the nature of future contingencies. Seeing then, that, the presence of fu^ure
contingencies to God in his eternity being supposed, were notwithstanding,
forced to inquire how it comes to pass, and, whatsoever proves the true reason
of that will prove the true ground upon which they may be foreseen, it follows
necessarily, that, the determination of contingencies which qualifieth them
future, (in the notion of that which shall be, not of that which may be) in all
the ground, why they are present to the view of God, which presence infers,
that it is foreknown to God that they shall be, at that time, in regard whereof
they are called future.

But this opinion, I confess, is liable to diverse great difficulties. Here, in
the first place, it may be objected; That, by this means, we make God pick up
that knowledge, that goes before his providence to direct it, from his
creatures, collecting by the inclination which he sees to be in them, what they
will do, when they come to be in such or such an estate, and accordingly,
resolving to bring them or not to bring them to it. To which I answer, that
this imagination is no less abusive, then that upon which Epicurus denied
providence, for fear God should be troubled with that infinite care which it
would require, as men are with a little part of it. But if all the sight, which
God has, of the creature* proceed from the knowledge of himself, whereby,
seeing what he may make, he resolves what he will make; Though I say, the fight
of his creature at present depends upon the decree of producing it in his own
time, yet, seeing I make th^s decree to depend only upon the infinite wisdom
and goodness of God, which moves him, to choose what he thought best to do, I
make him to depend upon himself alone, not upon his creature. In like manner,
though I make the decree of Gods providence to proceed upon consideration of
the free inclination of his creature, moved by the consideration of such
objects, as he sees are presented to it, and his foresight of future
contingencies proceeding from the fre^will thereof, to stand upon the said
decrees; Yet, since I derive the freewill of the creature, from the knowledge
and will of God, and the state of it, from the course of providence, which his
own knowledge directs, I cannot be thought to disparage God with the
imperfections of his creatures. I do indeed understand, that simple Christians
take it with a grain of jealousy upon a man's Christianity, when a man of
understanding shows them the order of secondary causes, in effecting the works
of Gods providence, as if therefore, he did not believe that all comes from
God, because he will not have him, at every turn, to transgress the ordinary
course of those causes which his providence has once set on work, because
they understand it not. Bu^, though the most understanding know very little of
it, yet thus much they know; that it is more for the honor of God, that it
should be thought, that God, from the beginning has elected a certain order
agreeable to his own infinite wisdom, justice, goodness, so and verainty, but
yet of his own free choice, by which all things come to pass, his creaturs
serving the turn of his purpose; Then, that he should, at all turns, by moving
his creatures to that which they are not inclined to by their first nature, but
by his present will immediately, attain his designs. For, that he should
transgress his own order, for the introducing of those effect^ which are above
nature, the whole book of God requires us to believe. And, if the glory of God
consists in causing natural things working their own inclinations, to serve
to do what he designeth, much more* it is for his glory, that, maintaining m^n
in the exercise of his freedom, he makes him never the less, whether by good
or by bad inclinations, an instrument to bring to pass those events, which he
in his wisdom determin^th.

In the second place it may be objected; I hat, supposing all that can be
supposed in the nature of future contingencies, they must appear possible on
both sides, they may appear infinitely more and more probable on the one side,
but, so long as they appear not certain, they cannot be the object of certain
knowledge, as Gods is; And certain they cannot appe^re, so long as we suppose
them to remain contingencies. To which I answer, acknowle^ging, that I* who
draw my knowledge from that which I see, cannot, by limit^ng the probabilities
of future contingencies, att^ine to more then probabil^ty But that it would be
against all the reason in the world, thereby to take m^asure, what God can
attain to, comprehending, not only the inclina^ions of his creatures, and the
considerations which they meet with, but also that they shall meet with no
other, but what he comprehends; And to u^d^rtake that he, by what he sees,
cannot discern that to b^ certain, which I, by tha^ which I see, c^nnot
discern to be more then probable. I know it may be sai^ on the other side;
that it is only the weakness of our understanding that h^nders us to
discern the consistence of our freedom with the immediate determ^nation
thereof, by the act of God, to that which it chooses And it is usually argued,
that the work of saving grace, and the difference which it makes between those
that are ^aved, and those that are not, would not remain such a mystery, as
the differences on foot about it in the Christian world demonstrate, if the
reason of it be resolved into the congruity of that motion, which suffi^ient
reason ^enders to a reasonable creature. To which I answer in the first plac^;
That, if it were not a secret, according to that opinion which I advance, this
objection, wherein all the difficulty is couched, would not lie against it. And
that, supposing all the diffiultie thereof voided, it would remain no less^ a
secret, why God should move some providing that congruity, others, wa^ving ^t,
then, w^y he should, by his own immediate act determinate some to be Christians,
wh^lst ^t remains posible that those who are not so determined should b^ the
like. To the other I say; That it is one thing not to know no^ to be able ^o
demonstrate how God can have certain knowledge of things* that, wh^^st they
are known, remain contingencies; Another thing to know, that by ^he knowledge
which he has, they remain no^ contingencies. Christianity supposing them to
remain contingencies. For, it is no shame for a Christian or for a Divine, to
profess ignorance, when the qu^stion is how it may b^ evi^ent, that matters of
faith are true; As in the matter of the H. Trinity I have sa^d. Bu^, that, in a
matter so subject to common understanding as the determination of the will by its
own choice, reason and experience justifying that which faith makes the ground
of Christianity; because I cannot answ^r an objection, I shall make the whole
tenor of the Bible, the tender of Christianity* the whole treaty of God with
man concerning his happiness delusory and abusive, as conditioni^g for that
which no man can stir head or foot toward, till being determined, he cannot
do otherwise; I should deny that which appe^ares* because I c^n not evidence
that which appears not, seems to me very unreasonable. Especially, having so
many intimations in the Scripture, to signify* that God has in consideration
the circumstance of each man's case, for the ground of h^s foresight in each
man's proceedings. For, let Gods foreknowledg never so much r^quire, that the
truth of those things which he foresee^h be determined and certain it will be
no abatement to this cerainety, that I believe it is not grounded upon his
immediate determing of man's will to do it, but upon his determining of the
means, in consideration whereof he sees that man will certainly proceed to
determine his own choice. Lastly, it will be said, that* by this means, all
things shall come to pass necessart^y* being determined by God to come to
pass: For, unless we suppose, that the purpose of God c^n be defeated that
which he purposes to bring to pass must nec^ssa^ily come to pass. I answer,
that I have distinguished beween that sense, in which it may be said, that a
thing comes to pass necessarily, and that sense in which it may be said, that
it must necessarily come to pass. For* I suppose, that the property of our
English will help me* here, to distinguish these two senses, to all that
consider their mother tongue, and may discern a several mean^ng when a man
says, the fire burns necessarily, and Peter must necessarily deny our Lord,
supposing that our Lord had fore told it. For, when the necessity is understood
to be in the cause, which, the nature thereof, though by Gods will, determines;
it is proper to say, tha^ it comes to pass necessarily* But, when the
necessity is understood to stand upon a supposition of the effect, either
being, or known to be, (which knowledge presupposes it to be, being suppos^d
to be true) or the like, it is proper to say, this must needs come to pass, or
it must of necessity, come to pass, but not that it comes to pass
necessarily, because, then, the necessity must no^ fall upon the coming of it
upon pass, but upon the manner, by which it comes to p^sse. I say then, if any
can infer upon my saying, that, the necessity which it infers is antecedent to
the being of it, I grant, I am fallen into the inconvenience which I would a
void, and will disclaim the position upon which it follows; But, if it be
only consequent, upon supposition, either, that it is, or that it is taken to
be, it is no more, then that necessity, which is found in all co^ti^gencies,
according to all opinions, that must allow all things necessarily to be (though
not to be necessarily) supposing that they are. Now, when I say that God
determines the even^s of future contingencies, I say not that he does it* by
determining their causes to do them, speaking of free causes; (for, the
conting^^cies which come to pass by the concurrence of natural causes, I
grant ^o be mere necessities, in regard it is necessary, that, when every
cause act^ to the u^most of his strength, that must, not only needs come to
pass, but come to pass necessarily, which, the concurrence of several forces
produces, and must need^ appear in the causes* to any that comprehends the
force of them all) bu^* that this act of his ends, in determining the motives
which present themselves to such causes; Which act is consistent with an other
act, whereby he m^intaines the cause in an ability of doing or not doing that
which it is moved to do. But that, comprehending the inclinations thereof, and
the force o^ the motives which it is presented with, he comprehends thereby,
that it will proceed to act, though comprehending, that it might do otherwi^e,
should it regard those appearances, which either habitually it has, or
actu^lly ^t ^^ght to have. Now I confess again, it is hard for me to show,
how it ought actually to have those appearances which habitually it has: But,
seeing tha^, supposing this, I show evidently, how the providence of God i^
unce^easib^^* the will remaining free, and the effects thereof contingent; I
will rath^r con^esse, that I cannot show, where their freedom might or ought
to move when it does not, then destroy the ground of all Christianity. Thus
much is evident, supposing my saying; that, the certainty of the event includes
the supposition of the will acting freely, and therefore infers no necessity
antecedent to it, the knowledge upon which providence decrees, foreseeing that
it will freely proceed being so moved.

CHAP. XXV. The grounds of the difference between sufficient and effectual.
How natural occasions, conduce to supernatural actions, The insufficience of
Jansenius his doctrine. Of sufficient grace under the Law of Moses and Nature.
ANd now I shall not use many words, to declare what it is, that makes those
helps of grace, which of themselves are sufficient, effectual. For* if all
particulars are contained in their generals, that which is said of all the
works of providence must hold in those helps of supernatural grace, whereby it
conducteth to the happiness of the world to come. And* therefore the efficacy
of Gods grace, (taking efficacy to imply the effect) consists in the order
which providence uses, that the motives of Christianity, (whether to embrace
or perform the profession of it,) be presented in such circumstances, as may
render them accepted of the will, to whose judgment, for the pre^ent, they so
appear. So that, the same for nature and kind* prove effectall to one, which
to an other prove void and frustrate. For, it is manifest, that those helps are
the grace of Christ, even, as they are sufficient, and supposing them not to
take effect. And, it ought to be manifest, that the circumstances in which they
are present to every particular person, are brought to pass, by the conduct of
Gods spirit which fills the world, and attaineth from the beginning to the
end of all things which come to pass. And this spirit, and the coming thereof
being purchased by our Lord Christ, and granted in consideration of his
obedience, it is easy to be seen, how it is the grace of Christ, not only as
sufficient, but also as effectual.

This resolution then, presupposes two things, as proved, Chap. XVIII. The
first; That the preaching of the Gospel is the grace of Christ: That is to
say; A Grace granted by God in consideration of Christ's merits and sufferings.
The second; That the grace of Christ attaineth and reaches the very effect of
conversion and new obedience, and rests not in having enabled man to do it
of himself, without the influence of it. To make this part of faith better to
be understood among believers, better to be maintained against unbelievers,
that which this resolution advances is this; That the Grace of the H. Ghost,
purchased by the humiliation of Christ, and by his exaltation obtained, as it
is the means which God has provided for the publishing of his Gospel, to the
conviction of all who understand it, that they ought to submit to the faith,
and live according to it* so it is the means to make it effectual to the
conversion of the Nations to Christianity, and that conversion effectual in
their lives and conversations, by presenting the reasons and grounds thereof,
(being of themselves sufficient for the work) to every man's consideration* in
those circumstances, procured by the providence of God which it executes, in
which, his wisdom ^oresaw that they would tak^ effect, and become to the
purpose. And truly, when our Lord says John XVI. 8, 9, 10. And, when he comes
he will convict the world of sin, of righteousness and of judgment Of sin
because they believe not in me: Of judgment, because the prince of this world
is condemned; we must understand, that the H. Ghost convinced the world of sin,
because those miracles which the Apostles did by the holy Ghost, convincing the
world that they spoke the word of God showed the world* that they were under
sin, and liable to Gods wrath, if they became not Christians: And that he
convinced the world of Judgment, because the Prince of these world is
condemned, by the conversion of those who forefook him to become Christians.
Therefore S, Steven upbraideth the Jews, saying; Ye stisnecked and
uncircumcised in hearts and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, even
you also, as did your fathers, Acts VII. 51. Because, being convicted by the
Holy Ghost which spoke in him, that he spoke from God, nevertheless, they
submit not to his message. Therefore our Lord Mark III. 28. 29, 30, All sins
shall be forgiven the sons of men, and blasphemies which they shall blaspheme:
But whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost has no remission for ever,
but is liable to everlasting damnation; Because they said, he has an unclean
spirit* which you have again Math. XII. 31, 32. Luke XII. 10. Because, being
convicted that our Lord spoke and did his miracles by the Holy Ghost, they
blasphemed, saying, that he spoke and did them by an unclean spirit. For,
these words and these works are the means by which our Lord accomplished ^his
promise John XIV. 23. If any man love me he will keep my word, and my Father
will love him, and we will come to him, and abide with him. For before the
condition; If any man love me; be fulfilled, the case is that which our Lord
expresses Apoc. III. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock. And if any man
hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him and sup with him, and
^e with me. But, being fulfilled, the words of our Lord take place. John XVI.
15, 16, 17. If ye love me ye will keep my commandments. And I will ask the
Father, and he will give you an other Advocate, to abide with you for ever;
even the spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive, because they ^ee it
not, nor know it, but you know it, because it abides with you, and is in you.
For, seeing it is manifest by the premises, that the undertaking of
Christianity is the condition upon which the Holy Ghost is granted as a gift to
abide with Christians; the preaching of Christianity, that is, the proposing of
those reasons which God by his word has showed us, why we should be
Christians, is the knocking of our Lord Christ by the spirit, at the door of
the heart, that he may enter and dwell in us by the same spirit, according to
the words of S. Paul. 2. Cor. II. 16. For ye are the Temple of the living God,
as God has said; To wit, I will dwell and converse among them, and will be
their God, and they shall be my people. That which some Philosophers say of the
natural generation of man; That the soul frames its own dwelling; being
fulfilled in the work of generation by grace, when the Holy Ghost, by his
actual assistance, frames the man to be fit for the habitual gift, of the
Holy Ghost, by becoming a true Christian. If then we believe, that the Holy
Ghost was given by God, and obtained by Christ, as well to make the Gospel
effectual, as to move the Apostles to preach it; there can no doubt remain,
that the preaching of the Gospel, that is to say, the means which the Holy
Ghost provideth to make it either sufficient or effectual to convince the world
of it* is the instrument, whereby he frames himself that invisible house of
true believers in which he dwells. And therefore, the means whereby Gods
grace becomes effectual to those who embrace it, is the same that renders it
sufficient for those who refuse it; the difference lying as well in the
disposition which it meets with, (for which the man is accountable) as in the
spirit of God that presents it, which renders God the praise when it takes
effect* and leaves men accountable when it does not. If this reason had been in
consideration with Socinus, (and perhaps with Pelagius,) he would have found it
necessary, acknowledging (as all that read the Scriptures must needs
acknowledge that which they find so frequent and so clear in the Scriptures)
that the habitual gift of the Holy Ghost is granted to enable those who
undertake Christianity to perform it; to acknowledge also, that the actual
help of it is necessary, to make the motives of Christianity effectual to
subd^e men to it. And by consequence, that the coming of the second Adam was
necessary to restore the breach which the first had made, seeing it was not to
be repaired without the same.

Nor is it to be marveled at, that natural means, conducted by the grace of
Christ, should produce supernatural effects, such as I have showed the
obedienc^ of Christianity to be, which, supposing the Covenant of grace, and
freedom of man's will, cannot be otherwise; The reasons which appear to the
understanding, and move the will, to act contrary to the inclination of
original concup^scence, in professing Christianity and living according to the
same, being sufficient to convict it to give sentence, that so the man ought to
do; And, the circumstances, in which the spirit of Christ conducteth these
motives to the heart which it knocks at by their means being able to
represent them valuable, to take effect with him, who is moved to the contrary
by his original concupiscence* And though means natural, because they* move
a man to proceed according to right reason, which nature requires him to do;
yet, as they are brought to pass and conducted by a supernatural cause,
nothing hinders the effect to be supernatural, in such* a nature, as is by
them made capable of acting above nature. I do much approve the discourse of
some, that have endeavored to show how this comes to pass, thus; supposing
the covenant of the Law to be the renewing of that which was made with Adam in
Paradise, for the maintaining of him in the happnesse of his natural life:
Which we may suppose, though we suppose not, that God covenanted not with him
at all for the life to come. For, the dispensation of those blessings of this
life, which the covenant of nature, limited by Moses Law to the happiness of
the land of promise, tendreth, may well be the advantage which God takes, to
make the covenant of Grace acceptable, especially to those, who, by Gods
blessing, failing of the blessings of the first covenant, and, by that means
becoming out of love with this present worl^, mee^ with the Covenant of Grace,
in such a disposition, as may render it acceptable. For, so long as things go
well with men in this world, it seems ha^sh, to require them to takeup the
Cross of Christ, that they may obtain the world to come, But, when the
comforts of this world fail, it is no marvel, if any condition that tenders
hope in the world to come be welcome If it be said that this renders the grace
of Christ effectual only to the poor, and men o^ mean condition in the
world, who have cause to be weary of their est^te in it; It is answered, that
it is no marvel, if the means that makes the grace of Christ effectual,
address it self especially to that estate o men* in which our Lord Christ, to
whom they so become conformable, appeared in the world. And, for that very
reason; to figure that est^te of mind which the Gospel requires; the people of
^sraell were, by Gods Law, left un^u^nished of many helps of policy and force,
by which other nations maintain themselves free from serv^tude, that they might
remain obliged to depend upon G^d^ immediate assistance and providence. But it
is to be said further; That, the greatest estates of the world being subject to
the greatest crosses, through want of success, and those great changes to
which they are liable; this way of preparation to the kingdom of heaven can no
way seem wanting to any estate, when a beggar is seen, no less to do^e upon
this world, then an unclean person is seen to do^e upon that whore by whom he
is abused. It is moreover to be said* That, the remembrance of death which
must, and the inconstancy of this world, which may deprive us of all the
benefits thereof, being, by Gods judgment, the punishment of sin, soures all
the content of them that drench themselves deepest in the pleasures of this
life, and gives them just cause to forsake them all in case they stand not with
the hope of the world to come: And the very enjoying of them, (being enjoyed
with that conscience which all Ch^^stians have, of Gods providence, and the
sense of his hand from whence they come, is reasonably an advantage to those
who enjoy the best success that can be express^d in the course of this world,
both to become thankful to God for it, and also, to prefer ^^ernity before it.
Whereby it may appear, that the course of this world, disposed by God upon the
terms of the covenant of nature contains ^^ it those opportunities and
advantages* which the act of Gods providence by the grace of Christ, knows
easily how to mak^ effectual, to the supernatural purposes of it.

This is the place for the rest of that which I am to say of the opinion of
Jansenius, settling the efficacy of saving grace upon other grounds then those
which I use. The ground of it seems to stand upon the observation of S.
Augustine de corrept. and gratia, Chap. XI, XII. Distinguishing between the help
of grace, without which the work of grace is not don, and that by which it is
don, auxilium sine quo non, and auxilium quo; and comparing the grace of
Christ, which comes to effect notwithstanding original concupiscence, with
the grace given Adam, which might have come to effect, had he pleased, but came
not notwithstanding his innocen^e; as more powerful in our weakness, then
that in his strength. For, hereupon, he will have the grace of Christ to be
only that which takes effect; confining that help without which the work of
grace cannot be don, to the state of innocence, as ou^ of date now under
o^iginall sin. So that* the freedom of the will is so far from being r^quisite
to ^he effects ^hereof, that it has no being but b^ the means of it,
consisting, in that free love of that which God commands, because he
commands it, which it inspireth. As on the other side, the coun^erfeit of it,
in them that sin without reluctation, because free from righteousness, is
nothing but the free l^ve of sin, for the sa^isfaction of concupiscence. It is
therefore, in his opinion, impertinent, how necessarily the grace of Christ
determines the will to embrace the true good; seeing it is the love of it, and
the delight in it, which grace works in the w^ll, that determines it,
willingly and freely to embrace it. To t^ke the more distinct view of this
plea, let us put the case in him, who, running full speed in a course of sin,
is called by the preaching of the Gospel to become a Christian: Or, to the
same purpose, in him who, being a Christian, and runn^ng the same race, is
summoned by his profession, and the grounds thereof* to re^urne to it. In this
case, can any man imagine, that the reasons which move us all to be Christians
should raise no love of true good, no dislike to sin, no fear of vengeance, no
desire of everlasting hap^i^esse, in him that considers them as they deserve?
Especially being managed by the spirit of God which knocks at the door of the
heart by that means. Or can any man question, as it is ^he fear of vengeance
that begins, so it is the love of good for Gods s^ke that con^ummateth the
resolution of becoming a true Christi^^? But, the qu^st^^n being put about
changing the chief end of a man's whole life and doings, can it be supposed,
that any man is prevented with such a delight in true goo^nesse, as i^st^ntly
to abandon the lust, which his b^s^nesse has been hitherto to satisfy,
without demurre or regret? I doubt not that God can immediately cr^a^e in any
man that appearance of true good* that shall without debate or looking back,
transport him to the prosecution of it: That, notwithstanding the Covenant of
grace, he may do it; Which, though a rule to his ord^n^ry proceeding, is no
Law to his Sovereign perogative. But, him that is thus s^ved, though s^ved by
grace, yet, we cannot count to be saved by the Covenant of grace; Which
proposes a reward to them, who are led by motives thereof, notwithstanding the
difficulties to the contrary; though implying the work of grace in him that
overcomes. And, this no man more c^ear^ly acknowledges then Jansenius de
gratia Christi VIII. 2. where ^^ con^esseth that the predetermination of the
will by the grace of Christ is not indefeasible, but only when it overcom^s;
as Gods predetermination, according to the Dominicans, is. For, by this
difference (which in stati^g of this opinion, I have not neglected before) the
efficacy thereof cannot be attribu^ed to ^e ^a^ure of that help which
overcomes, a^ of an other kind then that which p^oveth frustrate. And
therefore, notwithstanding that large and elaborat work of his, he has left us
to inquire further, whence the efficacy of it proceeds; As having, in effect,
only resolved us, wherein the efficacy of Grace consists in the nature of
the formal cause; Not from whence it proceed^th, in the nature of the
effective cause, which the question, indeed, demand^th.

And truly, the very consideration premised; That, as freedom from sin
co^sists in the determination of the will to righteousness, which the Grace of
Christ effects; so, freedom from righteousness, in the determination of it
to sin, which it acts; In^orceth an other kind of freedom, common to both
estates, not importing praise or dispraise, but a capacity of either, by doing
that which no necessity determines a man to do. And therefore, that, though
the grace of Christ's Cross be the medecin, yet, till it be freely taken, it
works not the cure. This is that freedom from necessity, by the present
condition of our nature, the use whereof produces the other freedom from
bondage, either to sin or righteousness* Not that this state of proficience
requires actual indifference, which supposes so great an inclination and
biasse as that of inbred concupiscence, Not determining the will to any action
or object, but the acts thereof to those taints, which the want of a due end,
and right reason (and therefore of just measure) in a man's desire, necessarily
infers. But because, in passing from the bondage of sin to the love of
righteousness, it is necessary, that a man, go through an instance of
indifference, wherein his resolution shall balance, between the love of true
good and that which is counterfeit. It is therefore to be acknowledged, that,
in the state of innocence, there had needed no other help then the knowledge
of Gods will, to enable men to perform whatsoever he should require; (Of the
sphere of nature, supposing Adam instituted and called, only to the
uprightness and happiness, of this life; or supernatural, supposing him
instituted and called to the world to come) For, where no immoderate
inclination of the sensual appetite created any difficulty, what should hinder
the prosecution of a reason so unquestionable as the will of God is? But, is
not therefore the knowledge of Gods will revealed by the gospel, under reasons
convincing man of his obligation to do it, upon the account of his utter
misery or perfect happiness, the grace of Christ? Knowing, by the scriptures
alleged before, that the means of it are purchased by his cross, and that
where the reason is so convinced, there cannot want motives sufficient to
incline the will to make choice. Not, that I think those reasons, not being
necessary but only sufficient, would take place, were they not managed by Gods
spirit; Whether for the dificulty of supernatural actions, or for the contrary
biasse of inbred concupiscence: But because, in the nature of a sufficient
help, they do actually enable a man to make choice; though, in regard of the
difficulties which contrary inclinations create, is is most certain they would
prove addle, and void of effect, were they not conducted by the grace of God,
which is called effectual for the event of it. Not that the nature of those
helps which prevail is any other then the nature of those which overcome not,
(which I may well affirm, if Jansenius, though to the prejudice of his
opinion, can not deny it) but because they are, by the work of providence,
presented in several circumstances, to several dispositions and inclinations,
whether of Gods mere will and pleasure, as he is Lord of all things, or upon
reason of reward or punishment, in matters wherein he has declared himself by
the Covenant of Grace. So that, the same reasons and motives, which, in some
prove void and frustrate, coming to effect, and reaching and attaining to the
very doing of the work which they enable a man to do; it cannot ^e said,
according to this position of mine, that God, by the grace of Christ, only
inableth to do what he requires, (the will of man making the difference
between him that does it, and him that does it not) but the very act, as well
as the ability of doing, is duly ascribed to the work of Gods Grace,
according to the articles agreed by the Church against Pelagius.

And this not only under the Gospel, but even under the Law. For, though I
showed you in the first book, that the law expressly tenders only the promise
of temporal happiness in holding the land of Canaan, for the reward of the
outward and carnal observations thereof; Yet I showed you also, that, in the
mean time, there was an other traffic in driving under hand between God and
his people, for the happiness of the world to come, upon their obedience to
his Law, for such reasons, and to such an end; and with such measures as he
requires. Therefore, The Law is spiritual according to S. Paul Rom VII. 14.
and a grace according to S. John I. 16, 17. When he says; Of his fullness we
have all received, and grace for grace. For, the Law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. The grace of the Gospel, instead of the
grace of the Law. And, S. Paul again, speaks of the things which are granted
us by the Gospel, not in w^rds taught by man's wisdom, but by the Holy Ghost,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual things. 1. Cor. II. 13. Signifying,
that he taught the Gospel out of the Law, comparing the spiritual things of
the Gospel as signified by the Law, to the same spiritual things as revealed
by Christ. And again when he says Romans I. 17. The righteousness of God is
revealed in the Gospel, from faith to faith; His meaning is; proceeding to the
faith of Christ, from that which was under the Law. True i^ is indeed, and I
acknowledge, that this spiritual sense of the Law, was not to be discovered in
the Law, nor was discovered under it, without the revelation of Gods spirit,
(that placed it there) to his friends the Prophets, and by them to their
disciples and followers. But, the office of those Prophets being to call the
people to the spiritual service of God, and obedience to his Law out of love.
(which was the intent for which his spirit strove with them, as with those
before the flood Genesis VI. 2. Whereupon Noe is called the preacher of
righteousness 2. Peter II. 5.) it follows of necessity, that there was means
for them to learn, and to practice true righteousness, seeing they are
charged for resisting the spirit of God calling them to it. S, Steven in the
seventh of the Acts, insisteth not in convincing the Jews of the truth of
Christianity, (supposing it done by that, which had passed,) but inferrs, by
all that long speech, clearly this; That, as the Israelite refused Moses for a
judge between him and the Israelite whom he wronged, as the people were
rebellious to him in the wilderness, and turned back in their hearts to Egypt,
so were they to the prophet whom Moses had foretold: concluding therefore; Ye
stifnecked and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, ye do always resisty the
Holy Ghost, as your fathers, so you also. Which of the prophets did not your
fathers persecute? Killing those that foretold of the coming of that righteous
one, of whom you are now become the traitors and murderers? And our Lord, when
he tells them, that, by honoring the memories of the Prophets, and
persecuting the Prophets and wise and Scribes and Apostles, whom he was sending
them, they owned themselves heirs of them that killed the Prophets Mat. XXIII.
29* 37. shows, that the case was the same with the Prophets of old, as with
himself and his Apostles. And whatsoever we read in the old Testament, of the
grace of God to that people, in granting them his spirit, or of their
ungraciousnesse in resisting the same* serves to prove the same purpose. It is
truly said indeed, in rendering the reason why our Lord Christ came not till
toward the later end of the world; that God meant first to show the world,
that all other means which he thought fit to use to reclaim man by the
fathers* and by, and under the Law, were not to purpose* that the necessity of
his coming might appear. But, that this is not to be understood, as if God
meant to render them inexcusable by using insufficient means, that could not
take effect. But, that dispensing to those times such means of grace, as he
found the reasons upon which his secret coun^ailes proceed to require,
proportionable to the obedience and service which he required then at their
hands; He reserves the full measure of them to the coming of his Son
proportionable to the difficulty of beraing his Cross, which he purposed, for
the condition of those promises which he brought. And, the same is to be said
of the Fathers under the law of nature; Which, if we understand it to be so
cailed, as if the light of nature then taught and enabled them to please God*
we contradict, not only the faith hitherto maintained against Pelagius, but
also the appearances in Scripture, of those revelations, of that cpmmerce and
in^rcourse with God, whereby, they advanced, to the state of his friends. The
book of Job* (to the time whereof we see this state lusted) presenting most
evident instances* both of Gods correspondence with the Godly of the Gentiles,
and of Christians, piety in their conversations.

Now, to that state of inocence wherein Adam was created, it must needs be a
grace o^ God to make known his will, because it cannot be supposed, that God
should employ his creature in his service and not reward him for doing it, with
advantage: But, not as if suck knowledge could give him ability, but only
determine the matte^ of his obedience, who had nothing to hinder the doing of
that, which, commanded by God, must needs be for his advantage to do. Since the
fall, if reasons provided by God to convince the understanding, to incline the
will to that which he purposes for our happiness, may and would prove
ineffectuall, were they not acted and managed by the holy Ghost, Let us not
therefore so far mi^^ken the counsel of God, in providing them, as to im^gine
the work is not done by them, because it is his special grace that makes them
effectual to purpose. The indowments of Adam, how great soever they were, the
event shows, that they might fail, and, h^d they not failed, it must have
been ascribed to God for a greater grace then those indowments; in as much as
these made him accountable to God, that, would have in^itled him to a reward.
So that, by this account, it will be no marva^le, that the grace of Christ,
which saves us in and through this weakness of i^bred concup^scence, should
be counted greater then that which Adam had in his in^^^ncy. And, the same is
to be said of the Angels that fell, and those that stood. How great soever
their indowments were, had not the motive whatsoever it was, that prevailed
with the one part to depart from God, been preven^ed of taking effect with the
rest, it might have come to pass, as well in all as in some. That it did not,
what can it be ascribed to* (all being tur^^shed with abilities fully
corespondent to that which God required at the^ hands) but some dispensation of
Gods secret counsel, being, by no reason of his declared Justice, obliged
otherwise? Not that the Will of Adam or of Angels was not able to do what God
required, and h^d done it, of ^^ self, without any help added by God; But
because* so great is the influence of the makers providence, that the events
thereof* how justly soev^^ imputable to the choice of the creature, must of
necessity have their springs, in and from the secret dispensation thereof, not
concerning his justice.

Seeing then, that, as I said before* the opinion of Jansenius, though it gives
account wherein the grace of Christ formally consists yet gives no account
from whence effectively it proceeds* but, the imm^diate w^ll of God, ^he
question demanding, upon what ground, it redounds to man's acc^u^t; Let them
either look about them for a better reason, or accept of th^s, not a destr^ying
that which it says, but to the introducing of that which it sa^eth not. For it
is ag^eed upon both ways, that it is delight in true goodness for the love of
God, that makes the grace of Christ's Gospel eff^ctual in men's lives and
conversations: How by the act of that will* which in others, rejects it, ^
^ndevour to say what the scriptures and faith of the Church will allow; But
Jansenius his opinion goes no further then that so it is, to wit, because love
is free, therefore man is fre^ly saved, howsoever love be brought to pass.
But, the necessity of those actions to which grace determines, which is
antecedent in Jansenius his opinion, (the cause which is Gods will being
unde^easible) i^ in mine only consequent, upon suposition of efficacy, which
implies the being of that which comes to effect, grounded upon the foreknowledg
of God, which supposes the free motion of the reasonable creature. If the
advantage be such in reconciling the efficacy of grace with the free will of
the creature, in reconciling the same with Gods foreknowledge and effectual
providence, extending to all good and bad, it will appear much more. For, had
Jansenius done his business in the matter of supernatural grace, he had not
obliged us much, unless his resolution were an overture to abate the general
difficulty that remains. But, if he sends us, for that, to the
predetermination of God, which is said to be requisite upon the gene^all
account of the creature, and the indifference of man's will; he leaves us to
seek for a reason, how God is not the author of that sin, which he determines
the will to do, before* it determine it self. If we avoid that, as Doctor
Strange* whom I spoke of before, has done, by maintayning against Doctor
Twisse, that the will is not determined by God to the actions of sin; Besides
that he is to give account, why the same providence of God, which is general
to all things, should be thought to teach this sort and not that; (all actions,
as append^nces of Gods creatures, having the same dependence upon God which the
prerogative of the first cause requi eth) we are le^t to seek, how that
foreknowledge of God, which directs his providence, comes informed of the
truth of future contingencies. For, if we maintain, that the wisdom of God,
comprehending the inclinations of his creatures, and all those considerations,
which outward occurrences, or inward appearances shall present or not present
them with, to determine their choice, cannot thereby cetainely discern what
will come to pass: (as Doctor Strange maintains, that so, there cannot be in
God any certtine knowledge of future conditionalls) I leave to them that shall
peruse this writing, what satisfaction it is possible for him to give, in the
possibility of foreknowing future contingencies. For, to say, that they may be
^oreseen in the deceit of permitting them, is to say, that, that which may be
otherwise may be certainly foreseen, by certainly knowing that there is
nothing, to hinder it.

It remains, that I say, what is to be thought of that proposition which some
of the School. Doctors holdforth, That, to such as do what is in them to do by
their natural abilities, God gives grace: facient^bus quod in se est ex vi ibu
nature Deus largitur gratiam; Because it seems to follow upon ^upposition of
that which I have maintained; That the unregenerate are, notwithstanding
original concupiscence, able to do things that are good for a right end,
though not out of a resolution to do all for the right end of all, which is,
God and his service. For hence it seems to be inferred, that those who live
in civil righteousness, for honesties sake (and not for their particular
advantage, inconsistent with the general good of mankind,) d^ser^ve that God
should ^end you those helps of grace, which are immediately sufficient to save
them by the Covenant of grace* But it is manifest, that the proposition may be
understood in two senses; One in point of Fact* the other of right; Theone
making the proposition universal, the other particular; The one importing that
God may, the other that God must give those helps of grace, that are
immediately sufficient* to them that live well according to the light of
nature; there being a vast difference, between Gods giving the helps of grace
that are immediately sufficient, to them whom he considers to have done such
things as the light of nature justifies; And, his giving them because of the
same, as obliged so to reward them. For, the one leaves those sufficient helps,
gifts of Gods grace by Christ, the other renders them rewards of men's works,
not subject to Gods bounty, being prevented with the obligation of justice; and
therefore establishes that opinion of meritum de congruo, which had much vogue
in the Schools, and supposes not, but infers the Covenant of grace, and
therefore destroys it, as verifying the effects thereof into those works of
man, that oblige God to grant those helps, which the Gospel, pretending to be
set on foot by Gods free grace in Christ, tendreth. Certainly, admitting that
which has been proved, that the preaching of the gospel is granted in
consideration of the merits and sufferings of Christ; it cannot by any means
be maintained, that any works of mere nature can oblige God to send the means
of knowing the Gospel, and conviction of the truth of it, without granting by
consequence, that the very coming of Christ, whereof these means are the
consequence, must be imputed to the works of those, who, in the state of
corrupt nature, have obliged God to send them the knowledge of Christ: Which
they could not have had, had not the coming of Christ been first provided:
Which, by this reason, must have been, in consideration of the original merit
of their works. I say, the original merit of their works, because, in this
case there could be no consideration of Gods promise made out of free grace, as
the ground of those blessings, which God, thereby, ties himself to bestow,
upon condition of doing that which his Covenant requires, though otherwise,
infinitely exceeding the value of the condition, which he requires. For, here
it is evident, that the free grace of God, which tenders the promise upon the
condition is the original ground of all the claim, that, any that is
qualified can make to the promise. But, supposing the works of corrupt nature
to oblige God to give his Gospel, it is no more his free grace, but the
original merit of those works, to which all the grace of it must be imputed.
Which* as it directly falls into the prime article of Pelagius his heresy, that
grace is given according to merit, and, that it is not given to every act,
being prevented by those acts in consideration whereof this opinion supposes it
to be granted; So, by consequence, it makes the publication of the Gospel to
be no grace of Christ, but the reward of man's merit, which is the true
consequence of Pelagius his position. For though, being pressed with those
scriptures, in which the grace of Christ is so clearly preached, that nothing
but impudence could deny it, he granted, that the preaching of the Gospel is
as much of Gods free grace as the light of nature by which these works are
done; yet in very deed he o^erthrewe his own saying, (that is, gave the Church
an undefeasible advantage against himself,) by granting it; His heresy being
no ways tenable, without maintaining, the very preaching of the Gospel to be
the purchase of man's merit, and Christ himself, the subject of the Gospel, by
consequence. And thus, the heresy of Pelagius becomes that very opinion which
S. Paul writes against, as often as he disputes, that a man is justified by
grace and not by works; Only with this difference, that, when he writes
against the Jews* arguing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law
but by faith, his meaning is; that the righteousness of the Jews turned
Christians is not to be ascribed to the outward observation of Moses Law, but
to the Covenant of grace* But when he wriets to the gentiles; That they
attained not the promises of the Gospel by the works which they had don before
they heard of it, but by the mere grace of God that sent our Lord Christ to
bring it. But, if any man insist, that nothing hinders him to suppose the
Gospel already set on foot, and thereupon to say and hold; That, by the use of
corrupt nature* God may be obliged to send the knowledge of it; The
insufficience of the plea will be evident enough. For, those works of moral
honesty which corrupt nature is able to do, not serving to discharge the
obligation thereof to God, in those particular occasions upon which they become
due, because they are void of any, whether habitual or actual, *intent of
that end which they ought to aim at; It were ridiculous, to tie God to grant
the effects of his free grace, in sending our Lord Christ, to those that are
less sinners then others. And consi^ering that which is visible in point of
fact, it will be imposible to reduce those things which appear in the
propagating and maintaining of Christianity through the world, to any
difference of works done before the knowledge thereof, as the reason of Gods
dispensing of it.

Which may also be said of another opinion, that may be, and perhaps is held
upon terms not prejudicial to the faith, as this seems to be; to wit; That
God, by declaring the Covenant of Grace, and his inclination to save all the
world by it, has tied himself to grant such motions and inspirations of true
good to all men, that, if they neglect them not, but do what corrupt nature so
prevented is able to do, he shall stand obliged to second the same with means
sufficient to bring them to everlasting happiness. For, the beginning of the
work being acknowledged to require Gods preventing Grace, it cannot be said,
that those who are supposed to be thus saved are saved by works and not by
grace; or that, in their regard, Christ is dead in vain, the said helps being
granted in consideration of Christ's death. But, though it may without prejudice
to christanity be said, that God may dispense the helps of that grace which
Christ's death has purchased, besides, and without the preaching of the
Gospel, yet can it not be said, during the Gospel, that any man attaineth the
kingdom of heaven, which Christianty promises, but by it. Now, to be saved by
the Gospel, requires the profession of the faith, and that, the Sacrament of
Baptism, at least in resolution and purpose. So that, whether, among those
nations where the gospel is not preached, any man be saved by this way, is a
thing visible, and to be tried by examining whom this case has been known to
have become a Christian. Of which, I assure my self, there will be found so
few instances, of historical truth, that a discreet man will have no pleasure
to introduce a position, so nearly concerning the intent of Christ's coming
whereof there can so little effect appear, For, supposing instances might be
alleged to make the matter questionable, how far would they be from rendering a
reason of that vast difference, that is visible, between the proceeding of God
toward the salvation of those that are borne within the Pale of the Church,
and those that live and dye without hearing of christianity? The one being so
prevented with the knowledge of what they are to do to be saved, that they
shall have much a do so to neglect it, as to flatter their own concupiscence
with any color of an excuse. Whereas, the other, whatsoever conviction we may
imagine them to have of one true God, of an account to be made for all that we
do, of the guilt of sin which they are under, without the Gospel; it will be
impossible to reduce the reason of the difficulties they are under, more then
the former* to an equal desire in God of saving all, together with the
difference of men's compliance with the helps of Grace which it produces. And
therefore, considering the antecedent will of God is not absolutely Gods will,
but with a term of abatement, reserving the condition upon which it
proceeds* I conceive it requisite* as I have don, to limit the signification
thereof to those effects which we see God being to pass by virtue of it. The
utmost whereof being the prov^d^ng of means for the preaching of the Gospel,
it is nevertheless no prejudice to it that the Apostles are forbidden by the
spirit to preach in Bithynia or Asia, Acts XV^. 6, 7. not because God would not
have them to be saved, or, because the Macedonians, by their works, had obliged
him to set them aside for their sakes, who could have provided for both: But
for reasons known to himself alone, and, not reducible to any thing that
appears to us. Especially considering the c^se of infants dying before
Baptism, in whose works, it is manifest there can be no ground of difference.
For to say, that, by the universality of that Grace which God declares by
Christ, we are to believe, that, they are all saved, as many as live not to
transgress the Covenant of grace, would be a novelty never heard of in the
Catholic Church of Christ, tending to un^ermine the foundation of our common
salvation laid by our Lord ^o Nicod^mus; Unless ye b^ born again of water and
of the Holy Ghost, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God For, how should the
general tender of the Gospel entitle infants to the benefit thereof, because
they never transgressed that in which they were never estated. It were in vain
then, to look about the scripture, for examples to justify any part of this
position. The widow of Sarepta to whom Elias was sent, Naaman and the Syrian,
who was sent to Eliseus Cy^us whom many supposed to have worshipped the only
God, (because in the end of the Chronic^es and beginning of Esdras, he says,
the God of heaven has given me all the Kingdoms of the earth; and because the
Prophet Esaias makes him a figure of the Messiah (as the Kings of Gods people
were) for the freedom which they attained by his government) the Centurion
Cornelius, to whom S. Peter was sen with the Gospel, are all of one case;
which is the case of th^se strangers, who, living in the commonwealth of
Israel, though not circumcised, yet wo^shiped the only true God, under those
laws, which, the Jews tell us, were delivered by God to Noe, and by him, to
all his posterity: and so were capable of tha^ salvation, which the Israelites
had the means of under the Law, though themselves not under it. But neither
have we evidence, that their works under the light of nature obliged God, to
call them to the privilege of st^angers in the h^ use of Israel; nor can the
works of Cornelius be taken for the works of corrupt nature, being in the
state of Gods grace which was manifested under the Law, and therefore prevented
with those means of salvation, which become necessary under the Gospel, to
the salvation which it tendreth So far are we from finding in them any
argument, of a Law obliging God, to grant them those helps in consideration of
their works don in the state of corrupt nature. And therefore, whatsoever
examples we may find of this nature under Christianity, they are to be referred
to the free grace of God; which, as sometimes it may come to those of best
conversation according to nature, (to whom, the words o^ our Lord; To him that
has shall be given, may be applied without prejudice to Christianity Math.
XXV. 19. Luk XIX. 26. So also it fails not to call those, who, for their
present state, are most strangers to christianity, that it may appear, that no
Rule ties God, but that free grace, which his own secret wisdom dispenses. And
truly, those good works which corupt nature produces, necessarily depend upon
those circumstances, in which Gods pro^^dence places one man and not an other,
though both in the state of mere nature: So that the one shall not be able to
do that which is reasonable, without overcoming those difficulties, to which
the other is not liable. In which regard it has been said, that the Heroic
acts of the He^hen may be attributed to the spirit of God moving them, though,
not as granted in consideration of Christ, but as conducting the who^e work of
providence. So little cause there is to imagine, that the consideration of them
should oblige God to grant those helps of grace, the ground whereof is the
obedience of Christ, and the end, the happiness of the world to come.

CHAP. XXVI. Predestination to grace absolute, to glory respective: Purpose of
denying effectual Grace absolute, of punishing respective. The end, to which
God predestinates, is not the end for which he predestinates. Grace the reward
of the right use of Grace. How much of the question the Gospel determines not.
That our endeavors are engaged no less, then if predestination were not, it
determines. Of the Tradition of the Church; and of Semipelagians,
Predestinatians and Arminians.
I Am now come to the upshot of the controversy concerning the covenant of
grace, and free will, in imbraceing and performing of the covenant of grace,
which is the dispute about Gods predestination, whether it proceeds upon the
absolute will of God, or, in consideration of man's being qualified as the
gospel requires, Which, though of it self never so intricate, the premises
being supposed, must of necessity be thus resolved; That, predestination being
the appointment of grace and glory, as reprobation on the other side the decree
of not giving effectual grace, and of condemning to pain* the appointment of
glory and misery cannot be absolute, but, the appointment to actual grace and
perseverance or not, nec^ssarily is. The reason, supposing the premises, is not
liable to be contradicted in either part of it; For, it cannot stand with the
wisdom and truth of God, to execute his counsels upon other reasons, and in
other considerations, then, from everlasting he purposed to do. Therefore, for
what reason, and in what consideration, God shall in due time give life and
death to them whom he shall give it to, for the same reason he did resolve to
give it from everlasting. But nothing is more evident in Christianity then
this; that God at the last day, shall give sentence of life and death,
according as men shall be found to have behaved themselves as Christians or
not. And, all that I have premised, to manifest the condition of the Covenant
of grace, makes good the same. For, the state of life or death cannot become
any man's own upon other terms, then, the right and title to it becomes his;
Therefore God, from everlasting, determined to give life o^ death to every man,
in consideration of his being found qualified for this or for that, according
^o those terms which the covenant of grace proposes. On the other side, it
being resolved, that man, as he is borne into the world, is not able to do any
thing that can oblige God to grant him those helps of grace, which only will
be effectual to enable him, to embrace and go through with that condition
which the gospel tendreth; It is manifest that the reason, why he provides
effectually, sufficient helps for some, which others have not, why he tenders
them to some in those circumstances, in which he knows they will be
effectual, to others not, must take rise and begin at his own free choice, in
granting matters of free grace to whom he pleases, and not to others; Though,
of each man's proceeding or not proceeding in the way of Christianity a reason
is to be given, from the good or bad use of those sufficient helps, which he
had been prevented with. For, seeing it was in the mere appointment of God, to
have caused any man to be borne, or after to live, where he should have met
with sufficient helps to convict him of the truth of Christianity and those so
presented to him, as he best knew they would not be refused; there is nothing
more manifest, then, that it was only in the mere will of God, that it was
appointed so as it is and not otherwise. But, this is no hinderance, why the
sufficient helps of Gods grace should not proceed from the Will of man's
happiness in God, though they take no further effect, through man's fau^^; And,
the having or not having of further helps, which God either does, or might have
seconded them with, be imputed to the good or bad use of those which went
before: Because, it has been made manifest by the premises* that the end of
Gods gifts is the happiness of his creature, though it come not to pass. But,
the reason of the particulars, which he actually bestows or refuses, is to be
resolved into the quality of the persons that receive them or not; but so,
that, the order of all depending upon the first helps of free grace which every
man is prevented with, there is no reason to be given for the whole, in the
nature of a meritorious cause.

Against the two parts of this resolution, there are two objections, one
against each, which, so far as we shall be able to resolve, so far shall we be
able to leave the business clear. For, seeing that the end is first desi^ed,
and then the means; (the reason why the means are desired being derived from
the desire of the end, and referred to it) And, that the end of all grace is
glory, the end of all the means of salvation, the salvation intended by it; It
seems, that Gods predestination, must, of force, appoint salvation to them
that are to be saved in the first place, from thence proceeding, to design the
way and order, by which, the person designed to it may be induced, of his own
free choice to accept the means of it. This slight mistake seems to have been
the occasion of many horrible imaginations, which, even Christian divines have
had, of Gods design from evarlasting, to create the most part of men, on
purpose to glo^^fie himself by condemning them to everlasting torments,
though, in consideration of the sins which they shall have don: That which had
been granted, in Gods predestination to life, upon this mistake, seeming
necessarily to extend it self to his reprobation, signifying the decree of
condemning to everlasting torments. But, the mistake is, that the end of the
creature, by Gods appointment, is taken for Gods end; Which, though it be his
end because he appoints it for his creature, yet it is not any end that he
seeks for himself. The reason is so punctually laid down in the premises,
that it can be but repeated here; That God, being of himself sufficient for
himself, can have no end upon his creature; Because nothing accrues to him,
nothing goes from him, whatsoever accrues to his creature or goes from it: And
though, God having now resolved to make the world for himself, that is, for
his own glory, it is necessary we suppose him, to design the government of it
so, as it may be a fit means, to obtain that end; yet is it to be much
considered, that, God having once given a Law to his understanding creatures,
tendering happiness as the reward of abiding by his Law; it can no longer stand
with that tender, that it should be a fit means of Gods glory, to give
happiness to his creature, not considered as qualified by his law, and
therefore, not to resolve to give it. Whether we consider the interest of Gods
justice in requiring that Law, it cannot be imagined, that the love of any
creature can move him to waive it; Or, whether we consider his truth in making
it good, being once declared, it is manifest, that, the thing promised by it,
cannot be appointed by God as the means to his glory, not supposing the
condition which it requires. For, whatsoever may be said of the consideration
of our Lord Christ; As it can have no place, till we suppose his obedience to
be in consideration, when any man's reward is appointed by virtue of that
Covenant which he came to treat; So can it not be in consideration* til we
suppose him to whom the benefit of it is appointed, to be qualified as it
requires. And this might have been seen by the opposite decree of Reprobation;
In which, everlasting death, appointed as the term of it, not being capable of
bearing the notion of that which God aims at of it self, cannot be considered
as the end; Which might have been argument enough, that, as the death of the
reprobate is not, nor can be the means, of Gods glory, but as it is intended
to punish men's forfeits; So neither can the life of the elect be the means of
Gods glory, but as it is intended to reward their performance.

It is therefore answered, that the reward of the Elect, and punishment of
Reprobate becomes the means of Gods glory, not absolutely, but in regard that
God, having proposed a Law, by the obaying whereof they might attain
happiness, though requiring supernatural obedience, the one have observed it
the others not; And, God having proposed a law which the light of nature
inableth all to observe, none have observed it. But otherwise, that it could no
more be the means of Gods glory, to appoint life for the Elect, then it could
be the means for the same, to appoint death for the Reprobate. And therefore,
that it is necessary to the glory of God, that, the good gifts which he
bestows upon his creatures, should all be taken for means of their
everlasting happiness, by his appointment. To which purpose, we have not a few
passages of holy Scripture that are very express. S. Paul tells the Athenians,
Acts XVII. 16. That; God made all mankind of one blood, to dwell on the whole
face of the earth, determining appointed seasons, and the bounds of their
dwellings, that they might seek the Lord, if by any means, they might find him
groping, though not far off from every one of us. And so those of Lystra Acts
XIV 16. That; In the by past ages, he suffered all nations to walk their own
ways, though ^e left not himself without witness, d^ing good, giving rain
from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness:
For what can this witness mean, if it intend to destroy his own resolution
of damning them? And therefore, speaking to them that condemn the sins of
others, and do the like; Do thou condemn the riches of his patience and
long suffering says he, not knowing that the goodness of God leads to
repentance, But, according to thy hardness and impenitent heart, heapest up
wrath to thy self, against the day of wrath and revelation of the just
judgment of God? Romans XI. 3, 4. Which are the same terms that S. Peter uses
of the impenitent, within the knowledge of Christianity, when he says, 1. Peter
III. 9. The Lord is not slack of his promise as some men count slacknesse, but
is long-suffering toward us, not willing that any should perish, but come to
the knowledge of his truth; Which is, in that place, the effectual
acknowledgement of it. As like wise says the prophet, to them that cast off
the thoughts of repentance, as, dispairing of forgiveness, Ezekiel. XXIII. 2. As
he had done before Ez^k. XVIII. 22. These exhortations signify nothing,
unless we suppose that it turns to every man's account, to neglect the means*
upon which they proceed: Which is this; That God on his part, has done what
his goodness and justice requires, (though not immediately bringing to pass
that which was immediately sufficient to the capacity of salvation) and
therefore requires this at their hands, intending to judge them in case they
fail, on their part. For, there is none of those gifts but inables a man
immediately to do that which God immediately requires, and therefore condemes
him that ^eglects to do that, which he is immediately enabled to do. And,
th^ugh God cannot become obliged, upon man's compliance wi^h the light of
nature, immediately to give sufficient helps of grace to bring every man to his
kingdom, (because of the certain faileur of man's compliance with them,
through the servitude of sin, from which we cannot come free by nature) yet is
the sin for which he is condemned justly imputed to his not do^ng that, which,
by the light of nature he might have done. How much more is the refusal of
sufficient helps to them, who have neglected the improvement of those helps
which they had, or might have had, to be imputed to them, who have made
themselves to be refused them?

From hence it necessarily follows, that those helps, which God follows his
own preventing grace with, are granted in consideration of the good use of his
preventing graces; Notwithstanding that nothing hinders the goodness of God,
both to oversee those failleures for which he might justly have given over
those which he had prevented by his grace, and not brought them finally to
persevere; or, to redouble upon them those helps, which, the use that they
formerly had made of his former graces might justly have moved him to refuse.
So, though all Gods gifts to man are granted out of Gods desire of man's
happiness, (to wit, as the man's end and not as Gods) so, the gifts by which it
is Purchased are granted in consideration of the right use of his former gifts?
That in the nature of the final, this of the meritorious cause, though no way
obliging God, but by virtue of his own will to be obliged. And, herewith
agrees that of Solomon, Prove. XVI. 4. The Lord has made all for himself. And
also the wicked for the day of wrath. For, whether we translate it, with
Grotius, for it self, or, as it uses to be translated, himself, the
consequence of it will be; That, as the world is, and as things pass in it,
all that comes to pass is by Gods appointment, or for his glory* which is all
one: Leaving the account by which it may appear so, to be given, from the rest
of the Scripture. But, if we join both causes together, by repeating for
himself in the second; (As to say; That God for himself has appointed the
wicked for the day of his wrath) then is the reason given how the being of
evil is for Gods glory; to wit, by punishing them that do it. Herewith also
agrees that of S. Paul, far better then it is imagined to do; Romans VIII. 28,
29, 30. Now we know, that all things work together for good to them that love
God, which are called according to purpose. For, whom he foreknew, those he
also predestined to become conformable to the image of his Son, that he may
be the first borne among many brethren; But, whom he predestined those he
also called, and whom he called, those he also justified, and whom he
justified, those be also glorified. The purpose, according to which, he
describes them to be called, to whose good all things conduce, is either the
purpose of God, or their own; As Barnabas exhorts them that were converted,
to cleave to God with purpose of heart Acts XI. 23. For, those that are called
are often taken by S. Paul metonymically, for those that have obeyed their
calling by God, as Romans I. 6, 7. 1. Corin. ^. 2. 24. Jude 9. Apoc. XVII. 14.
and so (...) Epe. IV. 1. And so all things conduce to good, for those that not
only are professed Christians, but are so from a steady purpose of heart. But,
though we grant that they are described by two qualifications, one, that they
love God, the other, that thy are predestined to life, (that is, called, out
of a purpose in God to save them) yet they are not predestined by God to
become conformable to the pattern of Christ, (which consists in bearing his
Cross) but as Christians* And this it is which here S. Paul says they are
predestined to, not to life; The predestination which he speaks of here, is
not of men to be saved, but of Christians to bear the Cross of Christ:
whereof he had said a little before, for the occasion of this discourse, Romans
VIII. 17, 18. If we be sons, then also ^eires: Heirs of God, but joint heirs
with Christ, that, if we suffer with him, we may also be glorified with him.
For, I reckon that the sufferings of this time, are not valuable with the glory
that is to be revealed upon us. And, when he calls them Saints, and, those
that love God, and those he foreknew, it is manifest, that the foreknowledge
which he means is that, whereby, God knew them true Christians from the
heart, whom he intends to prove; and therefore appoints them to bear Christ's
Cross, that, being justified, that is, approved in so doing, they may be
glorified in Gods purpose, and the right and title of their own estate. All
this being manifest by the proposition of the Chapter; There is now, therefore,
no more condemnation for them that are in Christ Jesus; that live not after the
flesh, but after the spirit; Which words plainly describing those that are
Christians from a grounded purpose of, the heart, of whom the sequel of the
discourse must proceed, manifestly demonstrate, that S. Paul speaks not of
Gods predestinating any man to be saved, but of predestinating those whom he
knows to be good Christians to bear Christ's Cross, and so to obtain Gods
promises: As the same S. Paul says, that it was granted of grace to the
Philippians, not only to believe in Christ, but to suffer for Christ, Phi. XI.
26. And hereby it is manifest, that succeeding graces are bestowed in
consideration of the right use of those that went before. For, here you see,
that those, who, being moved by the helps of Gods preventing grace, have
submitted themselves to the profession of Christianity from the heart, are, in
consideration thereof, designed by God, to the happy accomplishment of their
course. And this is invincibly evidenced, by the promise of the H. Ghost,
tendered by the Gospel, to those that obey Gods calling, by undertaking to be
Christians, for the inabling of them to persevere in that which they undertake.
The same is expressed in the words of the Apostle, when, having menaced the
Hebrew Christians with the expectation of vengeance upon their Apostasy, he
thus restores them again, Heb, XI. 9. 10. But, we are persuaded better things,
and that belong to salvation, of you, beloved, though we thus speak: For God
is not unjust, to forget your work and labor of love which ye show to his
name, ministering to the saints, as still ye do. For, it is manifest that the
Apostle expects here the supply of grace, inabling to persevere, from the
justice of God, in consideration of that which they had done in performance of
their Christian profession before.

On the other side it may be objected, that, if the whole work of grace in the
life of each Christian be resolved into the free appointment of God, (in regard
that those helps which each man is first prevented with, cannot be granted in
consideration of any work of our nature, the rest depending on those first
helps) it is to no purpose to dispute, how the freedom of the will takes place
in every particular act, each man's final estate being no less determined,
then if there were no place for it. Neither avails it any man, that God
appoints him not to death, or gives him sufficient helps to bring him to
life, seeing that, the efficacy of them depending upon his mere will, the
sufficience of them serves but to aggravate his sentence, To this, my answer
is, that I conceive, I am not to answer further then S. Paul has done; Who,
having objected to him self, in the person of the Jews, thinking much they
should not be saved by the Law; Why does God then find fault? For, who has
resisted his will? Romans IX. 29. Returns an answer, that denies not, that God
might convert the Jews to Christianity, did he think it fitting: But thus; Nay
rather, who art thou O man that disputest with God? Shall the earthen pot say
to the potter; Why have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power over the
clay, to make one vessel to an honorable use, another to a dishonorable, of
the same compost? What if God, willing to show wrath, and make known his
power, has borne with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fit to be
destroyed? That he might also make known the riches of his glory, upon vessels
of mercy, us whom he has called, not only of the Jews, but also of the
Gentiles, whom he has prepared for glory, Where, since God forbeares the
vessels of his wrath, with that long suffering which, S. Peter says, ^leades
to repentance, (designing to show his wrath the heavyer upon them for
neglecting it.) it is manifest, that they are not said to be (...), as if God
had fited them for it, as designed and made to that dishonorable use, (which
is the reason why I translated it not as a participle, but as a noune, not
fitted for destruction, as by God, but fit for destruction, as of themselves.)
And therefore, that, one and the same mass of compost out of which the potter
makes vessels to contrary uses, is to be compared with mankind in that estate
in which the Gospel finds it, the question being made why some obey it and not
others, why the Gentiles, rather then the Jews; and the argument made, that,
if Gods grace be the cause, then are not they to be blamed that neglect it; And
the Apostle having premised for his ground, that all mankind, being overtaken
by the Gospel destitute of righteousness, are to become Christians that they
may obtain it. This being the case, it is plain that the objection is the same
against S. Paul, as against the resolution proposed. For, as this answer
supposes, the reason why the Gentiles were converted to be Christians, and the
Jews, not, to be resolved into the will of God; so the resolution here
proposed resolves the reason of the true Christianity, and final perseverance
in it, of those that shall be saved, into that disposition of motives,
resolving free will, which Gods free grace only appoints And, the question
is evidently the same, if, as one ingredient into the disposition of each man's
salvation or damnation, it be demanded, why God suffered man to fall from the
state of innocence, but procures that the preaching of the Gospel arrive at
the knowledge of some people, and not of others. For, if supposing sufficient
helps of grace, the reason where by they become effectual is nevertheless
resolved into the immediate disposition of God; Then, though we consider man as
not fa^^e from the state of innocence, and resolve the reason, why God should
bring him into that estate, in which he foresaw that he would fall, (intending
to propagate his kind under the condition of this lapsed estate) we have
recourse to no other reason, then that which S. Paul employed before us.

Where, we may see the fault which has been committed by them, who, to attain
the end of his glory, by the absolute salvation of some, and damnation of
others, no otherways qualified then as such persons; have made the object of
Gods predestination to be mankind, not made but to be made, the purpose of
making mankind, being the next means subordinate to the attaining of that end,
which the first decree proposed to God. For, besides that this ingages God to
procure the fall of man, and the sins in which the reprobate finally persevere,
no otherwise then the grace in which the Elect depart; it makes God to
predestinate only a number, and to reprobate the same: there being no other
consideration possible to be had upon those, that are supposed not to be as
yet, but only, that they may be so many, as God shall appoint of either kind.
So that the glory of God, according to this monstrous imagination, shall
consist only in saving such a number, and in damning such an other, rather
then one more or one less of either sort. Neither is this inconvenience cured
by the position of those that have been called Sublapsariaus, by as monstrous
name as the other of Supralapsaians; That God, seeing mankind Lapsed from the
state of innocence, resolving to save so many of them, and to damn so many,
provided to send our Lord Christ with effectual means to save these, leaving
those, unprovided of sufficient means) to find their own ruin. For, solong as
those that are appointed to be saved and to be damned are qualified no
otherwise, then as men found in the common case of man's fall, the glory of God
is made to consist in damning somany of them and saving so many rather then one
more or one less. For, the original corruption in which we are borne, though
it renders the first Adam unrecoverable without the second; yet it leaves every
man, in every instance, undetermined to evil, till, by his own choice of
evil before good and the habit which accrews by custom, his natural
inclination to it become, so determined, that his choice determines without
deliberating any more. But, suppose so many absolutely appointed to life, and
so many to death, in this estate; you suppose them respectively determined,
though not in particular, what good or what evil they shall do, yet in
general, to sin and to dye in sin, or, o^ the other side, to attain the state
of grace and to dye in it; Unless we think, that, God being God, the absolute
appointment of his Providence can ^e defeated. Whereas, in making God determine
to save and to damn those, who are qualified for each, according to the
Gospel: But, to give effectual means of being so qualified to the one, which
out of his freedom he refutes the others, granting them what he deemes to be
sufficient) we make the glory of God visible here in the one point, not
disparaging it, if, in the other, it be, for the present acknowledged, with
Saint Paul, to be invisible.

For, if there were any other Religion in the World, which could pretend*
maintaynig the differences between good and bad the providence of God in all
things, and the reward of good and bad in another world, to give further reason
of the coming in and continuance of evil in the world; there might be some
pretense of prejudice to the privilege which Christianity claims, in
maintayning those principles, from the inability of declareing the reasons, by
which God dispenses the means of his effectual grace. But, there never was
any other religion in the world, that could pretend any such thing, The
Greekish Philosophers, (who were the Divines of the Gentiles) some of them
openly professed necessity and fate, as the Stoicke, thereby destroying
freedom and contingence, by the consequence, Religion, and all difference
between good and bad; much more the truth of Christianity, consisting in a
treaty for embracing good and rejecting bad. Others, supposing this, either
renounced Providence, (and by consequence the being of God) As Epicurus and his
predecessors and followers; or at least doubted of it, in which mire, it is
more then probable that our master Aristotle sticks. If, with Plato and
Pythagoras, we suppose them clearly to acknowledge all this, yet is there a
way left, either, by making the material cause coexistent which God from
everlasting with Plato; or by presupposing those contrarieties of good and
evil which Pithagoras imagined to have been from everlasting, made, by
consequence, the principles of all that comes to pass in the World; to advance
some other cause of good and evil in this world, then man's will under Gods
providence. And it is very remarkable, that Epiphanius observes, all the Sects
of the Gnostickes, (whereof he, of all others, has given us the most
particulars) proceeded upon a pretense, of giving a reason for the coming in of
evil into the world: To wit, by setting up two principles or Gods, one the
fountain of evil, the other, of good. Which, together with the express
testimonies of diverse others of the Fathers, witnessing, that they had their
principles from the Greekish Philosophers; seems to argue, that they took their
rise from a pretense of rendering an account of the beginning of evil as well
as of good; intimating thereby, that Christianity did not sufficiently perform
it, as not pretending all to be declared, till the general judgment. And this
is the case of Marcionists and Manichees. For, as for Jews and Mahumetans, I
suppose, there is no man so little read in the difference between them and
Christians, as to conceive that they can give account of Gods providence, in
the evil which he maintains to be in the world, (together with the means,
by which some come to life others to death) If Christians by their profession
cannot do it. Nor is it to be doubted, that the dispute about free will and
providence, (consequently predestination, so far as the world to come is
acknowledged) has been and in part remains alive, as well among Gentiles
Jews and Mahumetans, as we see it is among Christians. So that we may justly
infer, that, seeing no other religion, either antecedent to Christianity, or
that has come after it, can pretend that satisfaction to this dispute which
Christianity gives, by the coming in of sin upon the fall of Adam; that it is
no disparagement to it, not to be able to declare the reason of Gods proceeding
with particular persons, in dispensing to them the means of effectual grace;
when it remains manifest, both, that Christianity goes further in declaring
the same, then any other Religion can do, and, that there may justly be those
reasons reserved to God, which he, notwithstanding the grace which he publishes
by Christ, finds no cause to declare.

The answer, then, to the objection, consists in this; That, as it is not
necessary for the maintenance of Christianity, to give account why God
disposes of his effectual grace as he does: So is there no opinion able to
reconcile it to the freedom of man's will, without the bonds of Christianity,
but that which makes predestination to Glory conditional, to Grace, absolute.
It may be the readers lot, as it has been mine, to hear an objection cast
forth; That if Gods predestination be unmovable, it is vain for Christans to
endeavor to live as Christians; And the answer so insufficient, as to leave
more offense in his mind, then before it it was made; According to that which
is some times said; That unskilful Conjurers some times raise a Devil, whom,
they cannot lay again. For, certainly, it serves not the turn to say; That
God, as he has appointed the end, so has appointed the means. For, it is the
secret will of God, which is always effectual, that appoints the end. But his
revealed will that appoints the means, by commanding, comes not always to
effect. And therefore, if God have absolutely appointed the end he that knows
not whether he has appointed it or not, can have no reason to go about the
means till he knew it as absolutely appointed as the end is. Nor servs it the
turn to adxe, and to say further; That God, as he apointeth the end, so, he
appoints also the means to be freely employed by man for the attaining it;
Which, the opinion of Predetermination may say. For, all the encouragement this
can give a man to employ his freedom to any purpose, is; That, if God
determine him he shall freely employ it, if not, he shall freely not employ it
to that purpose. Which is to say in English; That his freedom (being called
freedom, but is not) can not be employed by him, that is encouraged to employ
it. And therefore, it is reasonable for him to say; I shall freely do so if
God has appointed it, and freely not do so if he have not appointed it. If it
be said further, and that according to my opinion, that no event is determined
by God, but supposing man's freewill, and foreseeing what choice it will make,
upon the considerations which a man is outwardly or inwardly moved with;
Neither will this be enough to move a reasonable man's indevours, supposing
himself absolutely predestined to life or to death before. For, that life
and death being absolutely appointed, becomes Gods end (though subordinate to a
further end of his glory) and not only the end of the means which he
provideth for it; A thing, no less destructive to the supreme Majesty of God,
then to that which I said before. For, that which God absolutely desires, that
he ingageth his supreme Majesty to execute and bring to effect; Unless it can
be thought, that a Sovereign can be sovereign, and not stand obliged, and
make it his Interest, that no design of his be defeated. Which if God do, what
avails it the creature, that the will thereof is free, and the effects of
that will are not determined but by the free choice thereof; Whenas, being the
will of a creature, and necessary proceeding upon consideration of those
objects which providence, inwardly or outwardly presents it with, it is, by a
former act of that providence, determined to that, which may and must be the
means of producing that end, which God had designed before. And, upon these
terms, providence will stand engaged, not to permit but to procure the sins,
upon which the sentence of eternal death, as the good works, upon which the
sentence of eternal life proceeds: And, he who knows that whatsoever he
does, though never so freely, shall certainly bring him at length to that
estate, which God had appointed for him before he considered what he would or
would not do; what reason can he have to employ the indevours of his will to
do what God commands, for the obtaining or avoiding of that, which he has
appointed, before any consideration of his endeavors? But, absolute
Predestination to the first helps, that effectually bring a man to the state of
Grace, produces not the like consequence. For as, supposing good and bad in
the world, and, that the Gospel is refused by some and embraced by others, it
is merely the work of providence, that a man is borne under the obligation of
it or not, and cannot be imputed to any act of his own; So, he that supposes
that God has not appointed him to life or to death, but in consideration of
his own doings, shall no less stand obliged, to follow those sufficient
reasons of well doing, which Gods spirit by the preaching of the Gospel meets
him with, then if it did not lie in the work of providence to make them
effectual or not.

As for all the rest of every man^ life, that falls between the time that he is
sufficiently convinced that he ought to live and dye a good Christian, and that
state of grace or of sin in which he deceaseth; It is evident, that the helps
of Grace are dispensed all along, upon that reason of reward or punishment,
which the covenant of grace establishes. For, seeing the Holy Ghost is
promised, to assist all Christians, in the performing of that which they
undertake by their Baptism; it cannot be imagined that God should destitute
any christian of helps requisite of the fulfilling of his Christianity, whose
profession was not counterfeit from the beginning, (that is, not so real as it
should have been) until he fail of complying with the motions of it. There
is, in deed, some difference of opinion, according to which, a difference will
arise in the terms, by which we express our selves in this business. There
be those in the Church of Rome who hold that a Christian once settled in the
state of Grace, may, by Gods ordinary grace here, live without even venial sin
till death. Supposing this done, the helps of grace which God assisteth such a
man with, are the effects of his justice which consists in keeping promise;
Though, Originally the effects of mere Grace, because it was mere Grace that
moved him to make that promise. Those that hold absolute predestination to life
or to death, and, justifying faith to be nothing but the revelation of a man's
predestination to life; can no more allow, that such a one may fall from the
state of Grace, then, that Gods promise can fail, or Christ's death be to no
purpose. So that, not only the sins which they do are to them occasion of
good, (as S. Paul says, that, all things cooperate for good to them that love
God. Romans VIII. 28.) but the permission (which, in that opinion is the
procuring) of them is an effect of their predestination to life; according to
this opinion, also, the helps of Geace are the effects of that Justice which
consists in keeping, as well as of that grace which was seen in making Gods
promise; though the condition of that promise be cleared, in this opinion, at
the first instant that a man believes, in the other, not till the last instant
that he lives. Though I have already laid aside both the suppositions upon
which this opinion stands, yet I suppose it not refuted as yet, because there
must be a time on purpose, to consider the arguments, which it pretends. But,
because one of the contradictions which it involveth is this; that making
justification to consist in remission of sins, it allows the regenerate to
become guilty of sin, and yet maintains him justified at the same time; an
other contradiction that it involveth must needs be this; That, the helps of
Grace requisite to the saving of him that is justified, (which, as I said
before, according to this opinion, are due to the elect by the justice of Gods
promise) are granted of mere grace, to the Justifying of him, who, being
justified, is notwithstanding acknowledged to need remission of sin. For, to
tie God by promise, to help any man out of sin, as often as he shall please to
fall back into sin, (who, of Grace, may allow ways freely to do it,) is to
make the Gospel a passeport for sin. And therefore, notwithstanding this
opinion, I shall not let to presume here, (before I have spoken to it) that the
helps of grace requisite to the recovering of him that is fallen from the state
of grace come not by the virtue of the promise, wherein the Covenant of Grace
consists (the right whereof is forfeited in that case) but by virtue of that
mere grace which first moved God to tender it, though, in consideration of the
merits and suffering of our Lord Christ which purchased it. Whereupon, the
truth is, that the helps of grace that are requisite to maintain them in the
state of grace which have attained it, are due by that justice of God, which
consists in keeping promise. And, though Gods clear dealing with man
requires, that, from the first heareing of the Covenant of grace, (that is,
from the first preaching of the Gospel; or, from the first calling of him that
is fallne from the state of grace) a man be enabled to embrace that which is
tendered; yet, that he shall effectually embrace it, will always remain the
effect of mere grace.

So, the gifts of nature, and the death of Christ for mankind, are provided by
God for the salvation of all, not as Gods end but as the end, of the said
means which he provideth. But, that, by providing the death of Christ for the
salvation of mankind, he obl^geth himself, to grant them who never heard of
Christ, inspirations, and revelations, convicting them that they are to be
Christians, as he obliges the Church to cause them to hear of Christ, I grant
not; (though I find it not to be prejudicial to the Faith) Because, then must
all men be judged by the Gospel of Christ reason being showed, that they to
whom it is not preached, shall be judged by the Law of Nature. And, upon these
terms, S. Paul may reject the demand, Why God should complain, seeing no man
can resist his will, but he may make whomsoever he shall please a good
Christian. But, God to have absolutely appointed all men to life or to death,
and so, to be engaged by the interest of his Sovereign Majesty, not to see his
design defeated, but to provide the means by which he designeth to bring his
appointment to pass; S. Paul might allow the demand, and his Gospel to have
no answer for it. And therefore, the comparison of the potter that follows,
though it hold thus far; that God indeed makes the vessels, that come to
honor and shame in the world to come, by the government of him that made them:
yet it holds not in this; that Gods glory is interested to procure them to be
saved, that shall be saved; and them damned that shall be damned: as it
concerns the potters trade to be furnished, as well with vessels for
dishonorable, as for honorable uses. Nor will the instance of Pharaoh bear it,
according to S. Paul's words. For, had God spared Pharaohs life out of a design
to bring him to those torments, which, his obstinacy in refusing the plagues
that succeeded should deserve; he could not be said to bear with much
long-suffering the vessels of wrath that are fit to be destroyed, though,
intending at length to show wrath, and make his power known. The decree then of
predestination proceeding, partly upon the terms of the gospel; but, in those
things, to which the Gospel extends not, and in those men that shall be
judged by the law of Nature, upon the Soverainty of God, the reasons whereof
either we cannot understand, or God will not declare; contains all the
decrees, whereby the motives, upon which God foresees a man will embrace and
persevere in his Christianity to the end, or not persevere to the end, whether
he embrace it or not; or finally, not so much as hearing of it, will resolve
for the better or for the worse, from the beginning of his life to the end of
it* which our understanding necessarily distinguishes, by the objects which
they bring to pass. The order of them is the same with the reasons which the
Sripture inableth us to give, for the effects which they produce, either in the
nature of the final or meritorius cause; speaking only of that which comes
from Gods declared will, not from his secret pleasure: Which, as it always
verifieth his declared will, so, extends to that which the other compriseth
not. And, it is as easy to comprise in the same decree, (which is the pure
essence of God, willing to glorify it self by doing that, which it might have
glorified it self by doing otherwise) the order of the reasons, upon which,
all mankind comes to that estate in which they shall continue everlastingly in
the world to come. Seeing then, all the effects of it fall not under Gods
revealed will, there can be no reason given for the whole decree, whether
respective to any man, or to mankind. Seeing there is a reason to be given for
all that fall under the same, in the nature of the final or the meritorious
cause; God stands as much glorified, man as much obliged to work out his
salvation with fear and trembling, as if he knew the bottom of Gods secret
counsel. And thus the objection is void.

It remains, that we consider the Tradition of the Church, and what it
declares concerning the truth of that which I have resolved, or toward it.
Where, we must take notice of the Monks of Adrymetus under Valentine, who
received S. Agustines doctrine of Gods effectual grace, and predestination to
it from everlasting, in such a sense, that they inferred from it, all
endeavors of men, all exhortations, reproves, instructions, and prayers to be
utterly fruitless and vain; as tending to that which depends upon the mere
appointment of God, which cannot be defeated, and without which nothing can
serve. To rectify this mistake, S. Augustine lived to write them his book yet
extant de correptione and Gratia, wherein he declares, all that he had said,
of the grace of God, and the efficacy thereof, to proceed upon supposition of
free will in man, though inslaved to sin by the fall of Adam, from the bondage
whereof, the grace of Christ, voluntarily though effectually, redeemeth those
that are freed by it; whereby (as by the rest of his writings concerning the
grace of Christ against Pelagius) he establishes two points belonging to the
foundation of the Christian faith. The first, of the freedom of man's will,
though not from sin, since the fall of Adam, yet from necessity determing the
resolution of it, when, by the treaty which the Gospel advances, it is
invited to embrace Christianity and to live according to it; Which were all a
mere nullity, were not any man free to resolve himself upon it. The second, of
the grace of God by Christ, which if it may be purchased by the endeavor of
man's free will, then was it not necessary to send our Lord Christ, as the
second Adam, to repair the breach which the first Adam had made; This being
the sum of the Catholic faith in this matter, and the rest, which is advanced
to show how those two points both stand true together, belonging to the skill
of a Divine, not to the faith of a Christian, so far, as by maintayning them,
men destroy the foundation of Christianity on neither side. Which, it is no
marvail, that some things which S. Augustine had said, in giving a reason
hereof, seemed to some to do; seeing, those that accepted of his doctrine in
Africa drew from it a consequence utterly destructive to Christianity. I speak
of those in the parts of France about Provence and Marsailles, who, inferring
from S. Augustines saying, that in his opinion God makes the far greater part
of men on purpose to condemn them to death; seemed to mainetaine, the
beginning of salvation to come from those endeavors of man's will, born as he
is, under original sin, which God fails not to second with those helps of
Grace which the matter requires. There is great appearance of that which
Jansenius disputes so eagerly de Haeresi Pelag. VII. 5. and s^q. that the
maine ground of their opposition was the decree of predestination, which S.
Austine would have to be absolute; As being persuaded, that, thereby, the
effects of free will become fatal, in which, that reason of reward and
punishment which the Covenant of Grace establishes, requires contingence. And
herewith, the occasion which Faustus pretends, for the writing of his book de
Gratia et Libero Arbitrio agrees. To wit, that a certain Priest called
Lucidus is required by him, in the name of a Synod held at Arles, under
Leontius, Bishop, to recant certain positions tending to maintain the
necessity of being damned for original sin, by the foreknowledg of God, in
them for whom Christ dyed not, dying only for sin. And, this by a letter
subscribed by one of the Bishops. This recantation being made, Faustus
pretends to write, at the entreaty of the Synod, to lay forth their sense and
reasons. But, to have added something upon the decree of an other Synod, held
afterward at Lions True it is indeed, which V^ssius observes Historiae Pelag.
VI. Thesi. XIV, that* whereas some of them insisted on nothing else, others
proceeded to deny the necessity of preventing grace. For, whatsoever we say of
Cassian^, who has writ to several purposes, in several places; Faustus
manifestly affirms, that, by the act of free will in beginning to believe, a
Christian obtaines the grace of God, which his own choice preventeth. Which if
we understand the Faith which he speaks of to signify Christianity, and, the
act of believing to consist in becoming a Christian, is nothing else but the
fundamental faith of Christianity; That the habitual gift of the Holy Ghost
is granted in consideration of a man's turning Christian. But, who believes,
that the actual grace of the Holy Ghost, whereby the world is converted to be,
as well as convicted that it ought to be Christian, is obtained by the
exaltation, as purchased by the humiliation of Christ, (which Faustus,
supposing the preaching of the Gospel, being the means which it uses, no way
denies) acknowledges by consequence, that act of faith, which preventeth the
habitual gift of the Holy Ghost, to be prevented by the actual helps of Grace
which the preaching of the Gospel imports. And, Jansenius de Haeresi Pelag
VIII: 1-9 acknowledges, that they had no design to destroy the grace of God
through Christ, as Pelagius had; and therefore did acknowledge, not only the
outward preaching of the gospel, but inward inspiration to make it effectual:
Only, that, making the effect of that grace which God appoints, to depend on
free will* they fell into the heresy of Palagius which they desired to a void

Now, Pelagius, indeed, acckowledged that grace which the preaching of the
gospel signified according to his own opinion, which was false. For, not
believing that our will is any thing the worse for Adams fall, he could not
allow, that Christ has purchased any help to repair the breach, and to cure
the disease which he had made But, as he could not deny it to be an act of
bounty in God, to propose the reward of everlasting life, which is
supernatupall; So he must affirm, that it is purchsed by the merre natural
act of free will, without any help of grace, granted of Gods mercy in Christ,
in consideration of his obedience. And, by this means, he brought the death of
Christ, to no effect; Seeing God might have assured the tender of his gospel
to come indeed from him, without it. And so the merit of grace, (that is, the
reason that obliges God to give it) is originally ascribed to the works of free
Will, according to Pelagius; But, according to those who, acknowledging
Original sin, acknowledge the cure of it by the help of grace purchased by
Christ, which the preaching of the gospel brings; not to the intrinsecall
value of the works which freewill alone does, but to the promise annexed by
God, to the works which freewill, by the help of Grace, purchased by Christ,
produces. It was no marvel indeed, that they who had overseen the actual
helps of Grace, should a scribe the merit of habitual grace (so the language
of that time spoke) to the act of freewill, in beginning to believe (that is to
be a Christian) as not depending upon that operation of grace, which themselves
supposed, though they oversaw it. But, it were ridiculous to think that he,
who, by the preaching of the Gospel, and the reasons which it lets forth,
why men are to be Christians, is effectually moved to become a Christian, is
not to impute his being so, to that grace which preventeth him with those
reasons. How much more, when those reasons are acknowledged to be the
instrument, whereby the Holy Ghost works a man's conversion at the first, or
his perseverance at the last; is it necessary to impute it to the grace of
Christ, that is, to those helps, which God, in regard to Christ's death,
preventeth us with? Surely, should grace immediately determine the will to it,
the effects that should be imputable to grace would be the same, neither the
cov. of grace, nor the experience of common sense remaining the same; which will
not allow such a chang in a man's life, as becoming a good christian of an enemy
to Christ's Cross, to succeed, without an express change in the will, upon
reasons convincing the judgment, that this world is to be set behind the world
to com*

It is now to be acknowledged, that S. Austine, writing against these men's
positions, as they were revealed to him by the letters of Prosper and Hilary,
his book now extant, de Praedestinatione sanctorum and de dono Perseverantiae
has determined; the reason why one man is converted and persevereth unto
death, an other not, to consist in nothing that can, resolve into any act of
man's will, but ends in Gods free appointment. That Pope Celestinus, writing to
the Bishops of Gaul, upon the solicitation of the same Prosper and Hilary, in
recommendation of S. Austines dostrine, then so much questioned in those parts,
determines, not only the sufficience, but the efficacy of the means of Grace
to come from Gods Grace. That the second councile of Orange, determining the
same in diverse particulares, concerning the conversion of man to become a true
Christian, concerning his perseverance to the end in that estate, has only
determined, that by the help and assistance of Christ, and the grace received
in Baptism, a Christian may, if he will faithfully labor, fulfill whatsoever
his salvation requires. Is there any thing in all this to signify that a man's
will, before he determine, is determined by God to embrace Christianity, and
persevere in it to the end, or not? That every man is determined to everlasting
glory or pain, without consideration of those deeds of his, for which, at the
last, he shall be sentenced to it, and either suffer or enjoy it? Here, I must
have recourse again to Vossius his Collections, finding them sufficient, and,
my model not allowing me to say more. Whether no help of Grace but that which
takes effect be sufficient; That is, whether, men refuse Christianity or fail
of performing it, because they could not embrace and persevere in it, or
because they would not when they might* let him that shall have perused what he
has collected, in the second part of this seventh book, say, as to the
persuasion of the whole Church. Whether God would have all men to be saved,
and, has appointed the death of our Lord Christ to that intent, let him that
shall have perused the first part of the same Thesi II. and III. give sentence
what the Church has allwaies believed. No less manifest is it, by that which
he says there, part II. thesi II. Part III. these. I. and II. that there is
no reason to be given, why any man sins or is damned, because God would have
it so. On the contrary, that the reason why a man is not saved, to whom the
Gospel is tendered, is, because he refuses it, which God, for his part,
tendreth to all mankind. In fine, that the Catholic Church, from the
beginning, believed no more, then, that those who should believe and persevere
to the end good Christians, were appointed by God to be saved; Understanding
this to be don by virtue of Gods Grace, for which no reason can be rendered,
from any thing that a man can do, as preventing all his endeavors; I
acknowledge to appear by that which he has said Lib. VI. these. VIII. When
therefore S. Austine maintainneth, (as I have acknowledged that he does
mainetaine) that the reason why one man is converted and perseveres unto death,
another not, resolves into Gods mere appointment; I will not dispute whether
this be more then the whole Church delivers, for that which it is necessary
to salvation to believe. It is enough for me to maintain, that it seems to
follow, by good consequence of the best reasons that I can see, from that sense
of our Lord and his Apostles doctrine, which the Church has always taught.
Which will allow me to maintain, as well the predetermination of the will, as
absolut predestination to glory and pain, to be inconsistent, as with the
Covenant of Grace, so with the Tradition of the Church.

I find that Gennadius, being manifestly one of those in Gaul, that
contradicted some thing of S. Austines doctrine, (by his commending of Faustus
and Cassiane, and censuring not only Prosper who confuted Cassianus, but even
S. Austine in his book of Eclesiasticall writers) in a certain addition to
that list of heresies which S. Jerome has made, reckons them in the list of
the Heretics condemned by the Church, who teach absolute Predestination;
under the name of Predestinatians. After him, not only Hincmarus of Rheims,
condemning Gotescalcus, a Monk of his Province, for maintayning it, (being
transmitted to him by Rabanus of Ments, who, in, a Synod there, had condemned
him for the same) has supposed it condemned for an heresy by the ancient
Church; but also before Hincmarus, Arnobius, that has expounded the Psalms,
(called Arnobius the younger by some) and a certain continuation of S.
Hieromes Cronicle, under the the name of Tiro Prosper, the one contradicts
them, the later mentions that they had their beginning from S. Austins
writings, Sirmondus also, the learned Jesuit, has published a piece so
ancient, that, pretending to make a list of Heresies, it goes no further then
Nestorius; reckoning next after him the Predestinatians, as those who derived
themselves from S. Austines doctrine. To which, it is well enough known what
opposition is now made, by them, who believe not that there ever was any such
Heresy, but, that the adversaries of S. Austine in Gaul do pretend that such a
Sect did indeed rise, upon misunderstanding his Doctrine. And certainly, there
are properly no Heretics, as to the Church, but those whom the Church
condemns, for some position, which they had rather part with the Church then
renounce. Neither can it be said, that ever there was any Sect expulsed the
Church upon such cause. That there was a Council held at Arles, and after that
another at Lions, that decreed some thing about absolute predestination, is as
certain, as it is certain, that Faustus writ his book de gratia and libero
Arbitrio by commission from them; for both are affirmed by the Preface, which
is of the same credit as the book. But what was determined, we cannot measure
by the letter of Faustus to Lucidus, which goes a long with it. Lucidus was a
Priest whom Faustus moves to recant his opinion, That God makes the greatest
part of men on purpose to damn them: This he does, by a letter which he
returns to Faustus, renouncing several articles to that purpose, but, which
he might have framed out of Faustus his book, always disowned. For, why might
not Faustus be entrusted, to write against the opinion, and exceed his
commission so far, as to deny preventing grace? And, though Faustus his letter
is subscribed by diverse Bishops, yet are they not the Council, nor do the
subscriptions appear in all copies. As for the return, neither does it
appear by the date, nor by any other mark, that it was approved or inacted by
the Council.

But, granting it had, the leter of Pope Celestine in ^avour of S. Austins
doctrine must needs have given a check to the execution of it; Which, having
decreed diverse articles concerning the necessity of preventing grace, in the
end, condemns the determining of difficult questions that incur, upon the
necessary dispute of preventing Grace. And the II. council of Orange, in the
end, is content to add only; That, if any man say, that any man is
predestinate to evil, (whether of sin or punishment) the Synod declares him
anathema. Whereby, as, whatsoever Faustus or Cassiane might have said to the
prejudice of preventing Grace is condemned by the Synod; so, that which the
former Synod had said of predestination seems to be superseded, and void, by a
greater authority, of the Sea of Rome concurring with the Councile of Orange.
Which may be the reason, why there is no further mention in antiquity o^ the
decrees of those Counciles; which, had they not decreed, as some suppose,
Faustus would have heard of it by Maxentius, who is so angry with the Sea of
Rome, that they made not the adversaries of S. Austin Heretics. I grant
therefore, that there was never any sect of Praedestinatians; But I do not
therefore grant, that ever there was any sect of Semipelagians. Faustus, or
Cassiane might, in opposition to absolute predestination, mistake themselves so
far as to deny prventing grace. Some on the other side, (as he that writ the
Treatise which Sirmondus his Praedestinatus confutes, though some take it for
his own that confutes it,) might deserve the censure of those Counciles; as
the positions that prejudice preventing Grace are condemned by that of Orange,
and the writings of Cassiane and Faustus censured afterward, their persons
remaining untouched, upon conformity to the decree. As for Godscalcus, whom
Hincmarus condemned by virtue of the Counciles of Arles and Lions, which I
think void; I see there is opposition in point of right, what ought to be held
between Hincmarus and his party on the one side* and Remigius of Lions with
his; Whatsoever Godscalus his opinion truly was in point of fact. And
therefore, the authority of the Church not being engaged on either side, I am
at freedom to refuse absolut predestination to glory, (much more
predetermination which is but one way to execute it) admitting absolute
predestination to grace. And truly, though I impute it for a charge, to those
that maintain the determination of man's will by the immediate Act of God,
before it determine it self; that they destroy freewill by pretending to
maintain it (because the determining of it, which they make the ground of
freedom, is indeed the ground of necessity, which stands not with freedom)
which is no small fault in Divines; yet, as Christians, I count them so much
the less enemies to the Faith. For, in as much as they do this under the
pretense of establishing freedom, it is manifest, that they ground their
salvation upon the Covenant of Grace which supposes it; And therefore, think
themselves notwithstanding obliged, to apply their utmost endeavors to the
fulfilling of it: Though, the difficulty of the question; intangling, and as it
were maleficiating their understanding, makes them imagine, that it is
maintained by that which indeed destroys it. And therefore, I cannot in the
like manner excuse them, who, besides the predetermination of the will by God,
do hold, that faith which only justifies to consist in believing that God
predestinates to life in consideration of the obedience of Christ, provided for
the elect of God alone; Because, not requiring that voluntary conversion of the
will of God, for the condition o^ the Covenant of Grace, (the revelation of the
will of God aforesaid not implying any thing, but the evidence of Gods word
manifested by his spirit to that effect) they disoblige themselves of employing
that freedom of the will which Christianity supposes, to perform that
condition which Christianity requires; As if the loss of freedom from sin
did infer the loss of freedom from necessity, by virtue of original
concupiscence, extending nevertheless to the state of innocence. In fine, the
free grace of God and the freewill of man belonging both to the foundation of
Christianity, there are two extremities to be argued in this question,
consisting in destroying the one, out of a desire to preserve both, which, he
that has not, in plain terms, destroys Christianity. And therefore, I blame
not the determinations of the Council of Orange that have secured us, on the
one hand, against the merit of grace by works of nature; But I find reason that
we should be secured on the other hand, against the determination of the will,
that introduces necessity, to the overthrow of Christianity. For, it is
possible, for the understanding of him that desires to maintain both grace,
and freewill, to be so intricated with the difficulty of reconciling them both,
as to make the freedom of man's will to depend upon the immediate act of Gods
will, determining it freely to act when it acts, out of pretense of
maintaining the efficacy of Gods free grace; whereas it is, indeed, no help of
grace, that inables not freely to do* what the Covenant of grace requires. I
do not therefore pardon our Presbyterians, when they bring into their
confession of faith, (which we must all be obliged to, forsooth) the
determining of man's will by God, having no ways secured us from the position
of j^stifying faith, to consist in beleiving that we are predestinate to life.
But I forw^rne their misled hearers, that, though they think themselves bound
to pay them well for their pains, to make them partisans in questions which
they understand not, and give them the confidence to censure for Arminians,
those that resolve them in such terms as they comprehend not; Nevertheless,
at the last judgment of God, they may have cause to complain of them, if not
for teaching them to tie kno^s which they cannot teach them to loose; yet, for
inducing them to break the peace of the Church, to obtain freedom of
professing, or imposing upon others, the belief of things thus prejudicial to
Christianity. In the mean time, it shall be enough for me, by this short
resolution, to have drawn a line, which they that will tread the Labyrinth of
this dispute may be guided by, the best that I can show, from falling headlong
on either side. Not doubting, that the skill of those, who, being more traded
in it, resolve to avoid both extremities, may produce that information, which
may oblige me for further intelligence, as well as the rest of the Church: But
having confidence, that, the denying of Gods Predetermination, is not the
denying of Gods effectual Grace; which, I have showed, that it does stand with
freewill, according to the supposition that I advance, though I undertake not
to show, how reason reconciles the parts of it.

And truly, I am confident, that, when S. Austine, in his book de Correptione
and Gratia, distinguishes between that help of Grace without, which we cannot
obey the Gospel of Christ, and that help by which we do it, auxilium quo, and
auxilium sine quo non; and, whenever else he makes the efficacy of Grace to
attain the doing of that which it effects, not only the inabling of man to
do it; he never intended to determine the manner how it is effected. For, though
S. Austin himself has balked the ground which himself had laid, for the
distinction between the antcedent and consequent will of God, in his book de
Spiritu and litera Chap. XXXIII. by bringing in other expositions of S. Paul's
words; God would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth; that are inconsistent with it; Though I have not found him distinguish
between necessity upon supposition and antecedent, as Anselme, in pursuance of
his Doctrine, has don; yet, he that shall read what he has said of the
redemption of all mankind upon Psalm XCV. besides abundance of other passages,
whereby he concurreth to witness that sense of the redemption of all mankind,
of Gods will that all be saved, of sufficient Grace that is not effectual,
which the Church generally declares, as I showed you before; I say, he that
considers them will find it more reasonable, to reconcile him to his own
doctrine, then to pretend a change in his judgment, where he acknowledges
none, as, in the matter of preventing Grace he does not acknowledge. Certainly,
seeing that Prosper, in defending him, frequently and clearly acknowledges
Christ to have dyed for all mankind, out of Gods will that all might be saved;
But, the author of the book de ^^catione Gentium, (never yet suspected for a
partizane of the Semipelagians) has so plentifully maintained it, during the
time that the parties in Gaul charged one another for Semipelagians and
Praedestinatians; (For, during that time was it writ, without peradventure)
they will never deserve well of S. Austine that defend him otherwise.

So far are we from being obliged by his doctrine to acknowledge grace to come
to effect, by Gods predetermining the will of man to all that coms to pass;
when I have showed a supposition, according to which it may be don, without
prejudice to Christianity; though beyond my understanding to show how. For,
supposing the common faith to be this; That God appoints them to life or to
death, whom he foreseeth to embrace or not embrace Christianity, and, to
persevere or not persevere in the practice of it till death; Can it not be true
also, that he has appointed some and not others the means, whereby he
foresees that they will persevere? Nay, if some only persevere in the state of
Grace, when all might, as the Council of Orange has decreed, what is there but
Gods will to create the difference? much more, between them that never hear of
the Gospel, and those that refuse it. And, what has Christianity hereupon to
answer, but Porphyries question; why Christ came not before? That is, why God
suffered man to fall and sin to come into the world? Why he makes not all men
true Christians when he might? For one answer would serve all these questions.
Which, if it be a scandal to Christianity that it is not answered, it
remains, that Christians be Porphyries disciples. In the mean time, absolute
predestination to grace infers, not absolute predestination to glory. Nor
obliges God to procure sin, as the means to his end; or, as the means to that
means, to predetermine man's will to do it. But, did Saint Austines doctrine,
in my opinion, contain any thing contrary to the doctrine of the rest of the
Church, concerning the antecedent and consequent will of God, the coming of
evil into the world, and, that the foreknowledge of God does not effect but
suppose it, the freedom of the will from necessity, while slave to sin; I
would think my self obliged to renounce him, that I might adhere to the rest
of the Church: Counting it a thing ridiculous, and contrary to the principles
of Christian truth, acknowledging the tradition of Faith to come from the whole
Church to advance the doctrine of a member thereof, though so eminent as S.
Austine, against that which the rest of the Church is acknowledged to have
taught.

If i^ be said, that, the supposition of Gods foreseeing the event of men's
resolutions by the objects and considerations which he appoints them to be
moved with, is an invention of the Jesuits, or at least, has been much
maintained by them; I demand what advantage they have, that espou^e the
supposition of the Dominicans; (the first Inquisitors, that is, Ministers of
persecution for Religion, by the interest of the Church of Rome with secular
powers) Especially, adding unto it the position of justifying faith; by
believing that we are predestinate, so destructive to the Covenant of Grace.
Yet, I give the reader that is willing to take the pains of being informed,
notice, that the supposition which I advance, is rather in the form that is to
be collected out of Durandus* then in that which the Jesuits since have given
it. In fine, let Maldonat and Jesuits think it their honor to profess, that
they like not such and such expositions of scripture because they come from the
Heretics; (by which names we know whom they mean) Let Puritan preachers co^fe
their simple heare^s with a prejudice against all that they like not, as drawn
from Arminians or Jesuits, (whose positions they understood not, and when they
are understood, are nearer the truth then their own) I shall find my self
never the less o^liged to follow that truth for Christ's sake, which, I
conceive, maintains the interest of Christianity best, though a Jew or a
Pagan, much more a Jesuit or an Arminian had said it. As for the opinion of
Arminius, and the decree of the Synod at Dort, having already said why I have
enlarged my considerations beyond the compass of those terms upon which they
disputed, it shall suffice me to say; That his opinion concerning Election and
Reprobation is that, which, I have showed, that all the Church has always
held for matter of Faith. To wit, that God appoints them to be saved and to be
damned, who receive Christianity and persevere in the profession of it till
death, or not. That, in mine opinion, they might have admitted some thing more;
To wit, that God is not obliged by any works of free will, preventing the help
of his Grace through Christ, but by his own free pleasure, to grant those helps
of Grace, which he knows will be effectual to final perseverance in
Christianity, to some, which he refuses to others. And, that the decree of
granting them is Gods absolute predestination to Grace. For, I am confident,
that Arminius does acknowledge the calling of Gods Grace to become effectual,
by means of the congruity of those helps which God provideth, with that
disposition which God foreseeth, in him whom he appoints to be moved by the
same. Whether or no the decree of the Synod require further, that they should
acknowledge Predestination to glory to be absolute, I hold not my self any
ways obliged to dispute. For I find, that those persons, that were ^mployed to
the Synod from England, have professed, as well in the Synod, as otherwise,
that they came not by any commission or instruction from the Church of England;
but only, as trusted by K. James of excellent memory, to assist his good
neighbors the states of the United Provinces, in composing the differences in
Religion raised among their Divines and people. And therefore, I cannot be
concerned in the decree, to which the Church of England never concurred. Yet I
say further, that the persons that concurred to it, whose opinions, as Divines,
I cannot esteem at an easy rate; by wa^ving the opinion of predetermination,
by acknowledging the death of Christ for all, and the operation of grace not
irresistible, but such as stands not with actual resistance, do seem not to
insist upon absolute predestination to glory. And that, if the decree do
necessarily import it, I do not know how to reconcile it with their own
opinions. Which, whether it be also to be said of them of the reformed Churches
in France, who holding the decree, do now acknowledge the death of Christ for
all mankind, let them that read their writings judge.

CHAP. XXVII. The question concerning the satisfaction of Christ with Socinus.
The reason why Sacrifices are figures of Christ, common to all sacrifices. Why,
and what Sacrifices the Fathers had, what the Law added. Of our ransom by the
price of Christ's propitiatory Sacrifice.
HAving thus showed, how the Gospel tenders a Covenant of Grace, though
requiring the condition of Christianity, in regard of those helps which the
Grace of God through Christ provideth, for the performance of it: I am now to
show the same, in regard of that right to which God accepts that performance.
For if it appear, that God, out of his grace in Christ, and not for the worth
of that which we do, accepts it for a title duly qualifying us for
remission of sin and life everlasting; then is it a Covenant of Grace which
the Gospel tenders, though it require the profession and practice of
Christianity on our part. And here I have to do with the Socinians on the one
extremity, in the first place; who will not allow the Gospel to continue the
Covenant of grace, if it be said, that it tendereth remission of sins and life
everlasting to those that are qualified as it requires, in consideration of
the obedience and sufferings of Christ, as the ransom and price of our sins.
Acknowledging allways, that Christ died to settle and establish the New
Covenant, but not to oblige God by his death either to declare, and become
engaged to it, or to make it good having declared it; but to assure mankind,
that God, (who, of his own free grace was ready to pardon and accept of those
that should accept of the terms of reconcilment which his Gospel tendereth)
will not fail to make good that, which, by delivering his well beloved son
to death, he has signed for his promise to us. Indeed, they go about to
strengthen this opinion, by adding another reason and end of Christ's death; To
wit, the attaining of that Godhead, wherewith God, they say, has rewarded his
obedience in doing the message which he trusted him with, that thereby he might
be able, of himself, to make good that which God by him had promised,
confounding all that may oppose the salvation of them that embrace the Covenant
of Grace; But that it should be said, that God declares, or gives remission
of sins and everlasting life to them that imbrac^ the same in consideration
of the obedience and sufferings of Christ, as satisfied thereby for that
punishment which our sin deserved of his justice; this is that which they
deny, and the Church teaches, and therefore this it is, which we must show how
it is delivered by the Scriptures. Which, every man may observe, to stand
cheifely in those texts of Scripture which say, that Christ died for us, that
he redeemed us, and reconciled us to God by his death and blood shed; (which
being the utmost of his obedience, comes most into account at all occasions of
mentioning this subject) in fine, it is easy to be observed, that the
expressions of this point in holy Scripture have relation to the Sacrifices of
the Old Testament, as figuring the death of Christ, whereby both agree we are
delivered from sin, the question remaining, whether ransomed or not. And
therefore I shall first consider, how, and to what effect, the Sacrifices of
Moses Law are figures of the sacrifice of our Lord upon the Cross. Where I
must, in the first place, infer from the principle premised of the twofold
sense of the Old Testament, that, all the sacrifices thereof were figures of
the death of Christ, and our reconcilement with God by the same; So far I am
from yiedling them that unreasonable demand, that only expiatory Sacrifices,
and especially that of the Solemn day of Atonement, are properly so. Only I
must declare my meaning to be this; That, whereas the sacrifices of the Fathers
were so, as they were pledges of Gods favor generally; the sacrifices of the
Law (being the condition upon which that people in general, and every person
thereof in particular held their interest in the land of promise) express more
correspondence with that interest in the world to come, which Christians hold
by Christ's death on the Cross. For, the land of Canaan being promised them
upon condition of keeping the Law, and every man's interest in the goods of it
depending upon the same; it is manifest, that, whether the sacrifices which the
Congregation was bound to offer of course, upon ordinary or solemn days, or
those which purged legal impurities, inferring only incapacities of
conversing which Gods people, or those which were offered for sins properly
so called, or for acknowledgment of blessings received, or whatsoever they
were, all were made an offered upon the general claim to the land of promise,
and every man's share in it. Neither is there any greater argument hereof, then
this; That there is no sacrifice appointed by the Law for capital offenses,
Number. XV. 23. 27. 28. 29. as those which the Law deprived of all interest in the
land of promise, all right to converse among Gods people. Which, what it
signified to Christians, you may see by the apostle Ebr. II. ^*-X. 28. to wit,
that they who stick not to the terms of their Christianity must expect so much
the heavier vengeance at Gods hands. And therefore, when the Apostle argues
Ebr. X. 4* It is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away
sin; The answer is given by the same Apostle, Ebr. IX. 13. If the blood of
bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the defiled,
sanctifies to the purity of the ^lesh* -- That it takes not away the guilt of
sin from the conscience, which shuts heaven upon us, but it takes away the
incapacity of coming into the Tabernacle, or conversing among Gods people, or
other forfeitures of legal promises. And therefore, I may conclude, that the
sacrifices which the Law was established with Ex. XX. 4*^^, though not
expiatory, gave the people right to the land of promise, to wit, as done, to
solemnize their resolution of submitting to the Law. For, the people having
been Idolaters in Egypt, as we understand by the Prophet Ezekiel* XX. 6. 7. and
now submitting to a Covenant with God, for the land of promise, by obeying his
Law, are they not thereby accepted by God for heirs of it?

This seems, indeed, not to stand well with the opinion of the Fathers; S.
Chrysostom, Theodoret, and diverse others, the best expositers of the
Scriptures that the ancient Church has* that the sacrifices of the Law, were
appointed by God, not of his own original intent, but upon occasion of their
pronenesse to worship Idols, as the Hethen did; granting them those rites,
which they had known them serve their idols with, so as they might be
performed* after that perticulare manner which he should injoyne, as done to
him alone. And this they make the meaning of the Prophet, when he says, that
God commanded their Fathers nothing concerning Sacrifices, at their coming out
of Egypt Jer. VII. 22. because, we see, that, in their first coming out of
Egypt, he treates with them about keeping his Laws, but not about sacrifices,
Ex. XV. 25. 26. But nothing hinders those sacrifices, which were brought in
occasionally, to have been intended to figure the sacrifice of Christ. As
nothing hinders those sacrifices, which from the beginning had been d^livered
the Fathers, as pleges of Gods love to them through Christ, to be, by the
malice of the devil, diverted and employed to the service of Idols. Certainly,
the Fathers before the flood sacrificed nothing but whole burnt offeringes;
because, at that time, they were not to eat of their sacrifices, feeding only
on things that grew out of the earth, Genesis I: 28. For afterward, when he gave
the sons of Noe license to eat flesh, Noe offered peace offerings; whereof,
part being burnt upon the Altar, the rest went to the use of those that had
sacrificed, to ^east upon. Genesis VIII. 19. 20. IX. 4. And those which Moses
solemnized the Covenant of the Law with, were holocausts and peace offerings.
Exodus XXIV. 5. those which the Law makes properly explatory being afterward
introduced by the Law. Now, that all sacrifices are figures of Christ, we have
not only the general reason premised, but particulare instances in the New
Testament. The Paschall Lamb 1 Cor. V. 7. The holocausts and peace offeringes
which the Law was inacted with. Exodus XXIV. 5. Ebr. IX. 18-22. together with
all those, the blood whereof purges by the Law. The daily burnt offeringes of
the Congregation. Ebr. X. 1. (for Socinus is ridiculously wilful to
understand (...) there once a year, as if the speech were only of the
sacrifice for the day of atonement) and by consequence, all anniversary
oblations. And, whereas Socinus observes, that no lamb is appointed by the Law
for a Propitiatory sacrifice; I suppose, when the Baptist says, John 1. 36.
Behold the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world; when S. John
says, Apoc. 1 5. To him that loved us, and has washed us from our sins in
his blood; when the Martyrs say, Apoc. V. 9. Thou wast killed and have brought
us to God, out of every kindred and tribe and language and nation; when the
Apostle Apoc. XIII. 8. mentions those, whose names are not written in the book
of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; These, I suppose
knew well enough what creatures were sacrificed, and yet declare, that Christ
was figured by Lambs; to what purpose, let their words argue.

It is manifest indeed, that the Epistle to the Ebrues argues most upon the
anniversary sacrifice of the day of atonement, whereof, one thing I must
observe to him concerning the accomplishment of that which it figureth; that as
he makes it, (together with all other sacrifices, the blood whereof is
sprinkled upon the Arc) to signify Christ crucified without the walls of
Jerusalem; So, he makes the sacrifice of Christ crucified signified thereby, a
p^ace offering for the Church to feed upon, (as we do in the sacrament of the
Eucharist) though, by the Jews not to be touched, because they killed it
without the City as abominable, Ebr. XIII. 8-16. But Socinus will not have this
sacrifice made, (at least not perfected) nor Christ an High Priest, till he
entered into the heavens to present it to God, as the High Priest into the Holy
of Holies to sprinkle the blood. How then is he figured by those sacrifices,
the blood whereof is not carried within* the veil? I grant, the sacrifice of
Christ is not done till Christ come to judgment, as that was not done, till the
High Priest came out of the Holy of Holies, declaring the accepting of it
Levit, XVI. 18, 19, 20. But, as he must Be* an High Priest that sacrificed what
God accepted, so must Christ be High priest before he was killed. And therefore
a sacrifice, as the Apostle expressly says, Ebr. X. 26, 27, 28. That; having
abolished sin by the sacrifice of himself, he shall appear again to the
salvation of them that expect him; As the High Priest out of the Holy of
Holies. The same is many ways evident by Ebr. IX. 14-20. For, where Socinus
will have Christ to offer himself unspotted to God by the ^ternall Spirit; by
presenting himself in heaven immortal upon his resurrection, free from the
punishments of sin which he had upon him here on earth; you have seen that
the everlasting Spirit is the Godhead of Christ. And, had the apostle meant the
presentation, which is now in doing, he would have spoken in the time past
(...). And, he that considers, that all sacrifices were visited before they
were killed, whether legal or blemished (which is called in one word, (...))
must believe, that he is called here (...), as found spotless, and so, fit to
be slain, And, does he not make the death of Christ the Sacrifice, when he
makes the New Covenant, in correspondence to the Old, to be inacted by it? It
is true, the same Apostle Ebr. IX. 2*-6. showing the highest heavens to be the
Holy of Holies, where the Priesthood of Christ is exercised, adds, That if he
were upon earth, he should not be a Priest, there being other Priests to offer
gifts according to the Law; But this is only to say, that his Priest-hoode is
not earthly, who has carried his own blood into the heavenly Tabernacle, not
meddling with the sons of Levi, or their office: For, (...) is (according to
the Ebrew, which, for want of composition, expresses adjectives by
praepositions) for (...): If ^e were upon earth, signifies; if he were an
earthly Priest; as those of the Leviticall Priesthood. It is true, he was to
learn compassion for us by his sufferinges, here, Ebr. II. 17, 18. V. 1, 7, 8.
but might he not, as well as other high Priests learn that compassion by
sacrificing himself for us here, which he has for us to the end of all things?

In fine, every sacrifice is a sacrifice from the time that it is consecrated
to God, as the Paschal Lamb from the tenth day of the month* Ex. XII. 2.
thence it is (...) due, and (...) a gift. Or, let any Jew say, if it might not
many ways become (...), reprobate, before it came into the Holy of Holies,
because a sacrifice or Offering, before. And was not Christ consecrated when he
was the Lamb of God? Of himself he says, John XVII. 19. For their sakes do I
sanctify my self; To wit, to be a spotle^^e sacrifice. This is therefore no
exception to the general argument, the force whereof consists in this; That,
seeing it cannot be denied, that the inheritance of the Land of Promise, and
each man's share in the goods and and rights of it, is assigned the Jews in
consideration of their sacrifices, to wit, as the condition of that Covenant by
which they were prescribed; It must not be doubted, that the inheritance of the
kingdom of heaven is assigned to Christians by the Covenant of Grace, in
consideration of the obedience and sufferings of Christ which they figure.

But this is still more evident, by the terms of ransom, and price, and
buying, attributed to the sacrifice, of Christ. The heathen had sacrifices that
they called Lustralia, and lustrare signifies to expiate, among the Roman^s, to
wit, By paying a price. For Ennius, translating into Latin a Greek Tragedy
called (...), (out of Homer, where he speaks of Priamus ransoming Hectors
corpse from Achilles) entitled it Hectoris lustra. Therefore it is the Latin
of (...): And (...) signifies deliverance by paying a ransom. In the words of
the Prophet, Daniel, III. 57. IV. 24. Redeem thy sins by repentance, and thy
misdeeds by having mercy on the afflicted; Many blame the vulgar Latin, and
would translate (...) break off: But the words of Solomon Prove. XVI. 6. By
mercy and truth iniquity is redeemed; show, that it is truly translated. And
having showed before, that such considerations do qualify us for remission of
sins, I may well argue from hence, that the term of ransom imports the
consideration for which it is bestowed. Wherefore, let the sweet smelling
sacrifice of Christ Ephesians. V. 2. be understood in the same notion, as the good
works of Christians are called a sweet savor, Phil. IV. 18. Ebr. XIII. 16.
Seeing Socinus will have it so: Provided that it be understood, that the
sacrifice of Christ is accepted, to purchase mankind the right of coming out of
sin into everlasting life, the sacrifices of Christians, to the quallifying
of their persons, for the benefit of the same. To the same sense Prove. XIII. 8.
The ransom of a man's life is his wealth: For, literally, a man's wealth is the
saving of his life, with the world that spares a man's life in consideration of
his wealth, (or sets not upon him in regard of it) which the Psalmist says God
does not, Psalm. XLIX 6, 7, 8. mystically, it is the same that Solomon said in
the place before quoted. But, when Solomon says Prove. XXI. 18. The wicked is a
ransom for the upright, and the sinner comes instead of the righteous; And the
Prophet Esa. XLIII. 3. I have given Egypt for thy ransom Cush and Seba instead
of thee; God signifies by a Parable, that, having employed Sennacherib to
execute his judgments upon those nations, he had given him the Egyptians and
Aethiopians that he might spare the Israelites. So, he paies him his hier which
discharges his own people of that which they had suffered otherwise. So in the
words of Otho, Tacit. Hist. IV. Hunc animum, hanc virtutem vestram ultra
periculis objicere, nimis grande vitae meae pretium duco. I hold it too great a
price for my life, to cast this courage and valor of yours any more upon
dangers; It is manifest, that a ransom or price, imports the consideration of
that for which it is laid out: The blood of his soludiers, for their Generals
life. And, shall it be otherwise when the Apostle says, that Christ's death
intercedes, for the redemption of those transgressions that remained under the
Old Testament. Ebr. IX. 15? when S. Paul says, that the man. Christ Jesus gave
himself a ransom for all, to be witnessed in due time? 1 Timothy II. 5, 6? When
our Lord says the same Mat. XX. 28. Mat. X. 45? and S. Paul again. 1 Cor. VI.
20. Ye are bought with a price; glorify therefore God with your body and with
your Spirit, which are Gods. And again, 1 Cor. VII. 23. Ye are bought with a
price. Be not servants of men. And of Christ, Titus II. 14. Who gave himself
for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works. The same Apoc. V. ^. Romans III. 24. Gal.
III. 13. Ephesians. I. 7. Acts XX. 28. Where I must needs call it mere impudence in
Socinus, to say, that God redeemed his Church by his own blood, because Christ's
blood, which it was redeemed with, was, as Christ, Gods own.

It is not here to be denied, that these terms may, by figure of speech,
signify mere deliverance, and that so they do signify, in the figures of Christ
in the Old Test. when the Judges and Kings of Israel, when God above them are
said to redeem Israel, that is, to deliver him, without paying ransom for him:
Nor, that the New Testament speaks likewise, when the effect only is
considered: See Ex. XV. 13. Deuteronomy. VII. 8. IX. 26. XIII. 5. XXI. 8. 2 Samuel VII.
23. Nehem. I. 10. Psalm. LXXVI. 16. XXXI. 6. CXI. 9. Esa. XXIX. 22. Luke. II.
38. XXI. 28. XXIV. 21. Act. VII. 35. Rom VIII. 23. Ephesians. VI. 30. As also for
the terms of buying and selling, Romans VII. 14. Esa. L. 1. Deuteronomy. XXXII. 30. Jud.
III. 8. II. 14. Ephesians. V. 16. Col. IV. 5. And therefore, it is not to be
marvailed at, that the Jews, denying Christ, should deny his ransom, as not
expecting to be delivered by paying ransom. But, the figures of the Old
Testament being performed in the New, where the sacrifice of Christ determines
the ransom of Israelites, (by their Kings, Priests, and Prophets, as well as
their Sacrifices) to the ransom of the World by his blood; Where the words of
the Apostle and of our Lord express the guilt and punishment of sin, from
which it redeemeth; Next to the obstiuacy of the Jews, in not believing, it
will be, to acknowledge freedom given, with the Jews, without acknowledging
the consideration of a ransom, with Christians. Let us hear the Apostle, Pet.
I. 18. 19 20. knowing, that you were not redeemed from your vain conversation
delivered from your Fathers, with corruptible things, gold or silver, but
which the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without spot or blemish,
foreknowne indeed from the foundation of the world, but manifested in these
last times for us. For, though the end of this ransom be expressed, because it
is not immediately attained, by the paying of it, but by our will concurring
with Gods; Glorify God because ye are bought with a price; Be not slaves to
men, because ransomed by Christ; By the blood of Christ ye are redeemed from
your vain conversation received from your Fathers; Yet, if the meaning were
only to assure them, that their deliverance will not fail them, there could
no cause be given them, why the purchase of it by way of ransom should be
expressed; Which every man that goes to market, must needs understand to import
the consideration, in which we have it. There must be indeed freedom and
deliverance where a ransom is paid, as there is in our case, if the se^vice of
God be freedom. But, where the guilt of sin goes before, a clear score
follows, and the death of Christ comes between them, must not the
consideration, which compares them together, make even the reckoning?

CHAP. XXVIII. Christ took away our sin by bearing the punishment of it. The
Prophecy of Esaias LIII. We are reconciled to God by the Gospel, in
consideration of Christ's obedience. The reconcilement of Jews and Gentiles, Men
and Angels, consequent to the same. Of purging and expiating sin by Christ,
and making propitiation for it. Of Christ's dying for us.
THere is further, in sacrifices, a consideration of bearing the punishment due
to the sins that are expiated by them, and so taking them away; Wherein, the
Scriptures declare, the sacrifices of the Law to figure the sacrifice of
Christ. So S. Paul, Gal. III, 10. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the ^urse of
the Law (where it says, Deuteronomy. XXVII. 26. Cursed is every one that abides not
in all things written in the book of the Law to do them) becoming a curse for
us, as it is written; Cursed is every one that h^ngeth on a tree: The exception
of Socinus; That this belonges only to Jews, as a discharge of that curse
which the breaking of Moses his positive Law infers; is neither pertinent
nor true. For, where the leter of the Law takes place to civil effects, there
the spiritual sense thereof takes place to spiritual effects, by that which
has been said. Therefore, if the Law of Moses bind the posterity of Abraham
over to a curse, because they keep it not which S. Paul supposes; then the Law
written in the hearts of mankind, (which the Law of Moses, as it is spiritual,
both contains, and improveth) binds over mankind to that curse which the
transgression thereof infers. And there is no appearance that those whom
the Apostle writes to were Jews; but such as, out of error, thought themselves
bound to be jews, (whether in part or in whole) as they were Christians. We
are then, ransomed from the curse, by the curse which Christ indurd for us.
When S. Paul says 2 Cor. V. 21; Him that knew no sin he made sin for us,
that we might become the righteousness of God in him; Socinus says, that
Christ was made sin, and a curse, because the Jews used him, as if he had
been sinful and accursed by the Law. But, if God gave him up to them, so to
be used, then was he used as sinful and accursed by the will of God, not only
by the sentence of Pilate: And, if we become righteousness to God, then he
became not sin to man alone. Therefore, being so used, not because he, but
because mankind was sinful and accursed, the effect must be to the account of
mankind, where the reason is grounded upon the consideration of it. But why do
the Israelites lay hands on the Levites, the Levites and Sacrificers both on
the Sacrifice, but to signify the discharging of themselves, and charging their
guilt upon the Priests and sacrifices respectively? Lev. I. 4. Number. VIII. 10.
14. which their (constitutions injoyne to be done with all* their might, and
with confession of sins) Maimoni, of offering Sacrifices, III. 6. 8. 9. For
this reason, the sin offeringes are given the Priests, forbearing the
iniquity of the Cougregation, and making propitiation for them before the Lord,
Levit. X. 17. The Greek indeed translates it, (...). But the meaning is; That
ye may take iniquity away from the Synagogue (to wit, by taking it on
themselves) and make propitiation for them before the Lord. For, in
consideration of their taking the sin upon them, they are properly rewarded
with the sacrifice. So Aaron bears the iniquity of their consecrate things,
Ex. XXVIII. 38. And, the Levites make propitiation, lest the people be slain
for coming near. This is the reason of that which the Apostle observes, Ebr.
XIII. 11. that, those sacrifices for sin, the blood whereof is carried within
the veil, are burnt without the camp: Because, being charged with the sin
which they expiate, they are to carry it away from among them whom they clear
of it. Wherefore, going on to apply this to Christ's suffering without
Jerusalem, he shows the figure to be accomplished in his taking away our
sins, but, because they were laid on him first. And truly, the customs and
opinion of the Hethen, in purging their sins by laying the^ upon their
sacrifices, are so plain to this purpose, that to deny this to be the intent
of that pattern which the devil thereby corrupted, is to offer vi^lence to
common sense.

Here I come to the Prophesy of Es. LIII. wherein, being obliged, lite^a^ly to
expound it with Grotius of the Prophet Jeremy; I shall be thought by ^o^ ^ to
make it the more difficult, to prove this to be the mystical sense of it. Bu^
having given my self a Rule, to maintain the difference between these two
senses in the Prophesies of the Old Testament; I shall forbid Socinus any
advantage against the Church by it. Thus then says the Prophet Es. LIII. 4 --.
But he took our sicknesses, and bore our greifes. And we thought him plag^^ed,
smitten of God, and afflicted. But, he was wounded for our transgr^ssio^s, and
beaten for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by
his marks we are healed. We all had gone astray like sheep, every one was
turned his own way, and God made all our iniquities to meet him. He was
oppressed and afflicted, yet opened he not his mouth: He was led as a sheep
to the slaughter, and, as a sheep is dumb before him that sheares her, so
opened he not his mouth. He was taken from restraint and judgment, and his
generation who shall declare? For he was cut off from the land of the living,
he was smitten for the transgression of any people. And he made his grave with
the wicked, and with the rich at his death, for no wickedness that he did, nor
deceit in his mouth, yet the Lord was pleased to afflict him with sorrows. If
thou make his soul an offering for guilt, he shall see a seed, he shall
prolong his days, and the good pleasure of God shall come to pass by his
means. For the labor of his soul shall he see and be satisfied: By his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, and he shall bear their
iniquities. Therefore will I give him a share with the great ones, and with the
mighty shall he divide the spoil, because he poured out his soul to death and
was counted among transgressors, and bore the sins of many, and interceded for
transgressors. That the Prophet Jeremy should be a figure of our Lord Christ,
in his doings and sufferings, is no more then I have showed, that all the
Prophets were. That the Prophet Esaias should foretell the same for a figure of
Christ, is no more, then, that he should prophesy of our* Lord Christ under the
figure of himself; which he does many times The reason, why the Prophet Jeremy
is a figure of our Lord, imports no more then this; That, being sent by God to
reduce his people to his Law, that they might continue enjoying the Land of
promise, he was by them taken for an enemy of his country, and used
accordingly, because he foretold their ruin in case they obayed not; and so,
God brought on him the merit of their sins, which he labored to cure: But
so, that his doctrine, and the event of his Prophesies having reduced them to
God and his Law, their restitution from captivity, which he had foretold, came
to pass by his means. Upon this account the Prophet Jeremy is a sacrifice for
his people, though no otherwise then as S. Paul exhortes the Romans, to
present their bodies living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable to God, Rom XII. 1.
Or, as he says to the Philippians; If I be poured forth (as a drink offering)
upon the service and ministry of your faith, Phil. II. 16. Or as to the
Colossians; I. 24. he supplies the remains of the afflictions of Christ in his
flesh, for his body, which is the Church. For, the proportion will be just,
between that reconcilement which the Prophet procures between God and his
people, by his intercession and doctrine, as to their temporal estate, as a
minister of God, and a figure of Christ; And, that which our Lord Christ
procures between God and his Church, as to the everlasting estate of it.
Seeing then, that Socinus acknowledges all this to be meant of the redemption
of the world by the sufferinges of Christ, what advantageth i^ him, that it is
understood literally of the Prophet Jeremy? For, the importance of the Prophets
words in him, will take place, according to the pretense of his coming, not
according to the nature of the Prophet Jeremies office, And therefore, what if
the Evangelist say, that the words of the Prophet Esaias; He took away our
infirmities, and carried away our diseases; were fullfilled, when our Lord cured
the blind and the lame, Mat. VIII. 17. (...) in the Evangelist (...), I
confess, signify taking away, as well as bearing: And therefore, that which
the Baptist says Mark I. 24. (...) Whose s^oe latchet I am not worthy to
stoop and unty; Is in S. Matthew. IV. 11. (...); not to carry, but, to take away
his shoes; Which, he that looses, intends to take away. Therefore Tertul. ad
Marc. IV. Ipse igitur est Christus remediator valetudinum. Hic, inquit,
imbecillitates nostras aufert and languores portat. Therefore Christ himself
is he that cures sicknesses. He says, he takes away all infirmities, and
bears our diseases. Portare autem Graeci pro ^o solent ponere, quod est
tollere. Now the Greek is wont to put bearing, (...) for taking away. And
indeed, the cure of bodily infirmities by Christ, could not be fortold by the
Prophet, to come to pass by taking them upon himself, but by taking them away
from the people. But if we say, that he was to cure our spiritual infirmities
no otherwise, neither will the figure of Jeremy, nor the words of Esaias hold so
properly; which as I said before, are fullfilled more properly in the mystery,
then in the History. For, it is manifest, that, bearing our sins serves to
amplify the sufferings, whether of Jeremy, or of our Lord, which taking them
away does not; and yet it is as well understood, that they are taken from them,
by consequence, to wit, because laid on him. For, Jeremy bare the sins of
the people first, as our Lord on the Cross, but the cure came afterward.
Besides, when the Prophet says; If thou shall make his soul a sacrifice for
guilt; It is manifest, that God lays the guilt on him which he takes from us.
Thirdly, when the Prophet says (...) (where, one case of the person, another
of the thing follows (...)) And Socinus translates it; God by him met with all
our iniquites; I say confidently, he makes it no Hebrew. Had the Prophet said
(...), it might have passed for Hebrew, to signify that which he says; But, as
it lies, at no rate. Fourthly, no man shall expound the Prophet but the Apostle
1 Pet. II. 24, 25. Who himself took up our sins upon his body to the Cross,
that being dead to sins we may live to righteousness, by whose blew marks
we are healed. For, ye were as sheep g^ing astray, but are now returned to the
Pastor and Bishop of our souls. First, when S. Peter repeats the very words of
Esaias; to question, whether he allege this passage or not, I suppose, is
ridiculous. Neither will it be of consequence, though we take (...) for (...);
For wether Christ took our sins up to the Cross, or, bear them upon the
Cross, still they remain charged on Christ, fa^^ned to the Cross. As for the
Apostle, Ebr. IX. 25, 26, 28. where, (having said, that Christ went into heaven
to appear before the face of God, without any intent to suffer himself any
more, (as the high Priest entered once a year into the Holy of Holies, with the
blood of a sacrifice) for then must he have suffered many times since the
foundation of the world: But, was once manifested at the end of the world, to
abolish sin by the sacrifice of himself) he concludes, that, being once
offered, (...), to take away the sins of many, he shall appear the second
time without sin to the salvation of those that expect him; It is here
evident, that Christ was manifested at the end of the world, to such in the
world as knew him not, not to God in heaven, that did: And therefore sin is
abolished by the sacrifice of the Cross, if by his intercession in heaven, in
consideration of it. And, his second appearance is without sinn^; because he
shall have taken sin away; but he shall have taken it away, by being offered.
Therefore if he will needs translate (...), to take away the the sins of
many, yet can he not deny, that they are taken away by being born upon the
Cross. For, must we not have account from the text, in what consideration he
takes them away? And is the assuring of us that God will make good his promise,
or is the moving of God to make it good, the pertinent reason why he is said to
take away our sins by a sacrifice? There is no doubt, that S. Peter expresses
the end of Christ's sufferings in that which follows; ye were as sheep going
astray* but is not therefore the consideration to be expressed, upon which that
end is attained? As for that little objection of Socinus, that when the Prophet
says; For the labor of his soul he shall see and be satisfied: By his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, and he shall bear their
iniquities; That it must mean; He shall take away their iniquities; because
justifying went before. Neither uses the Language of the Scripture always,
according to order of nature and reason, to put that first which gives the
reason of that which follows: So that bearing their iniquities (not taking
them away) may well follow, as the reason why he justifies; And if, insteade of
and we translate for, (which is usual in the scriptures) we silence the
objection, and make the reason why he justifies, to follow in due place; to
wit, because he bears their iniquities. Lastly, that the Prophets and
righteous in general, and the Messiah in particular, were to bear the sins
of the world, and expiate the wrath of God for them, you may see by Grotius
upon Mat. XX. 28. that the Jews have understood out of this place of the
Prophet Esaias. Which is prejudice enough; If they who understand not the reason
why and how we say our Lord expiates sin by bearing it, and, whose interest
it concerns not to understand it by the native sense of the Prophets words,
find that which Christians deny, and, by denying, prejudice the common cause.
Which to acknowledge, prejudices not Christianity, understanding as much
difference between that exp^ation which they make, and, that which Christ
makes, as Christianity puts between Christ and Christians.

Let us now consider that reconciliation, which S. Paul says, many times, is
wrought for us by Christ's death. 2 Cor. V. 18 --. All things are of God, that
has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and given us the ministry of
reconcilement: As that God was reconciling the world to himself by Christ, not
imputing to them their transgressions, an^ putting the word of reconciliation
upon us. We are therefore ambassadors in Christ's stead, as if God did exhort
you by us, we beseech you in Christ's stead, be reconciled to God. For* him that
knew no sin he made sin for us, that we might become the righteousness of
God in him. Socinus mervailes how any man can imagine, that Christ can proffer
us reconcilement, and not be reconciled to us when he proffers it. An
imagination as ridiculous as his, that fansied he should meet his fellow,
before his fellow met him. For, if reconcilement be between two, though one
may provide the means, (as in our Case God) though out of love, yet seeing as
yet he only offers friendship, that is to say, seeing as yet we are not made
freindes; it is manifest that both are reconciled at once. And, does not
experience of the world show, that, when Princes and States are at war, the
one out of a desire of peace, seeks means of reconcilement, but is not
reconciled before the other agree. So, God ingages to be reconciled, by
publishing the Gospel, while he gives man leave to deliberate; but, is not
reconciled, till man undertake Christianity by being baptized. So, when God
seeks to be reconciled to men, it is true, as S. Paul says, he imputes not
their transgressions to them; for, if he should prosecute their sins by
imputing them, he should not seek reconcilement; But, when he is reconciled,
it is a contradiction that he should impute them. Now, though the Apostles are
messengers of reconcilment in Christ's stead, yet with this difference that, he
also furnished the means, they only brought the message. S. Paul therefore
having signified this means before, (when he says that, not imputing to the
world their transgressions, he sought to be reconciled with them by Christ) and
inferring; Him that knew no sin he made sin for us, that we might become
the righteousness of God in him; Either he makes no difference between our
Lord and the Apostles, or it is expressed by these words in reference to that
which went before: To wit, that God was willing to be reconciled with the world,
because he had provided Christ, and Christ had undertook the sins of it. So
again Romans V. 10, 11. For if, being enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
death of his son, much more, being reconciled, shall we be saved by his life.
Nor only so: But we glory in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we
have received reconcilement. From what shall we be saved by being reconciled?
From wrath, says the Apostle, in the words next before. Therefore, before
reconcilement we were under wrath. And surely there is a difference between
the right and title that we have to be reconciled with God, (though upon
condition of our conversion to Christianity) and between the State of
reconcilement, which is our right to life. But so, that, if the State be from
Christ, (as S. Paul says we have received reconcilement by Christ) then is the
right to it in consideration of Christ, when he says, that, being enemies, we
were reconciled to God by his death.

Saint Paul again arguing, how God has abolished the difference between Jew
and Gentile by the Law; pursues it thus, Ephesians. II. 15. 16. That he might make up
both into one new man. through himself making peace: And reconcile both in one
body to God, by the Cross, slaying the enmity by it. Here Socinus will have us
to construe (...) not with (...), but absolutely, to the behoof and glory of
God. Which, had a Schooleboy do^e. he should have been whipped, for seeking
something out of the text to govern that case, which he has a verb in the
text to govern. Therefore, the Gentiles are indeed reconciled to the Jews,
according to S. Paul; But why? because both to God. And therefore, the reason
is the same in the reconcilement o^ men and Angels Col. I. 19 22. For in him he
pleased that all fulness should dwell. And by him to reconcile all to
himself, pacifying, through him, by the blood of his Cross, whether the
things that are on earth, or that are in heaven. And you, being once estranged,
and enemies in your mind through evil works, now has he reconciled by the
body of his flesh, through death. Especially comparing this with the purpose of
God, which he declares Ephesians. I. 10. For the ordering of the fulness of time,
to recollect all in Christ, whether things in heaven, or on earth. For, that
which here he terms (...), to recollect unto Christ, (that is, by Christ to
reduce to the original state of dependence upon God) is in part, the same with
(...), to reconcile to himself, before; But wholly agrees not, in as much as this
particularly concerns the case of mankind, whose sin required reconcilement,
that they might be reduced to God, in one body with the holy angels that had no
sin. All this the Apostle meant to express at once, and yet imply what was
particular to man, besides that which belonged to the Angels. And we must
either admit reconcilement between Men and Angels, because both reduced to God,
((...), signifying, (...), that is, (...), (because, of Christ* mention had
been made before Col. ^. 20.) as (...), 1 Pet. I. 4. is, (...); and 1 Pet. I.
25. (...), is, (...). And (...) Ephesians. I. 5. is, (...), 1 Cor. VIII. 6. (...))
or show, how the Angels are reduced to God, by the death and bloodshed of
Christ his Cross.

It remains, that I say something of the effect of all this, in cleansing and
purging of sin, and in making propitiation and atonement for it: Of which you
have the words of the Apostle, 1 John I. 7. If we walk in the light, as he is
in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all sin. Where, cleansing of sin by Christ's blood
supposing the condition of Christianity, it is manifest, that the effect of
Christ's blood in cleansing of sin, is not to bring us to Christianity.
Again, 1 John II. 1, 2, If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not
for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. Says Socinus, Jesus
Christ the righteous, that is, Jesus Christ the faithful: 1 John I. 9. If we
confess our sins* he is faithful and just to forgive our sins, and cleanse
us from all unrighteousness; That so, he may be thought to expiate our sins
by testifying the Covenant which ingages Gods faith. So far he goes for an
interpretation that destroys the virtue of Christ's intercession, founded upon
his innocence, 1 Peter I. 19. Isaiah LIII. 7, 9. For, if Christ be an
effectual advocate because he suffered innocently for Gods will, then, not
only, because he has obliged God, by dealing in his Name, to make good what
he has promised us. Whereas, if his blood be a propitiation for the sins of
Christians, that are not any more to be moved to receive the faith, as well as
for the sins of the rest of the World, that are; it must be the same
consideration of Christ's obedience, that moves the goodness of God to send the
Gospel to the World, and to make it good to Christians. And, what (...), or
(...) means, is seen by the Latin hilaris, according to Hesychius (...) says
he, is (...); And (...), cheerful in countenance; And (...), cheerfully,
m^r^ly. So, the condition of Christianity being supposed in these words also,
the consideration of Christ's blood makes the face of God cheerful to a
Christian that sins. Here they allege (...), Heb. II. 17. to signify
expiating sins, and that must presently be, by bringing men to be Christians.
But there is, in diverse speeches of this subject, that figure which Servius so
often observes in Virgil, calling it Hypallage. As (...), Heb. I. 3. It is not
the sin that is cleansed, but man from sin. And yet the Apostle says of
Christ; who, having made purgation of sins. So, neither are sins ransomed,
but men from sin; and yet he says again, Heb. IX. 15. (...). For the
ransoming of the sins that were under the former Covenant. And this is the
true sense of Dan. IV. 24. (...). Redeem thy sins. For, though a man ransomes
not his sins, yet he ransomes himself from his sins, by repentance, as I
said before. So, seeing propitiation tends to make God propitious, of angry; It
is manifest that (...), for variety, or brevity, or elegance of Language,
stands for (...). As for the Hebrew verb, (...), whereof, (...) is alleged to
be the Greek, in the signification of expiating a man of sin, which the
sacrifice of Christ, does, say they, by persuading him to be a Christian;
sometimes it is said of the Priest making propitiation for the sanctuary or the
Altar, with the particle (...), or for the people, with the particle (...) as
Levit. XVI. 33. And then, out of that which has been said, it may appear, how
the sacrifice is the consideration whereupon it is made. But, if it be said of
God, as Jer XVIII. 23, Ps. LXXIX. 9. with the particle (...), it seems to
express God propitious to sin, (when it is said; Be propitious to our sins:
Be not propitious to their sins) without sign^fying, how, or upon what
consideration he becomes propitious.

The Apostle says again, Ebr. IX. 11. That Christ entered into the Holy of
Holies, not with the blood of goats and bullocks* but with his own blood,
having found, that is, obtained, everlasting ransom. To wit, by the sacrifice
of the Cross. They say the indefinite tense signifies not always the time
past; And I grant, it is enough, that the time which it signifies be past to
him that speaks, as (...) which you have so often in the Gospels, he answered
and said, arguing no priority between answering and speaking. But necessarily,
that our Savior answered and said before the Evangelist related it, for
sometimes it concerns not which is first, as, whether our Lord first answered
or first said. So, Heb. II. 10. When therefore the Apostle says, that Christ
entered into the Holy of Holies, (...), he says not, (...); (which he might as
easily have said) Nor meant, that he should or would find ransom, by
delivering his brethren from sin; But that he had found ransom, by paying
the price of their sin. For, deliverance from sin is future in respect of
the Apostle, and the time when he writ. Which (...) cannot signify. Besides, if
there be question, what but the nature of the thing signified can determine the
order that is between them? Now, in our case, ransom is ascribed always to
the sacrifice, (as I have showed) never, to the sprinkling of the blood before
the Propitiatory. So Heb. I. 3. when it is said, Christ having made purgation
of sins, sat down at the right hand of God. For if it be said, that he made
purgation of sin, by that assurance of pardon, which the appearance of his
blood before God gives Christians; Manifest it is, that, what is attributed to
the sprinkling of the blood before the Propitiatory, must be understood to be
effected by virtue of the blood shed at the Altar. The case is plain, Heb.
XII. 24 You are come to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things
then that of Abel. Abels blood shed called for vengeance; Therefore, Christ's
blood shed, for remission of sins. Herewith agrees S. Paul Romans III. 25.
whom God has proposed a Propitiatory through Faith in his blood. Late Writers
so translate (...), in the notion of a place, as (...) of the same ^orme. For
my part, I rather follow Hesychi^^, or rather those that he followed, who most
certainly, had regard to this text, when they expound (...), a purging
sacrifice, or an Altar, as the means to make God propitious: Which is clear
for our purpose. But whether the place, or the means, why did God appear
propitiou* upon the Ark, but because made propitious by that which it
signified, Christ incarnate, and by the blood of the sacrifice signifying the
blood of his Cross? Therefore they prayed toward the ark under the Law, as
under the Gospel toward the East, and found God propitious, because of the
consideration in which they directed their prayers, directed by out Lord John
XVII. 23-26. To which purpose we may observe the purging of the Altar,
Tabernacle, and all within the veil by the blood of the sacrifices Levit. XVI.
16, 20, 33. Ezekiel. XLIII. 20, 22, 26. XLV. 20. For, what purging needed they,
but, as they became polluted by the sins of the people; As the Land, which
was holy, being polluted by blood shed, must be cleansed by the blood of him
that shed it. Number. XXXV. 33? Therefore the Congregation became guilty, when he
that did a murder was not taken, because the Land was promised to the
Congregation, and therefore an expiation is appointed, Deuteronomy. XX^. 1* 10. In
correspondence whereunto, it must be granted, that the world and the heavens
being polluted with man's sin, (which is that bondage of vanity and
corruption, under which S. Paul says, that the whole creature groaneth,
desiring to be delivered into that freedom which the resurrection shall
restore, Romans VIII. 19* 22.) were to be expiated by the sacrifice of Christ's
body brought in, and his blood sprinkled there Heb. IX. 23. that, in
consideration of his obedience and sufferings, God might be found propitious
there So the everlasting intercession of Christ, is grounded upon the
everlasting ransom Ebr. VII. 24. This Priest remaining for ever, has an
everlasting Priesthood. Wherefore, he is able, perfectly to save those that
come to God by him, all ways living to interceds for them, To wit, by pleading
his own blood, the ransom of all sin. This is the ground of all our
prayers, and the confidence which we may make them with, in particular, for the
cleansing of sin, after reconcilement. Of which S. Paul Romans VIII. 34. Christ
it is that died, or rather that is risen again, who also is at the right hand
of God, making intercession for us. And, this is the necessity of Christ's
sufferings, which the Apostle pleades Ebr. II. 14* 18. that he might be
sensible of ours. For, if the guilt be taken away by his intercession
succeeding his sufferings, then did he suffer that it might succeed. And thus
are our sins forgiven for his name, or, by his Name, John II. 12. Which
Soci^us will have to be Gods name* as in the Old Testament Es. XLIII 25. Psalm.
XXV. 11. LXXIX 9. CVI. 8. CXLIII. 12 But, if the name of God be in Christ under
the ^ew Testament, as in the Angel that represented God in the Old as I have
showed; then, when we pray in christ's name, we pray in Gods name, though in
consideration of Christ's merits.

Upon the premises depends the true meaning of all those Scriptures, where
Christ is said to have died for us, and for our righteousness; Not as if the
preposition for could determine whether we are to understand the final cause
in respect of man, to move him to accept of Christ, or the impulsive cause in
respect of God, moving him to grant the Gospel. For, when S. John says, that
we ought to lay down our lives for the bre^h^en* as Christ for us, John, III.
16. it is manifest, that our life is no ransom for the brethren, as Christ's for
us: And, when S. Peter says; He will lay down his life for Christ, John XIII.
37. 38. he means not, to move God thereby to spare his Masters life. And yet
notwithstanding, when Esau sold his birthright for a mess of potage, Ebr. XII.
16. he gave away his birth right in consideration of it. And, should God have
taken S. Paul's life, upon condition of saving the Jews, they must have been
saved in consideration of his becoming anathema for them, Romans IX. 3. And
Caiaphas thought that Christ must be destroyed, least the Romans should think,
that they would rebel under him, as their true Prince; and so it was
necessary that Christ should die for the people Joh^, XI. 50. 51. 52. But, in
what sense do Christians find it true? Surely, no man that ever prayed to God
in Christ's name need to be told it. It is requisite, therefore, that we have
recourse to the consideration of those things, which the Scripture uses to
join with the mention of Christ's dying for us, if we will rightly determine
the meaning of it. And so, having premised the consideration of a sacrifice,
upon which our sins were charged, of our ransom, by the price of it, of
reconciliation and propitiation for sin, obtained for us by it, we must
conclude, that, when the Scripture speaks of Christ's death for us, the meaning
of it cannot be satisfied, by granting, that he died to move us to be
Christians.

CHAP. XXIX. The grant of Grace, in consideration of Christ, supposes
satisfaction made by him for sin. Neither our sins imputable to Christ, nor
his sufferings to us, formally and personally, but, as the meritorious causes
which satisfaction answers. The effect of it, the Covenant of Grace, as well
as help to perform it. The Fathers saved by the Faith of Christ to come. The
Gospel a new Law. The property of Satisfaction and Punishment in Christ's
sufferings. Of the sense of the Catholic Church.
THere remains one argument from the premises, where I concluded, that
effectual Grace is appointed from everlasting, and therefore granted in time,
in consideration of Christ and his merits, according to S. Paul, Ephesians. I. 3-6.
For, if this grace be granted in consideration of Christ, and life everlasting
appointed from everlasting, and granted in time, in consideration of that
quality which this grace eff^cteth; it cannot in reason be avoided, that
remission of sin and life everlasting is granted here in right and title, and
in effect in the world to come, in consideration of that quality, which the
effectual helps of Grace, of their own nature tend to produce, which they are
appointed by God to produce, and which really and in effect, thus are produced,
being granted by God, in consideration of Christ's obedience. But why should I
be so solicitous to restore all those Scriptures to their true meaning, which
they have set upon the rack to make them speak a false, having such evidence of
reason, that, by this position, they make the death of Christ void, and
needless, even in their own judgment? For though, if they should say, that
Christ came, only to show those works that migh be sufficient to make his
Gospel credible, and give us good example; I could not say that the death of
Christ were to no end; Yet would they say, that it were to no competent end,
complaining, (as they do) how much they are wronged, when they are understood
to acknowledge no further end of his coming. But, when they say, that he died
to induce men to be Christians, by inacting the Covenant of Grace; (that is,
assuring them, that God will stand to it on his part, and that, according to
the example of Christ, bearing his Cross, they shall attain his glory) I
demand, how all this can be more assurance then every man has, that is
perem^orily assured otherwise, (as no man doubts, but, competently it may be
assured otherwise) that the Gospel of Christ is Gods message. For, when
sufficient evidence is once made, and a man is convinced to believe, that God
promises remission of sins and everlasting life to them that embrace it, can
he that beleives God to be God, remain any more doubtful of the truth of his
promise? To Pharao and to his people, it was necessary, that the wonders of God
should be repeated, till they stood convict, that there was no God else, which
they believed not before: But, to them that admit the God of Israel to be the
only true God, being convict that the Gospel is his promise, is any further
assurance requisite that he will stand to it, who were not God if he should not
stand to it? when they say, that Christ died to the end that, being advanced to
be God, he might be able to bring his promises to effect; I refer my self to
the sense of any man that is able to think of God with due reverence, whether
it be possible to imagine, that a mere man, having made promises to mankind in
Gods name, can live with God, to see Gods promises frustrate: And, by
consequence, whether it can appear necessary, that our Lord Christ should be
advanced to be God, that he might be able, in his own person, to fulfill the
promises which he had made us in his Fathers Name. I refer my self to that
which I have said, to show, the word of God, which took the flesh of man from
the Virgin, to be God from everlasting, as the Son of God, and his
everlasting wis^ome and image: And therefore, not advanced to be God, in
consideration of his obedience: But, that, having condescended to that state,
which his obedience, in doing his fathers message and testifying the truth
thereof, required; the Son of God incarnate, was advanced in our flesh, by
the appointment of God, in reward of his obedience, to the privilege of sending
the Holy Ghost, to make his Gospel effectual to convert the nations to
Christianity, that, by them he might be acknowledged, and glorified for that
which he was from everlasting. So that, the end of his coming being, to obtain
that grace, by which the world might be converted to Christianity, and being
converted, obtain remission of sins and life everlasting for it; and,
neither of these purposes admitted by Socinus; we may well say to him, as S.
Paul says to the Jews Gal. II, 21. If righteousness be by the Law, then is
Christ dead in vain; So, if righteousness came as Socinus would have it,
then is Christ dead to no purpose; Because, all that he requires might have
been as well effected without it. Whereas, a due valuable consideration, in
regard whereof, the converting grace of the Holy Ghost, and remission of sins
and life everlasting in consideration of the effect thereof, should be granted;
could not have been had without it.

It is strange to be observed, how little Socinus has to produce out of the
scriptures, to prove a position of such consequence as this; All his business,
(in a manner) being, to draw those texts, which heitherto have been understood
in the sense of the Church, to his intent. I can, for the present, recall no
more, then those frequent passages of the Apostles, (especially S. Paul)
whereby they affirm, the righteousness and salvation of Christians to come by
the mere grace of God and our Lord Christ. Which I need not here repeat, no
ways apprehending the infernce; That it cannot be said to come from the mere
grace of God, if I suppose the consideration of Christ's obedience and
sufferinges, as the purchase of it. It is true, in the words of the Prophet
Jeremy XXXI. 34-34. (alleged by the Apostle Ebr. VIII. 8-12. to be meant of the
Gospel) we find a promise of God to pardon the sins of his people, without
expressing any consideration, in regard whereof he would do it. And likew^se
our Lord, in the Parable of the master that forgave his servant ten thousand
talents, Mat. XIIII. 23 --. Seems to express Gods pardon, which his Gospel
publishes, to be free from any consideration, in which it is either proclaimed
or granted. But, as I said to our Antinomians, who will needs believe, upon
the warrant of the Prophets words, that their sins are pardoned, merely in
consideration of Christ, without regard to any disposition requisite to qualify
them for it, by the Gospel; That it was neither requisite nor fit, that the
terms, upon which the blessings promised by the Gospel are granted, should
be expressed by the Prophe^y, that only foretells the coming of it; (being
to be gathered from that proportion, which the Law, in regard of the land of
promise, holds to the Gospel, in regard of the world to come) So say I to the
Socinians, who will needs have the same words to signify; That, supposing the
disposition that qualifies for the promises of the Gospel, they suppose no
consideration of the obedience of of Christ; That, (though the terms of the
Gospel are not expressed by the Prophet, foretelling the coming of it, as
being included in those of the Law, by virtue of the proportion aforesaid) it
were strange to think, that the coming and death of Christ is not sufficient
since, to determine the meaning of the Prophets words to it. And so likewise,
to the Parable, that, if our Savior found it not fit to express the
consideration; upon which the pardon which the Gospel publishes is passed;
yet, his death and suffringes coming after, to interpret the intent of that
which he h^d said before* that was to be declared, it is strange, that they
should not be thought sufficient, to add that consideration, which, before, he
had neither expressed nor denied. As for the free grace of the Gospel, I
challenge all the reason in the world to say, If Gods free act, in providing
the means of salvation by Christ, and sending him to publish the conditions
upon which he is ready to be reconciled to those that accept them, (tendering
withal, sufficient help so to do) be not a valuable reason, for which the
Gospel is to be called the Covenant of grace, though granted in consideration
of that ransom by Christ, which the free grace of God provideth. Whether our
Antinomians have not as good reason to say, that the promises of the Gospel
are not free, if they require the condition of Christianity, as the Socinians,
if they suppose Christ, and his obedience.

Here follows, I confess, a very valuable reason of Socinus, so long as that
satisfaction of Christ which the Church teaches is not understood; which, it
is no mervaile, if it carry them aside, not understanding the faith and doctrine
of the Church aright. They allege, that there can be no ground in reason, upon
which, one man may be punished for another man's sin* Guilt, being a moral
consequence of an act that is naturally past and gone* (that is, for the
present, nothing in rerum natura) upon a due ground of reason, which imputes
the acts of reasonable creatures to their account, because they are under a Law
of doing thus and not otherwise. But, that the sins of one man should be
imputed to another, who cannot be obliged for another, to do or not to do,
that which redounds to the others account, if done, or not done; is no more
possible, then, that he should have done, or not done that, which the other is
supposed, to have done, or not done. If it be said, that Christ voluntarily
took upon him the punishment of our sins, as a surety answers for his
friends debt; It is acknowledged, that this way turns off the Debt, from him
that it is paid for, to the surety, but extinguishes it not, as the undergoing
of punishment extinguishes the crime in all the Justice of the world, so that,
he who had right to punish, can exact that no more, for which he has received
satisfaction once: Which is to say, that the sufferinges of Christ are not the
punishment of our sins, And I truly do freely acknowledge, that, the
instances which have been brought, either out of the scriptures, to show, that
one man has been punished for another man's sin among civil people, (so that it
is not to be thought against the light of nature) are either insufficient, or
impertinent to the case. For, I have learned, from my beginning in the
Schools, that God, when he visits the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children; does not inflict upon them more punishment then their own sin
deserves, but, makes their sins his opportunity, of bringing to pass his
judgments against the sins of their predecessors, or those who, in regard of
other relations* are reasonably taken to be punished by their punishment. And
this I will here prove no further; but, taking it for granted, infer, that it
comes not home to the case of our Lord Christ, purchasing us, by his death,
remission of sins, everlasting life. But my reason is, because, it is evident
to me, that one man's doings or sufferings may be understood, or said, to be
imputed to another, two ways. First: immediately and personally, supposing
that there is a ground in reason for it; And this, that opinion requires, which
holds, that faith which alone justifies to consist in beleiving that a man is
praedestinate to life merely in consideration of Christ's death, suffering for
the elect alone; For, how should we be justified by believing this, but,
supposing, that Christ suffered upon this ground, to this purpose? But, having
showed this opinion to be utterly false, by showing, that the Gospel supposes
the condition of Christianity in that Faith which alone justifies; I must here
presume, that this sense of the imputation of Christ's merits, (and therefore,
this intent of his death) is merely imaginary: And the supposition whereupon
it proceeds; to wit, that one man's doings or sufferings may be personally and
immediately imputed to another man's account, utterly unreasonable. And
therefore must and do say, that, as it is sufficient, so it is true, that the
sufferings of Christ are imputed unto us in the nature of a meritorious cause,
moving God, to g^ant mankind those terms of reconcilement which the Gospel
imports. This is evident by the opposition which S. Paul makes, between the
disobedience of Adam and the obedience of Christ, Romans V. 12. 18. 19. Where,
discovering the ground of our reconcilement with God, which the Gospel
publishes, he imputes it to the obedience of Christ, in the rest of his
discourse attributing it to his death. For, having said, that Christ died for
us being sinners, and that we are justified by his blood, and reconciled by the
death of his son, being enemies, he infers; therefore as by one man sin
came into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all;
Signifying* by the other part of the comparison, which he renders not till
after a distance, that; As by the offense of one it came to all men to
condemnation, so, by the righteousnesie of one, it came to all men, to
justification of life: For, as by the disobedience of one man, many were made
sinners, so, by the obedience of one many shall be made righteous. And
hereupon, as the exaltation of Christ is imputed to his obedience in the state
of his humiliation, (by S. Paul, Phil. II. 8. he humbled himself, becoming
obedient unto death) So are the effects and consequences thereof, ( Romans IV.
25. who was delivered for our transgressions, and rose again for our
justification) to be ascribed to the same. And, that which the Father
proclaims of the son, Mat. III. 17. XVII. 5. This is my beloved son in
whom I am well pleased: cannot be understood in any other regard, but, of his
obedience, performed, in publishing the message which the Father sent him upon
into the world, and suffering for it; (in which, he testifies so often in S.
John's Gospel, that he came not to do his own will but his Fathers, that he
sought not his own glory but his Fathers, he did not, he said not any thing of
himself, but what he had seen his Father do, what he had heard his Father
say; that it were tedious to repeat the several places) And this according to
the figure of David Psalm. XI. 9. 10. then said I, Lo I come. In the volume of
the book it is written of me, that I should fulfill thy will: I am content to
do it, O Lord; yea, thy Law is within my heart. Whereupon the Apostle says,
that we are sanctified by this will, through the once offering of the body of
Jesus Christ, Ebr. IX. 9. to wit, the will of God, which, by doing his will,
Christ had moved to favor us. Even as, in the figure, punishment is remitted
remitted to David's posterity, for the promise indeed 2 Kings VIII. 19. XX. 6. 1
Kings XI. 3. but made, in consideration of David's obedience 2 Samuel VII. 18.

Here, I suppose further, that, this obedience of Christ is not tenderd as of
Debt; (which, they that believe him to have been borne a mere creature must
hold) But, having proved, that he assumed man's nature, being the Word of God,
God of God from everlasting before, do necessarily presume, that this
obedience, being undue, is meritorious to whatsoever purpose God, that sent
him, accepts it. And hereupon infer, that God granted those terms of
reconcilement, which the Gospel imports, (in derogation to his own
original Law) in consideration of it. For, I do suppose, that man, being
fallen from God, yet knowing God, and himself to have been made by God, and to
be governed by his providence; necessarily understood himself to be under the
obligation of making God the end of all his actions, and therefore, of enjoying
no creature otherwise then the service of God should either require or allow.
Though, that ignorance of God, which original concupiscence has since brought
into the world, through the worship of Idols, and the corruptions that attend
upon the same, had since so extinguished or darkened the light of nature in man
that the greatest part of mankind, though they could not deny this truth,
nevertheless held it prisoner in unrighteousness, as S. Paul says Romans I.
18. This is that which I call the original Law of God, the transgression
whereof binds over to that punishment, which God by his word declares. And
of this Law, the necessary immediate consequence is, that we submit to all such
Laws as God shall publish to man, in as much as he requires, and upon such
penalties as he declares. So that, by publishing the Gospel, the original Law
of God is not abrogated, continuing still the rule of men's actions, but rather
strengthened, and enlarged to all those precepts, which are positive under the
Gospel, and come not from the light of nature, as necessary conditions to
salvation in all estates; But, the publication of the Gospel is a dispensation
in the exercise and execution of the original Law, by the penalty which it in
acts, in consideration of Christ's obedience; though, (being general to all
mankind after the publishing of it) it may be called a New Law, as proposing
new terms of salvation, which, if any man challenge to be a derogation to Gods
original Law, I will not contend about words. As for the Law of Moses, if we
consider it, as containing the terms upon which that people held the land of
promise, the publishing of the Gospel neither abrogates it nor derogates from
it; Being only given to hold till the time of reformation, as the Apostle
calls it Ebr. IX 10. therefore expiring when the Gospel was published, which
limited the intent of it. But if we consider it as containing an intimation of
that spiritual obedience which God required of those that would be saved under
that light, by the outward and civil obedience of those positive precepts,
whereby they were restrained from the worship of Idols and commerce with
Idolatrous nations* in proportion to the reward of the world to come, signified
by the happiness of the land of promise; then must we acknowledge another
dispensation in the same original Law, by the Law of Moses, and for the time
of it, which was also in force under the Fathers from the beginning, though not
burdened which that multitude of positive precepts which the Law of Moses
brought in, for the condition upon which they were to hold the land of promise.
And, in opposition to those, it is called, by the Fathers of the Church, the
Law of Nature, not in opposition to Grace; The very giving it by Gods voluntary
appearing to the Fathers and instructing them by familiar conversation, as it
were, being a work of mere grace; as also the effect of it, in the works of
their conversation, which we find so truly Christian, that the Fathers of the
Church do truly argue from thence that Judaisme is younger then Christianity.

And therefore, I do here acknowledge, this his dispensation, by which the
Fathers obtained salvation before the Gospel, to have been granted also in
consideration of that obedience, which our Lord Christ had taken upon him to
perform in the fulness of time; Nothing hindering us to understand, in Gods
proceeding, with them, something like that, which, in the civil law is called
novatio or delegatio, renwing of bonds, or assignation of payment; Gods
accepting the interposition of our Lord Christ to the reconcilement of them,
being, as if he accepted a new bond for an old debt, or, of payment by proxy,
to be made at a certain term. This is a point as manifest in the Scriptures
of the New Testament, as it was requisite, that a point not concerning the
salvation of those that live under the New Testament, but, the understanding of
the reason thereof in the salvation of those that died under the Old, for the
maintenance of it against unbelevers, should be manifest. For S. Paul thus
writes 1 Cor. X. 1-4. I would not have you ignorant brethren, that our Fathers
were all under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and all were baptized
unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea, and all eat the same spiritual
meat, and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they all drank of the
spiritual rock that followed them; Now the rock was Christ. They that entered
into a Covenant of works to obtain the Land of promise, as I have showed they
did, entered not expressly into a Covenant of Faith in Christ, for obtaining
the world to come. No more then, being baptized into Moses in the cloud and in
the Sea, as he says here they were, (that is, into his government, into the
observation of the Laws he should give, in hope of the promises he should
give) they can be said to have been baptized expressly into Christ, and that
profession which his promises require. Wherefore when he says; that the rock
was Christ; his meaning is not immediately, and to those that rested in this
temporal Covenant of works; But as the Manna was Christ, and Moses was
Christ, by the means of that faith, which God then received at their hands; to
wit, the assurance of everlasting happiness, for them, who under this calling,
should tender God the spiritual obedience of the inward man; upon those
grounds, which, his temperall goodness, the tradition of their Fathers, and
the instruction of their Prophets afforded at that time. Now, I appeal to the
sense of all men, how those can be said to have that interest in Christ, which,
I have showed that Christians have, (and therefore upon the same ground) if
there were no consideration of Christ, in the blessings of Christ which they
enjoyed. Wherefore, when S. Paul proceeds hereupon to exhort them, not to tempt
Christ as some of them tempted, we must not understand, that he forbids us to
tempt Christ, as they tempted God; But, that they also tempted Christ, who went
along with them, in that Angel, in whom the name of God, and his word was, as I
said before, So, when the Apostle says that Moses counted the reproach of Christ
greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, for he looked at the recempense of
reward; Ebr. XI. 26 when, putting them in mind to follow their teachers,
considering the end which they had attained, and Moses, aimed at, he adds;
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and for everlasting, Ebr. XIII.
8. when S. Peter says, that, the Prophets, who foretold the Gospel, searched,
against what time the Spirit of Christ, that was in them, declared and
testified before hand the sufferings of Christ, and the glorious things that
followed, 1 Pet. I. 10. when S. Paul says, that all Gods promises are yea and
Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. I. 20. me thinks it is strange, that a Christian should
imagine, that there was no confideration of Christ in these promises, under
which they ran the race of Christians. Nor could S. Paul say; As by Adam all
die, so by Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. XV. 22; Nor could the
comparison hold, between the first and second Adam, which he makes Romans V.
12-19. if that life, which, I have showed how Christ restores Christians to,
were given to the Fathers before Christ without confideration of Christ. Nor
could the Apostle otherwise say; That Christ is the mediator of a New Covenant,
that, d^^th coming, for the ransom of those transgressions that were under the
Old, they that are called may receive the promise of an everlasting
inheritance. Ebr. IX. 15. but because those sins which were redeemed only to
a temporal effect, by the sacrifices of the Old Law, (as also those, which
were not redeemed at all by any, as I said) were, by the sacrifice of Christ,
redeemed, to the purchase of the world to come. Which is that which S. Paul
tells the Jews Acts XIII. 29. that, through Christ, every one that believes
is justifiyed from all things which they could not be justified of by the Law
of Moses. For, as the Law did not expiate capital offenses, so, it expiated
none, but to the effect of a civil promise. And, though we construe the words
of S. John Apoc. XIII. 8. whose names are not written in the book of life of
the Lamb, slain from the foundation of the world, out of the same sense
repeated Apoc. XIII. 8. Not, that the Lamb was slain from the foundation of
the world, but, that their names were written in his book from the foundation
of the world: yet, in as much as it is called the book of the Lamb, that was
foreknown from the foundation of the world, 1 Pet. I. 19. when Moses demands,
not to be written in Gods book, or, when mention is made of it in the New
Testament, it must be the book of Christ in the mystical sense. And when S.
Paul says; that Christ gave himself a ransom for all: A testimony for due
time; What can he mean, but that, though he gave himself for all, yet, this
was not to be testified till the proper time of preaching the Gospel? And what
is this, but that, though this is testified only by the preaching of the
Gospel, yet he was a ransom for all. Which reason suffers not the same term
all, Ebr. II. 9. Romans III. 23. to be restrained from that generality which it
naturally signifies. Lastly, when the Apostle argues; that, if Christ should
offer himself more then once, that he might, more then once, enter into the
Holy of Holies; he must have suffered often from the foundation of the world;
that is, before the end of the world, in which he came indeed Ebr. IX. 25. 26.
he must needs suppose, that he suffered for all that were saved before the
Gospel. For, what pretense can there be that he should suffer for sins under
the Gospel before the Gospel, more then, that the High Priest, before the
Law, should expiate those sins which were committed against the Law, by
entering into the Holy of Holies. And here you may see* that I intend not to
affirm, that all that were saved under the Law, though in consideration of
Christ, did know, in what consideration Christ should be their salvation, as
Christians under the Gospel do; But to refer my self to the determination
of S. Augustine, and other Fathers and Docters of the Church; that they
understood it in their Elders, and Superiors, the Prophets of God, and their
disciples, the Judges of Israel, (who were also Prophets) and the Fathers of
several ages, of whom you read Ebrews XI. who, being acquainted with the
secret of Gods purpose, were to acquaint the people with it, so sparingly and
by such degrees, as the secret wisdom of God had appointed.

These things thus premised, I do acknowledge, and challenge, the act of God,
in dispensing in the execution of his original Law, and bringing the Gospel
into effect in stead of it, not to be the act of a private person, remitting
this particular interest in the punishment of those sins whereby his Law was
transgressed; But the act of a Master of a household, or the Prince and
Soverraigne of a Comonwealth, which you please, disposing of mankind as his
subjects or household servants. Not denying, that a man, considered as free from
all obligation of civil Society, and a member of no Commonwealth; that a
Sovereign in respect of another Sovereign; yea, in some sort, the subject of
one Sovereign in regard of another Sovereign and his subjects, may have right
to exact punishment, which he may as freely remit: but resolving, that
whatsoever can be said of such cases, is impertinent to ours; God being,
necessarily and essentially, Sovereign Prince over his own subjects, his
creatures, and master of them, as his household goods. And this act, whereby he
dispenses in the effect of his original Law, so as to introduce another in
stead of it, being such, that his glory must necessarily consist in the
consideration upon which it is done, as the principal act that can be done, in
the government of the principal creature. And therefore, I say on the other
side, that the cases of Damon and Phintias the great friends, (whereof the one
suffered, or would have suffered for the other under Dionysius the Usurper of
Sicily) and of Zale^cus, (who, having made a Law, for his Country to punish
adulterers with loss of both eyes, and, his son being taken in adultery,
pulled out one of his own and one of his Sons, to satisfy the Law) are not
pertinent to our case. Suppose a friend had right to lay down his life for a
friend; Suppose the Usurper had right to take away one life, and to accept
another for it: Suppose Zaleucus had right to dispose of his own eye to his
sons interest; suppose the people, that inacted the Law, did dispense so far
in it: The effect of a civil Law is utterly satisfied, by the evil once
suffered, (proportionable to the forfeit, in the judgment of the Law, (not
considering out of what intent of mind it was suffered, nor claiming any thing
further, when it is suffered. But I have showed, that the sufferings of Christ
were accepted of God to the redemtion of mankind, in consideration of that free
and pure obedience to God wherewith they were tendered to God, not to satisfy
his wrath against us, by the evil which he endured, (for the time of mere
punishment is not till the World to come) but that he might show that virtue,
and that obedience, which is not to be showed, but through the difficulty of
afflictions: And this, not to the effect of making personal and immediate
recompense for the sins of so many as shall be saved; (which, were it made,
God could not in any justice, impose upon them any condition, for obtaining
remission of those sins, which he had received satisfaction for) But to give
God that satisfaction, (by so undue and so perfect obedience in such trials,
that the world can never see the like virtue) as might move him, in
consideration thereof, abating that debt of punishment which we are engaged to,
by transgressing his Original Law, to publish an act of Grace, admitting all
to remission of sins, and right to life everlasting, that will undertake to
live true Christians. And this consideration, I conceive I may say, redounds as
much to the glory of God, as it is possible to conceive, that any can do; There
being nothing more valuable then this obedience, nothing more acceptable in him
that is a sinner, then new obedience for the future. But, the consideration in
the mean time, not personal, but in the nature of the meritorious cause, to
which all satisfaction is reducible, as purchasing freedom from evil, though
not right to good: For no man's debt is immediately paid by the pain which
Christ suffered, but, in consideration of his obedience to God in undergoing
such trials, all that will undergo the condition are admitted to remission of
sins and everlasting life.

Therefore, the punishment which Christ indures for our sins, imports not
that there was any ground of reason, why he should be accounted to have done
them, or we accounted to have undergone his sufferings; But, in regard of the
evil which he suffered, in consideration of our sins, with an intent to take
them away in freely offering himself, to undergo what God should think fit to
that purpose, neither can it be pretended, that any thing is wanting, to
manifest the justice of Gods proceeding with him, nor the reason why it
redounds to our benefit. Now Socinus, having in detestation that opinion,
which, places justifying faith in believing that we are predestinate in
considesideration of the merits of Christ, suffering only for the elect; And
abhorring as much the doctrine of the Church, which he took to be tainted with
the levain of Antichrist, from the Apostles time; It remained, that he should
run into another extreme, making the Gospel an act of Gods Grace excluding
all consideration of Christ, which could not be brought in but by voiding the
Faith of the holy Trinity into the bargain. But, though I allow Socinus to
dispute, whether the sufferings of Christ be properly the punishment of our
sins, or not; because I have showed, that they are not the punishment which
civil Laws require; (though, not allowing him to blame S. Augustine, or other
Church Writers, that have so called them, much less to depart from the Faith
of the Church, for the signification of a word) yet can it not be denied, that
the death of Christ is properly satisfaction, upon the premises. For,
satisfaction is, properly, a payment that may be refused, as not in the nature
and kind of that which was due. Suppose, for the purpose, when a band is
forfeit, the forfeit incurred, recompense satisfies not. Indeed, it is contrary
to natural equity in man, to refuse to be satisfied with such a recompense as
makes up his interest: But between God and man it is otherwise. For, the
forfeit of sin consisting in this, that the act is done which cannot be undone;
Suppose the sufferings of Christ, (supposing his divine nature from
everlasting) both voluntary and meritorious of themselves, and that to an
unvaluable value, even in justice; yet are they refutable in point of Gods
justice, because he i^ not to be obliged by any thing, as receiving advantage
by it. But, being accepted by him, they become a full recompense, to the
purpose for which they are tendered, that is, for the obtaining of pardon and
salvation for them that embrace Christianity, and that, in the strict and
rigorous estimate of justice, for the infinite value of the person from whom
they proceed. And this according to Vlpiane 46. ff. III. L. 52. Satisfactio est
pro solutione; Satisfaction is that which succeeds in stead of payment not
made: And according to Caius 2 ff. VIII. 1 Satisfacere est desiderium alicujus
implere. To satisfy is to fulfill a man's desire. For, that God cannot be
obliged but by his own will, to accept it to this effect; whereas man is bound
by natural equity, to accept that for full satisfaction, which makes up his
whole intresse, when civil Law obli^es him not; Makes the tender of Christ no
less the substitute, to our payment of that debt which Gods Law requires,
(for, how is it less fit to be tendered, when it is not due to be accepted,
then when it is?) no less able to fulfill Gods desire; seeing nothing can be
imagined more acceptable to him, then the voluntary obedience of his own son;
consisting in those sufferings, wherein, the greatest virtue that man's nature
is capable of was seen: and tending to the redemption of mankind, which his
love to his creature inclined him so much ^o desire, as his wisdom found to
comport with his native goodness, and the exercise of his justice.

I shall not here, as in other points, stand to clear the Faith of the
Catholic Church. When Pelagius is alleged for one, that held not the
satisfaction of Christ; it is plain enough, that it can have no footing in, or
allowance, from the authority of the Church, which has disclaimed P^lagius.
Only we may take notice, how well, the evidence which the witness and
practice of the Church renders to the rule of Faith, is understood by them,
who, in stead of alleging some allowance of the Church* (by some person of
noted credit openly professing it, and nevertheless esteemed to be of the
Church) name us one that was cast out of the Church for holding it, whether
expressly or by consequence. As for Lactantius, who, alleging the suffering of
Christ for our example, adds further nevertheless, pro crimine nostro, for
our crime. Instit. IV. 23, 24, 26. Though I might safely have said, as before,
that a word of his upon the by may well have past without censure, because his
credit was not such in the Church, as to create appearance of offense; Yet I
shall not need to have recourse to this answer, his own words having given so
much advantage, for a fair interpretation of his meaning, in the sense of the
Church. As for P^trus Abailardus, that is thought to have said something to the
same purpose, I shall not need to insist what his opinion was. For, as I allow,
that he lived in such an age, when something that is true might be entertained
with the censure of the Church; So, when it is said to be in a point, wherein
he is p^rtizane with Pelagius, the Church that condemned him must needs, in
condemning him for i^, be partizane with the Church that condemned Pelagius. I
will only allege here, a doctrine, which, I take to be generally received by
the ancient Fathers of the Church; That the devil, by bringing Christ to death,
that had not sinned, forfeited that power of death, which the Apostle speaks
of Heb. II. 14. to wit, that which he had over man that had sinned, in bringing
him to death. And I allege it because, the Socinians seem to take it for
granted, that the Church is now ashamed to maintain this, which, I confess, I
am not. For, if the devil be Prince of this World, as our Savior calls him,
John XIV. 30. because he is employed by God as his Jailer, (or the executioner
of those judgments, to which he abandons those that forsake him, by giving
them up to his temptations) shall we not understand, the justice of God to be
seen toward him in limiting this employment, as under the grace of Christ we
believe it is limited, in consideration of his attempting upon Christ beyond
his commission, because without right, he being without sin? And therefore,
the justice of God having appointed him this employment, and, this justice
satisfied by the obedience of Christ; it is but due consequence, that this
employment, in which the principality of this World consists, should become
forfeit and vo^de, so far as the Grace of Christ determines it. By virtue of
which reason, our Lord Christ rising from death, because, not having sinned, he
could not be ^^ld by death, draws after him all, that, upon the sound of his
Gospel, embrace the profession of Christianity.

CHAP. XXX. God might have reconciled man to himself without the coming of
Christ. The promises of the Gospel depend as well upon his active as passive
obedience. Christ need not suffer ^ell pa^nes that we might not. The opinion
that makes justifying Faith to be trust in God not true; Yet not prejudicial
to the Faith. The decree of the Council of Trent, and the doctrine of the
School; how it is not prejudicial to the Faith. As also that of Socinus.
I Will not leave this point, till I have inferred, from that which has been
said, the resolution of two or three points in question, necessarily following
upon it. And first, that, though, as I have said, it is impossible for the wit
of man to propose any course, for the reconciling of men to God, by which, the
glory of God* in the exercise of his divine perfections should have been more
seen, then is that which it pleased God to take; Yet was it not impossible for
his divine wisdom to have taken other courses to effect the same, his glory
remaining in^^re, according as S. Augustine has long since resolved; Though,
to the great displeasure of all them, who distinguish not the imagination of
immediate satisfaction by the death of Christ for the sins of them that shall
be saved, from that dispensation in the Original Law of God, which the Gospel
declares to all that embrace the terms of it; To the effect whereof, I have
showed, that God provided and accepted it. For, if God did not provide, no^
accept de facto the death of Christ, for immediate satisfaction to his
vindicative justice, in behalf of their sins that shall be saved* Then was he
not tied in point of right, to seek that satisfaction for the same, either from
Christ, or from us. And truly, this opinion, (that God was tied to execute his
vindicative justice either upon Christ or us) seems to represent God to the
fancies of Christians, as taking content in the evils and torments which Christ
suffered, (that being the only recompense that vindicative justice seeks)
without consideration of that perfect obedience and zeal to Gods glory in the
saving of his creature, together with his justice and holiness, in regard
whereof God indeed accepts the same. Now, though it be necessary, for the
maintenance of Christianity, to say; that, the course which God take^h for the
reconciling of man to himself, according to it, preserves his glory entire, as
being agreeable to his divine perfections; (For, to say, that man cannot
propose a course more for his glory then that which it advances, is rather
honorable for Christianity then necessary for the maintenance of the truth of
it) yet, to say, that Gods wisdom, in designing this course according to the
exigence of all his perfections, is so exhausted and equalled by the work of it
(as it were) that his own wisdom could have designed no other course to
attain the same end, preserving his own glory entire; is to make the wisdom
of God subject to be comprehended by man, supposing what he has revealed of
the works of it. But, as nothing is more derogatory to the glory of God, then
to say, that God can do nothing but that which h^ does; So, supposing the fall
of man, the will of God to propagate mankind, and to tender him means of
reconcilement; To say, that God could take no other course to effect this, but
that which ^e took is, without doubt, in the next degree, derogatory to his
glory

In the next place, I infer, that, as well the active as the passive
obedience of Christ is imputed to us, in consideration of remission of sins,
and everlasting life. It is said, that this opinion; That we are justified
only in consideration of the sufferings of Christ; was first heard of in the
parts of Germany, contained in the upper Palati^ate: And, being consured by the
Divines of Wittemberg, went no further among those of the confession of
Augsburg. But the remains of it subsisting at Heidelberg, John Cameron, it
seems, studying there in his younger time* brought it with him into the
Reformed Churches of France. Where it caused such a heat as had come to a
breach, had not the dispute been put to silence. I have not seen what reasons
that ingenuous man maintained it with: This I may take upon me to say; One of
the principal was this; Because, that which we are released of in
consideration of Christ, that of Christ, is imputed to us, not that which we
are not: Now, as it is certain, that we are released of punishment in
consideration of Christ; So, it is certain, that we are not released of the
obligation to new obedience, according to the performance or neglect whereof
God will judge us. Therefore, in regard of the sufferings of Christ, our debt
of punishment is discharged; whereas, were the active obedience of Christ
imputed unto us, we could not stand bound to the like obedience, nor be judged
by our bond to it. So that, ascribing remission of sins to the sufferings of
Christ, and Faith in his blood alone, he ascribes salvation to our new
obedience* according to the manifest sentence of the Scripture, which I have
produced in due place. In the mean time, you see this opinion stands upon the
same imaginary presumption of the immediate and personal imputation of Christ's
death, in consideration of the remission of sin, which the adversaries thereof
proceed upon, as well in consideration of Gods assigning everlasting life, as
of his forgiving of sin. And therefore I shall easily shut it out of doors,
upon supposition* first, of that which has been said concerning the condition
that quallifieth for remission of sins; Having showed, that it is no other
faith, but the sincere and cordial pro^ession of Christianity. Secondly, of
that which has been sa^d here, to show, that the immediate imputation of any
thing done or s^ffered by Christ to any man's person, in satisfaction for his
sins* is a mere imagination which the Gospel of Christ never taught us; But
only, that, in consideration of the obedience of Christ, in publishing the
Gospel, under such difficulties as ended in the death of the Cross, God grants
remission of sins, and life everlasting, to all them that take upon them
resolutely and sincerely to profess Christianity. For, these things being
admitted, it is manifest, that, as well the active as ^he passive obedience of
Christ is considered, in passing the promises which the Gospel brings, upon the
terms which it requires. Neither indeed, can there be any consideration of
Christ's sufferings in the business, without the consideration of the free an^
voluntary and perfect obedience which he undertook and underwent them with; All
the course of his life, wherein he displayed that only accomplished mi^rour of
virtue that ever the Sun saw, being a continual course of suffering that
hardship, which he was no otherwise obliged to undergo, then because he had
undertaken to show ^uch example, to such effect and purpose. And therefore, if
any Scriptures ^eem to make mention of his sufferings, without speaking of that
obedience which he undertook and endured them with; It is easy to have
recourse unto those, whereby, I have showed the account which God had, of that
free and constant obedience, which he undertook and went through them with. And
truly it is an inconsequence which no reason pardons, to imagine any other
consideration for that remission of sins which the Gospel tenders* then, for
everlasting life: Seeing it is manifest, that the Gospel tenders not remission
of sins, without everlasting life; Nor can any man attain really the state of
remission of sins, without attaining as really and effectually the right of
everlasting life. For, as it is evident in reason, that in what considerations
God one day actually gives everlasting life, in that consideration he deermined
from everlasting to give it; So it is no less evident, that, the person that
becomes so qualified, as the Gospel requires, is, at that time, and from that
time that he becomes so qualified, invested in the right of those promises
which the Gospel tenders, in the same consideration, for which they are either
granted from everlasting, or bestowed in due time. And I conceive, that neither
Cameron nor any of his opinion would undertake, that eternal life is assigned
to the new obedience of Christians, without consideration of what Christ has
done for us, which surely, was not done, but in suffering, and by suffering for
us. It is therefore for the honor of Christianity, to maintain, that God, for
Christ's sake, is ready to admit the heirs of everlasting damnation into the
inheritance of everlasting happiness, in never so short a time, as we can
believe, that they can change their resolution from following sin, to
profess that belief and conversation which Christianity imports. Suppose we
believe Zosimus, when, to the disgrace of it, he reports, that Constantine was
persuaded to become Christian, in hope to come clear of those sins, which
were so great, that he could find no other means to exp^ate them; Provided we
understand always the condition which Christianity requires. Be a man's bypast
sins greater or less, it is the claim of Christianity, that there is no
sin so small as to be cleansed without it, none so great as not to be cleansed
by it, all in consideration of Christ whom it preaches. If this be as soon
done as a man's mind can change, it is to be remembered, that the change of a
man's mind infers the change of all his life that remains; and, that the change
of his life must obtain the effect of those promises, the right whereof he is
invested with upon the change of his mind, all in the same precious
consideration of our Lord Christ and his obedience.

Lastly, I infer, that there is no reason to imagine, that the redemption of
mankind should require our Lord Christ to suffer the pains of the damned,
supposing, that we are delivered from damnation, by his sufferings; And
therefore, that this cannot be the intent of Christ's descent into hell, which
the Apostles Creed declares. I pretend not here to dispute what are the pains
of the damned, or what were the pains of the soul which our Lord Christ
indureed upon the Cross; Or, in order to it* How essentially requisite it is,
in the pains of the damned, that they should despair of Gods favor for ever,
and therefore, ever to come free of that estate. This I infer upon the
premises, that the redemption of mankind does not require, that Christ should
suffer the same kind of pains, which we must have suffered, had not ^e
interposed for us; But, that he tendered that obedience to God, in undergoing,
whatsoever, the execution of that commission, which God h^d imposed upon him,
required, which, coming from the Son of God, was valuable in worth, to move
God to dispense in that Original Law, which he had made the rule of our
actions, by right of our creation, upon pain of everlasting death, and to
allow everlasting life upon remission of sins, to all that should embrace
Christianity. For, seeing the sufferings of Christ were not intended mere for
punishment, (so that, he enduring that which we were liable to, we should no
longer remain chargeable with it) but to tender God a consideration, valuable
to satisfy him, not to execute the penalty of his Original Law upon us, but to
abate of it by tendering us new terms of reconcilement and peace with him; there
can be no reason why he should undergo the same kind and nature of punishment,
which we must have suffered had not ^e interposed. And therefore, whatsoever
the pains were which Christ endured in his soul, either upon the Cross, or
in order to his Cross, being abandoned by God to the will of Satan and his
ministers, even unto death; (which here I am not concerned to dispute) this I
must infer from the premises; That we are to seek for no other consideration
for which we are admitted to Grace, but that, which, the whole tenor of the
Scriptures, and the consent of Christ's Church holds forth to us: that is to
say, the precious blood of our Lord Christ shed upon the Cross for us.

Having thus excluded the two extreme opinions concerning the justification of
sinners by the Gospel of Christ, which, I hold to be equally destructive to
Christianity on contrary sides, the one acknowledging no condition to qualify
us for the promises of the Gospel, but the immediate imputation of the merits
and sufferings of Christ, sent to die for us; The other acknowledging no
consideration of Christ, in sending, or accepting the Covenant of Grace, and
the condition which it requires; I will now proceed to resolve the merit of
mean opinions concerning the same, from the premises. The first is the opinion
of many of the Reformation, that make the justification of sinners by the
Gospel to consist in remission of sins, tendered and embraced by that Faith,
which consists in a resolution of trusting and reposing confidence in God,
for the obtaining of his promises tendered us in Christ Jesus; But, supposing
always and premising Repentance, as a condition requisite to make this
confidence lively and Christian, not sensual, carnal, and presumtive; And
supposing always, and inferring upon it, the promise of Gods spirit,
sanctifying, and inabling to perform that new obedience, which qualifieth for
the world to come. That there is this opinion amongst the Reformed, and those
of them, that labor most to interpret the Reformation so, as not to contradict
the Faith of the Church; I may well say, without going further then my self,
who do acknowledge this to have been mine opinion for many years, and do
certainly know that it was maintained in my time, against the furious pretenses
of Zelots, in the University of Cambridge. And of this opinion I will say three
things. First, that it is not destructive to the true Faith of Gods Church. My
reason is, because of that Repentance which it supposes, and the consideration
of new obedience in obtaining everlasting life, which it infers. For,
Repentance, in this argument, cannot signify conversion from any particular
sin, but the change of the whole man, of his intentions, and by consequence
of his actions, to seek God, in stead of himself and this world: And therefore
contains in it, whatsoever the Gospel can require, to make any man, that is
surprised in the state of sin, capable of Gods grace by Christ; In as much as
this change cannot be wrought, without the tender of pardon for Christ's sake,
upon that which his Gospel requires. For, Repentance thus understood, as it
turns from all sin, so it imports a resolution, to all that goodness
which Christianity prescribes; Which is all, that he who is presently
surprised in sin can have, to come out of it; supposing this resolution not
to be supper^iciall, but rooted in him by frequent prayers, and tears, which
such works of humiliation as are only able, and absolutely requisite to make
effectual impression in man's mind, always apt, through variety of objects,
to entertain impressions tending to contrary resolutions. And therefore, this
Repentance being required to the truth of living and justifying Faith, as new
obedience to the attaining of the world to come; And, every thing required by
Gods Law, being of necessity that which qualifyeth for Gods promises, in his
account who tenders the Law; The condition which this opinion requires, to
qualify for the promises of the Gospel, is materially, and for the things it
contains, the same which I have showed that the Gospel requires: Though
formally, and in express terms it renounces all consideration, in the
justification of sinners, but that of Christ and his obedience embraced by
Faith, as I have said. This I may say, that, in the remembrances of those
things which I have said in public to the people, concerning this point,
during the time that I was of this opinion, I do not remember now that their
is any thing, that I could not presently say; my Judgment being thus far
changed.

For, secondly, I must say, that this opinion is not true. As may appear by
that which has been said, to show, what it is the Gospel requires on our
part* to qualify us for the promises which it tenders on Gods; and, by
consequence, what is that Faith which alone justifies. For, having showed the
true sense of the Scriptures, according to that which the Jews opinion that S.
Paul disputs against, (still extant and visible in their Constitutions) which
the consent of Christ's Church, which the consequences of the difference between
the literal and mystical sense of Moses Law, (pointed out in part by some
modern writers) has taught me; I do conclude, the sense of them which this
opinion infers, though it be not destructive to Christianity, yet, not
deducible from the principles of it, by good divinity. And truly, to require
repentance to the truth of that faith which only justifies, and not to make
it part of that quality, in consideration whereof, God, for Christ's sake,
allows remission of sins; is to say things utterly inconsequent: In as much
as I have said, that Gods consideration imports only this, that he decrees
remission of sins for repentance in the nature of a motive cause, not that he
is moved by repentance to decree it. Neither is it any way consequent for him
that admits new obedience to be in consideration, in bestowing everlasting
life, to stick at admitting repentance to be in consideration, in bestowing the
right of it. For, though the promises of the Gospel in this life are many, (
remission of sins, and reconcilement, regeneration, justification,
sanctification, adoption of sons, and, if there be any thing else of that
rank) yet, whatsoever difference a divine may justly argue between these from
the Scriptures, it were a gross inconvenience to say, that, the condition of
the Gospel being performed, they are not all due to him in whom it is found.
The term of sanctification it self, though it necessarily imports the
habitual dwelling of the Holy Ghost in him that is reconciled to God, because
we know the Gospel promises it; yet, it supposes not only that promise, but
also another, that God will accept it for holiness, in him, in whom original
concupiscence, notwithstanding, remains. And, if the term of regeneration
import that inhaerent disposition of mind, to which a man, by becoming a
Christian is borne a new; yet, that of adoption expresses the free will of God,
by which he accepts him that i^ changed to such a disposition, for his son.
So that, neither remission of sins, nor right to the kingdom, can be
understood to be assigned under the title of justification, in consideration of
Christ, without consideration of that condition which the Gospel of Christ
requires.

Lastly I say, that the said opinion is apt to give just occasion of a mistake
in justifying Faith, that may be destructive to the Christian Faith. My reason
is, because it is hard so to provide, (as heitherto sufficient provision could
never be made) as to distinguish from it the opinion of justification, by
beleeveing that Christ died for him that believes, as one of the Elect, for
whom alone Christ died; Which is no less destructive to the Faith, then the
Haeresy of the Antino^ians, that a man is justified in consideration of Christ,
before we believe it. And truly, the manifold controversies, and everlasting
wrangles, which, the misunderstanding of the nature of that faith which alone
justifyeth has raised, among those that depart from the Church of Rome; (Some
making it to consist in believing that a man is predestinate to life, others,
in trusting in God through Christ; Some making only the passive obedience of
Christ, others both active and pasive to be imputed to us; Some making
justification to consist only in remission of sins, others in that and in
the imputation of Christ's merits both) may justly move them to retire to the
simplicity of the Gospel, which they will never find in any terms but those
which I propose; That all the promises thereof are due, upon making good the
true profession of Christianity. If it be said, that those Homilies, which the
article of the Church of England referres us to, for the right understanding of
Justification and Justifying Faith, seem to express this opinion which I
esteem neither true, nor yet destructive to the Faith; I answer ingenuously
that they seem to me so to do: But that, so doing, the sense of it, is
utterly unreconcileable with those things which I have quoted out of the office
of baptism, and the beginning of the Catechism. Which being as much
subscribed by the Clergy as the Articles and Homilies are, and also containing
the whole Religion of the people, and the Clergies, therefore, as Christians,
(for the people, being not acquainted with the Articles but when they change
their Curate, had no means to take further notice of them) is by consequence
to be preferred in case of competition. Unreconcileable I say, as far as this
opinion is unreconcileable to that which I have proposed; the communion of the
Church no ways requiring that men should be reconciled in the interpretation
of the Scriptures, provided it draw no consequence destructive to the Faith, as
this does not, but that which in terms it complies with does. And therefore, I
have held it my duty, (that opinion having broken forth into a manifest Heresy
of the Antino^ians, and the detestation of that tending to let in a contrary
Heresy of the Socinians, as first it bred it) to declare to all, that are not
professed enemies to the Church of England, and the Catholic Church with it,
the first misunderstanding, from whence I conceive such dangerous errors
proceed; that, if God ever send order, out of that confusion in Religion which
now rules among us, I may have contested, that there can be no sure ground for
it, but the plain faith of the Catholic Church.

It is well enough known, that there is still another opinion concerning
Justification, to wit, that of the School Doctors, which the Council of Trent
seems to have made matter of Faith; Which makes the beginning of
Justification to consist in that faith* which believes the Gospel to be true.
Whereupon, as there necessarily follows servile fear of that punishment, to
which, it discovers all that refuse it to be liable; So it gives ground enough
of hope, to all that resolve not to refuse it: So that, the mind balancing
between the love of God, (which preferres the next world) and the love of our
selves and of this world, (which preferres this) if a man (concerning that
sorrow for his sins, which the love of God, not the fear of punishment
suggests, and, acting those works of Penance, which, if a Christian before,
the neglect of his calling and profession requires) resolve to prefer the
love of God in all his actions for the time to come; the faith and the hope,
which he had before without form, now being informed by the love of God above
all, and his servile fear turned into filial, he becomes just, because
formally endowed with this love, which makes all his indowments supernatural,
and proportionable to the reward of everlasting happiness which the Gospel
tenders; provided that he receive the Sacrament of Baptism, or effectually
desire it* if it were to be had; Of this opinion I say* First, that it
commits as great a fault as the former, in assigning the true conceit and
notion of justifying Faith. For, whereas there are indeed, as I have showed,
three significations of Faith in the writings of the Apostles, (wherein only
there is express question of the justification of Christians) the first and
last whereof depend upon the middle, as the cause and effect of it; And that
the Apostles intend the second sense properly, when they dispute against the
Jews, that a man is not justified by works, nor by the Law, but by Grace, and
by Faith (that is, by the Gospel, tendering the Covenant of Grace, and by that
Faith, whereby we undertake that Christianity wher^into we are baptized) they
who make the office o^ Faith in justifying no more then believing the Gospel
to be true, seem as void of the truth in that, as those who place it in
reposing trust and confidence in God, upon it. For, as the Gospel gives
sufficient ground of trust and confidence in God, from the first moment that
any man hears of it, (what state soever it is, and how sinful, in which it
overtakes him) if we speak of confidence that we may or shall obtain remission
of sins, upon condition of embracing and performing the condition which it
advances; So, if we speak of trust and confidence in God, as, indeed and
actually reconciled to God, seeing it supposes justification, it must needs
suppose that Faith which justifies; And so, justifying Faith cannot be said to
consist in it, but, by consequence of nature, to produce it. On the other side;
whereas all the works that a man can do, after he sincerely believes the truth
of the Gospel, but* before he has made profession of Christianity by being
baptized, cannot avail to the forgiveness of sin, much less, to entitle
him to everlasting life, according to the doctrine of the Apostles; It can by
no means be imagined, that, when they attribute justification to Faith, whether
alone, or, in opposition to works, or to the Law, they do attribute it to
that Faith whereby he remains not justified, not to that, which, he i^
necessarily justified as soon as he has. And this is the true end of that
endless dispute, between Faith and good works, when it is questioned, whether
true Faith can be without Good works, or not. For it is manifest, that
Heretics, Schismatics, and sinful Christians do as truly believe, either
the whole Gospel, (so far as the Common salvation of Christians requires)
or* at least, that part which their Heresy or Schism contesteth not, as a good
Christian really does. It is nolesse manifest, that, not only Heretics and
Schismatickes, but even badde and sinful Christians also, not only may, but
really have a true and real confidence in God, as to the world to come;
without which, those that believe the world to come could not live and die in
that course, which, indeed, renders them incapable of it. But, the Faith which,
whosoever is baptized plighteth to God, to profess the Faith which he has
taught to the death, and to live according to it, must needs either be
counterfeite, (and so, produce no effect but the damning of him that is
baptized with it) or produce the works of Faith, so long as it is and
continues sincere. And thus is the Tradition of the Church, concerning
justification by the good works of Christians reconciled* not only with the
doctrine of the Apostles, that a man is not justified by the works that go
before Christianity; But also with the Tradition of the Church, concerning the
ingredience of Baptism into the same work; And* with the doctrine of the
Fathers, manifestly distinguishing that true Faith which produces good works,
from that dead faith, which does not, not by the accession of Love, but by
marks intrinsecall to the nature of it; manifestly distinguishing those good
works which indeed do justify, from those, which, for the mind which they are
done with* do not justify, but* for their kind might, had they been done by
Christians; by the boundary between them, which is baptism. But so, that the
works themselves are but the material part, that is, the thing which the
Covenant of Grace requires; But, the reason and consideration in which they
are accepted by God to that effect, is not the influence of our free will,
though cured of concupiscence, (as cured it may be in this life) and acted by
Gods Spirit; but the Grace of God, moving him, in consideration of our Lord
Christ's sufferinges, first, to publish the Gospel, then to accept the
profession and life of Christians according to it, for a condition qualifying
them for that which he promises by it. Which is but the English of that which
is commonly said, that God accepts of our works as dipped in Christ's blood,
which he accepts not, if he accept them not to that effect which his Gospel
promises* having, (as he does, if the Gospel be true) all that he accepts
not to that purpose.

Having said this, in common, as it were, to both these opinions, in
particulare, to that which I propose last, or rather, to the rest of it, I say
three things. First, that it may be understood two ways; To wit that this
holds, Either by virtue of the original Law of God, or by virtue of that
dispensation in it, that abatement of the penalty of it, which the Gospel
imports. For, so long as it is only said, that God infuseth into him that
receives the Sacrament of Baptism out of a resolution of Loving God above all,
an habit of supernatuall righteousness; which is formally the remission of
sins, as extinguishing them by contrary dispositions; and that this is the
righteousness which he pleades to God, for the reward of the world to come; I
say, all this while it is not said, whether the nature and kind of the quality
thus produced oblige God to give him that happiness of the world to come, in
recompense of it; or, whether the promise of the Gospel, decreed and declared
out of his mere goodness, render that due by way of recompense, which,
otherwise, this disposition could no way claim. For, he that says, that the
natural worth of the qualities here supposed claims the reward, as due by
Gods justice, must needs say* that they justify by Gods original Law: But he
that says, by Gods promise, and, only by that justice which consists in
keeping promise, by the Covenant of Grace. Now then I say, if that, this
opinion proceed upon first ground, it is destructive to the Christian faith.
For, I have showed* that the Gospel contains a Covenant of Grace, not only in
regard of helps of Grace, to fulfill the condition which it requires, (which,
I have showed that God grants, in consideration of our Lord Christ and his
obedience) but also, because in the same consideration, he accepts of the
condition, both to extinguish the debt of sin, and to entitle us to
everlasting life, which otherwise it inables us not to claim; And both these
regards* I have showed, belong to the Christian Faith. Now, he that affirms
that the righteousness which God infuses into those that are baptized
challenges remission of sins and everlasting life, (or rather challenges
everlasting life, because it extinguisheth sin) by Gods original justice,
acknowledges indeed the Grace of God, in granting those helps, by which we
attain the said righteousness; (and that in consideration of our Lord Christ
and his obedience) But acknowledges not the Grace of God through Christ in
accepting of it to such purpose; and therein, as I suppose, denies the Covenant
of Grace which the Gospel contain^s.

Secondly, I say, that there is enough in the doctrine of the School, or in
the d^cree of the Council of Trent; to show, that they cannot intend the first
sense, but that they must acknowledge it to Gods free promise, which, being
accepted, becomes the Covenant of Grace. This follows upon several points of
their doctrine. First, as they make, at least the material of original sin
to consist in concupiscence, the remains whereof in the regen^rate ^re
therefore, even with them, of the same nature and kind, though rebated, and
acqui^ed of the nature and effect of sin, which is, to make liable to death.
For, this cannot hold, but, in regard of several Laws, whereof the one
forbids this concupiscence, the other allows reconciliation and grace
supposing it, as I said before; that Law that succeedes being the Covenant of
Grace. Secondly, as it requires the Sacrament of Baptism to the allowance of
this righteousness, in lieu of the reward which it challenges. For, the
Sacrament of baptism being a part of the Christian Law, which is the Covenant
of Grace* and so, a Secondary and positive provision for the salvation of
mankind, lost by Gods original Law; it were a contradiction to say* that, any
thing claimed by vi^tue thereof should be due by Gods original Law. Thirdly
and lastly, in regard of that sound sense in which they clearly and freely
maintain the satisfaction of Christ; which, by the promises, is nothing else,
but the consideration, for which God accepts the acts and the qu^liti^^ which
the Gospel requires, in due plea for that which it premis^s. For* imputation
being nothing else, in common reason, but the immediate consequenc^ of
satisfaction* the righteousness which God imputes to Abraham's spiritual seed,
as to his person, according to S. Paul, Ro^. IV. 16, 24 cannot depend upon the
mere worth of the condition required, but upon the free grace of God, accepting
it for that it is not worth, in consideration of the obedience of Christ.

Lastly I say, there is appearance of reason, to move men that are jealous of
the glory of Gods grace, to think that they cla^me the promises of the Gospel,
as due by Gods original Law, to that infused righteousness, by having
whereof, they say we are righteous before God. First, in that they depart from
the language of the Scripture, and the true meaning thereof, in making
justification to consist in the infusion of righteousness; which, though it
presupposes, by the premises, formally it signifies not. For, having showed,
that the condition which the Gospel requires, is allowed of grace, in
consideration of Christ, to qualify us for the promises of it; it remains
beyond question, that the righteousness which the Gospel require^ is of it
self r^all true righteousness; because it is God that allows it and accepts
it to that effect, to which he accepts not the righteousness of an hypocrite.
Allwaye^ understanding it to be the righteousness of one that turns from
sin* with a sincere and effectual resolut^on to serve God in all things for
the future; Whose righteousness may well be called infused righteousness, in
regard of the helps of Gods grace whereby it is effected* though we suppose no
other ki^d of quality, (beside that disposition which brings a man to Baptism)
to succeed upon it, but only the habitual assistance of the Holy Ghost,
promised, ^o enable all them that sincerely undertake Christianity, to preforme
what they undertake. Thus then, making justification to consist, not in Gods
allowance, but in his act of infusing righteousness, they create appearance ^o
reason, that the righteousness so infused, is, in their opinion, that
righteousness before God, to which the promises of the Gospel are due by his
original Law. For, if there were not other points of their doctrine to create
another interpretation of it, there could be no other sense for it, then this.
Secondly, in that they make this righteousness to consist, not in any
acceptance and allowance of God, but in his grace really infused into that
soul, which, out of an act of the love of God raised by the helps of his
grace* supposing faith and hope, joined with servile fear before, had resolved
upon Baptism. For what allowance can this love be imagined to need, as of
grace, to make the promises of the Gospel by Gods original Law due to it, if
it be admitted for righteousness before God? Here I must do them right. I
must not say that it is the Council of Trent, or that it is any act of the
Church obligatory to all the Communion that ownes it, that obliges them to
attribute the effect of justifying to Gods infused Grace, by virtue of the
nature of it, and not by virtue of his Grace in accepting it to that purpose.
For it is notorious, and you may find the names of the Doctors in Vasquez. in
1. 2. Disput. CCIV. Number. 1. 2. 3. that hold this grace not to render men
graceful to God for it self, but by his free accepting it to that effect; The
Nominals in particular, besides Durandus and Alliacensis by name. In the mean
time, no man can deny, that it is lawful to ^old that we are just^fied by the
worth and natural perfection of Gods infused Grace; Which though he freely
gives, yet can he not refuse justification having given it: And therefore,
they who place their Religion in making their distance from Heretics, (as our
Puritaines from Antichrist) as wide as they can possible, have taught and still
do teach, that the supernatural infused righteousness of Christans, (which,
as I said, they make to consist principally in the love of God above all
things) of it own worth and intrinsecall perfection* and not by Gods
accepting of it to that effect, not only formally remitteth sin, as formally
it expels the same, but so justifies, that God were unjust should he not
justify Christians in consideration of it? And, what could have been said more
express, that it is due by Gods original law, not by any dispensation in it
which the promise of the Gospel imports? That the grace of God in Christ i^
not seen, in rewarding that disposition which the Gospel requires, but in
giving those helps whereby we attain unto it? A thing never a whit more
contradictory to that which has been proved here, then to other points of
their own Profession alleged even now.

Before I leave this point, for the clearing of that which I said; that the
Council of Tr^^t seems to have inacted the doctrine of the Schol^ for matter
of Faith, not, that indeed it has so done; I will observe, that it has not
decreede, that we are justified by Grace habitually dwelling in the Soul; But
only, that, through the merit of Christ's passion, the love of God is diffused
in the hearts of those that are justified, and is inherent in them, so that, in
their justification, with remission of sins, they receive Faith Hope and
Charity, as infused into them. S^ss. VI. Cap VII. For here, it is expressly
claimed by Doctors of that Church, not* that the Grace whereby we are justified
is a quality habitually informing the soul of man, as supernaturally infused
by God into it: But only, that Faith Hope and Charity are infused into them
that are justified, and inherent in them, as shed into their hearts by the
Holy Ghost; Which* they say, may all be understood, supposing that a man is
justified by the acts of Faith Hope and Love, infused or shed into the heart
by the Holy Ghost* as well as by habites supernaturally created to reside in
the soul. For, you may see by Morinus in his Late work de Administration^
P^nitenti^ VIII. 2. 3. 7. that for MCC years after Christ, a good while after
the School Doctors were come in, there was no question at all made, whether we
are justified by an infused habit of grace or not; and that it was about the
year MCCL that this opinion entirely prevailed in the Schools. Whereby it
appears, that, as this opinion contains nothing destructive to the faith* if
it be understood in that sense which the Church of Rome allows; that it is not
the natural worth of it which justifies, but Gods accepting of it to that
effect; So if it did, yet could not the Church of Rome be said to teach any
thing destructive to the faith* But only to allow since ^uch things to be
taught. For, the Council of Vienna under Clement V. determines it not as matter
of faith, but as the more probable opinion, as you may see Clement. de summa
Trin. and Fide Cathol. Tit. I. Cap. VII. And therefore Albertus P^ghius de
libero Arbitrio lib. V, notwithstanding this decree, sticks not to count this
doctrine forged without any authority of Scripture; And those that speak of it
with more respect then he, think not themselves tied to that, which the
Council hold^ the more probable. It is indeed manifest, by the experience of
all Christians, that the custom and practice, even of supernatural actions,
to which the inclination of corrupt nature is utterly averse, breeds in a man
an habituated disposition of doing those things, with ^ase and pleasure, which,
at the beginning of his Christianity, he could not do without offering
himself much violence. But, that habit which custom and practice leaves
behind it, though supernatural for the cause or effect of it; because the acts
upon* which it accrues, as also those which it produces, cannot accrue from
mere nature, without the help of Christ's grace; is notwithstanding, for that
wherein it consists, a disposition really qualifying the nature and substance
of the soul, and inclining it to act otherwise then without it. Besides, the
Gospel promising the Holy Ghost for a Gift to abide with and dwell in those
that are baptized, nothing hinders the Gift thereof to be held and termed an
habitual grace. In these regards, I find it neither prejudicial nor
inconsequent to the Christian faith, to acknowledge habitual grace, though
neither scripture nor tradition of the Church own any habit of grace, created
by God, and infused into the soul in a moment, as the School imagines.

But they seem to have committed another mistake, in that, the Church having
decreed against Pelagius, that the Grace of Christ is necessary to all truly
good actions, and therefore, that man cannot merit the first grace; this
infused habit of grace they have made to be that First grace which God gives,
before man will endeavor any thing toward it. For so the Master of the
Sentences determines, that grace which preventeth man's indevors to be faith
with Love libro II. distinct. XXVI. D. which, though it be capable of a very
good sense; That the motion to believe the truth of Christianity out of the
love of God is that which Gods grace prevents all man's compliance with; yet, in
what sense they swallowed it, will appear by the difficulties and dispu^es
they were entangled with, about that sorrow, which the heart conceives for
sin out of meer^ love to God* not fear of punishment, which the love of our
selves breeds. For, this sorrow being necessarily a disposition preparing him
for justification that comes to God; in regard the first grace which God
preventeth all man^ endeavors with is to them this infused habit of Faith and
love which formally justifies; how he should come prepared for justification
by that contrition, which without Gods grace man cannot have, who is justified
by that infused habit of grace, which he was first prevented by God with; has
been among them the subject of endless jangles. Whereas, it is manifest, the
maintenance of the Faith against Pelagius requires no more, then* that the
resolution of persevering in Christianity to the and be thought necessarily to
depend upon the motion to embrace it, which God first preventeth man with,
without respect to any act of man obliging God to grant it. And therefore it is
manifest, that the Church decreed no more against Pelagius, but, that the first
motion to become a good Christian, that every man is prevented with, must be
ascribed to Gods free grace through Christ, not engaged by any act of man's
goeing before. Now, requiring only the actual assistance of Gods preventing
grace, it is easy enough to say; not how attrition, that is, sorrow for sin
in regard of punishment, accompanied with slavish fear, is changed into
contrition, that is sorrow for sin out of the love of God whom it offends;
(For, it is not possible, that he who loves God should be sorry for sin for
the same reason, which he was sorry for while he loved the world) But, how the
man that was attrite becomes contrite. For, when first the Gospel reveals
unto a man his desperate estate in and by the first Adam, it is not possible
that he should remain u^touched, either with sorrow for the present, or
apprehension for the future. And yet no less unpossible is it, according to
Gods ordinary way of working, even by his Grace, that he should, in an instant,
resolve to embrace the only way to give him peace in that exigence. But while
he neither casts off the motion of grace, nor resigne^ his interest in himself
and the world to it, but considers, upon what reason it behooves him to resolve;
this consideration, by the work of Gods Spirit dis^overing to him, how much
God and the next world is to be preferred before himself and this; as the love
of God and the world to come prevails in him above the love of himself and
this, accordingly of necessity, must the grief of having offended God before,
prevail in him above all that he can conceive for the misery he has incurred.
And all this, by virtue of those helps which God grants, though always in
consideration of our Lord Christ; yet, not by virtue of that Covenant, which is
not contracted till ^ man be baptized, but, of his own free goodness,
dispensing the effects of Christ's coming, according to the reason of his secret
wisdom, which the Covenant of grace discovers not. I need say no more to
show, how a man that come^ into the world with concupiscence becomes, either
habituated to the love of God above all things, or endowed with the habitual
assistance of Gods Spirit, by that promise which the Gospel imports. Thus
much is to be seen^, by that which has been said; That, in the justification
of a sinner by Christianity, (which, I have showed to be the condition of it)
there is a twofold change either implied or signified: For, that a man should
become reconciled to God, continues in the same affection to himself and the
world as before he heard of Christ, is a thing which the so^ere^t of them that
dispute justification by faith alone abhor. And, that a man, by the Gospel,
should be entitled to no more, then, that disposition which be is changed to,
obliges God to give, is no less horrible to them that dispute justification
by the works of faith. And therefore, besides that change in the nature and
disposition of him that becomes esta^ed in the promises of the Gospel, which
justification involveth, there is another change in Gods esteem, which is
moral, by virtue of his free promise, which the change which his nature has
received signifies not* because Gods will only inf^rs it. The former of these
the School insist upon, and they seem to follow S. Austin^ in it; who, though
he have nothing to do with any conceit of habitual grace, yet, most an end,
attributes the effect of justifying; even before God, to those inherent acts
of righteousness, whereby, the grace of God translateth his enemies into that
state of his grace. The later, though it be that, which, both the Scriptures,
and the most ancient records of the Church do express; yet, so long as the
effect of justifying is attributed to the disposition which is inherent in the
soul, not for the worth of it, but by Gods Grace, it can contain nothing,
either formally destructive, or, by consequence prejudicial to the Faith. That
the one is fundamentally employed, the other formally signified in the
justification of a Christian, belongs rather to the skill of a divine, in
understanding the Scriptures, then to the virtue of a Christian in holding the
faith.

What the Church thinks, of the works of those, who* believing, do not yet
declare themselves Christians, by procuring Baptism; as it is a consideration
fit for this place, so is it manifest, by the doubt which they make of the
salvation of those, that dye in that estate. For, though the life that they
live, supposing the preventing Grace of the holy Ghost, to bring them to that
estate, must needs be ascribed to the same, yet is it not as yet under the
promise of reward, because they are not yet under the Covenant of Grace, but
only disposed to it. And, how good soever their life may be, yet, so long as
it proceeds not to an effectual resolution of undertaking Christ's Cross, it
is bu^ actual, and depends d^ facto, upon the assistance of Gods Spirit,
which d^ jur^ they can challenge no title in, being not yet estated in Gods
promises, but only prevented by those helps, which, they can claim no
difference of right in, from those that are not prevented with the same. But he
that undertakes Christ's Cross by coming to Baptism with a good conscience,
obtains remission of sins, adoption to be Gods Son, and right and title
to everlasting life; Which adoption, and which title, as they are moral rights
and qualities; so are they mere appendences of that justification which God
allows the Faith of those that are baptized sincerely, without consideration
of works, according to the doctrine of the Fathers. Supposing, it is true, as
much change as between a Christian and no Christian, in him that obtaines them,
(in which regard, it is no marvel, if remission of sins or justification be
ascribed to the said change many times, in their writings; For, how such
sayings are to be understood, imports only the signification of words, not the
salvation of a Christian) but not importing Gods consideration of their
qualities, the consideration of whose, works is excluded. S. Augustine, it is
true, considering this change in him that is justified (which is indeed the
ground upon which God accepts of his Faith to that purpose) and using the
word justifying to signify the same, has occasioned the School to agree in
that form of doctrine which the Council of Trent canonizeth. But though he
frequent the term more then others in that sense, yet can he no ways be
thought to depart from the meaning of the rest, who do sometimes describe
justification by the ground which it supposes, sometimes by the quality in
Gods account, which it signifies. Acknowledging all of them, the gift of the
holy Ghost to be obtained by this faith which justifyeth; of Gods free Grace
indeed, which only moved him to set the Gospel on foot, but as due by the
promise which it contains, to abide and to dwell with him that voides not the
condition upon which it is granted. This grace of the holy Ghost, habitually
dwelling in them that have undertaken Christ's Cross, to enable them to go
through with the work of it, as it cannot be unfruitful in good works; so are
those works, henceforth, under the promise of reward, which no works done
before Baptism can challenge.

I must not leave this point till I have said a word or two of Socinus his
opinion, as to this point of justifying faith. For, as concerning the two
points premised, I conceive I have showed you, that it is no less destructive
to Faith, in teaching that a man is able of himself to embrace and to fulfill
all that the Gospel requires at his hands, without any help of Gods grace
granted in respect of our Lord Christ's obedience; Then, that God accepts what
a man is so able to perform, not out of any, consideration thereof, but of his
own free goodness, which, moving him to settle such a decree, moved him to
send our Lord Christ to publish and assure it. As for the rest of his opinion,
having maintained, that the efficacy of all acts, whether of Gods grace or of
man's will, toward the obtaining of the promises of the Gospel, necessarily
depends upon the receiving of Baptism, where the outward fulfilling of the
promises of a positive precept (which the only will of him that is converted
to Christianity fulfilleth not) is not unavoidablely prevented by casualties
which his will cannot overcome; I suppose I have by that means showed, that
his opinion is destructive to Christianity, because destructive to the precept
of receiving Baptism, without which no man is a Christian. And truly this
imputation reflects upon the other extreme opinion, concerning the
justification of a Christian, which, ascribing it to believing that a man is
predestinate, excludes it from being necessary, either as a means to
salvation, or as a thing commanded; both which considerations concur in the
necessity of it, supposing the premises. For, the necessity of that which is
necessary as the means, and the necessity of that which is necessary as a
thing commanded him that will obtain salvation, differ only in this; That the
necessity of the means of salvation is undispensable in regard of whosoever
will be saved: But the necessity of a thing commanded takes not hold, till a
man becomes liable to the precept whereby it is commanded. The want of Baptism
then not being peremptory to the salvation of them that are prevented of it by
unavoidable casualties, but of all others; Choose whether you will call it
necessary as the means, not supposing that exception, or necessary as a thing
commanded, supposing it. But that opinion which justifies without it, because
before it, and makes it signify nothing to the not predestinate, to them that
are, only to signify that which is done without it, is necessarily destructive
to the Covenant of Grace: Whereas supposing repentance, to justifying faith,
the necessity of the Baptism of repentance may be maintained; Nay, repentance
implying a conversion to all that Christianity requires, and Christianity
requiring Baptism, in reason, implied it is in that repentance which that
opinion presupposes to justifying faith. But, that Volkelius Instit. IV. 3.
makes justifying Faith to consist in believing all that Christ taught, and
trusting in him, out of a resolution to keep his commandments; I take to be the
meaning of S. Paul when he says, that a man is justified by Faith alone;
Provided that a man be baptized with that disposition which he calls justifying
faith, believing that, being enabled by the holy Ghost, in consideration of
Christ's merits accompanying his Baptism, to perform what he undertakes, he
shall attain the life to come in consideration of the same.

CHAP. XXXI. The state of the question concerning the perseverance of those
that are once justified. Of three senses, one true, one inconsistent with the
Faith, the third neither true nor yet destructive to the Faith. Evidence from
the writings of the Apostles. From the Old Testament. The grace of Prophecy
when it presupposes sanctifying grace. Answer to some Texts, and of S. Paul's
meaning in the VII. of the Romans. Of the Polygamy of the Fathers. What
assurance of Grace Christians may have. The Tradition of the Church.
THat which has been said properly concerns only them that first hear of the
Gospel at man's age, and are justified by being baptized into the profession of
it; But the reason of it is the Rule of that which is to be said of all. To
extend it so as to answer all questions concerning all men's cases; There
remains yet another question, whether those are once justified can fall from
the state of grace, so as, finally, to be damned; Which, he that will speak
truth, must allow to have been burdened with unchristian prejudices, without
any cause. For, who knows not, that commonly, it has been given to
understand, that, whosoever allows this, grants; Gods everlasting grace and
purpose toward him whom he accepts in Christ, as righteous, to fail, and
become void? Which, I grant to be truly consequent to the opinion of those,
that hold justifying faith to consist in believing that a man is predestinate
to life. For, if that were so, then, he that should fail of his justification,
must, by consequence, fail of his predestination; That is to say, the decree
of God, by which he purposed finally to save him that is justified by believing
that he is predestinate, must fail, and become void, when soever he cease
to be justified. But, what is that to him that believes, and has proved, that
God absolutely decrees, whom he will give and whom he will refuse the helps
of effectual grace, whereby they attain that disposition which qualifies them
righteous before God? That the helps of Grace whereby they are effectually
enabled or not enabled to continue or not to continue in the same disposition,
are granted in consideration of the right use of those helps which went before?
That the decree of reward or punishment passes in consideration of persevering
or not persevering to the end in the same? Is there any ignorance in the world
so slanderous, as to pretend any change in the purpose of God, when his
sentence changes upon the change of the condition, upon which he grants
remission of sins and right to everlasting life? If any man do, let him first
call him self to account whether he will undertake to maintain that position,
whereupon it follows; to wit, that to believe a man's self prdestinate to
life, is that faith which alone justifies. And undertaking it, let him take
this defiance from me, that his opinion is destructive to the foundation and
ground of Christianity. But as I said before, that there is so great difference
between those that hold justification by believing a man's self to be
predestinate to life, and, by trusting in God for the obtaining of his promises
in our Lord Christ, that the one opinion is destructive to Christianity, but
the other not; at least, in those that require and presuppose true repentance
to go before that trust in God, wherein justifying faith, in their opinions
consists; So must I consequently say, concerning this point, that it may be
held, and I have some reason to think that it is held by diverse, upon such
terms as seem not to render it destructive. For when I see, that they require
repentance to go before justifying faith, as a condition requisite to that
trust in God, wherein justifying faith consists; I must needs infer, as I
see some Authors of that opinion to grant, that, when the children of God fall
into such sins, as Tertulliane, says lay waste the conscience, neither
remission of those sins, which justification includes, nor that trust in
God, wherein that faith which only justifyeth consists, can be understood to
have place before repentance, if they speak things consequent in reason to
the^r own positions. How then shall they pretend, that the sentence of
justification once granted, or rather, the promise obtained by virtue of that
contract which the Gospel tendreth, as I have showed, can remain firm, the
condition failing which it necessarily presupposes? Surely, I suppose, in that
manner as it is ordinarily said, in many disputes, (and that very truly, how
much soever to the purpose) that a thing is in some respect false, which is
absolutely true, or contrariwise* absolutely false, which, notwithstanding, in
some respect, holds true. So seem they that are possessed with this prejudice
to imagine, that, when God admits any man into the state of Grace by virtue of
that contract which the Gospel tendereth, (that is as I say, by being baptized
upon a sincere profession of Christianity) if this be done with an intent of
granting the grace of perseverance, then is that person said absolutely to be
justified; who, when he falls into such sins as I have named, becomes in some
respect not justified, to wit for the present, and in respect of those sins
of which he is not yet reconciled by repentance. And consequently, the act of
justifying faith is suspended and interrupted, as in him that cannot have
confidence in God, as reconciled to God in regard of these sins; the seed of
it notwithstanding remaining, by virtue of that act of Faith, whereby, being
reconciled as these are that are for ever reconciled to him, he remains
certain of helps of grace, that shall be effectual to work in him true
repentance, and of reconcilement upon supposition of it. Whereupon it must be
said the contrary, that, those whom God receives into grace without any
purpose of granting them the grace of perseverance, cannot be said to be
justified, without some term of abatement, signifying the justification
granted them to be, as to the sense of the Church, or, to an opinion unduely
conceived by themselves, but not as to God. So that their faith also must be
understood to be a confidence unduely grounded, the failing whereof is not the
disanulling of that which once was good, but the discovering of that, which
once seemed good and was not.

This opinion, so limited as I have said, I should not think destructive to
Christianity, for the reason delivered before, concerning that opinion of
justiing faith, upon which it follows. But, as I then concluded, that though
not destructive to the Faith, yet, that opinion from whence it follows is not
true according to the true sense of the Scriptures, wherein the skill of a
Divine consists; So must I here conclude, that this opinion of perseverance,
which proceeds upon that supposition of justifying faith, which, though not
destructive to the Faith, yet is not true, is also not true, though not
destructive to the Faith: The other, which proceeds upon that supposition of
justifying faith and predestination, which is destructive to the faith,
remaining both untrue and destructive to the faith. I grant that, though the
gift of the holy Ghost, (which is, as I have said, the habitual assistance of
it) being granted in consideration of a man's undertaking Christianity, becomes
void upon not performing that which a man undertakes; yet God, of his free
goodness, not as obliged by any promise of the Gospel, may continue the
assistance thereof, but upon the same terms as he first grants the help of it,
to bring men out of the state of sin into the state of grace. I grant, that
the resolution of believing the faith of Christ, and of living according to the
same in the profession of Christianity, having been once made, upon reasons
convincing a man that he is bound so to do, cannot be changed at his pleasure,
in an instant, though it fall out, that he be overtaken with some sin that
lays wast the conscience. But, the promises of the Gospel being made in
consideration of undertaking the profession of Christianity, (and therefore
incompetible to those that live not according to it) I say, that they all
become void to him that falls into such a sin. For, the Covenant of Grace
passing upon supposition of original concupiscence remaining in the
regenerate, and insnaring them all with the occasions of sin; It cannot be
imagined that all sin makes it void. But on the other side, some sins being
of so gross a nature, that a man cannot be surprised by them, (but that the
being so conquered must imply a resolution to prefer this world before the
world to come) must needs forfeit those promises, which depend upon the
Covenant of Grace, a rebellion against which they contain and declare. So
that, unless the free grace of God, by the operation of his Spirit, bring a
man back to repentance, the whole resolution of being a Christian shall in time
be blotted out, though the profession, because it imports the benefit of this
world in Christian states, remain counterfeit. This is then the reason of my
resolution, necessarily following upon the premises, that the sincere
profession of Christianity is the condition of the Covenant of Grace; seeing it
is not imaginable, that any man should hold any privilege at Gods hands, by
professing that which he performs not: The profession, as it serves to
aggravate the sin which it committed under it; (as done in despite of all the
grace of God, and the conviction which it tendereth, to reduce us to
Christianity, and the profession made in submission to the same condemning a
man by his own sentence) So, containing the condition upon which all the
promises become due, upon the violation whereof, on the contrary, they must of
necessity become void.

And this is the reason that leaves no place for any composition of this
difference, by saying, that a man remains absolutely justified, when the
particular sin which is not yet repented of is not pardoned. For, seeing the
wages of it is death, so far as the Covenant of Grace dispenses not; and,
seeing the Covenant of Grace cannot protect him that transgresses the terms
of it; of necessity, he falls into the same estate which he was under setting
the Covenant of Grace aside, as if to him our Lord Christ had neither been
borne, nor crucified, nor risen again. Those that suffer the truth of this
condition to be obscured, by defective interpretations of that faith which
alone justifies, and the scripturs concerning the same; it is no mervaile if
they can imagine a reconciliation between the state of sin and the state of
grace, in the same man at the same time; which makes the positive will of God,
declared by the Gospel, to dispense with the necessary and natural hate he
bears to all sinners, for their sin. But, when it is once discoverd, that,
by the terms of the Gospel, God, who declares himself ready to be reconciled
to all sinners, is declared unreconcileable to any, so long as he continues in
sin; then must it necessarily appear, that, the positive will of God
declared by the Gospel concurring with the natural detestation of sin which
is essential to the purity of his nature, whosoever is under the guilt of
sin remains liable to his wrath. And, proceeding upon this ground, as I do,
I shall not think my self obliged to take notice of those things, which have
lately been disputed, in great volumes, upon this point, to and again. For,
presuming that the parties have not the ground upon which I proceed, in debate;
As, of necessity, he who seems to come short of proving his intent without it,
may with it be able to make the conviction effectual which he tenders; So, he
that seems to have made the worse cause seem the better, without considering
it, must provide new evidence, to make the condition of the Covenant of Grace
seem otherwise then I have showed it to be, before he can think to have done
his work. Notwithstanding, because there are many texts of Scripture, which
evidently fortify the sum of Christianity settled upon the terms of the
Covenant of Grace, by demonstrating the failleure of the promise upon failleure
of the condition to which the Gospel makes it due; I take it to be part of my
business to point at the chief of them; without being much troubled to bring
all that might be alleged; Because I may make this general inference from the
premises* that all precepts, all exhortations, all promises, all threats made
to induce man to perseverance in that estate, to which the promises of the
Gospel are any way signified to be due, are necessary arguments to show, that
those to whom they are made may fail of the perseverance to which they
induce. And this, by virtue of the general reason premised, that they are all
evidences of that free will of men, which the grace of God destroys not but
cures. And therefore, as* when they are used to induce men to embrace
Christianity, they contain an evidence that he may do otherwise; So also,
when they are used to induce man to persevere in that profession which he has
once undertaken, they must necessarily, by the same reason, contain an
evidence, that it is possible for any man not to persevere, who is induced by
them to persevere in the course of a Christian. For if it be said, that,
without the grace of God they cannot, with it, they cannot but be effectual;
Either it is supposed, the grace of God here named shall become effectual to
induce them to persevere to the end, supposing that God foresees that they
shall so^persevere, or something else including the foresight of the
perseverance it self, or not; If so, it is no mervaile, that the said
exhortations cannot but prove effectual, because God foresees they shall be
effectual, and, that which shall not be, can never be foreseen: But if, not
supposing this, any man undertake to say, that, the exhortation of the Gospel
with the help of Gods inward grace must necessarily prove effectual; he will
necessarily fall into all the inconvenience which I have charged them with, who
maintain, that the will of man is immediately determined by the will and
operation of God, to do whatsoever it does; Which is no less then the
destruction, as well of all civility as of Christianity.

But let us see what the Apostle writes, Heb. VI. 4-7. For, it is not possible
to renew unto repentance, those, that being once enlightened, and having tasted
the heavenly gift, and been partakers of the Holy Ghost, and relished the good
word of God, and the powrs of the world to come, fall a way, and crucify to
themselves and traduce the Son of God. For, the earth that drinks the rain
that often comes upon it, and bears herbs fit for them by whom it is tilled,
receives a blessing from God; But that which bears thorns and thistles is
reprobate, and near a curse, the end whereof is, to be burned. Could more have
been said to express the state of grace? For, if any man can undertake to have
the Spirit of God, without premising Christianity, I say confidently there is
no cause why any man should be a Christian. Therefore (...), here, as Ebr. X.
32. signifies neither more nor less then Christened ((...) with the ancient
Church signifies Baptism) because of the darkness of Hethenisme, or Judaisme
which it dispelleth. What is then the heavenly Gift which Christian taste? be it
remission of sins, or be it the Gift of the Holy Ghost that follows,
(expressing the same thing in several parallel terms) my business is done,
if the Gift of the Holy Ghost be not granted but upon that condition, which
makes all other promises of the Gospel due. Wherefore, I am content that,
relishing the good word of God, shall signify no more then that conditon, to
wit; That sense of Christianity which resolves a man to undertake it: But to
relish the powers of the world to come no man can be understood, but he that,
upon supposition of the said condition, becomes sensible of that peace and joy
of the Holy Ghost, which, under Christianity, only Christianity can give. And
therefore, though I dispute not here, how he means that it is impossible to
renew those that fall from Christianity to repentance* yet I challenge that
impossibility of renewing to contain both a former right in, and a possession
of that estate, to which they are renewed by repentance, and also the present
loss of it, by falling from the condition which g^ves it. So that, the
comparison which follows, of fruitful and barren land upon tillage, as it
expresses a promise of following helps of grace, to them that use those which
went a fore aright, contained in the promise of giving the Holy Ghost, to
enable them who sincerely profess Christianity to perform that which they
undertake; So it convinces the fruitless to be liable to the curse of fire,
which it is said to be near, because it is called reprobate.

The same is the effect of the like exhortation Ebrews X. 26*-29. For, if we
sin voluntarily after receiving the acknowledgement of the truth, there
remains no more any sacrifice for sin, but a certain terrible expectation
of vengeance, and glowing of fir^ that is to consume opposers. If one set at
naught the Law of Moses, without mercy he dies upon two or three witnesses. Of
how much worse punishment, think you, shall he be thought worthy, that treads
the Son of God under foot, and esteems the blood of the Covenant by which he
is sanctified un^leane, and does despite to the Spirit of Grace? I say, this is
to the same effect, if it be once granted, that this sin may be committed by
a true Christian, which no man can deny. For, can a Christian be thought to do
that despite to the Spirit of Grace, which the Scribes and Pharisees are said in
the Gospel Matt, XII. 28. 32. Mark III. 29. Luke XII. 10. to do, in sinning
that sin against the Holy Ghost, which, our Lord there pronounces
irremissible? Is it not manifest, that their sin consisted in attributing the
miracles by which our Lord sought to convert them, to the unclean spirit,
being in Judgment convinced, that by the Holy Ghost alone they were done? And
is it not as manifest, that a Christian, having received the Spirit of Grace,
promised to those that are baptized out of a sincere resolution of
Christianity, abuses the spirit which is so given him, and which he has, and
which had already wrought that work of conviction, which the scribes and
Pharisees sufferd not to take effect in their hearts? Especially, when the
Apostle expressly premiseth the washing of them, called here sanctifying by
the blood of the Covenant, which is the cleansing of that vessel by remission
of sins, into which the new wine of the Holy Ghost is to be put. Wherefore, I
will not say that the faith of these men is true faith, if you mean that only
to be true faith which lasts to the end, which is many times, in common
language, that which truth signifies: But, if you mean that to be true faith
which effects remission of sins, and qualifieth for the world to come; he
must set the scripture upon the rack, that will make it confess any other
sense.

Now, consider what the Apostle writes of those Christians, who, he says, are
seduced by the Heretics which he speaks of, 2 Pet. II. 18*22. For, speaking
bombast words of vanity, they catch with the bait of fleshly concupiscences,
in uncleanness, those that had really escaped them that converse in error;
Promising them freedom, themselves being slaves to corruption; seeing a man is
slave to that by which he is conquered. For if, having escaped the pollutions
of the world, through the knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, and
being entangled in them again, they be conquered; the last error is become
worse to them then the first. For, it had been better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness, than having known (or acknowledged) it, to
turn from the holy precept once delivered to them. But it is fallen out to
them according to the old Proverb; The dog that returns to his own vomit;
And the sow that is washed to wallow in the mire. Is it possible that all this
should be thought to import no more then profession, as to men, without any
effect as to God, but only to the Church? For, if we suppose them all to have
counterfeited Christianity, not really resolving to live as Christians, how
comes he to say that they had really escaped those that live in error, whose
ways they had not really left? And, if they had escaped the pollutions of the
world by the knowledge of Christianity, had they done no more then a man by
mere nature may do? Then may a man by mere nature be disintangled of the
pollutions of this world. But if they had conquered sin by those helps of
grace which brought them to be Christians, (for otherwise, how should they be
conquered by the baits of sin, which those Heretics deceive them with?)
then had they obtained those promises which the Gospel rewards that conquest
with. In fine; Can a dog return to the vomit, or a sow to the mi^e which
they never left? or can the later end be worse then the beginning, to them who
never were clear of that damnation, in which they were overtaken by the
preaching of Christianity? To that of S. John, speaking of the Antichrists of
the time, them and their followers, John II. 19. They went ^ut from among us,
but they were not of us; For, had they been of us, they would have continued
among us; I will use no other answer then that which S. Austine has given us,
de corrept. and gratia cap. IX. that those who are qualified by attributes
signifying predestination, cannot fall away; as long as they are described by
present righteousness they may. For says he, had they persevered, they had
persevered in Grace, not in unrighteousness, neither was their righteousness
counterfeite, but not durable: Therefore they were not in the number of sons,
when they were in the Faith of sons, because those are truly sons, that are
foreknowne and predestinate, and called according to purpose, that they may be
like the son. For, S. John and S. Paul, being assured of their own
adoption, according to purpose, it is no marvel if they presume the like of
those whom they comprise in the same quality with themselves, in regard of
their present righteousness, the profession whereof was visible. I must not
here omit the Epistle to the Seven Churches Apoc II. III. and the exhortations,
promises, and threatninges tendered the Angels of them, whether in behalf of
themselves, it matters not much to this purpose, or, which is certain, in
behalf of the Churches. In particular to that of Ephesus II. 45. But I have
this against thee, that thou have left thy first love. Remember therefore
whence thou art ^allen, and repent, and do thy first works; Otherwise I will
come to thee suddenly, and remove thy can^lesticke out of the place thereof, if
thou repent not. How should any man be exhorted by the Spirit of God, to
return to those works that were not the works of a true Christian? How
should the Judgment threatened take effect, and no soul perish, that had been
saved otherwise. To that of Thyatira II. 25. 26* 28. But hold what you have
until I come. He that conquereth, and keeps my works to the end, I will
give him power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with an iron rod, as
a potters vessels are broken, as I also have received of my Father: And I will
give him the morning star. What means this exhortation to them that are not
capable of doing otherwise? What means the power of Christ, and the morning
star, if not the reward of the world to come? To that of Pergamus III. 11,
Behold I come suddenly: Hold what thou have, lest another take thy crown. Is
it not plain that he shall be saved if he hold what he has? That he shall
not, if another take his crown? Can S. Paul's severe sentences be avoided? 1
Cor. VI. 9 10. Know ye not that the injurious shall not inherit the kingdom of
heaven? Be not deceived. Neither whoremongers, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers,
nor the soft, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor those
that defraude, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor robbers shall inherit the
kingdom of God. Gal. V. 19. 20. 21. The works of the ^lesh are manifest,
which are these; Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry,
witchcraft, enmities, strifes, jealousies, animosities, provocations,
divisions, sects, envies, murders, drinkings, debauches, and the like to these,
of which I told you before hand, a^ I foretold you, that they who do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Ephesians. V. 58. For this ye know,
that no whoremaster, or unclean person, or that defraudeth, who is an
Idolatur, has inheritance in the kingdom of God and of Christ. Let ^o man
deceive you with vain words; For, for these things comes the wrath of God
upon the children of disobedience. Be ye not therefore partners with them. For
ye were darkness, but are now light in the Lord. Wal^e as children of the
light. They that sow pillowes under sinners elbowes ( excusantes excusationes
in peccatis, according to the vulgar translation Psalm. CXL. 4. and treating
terms of reconcilement between Christ and Belial, between the promises of
the Gospel for everlasting, and the pleasures of sin for a moment) will not
have this to belong to the godly, whom they allow to do such things for a
snap and away, without forfeiting their interest in the world to come; but to
the unregenerate, who live in a settled course of such sins without remorse.
And, I freely allow, that, so soon as the godly man, whom they suppose to be
overtaken with any such sin, shall take such a course to turn from it, as
may restore in him that resolution of mind, for which God accepts a true
Christian; he is restored to the place which he held in Gods grace, not as
never forfeited, but, as recoverd anew. In the mean time, if any pretense be
made, that, being once in Gods favor he can never fail of it, it is as easy to
wipe it off with S. Paul's argument, as any of those vain words that were
advanced in his time: For, if for those things the wrath of God comes upon
Gentiles, that are darkness, much more upon them, who, being become light,
have a share in the works of darkness, if S. Paul's argument be good. And,
whatsoever induces a man to believe otherwise, belonges to those vain words
which S. Paul forbids them to be deceived with.

The prophesy of Ezekiel must needs have a room here; which, in order to
induce the backsliding Israelites to repentance, protests that God judges the
righteous that turns from his righteousness, and the sinner that turns
from his sin, not according to the righteousness or to the sin from which,
but according to that to which they turn, Ezekiel. XVIII. 5 --. For, to say, that
the Prophet of God, speaking in Gods name, of the esteem and reward which God
has for righteous and unrighteous, speaks only of that which seems
righteousness and unrighteousness to the world; or, which an hypocrite
cousens himself to think such, is such an open scorn to Gods word, as cannot
be maintained, but by taking righteousness to signify unrighteousness, and
turning for not turning, but continuing in that wickedness which was at the
heart, when he professed otherwise. Which is nothing else, but to demand of us,
to renounce our senses, and the reason common to all men, together with the
signification of these words whereby God deals with us in the same sense as
we among our selves, to make good a prejudice so prejudicial to Christianity.
And, what shall we do with those examples and instances of holy men, recorded
in holy Scripture, to have fallen from Gods grace into his displeasure,
beginning with our first parents Adam and Eve, whom, no man doubts to have
been created in the state of Gods grace, that will not have their fall
redound upon Gods account. For if it be said, that this is a difference between
the Covenant of works, first set on foot with our first parents in Paradise,
and the Covenant of grace, tenderd by our Lord Christ; It is said indeed, but
it cannot be maintained, without destroying all that has been premised of the
Covenant of Grace, and the condition of the same: Which, though it take place
under the Covenant of works, which is supposed forfeite, to restore mankind to
the hope of a heavenly reward, upon conditions proportionable to their present
weakness; has notwithstanding appeared to be tendered to their free choice, as
containing conditions, by transgressing whereof, they forfeite as much as Adam
could do.

The examples of Saul, and Solomon, and David, and S. Peter, have in them
indeed some difference one from another, but, is there any of them, that
imports not the state of damnation after the state of grace? S. Peter, it is
plain, forfeits the condition of professing Christ, whom he that denies, if
our Lord say true in the Gospel Luke XII. 8. 9. shall himself be denied at
the general judgment; and, can we imagine his tears to have been shed
without sense of this forfeite? Wherefore, whatsoever seeds of grace remained
in him, to move him to repentance, as soon as he was become sensible of his
estate; it is manifest, that he had lost the state of grace, which he labors
to recover by repentance. I will not examine, how much longer David lay in his
sins then S. Peter, before the Prophet Nathan brought him to the sense of
them: It is enough, that he prays so for pardon, as no man could do for that
which he thought he had af^ore. He prays also for the restoring of Gods Spirit
to him again Psalm. LI. 10. 11. 12. Make me a clean heart O God, and renew a
right Spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thine
holy Spirit from me. O give me the comfort of thine help again, and stablish
me with thy free Spirit. For, that which he prays God not to take away, he
acknowleges to be forfeite: So that, it is but of reason, that he further
desires, that it be restored him, rather then continued. Some think they
avoid this, by understanding, only the Spirit of Prophesy to be his desire,
not wanting the Spirit of regeneration, whereby he desires it. Which, in the
case of David, no way takes place, without offering violence to the words. And
I have sufficiently advised, that, by the help of Gods Spirit granted out of
that grace which preventeth the Covenant of grace, and, that state of grace
which depends upon the undertaking of it, a man is enabled to desire the gift
of Gods Spirit to dwell in him, according to that which the Covenant of Grace
promises.

As for Saul and Solomon, both of them endowed with Gods Spirit, the one of
them must not be understood ever to have been in the state of grace, the other,
to have ever fallen from it. For, it is alleged, that Balaam and Caiaphas
prophesied; and, our Lord shall say to those that had prophesied and cast out
devils and done miracles in his Name, I never knew you; Mat. VIII. 22. 23. But
S. Paul's words would be considered, concerning his Apostles office 2 Cor. III.
4. 5. 6. This confidence we have toward God through Christ; Not because we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficience is of God, who has made us able ministers of the New Testament,
not of the letter but of the Spirit. For, if the grace of an Apostle suppose
not the grace of a Christian, how has S. Paul confidence to God, in the grace
of an Apostle given him by God, which a Christian obtains through Christ?
Certainly, no man spares to argue from these words, that we are not able of our
selves to think any thing toward the discharge of a Christian man's office; as
taking it for granted, that a good Apostle supposes a good Christian. And, what
an inconvenience were it to grant, that God imployes men, that are not good,
upon his messages to mankind, giving them the oporation of the Holy Ghost to
demonstrate that he sendes them, which is sufficient credit for all that they
deliver as in his name; unless we will imagine it no inconvenience, that God
gives testimony to those whom he would not have to be believed? As for Balaam,
it is manifest, that he was employed by unclean Spirits, to maintain men in
their Idolatries, by foretelling things to come by their means: And, that Gods
appearing to him, to hinder him from cursing his people, was upon the same
account, as Arnobius says, that Magicians did use to find the virtue of
Spirits opposite to those unclean Spirits whom they employed, not suffering
them to bring to effect those misehevious intentions, for which they set them
on work. And by this means it was that Balaam, not being employed by God, is
forced to declare that will of God which he would have made void. As for
Caiaphas, it is not to be imagined, that he had any revelation of that truth
which he declares by the inspiration of Gods Spirit; but, that God, who, from
the beginning had used the High Priests, by Urim and Thummim to declare his
direction to that people, directed his words so, that they might serve to
declare that will of his which he had never acquainted him with, as a Prophet
of his; nor could have been acknowledge for that will which God intended to
declare by him, had not S. John, by the Spirit of God, declared Gods intent in
so directing his words. Wherefore, when God changed Sa^les heart at his parting
with Samuel, and sent his spirit upon him straight ways, 1 Samuel X. 9. 10. it
seems that, having liked so well of him as to call him to be Prince of his
people, he endowed him with the grace of his Spirit, for the discharge of that
place, which only a good man could rightly discharge. Whereupon it follows,
that, the taking away of this Spirit, and sending an evil Spirit in stead
thereof to torment him, are the evidences of his fall from that inward grace,
which the gift of Gods Spirit presupposed before. Whereby we may judge, what the
Parable of the unclean Spirit cast out, and returning with seven Spirits worse
then himself Mat XII. 43. 44. 45. Luke XI. 24. 25. 26. imports to our purpose;
though, being a Parable, I bring it not into consequence. The like is to be
said of those, who, having prophesied and done miracles in our Lords name,
shall not be acknowledged by him at the day of judgment. For, when he says, I
never knew you; he speaks out of the knowledge of God, which, reaching from
one end to the other at the same instant; when they had the grace of Prophesy,
to witness their employment from God, foresaw that they would fall away, and,
becoming Apostates, retain no part in the kingdom of heaven which they had
preached. No mervaile if he take them not for his, who, he sees, are not to be
his for everlasting; To which purpose the graces of Gods Spirit are promised
true Christians Mark XVI. 17. Acts II. 38. V. 32. And, though Origin has
excellently said; that the name of Christ had such power over devils, that some
times, being alleged by evil men, it did the deed, though rather, when out of
the sound and genuine disposition of beleivers; (as those Ebrews, who, in our
Lords time, did exorcise Devils, as he shows us Mat. XII. 25. and, as we
learn by Justine Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertulliane, and Theophilus of Antiochia
produced there by Grotius, that, so they did till their time) yet, the doing
of miracles in evidence of the Gospel which they preached, alleged by those
whom our Lord shall disclaim, seems to import a great deal more, then the
casting out of devils by naming the name of Christ; and therefore, to contain
the approbation of those men, whose employment from God they seemed to witness.

Here is the place where I will give the true meaning to three or four
Scriptures, (for so many there are) that, in opposition to the whole stream of
Gods book, men will needs produce, to reconcile the promises of the Gospel
with the present guilt and love of sin, in Christians that have been
overtaken with it. Jesus answered and said; to the Samaritane woman John IV.
13. 14. 15. Whosoever drinks of this water shall thirst again. But,
whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall not thirst, for
ever; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water
springing up to life everlasting. The woman said to him; Lord, give me that
water, that I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw. I allow him that has a
mind to it, to translate our Lords words shall never thirst. For, it is plain,
the woman understood him as if he had told her of a water, which, whosoever should
once drink of, should never be a thirst any more, as long as he lived. But, if
she failed of his meaning, because she understood not that he spoke of
thirsting in the world to come; do not they fail of his meaning, who when he
says, he that drinks of my water shall not thirst for everlasting, understand
it to be, that he shall never thirst in this world; Being so plain, that he
shall not thirst in the world to come? They make him say; He that once tastes
of my Grace, in him the spring of it shall never dye in this world; which is
that the woman understood him to say in the literal sense, because she
understood not that he spoke of the world to come. He, comparing this world
with the world to come says; He that drinks of my water in this world, shall
not thirst in the world to come. Which is to say, that he who departs from the
Christianity which once he professed in this world, does not drink of my water
in this world, because he comes short of my promise, that in him it shall be a
well of water springing up to life everlasting.

I have no reason to be afraid any more of the difficulty of S. Paul's words,
Romans VIII. 28-39. having showed by evident arguments, that the subject of them,
are they that love God, they that are called according to purpose, they that he
foreknew to be such, they that walk not according to the flesh but according to
the Spirit in Christ Jesus. For, to such I may well allow, that all works for
the best, because God, having foreappointed them to be once conformable to the
pattern of his son, that he might be the firstborn of many; calls them ^o
their trialls, and finding them faithful in them, justifyeth and glorifyeth
them therefore. Nor can S. Paul's words signify more, supposing, when he says;
whom he foreknew those he predestined, whom he predestined those he called,
whom he called those he justified, whom he justified those he glorified; That
he speaks of those whom God foreknew, to be qualified as before; then this;
that, knowing them to be such, he appointed them to bear Christ's Cross, and to
inherit his glory for the reward of it. Wherefore, when it follows; What shall
we then say to these things? If God be with us who can be against us? He that
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not
with him give us all things? It is manifest, that the quality which S. Paul
understands in them whom he comprehends, when he names us, is no other but
that which he has described true Christians by, thus far. And therefore,
when he proceeds; Who shall impeach the elect of God? It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ that died, or rather that is risen
again, who is also at the right hand of God, Who also makes intercession for
us; It is manifest, that this word elect, has no manner of reference to Gods
everlasting decree, but to the present Christianity of those whom God declares
to account his choice ones, his jewels, his first fruits, out of all the rest
of the creatures. So is (...) often used, in the New Testament especially, to
signify egregius or eximius or that which they signify in Latin, when they
speak of creatures chosen our of the flock to be sacrifices, or dedicated to
God for first fruits. Examples you have in abundance, Mat. XX. 16. XXII. 14.
XXIV. 23, 24, 31. Mark XIII. 20, 22, 27. Luke XVIII. 7. Romans XVI. 3. Col. III.
12. 2 Timothy II. 10. Titus I. 1. 1 Pet. I. 1. II. 9. 2 John I. 14. Apoc. XVII.
14. In all which texts there is nothing to be sound, that inforceth any more,
then the choice esteem which God has of those that are there qualified his
elect, without intimation of any decree of his, whereby he has designed them
to life everlasting.

Which, those that will not content themselves with, when the Apostle exhorts
to make our calling and election sure. 2 Pet. I. 10. to wit, to assure our
selves of the state and condition of Gods choice ones; do entangle themselves
in everlasting difficulties, how any man can assure himself of that which he
can never forfeit, being passed from everlasting. Let S. Paul then go forward;
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or hunger, or nakedness, or peril, or the sword? (as it is
written; For thee are we killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep to
be slain) Nay, in all these we are more then conquerors, through him that has
loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death nor life -- shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is through our Lord Christ. Is there
any thing in all this to signify, that sin cannot separate Christians, from
the love of God; Not, that neither life nor death, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature can separate those whom S. Paul comprehends
with himself in the plural us, from the love of God to sin? Surely I cannot
allow the curiosity of those, that would have Saint Paul say all this, out of a
revelation made to him in particular, of his salvation; For what shall become
of this us? whom besides S. Paul shall it comprise? But when S. Paul says
(...), I am persuaded, he says no more of himself, then, I can maintain every
one of those whom he comprises with himself in the plural us, to say; Which
is, that every good Christian may aim at as firm a persuasion, of attaining
salvation, as he finds, his own resolution to be firm, to abide in the way of
it; And that, having digested the greatest difficulties to which he is liable,
and, being assured not to fail of Gods help, in not failing of his endeavors
by grace received from God; none of them shall be of force to cast them away.
Indeed I find S. Paul more confident in the same purpose, when he speaks
nearer death 2 Timothy IV. 7, 8. I have fought the good fight, I have finished the
course, I have kept the faith: henceforth is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall render me; As having
it from God, that there was not much of his course remaining, and having
digested in his mind the terrors of death. But when he says further; And not
only to me, but to all that love his appearance; I am confident, as those that
love his appearance have the same crown laid upfor them, so, they that know
they love his appearance, may as well know, that they have the same crown in
store. And therefore, that S. Paul meant not to abate any thing of this
confidence, when he said; 1 Cor. IX. 26, 27. I therefore so run as not at
random: So fight I, as not beating the air; But chasten my body, and inslave
it, least, having preached to others, I leave my self a reprobate; But, that he
expresses hereby the supposition upon which his confidence was grounded,
together with his resolution to undergo the utmost of it.

The words of S. John have no difficulty in them, if we take them together 1
John III. 7, 8, 9. Little children let no man deceive you: He that does
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous: He that sins is of the
Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning. The Son of God was
manifested on purpose to dissolve the works of the Devil. Every man that is
borne of God does not commit sin, because his seed abides in him, and he
cannot sin, because he is born of God. Was there not reason for Saint John to
warn them against all deceitful pretenses of righteousness before God, in
them that live not in righteousness, when it is manifest, that he writes
against Heresies, which, wallowing in uncleanness, pretended a secret ground
whereupon they continued righteous before God? I say not that this is the
opinion I write against: But I say, that, if the Apostles argument be true;
that sin is from the devil, and, that Christ came to dissolve the works of
the devil; Then, he that does the works of Belial has no part in Christ, more
then Belial has. And therefore, when it follows, every man that is borne of
God does not commit sin, because his seed abides in him; He means not to
show us a distinction, to sin, and enjoy the pleasure of sin, without
committing of sin, as if the sins of the regenerate, overcoming so many
more obligations, were not committed more then those of the unregenerate.
Neither does he discover that which every man knew before, by saying, that a
Christian, if he do like a Christian, sins not, because the seed of his
Christianity remains in him; unless we think our Lords words to no purpose
Mat. VII. 16. 17. 18. do they gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of thistles?
So, every good tree brings forth good fruit, and a corrupt tree badde fruit.
A good tree cannot bring badde fruit, nor a corrupt tree good fruit; And that,
speaking of the same Heresies, of which S. John is to be understood, as I have
showed, that they might not admit any pretense against that mark. Or, unless
we think S. Ignatius his words to no purpose, who uses the same sentence in
the same case. Wherefore, when S. John says, that he who is borne of God
cannot sin, because his seed is in him; his meaning is that which Tertulliane
expresses, de praescript. Haeret. Cap. III. Non futurus Dei filius si
admiserit; Because he cannot continue the son of God if he sin.

It has been much argued, that S. Paul, Romans VII. 7-25. sets forth in himself,
as regenerate, such a conflict between the law of his members and the law of
his mind, that, as a carnal man, he confesses himself to be sold under sin;
because says he, what I do I allow not: For what I would I do not, but what I
would not that I do. Which if I do when I would not, I agree with the Law that
it is good. But it is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. And this
law in his members, warring against the Law of his mind, he says lead him
captive to the Law of sin in his members, so that he cries out; Miserable man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Whereunto is added
the authority of S. Augustine, pressing this exhortation so hard, that it
serves for an aspersion of Pelagius his heresy, for a man not to allow it.
Though S. Augustine is not alone in it. Methodius against Origin, in Epiphanius
writing against his heresy, S. Gregory Nazianzene, and others perhaps among the
Fathers, follow the same sense. But the aspersion is too abusive. For, I have
showed, that the Tradition of the Church, declared by the records of the
Fathers, extends not to the exposition of particular Scriptures, but to give
bounds, within which the Scriptures are to be understood. Wherefore, had S.
Augustine and his party truly expounded this Scripture, yet ought it not to be
a mark of Plagianisme to maintain another exposition, without supposing any
part of Pelagius his heresy. But, if they consider further, that S. Augustine
acknowledges no more then the motions of concupiscence, which are alive in the
regenerate, to divert the rigor of their intentions from the course of
Christianity; not, the committing of any sin that lays wast a good
conscience, to be consistent with the state of grace; they will have little joy
of S. Augustines exposition of this place. For, what is that to the murder and
adulteries of David, to the apostrasy of S. Peter, to the Idolatries of
Solomon? Or, what consequence is it, because concupiscence is alive in
Christians, that are at peace with God until death: that therefore David, S.
Peter and Solomon were at peace with God, before they had washed away those
sins by repentance? Wherefore, I must utterly discharge S. Augustine, and
those of his sense, of having said any thing prejudicial to Christianity, by
expounding S. Paul according to it. The question that remains will be, how S.
Paul can call himself carnal and sold under sin, how he can say, I like not
that which I do; For I do not what I would but what I hate; And, to will is
present with me, but how to do that which is good, I find not; And; I find a
Law, by which, when I would do well, evil is at hand to me; And that, this
Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind, leads me captive to
the Law of sin that is in my members; And; wretched man that I am, who will
deliver me from the body of this death? The question I say will be, how all
this can be said of him, of whom it follows, Romans VIII. 1, 2, 5-8. There is
therefore now no damnation for those in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. For, the Law of the spirit of life, in Christ
Jesus, has freed me from the Law of sin and of death. For, they that are
according to the flesh, mind the things of the flesh; They that are according
to the Spirit, the things of the spirit. For, the sense of the flesh is death,
but the sense of the spirit, life and peace. Because the sense of the flesh is
enemy to God, for it is not, nor can be subject to the Law of God; Neither can
they that are in the flesh please God. For, if these things cannot be said of
the same man at the same time, it remains, that, though we allow S. Augustine
and those of his sense, that a Christian falls continually into sin, and by
continual offices of Christianity comes clear of it; yet, when he wilfully
runs into that sin, which, he cannot but know that it cannot stand with his
Christianity; he cannot be of that number, for whom, S. Paul says, there is no
condemnation, in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the flesh but after the
Spirit. And therefore, for the true meaning of the Scripture in hand, it will
be requisite to have recourse to that figure of speech, whereby, S. Paul
himself declares, that he speaks that of himself, which he would have
understood of others, merely for the a voiding of offense, 1 Cor. IV. 6. So is
it no mervaile, if, to make those that were zealous of the Law believe, that
they could not be saved but by Christianity, he whom they took for an Apostle,
show it in his own case, before he was a Christian, saying; Is the Law sin?
Nay, I had not known sin but by the Law. Romans VII. 7 -- I have showed, you,
how Grotius has understood him to speak of himself, in the person of an
Israelite, comparing himself, considered as having received the Law, and under
the Law, with himself, before he received it. If any man think this
consideration to far fetched, for S. Paul to propose to those, zealous of the
Law, that he writes to; He may understand him to speak in the person of one of
them, to whom the Gospel had been proposed, (and thereby, conviction of the
spiritual sense of the Law) which therefore, the concupiscence which we are
borne with cannot but make great difficulty to embrace, according to the
premises. For, seeing the Scribes and Pharisees, having received the Tradition of
the world to come, in opposition to the Sadduces, had prevailed with the body
of that people, to believe, that the outward observation of the law, according
to the letter, was the means to bring them to the rewards of it; It is no
mervaile if S. Paul, in the person of one so reduced, say; I had not known
concupiscence, had I not found the Law to say; Thou shall not covet. For, he
that understood not the Law of God to prohibit the inward motions of
concupiscence, till, by the preaching of Christianity, he learned that to be
the intent of the precept* may very well say, that, he knew not concupiscence
but by the Law so preached. By that same reason might he say, as it follows;
Without the Law sin is dead. But I was once alive without the Law: To wit,
when he thought himself in the way to life under the doctrine of the Pharisees;
But, when the commandment came, to be declared to him in that sense, which the
salvation tendered by the Gospel requires, its no marvel if sin that was in
him, and concupiscence of it revived, and he was discovered to be dead in
sin, as not yielding to the cure of it. But, that the commandment which was
given for life became unto his death, because sin, taking occasion by it,
deceived and slew him; All this takes place in that Pharisee, who, being
persuaded by the Pharisees, that, by not contriving to take away his neighbors
wife and goods, he stood qualifyed for the world to come; now, coming to know,
by the preaching of the Gospel, the restraint of inward concupiscence is
commanded by it, found himself by means of the Law, cousened and slain, as
enemy to Christianity, which tenders the only cure of sin; Whereunto the
conclusion agrees well enough. For when, having questioned; Miserable man that
I am, who shall deliver me out of the body of this death? He answers; I thank
God by Jesus Christ our Lord; He seems to declare, that, the Gospel having
overtaken him in this estate, and discovered him to himself in it, the
embracing of it cured him, and gave him cause to thank God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, for his deliverance from it. All the rest, that follows between
these terms, in the discourse of Saint Paul, serving for a very lively
description of that man's estate, who, being convinced of the truth of
Christianity, finds difficulty in renouncing the pleasures which sin
furnishes, for the obtaining of those promises which the Gospel tendreth.

There remains yet one difficulty, concerning the Polygamy of the ancient
Fathers, before and under the Law; which to me, has allways seemed an argument
for the truth which I maintain, rather then an objection against it. If any
soul, sensible of the fear of God, can imagine, that Gods Jewels, his choice
ones, the first fruits of his creatures, knowing themselves to be under the Law
of having but one wife, not to be parted with till death, should
notwithstanding take many, (and those many times so qualified, as the Law, much
more Christianity, allows not; as Jacob two sisters, Abraham his niece, and so
Amram) and, to outface the Law, hold them till death, and never come short of
Gods favor, whose Law they transgress with bare face, as the Scripture
speaks; let him believe that a Christian, living in sin, can be in the state
of grace. But, he that sees the Law to have restrained marying with the neice,
which he sees practiced before; and sees withal, that plurality of wives is not
forbidden by the Law, (for, besides wives of an inferior rank, which may be
called concubines, a captive Deuteronomy. XXI, 11. and an Ebrew maid sold for a slave
Ex. XXI. 8. 9. 10. there can be no question in the Law of two wives whereof the
one is beloved the other not Deuteronomy. XXI. 15. besides, that, the Law restraining
the King from having many wives, seems to allow him more then every man had,
and therefore, that David might be within compass of the Law, though Solomon
trod it under foot) I say, he that considers these things, will be moved to be
of opinion, that the Pharisees interpretation of Levit. XVIII. 18. is true, and
that, before that Law, there was no prohibition for a man to marry two sisters,
which is there first introduced, and yet with an exception in Deuteronomy, in
the case of a brother dead without issue; which before the Law, was also in
force, as by the story of Judah Genesis XXXVIII. does appear. I will therefore
conclude, that, as the knowledge of God increased by giving the Law, so was the
posterity of Abraham restrained from more by the Law, then the posterity of
Noe, upon the promises given them, had been restrained from after the deluge.
From whence, in all reason it will follow, that the posterity of Abraham
according to the spirit, which is the Church of Christ, should be still
restrained from more, then the posterity of Abraham according to the flesh, by
the law. And so, that the Fathers before and under the Law, living in Gods
grace, did, not withal, live in open violation of Gods Law; but, that they
knew themselves not to be under the Law of one wife to one husband (though
intended in Paradise) by virtue of Gods dispensation in it, till Christianity
should come. For unless we presume, that, not only all things necessary to
our salvation, but, all thing necessary to the salvation of all men since the
world stood, are recorded in the Scriptures, there can be no reason to presume,
that they could not understand what Laws they were under, but by those
Scriptures, which for our salvation, have been granted us.

I argue yet further, that it will be impossible for true Christians, and good
Christians, to attain unto assurance of the state of Grace, if it be to be had
for them, that commit such sins as Christianity consists not with. And this,
upon supposition of the premises, for the ground of this assurance. For,
without doubt, were not some thing in the condition which the Gospel requires
impossible for flesh and blood to bring forth, it were not possible for him
that imbraceth the Gospel, to assure himself, that he does it out of
obedience to God, not out of those reasons which hypocrites may follow. But I,
having declared before, and maintaining now, that no man, by the force of flesh
and blood, (that is to say, of that inclination to goodness which a man is
born into the world with) is able to profess Christianity out of a resolute and
clear intention to stand to it; am consequently bound to maintain, that he who
so does not only may, but must needs assure himself of the favor of God,
in as much as he cannot but assure himself of that which himself does. For,
in as much as he knows what himself means, and what he does; as S. Paul
says, that no man knows what is in man, but the spirit of a man which is in
him; so sure it is, that a man's self knows what he means, and what he does,
as it is sure that another man knows it not. But, not allowing, nor
presupposing this ground of a man's knowledge, how shall he know it? Shall a
man, by having a persuasion that he is in the number of Gods elect, or, by
having in himself an assurance of Gods love, to the effect of everlasting
happiness, be assured, that his assurance is well grounded, and that he is of
that number which is elected to life everlasting? As if it were not possible
for the temptations of Satan, and carnal presumption, to possess a man as
much, even to this effect, as the Spirit of God can do. Where is then the
effect of Christianity seen, if not in limiting such grounds, and such terms,
as he that proceeds upon, shall not fail of that grace of God, whereof he
assures himself upon those grounds? But, he that places that faith which
alone justifyeth, in believing, that he who believes is predestinate to life
everlasting; Or in the confidence of Gods grace in attaining the same; I
demand; upon what ground he can pretend to distinguish this faith from that,
which, he cannot deny that it may be false. For if it be said, that the Spirit
of God that is in him assures him, that his persuasion is well grounded; It is
easy for me to say, that the question to be cleared, that is to say; whether
it be the Spirit of God that tells him so, or not; cannot be the evidence to
clear it self. And therefore, that he stands obliged to bethink himself of
some means, whereupon he may assure himself that it is the Spirit of God, not
the temptation of Satan, or carnal presumption, that assures him to be of the
number of those that are predestinate to life everlasting. For, if any man say,
that he is assured that the act of his faith, which he first conceived, when he
was first converted from sin to righteousness, assures him of the grace of
God, because it was grounded upon that conversion to God which the Gospel
requires; I will yield him all that. But then I will demand of him, who
presupposes true conversion to God, according to the terms which the Gospel
requires, (that is to say; Joined with a sincere resolution of living for the
future, in that conversation that the Gospel prescribes) to be the condition
of those promises which the Gospel tendereth; I say I will demand of him, upon
what ground he can persuade himself, that, having professed Christianity and
failed of it he remains in that favor of God, which he obtained by professing
that Christianity which he performs not. Indeed could it be said, that the
condition which the Gospel requires is a thing that God immediately determines
man to do, without and before any determination of his own; I should not much
marvel, that a man, who is accepted by God upon such a condition, should
continue in favor till it come again, and make him hate that sin for which
he forfeited it. But having proceeded thus far, in showing, that the
condition which the Gospel pel requires, is no less then the total change of
a man's intentions, from seeking the world, to seek God; and, that the helps of
Grace determine him to this no otherwise, then, by determining him to choose
the better and leave the worse; For me to say, that, waving this determination,
he remains possessed of the promises which it produces, would be to say, that
there is no reason why any man should require repentance, as a condition which
justifying faith presupposes. And therefore it is very much to be admired,
that those who would seem truly religious, should think it an abridgement to
that security and confidence, that peace and joy in the holy Ghost, that
boasting assurance, which S. Paul professes to be the privilege of true
Christians, that they cannot maintain it but upon just assurance, that, upon
their true conversion to God, there was just ground for it. Nay further, that
God invites not men to Christianity upon fair terms, unless he allow it. For
I demand; Is it not an act of infinite mercy in God, to set up a standard of
confidence to all the world, conditionally, that they embrace those terms
which he propoundes, out of his own mere goodness? Is it not enough, that be
allows them pardon, upon condition of repentance? That he allows this to them
that have forfeited their repentance never so often, by repenting them of their
repentance? Especially, to them who ground themselves upon their repentance, as
the condition whereupon they obtained his favor, can it seem strange, that his
favor should become void, when they repent them of their repentance?

Some object the case of Caleb and Josua, who, upon preseverance, when their
fellows fell away, are assured of the land of promise; to argue, that under
Christianity, by perseverance in it, a man may obtain assurance of salvation,
such as that which Gods word creates to those who know it to be Gods word, as
to that which it assures. The difference of the case is this; That, they had
Gods word for their assurance, which I must needs have granted in S. Paul's
case, had I granted that the assurance of salvation which he professes had
been grounded upon a revelation made to him in particular, that he should be
saved. But, seeing I have grounded that assurance, which he expresses, merely
upon that conscience of the common Christianity, which he had; I say, that,
supposing Caleb and Joshua to be certain of their inheritance in the land of
promise, by virtue of the promise there recorded (which nothing hinders, to
imply that condition of walking according to the Law of God, upon which it is
made) It is enough, that the Gospel can assure us of eternal life, upon
supposition of that disposition of mind, upon which S. Paul assures himself of
it. For if it be said, that, he who assures a man, of Gods grace upon condition
of doing what he can to hold it, assures nothing, seeing it is agreed upon,
that he which does no more then he can shall certainly fall from it; The
answer is easy, that nothing can be more injurious, then to measure that which
man can do, when, by the grace of God he has been resolved to Christianity,
(and thereupon has received of God the promise of the habitual assistance of
his Spirit, for the performance of that which he has undartaken upon
confidence of Gods assistance) by that which no man by meet nature is able to
do. For these promises being past upon supposition of that weakness and
perverseness by nature which they come into the world with* it cannot be
imagined, that man can become void, by the means of those subreptions and
surprises of native concupiscence, to which all men are liable. Though, if a
man shall openly transgress his Christianity, in that, which, he must needs
know, that it cannot stand with it; or, if by continued negligence, he cast off
that regard that he has professed to it; can any reason be imagined, why God
should continue his favor, or the inward effects of it; but that which all men
have, to reconcile the present love of sin to the promises of the word to
come?

Wherefore, though I cannor allow, that saying, which the School has allowed
in many Doctors; Facienti quod in se est Deus largitur gratiam; Unless it be
restrained to him that complies with the helps of preventing Grace; whom, I am
persuaded, God will not fail to bring to the state of Grace, by following
helps of Grace; Yet there is another saying of the School which I do utterly
allow: Deus neminem deserit, nisi desertus; That God leaves no man that leaves
not him first; Because it is evident in reason, that the promise of the holy
Ghost must come to nothing, unless it may be held upon such conditions, as are
possible to him that comes to be a Christian with original concupiscence; That
is to say, so, as not to forfeit it upon those surprises and subreptions, which
morally no man can avoid; but, upon departure from that which a man upon
deliberation had professed before. He that considers how many times God in the
Old testament, delivers the Israelites from those oppressors, to whom he had
given them up for their transgressions of his covenant; will never believe,
that, upon every thansgression of Christianity, he will break with those that
sincerely desire to continue in his favor, upon condition of it. And he that
considers, that it is not commendable amongst men, to break off friendship upon
every offense, with them whom a man has entertained it with in matters of
privacy, and a long time; will never apprehend, that the Scripture,
representing the friendship of God with his children according to his Gospel,
by the pattern of that love which the best men show to those whom they
intertaine friendship with, does intend to express him disobliged upon every
offense. But, unless we think it commendable for God to love men more then
righteousness, for the love of Christ, to whom the same righteousness is no
less dear then to God; will never think it agreeable to the honor of the
Gospel, to propose the reward of that righteousness which it requires, but,
upon supposition of performing of it. Certainly Celsus had done the Christians
no wrong, in slandering them, that they received all the wicked persons whom
the world spued out, into an assurance of everlasting happiness; nor could
Zosimus be blamed, for imputing the change of Constantine the Great, to a
desire of easing his conscience of the guilt of those sins which Paganism
could show him no means to expiate; had the Christians of that time
acknowledged, that they tendered assurance of pardon to any man, but, upon
supposition of conversion from his sin.

These things supposed, it will be easy to resolve, that, the assurance of
salvation which the Gospel inables a good Christian to attain, is not the act
of justifying Faith, but the consequence of it. Indeed, if a man were justified
by believing that he is justified; so far as a man has the act of justifying
Faith, so far he must necessarily rest assured, not only of his right to
salvation at present, but of his everlasting salvation in the world to come.
But, neither is that opinion, which makes justifying Faith to consist in the
trust and confidence which a Christian reposeth in God through Christ, for the
obtaining of his promises, liable to the horrible and gross consequence of the
same. To exclude all Christians from salvation, that are not as sure that they
shall be saved, at they are of their Creed, is a consequence as desperate, as
it is gross, to make that assurance the act of justifying Faith. The true act
of justifying Faith, which is constancy in Christianity, the more lively and
resolute it is, the more assurance it creates, of those consequences which the
Gospel warranteth. For, no man is ignorant of his own resolutions. Nor can be
less assured, that it is Gods Spirit that creates this assurance, then he is
assured, that his own resolusions are not counterfeit. And therefore, his
trust in God, not as reconcilable, but as reconciled, must needs be
answerable. And, the same trust may warrant the same assurance, though, not of
it self, but upon the conscience of that Christianity whereupon it is
grounded. And, by those things which were disputed, not only during the
Council of Trent, but also since the de^ree thereof, it is manifest, that the
Church of Rome does not teach it to be the duty of a good Christian, to be
always in doubt of Gods grace; But, allows that opinion to be maintained,
which makes assurance of salvation attainable upon these terms; and therefore
incourageth good Christians to contend for it. As for the assurance of future
salvation, which depends upon the assurance of preseverance till death, or, a
man's departure in the state of Grace, you see S. Paul involveth all Christians
in it with himself, by saying; I am persuaded, that neither life nor death --
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Jesus Christ our
Lord; And therefore, I conceive, is was a very great impertinence to dream of
any privilege of immediate revelation, for the means by which he had it.
Whosoever is a Christian, so far as he is a Christian, has it. Adouble
minded man, that is unconstant in all his ways; as S. James speaks (that is
who is not resolved to live and die a good Christian) cannot have it; Whosoever
has that resolution, in as much as he has that resolution; that is, so firm
as his resolution is; so firm is his assurance. For, knowing his own
resolutions he knows them not easily changeable, in a water importing the end
of a man's whole course: And therefore, knowing God unchangeable while he so
continues, is able to say full as much as Saint Paul says; I am persuaded,
that neither life nor death shall be able to separate ^e from the love of God
in* Christ Jesus.

As for the sense of the primitive and Catholic Church, (putting you in mind
of that which I said before, to show, that it places justifying Faith in
professing Christianity, the effect whereof in justifying must needs fail, so
soon as a man fails of performing that Christianity, in the profession
whereof his justification stands) I shall not need to allege the opinions of
particulare Fathers, to make evidence of it, having Laws of the Church, to
make evidence, that those who were ruled by them must needs think the promises
of the Gospel to depend upon the Covenant of our Baptism; and therefore, that
they become forfeit by transgressing the same. The promise of persevering in
the profession of the Faith until death, and of living like a Christian, was
allways expressly exacted of all that were baptized, (as now in the Church of
England) And upon this promise, and not otherwise, remission of sin* right to
Gods kingdom, and the Gift of his Spirit, was to be expected. As, if it were
not made with a serious intent at the present, baptism did nothing but damn
him that received it; So, if it were transgressed by gross sins, not to be
imputed to the surprises of concupiscence. For, the condition failing, that
which depends upon the same must needs fail. For the means by which they
expected to recover the state of Grace thus forfeited, we have the Penitential
Canons (which, as they had the force of Law all over the Church, all the better
times of the Church; So, I show from the beginning, that they had their
beginning from the Apostles themselves) to assure us, that all believed that,
without which there could be no ground for that which all did practice. Can any
man imagine, that the Church should appoint several times, and several
measures of Penance, for several sins to be debarred the Communion of the
Eucharist, and to demonstrate unto the Church, by their outward conversation,
the sincerity of their conversion to their first profession of Christianity;
had not all acknowledged, that the promises of the Gospel, forfeited by
transgressing the profession of baptism, were not to be recovered otherwise?
And that, the deeper the offense was, the more difficulty was presumed, in
replanting the resolution of Christianity in that heart, which was presumed to
have deserted it, according to the measure of the sin whereby it had violated
the same? This is enough to prescribe unto reasonable men, against such little
consequences, as now and then are made, upon some passages of the Fathers,
which, upon by occasions, seem to speak otherwise. S. Augustine is the maine
hope of the cause, so far as it has any joy in the consent of the Church.
But, what joy they can have of S. Augustine, may easily be judged, by his
opinion of the VII. to the Romans, and the difference which I have observed
between it and theirs. For, what can any man imagine to be the reason, why he
should understand. S. Paul to speak only of the surprises which the
regenerate are subject to, remaining regenerate; but, because he was assured
that they remain not such, when they fall away to these gross sins, which
no man is surprised with? And, he that shall take the pains to peruse what S.
Augustine has written in his books de correptione and gratia, And de
predestinatione sanctorum, may justly mervaile, how any man could come to have
such an opinion of S. Augustine. Besides, in his work de Civitate dei and in
many other places, he has so clearly expressed himself, that unless a man
resolve, not to distinguish between the state of grace, and the purpose of God
to bring a man to everlasting life, (which, he that uses the common reason of
all men cannot but distinguish) it is a mervaile how S. Augustine should be
taken to say, that the state of grace cannot become void, because, it is true,
he says so often, that the decree of predestination cannot become void. S.
Gregory is taken for one of the same opinion, because, expounding the words of
the Prophet Jeremy, Lament. IV. 1. How is gold obscured? the pure mass
changed? The stones of the Sanctuary scattered in the head of every street;
Concerning Christians that fall from their profession, according to the true
reason of the mystical sense; he has these words; Aurum quod ^bscurari
pot^it, aurum in conspectu dei nunquam fuit. That gold which could be darkened,
was never gold in Gods sight. But is it not easy to understand, that the sight
of God is that freeknowledge, which the decree of predestination either
supposes or produces? And, that those whom God ^oreseeth to fall from their
Christianity were never gold in his esteem, in regard of it? As I said before,
that he never knew them, whom, he ever knew, that they would not ever continue
his. And, seeing S. Austine expressly distinguished between sons of God
according to that which they are at present, and* according to Gods foresight
and purpose; it will be necessary consequently, to distinguish upon the
attributes of members of Christ, and of his Body, ingrafted into Christ, and
his disciples; That, those are truly called such according to S. Austine, that
shall continue such for everlasting; though, those that shall not so continue
are so for the present, according to S. Austine. As it is peremtorily evident,
by one exception; in that he makes the difference between some of them, who
have the gift of perseverance, and others that have it not, to consist in this;
That, some are cut of by death, while they are in that estate, others are
suffered to survive till they fall from it: A thing many times repeated in the
books aforenamed, and which could not have been said, but by him that held
both for the present to be in the state of Grace; Nor could he indeed dispute
of perseverance* not supposing the truth of that, in which he requires Grace
to persevere. I acknowledge to have seen the Preface to one of the Volum^ that I
spoke of, and in it some pretense, of making S. Austine, and S. Gregory
especially, for the contrary purpose. But I do not acknowledge to have found
any thing at all alleged there, that had not been fully answered before it was
alleged there, in Vossi^^ his Collections Histori^ Pelagianae libro VI. Th^s^.
XII-XV. And therefore I will discharge my self upon him in this point, rather
then repeat briefly, in this abridgement, that which he has fully said there.
For, you shall find also there, upon what terms, and, by what means,
Christians may and do overcome that anxiety of mind, which, the possibility of
falling from Grace may affect them with, according to the Fathers; Even the
same as according to S. Paul, whose assurance needed no revelation of Gods
secret purpose; but the knowledge of that resolution, which Gods spirit had
settled in his spirit; which, being assured that God will not forsake, while
he forsakes not God, assures him, that, by Gods help, he will not forsake
God. And not only he, but all, whom S. Paul comprises in the plural us, as
grounded like S. Paul. Otherwise, that a Christian, from the first instant of
his conversion, should be able to say so; that, whosoever is saved, before
death must say so out of the same confidence, knowing by faith that he is
predestinate; as it is mere frenzy once to imagine, so never did any of the
Fathers maintain. Only, whereas the author of that Preface, acknowledging,
that the Dominicans and Jansenians, (who hold up the Doctrine of S. Austine
concerning the Grace of Preseverance) suppose nevertheless, them to be
regenerate, that are not predestinate, nor shall be saved; imputes it to the
abominable fictions of implicit says, and the efficacy of the Sacraments, in
exhibiting and convaying the Grace which they seal; I would not have him
think the efficacy of Baptism can be counted a fiction, by any but fained
Christans. Of the Sacraments, I say nothing in this place: For, I need not so
much as suppose what a Sacrament is; And, whether Baptism be a Sacrament or
not, (though a thing that no man questions) is nothing to my present purpose.
That God contracteth with man for the promises of his Gospel, upon condition
of Christianity; and, that this contract is not only solemnized but inacted by
receiving Baptism; is not now to be proved, having been done from the
beginning of this book. And, he that would be free of that which he contracteth
for by his Baptism; whereby he holds his title to all that the Gospel
promises; would make that step to the renouncing of his Christianity. What
implicit Faith should pervert the understanding of Doctors, whose Faith is
explicit in all matters of Faith, I understand not; unless he mean, to
acknowledge that which is most true, that there never needed any express decree
of the Church in this point, (as in other points questioned by Pelagius)
because never any man held otherwise. If this be the implicit Faith which he
means, because the whole Church always held it, but never decreed it; I shall
agree to it, but not, that any Christian can be seduced by following it.
Jovinian we read only of, confuted in this opinion by S. Jerome, not
condemned by the Church; because he could never make it considerable, and so
dangerous, to the Church. But in very deed, implicit Faith here signifies
nothing, being only employed to make a noise, for a reason of that, for which
no reason can be rendered* How that can be thought to be the sense of S.
Austine, which never any of his followers, all zealous of his Doctrine, in the
matter of Grace, could find in his writings. And therefore, the whole Church
before the Reformation, and, since the Reformation, all that adhere to the
Confession of Auspurg, in this point, are in the balance against Calvine and
his followers. As for the Church of England, if we consider matter of right;
That is, what ought to be the sense of the Article, which allows Penance,
because men may cast off the Holy Ghost, which they have received; it is
manifest, that the addition of neither totally, nor finally, is a Gloss that
distroyes the text. For, that facility of returning to Grace once received,
which, frequent custom, even of supernatural actions, disposes men to, may
remain, when the Gift of Gods spirit is forfeit; and, though God may as well
continue the assistance of it, totally forfeited, as he did first, give the
help of it; yet is all title to the promises of the Gospel totally forfeit:
And that finally, to those whom God has not appointed the Grace of
Perseverance, whom, had he cut off at another time, they had been saved,
according to S. Austine. Besides, making justifying Faith to consist in trust
in God, according to the Article and Homily, it will be utterly unreason^ble to
imagine, that this trust, which is not attained but premising repentance,
should not fail, when that repeatance is recalled by sin. But, making it to
consist in the trusty undertaking of Baptism, according to the Service and
Catechism; it is a mere contradiction to imagine that it can stand entire,
supposing such sin. This for the sense of the Church of England, in point of
right. In point of fact, as there have been always those that have understood
the article according to that Gloss which destroys the text; so is that
force, whereby they have prevailed to destroy the Church of England, with all,
no means to prevent the damn^tion of their souls, that give themselves up to
be taught according to it.

CHAP. XXXII. How the fullfilling of Gods Law is possible, how impossible* for
a Christian. Of the difference between mortal and v^niall sin. What love of
God and of our neighbor was necessary under the Old Testament. Whether the
S^rmon in the Mount correct the false interpretation of the Jews, or inhanse
the obligation of the Law. Of the difference between matter of Precept and
matter of Counsel; and the Perfection of Christians.
IF it be the mark of a good resolution, that it assoileth all difficulties
incident to the question that is resolved; I shall not doubt that this will
prove such, by the ready means which it furnishes, to resolve those endless
disputes which depend upon the premises: As, in the first place, whether it is
possible for the regenerate to fulfill the Law of God in this life, or not.
For, supposing that which has been said* the resolution is unavoidable; That,
if we consider the original Law of God, (which, under the Gospel, continues
the rule of that righteousness which we owe) it is not possible that m^n,
coming into the world with his original concupiscence, should fulfill it, by
doing every thing according to it: But, if we consider the terms of the
Covenant of Grace, (which is the Law, by which, God has declared that he will
proceed with all them that are under it) that no man can be saved but by
fullfilling it. The reason is clear on both sides. For, seeing that original
concupiscence remains in them who are regenerate by Grace; and, that it is
confessed on all hands, that, by the means thereof, all do commit sin;
either there is no Law of God which that sin breaks, (and so it is no sin,
which we suppose to be sin) or, that Law is not fullfilled which that sin
violateth. On the other side, if God, of his Grace, in consideration of our
Lord Christ, and his meri^s and sufferinges, has declared himself re^dy to
accept of all them that return to him by true repentance, and serve him in the
profession of Christianity, with that new obedience which it requires; either
the Gospel is false, which tendreth remission of sins and everlasting life
upon condition of this new obedience, or, whosoever fails not of the condition,
cannot come short of fulfilling of that Law.

For, every contract is, by the nature thereof, a Law to the parties that make
it. And, though the Covenant of Grace, according to which our Lord Christ will
judge, is merely Gods Law, because he chooses the terms upon which he inacteth
it with these that are baptized; (and declaring them, becomes engaged to stand
to them, before man ingageth) yet he becomes further engaged by our embracing
the terms which he proposes; and much more, by our i^deavors, in forcing our
natural weakness and crookedness to perform wha^ we undertake, and by the
performance which these endeavors produce. And, if among civil men, friendship
long exercized suffer not a man that stands upon his credit to break upon
ordinary offenses; we see the reason, why God so often helps his ancient
people, in respect of that Covenant, which they, for their parts, had made
void and forfeit: And therefore, how much more he obliges himself to pass
by those faill^^rs and weaknesses, which Christians endeavor to overcome, and
cannot fully do it. It is indeed most manifest, that the Gospel requires of
Christians the full innocence, and holiness of Paradise; all that the first
Adam was created to, because created in it. But it is manifest also, that they
who undertake to be Christians come into the world with concupiscence; and
therefore cannot undertake never to sin) though they may undertake to
persecute and to crucify their own inclination to sin, and to deny
themselves things otherwise Lawful, when they find themselves subject, thereby
to be seduced to sin. And it is likewise manifest that our Lord Christ, who
shall judge all men according to their works, shall not judge the works of
Christians according to that which they might have done, had not Adam failed;
But, according to that which every one in his estate may attain to, in the
performance of his Christianity. Here is then the ground, why, those things
that are done against the Rule which the Gospel proposes, out of invincible
ignorance, or out of mere surprises of concupiscence, (though, for the matter
of them, contrary to that Law which the Gospel inacteth for the Rule of their
actions) cannot, by the Gospel, be imputed to Christians, striving toward that
perfection which Christianity imports. For, those who do not study to
mortify the concupiscence, whereby they have been seduced to sin; to watch
over their thoughts, whereby, they knew, they may be seduced to sin; cannot be
understood so to do. And therefore, though sins of invincible ignorance, and
upon mere surprise of concupiscence, are sins against the Original Law of
Paradise, and the directive part of Christ's Law, which revives it; Yet are they
not sins against the Covenant of Grace, contracted upon supposition of
Original sin* ^ nor against the vindicative part of Christ's Law, according
to which he will judge Christians.

Certainly, it is a gross inconvenience, to acknowledge any thing to be sin,
which no Law of God forbiddes. That venial sin should be beside the Law of
God, but not against it, would make it no sin; which, nothing but the
transgression of the Law determines 1 John III. 4. Romans IV. 15. For, why is
any thing sin, but, because it ought not to be done? Or, why ought it not to
be done, but, because it is Gods will that it should not be done? Or, what
would God have done that is not a Law to his creature? Therefore, all sin,
transgresses that will, whereby God would not have that done, which, it doing,
transgresses his Law. On the other side, how clearly agrees it with the
goodness of God, how necessarily follows it upon that Grace which his
Gospel publishes, that those who are called to it, supposing them obnoxious
to that concupiscence, which will certainly induce them to sin,
notwithstanding the Grace whereby they are regenerate, should neither forfeit
their estate in it, by every sin which they commit, nor, by any sin which
they forsake by timely repentance? Therefore, how exact so ever that obedience
is, which the Gospel requires at our hands; So long as it leaves him that
returns by repentance, from that sin whereby he fails of it, right of
being reestated in his reconcilement with God; It is manifest, that his estate
in the promises of the Gospel is not forfeit by falling into sin, but by
persevering in it. How much more, when it is acknowledged on all hands, that
there are in the World so many means to divert our minds from the true end
and rule of our doings, so numberless snares for our inclinations* (naturally
biassed toward that which seems best for the present) that no Christian can
keep an exact account of the occasions, whereby he finds himself to fail of
that righteousness which he aims at; how much more, I say, is it to be
presumed, that the grace of the Gospel reaches further then any man's
repentance, and, in consideration of our Lord Christ, accounts not that to be
a breach of Covenant, which, only the general study of new obedience
extinguisheth? In this consideration, if any man will say, that some sins are
venial others mortal, in regard of those terms of reconcilement with God,
which the Gospel proposes; (which as no sin voideth if repentance follow,
so, those sins which the present weakness of our mortal nature cannot
easily avoid, must not be thought to infring) he shall say no more then the
Gospel of Christ will warrant, by necessary consequence. But, whether any sin
be originally venial, by that first Law of God, the transgression whereof it
is; as it manifest, that we are not enabled by the Scriptures to dispute,
(tending only to reveal, by degrees, Gods purpose of dealing with man under
sin, which the Gospel at last has clearly set forth) so it is certain, that
it no way concerns, either my purpose, or any man's salvation, to determine.
And this destinction of Gods Law is founded upon the express words of S. Paul
Romans IV. 27. where he says, that glorying is excluded by the law of Faith, not
by the Law of works. And S. James, 11. 12. So speak ye and so do ye, as those
that shall be judged by the Law of liberty. For, those terms which God has
proposed to Christians, whom he has freed from sin, are that very Law of
Christianity, whereby, those that are so freed shall be judged, whether they
have walked in the freedom to which they were called or not; the original
Law, which differenceth good from bad, being set aside, as to the purpose of
giving sentence by it.

And, upon these terms, whosoever dies in the state of Gods grace fulfilleth
Gods Law, obtaining the promise which the Gospel tendreth, by fulfilling the
condition which it requires. But, where as it is further questioned among the
School Doctors, whether, according to the ordinary measure of Gods Spirit
which the Gospel brings, it is possible for the regenerate to live without
sin, and that distinguishing whether without mortal sin, or whether
without venial sin; (because I have allowed the distinction in some sense,
and to some purpose) Having already answered that which was necessary to be
satisfied, I am not solicitous of the rest. The Church supposed the Faith
secured, when it was resolved, against Pelagius; That the Law is not to be
fullfilled without the Grace of Christ. For the rest. S. Austine was tender of
denying, that a Christian may live without sin, by Grace. For what may it not
do? Yet, could have no good opinion of him that should think himself the man
that lives without sin. S. Jerome, with many of the Fathers, found it an
inconvenience to grant, that God commands impossibilities; And therefore
punishes that, which a man must needs do. And yet he makes difficulty to
grant that a man may live without sin. The Council of Trent decrees Sess. IV.
Can. XVIII. Si quis dixerit, Dei praecepta, homini etiam justificato, and sub
gratia constituto, esse ad observandum impossibilia, anathema esto. If any man
affirm; that the commandments of God are impossible for a man that is
justified, and in the state of grace, to keep; let him be anathema. Thus an
opinion, when Pelagius was condemned, becoms an article of Faith, by the
Councile of Trent. But my opinion is not pressed by the decree. For, having
excepted invincible ignorances, and mere surprises of concupiscence, because
the Gospel supposes concupiscence, the commandments of God may be possible, and
yet not possible for a man, whose intentions are distracted about many, to
avoid all sin. And it follows in the decree of the Council Can. XXII. Si
quis, hominem Jemel justificatum, dixerit, posse in tota vita, peccata omnia
etiam venialia, vitare; nisi ex speciali privilegio, quemadmodum de beata
virgi^^ tenet Ecclesia; anathema sit. If any man say, that a man once justified
may avoid all, even venial sins, through all his life; unless by special
privilege, as the Church holds of the blessed Virgin; let him be anathema.
What Church holds that the blessed Virgin never sinned, I know not. That the
Catholic Church holds it not, is evident by the opinions of doctors of the
Church to the contrary, which you shall find, with the rest which I have
alleged in this point, in Vossius his Collections Historiae Pelagianae libro
VI. Part I. But Andreas Vega, who maintains stiffely, that a Christian may
live all his life without sin, will have much ado to shelter himself from
this anathema. Thus far, then, I quarrel not the Council of Trent. And, those
who have the II. Councile of Orange at their fingers ends, whenever the
absolute efficacy of grace is questioned, will be ashamed to refuse the last
Canon of it, which says; Hic etiam, secundum fidem Catholicam credimus, quod,
accepta per Baptismum gratia, omnes baptizati, Christo auxiliante, and
cooperante, quae ad salutem pertinent, possint ac debeant, si fideliter
laboraro volueriut, adimplere. Here also, we believe, according to the
Catholic faith, that, all that are baptized, having received grace by
baptism, may and ought to fulfill those things which belong to their
salvation, if they will faithfully labor it. Which is no more then to say;
That they have sufficient grace to preserve them from falling away; Or from
falling into those sins, which forfeit the state of Grace. Though, I easily
yield, this possibility is rather natural than moral: And that, considering
the many opportunities and provocations even to those sins, which the
occasions of the world present the inclinations of Concupiscence, with it is,
in the judgment of discretion impossible, that a man should not forfeit the
state of grace, though absolutely there is nothing to enforce, that it must
necessarily come to pass. And truly the Prophet David's prayer; To be cleansed
from secret sins, but to be preserved from presumptuous sins, Psalm. XIX.
12, 13. shows difference enough between the kinds: But the obtaining of this
prayer, not to fall into any presumptuous sin, depends upon that diligent
watch, which even the regenerate may neglect to keep over themselves. Now, for
him that shall have committed this forfeit, though the promise of the holy
Ghost, and the habitual assistance thereof, is thereby void; yet, the
knowledge of Christianity, that is, the obligation and matter of it, and that
facility of living the life of a Christian which custom leaves behind it,
remaining; the actual assistance of the H. Ghost, which always accompanies
the preaching of the Gospel, cannot be wanting, where so great effects of it
are extant, to procure the recovery of him that is fallen away. Whether they
shall take effect or no, it is in the justice and mercy of that Providence
which only makes them effectual. The wisdom of God, which shall laugh at the
calamities, and mock when the fears of them come, that refuse when it calls,
and regard not when it stretches out hands, Prove. I. 22 -- represents the
condition of those that forfeit the Promise, exceedingly terrible, in that they
are fallen under Gods mere mercy; though it be granted, that they want not
sufficient helps to restore them, till they be come to the end of their race.

But, in very deed, the hardest of this point is, to give account how this
holds under the old Law, how any man could be saved by fullfilling that Law,
which, the Gospel declars to be taken away, because no man could be saved by
fulfilling it. To which my answer must be, according to the supposition
premised, concerning a twofold sense of Moses Law, that is to say, a twofold
Law of God, under the Old Testament; that it is no marvel, if the civil
happiness of Gods ancient people, (which the Law of Moses, in the litteral
sense, tendered for the reward of it) were to be obtained by worshipping the
only true God, and that civil conversation according to it, which that
people, of their natural freedom, were able to perform. True it is indeed
which S. Peter says, Acts XV. 10. that ^^ither they nor their Fathers, were
able to bear the burden of Moses Law: And that, for that reason, which, not
only Origin, but diverse others of the ancient Fathers, have alleged against
the Jews, that there went so many scruples to the precise observation of it,
as it was not possible for any people in the world to overcome. For, there
being such variety of cases, incident to the observation of such variety of
precepts, as no man could further be secured in, that he proceeded according to
the will of God, then, as the determination of those, whom God, by the law of
Deuteronomy. XVII. 8-12. XVI. 18. had referred it to, might secure him; And, that
always new cases must needs prevent new determinations, of necessity, the
precise observation of Moses law, even outwardly, and, in the literal sense,
was in ordinary discretion thing impossible. Which is effectual indeed to
convince the Jews, that God never was so in love with their Law, as to accept
them for precisely keeping of it, even in the world to come: But provided it
for an outward and civil discipline, to countenance the inward godliness and
righteousness of the heart, till he should think fit, openly to inact it for
the condition of the world to come; In the the mean time, having tendered the
Law for a condition, by which they might hold the land of promise; it is
manifest, that the obtaining of it depended not upon that precise observation
of all scruples, which, the nature of the subject rendered, in humane reason,
impossible: But that, in case they worshipped God alone, and observed the
precepts of the Law with that diligence, which a reasonable and honest man
would use in that case, the promise must become due. Whereby the law, in this
sense, is a fit figure to represent, both the impossibibility of Gods original
Law, and the gentleness of that dispensation thereof, which the Gospel
imports.

As for the inward and mystical sense of Moses Law, it is manifest, that, the
countenance which the Law gave true righteousness, by enforcing the worship of
the only true God, (together with so many acts of righteousness among men,
and temperance, chastity, and sobriety) with temporal penalties; With the
faith of the world to come, and the doctrine of spiritual righteousness of it
self acceptable to God, received from the Fathers, and maintained by the
Prophets and their disciples, in all ages; maintained always a stock of such
men, as God accepted of, even to the reward of the world to come. In whose
condition, notwithstanding we must observe a kind of limitation, or exception
to the temporal promises of the Law, not only at such time as the people fell
away from God, to the worship of Idols; but, in regard of hypocritical
Governors, who, pretending zeal to Gods laws of sacrifices and ceremonies, and
the promises of God due to them in that regard, under that color took
advantage, sufficiently to abuse and oppress his poor people. For when these
cases fell out, the Prophets, whose office it was to reprove such things in
Gods name, and their disciples, and followers, must needs fall under great
persecution at these men's hands. So that, their right in the land of Promise
turning to a sorry account of happiness, for them, who of all men were the most
severe observers of Gods Law; of necessity, the temporal promises thereof were
supplied and made good to them by the hope of the world to come. Which (as
Origin wisely and ingeniously observes) if a man well consider, he shall find,
that flaw in the promises of the Old Testament to be as a chink, or breach in a
wall, through which we may discern the light of the Gospel beyond it.

For, if the matter be rightly considered, it will appear, that, these
hypocritical Governors of Gods ancient people, which thought the promises of
the Law for ever entailed upon themselves and their successors, upon the
observing of sacrifices, and other ceremonies thereof, how little soever they
minded the true intent and meaning of it; were the true predecessors of the
Scribes and Pharisees in our Lords time; and the Prophets and their disciples,
the forerunners of our Lord, and his Apostles; and, that both persecuted both
upon the same score of account. The inward righteousness of the heart, which
God only allows, being that which both preached and professed, though the
former, under that knowledge of God and of his will with the Law, the other,
which the Gospel advances. And this the true and real ground, why they, and
that which befell them under the Old Testament, do bear the figure of our Lord
and his Apostles, and that which befell them by the rulers of the Jews in the
New: According to the words of our Lord Mat. XXIII. 34 -- where he shows,
that by crucifying himself, and persecuting his disciples, they do but fill up
the measure of their Fathers wickedness. And S. Paul of the Jews to the same
effect. 1 These. II. 15, 16. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own
Prophets, and please not God, and oppose all men. Forbidding us to speak to the
Gentiles, that they may be saved. For wrath is come on them to the end.

I say then, that, under that dim light of Gods will which the Saints of the
Old Testament enjoyed, when the world to come was not yet covenanted for, nor
the sayings and doings of our Lord Christ manifested, to invite to
Christianity; it is necessarily consequent, that God should accept of that
obedience under the law, which, as it must come from a sincere heart, and
studious of pleasing him, so must it needs come short of that perfection which
the Gospel requires. For, as I said before, that love of God with all the
heart, and all the soul, and all the might, which the Law requires, is limited
by the precepts of the law; which, whosoever observes with all the heart and so
forth must be thought to have performed that love, wherein then the observation
of Gods law consisted. As for the precept of not coveting, of which S. Paul
says, Romans VII. 7-11. that he had not known concupiscence had not the Law
said, Thou shall not covet: And Saint Augustine observes, that, being joined to
to the precept of loving God above all things, they comprise all Christianity;
Though all this be true according to the spiritual sense of the Law, yet
according to the leter, it cannot be denied, that the last precept of the
decalogue forbids only compassing that which is another man's; Counting his
wife in that number, because there was then means to compass another man's
wife, without breaking the Law, which allowed of divorces. And therefore this
is the sen^e of that which follows in S. Paul; Sin, taking advantage,
wrought in me all concupiscence by the commandment. For, without the Law sin is
dead. But I once lived without the law; But, the commandment coming, sin
revived and I died: And the commandment, which was to life, was found, for me
to death. For sin, taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and so slew
me; All this, I say, as the rest of that Epistle, concerning the inability of
the Law to bring us to righteousness, is to be understood, of the outward and
litterall sense of the law. To wit, that the Israelites, before they received
the Law, (and so, other men without the Law) understood not that it was a
sin, but a piece of wit, to compass a man's wife or goods, without violence,
or to commit that uncleanness, to which the law had assigned no penalty. So
the Law being given, and having assigned no penalty to the transgression of
this precept; was it marvile, that sin, prevailing over that conviction of the
conscience, which the precept tendered, should seduce a man, to give way to
concupiscence, and turn the precept that was given for life to his death? He
then, that was not imposed upon with this ^light of sin, but received the
commandment as Gods, who has other penalties in store then those which the Law
assigns; if, out of conscience to God, he observed the Laws of his worship
from the heart, if he kept all that, which not only the penalties assigned by
the law, but the will of God declared by the precept, convinced him to take
hold of his conscience; is it not reason to conclude, that he fulfilled that
measure of spiritual righteousness, which God for that time, required of them
whom he assured of the world to come, upon condition of such obedience? Which
if it be so, that obligation to this righteousness, which was so declared
under the Law, is that Law of spiritual obedience, which God judges those by,
whom for that time, he accepted unto the reward of the world to come.

As for the precept of loving our neighbor as our selves, having showed, that
it concerned only Israelites under the Law, I have also, by the same means,
showed, that they were to detest the Gentiles as Idolaters, that detestation
being the means to keep them up to the service of God, from falling away to
Idols; Whereupon, as, by the Law, he that fell from the Law, and seduced his
kindred to do the like, was to find no manner of pity, at the hand even of his
brethren, Deuteronomy. XIII. 8. So also, it is provided by the Jews Constitutions,
that they shall observe no rule of common equity, in seeking evidence against
such a one, to bring him to conviction, and to make him an example. And as for
those hypocrites, which, under pretense of the outward and carnal observatiof
the Law, persecuted the preachers of true spiritual righteousness (the
Prophets of Old, and our Lord and his Apostles, who pretended to carry it unto
the Gentiles, whom they hold themselves obliged to hate, as having been once
Idolaters) it is visible that those Saints who suffered persecution at their
hands, did not find themselves tied to that measure which the Gospel
prescribes, of praying for their enemies to the utmost. This is seen in those
curses, which David and Jeremy pursue their enemies with, the Gospel having
prescribed for a general rule to all Christians; Bless them that curse you,
Mat. V. 44. Luke VI. 27. Romans XII. 14. 1 Pet. III. 9. James III. 9. I deny not
that herein, they were figures and forerunners of our Lord and his disciples,
and their sayings, prophesies of the curses that should overtake the people of
the Jews, for persecuting them: For I have showed, just now, the ground, upon
which this is to be received. But I challenge, that ground also which I settled
at the beginning; that, the mystical sense of the Scripture always supposes
a litterall sense, and that these things cannot be understood to be fulfilled
in our Lord Christ, but that first they must have been verified in the Prophets
themselves: In whom, as it is plain, that the persecutions for which they
curse, did come to pass, so plain it is, that their curses fell upon their
persecutors, For, nothing can be more manifest, then, that the Prophet Jeremy
first prayed for the people, that God would not destroy them: And, when their
sins were so great, that God would not hear him, but commanded him to publish
their ruin; that they, thereupon, so hated and persecuted him, that his
patience was overcome, and he prayed to God to punish their ingratitude to him
with the judgments which he had denounced. Jer. VIII. 16. XI. 14, 19, 20.
XVIII. 16, 17, 18. XVII. 18-23. And it is plain, that the case is the same
with the Prophet David, and that he, receiving evil for good of his enemies,
thereupon, proceeds to those prayers which he makes against them Ps. XXXV.
11-14. LXIX. 5, 8, 10, 11, 12, 23-29. CIX. 3, 4, 5-20. And what is the
difference between this and that of Elias? Of whom S. James V. 17. says, that
he prayed that it might not rain, and it rained not for three years and six
mon^ths: So that when he says, 1 Kings XVII. 1. there ^^^ll be neither dew nor
rain upon the earth, but according to my word; He speaks upon the obtaining
of that prayer of his: For afterward, the rain came not till he prayed for
it, 1 Kings XVIII. 43. Whereupon it follows in S. James; And again^ he prayed,
and the heavens gave rain, and the earth budded forth her fruit. For, by these
things you see, that he prayed for judgment upon the Land of Israel, for
refusing his prophesies, even as he executed it upon the prophets of Israel, 1
Kings XVIII. 42. And is not the reason the same, when he destroys two
Captains of fifties with their bands, by praying for fire from heaven upon
them, for taking in hand to execute the command of an Idolatrous King, and
coming to seize him 2 Kings I. 10, 12? Is it not the same, in his Scholar and
successor Elizeus, when he curses the children of Bethel, for despising of
him, being a Prophet of God, whereupon two and ^orty of them are destroyed with
bears out of the forest, 2 Kings II. 22, 23, 24? For, had these children been
bred in the fear of the true God, and not under Idolatrous parents, it cannot
in reason be thought, that they would have reviled one of Gods Prophets, who
were held in, and treated with, such reverence, even by the Princes of his
people.

And truly, when Samson casts away his own life to do mischief to Gods enemies
and the enemies of his people, out of this express consideration, of being
revenged upon them, for putting out his eyes; can any man's heart be so hardened,
by misunderstanding the Scriptures, as to say that this can be reconciled with
the principles of Christianity, which forbid all revenge? Jud. XVI. 28-31. Romans
XII. 19. Mat. VI. 22, 38-48. It is said indeed, that Samson did this, as a
figure of Christ, who killed his enemies, the powers of darkness, by his
death. And it is certainly true. But that will not answer the reason formerly
alleged. Whether we say, that Samsons death was a figure of Christ's, by the
intent of Samson, or by the intent of God, whose Providence so ordered things
to come to pass, that his death might figure Christ's death; It cannot be said,
that the intent of figuring Christ's death could make that agreeable to Gods
Law, which otherwise was not. Rather we are to advise whether sinful actions,
and not according to Gods own Law, were fit to figure Christ. Nor will it serve
the turn to say, that he did it by the motion of Gods Spirit, which, we are
indeed to allow, that the Judges, being Prophets were endowed with. For, it is
not to be said, that the Spirit of God moves any man to do that, which, the
will of God declared by his Law forbids. And therefore, the fact of Razias 2
Mac. XIV. 37-46. though not udertaken, with that confidence of doing mischief
to Gods enemies, which Samson had by the assurance of his being called to
deliver Gods people from them; yet, being done, to deprive them of their
pleasure they should have, in insulting over Gods people, destroying so
faithful a servant of his, must needs be said to proceed from the the same
motive with Samsons; Though I say not, therefore, that this can serve to prove
that Book of the Maccabes to be either Canonical or otherwise. Thus much, I
conceive, is to be granted, that, the Maccabees taking arms for maintaining
their Religion and Nation against the tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes, is not to
be condemned as against Gods Law, because we see them commended By the Apostle
Heb. XI. 35-38. And yet, for Christians to take arms for the maintaining of
themselves in the free exercise of their religion, (much more, for the Power of
imposing of it upon others) is certainly, contrary to the instructions of the
Apostles Romans XIII. 1-6. Titus III. 1. 1 Pet. II. 13-17. as it appears by the
practice of all the Primitive Christians, who, maintaining themselves to be for
number able to defend themselves by arms against persecution, maintain
withal, that their profession did not allow them so to do. And indeed, though
the godly Jews endured death rather then renounce Gods Law, (as the
Christians afterward) yet, a man may see a great difference between the
motives of their several sufferings, if be consider, that they died for the
Laws of their country; (which the heathen themselves have reputed a due
consideration for a man to part with his life for, though out of carnal self
love)* ^ow much more to obey Gods Law, (whom they maintained to be the only
true God) by suffering death for the laws which he had given them? Whereas
Christianity requires to be maintained with our lives, though we become
ignominious by the Laws of our Countries for maintaining it. Whereby we see
how true it is, that God allowed them some motives of temporal good, to invite
them to undergo the hardship, which the profession of his Laws should
infer: Whereas, from Christians he challenges the same constancy, when he
allows no presumption of help in this world, no hope but that of the world to
come.

Which is, indeed, another strong argument, that God accepted of a lower
measure of obedience under the Law, then he requires, under the Gospel, of
Christians: Because, forsooth, he always managed his ancient people (like
babes, with the fear of the rod, and the hope of cakebread, so) with the fear
and hope of the blessings and punishments of this present world, habituating
them to presume of his favor or disgrace, according to the same. Let any man
read the book of Psalms, and consider throughout the whole tenor of it, what
presumptions of Gods favor, those who indicted them by Gods Spirit do raise
upon temporal deliverances, of his disgrace, upon the insultations of Gods and
their enemies; and tell me, if it be according to the style of the Gospel,
which allows only, the assurance of Gods providence for subsistence in this
world, to persuade us to take up Christ's Cross? Well then says S. Paul Romans
VIII. 15. Ye have not received any more the Spirit of bondage to fear, but ye
have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby ye cry, Abba, that is, Father.
For, those that are led with the hope of temporal promises, (as all must
necessarily be led, under that Law which was established upon such) must needs
be subject to fear of disgrace with God, whenever their sins allowed not
those promises to take place. So then, though they were then partakers of Gods
Spirit, as the Prophet Ezekiel shows us XXXVI. 27. XXXVII. 14. XXXIX. 20. Yet,
in as much as it is called the Spirit of fear, there is due argument, that,
they were not pertaker of that peace and joy in the holy Ghost. which
Christians afterward were moved with, to endure all persecution for the
maintenance of their profession. But, the Apostle points us ou^ further, the
sourse of this fear, Heb. II. 14, 15. When he says, that our Lord Christ
took part ^f flesh and blood, that, by death, he might abolish him that had
the power of death, ^ven the devil, and discharge all those, that, through the
fear of death, were all their life long subject unto bondage. For, so long as
the promises of this life ended in death, and the punishments thereof conducted
to it, they who knew that death came into the world upon the transgression of
Adam, could not think themselves, discharged of Gods wrath, so long as they
found themselves liable to the debt of it. No marvel then, if the Spirit of
God were the Spirit of fear, in them, who saw not as yet the kingdom of death
dissolved, by the rising of our Lord Christ from the dead.

Another argument I make from the words of our Lord, when the disciples were
ready to demand fire from heaven upon those Samaritanes that received them not,
after the example of Elias Luke, IX. 52-56. Ye know not what Spirit ye are of,
says our Lord; For the Son of man came not to destroy, but to save men's lives.
Whereby he declares that, because the Gospel brings salvation, whereas the
Law wrought wrath, as S. Paul says, by tendering conviction of sin, without
help to overcome it; Romans III. 20. IV. 15. VII. 8-11. therefore, God requires
under the Gospel, of those that are his, the Spirit that seeks only the good
of them from whose hands they receive it not; Whereas, under the Law, even his
Prophets, revenged themselves of their enemies, by vengeance obtained at Gods
hands. And, by this means, we have an answer for that difficulty, otherwise
insoluble, in our Lords words, of John Baptist, Mat. XI. 11. Verily I say to
you, there never arose among those that are born of women one greater then John
the Baptist. But the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater then he. For, if
God under the Law required not of his Prophets, that perfection of Charity,
which the Gospel exacteth of all Christians; if, in those things which they
said and did by Gods Spirit, they have not expressed it; well may it be said,
that the least of all those that belong to the Gospel in truth, which here is
called the kingdom of heaven, is, in a respect of so great concernment, greater
then the Prophets of the Old Testament.

As for the example of Jael the wife of Eber the Kenite, who, being in league
with Jabin and Si^era, for the good of Gods people, knocked him on the head,
being retired into the protection of her house, and is commended for it by the
Spirit of God, in Deborah the Prophetess. Jud. V. 17-21. VI. 24-28. The
instance indeed is difficult enough: And, they that are so ready to condemn
the fact of Judith* in cutting off Holefernes by deceit, and that by the
example of her father Simeon, that spoiled and destroyed the men of Sheche^^,
contrary to covenant Judge. IX. 2. Genesis XXXIV. 23. are not advised, how to come
clear of it. Suppose there was just cause of hostility between them, a daughter
of the house being dishonored by the Prince of that people. (For, among Gods
people, their chastity was always as highly valued, as it was little regarded
among Idolaters) Suppose that they condescended to be circumcised, not for love
to the true God, but for hope of increasing their own power and riches, by
bringing the Israelites under their Government, (as there is appearance enough
in the words of Hamor, Genesis XXXIV. 20, 21, 22.) Yet, a league being inacted
upon such a pretense, the zeal of Simeon and Levi, in destroying those that
were come under the covering of Gods wings so far, very well figures the zeal
of the Jews in persecuting the Apostles, and not allowing the Gentiles any
room of salvation, by their own only true God. And therefore it is excellently
observed by S. Jerome Tradit. Hebr. in Genesin, that the Scribes were of the
tribe of Simeon, as the Priests of the tribe of Levi, in whom the curse of
Jacob by the Spirit of God detesting their fact, (and prophesying the like to
those their successors in the case of our Lord Christ and his Apostles I will
divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Genesis XLIX. 5, 6, 7.) was
evidently fulfilled in the mystical sense. The tribe of Levi for gathering of
Tithes, and the tribe of Simeon, for employment of Clerks and Notaries,
dwelling dispersed through all the tribes, as Solomon Jarchi, in his gloss
upon the place literally expounds it. But the case of Judeth is the case of a
stratageme in professed hostility, which whether Christianity allow or not,
certainly no Law of nations disallowes. And therefore, though she propose to
her self the zeal of Simeon and Levi, for the honor of their people, and the
success they had against their enemies; yet if we understand her not to
commend the means by which they brought it to pass, (to wit, by violating the
public faith) we shall not find her contradict the Spirit of God, which, by
Jacob, condemns them for it. As for the ^act of Jael, it is in vain to allege
any mystical sense to justify it, as some would do, unless we can undertake,
that there was no such thing done in the way of historical truth; which, I
suppose, no man will be so mad as to do. And therefore, if any man will not
believe that the Spirit of God in Deborah extolls only the temporal benefit,
which the people of God re^ped, by that fact of hers* (for which she was
always to be famous amongst them) leaving to her self the justification of her
conscience; Let him seek a better answer. But he who, transgressing that
Charity that is fundamental in Christianity, (and therefore, without which, no
Christian can obtain the Spirit of God) shall make her example a motive to
that, which he cannot justify even in Gods ancient people; Though I allow him
to mistake Christians, for Pagans and Idolaters, (whose professed enmity to
Gods people, upon the account* of Religion, was the ground of that revenge,
which they were allowed then to pursue them with) yet I must not allow him to
be a Christian, that teaches that wickedness, which a Jew dare not maintain.
Though it be just with God, to suffer them, that presume of the assistance of
Gods Spirit in understanding the Scriptures, before they be principled in
Christianity; (which the gift of Gods Spirit to Christians presupposes) to be
led unto such wicked imaginations by reading the Scriptures; as he suffered
those, that, setting up their Idols in their hearts, and putting the stumbling
block of their iniquities before their faces, came to seek direction from God;
to be seduced by the Prophets by whom they should come to inquire, as the
Prophet threatens, Ezekiel. XIV. 8, 10. As for the fact of David and Hus^ai in
ruining of Absalom 2 Samuel XV. 32-37. XVI. 16-19. XVII. 5-14. there is the less
difficulty in it, because we are not obliged to maintain the actions of the
Fathers to be without sin, and the Spirit of God does no where commend it.
Which also holds in those officious lies, wherewith, Rebecca, and the Midwives
of the Isra^lites, and Rahab the harlot, seduced Isaak, and the King of Egypt,
and the Rulers of Jericho, to the good of Gods people Genesis XXVII. Exodus I.
15-21. Jos. II. 4, 5. because, whatsoever were the success which God blessed
them with, yet, as S. Augustine observes, its no where said that God blessed
them for lying, but for that love to his people, which, though joined with
their own weakness, he then rewarded. Though, he that well considers the
nature of these acts, (comparing them with these sayings and doings of David
and Jeremy, of Elias, Elizaus and Samson, which, I have showed, the spirit of
God allows) will, without doubt, find cause to believe, that the reason, why
their acts, which were joined with such infirmities, were blessed by God, at
that time, is to be drawn from that measure of knowledge, which the means
allowed by God at that time afforded; and the obligation which God required at
their hands, proportionable to the same.

From the premises we may proceed to resolve that endless dispute, concerning
the intent of our Lords Sermon in the Mount, whether it was to take away those
^alse glosses, which the Scribes and Pharisees had put upon the Law of Moses;
(importing, that nothing but the overt act of murder, adulteries, and the like,
stood prohibited by it) or, to enlarge it unto a further extent, of forbidding
the first motions of concupiscence, in regard of that further light which the
Gospel brings. For I have showed, that the most difficult passage of all,
which says; Thou shall love thy neighbor and ^ate thine enemy, Mat. V. 43.
is, according to the practice of the law in David, Jeremy, Elias, and Elizeus,
which is, without question, the best interpreter of the law, and the extent of
it. How much more if you translate it, (as questionless the Hebrew will allow
us to translate it) thou shall love thine neighbor, but may hate thine
en^my? For, it is manifest, that, when the fourth Commandment says; Six days
shall thou labor and do all that thou have to do; the meaning is no more but
this, Six ^ayes thou may labor; to wit, as for this commandment. So that,
this clause is nothing else, but the consequence of that limitation which the
law puts to the precept of loving a man's neighbor as himself; understanding
his neighbor to be only an Israelite, and teaching to pursue Idolaters with
all manner of hatred. Now when our Savior says; (...); his meaning is plain
enough, Ye have heard that it was said to them of old; (that is, to the Fathers
at the giving of the law) not, ye have heard it said by your Predecessors; to
wit, the Scribes and Pharisees, who about some hundred years before, had begun
to gloss the law with their Traditions. Mat. V. 21, 27, 33, 38, 43. The
subject matter in all the rest, besides that which I have spoken of, being
always the express letter of Moses law, no Tradition of the Elders. Yet it is
not my intent to say; that* our Lords intent is not to clear the true meaning
of the law from the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees. For I
acknwledge a false gloss of theirs upon Moses law, which, it is the intent not
only of the Sermon in the mount, but of all the New Testament, to clear. I
say, the Scribes and Pharisees, taking advantage of the truth of the world to
come (which they thought to be covenanted for, and not only intimated, as the
truth is, by Moses law) did infer the reward thereof to be due to the outward
and carnal observation of it. And this is that false gloss of theirs, which,
as every where else, so here especially, our Lord clears, when he says;
Unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. V. 20.
But this he does, by clearly inacting that conversation which the Gospel
requires, whereof the Fathers of the Old law had only expressed the rudiments
and principles, out of that light which the law, joined with the tradition of
the Fathers, and the doctrine of the Prophets, had supplied; Though, so well
accepted by God at that time, that he failed not to grant his holy Spirit, to
them, who had attained that measure of righteousness. And therefore we are to
conclude, that, during the L^w, there was a sincerity of righteousness,
consisting in the observation of the precepts thereof, not out of any temporal
respect, or hope of this world; but out of the sense of Gods will, who
searches the heart, and judges the thoughts thereof, according to which, the
Prophets of old and their disciples, as Zachary and Elizabeth in the New
Testament Luke I. 6. are to be counted perfect and entire in righteousness;
Comparing them, forsooth, with the Scribes and Pharisees, and all their sect,
who, in all ages of that people, as I have showed, standing so much upon the
precise observation of the positive precepts thereof, for their own power and
advantage, grossly failed in all performance, where the sincerity of the heart
became requ^site. But that, when our Savior says: Be ye perfect as your
Father in heaven is perfect. Mat. V. 48. It is manifest from the premises, that
he requires of Christians that charity toward God, and all men for Gods sake
(or, to speak in those terms which I take to be more general, that respect to
the will of God, and his glory and service, in all our doings) which he did not
covenant for with his ancient people.

Which point, before I conclude, that we may the better understand, wherein I
make this perfection of Christians to consist, it will be requisite to resolve,
whether or no Christians can do more then the law of God requires; and, whether
there are these offices, which the law of God commands not, but the Gospel
only commends, as matters of counsel, to those that aim at perfection among
Christians, not matters of necessity, for all that would only be saved; So
that, the works whereby they are pursued must be called works of
supererogation, because, he that does them, lays out more upon Gods service
then he is obliged to do. They are the words of our Lord to the disciples, Mat.
XIX. 11, 12. All are not capable of this word. (of not marrying) For, there are
Eunuchs which were so born from their mothers womb: And, there are Eunuchs
which were made Eunuchs by men: And, there are Eunuchs that have made
themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven. He that is capable, let him hold
this. Here it is said, that God has made some men of such constitution of
nature, that they are able to contain themselves from marriage, and that this
is the gift of continence, which whosoever has, falls under a command of not
marrying, whosoever has not, of marrying. But when our Lord exhorts those that are
able to contain themselves from marriage to strive for that grace, certainly
he makes not that a gift of nature, which he would have a man endeavor to
attain. He that is exhorted to make himself an Eunuch, is not so made by God,
but from God he has the grace, to prefer the kingdom of heaven before, even
that content which God allows him here; and, if he betray not that grace, by
preferring that content before the clearest and securest means of attaining
it, he will not fail of grace to perform that which he resolves, for Gods
sake. And truly it were strange, that the Gospel should make that grace, which
conducts to the height of Christianity, to consist in an indowment of nature.
But, S. Paul's words will take no nay, 1 Cor. VII. 25-28-36, 37, 38. Of Virgins
I have no precept of the Lord, but give advise, as having received mercy of the
Lord to be faithful. I think, then, this expedient for the present necessity,
that it is good for a man to be thus. Art thou tied to a wife? seek not to be
loose. Art thou loose from a wife? seek not a wife. But if thou marry thou
sinnest not, and if a virgin marry she sins not. Only such shall have
affliction in the flesh. But I spare you. Again, If a man think he deals
unhansomly with his Virgin, if she pass her flour, and so it must be, let him
do as he please, he sins not, let him marry. But he that stands firm in
his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his own will, and has
resolved this in his heart, to preserve his Virgin, does well. So he that
marries her does well, but he that marries her not does better. Is the
sunshine more manifest then this? A man may resolve either of both, for his
daughter a Virgin, (supposing her will to follow his, as, generally the duty
of the children is, which S. Paul here supposes) and not sin, but do well;
yet better in containing from marriage, because of the advantage which that
state yeildeth Christianity, as S. Paul shows. Therefore he declares that God
has given no law in it, but, his Apostle gives that advise for the best, which
his Lord had done. The same Apostle of Widows. 1 Timothy V. 5, 9-14. She that is
a Widow indeed, and desolate hops in God, and continues in supplications and
prayers night and day. And, let no Widow be listed under threescore years old,
having been the wife of one husband, having a testimony for good works, that
she has bred up her children, entertained strangers, washed ^he Saints feet,
helped the afflicted, followed every good work. But refuse younger Widows,
for, when they grow wanton against Christ, they will marry: Being to be
condemned, because they have renounced their first faith. And withal, they
learn to be idle, and to go about from house to house; and not only idle, but
tattlers, busy bodies, speaking things unfitting. Therefore* I would have the
younger marry. Here is again a clear case. Timothy is directed to li^t some
Widows, for the service of the Church, in the state of Widows* others to
refuse. That which commends the one for the preferment, is, the exercise of
those works which they could not have had opportunity for, in the state of
wedlock. That which renders the others dangerous, is, because, for them to
desire marriage, is to grow wanton against Christ. Wherefore, when S. Paul
would have them to marry, it is not because he denies in the next words, that
state of proficience, which he had acknowledged just before; but because it is
better to hold the mean, then to fall from the highest rank of Christianity.
Which serves to resolve his meaning, as well as his Masters, 1 Cor. VII. 1, 2,
6, 7. For that which you writ to me about, it is good for a man not to touch a
woman. But because of fornication, let every man have his own wife, and every
woman her own husband. But this I speak of indulgence not by command. For, I
would all men were even as my self. But, every one has his proper grace of
God, some thus, some otherwise. Does not the grace of God, in married people,
assi^t in the offices of Christianity toward those relations which marriage
procures? Correspondently, therefore, the Grace of God in the continent is not
a natural temper, obliging them so to live; But, the helps that enable them to
discharge themselves like Christians, in a higher rank, among Christians. So
that, the perfection of Christianity lies not in the state of continence, but,
in the rank of it; That is to say, in those offices of Christianity, wherein,
their estate gives them opportunity, to be conversant; the state being no
otherwise so accountable, then, because there is a presumption that persons are
such as they ought to be, and, as their state gives them opportunity to be. The
perfection of Christianity, then, consists in the love of God, and in his
service, and the service of Christians for Gods sake; That is, in spending a
man's life in those offices, in which there is most regard to God, least to our
own temporal interest. But, is it unreasonable to count that a state of
perfection, which generally, and in reason, is the means for it, because it is
found to be practiced to other effects? Is it unreasonable to think, that God,
who has need of all states for the service of his Church, and gives those
several graces, which are requisite to make several men serviceable for
several states, should not determine by law, but leave to their choice, whom
he indues with those graces, that which contains not the work of Christianity,
but, being indifferent by kind, is nevertheless, by kind, the means to
procure it?

Saint Paul gives this reason, why he wrought for his living, rather then take
any thing of the Corinthians, in these terms; It were better for me to dye,
then that any man should void that which I glory in. For if I preach the
Gospel, I have nothing to glory of, for necessity lies upon me, yea, woe to me
if I preach not the Gospel. For, if I do it willingly I have a reward, if
unwillingly, a stewardship I am trusted with. What is then my reward? That I
bestow the preaching of Christ's Gospel without charge: So as not to use my
right in preaching it. 1 Cor. IX. 15-18. The necessity of preaching the Gospel
stands in opposition to the preaching of it freely, which is therefore a matter
of free choice. The woe to S. Paul is, for not preaching the Gospel,
therefore, not for not preaching it for nothing. Wherefore, the reward he
means when he says, what is my reward, (that is, wherein lies my claim, my
plea, or my pre^ense to it?) is not that which the Gospel covenants for with
all Christians. For, that S. Paul was not to fail of, though he preached not
for nothing. Seneca says that a slave may oblige his Master, by doing, not
only what he commands, but what he knows will please him, though he command
it not. Such are not those whom our Lord speaks to, Luke XVII. 6-10. So ye
also, when ye have done all things that are commanded you, say; we are
unprofitable servants, we have done what we were indebted to do. Ye, that have
faith as a grain of mustard seed, that is, a small seed of Christianity, to
whom the parable there is proposed. For, it speaks of those who sit down when
their master has supped whereas, there are others, that must sit down with
their master Luke XXII. 30. others, that shall sit down as soon as he comes,
and himself wait on them, Luke XII. 37. And therefore there are servants of God
under the Gospel, that fail not of their wages, but oblige not their Masters
goodness without promise. Above these wages, is the reward which S. Paul
means, which though he pretend not, by discharging his trust so cheerfully as
to preach the Gospel for nothing, (which God commanded him not) he may
nevertheless obtain his wages by giving a just account of his office.
Therefore, the word, (...), when he says, (...), signifies not abusing, but
fully using, as in Plato, (...). He used not the gift aright: And in S. Paul 1
Cor. VII. 29. (...), they that use this world as not freely using it; Not, as
not abusing it; Though it has been so translated; because the rest of the
opposites before run in the like correspondence; They that have wives, as
having none, those that weep as not weeping, those that rejoice, as not
rejoicing, those that buy, as not possessing. So, those that use this world as
not using, or not freely using it. And in the Latin Saint Hierome, Qu^st,
Hebr, in Genesis Sancti Apostoli his fere testimoniis abutuntur quae jam fuerant
in gentibus divulgata. The holy Apostles, use (I suppose no man will say Saint
Herome meant that they abuse) those testimonies which had been already divulged
among the Gentiles. And in Plautus and the civil law, abuti is to spend, which
is the full use of things that may be spent. For, seeing Saint Paul, in the
beginning of the Chapter, challenges, that he might have done otherwise as
well as the rest of the Apostles; either he might have done otherwise without
sin, or he had not that right in point of conscience to God, which he says,
they used without sin. If then the law of God determine not a man to abstain
from marriage, to abandon the world, and riches of the world, which, he has
just title to; and yet this may be done to oblige God in point of goodness,
not in point of promise, what is Saint Augustine^, fault in saying of Saint
Paul, voluit S. Paulus ex Evangelio victum sibi quaerere. Quod maluit operari,
amplius erogabat. Saint Paul might have got his living by preaching the Gospel.
In that he choosed to work* he laid out more in Gods service? For, this is not
to say, that the love of God, for which he did it, is not commanded; but, that
he was not commanded to exercise that love* in forbearing his due. Therefore,
if any man shall teach; the precepts of loving God above all, and all for God,
and of mortifying the first motions of concupiscence, together with the
particulars, unto which our Lords Sermon in the Mount brancheth those
generals, to prescribe works of super^rogation, and matters, not of precept,
but of counsel, as too many have been allowed, (I say not enjoined) to do, in
the Church of Rome; worthily in that regard, is this professed in the Church of
England, to be a blasphemous doctrine. Neither can it appear, that the ancient
Fathers ever intended any such sense by it; who, notwithstanding, all with one
voice, agree in the difference between matter of precept and matter of counsel,
under the Gospel, which difference Doctor Field, in his learned work of the
Church, having acknowledged in the Church of England, no man can justly charge
me with novelty, in maintaining of it.

Now, though the perfection of Christianity, consist, as has been showed, in
loving God above all, and all for God; or, in resolving to do all in respect of
Gods will and for his service; Yet is not this perfection perfectly to be
obtained during this life. The reason is manifest: Because it is not morally
possible, that the work of it should not be interrupted by original
concupiscence, the mortification whereof, which proceeds by degrees* is that
perfection which a Christian arriveth at* whatsoever he aim at. Saint Paul had
gone as far as another man when he said Phil. III. 13, 14, 15. Brethren, I
count not my self to have seized. Only forgetting that which is behind, and
stretching at that which is before* according to the mark* I drive to the prize
of the heavenly calling of God by Christ Jesus. As many therefore as are
perfect, let us be so minded And* 1 Cor. III. 18. We all, looking, as in a
glass, upon the glory of God with bare face, are changed after the same image,
from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord; To wit, by the same degrees,
as the mortification of our own concupiscence makes room for Gods Spirit. And
therefore, he says again of himself, 1 Cor. IX. 26. I therefore so run, as
not without appearance of going forwards, so fight, not as beating the air:
But I cuffe and inslave my body, least having preached to others* I my self
become reprobate. Notwithstanding the law of Christianity which the Gospel
preaches, supposing this concup^scence, and providing a right of
reestablishment into Gods grace* for all that, being cast down in this course,
shall return by repentance; manifest it is, that, though we are not saved by
fulfilling the original rule of that righteousness to which the creation of
our nature on Gods behalf obliges us; Yet, by undertaking and pursuing that
perfection, which the profession of Christianity imports; provided, that we
persevere in pursuing it unto the end, though sometimes this pursuit consist in
turning from those sins, by which we had started aside. Now the law of Moses
is, certainly, a transcript, or rude draught of this original righteousness
due from man to God. And therefore, purposely made so curiously scrupulous,
that even the earthly promises of the land of Canaan, and temporal happiness
in it, should not be obtained by the exact observation thereof, as I observed
before. But it was also an intimation of the Gospel of Christ, not only in the
provision which it made for expiation of transgressions, (the signification
whereof the greatest part never understood) but in those grounds of assurance,
which it gave those that should observe it from the heart, as before God, and
for his love, of the reward of the world to come. In which regard S. Paul and
the Apostles so often allege the saying of the Prophet Abac. II. 4. The just
shall live by faith; and Saint Paul Romans I. 15. says, that the righteousness
of God is revealed, by the Gospel, from faith to faith: That is, from the faith
of Christ to come, to the faith of Christ come. And Saint John Baptist says of
our Lord John I. 16. Of his fulness we have all received, grace for grace:
Because the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.
So that, though the grace of the Gospel came by Christ, yet it succeeded the
same grace under the law, though, as under a fainter light, so in a scarser
measure. And Saint Augustine rightly accounts those that attain tru^
righteousness under the law, to belong to the New Testament, as carnal
Christians under the Gospel, to the O^d But if the faithful, at that time,
were saved by that scarce measure of righteousness, which the faint light they
were under required; then were they also saved, though, not by fullfilling the
original Law of righteousness due from man to God, yet, by fulfilling that
rule of Evangelicall righteousness, which God, under the Law, required at
their hands. In which regard, if the Fathers, by things recorded of them in the
Old Testament, may be seen to have attained that perfection which Saint Paul
calls his glory, in doing that which he was not commanded* as a means to the
discharging of that wherein the perfection of Christians consists; that which
became matter of precept under the Gospel, is necessarily to be taken for matter
of counsel under the Law. Always understanding, that, as those helps of
grace, without which, I have showed, that they had not been able to perform
such righteousness under the Law* were granted even then, in consideration, of
our Lord Christ's interposing his mediation to the redeeming of mankind; so was
the righteousness then performed, accepted in no consideration, but of the
obedience of Christ and his righteousness.

CHAP. XXXIII. Whether any works of Christians be satisfactory for sin, and
meritorious of heaven, or not. The recovery of Gods grace for a Christian
fallen from it, a work of labor and time. The necessity and efficacy of
Penance to that purpose, according to the Scriptures, and the practice of the
Church. Merit by virtue of Gods promise, necessary. The Catholic Church
agrees in it, the present Church of Rome allows merit of justice*
ANother dispute there is that makes an endless noise, never to be decided,
but upon this ground, not to be maintained, admitting it. That is, Whether the
works of Christians, merit heaven or not; which I must enlarge into another
point, of so near nature to it, that both may as easily be resolved as the one:
Whether the humiliation for sin, in praying, fasting, giving ^lmes, by
Christians, in confidence of the satisfaction of Christ, to obtain pardon of
God, be satisfactory for sin or not. For, in as much, as to be free from
evil is good, and, to obtain a discharge from punishment, is as much as to
deserve a reward; in so much it is all one to satisfy for* sin* so as to be
discharged of punishment, and to fulfill an obligation, so as to claim a
reward. Whereupon, as I said before, that, all satisfaction is necessarily of
the nature of merit. To this question then, or, to these questions, the answer
is necessarily consequent from the premises: That, if we regard the original
law of God, neither can any man make God satisfaction for his sin, nor merit
the reward of everlasting life at his hands; But, if we regard that
dispensation in it which the Gospel preaches, in consideration of the merits
and satisfaction of our Lord Christ; neither shall any man attain forgiveness
of sin without making satisfaction for it, nor the reward of everlasting
life, without making it due to him by virtue of Gods promise.

The proof of the first point consists in all those passages of Scripture
which require repentance as a condition requisite to the obtaining remission of
sins, whether in the New Testament, or in the Old: In as much as I have showed,
that the promise^ of the Gospel, were obtained under the Law, upon the same
terms and conditions for substance, as under the Gospel; though for the
measure, proportionable to that light of knowledge, and those helps of Grace,
which the dispensation of God under the Old Law afforded. In particular taking
notice of the theme of Saint John Baptist, which our Lord also took for the
argument of his preaching, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand; Mat.
III. 2. IV. 17. Mark I. 15. which the Apostles also followed, Acts II. 38. III.
19. Upon that ground which Saint Paul also debates, in the beginning of the
Epistle to the Romans; that the necessity of the Gospel and Christianity is
grounded upon a supposition, that both Jews and Gentiles are liable to sin
without Christ, and, by consequence, to judgment. And again, of those texts
of the Apostles writings, wherein there is mention, or intimation of Penance
required or enjoined by them, or by the Church, in their time, for the
obtaining of remission of sins by the keys, which I have handled in another
place. And thirdly, of those passages which I have quoted in this book,
disputing of Justification by faith, to show, that, remission of sins done
after baptism is obtained for Christians, by prayer joined with fasting and
giving of alms, to move God to give us pardon, as we forgive or give to our
brethren. But this proof consists also in all those scriptures, which I have
alleged, to show that the blood of Christ and his sufferings, are truly and
properly satisfaction for the sins of mankind. For, as he that believes this,
can by no means imagine, that, any man can make satisfaction for his own
sins, by the original Law of God; (for then, the coming of Christ had been
in vain* as not necessary, neither had there needed that dispensation in Gods
proceeding with mankind upon the original rule of righteousness, which the
Gospel declares) So can he by no means imagine, the satisfaction which any
man can tender God for his sin, to import any more, then the fulfilling of
that condition which God by his Gospel requires, to qualify any man that is
fallen from Grace by sin, after Baptism, for remission of sin: Because he
supposes aforehand, that the satisfaction of Christ's blood consists in
obtaining such terms at Gods hands, that, the condition being obtained, a man
should become qualified for remission of sins. On the other side, the Gospel
importing a promise of remission of sin, in consideration of the sufferings
of Christ, to them that turn by true repentance, to that new life which it
prescribes; It cannot be denied, that those works, wherein the reality of
true repentance consists, are properly satisfaction for sin (as for that
respective sin for which they satisfy) by virtue of that promise, which God
by the Gospel declares, in consideration of Christ's Cross. For, if the
Civilian say true, that to satisfy is no more then to fulfill a man's desire,
God by his Gospel requiring nothing else to be performed by us, (that is, by
any Christian that is overtaken in the state of sin) but to turn from sin;
of necessity it follows, that God is satisfied with our repentance, (which
otherwise he would not accept of for payment at our hands) though the
satisfaction of Christ is the consideration that makes it acceptable.

The mistake seems to lie in this; that, men take any kind of displeasure for
sin to be that repentance which qualifieth a man for remission of sin;
presuming that faith alone justifies, and that the grace* which the Gospel
tendereth would come to too short an account, if at every instance, a man might
not have recourse to the blood of Christ, for assurance of remission of sins.
Whereas I have showed, that, in all estates, at any instant, a Christian has
assurance of remission of sin to be had, upon condition that he see himself
qualified for it; But, that absolute assurance of remission of sin actually
had and obtained, is not to be had by the Gospel, but upon performing the
condition which it requires, unless we would make Christ, the minister of
sin, (as Saint Paul speaks) by saying; that he came to discover a way, by
which, standing in the love of sin, and enjoying the pleasure of it, we may
assure our selves of pardon for it. For it can in no reason be imagined, that
he who has wilfully committed sin can instantly come to such a resolution of
mind, as may reasonably be thought effectual, to move him never to do the like
any more. Will any body that is capable to consider what a change it is for a
man to undertake Christianity, being, by the preaching of it, become convict of
that sin which it pretends to cure; will any man say, that it is possible
for such a one, at the instant that he is first informed of a thing concerning
him so much, to resolve to take the course, overcoming all difficulties, which
all the custom of sin can create? As for him, who, having made profession of
Christianity, is notwithstanding overtaken with one of those gross sins,
that express a formal contrdiction to his profession so made; can he be
assured of a firm resolution to stand to all that his Christianity requires
for the future, who sees himself so shamefully cast from a resolution solemnly
professed, and perhaps grounded in him, by so many years practice, as he has
been a Christian? This is the reason why repentance is not to be measured, by a
wish that a man had not sinned, (which, those that are not past remorse
necessarily have, because they must needs wish themselves at peace with God)
nor, by a desire of forgiveness, (because they must needs wish themselves what
the Gospel promises) nor, by being sorry for the punishment which they have
incurred, (for that is not out of love to God, but to themselves) nor, by being
only sorry for having offended God; (for who would not wish that he could enjoy
both the love of God, and the pleasure of his sin?) In fine, no disposition
can qualify a man a convert, or penitent, but that which produces a change in
his actions; And that disposition not being produced, but by frequenting such
actions of humiliation, as may settle the impression of it upon a man's Spirit;
those actions by which this disposition is wrought, are justly counted
satisfaction to God, because they fulfill that which he desires of a sinner,
to qualify him for remission of sins.

One material difficulty there is, that may be objected against all this, from
the Scriptures, especially of the Gospells, and, those manifold invitations,
whereby, our Lord wooeth those which are weary of sin, to come to him for their
cure; For, in very deed, the Parable of the prodigal represents God so
desirous to be reconciled, that there is no room left for conditions, limiting
the pardon, which is granted before it can be demanded, upon a bare desire
expressed by returning home. And the Psalm of David seems to signify the
same, when he says; I said I will confess my transgression to the Lord and
thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin. Psalm XXXIV. 5. Which may be so
understood, as if, David only having purposed to make confession of his sin,
God prevented him with pardon before he did it. But to say truth, this is more
then the words can bear, because it is said just before; I made known my sins
to thee, and my iniquities I concealed not; So as David's sin was not pardoned
before he confessed it, but, having confessed it; upon a grounded resolution so
to do, and that, after so much trouble of mind for his sin, as the premises of
the Psalm express. As for the expressions of our Lord in the Gospel, having
showed that it tendreth high promises, but upon conditions proportoinable,
considering the present weakness of our nature; there is no reason in the
world to infer, that those who have forfeited the promises, by failing of that
which they undertake, may as easily promise themselves reconcilement with God
by repentance, as they are freely invited to be reconciled by Baptism. For,
that which is done in the state of ignorance, is easily passed by, upon
condition of amendment. But, where breach of amity may be reproached,
(especially tendered by God of mere Grace, and, upon his own charge, as it
were, of Christ's Cross) to persume of reconcilement, upon mere
acknowledgement of a transgression, were to tread under foot so great Grace.
And therefore, that which has been produced out of the Apostles writings
sounds to an other tune, S. John says, in deed; If we say we have no sin we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful, and just, to remit our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. If we say we have not sinned we make him a liar, and his
word is not in us. John I. 8, 9, 10. For, it appears by the premises, that
his word concludes even Christians to be sinners. For S. John goes forward
and says; My little children, these things I write to you, that you sin not;
And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. And when David, (who had
the spirit of God upon the same terms as Christians, have it, excepting that
which has been excepted, prays, Psalm XIX. 13, 14. Who understands his
errors? Cleanse me from hidden sins. Keep thy servant also from presumptuous
sins, that they bear not rule over me: Then shall I be upright and clean from
great transgressions. He shows sufficiently the difference between venial
and mortal sins, as to Christians; (which, in case of invincible ignorance,
and mere supprize, comes to no sin, as to Christians) But he shows also,
that Christians, neglecting themselves, may come to fall into sins of
persumption, which he prays against. For the rest, the same S. John,
encouraging Christians to pray for the sins of Christians, with this
limitation, (as I surppose) if, by their advice, they appear to be reduced to
take the course, which may procure pardon at Gods hands acknowledges further,
that there is a sin unto death, I say not that ye pray for it; says he 1.
John V. 16. 17. And the Apostle to the Hebrews VI. 4, 5, 6. speaks of some
sin, which, he acknowledges not that it can be admitted to penance for the
obtaining of forgiveness; which he protests again, Ebr. X. 26.-31. XII. 16,
17. It is commonly thought indeed, that, to deny the true faith, against that
light which God has kindled in a man's conscience, is hereby declared to be a
sin, that repentance cannot cure; Or rather, that God hereby declares, that he
will never grant in repentance, And truly, that blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, which, our Lord says, shall never he pardoned, neither in this world
nor in the world to come Mat. XII. 31, 32. Mark III. 28 29. Luke XII. 10.
manifestly consists in attributing the works which the holy Ghost did to
convert men to Christ, to the devil; being convinced that our Lord came from
God, by the works he did for that purpose. Just as Saint Steven reproaches the
Jews, for resisting the holy Ghost as their Fathers had done, Acts VII. 51.
And that there is no cure for this sin, it is manifest, because it consists
in rejecting the cure. And, apostasy from Christianity, (which is manifestly,
the sin which the Apostle to the Hebrews intends) differs from it, but,
as the obligation to Christianity once received differs from that
Christianity, which, being proposed with conviction, a man is bound to receive.
But, otherwise not only the Church, but the Novatians themselves supposed,
that those who had denied the Faith might recover pardon of God by repentance.
Nor can it become visible to the Church, what is that conviction, which, whosoever
transgresses, becomes unpardonable, because God has excluded him from
repentance. In the mean time, how difficult the Primitive Church accounted it,
to attain pardon of such sins, appears by the excluding of the Montanists,
and Novatians first; then, by the long Penance prescribed Apostates,
Murderers, and Adulterers, least the admitting of them to Penance might seem
to warrant their pardon upon too, light repentance. Saint Paul admits the
incestuous person at Corinth, whether to Penance or to Communion with the
Church; But upon what terms? Least the offender should be swallowed up with
extreme sorrow; and, least Satan should advantage himself against them, should
he refuse it. And because, having written out of great anguish of heart, with
tears, for them who presumed to bear him out in it, he had found them moved
with sorrow according to God, to repentance, with all satisfaction, and desire
of peace with the Apostle, 2 Cor. II. 1-8. VII. 7-11. For, we understand by
Saint Paul 1 Cor. V. 2. 2 Cor. XII. 21. that even the Church themselves, when
they shut a sinner out of the Church, did make demonstration of sorrow for his
case: And therefore himself much more was put to mourning, and to profess by
his outward habit, that he thought his sin incurable, without sorrow
answerable to it. And, when Saint Paul commands the Collossians, III. 5.
Mortify your members that are upon earth, fornication, uncleanness, passion,
evil desire, and covetousness which is idolatry; For which the wrath of God
comes upon the children of disobedience; It is manifest, that he places the
mortifying of these vices, in the afflicting and humbling of our earthly
members, wherein the lusts of them reside. Therefore he serves his own body no
otherwise, but, striving for the prize of Christians, like one of their
Greekish Champions, that would not beat the air; he beats his own body black
and blew, to bring it under servitude, Least having preached to others, himself
should become reprobate, 1 Cor. IX. 26, 27. And certainly, if Christianity
require this discipline over Saint Paul's body, least he should fall into sin;
it will require very great severity of them that are fallen into sin, to be
exercised upon their bodies, the lusts whereof they have satisfied by those
sins; to regain the favor, and appease the wrath of God, and to settle that
hatred of sin, and that love of goodness, in the heart, which the preventing
of sin for the future necessarily requires.

The practice of the Old Testament sufficiently signifies the same. Though
David, in the Psalm that I mentioned before, seem to make the pardon of his sin
a thing easily obtained at Gods hands; (as it is indeed a thing easily
obtained, supposing the disposition which David desired it with; but not, that
disposition, a thing easily obtained) yet you shall find the same David
elsewhere, wetting his bed, and watring his couch with his tears, so that his
beauty is gone with mourning, his flesh dried up for want of fatness, and his
bones cleave to his flesh for the voice of his mourning. Indeed he always
expresses his affliction to be the subject of his mourning: But, always
acknowledging his sins to be the cause of those afflictions, which he therefore
takes the course to remove, by taking this course for his sins. The Prophet
Esaias I. 15, 16. thus calls the Jews to appease Gods wrath; Wash ye, make ye
clean, remove the evil of your works from before mine eyes, cease to do evil,
learn to do good, seek righteousness. Sure, this was never intended to be
done, by the mere thought of doing it. But, the Prophet Joel having threatened a
plague, what does he prescribe for the cure? And now says the Lord, return to
me with all your heart, with fasting weeping and mourning, and rent your
hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God, for he is
gracious and merciful, longsuffering, great in mercy, and repents him of
evil. Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, invite the assembly, gather
the people, sanctify a Congregation, make the old and young, and the sucking
infants meet, let the bridegroom come forth of his chamber, and the bride of
her closet, let the Priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch
and the Altar, and say; Spare Lord thy people, and give not thine heritage for
a reproach. Joel II. 12-17. Sure, this is something more then not allowing a
man's self to sin, or not liking that which he does when he sins; which, no
man that ever heard of Christianity can do, till he have contracted such a
custom of sinning, that he is not sensible of any remorse for it. And it is a
thing most strange, that those who pretend to be the cream of Christianity,
should think the sins of the regenerate not to forfeit the state of Grace,
nor contract Gods displeasure, because they are done with dislike. Judas might
have robbed the poor so often, that, at length, he might be without remorse; but
certainly he betrayed not his master without reluctation. The regenerate, if
truly so, and not hypocrites, must needs find the burden of sin which they
commit aggravated, by the grace which they had received before; And therefore,
must needs find themselves obliged to a deeper measure of humiliation, to
expiate their ingratitude, and to recover the favor of God, which they had
forfeited, by abusing it before. This seems, in my opinion, to persuade a good
Christian, that works of humiliation and Penance are requisite to recover the
state of Grace, and to render God again propitious to those that have fallen
from the grace of their Baptism; As that which I said before seems to show,
that it is not prejudicial to the satisfaction of our Lord should be satisfied
by such means.

Now, the original and general practice of Gods Church punctually agrees
with that which has been said. Our Lord preaches repentance, but admits
all that profess it to be his disciples, not taking cognizance what they had
been, professing to become such as he requires for the future. So his Church,
knowing that there is no sin so deep that his blood cannot wash away,
admits all to Baptism; declaring, that without repentance, it avails
only to their damnation, but demanding no visible satisfaction of it, in them
that were not hitherto of the Church. But, those who falsify the profession
upon which they were admitted to Baptism, and that so visibly, that the
forfeiture of Gods grace is visible by the same means; those were so excluded
the communion of the Church (which ought to suppose a presumption of the state
of Grace, at least, the possibility of it) that at the first, the greatest
question was, whether they should be admitted to any hope of reconcilement by
the Church or not; As it appears by the breaches of the Montanists and
Novatians, and partly of the Donatists, and Meletians. If this admission were
granted, it was only to this effect, at the beginning, that they might tender
the Church satisfaction of the sincerity of that sorrow, wherewith they
pretended to satisfy God; that is to appease his wrath, and to recover his
grace. Those who think Penance was enjoined to no other effect, in the ancient
Church, then to make satisfaction for the scandal which the notoriousnesse of
sin had contracted; are as far wide of the truth, as those who think it
only made satisfaction for a debt of temporal punishment; the stain of
sin, and guilt of eternal punishment, being abolished by submitting it to
the Keys of the Church, out of that sorrow which they call Attrition, which
they will have to be changed into Contrition, by the humility of that
confession which submits a man's sin to the keys of the Church. In what
sense, attrition may be said to be changed into contrition, by the ministry of
Penance, I shall have occasion to debate again in the third Book. For the
present, I must not forget the ground which I have presupposed, that the
Gosspel is presupposed to the being and constitution of the Church. And
therefore, that remission of sins by the Church, and the ministry of Penance
in the Church, supposes the accomplishment of that condition, and the
production of that disposition, which, by the Gospel, qualifieth for remission
of sin. Neither can the ministry of the Church be otherwise necessary, then
as it may be effectual to produce the same. How, in the Penitent, that sorrow
for fear of punishment, which the first sight of sin necessarily causes,
(which is attrition in their terms) is changed into that sorrow for having
offended God, which the love of God causes; is to be understood, I conceive,
by that which I said before. That the ministry of the Church, cannot supersede
or dispense with the means whereby that change is brought to pass; as the
argument proposed evidences by the Scriptures; So, from the Tradition of the
Church, I conceive, I have peremptory evidence. For, those that deferred their
Penance till danger of death, then, confessing their sins, submitted to the
keys of the Church, though they were not refused reconcilement in that estate,
though they were admitted to the communion of the Eucharist, yet their
salvation remained questionable, in case they survived not to perform their
Penance. This you shall find at large in Saint Augustine Homilia XLI. ex L.
though some attribute it to Saint Ambrose; But you have it in Saint Augustine
again, de Tempore sermon LVII. And, when it is found in a letter of Faustus,
in answer to Paulinus of Nola, it cannot be excepted, that Faustus is a
suspected author, because of his opposition to Saint Augustine; in a point,
wherein, it is evident that he concurreth with Saint Augustine. But, in the
fourth Council of Carthage also, Can. VII. and VIII. those that submit to
Penance, and receive the Eucharist, in danger of death, are not to think
themselves acquitted of their sin, if they survive, sine manus impositione;
That is, without performing their Penance; during which, they were, at the
service of the Church, prayed for, with imposition of hands. And therefore, he
who having thus submitted to Penance, and received the Eucharist, recovered,
might be promoted to the Clergy, according to the IV Council of Toledo Can.
LIII. and Council. Gerund. can. IX. Whereas, whosoever had done Penance in the
Church, could never be admitted to the Clergy afterward. Because, such a one
had not been properly under Penance, the sin that is supposed in the case of
the former Canon not being specified, but only generally confessed for sin.
Whereby it appears sufficiently, that, in regard it is possible, the sorrow
wherewith a man submits to Penance in that case should be so sincere as to
obtain pardon at Gods hands, therefore the communion was not refused: But, in
regard of the doubt that remained in the business, the Church warranted not
the pardon, till satisfied of his conversion, by the performance of his
Penance. And therefore it is manifest, that the ancient Church did not believe
attrition to be changed into contrition by submitting to the Keys of the
Church; making question of the salvation of those upon whom the Keys of the
Church had passed, because the operation of Penance enjoined was prevented by
death. And so, the practice of the ancient Church concurreth with the doctrine
of the Apostles, to assure us of the necessity and efficacy of the works of
humiliation and mortification for sin, in appeasing the wrath, and recovering
the favor of God, in obtaining forgiveness of sin, and restoring to the
state of Grace, which, the ancient Church calls satisfying for sin.

By the same means it remains manifest, that these satisfactions are neither
enjoined grievous sinners by the Scriptures, nor notorious sinners by the
Church, out of any intent of extinguishing a debt of temporal punishment,
remaining after the sin is pardoned. That God, when he gave the Gospel,
might have reserved a debt of temporal punishment, upon them whose sin he
pardons by virtue of it, I question not. That he has reserved it, can never
be proved; the penalties which he exercises his children with, being rather
chastisements of love, then revenges of wrath. That this debt, if not
extinguished here, by satisfaction enjoined in Penance, remains for Purgatory
in the world to come, I cannot here dispu^^, not having yet considered the
effect of the keys of the Church in Penance. And therefore, for the ground of
it, which must come from hence, I shall conclude according to the premises.

That the condition which the Gospel requires, to bring a man to the state of
Gods grace, for remission of sins, and right to everlasting life, in point of
conscience as to God (as well as in point of profession, as to the Church) is
presupposed to every man's being a Christian, and a member of the Church. With
this difference, indeed, between them that are invited by the Church, to be
Christians, and them, who, being Christians, shall relapse to those finnes
which by their Christianity they profess to forsake: That, to those that are
without, the cure of sin is tendered merely as Physic, which the Physician
has no means to constrain a man to take, but his own interesse; But, to
those that are within, out of that authority and jurisdiction, which the
Corporation of the Church foundeth. The last resolution whereof, though it end
in the interest of a man's own good, which moves him to profess Christianity;
yet, that profession having engaged him to be a Christian, by it he stands
bound to stand to the judgment of the Church, in all things within the
authority of it. Now, if the Church ought to presume that, he who is admitted
to the communion thereof is qualified for remission of sin, before he be
restored to it; then cannot a man, by being restored to the communion of the
Church, become qualified for it; unless it can be said, that, the absolution
of the Church can presuppose that which it effects which without a
contradiction cannot be said. The Church then pardons not sin otherwise,
then, as, by the power of the keys, obliging the relapsed to use that cure
which it prescribes, upon presumption of the cure wrought, it warranteth
pardon, as having effected that disposition which qualifieth a man for it. So
that all the satisfaction that the Church can have, that a man is qualified for
pardon, proceeds upon a presumption that God first is satisfied, by the
conversion of a sinner to that disposition, which he requires to remission of
sin; But evidently, in consideration of our Lord Christ, because by the Gospel,
whereof he is the subject.

As for the merit of Christian men's works, in relation to the world to come,
if it be considered on one hand, how many ways the Scripture declares, that
it is impossible for any creature of God to come before hand with him that made
it, (because his allsufficience allows him not capable of any advantage, that
he may receive from it) on the other hand, that, by original concupiscence, we
are utterly disabled to satisfy for that, in which we are come behind hand
with God, and, for the future, to satisfy that original rule of righteousness
due from man to God, which our creation establishes; I shall not need to use
many words in a plain case, that, by the original Law of God, no man can
merit the reward of everlasting life. But, by the promise of the Gospel, God
is tied to reward them with it. For, on the other side, it is most evident,
that the Scriptures, as well of the New Testament as of the Old (in which, I
have showed how that salvation which we attain by the Gospel is intimated)
that the favor of God, and everlasting life, is the prize of that gole, the
crown of that conquest, the wage of that good ^ight of Faith, which a
Christian* in this warfare upon earth, professes. The Scriptures that contain
this sense being every where so express, and so well known, that I conceive I
do the Reader an ease, in sparing him the pains of reading them here again;
after so many canvases. But besides, the maine point, established at the
beginning of this Book inforces, inevitably all that this resolution imports.
*For, if God have, by the Gospel, imposed upon Christians the condition of new
obedience, which Christians, through his grace by Christ, are able to tender
him* to recompense them with such a reward) stands by his free promise engaged
to it, in consideration of that new obedience which he requires. This is the
utmost which the name of merit can enforce, understanding it to be grounded
upon the promise of God, declared by the Gospel, which, nothing but his own
free grace, designed through, and in consideration of our Lord Christ, before
all consideration of any new obedience of Christians, (which wholly depends
upon the same) could ever have moved him to set on foot. For, having said
before, that a meritorious cause can have no place in respect of God, otherwise
then, as he designs us good in consideration of good, though the good he
considers be originally his own gift; (whereas men are obliged, in reason and
justice, to reward that* good which themselves are prevented with, originally,
as to them, moving and obliging them to reward it) but the merit of heaven
never so fully ascribed to the works of Christians, (who are obliged, to
understand it so to be ascribed, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace) it can be
understood to signify no more, then a quality which it requires, upon which
the reward becomes due, by virtue of that promise which requires it. And that
this is the sense of the Catholic Church, among infinite arguments, this is
enough to demonstrate; Because, whereas it is very well known, that the Latin
Fathers do attribute the style and virtue of merits, and meriting at Gods
hands, to the works of Christians, in respect to everlasting life; the Greek
Fathers* in whose mouths the word could not be, expressing the same sense, in
such terms as their own language affords; (For who ever undertook to show any
difference of sense between them?) those of the Reformation have always
maintain^d, that their sense is the same with the sense of the ancient Church,
in the mouth of the Fathers. For if, in their mouth, that word can import no
prejudice to Christianity, neither can it import any now, unless the
signification thereof be fu^ther limited by other terms, which, being added to
it, every man will allow, may determine a sense utterly prejudicial to it.
True it is, diverse have observed, that the word mer^r^* in good Latin
(especially of those later ages, in which the Fathers writ) signifies no more
then to attain, compass, or purchase: Arguing from thence, that the works of
Christians merit heaven, in their sense and language, no otherwise then,
because they are the means by which we attain it. So Cassander observes that
S. Paul's (...). 1 Timothy I. 13. is, by S. Cyprian, translated misericordiam
merui; not intending to say, that S. Paul deserved that mercy which he
professes to have received of Grace: But only to signify, that he found mercy,
and attained it. But, though I should grant, that this word may signify no more
in the language of the Fathers; yet the Faith, and the sense, out of which it
is evident that they spoke, will enforce, that it does signify as much as I
say, when they speak of our coming to heaven by our works. For, having once
resolved, that the Covenant of Grace renders life everlasting due by Gods
promise, to those that l^ve as at their Baptism they undertook, (though not
for the worth of their works, yet by the mercy of God in Christ, which moved
him to tender such a promise) he that says, a man attaines heaven by the
means of those works which he lives in like a Christian; says, that those
works of his do merit heaven, in the sense that I challenge. For, as for those
that will have the works of Christians to merit heaven of their own
intrinsicke value; Of those I have already said, that, I conceive, they do
prejudice the Christian ^aith, in not allowing the necessity of Gods grace
through Christ, in accepting the condition which the Gospel requires, for such
a reward, as the intrinsic value of it cannot deserve, by Gods original law.
For, granting, those helps of Gods grace in Christ, being supernatural and
heavenly, to hold proportion and correspondence with the reward of life
everlasting, which is the same; Yet will it not follow, that in all regards,
(for the purpose, in that the actions which they produce are momentany, the
reward everlasting, which is the consideration S. Paul uses Romans VIII. 18. 1
Cor. VII. 17, 18.) the correspondence will produce an equality of value. And,
though the first principle of them be heavenly and supernatural, (which is the
help which God for Christ's sake allows) yet, seeing that it comes not
immediately to effect, but by the means of the faculties of man's soul
infected with original concupiscence; it cannot be said, that they can demand
a reward correspondent to heavenly grace, alone when earthly weakness concurres
to imbase and allay the value of that which it produces. But, as it cannot be
denied, that the Church of Rome, in which, that Order which maintain^s this
extremity has so great credit, allows this doctrine of merit to be taught;
yet can it not be said to injoine it: Because there have not wanted, to this
day, Doctors of esteem, that have always held otherwise. Among whom I may very
well name Sylvius, now or lately Professor of Divinity at Doway, who, in his
Commentaries upon the second part of Thomas Aquinas his Sum, expounds that
meritum de condigno, which the School attributes to the works of Christians,
to be grounded in dignatione Dei, because God vouchsafes and daignes, to accept
them whose they are, as worthy of the reward; expressing also the promise of
the Gospel, whereby this condescension of God is declared. The School Doctors
found out the terms of meritum ex congruo and ex condigno; merit of cong^uity
and condignity; Some of them, because they thought, That the works of mere
nature deserve supernatural grace, in regard that it is fit, that God should
reward him that does his best, with it; That works done in the state of Grace
are worth the Glory of the world to come. But, as the former part of the
position which is planted upon these terms is rejected by many; So, they who
only acknowledge meritum congrui, in works done in the state of grace, (that
is to say, that it is fit for God to reward them with his kingdom) say no more
then, that it was fit for God to promise such a reward; Which whosoever denies*
must say, that God has promised that which it was unfit for him to promise.
And if the dignity of our works, in respect of the reward, may have this
tolerable sense, because God daignes and vouchsafes it; The Council of Trent,
which has inacted no reason why they are to be counted merits, can neither
bear out these high opinions, nor be said to prejudice the Faith in this point.
For, The kingdom of God is not in word but in power, if S. Paul say true. And
therefore, though I affect not the term of merit, (which, diverse of the
Reformation do not reject) Yet can I not think it so far from the truth, so
prejudicial to the faith, as the peevish opinions of those, that allow not
good works necessary to salvation, but as signs of Faith. For, that which
necessarily comes in consideration with God, in bestowing the reward, (which,
the condition he contracteth for must necessarily do) though it cannot have the
nature of merit, (because the Covenant it self is granted merely of Grace, in
consideration of Christ's death) yet, it is of necessity to be reduced to the
nature and kind of the meritorious cause. Nor can the glory of God, or the
merit of Christ be obscured, by any consideration of our works, that is
grounded upon the merit of our Lord Christ, and expresses the tincture of his
blood.

The end of the Second Book.
Laus Deo.
OF THE LAWS OF The Church.
The Third BOOK.
CHAP. I. The Society of the Church founded upon the duty of communicating in
the Offices of Gods Service. The Sacrament of the Eucharist, among those
Offices, proper to Christianity. What opinions, concerning the presence of
Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist, are on foot.
IF God had only appointed the Profession of Christianity to be the condition
qualifying for the world to come, leaving to every man's judgment to determine,
what that Christianity is, and wherein it consists, which, it is necessary to
salvation he profess, and, what that conversation is which his salvation
requires; There had been no cause, why I should go any further in this
Dispute. But, having showed, that God has appointed the Sacrament of Baptism
to be a necessary means to salvation, limiting thereby, the profession of
Christianity which he requires, to be deposited and consigned in the hands of
his Church, whom he has trusted for the maintaining and propagating of it; I
have thereby showed, that he has appointed all Christians to live in the
Communion of the Church; The effect of Baptism being, to admit unto full
Communion in those Offices, wherewith God is served by his Church. It is plain
enough to all that have the use of reason, what that communion of the Church
and the Society thereof is able to effect, and has effected, in preserving the
Rule of Christianity, wherein the salvation of Christians consists, free and
entire from the infection of men's devices, expressly or by consequence
destructive to it, as well as the conversation of Christians from unchristian
manners. But, if the Church be trusted, to exact the profession of
Christianity, of all that require, by Baptism to be admitted unto the
Communion of the Church; It must, by consequence, be entrusted to exact of them
also, the performance of that which they have professed, that is, undertaken to
profess. For, the profession being the condition upon which they are admitted
to the Communion of the Church, the performance, or at least a presumption of
the performance, must needs be the condition upon which they enjoy it. Upon
this ground, the Church becomes not only a number of men, but a Society,
Corporation, and Communion of Christians in those Offices, wherewith God has
declared that he will be served by Christians. For, upon supposition of such a
Declaration, or such a Law of God it is, that the Church becomes a Body or
Corporation of all Christians, though under several Commonwealths and
Soveraignties of this world; As there are in all States several by
Corporations, subsisting by some act or Law of the Sovereign Powers of the
same. For, if God had not appo^^ted, what Offices he will be served with by
his people, at their common Assemblies, there could be no ground, why* the
Church should be such a Society founded by God, there being nothing appointed
by* God for the members of it to communicate in.

But, were there nothing but the Sacrament of the Eucharist acknowledged, to
have been delivered by God to his people, to be frequented and celebrated by
them at their common Assemblies; that alone would be enough, to demonstrate the
foundation and institution of the Communion and Corporation of the Church by
God. For, of a truth, the rest* of those* Offices, wherewith God requires to be
served* by Christians, are the same, by which he required to be served by his
ancient people before Christianity, setting aside that difference, with the
diverse measure of the knowledge of God, in this and in that estate, must needs
produce. Though there is no serving of God by the blood of bulls and goats, nor
by other ceremonies and sacrifices of Moses Law, under Christianity; Yet were
the praises of God, the hearing of his Word read, and the instructing and
exhorting of his people in it and to it, together with the sacrifice of Prayer,
frequented by Gods people under the Law, as still God is served and is to be
served with them under Christianity. And, upon this account, I have truly said
elsewhere, as I conceive it, that the Corporation of the Church is founded, upon
the privilege which God has granted all Christians, of assembling themselves
for the service of God, though, supposing that the Powers of the world should
forbid them so to do. For, this privilege consists in nothing else, but in that
command which God has given his Church, of serving him with these Offices.
Whereupon it necessarily insues, that, notwithstanding whatsoever command of
Secular Powers, they are forbidden to serve God, in the Communion of them that
are not of the Church; Seeing they cannot be commanded to serve God in the
Communion of the Church, but they must be forbidden to serve God, in the
Communion of them which are not of the Church. And, upon this ground stands all
the Power which the Church can challenge, in limiting the circumstances, and
conditions upon which men may communicate in these Offices. Which, as it may
justly seem, of it self, inconsiderable to the world, and the Powers that
govern it; So, when those Powers take upon them to establish the exercise of it
by their Laws; If they maintain not the Church in that Power, which, of right
and of necessity it had from God, before they professed to maintain
Christianity, they destroy indeed, that, which in word they profess. But, if
they take upon them to maintain it in the right, which originally it had, to
limit the said circumstances, by such Rules, as, by the act of Secular Powers
become Laws to their people; then must the Power of the Church become as
considerable as it is indeed, in all States and Commonwealths, that retain the
Christianity which they had from the beginning, in this point. This being the
ground, and this the matter of Ecclesiastical Laws, and the Sacrament of the
Eucharist being that Office proper to Christianity, in order to the Communion
whereof, all Laws, limiting the circumstances and conditions of the said
Communion are devised and made; It seems requisite to my design, in the first
place, to void those Controversies concerning the same, which, all men know,
how much they have contributed to the present divisions of the Church. For, the
determination of them will be, without doubt, of great consequence, to
determine the true and right intent of those Laws, which serve only to limit
those circumstances, which are only the condition of communicating in this and
those other Offices; Concerning which, there is no other controversy on foot,
to divide the Church, but that which concerns the said circumstances.

Now, what differences concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist are matter of
division to the Church, I may suppose all the world knows, the opinion of
Transubstantiation being so famous as it is: Which imports this; That, in
celebrating this Sacrament, upon pronouncing of the words with which our Lord
delivered it to his Disciples, This is my Body, this is my Blood, the substance
of the elements, Bread and Wine, cease and is abolished, the substance of the
Body and Blood of Christ coming into their stead, though under the species of
Bread and Wine; that is to say, those accidents of them, which our senses
witness that they remain. In opposition whereunto, some have proceeded so
far, as to teach, that this Sacrament is no more than a mere sign, and the
celebration and communion thereof, barely, the renewing of our Christian
profession, of believing in Christ crucified, whom it represents, importing
no spiritual grace at all to be tendered by it from God; Which may justly seem
to be the opinion of the Socinians, and properly to give the name of
Sacramentaries, to all that profess it. For, in reason and justice, we are to
difference it from the opinion of those, that hold it for a sign appointed by
God, to tender the Body and Blood of Christ, spiritually to be received by it,
of* as many as with a lively faith communicate in it. Though these also cannot
pretend to make it any more than a sign, by virtue of that consecration which
makes it a Sacrament; Seeing it is the faith of him that receives it, as they
say, which makes it the Body and Blood of Christ spiritually, though truly and
really, to him that so receives it. There is, besides, another opinion,
extremely distant from this last, in regard tha^, whereas this ascribes the
presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Eucharist, to the faith of them
that receive it, (which is after the consecration of the Sacrament, in as much
as it is exercised in receiving the same) the other extreme opinion, that I
speak of, attibutes it to the hypostatical Union of the two natures in the
person of Christ, the consequence whereof they will have to be this; That the
perfections of the Godhead are communicated to the humane nature, in the
person of Christ, exalted to the Power of gathering and conducting his Church,
through this world to the world to come: Because this Power, being to be
exercised in our nature, requires and imports the attributes of the Godhead,
to the executing, and in the executing of it. For, seeing the Manhood of Christ
cannot communicate with his Godhead, in giving this spiritual assistance to
his Church, but first it must be present; and, seeing this assistance is given
by the Sacrament of the Eucharist; of necessity, they think, the Body and Blood
of Christ must be present in the Eucharist, to give this assistance, by virtue
of the hypostatical Union ordained for that purpose. And so, this opinion
becomes extremely opposite to the last, because it attributes the presence, and
so the receiving of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, to that Faith, which takes effect after that consecration which
makes the Sacrament: Whereas this attributes the same to the hypostatical Union
of the Manhood with the Godhead in Christ, taking effect, without exception,
after his exaltation to glory, which, it is manifest, is so long since past and
done, before the celebration of it.

CHAP. II. That the natural substance of the Elements remains in the Sacrament.
That the Body and Blood of Christ is nevertheless present in the same, when it
is received, not by the receiving of it. The eating of the Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross necessarily requires the same. This causes no contradiction
nor improperty in the words of our Lord.
THis being the question wherein I am now to give judgment, and no more
required of a Divine, than to give such a meaning to those few Scriptures which
depose in it, as may no way contradict the Rule of Faith; I shall, (without
considering how to content those factions which these opinions have made)
content my self, by delivering that opinion, which I conceive best satisfies
the plain words of the Scripture; without trenching upon any ground of
Christianity, within which the meaning of the Scriptures is to remain. I say
then first, that, if we will not offer open violence to the words of the
Scripture, and to all consideration of reason, that may deserve to direct the
meaning of it, we must grant, in the first place; That the bodily substance of
Bread and Wine is not abolished, nor cease in this Sacrament, by virtue of
the consecration of it. And of this, I conceive, the manifest words of the
Scripture, wheresoever there is mention of this Sacrament, are evidence enough,
Mat. XXVI. 26-29. And, when they were eating, Jesus took bread, and having
blessed, brake and gave it to his Disciples, saying; Take, eat, this is my
Body. And, taking the cup, he gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying; Drink
ye all of it. For, this is that blood of mine of the New Testament, which is
shed for many, unto remission of sins. And I say unto you; I will not drink
from henceforth of this production of the vine, till I drink it new with you in
my Fathers Kingdom. In S. Mark, I can imagine no ma^er of difference but this,
Mark XIV. 24, 25. This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for
many. Verily I say unto you, that I will not drink of that which the vine
brings forth, till I drink it new in the kingdom of God. In S. Luke thus,
XXII. 17-20. And taking the cup, he said; Take this and divide it amongst you:
For, I say unto you, that I will not drink of that which the Vine brings forth,
till the kingdom of God come. And, he took bread, and, having given thanks,
brake it, and gave it to them saying; This is my Body which is given for you:
Do this in remembrance of me. Likewise also the cup after having supped,
saying; This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. S.
Paul, 1 Cor. XI. 23-32. For I have received of the Lord, that which I also
delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night that he was betrayed, took
bread, and having given thanks, brake it, saying; Take, eat, this is my body
which is broken for you: This do in remembrance of me. Likewise also the cup
after having supped, saying; This cup is the New Testament in my blood: This
do, so often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For so often as you eat
this bread and drink this cup, ye declare the Lords death, till he come.
Therefore, whosoever eats this bread, or drinks this cup unworthily, is guilty
of the body and blood of Christ. But let a man examine himself, and so eat of
the bread, and drink of the cup. For, whosoever eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body.
Therefore many among you are sick and weak, and many fall asleep. For, if we
did discern our selves, we should not be condemned. But, when we are judged,
we are chastised by the Lord, that we be not condemned with the world. And
again, 1 Cor. X. 16, 17, 18. The cup of blessing, which we bless, is it not
the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we* break, is it not the
communion of the Body of Christ? For as the bread is one, so we many are one
body: For we all partake of the same bread.

Had not a man as good bid the Scripture be silent, (for he will believe what
he list notwithstanding the Scripture) as set all this evidence upon the rack,
to make it deny that which it cries aloud? For, when S. Matthew tells us, that
our Lord took bread, and, having blessed, brake and gave it, saying; This is my
Body; that he took the cup, and having given thanks, gave it to them, saying;
This is my Blood; Is it not as manifest, that he says, This bread is my Body,
this wine is my Blood, as, that he says, This is my Body, this is my Blood?
Unless we think that This can demonstrate any thing, but that which had been
spoke of before, in the process, without giving any mark to know, what it is
that he meant to demonstrate. There is none of them that deny this, but will
be puzzled, to say himself, what he would have the Disciples, to whom this is
said, understand by This, forbidding them to understand that which went before.
In S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. Paul, the difficulty is the same. For is not This
of which our Lord speaks, the same that he took? If you say, not so, because
he gave thanks before he said; This is my Body, This is my Blood; at least it
must be that which he broke after he had given thanks, and that, of
necessity, is the same bread which he took, as the same wine. For, to imagine,
that This demonstrates bread and wine, which, when he says, is my Body and
Blood, are then abolished, to make room for the Body and Blood; is that, which
his affirmation is will by no means allow, requiring, that which it affirms
to be verified for that time which it demonstrateth, or presents to the
understanding. So that, This must be the Body and Blood of Christ, at such time
as it is This, that is, that Bread and that Wine which Gods word demonstrateth.
In fine, whatsoever it is which This may be said to demonstrate, besides Bread
and Wine, it will be unpossible to make appear, that the Disciples understood
that, which the Scriptures, whereby we must learn what they understood,
express not. But this is not all. When S. Matthew says; I will drink no more
of this production of the Vine -- (which, S. Luke says, that our Lord said
before the consecration of the Sacrament) either we must say, that he
repeated the same words, (which is nothing unlikely, seeing the tender of the
cup, at which they were said, is repeated by our Lord, as it is agreed upon,
that the Jews at the Supper of the Passover, did customarily repeat the same;
And this answer takes away all imputation of confusion from the text of S.
Matthew) But if any man stand upon it, that these words were said only before
the consecration, though they are repeated by S. Matthew after it, at the
delivering of the cup; and therefore, that it is not called wine which is in
the cup after the consecration; If he consider, how pertinently he makes S.
Matthew bring in this saying, upon the delivery of the cup, not supposing that
to be wine which was in it, he will find himself never a whit easied by that
escape. For, how gross were it for him, to put these sayings together, This is
my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many to the remission of sins:
And, I say unto you, I will drink no more of this production of the Vine -- had
he not taken that which was in the cup for wine? The same holds in the words
of S. Mark* having followed S. Matthew in this. So, when S. Paul makes our Lord
say; Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken for you; is it not manifest,
that breaking is properly said of bread; of a body of flesh, not without some
impropriety, to be understood, by that which is common to bread and to a body
of flesh? And, would S. Paul have used a term, which necessarily referrs him
that hears it to bread, were it not bread which our Lord brake, after the
consecration of the Sacrament, in resemblance wherewith, this body is said to
be broken, because it was wounded? But, when the same S. Paul, speaking of that
which they take, which they eat, which they drink, (which certainly they do
after the consecration, when it is the Sacrament) says; So often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup, ye declare the Lords death till he come.
Therefore, whosoever eats this bread, and drinks this cup unworthily, is guilty
of the body and blood of Christ; Is there then any reason left, why we should
not believe bread to be bread, and wine to be wine, when the word of God says
it, but that, whatsoever the word of God say, we are resolved of our
prejudice? And, when he says again, Let a man examine himself, and so eat of
the bread and drink of the cup; speaks he of eating and drinking any thing
else, but that which all Christians receive in the Sacrament of the Eucharist?
If any thing can possibly be more manifest than this, it is that which he
adds, arguing; that all Christians are one Body ^s the bread is one, (to wit,
which they eat) because they all partake of on^ bread. And therefore, when he
says further; The cup of blessing which we^ bless, is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the
body of Christ? I will not insist upon this; that it is called bread after the
blessing, though, S. Matthew observes, that our Lord calls it so after
giving of thanks; because the cup may be called, the cup of blessing which we
bless, before the blessing be past and done; But, I say confidently, that; to
make our Lord say, that the bread is the communion of the Body, and the cup*
(that is, the wine that is in the cup which is blessed, for what else can be
understood to be in the cup, with correspondence to bread?) is the communion of
the blood of Christ; is to make him say that which he did not mean, unless
he did mean, that that is bread and wine, whereby Christians communicate in
the body and blood of Christ, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

But, shall this evidence, of the nature and substance of Bread and Wine
remaining in the Sacrament of the Eucharist even when it is a Sacrament, that
is, when it is received, either deface or efface the evidence, which the same
Scriptures yield us, of the truth of Christ's body and blood, brought forth and
made to be in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by making it to be that
Sacrament? Surely we must not suffer such a conceit to prossesse us, unless
we will offer the same violence to the manifest and express words of the
Scripture. For, of necessity, when our Lord says, This is my body, this is my
blood, either we must make is to stand for signifies, and, This is my body,
this is my blood, to be more, than, this is a sign of my body and blood; Or
else the word is will enforce, the elements to be called the body and blood of
Christ, at that time, and for that time when they are not yet received; That is
to say, whether he that receives them, who think it for their advantage to
maintain, that This is my body and my blood signifies no more, but, this is a
sign of my body and blood; to advise, how they can ground the true and real
participation of the body and blood of Christ in and by the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, upon the Scripture, allowing, no more than the signification of the
body and blood of Christ by that Sacrament, to be declared in those words of
the Scripture, that describe the institution of it. For, that a man receives
the body and blood of Christ spiritually, through faith, in receiving the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, is no more than he does in not receiving the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, if, by the act of a living faith, we do eat the
flesh of Christ and drink his blood, as, understanding themselves aright, all
Christians must needs do. Unless we can maintain, that we receive the body
and blood of Christ, not only when we receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
but also by receiving it, there is no cause why our Lord should say; This is my
body, this is blood; when he delivered only the sign of it to good and bad,
and therefore, not out of any consideration of the quality of them that
received it. And, what a gross thing were it to say, that our Savior took such
care to leave his Church, by the act of his last will, a legacy, which imports
no more, than that which they might at all times bestow upon themselves? And,
let me know, whether the Church could not devise signs enough, to renew the
memory of Christ's death, or, (if that be likewise included) to express their
profession also of dying with Christ, by bearing his Cross, if our Lords
intent had been no more, than to appoint a Ceremony that might serve to
commemorate our Lords death, or to express our own profession of conformity to
the same? For, certainly, they who make no more of it, whom, I said, we may
therefore properly call Sacramentaries, cannot assign any further effect of
Gods grace, for which it may have been instituted, and yet make it a mere sign
of Christ's death, or, of our own profession to die with Christ or for Christ.
But, if I allow, them that make it more than such a sign to have departed from
a pessilent conceit, and utterly destructive to Christianity, I cannot allow
them to speak things consequent to their own position, when they will not have
these words to signify, that the elements are the body and blood of Christ
when they are received, but become so, upon being received with living faith,
which will allow no more of the body and blood of Christ to be in the
Sacrament, than out of it. For the act of living faith imports the eating and
drinking of the flesh and blood of Christ, no less without the Sacrament than
in it. Certainly it is no such abstruse consequence, no such far fetched
argument, to infer; If this is my body this is my blood, signifies no more
than, this is the sign of my body and blood, then is the Sacrament of the
Eucharist a mere sign of the body and blood of Christ, without any promise of
spiritual grace; Seeing that, being now a Sacrament, by being become a
Sacrament, it is become no more than a sign of the body and blood of Christ,
which though a living faith spiritually eats and drinks, when it receives
the Sacrament, yet should it have done no less, without receiving the same.

I will here allege the discourse of our Lord to* them that followed him to
Capernaum, John VI. 26-63. upon occasion of having been fed by the miracle of
five loaves and a few little fishes; Supposing that which any man of common
sense must grant, that it signifies no more, than they that heard it could
understand by it and; that, the Sacrament of the Eucharist not being then
ordained, they could not understand that he spoke of it, but ought to
understand him to speak of believing the Gospel and becoming Christians, under
the allegory of eating his flesh and drinking his blood. But, when the
Eucharist was instituted, the correspondence of the ceremony thereof with the
allegory which here he discourses is evidence enough, that, as well the
promise which he tendreth, as the duty which he requires, have their effect
and accomplishment in and by the receiving of it. I must here call you to mind
that which I said of the Sacrament of Baptism; that, when our Lord discoursed
with Nicodemus of regeneration by water and the Holy Ghost, John III. (not
having yet instituted the Sacrament of Baptism in the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, nor declared the promise of giving the Holy Ghost to them that
should receive the same) it must needs be thought, that he made way thereby,
to the introducing of that Ordinance, the condition and promise whereof, he
meant, by the process of his own and his Apostles doctrine, further to limit
and determine. In like manner I must here insist, and suppose, that he speaks
not here immediately of eating and drinking his flesh and blood in the
Eucharist, (which, his hearers could not then foretell that he meant to
ordain) but that, the action thereof being instituted, with such correspondence
to this discourse, the intent of it may be and is to be argued from the same.
Now, I have showed in due place, that the sayings and doings of our Lord in the
Gospel are mystical, to signify his kingdom of Glory, to the which he
brings us through his kingdom of Grace. So that, when our Savior fed that
great multitude with the loaves and the fishes, which he multiplied by
miracle, to the intent that they might not faint in following him and his
doctrine; it is manifest, that he intimates thereby a promise of Grace, to
sustain us in our travail here, till we come to our Country of the Land of
Promise. When therefore he proposes the theme of this discourse, saying; Ye
seek me not because ye have seen miracles, (which serve to recommend my
doctrine) but because ye have eaten of the loaves and were filled: Labor not
for the meat that perishes, but for that which indures to life everlasting;
he shows two things; First, that his flesh and blood sustain us in our
pilgrimage here, because he shows, the Manna which the Fathers lived on in
the Wilderness to be a figure of it; Secondly, that they bring us to
immortality and everlasting life in the world to come; by expounding the figure
to consist in this, that, as they were maintained by manna till they died, so
his new Israelites, by his flesh and blood, by eating his flesh and drinking
his blood which he was giving for the life of the world, never to dye. Now,
wherein the eating and drinking of his flesh and blood consists, he shows,
by his answer to their question upon this; Warning them, to work for the meat
that lasts unto everlasting life, which he tenders, and not for that which
perishes. The question is; What shall we do to work Gods works? And the
answer; The work of God is this, to believe in him whom he has sent. I have
showed in due place, that, the condition which makes the promises of the Gospel
due is o^r Christianity, to wit, to profess the faith of Christ faithfully,
that is, not in vain. Therefore, when our Lord says; The work of God is this;
To believe on him whom he has sent; he means this fidelity in professing
Christianity. For indeed, who can imagine, otherwise, that he should call the
act of believing in Christ that work of God, which Christ came to teach Gods
people? He then that considers the death of Christ, that is to say, the
crucifying of his flesh and the pouring out of his blood, with that faith,
which supposes all that to be true, and, by the consideration of it, is induced
to resolve and undertake the profession of Christianity; he it is that eats
and drinks the flesh and blood of Christ, till he depart from the effect of
it; For, no man can be thought to feed upon that which he vomits up again.
Neither can there be found a more exact correspondence, than that which is
seen, between the nourishment of the body, in the strength whereof it moves,
and those reasons, whereupon the mind frames the resolutions, from which a
man's conversation proceeds. And, because God has promised to give the Holy
Ghost to them that faithfully resolve this; and that, as many as have the Holy
Ghost, their mortal bodies shall, by the Holy Ghost that dwells in them, be
raised to life everlasting, Romans VIII. 11. therefore, they that thus eat the
body and blood of Christ shall not die, but live unto everlasting. This being
the eating and drinking of Christ's flesh and blood spiritually by Faith; and
that, when the Sacrament of the Eucharist is instituted, the effect of it must
needs be the same spiritual nourishment and sustenance of the soul, but by a
new means, to wit, the receiving of that Sacrament; As the eating and drinking
of the flesh and blood of Christ spiritually by faith presupposes the flesh of
Christ crucified and his blood poured forth; so must the eating of it in the
Sacrament presuppose the being of it in the Sacrament, to wit, by the being and
becoming of it a Sacrament. Unless a man can spiritually eat and drink the
flesh and blood of Christ in and by the Sacrament, which is not in the
Sacrament when he eats and drinks it, but by his eating and drinking of it
comes to be there. He therefore spiritually eats and drinks the flesh and
blood of Christ in the Sacrament, who, considering the profession Christ calls
us to, with that faith, which supposes him to have signed his calling by
finishing his course upon the Cross, resolves to undertake the same, and, in
that resolution participates of the Eucharist: But, if the flesh and blood of
Christ be not there by the virtue of the consecration of the elements into the
Sacrament, then cannot the flesh of Christ and his blood be said to be eaten
and drunk in the Sacrament, which are not in the Sacrament by being a
Sacrament, but in him that eats and drinks it. For, that which he finds to
eat and drink in the Sacrament, cannot be said to be in the Sacrament, because
it is in him that spiritually eats and drinks it by faith. Either therefore,
the flesh and blood of Christ cannot be eaten and drunk in the Eucharist; or,
it is necessarily in the Sacrament when it is eaten and drunk in it, in which
if it were not, it could not be eaten and drunk in it.

This is further seen by the words of S. Paul, when, inferring his purpose, to
wit, that Christians ought not to communicate in things sacrificed to Idols,
upon that which he had premised; The cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not
the communion of the body of Christ? he adds, 1 Cor. X. 18, 20, 21. Look
upon Israel according to the flesh, do not they which eat the Sacrifices
partake with the Altar? What say I then? That an Idol is any thing? Or that a
thing sacrificed to an Idol is any thing? Rather, that, what the Gentiles
sacrifice they sacrifice to Devils, and I would not have you partake with
Devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of God, and the cup of Devils. Ye cannot
partake of the Lords Table and the table of Devils. These words manifestly
suppose, the Eucharist to be the communion of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross. For as our Lord says; This cup is the New Testament in my blood, or,
my blood of the New Testament; so is it manifest, that God, in inacting his
Covenant, that is his Testament, proceeds, (according as the custom was among
the most ancient Nations of the world) to solemnize the establishment thereof
with sacrifice. I have showed you before, that the Law was covenanted for, with
sacrificing Holocausts and Peace Offerings, the blood whereof was sprinkled on
all the People: But the Elders, in the name of the people, feasted upon the
remains, Exodus XXIV. 5-11. And, among the Sacrifices of the Law, those
sin offerings, wherein the Priests shared with the Altar, in behalf of them
whose sins they expiated by them; and the peace offerings, wherein, those that
offered them, as well as the Priests that offered them, shared with the Altar,
had their effect by virtue of the Law, and the Covenant which introduced it:
And therefore they contained a new act, by which the Covenant was renewed, as
to the particular purpose of those Sacrifices, and the effect of them, in them
for whom they were made. Correspondently, the Covenant of Grace being inacted
by the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, as to Gods part, (that is to say,
so far as to oblige God, to grant remission of sins and life everlasting to
all those, that are baptized into the faithful profession of Christianity) is
renewed in the Consecration and Communion of the Eucharist, whereby that
Sacrifice is renewed and revived unto the worlds end. So that, as those who eat
of the Sacrifices of the Altar, (whether by the Priests or by themselves) did
feast with God, whose Altar had received and consumed a part of those
Sacrifices; So, those that communicate in the Eucharist, do feast upon the
Sacrifice of our Lord Christ on the Cross, which God is so well pleased with,
as to grant the Covenant of Grace, and the publication thereof, in
consideration of it. This, being evidently that correspondence, which the
discourse of S. Paul requires, remains manifestly proved by the same. Though of
a truth, the words of our Lord when he says; This is my blood of the New
Testament which is shed for you; Or, This cup is the New Testament in my blood
which is shed for you, cannot otherwise be understood, than by taking, This
cup, or This which our Lord speaks of, to stand for the action of giving and
receiving the Sacrament, not for that which is given and received in it and by
it. For otherwise, how should a Cup, or that which is in it be a Testament?
But, in as much as the Communion of the Eucharist proceeds upon supposition of
the Covenant of Grace, and therefore imports a profession, both on Gods part,
and on his that receives it, of performing the condition to which respectively
they bind themselves by the same; In that regard, nothing can be more properly
said, than, that God tenders, by that Sacrament, all that the Gospel promises,
and man, by receiving it, the Condition which God covenants for at his hands.
Which, whether you call the New Covenant or the New Testament it matters not, an
heir, upon condition of performing the will of the dead, being in the same
state with him, that contracteth upon articles. But, there is as much said,
when our Lord says only; This is my body which is given for you; if it be
rightly understood, that is, supposing the body of Christ to have been given to
be sacrificed for us upon the Cross. For he that tenders this to eat, thereby
declares, that he incites to the profession of that Covenant, which otherwise
appears to have been inacted by that which he tenders.

The same sense is contained in S. Paul's words, 1 Cor. V. 8, 9. Christ your
Passover is slain for you. Let us therefore feast, not with old loven, nor
with the leven of malice and deceit, but with the unlevened bread of sincerity
and truth. For, if we consider the circumstance of time and place, which our
Lord took to institute the Sacrament of the Eucharist, just when the Paschal
Lamb was eaten, how shall we deny, the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross to
have been as presently received there, as the Sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb was
the subject and occasion of the Feast, at which he ordained it? But the
discourse by which the Apostle persuades Christians to separate themselves from
the Jews, Ebr. XIII. 10-16. is most pertinent to this purpose, as that which
is not to be understood otherwise. Though, when he says; We have an Altar
whereof those that serve the Tabernacle have no right to eat; I allow, that, by
an Altar he means metonymically a Sacrifice. For, proving his intent, by
instancing in those Sacrifices for sin, the blood whereof was carried within
the vail, being, by the Law, appointed to be burnt without the Camp, or City
Jerusalem, he supposes them to figure our Lord Christ, who suffered without
Jerusalem; Inferring thereupon, that they ought to go forth of the communion of
the Synagogue, though they were to suffer persecution at the hands of their
brethren for it. But when he proceeds; By him therefore let us offer to God,
the sacrifice of praise continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving
thanks to his Name: And to do good and to communicate forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased; Either we must conceive him to return to his
purpose, and to show, what Sacrifice he meant when he said; We have an
Altar, of which, they that wait upon the Tabernacle have no right to eat; Or,
we can give no reason, what he meant to argue, that the Jews have no right
to the Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, which Christians pretend not to eat
of in any Sacrifice, but in the Eucharist. And surely, if we consider but the
name of Eucharist, we cannot think it could have been more properly signified,
than by calling it the sacrifice of praise, the fruit of the lips that confess
the Name of God; For, when he proceeds to exhort, not to forget communicating
their goods, do we not know, and have we not made it to appear, that this
must be, by their oblations to the Altar, the first fruits of their goods,
whereof, the Eucharist being first consecrated, the rest served the necessities
of the Church? Which, as has been showed, was the original of all
Consecrations, and Dedications, that have been made in Christianity. If,
therefore, the eating of the Sacrifice of the Cross, in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, mean no more but the signifying and the figuring of that eating of
the Sacrifice of the Cross, which is done by a lively Faith, (that is, by
every one, that considers the death of Christ with that Faith, which* supposing
all that the Gospel says of it to be true, resolves faithfully to profess
Christianity) the question is, why the Sacrament of the Eucharist was
instituted by God, why in those elements, and to what purpose, seeing, without
Gods appointment, men could have done it of themselves, to the same effect.
But, if it be manifest, that, by the Sacrament of the Eucharist, God pretends
to tender us the communion of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, then is
there another presence of the body and blood of our Lord in the Sacrament,
beside that spiritual presence in the soul, which that living faith effects,
without the Sacrament, as well as in the receiving of it. Which kind of
presence, you may, if you please, call the representation of the Sacrifice of
Christ, so as you understand the word representation to signify, not the
figuring or resembling of that which is only signified; But, as it signifies
in the Roman Laws, when a man is said, repraesentare pecuniam, who pays ready
money: Deriving the signification of it a re praesenti, not from the
preposition re; Which will import, not the presenting of that again to a man's
senses, which once is past, but, the tendering of that to a man's possession,
which is tendered him upon the place. That this is the intent of the Sacrament
of the Eucharist, one peremptory argument there remains, in the words of S.
Paul, when he says; Whosoever eats this bread and drinks this cup unworthily,
is guilty of the body and blood of Christ. For, neither can it be said, that
the Apostle, by way of hyperbole, calls the slighting of Gods ordinance, which
he has appointed to signify Christ's death, the crucifying of our Lord again:
Because, it is manifest, that his menace is grounded upon a particular
consideration of the nature of the crime, not upon that, which is seen in every
sin. Renouncing Christianity indeed is truly the crucifying of Christ again, as
the Apostle shows Ebr. VI. 6. and unworthily receiving the Eucharist is, by
just construction, the renouncing of Christianity, because that is it, which
renews the bond of observing it; But otherwise, it were too cold an expression,
to make S. Paul call it the crucifying of Christ, for that which is common to
all sins. Nor would it serve the turn. For, when it follows; He that eats
and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not
discerning the Lords Body; Unless a man discern the Lords Body where it is
not, of necessity it must there be where it is discerned to be, not made to be
there, by being discerned to be there.

It will now be objected, that I hold things inconsistent, and state such a
sense of our Lords words, as makes contradictories true. For, if bread and
wine, remaining bread and wine, can be also the body and blood of Christ, (that
is, unless, granting them to be that which they are, we deny them to be that,
which is not that, which we grant them to be) there will be no cause why we
should believe any thing to be that which it is, more than that which it is
not; All difference being a sufficient ground of that contradiction, which
denies any thing to be that which differs from it, that is, which it is not.
The difficulty of answering this is the same which every man finds, when he
is put to prove that which is most evident, or to make that clear by words,
which all men's common sense admits. Supposing the bread and the wine to remain
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as sense informs, and the word of God
inforces, if the same word of God assirm there to be also the body and blood of
Christ, what remains, but that bread and wine by nature, and bodily
substance, be also the bodily flesh and blood of Christ by mystical
representation, (in that sense which I determined even now) and by spiritual
grace? For, what reason can be imagined, why, the material presence of bread
and wine in bodily substance should hinder the mystical and spiritual presence
of the body and blood of Christ, as in a Sacrament, whereby they are tendered
of grace to them that receive? Shall they be ever a whit the more present in
this sense, if the substance of bread and wine be abolished than if it be not?
Certainly, unless we believe the spiritual grace of Christ's body and blood in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist to possess those dimensions, which the Elements
hold, (and, if so, then are they not there Sacramentally and mystically, but
bodily and materially) we can give no reason why the bodily presence of the
Elements should hinder it. So far is this from being strange, to the nature
and custom of humane speech, that, supposing the invisible presence of one
thing in another, and with another, which is visibly present, it cannot
otherwise be expressed, than by saying; this is that; though every man know,
what distance there is between their natures. The Dove, in the which the Holy
Ghost was seen to come down and rest upon our Lord, the fiery Tongues, in which
the Holy Ghost rested upon the Apostles, the fire and the whirlewinde in the
which Gods Angels attend upon him and upon his commands, (in regard whereof it
is said Psalm CIV. 4. He makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a
flaming fire) are they not as truly said to be the Holy Ghost, or those Angels,
as the Holy Ghost, or those Angels, is said to come down, to rest, or to move,
because those things rest and come down, or move, whereas the Holy Ghost
otherwise can neither rest nor come down, nor those Angels move, as the fire or
the wind moves, in which they are? I know it may be said, that neither the
Dove, nor those Tongues are called the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures; Nor do I
intend to build upon any supposition that they are. This I say, whosoever
understands the capacity of words, serving for instruments to signify men's
minds, may firmly conclude, rhat they may as well be said to be the Holy
Ghost, as it may be said, that the Holy Ghost came down, because the Dove came
down. For, can there be any occasion for a man of sense to conceive cloven
Tongues of fire to be the Godhead of the Holy Ghost, because they are called
the Holy Ghost, in regard they are used to demonstrate the presence of it; when
no man complains, that any man of sense has occasion to mistake the Godhead
to move, because the Holy Ghost is said to come down in the bodily shape of a
Dove? I know it may be said, and is said, that, in the Text of the Psalm that I
quoted, it is not to be translated winds but spirits, or spiritual substances,
because the Apostle, having alleged it, to show the difference between them and
our Lord Christ, Ebr. I. 7, 14. infers, that they are ministering Spirits;
signifying thereby, not winds, but that which Christians signify by the name
of spiritual substances. And I yield, that they are so called, (not only in
the common language of Christians, but in the Apostle also here, and by our
Lord, speaking in the common phrase of Gods people, when he says; A spirit
has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have, Luke XXIV. 39.) upon occasion of
that appearance of Gods majesty, which is either presented to, or described by
the Prophets in the Old Testament, with his Throne attended by Angels, the
visible signs of whose presence are whirlewind and fire. So, in the place
quoted, Psalm CIV. 2. That puts on light for a robe; stretches the heavens as a
curtain: lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, makes the clouds his
chariot, and walks upon the wings of the wind. Whereupon follows; That makes
his Angels Spirits, or Winds, and his Ministers a flame of fire; which answers
winds, not spiritual substances. Compare the description of Gods appearance,
Psalm. L. 3. Our God shall come and shall not keep silence, a consuming fire
shall go before him, and be very tempestuous round about; either with the
visions of the Prophet Ezekiel I. and Daniel VII. or with the description of
the same laid down, Psalm XVIII. 10-14. and you will have reason to say as I
do: Especially when you read; He rode upon a Cherub and did fly, he came
flying upon the wings of the wind; where, a Cherub in the first clause, is the
wind in the second; The same sense being repeted, according to the perpetual
custom of the Psalms. So, when Angels appeared in the shape of men, was it not
true to say, this is an Angel, but we must suppose the nature of man
abolished? If the Holy Ghost and Angels be of spiritual nature, the flesh and
the blood of Christ bodily, then are they at as great distance, from the Dove,
from the Tongues, from the Fire, from the Wind, from the men in which they
appeared, as the flesh and blood of Christ from the elements of the Eucharist.
Nor is the mystical and Sacramental presence, of the flesh and blood of Christ
in the Eucharist, ever a whit more destructive to the bodily presence of the
elements, then the invisible presence of the Holy Ghost or Angels, to the
visible presence of those things in which they were. Nay, if I may, without
offense, allege that which is most pertinent to this purpose, not being usually
alleged in it; That manner of speech which all orthodoxe Christians use, in
calling the person of our Lord Christ either God or Man, (according to the
nature which they intend chiefly to signify) or, in ascribing the properties
of each nature to the said person, respectively to the subject of their speech,
has no other ground than this which I speak of. For, all affirmatives,
Philosophers know, signify, the subject that a man speaks of to be the very
same thing with that which is attributed to it. As, when this wall is said to
be white; this wall is the same subject with this white. Therefore, when a
thing is said to be that, which, in nature, we see, it is not, (as, when a
man's picture is said to be he) the saying, though extremely proper, if you
regard what use and the elegance of speech requires, is unproper to the right
understanding of the nature of the things we speak of, though, a man would not
be so well understood commonly, if he should go about to explain his meaning
by more, or other words: As I conceive, I am not so well understood in writing
thus as our Lord was, when he spoke the words that I endeavor to clear. When
therefore, the properties of the divine nature are attributed to the Manhood of
our Lord, supposing, as all good Christians do, that neither natures nor
properties are confounded, what can we say but this; That, by such
attributions as these, in the Language of his Prophets the Apostles, God would
have us understand a supernatural conjunction and union of two natures, in one
person of our Lord? And, what shall we then say, when the name of Christ's body
and blood is attributed to the bread and wine of the Eucharist, but, that God
would have us understand a supernatural conjunction and union, between the body
and blood of Christ, and the said bread and wine, whereby, they become as truly
the instrument of conveying Gods Spirit, to them who receive as they ought, as
the same Spirit was always in his natural body and blood? For, it matters not,
that the union of the two natures is indissoluble, that of Christ's body and
blood only in order to the use of the elements, that is, speaking properly,
from the consecration to the receiving. The reason of both unions being the
same, that makes both supernatural, to wit, the will of God passed upon both,
and, understood by the Scriptures to be passed upon both, though to several
effects and purposes.

Therefore, I am no way singular in this sense. All they of the Confession of
Auspurg do maintain it before me, and think it enough to say, that it is an
unusual or extraordinary manner of speech, when one thing is said to be another,
of a several kind and nature, but which, the unusual and extraordinary case
that is signified, both expounds and justifies. They indeed maintain another
reason of this presence, and therefore another manner of it; For, if, by virtue
of the hypostatical union, the omnipresence of the Godhead is communicated to
the flesh and blood of Christ in the Eucharist, then is the flesh and blood of
Christ there, not only mystically, but bodily. But if, supposing both the
elements and the flesh and blood of Christ bodily present, it may nevertheless
truly be said; This is my flesh, This is my blood; How much more, if, as I say,
the elements only be there bodily, but the flesh and blood of Christ only
mystically and spiritually? And therefore I find it reasonable for me to
argue, that the sense of so many men, both learned and others, understanding
the words of our Lord in this sense, ought to convince any man, that it is not
against common sense, and therefore, tending so much to make good the words of
our Lord, and the holy Scripture, it not to be let go. I do not intend,
nevertheless, hereby to grant, that the sense of these words; This is my body,
this is my blood; for, This is the sign of my body and blood; is a true sense,
because abundance of learned as well as ordinary people take it so to be. But,
well and good, that it might have been maintained to be the true sense of them,
had no more been expressed by the Scripture in that business. For then, I
suppose the sense of the Church (of which I say nothing as yet) could not have
evidenced so much more, as, I have deduced by consequence from the rest of the
Scripture. But, the mystical presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the
Eucharist being further deduced from the Scripture by good consequence, I
conceive, the common understanding of all those men, who, granting that, do not
gr^nt the Elements to be abolished, sufficient ground for me, that the
signification of these words, This is my body, this is my blood, inforceth it
not. Whereas, on the other side, the substance of the Elements is not
distinguishable by common sense, from their accidents (for, whether the
quantity and the matter be all one or not, whether, beside the matter and
accidents which the quantity is invested with, a substantial form berequisite,
is yet disputable among Philosophers) And therefore, no reason can presume,
that the Apostles, to whom these words were spoken, did understand This of
which our Lord speaks, to signify the sensible accidents of bread an swine,
severed from the material substance of the same. I may therefore very well
undertake to say, that this sense of the words is more proper, than, conceiving
the substance of bread and wine to be abolished, the effect of grace to the
Church remaining the same. For, the property of speech is not to be judged by
the signification of a single word, but by the tenor of the speech wherein it
stands, and the intent of him that speaks, declared by his actions, and the
vi^ible circumstances of the same. Now, our Lord, having taught those to whom
this was spoken, that the eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood is done
by living faith; must be supposed, by appointing this Sacrament, tendering his
flesh to eat and his blood to drink, to limit and determine an office, in the
doing whereof, his flesh and blood is either eaten and drunk, or crucified,
according to the premises. If then, the eating and drinking of his flesh and
blood out of the Sacrament be merely spiritual, by living faith, shall not the
presence thereof in the Sacrament be according? Shall it not be enough, that
they are mystically present in the Sacrament, to be spiritually eaten by them
that receive them with living faith, to be crucified of them that do not? Is it
any way pertinent to the spiritual eating of them, that they are bodily
present? Is it not far more proper to that which our Lord was about (tending,
without question, to the spiritual union which he seeks with his Church) that
he should be understood to promise the mystical, than the bodily presence of
them in the Sacrament, which is nothing else than a Mystery, by the proper
signification and intent of it? I grant an abatement of that, which the terms
of body and blood were originally imposed to signify, being, without question,
that which is visible and subject to sense. But if the nature of the action
which our Lord was about, of the subject which his words express, be such as
requires this abatement, then cannot the original sense of these words be so
proper for this place, as this abatement. Here I will observe, that the Council
of Trent it self, Sess. XIII. cap. I. speaks so warily in this matter, as not
to exclude all manner of tropes from the right sense of these words, saying;
Indignissimum sane flagitium est, ea a quibusdam contentiosis and pravis
hominibus, ad sictitia and imaginarios trapos, quibus veritas caernis and
sanguinis Christi negatur, contra universum Ecclesi^ sensum detorqueri. It is
indeed a very great indignity, that they are, by some contentious and perverse
persons, wrested aside to contrived and imaginary tropes, whereby the truth of
Christ's flesh and blood is denied, contrary to the whole sense of the Church.
They were wiser than to impose upon all their Divines a necessity to maintain,
that there is no trope in the words; This is my cup of the New Testament; which
so many of their Predecessors had granted, because it could not be denied.
Which being granted, must needs take place in This is my body; by necessary
consequence. And surely, the common principles of Grammar and Rhetoric will
enforce it, when they inform us, that tropes are used as clothes are, either
for necessity, because there are more things (much more conceptions) than words
to signify them; (For, thereupon, necessity constrains to turn a word to
signify that, which it was not at first intended to signify, and that is a
trope) Or for ornament, to express a man's mind, with more elegance. Compare
then our ordinary way of expressing the conceptions of the mind by words, which
is common to all Languages, which our ordinary way of expressing the objects
thereof to our minds, by the said conceptions; If a word be diverted to
signify that conception, which it was not first imposed to signify, because
there was no other at hand imposed to signify the present conceit, Logic and
Grammar will make this a Trope, though Rhetoric do not, because it was not
used for ornament, but for the necessary clothing of a man's mind in terms
intelligible. The trial whereof is, if, the subject you speak of cannot truly
be said to be the thing which is attributed to it: As the bread and wine, which
our Lord blessed, cannot be said to be his body and blood. For, if the subject
matter, signified by the Scripture elsewhere, require, that the body and blood
of Christ be thought present, then is the property of the terms to be abated,
so as they may serve to signify that presence; Voiding all dispute concerning
the signification of words (which those that hold Transubstantiation could
never, nor never will agree upon among themselves, because it stands upon terms
of art, the use whereof no man's conceit can overruled) that which the necessity
of our common Faith requires, being once secured, as here. For, the reason
being rendered, why the Eucharist was instituted, and why it is to be
frequented, notwithstanding that the Body and Blood of Christ may always be
eaten and drunk by a living Faith; (to wit, because the reviving of our
Christianity, by receiving the Sacrament, reviveth the promise of Christ's body
and blood, being the means to convay his Spirit) it will not concern the
purpose thereof, that it should be present by Transubstantiation, abolishing
the nature of the Elements. For, though it has been boldly said, by those who
dispute controversies; That the body of Christ is really and substantially
resident in, and united to our bodies; That Grace and Charity, cooled by sin,
are inflamed in the Soul, by the body of Christ immediately touching our
bodies; That the seed of our resurrection is thereby sowed in our mortal
bodies: First, none of this is true, unless you understand it with the same
abatement; That the body of Christ received in the Sacrament, by the body of
him, whose Soul has living Faith in Christ, is the seed of the life of grace
and glory, both to his soul and body; Because, otherwise a dead faith should
receive the same. Secondly, none of this would hold, if Transubstantiation be
true; because rendering the body of Christ invisibly present, no man's body
whatsoever can immediately touch it. And therefore it is no marvel, that so
many excellent School Doctors have acknowledged, that, setting the sense of the
Church aside, (of which I will say what shall be requisite by and by)
Transubstantiation cannot be concluded from the Scriptures. Whose judgments I
carry along with me, for the complement of that prejudice which I advance,
toward the right understanding of the sense of the Church; To wit, that,
whatsoever the present Church may have determined, the Catholic Church did
never understand that which the Scripture necessarily signifies not.

Now let us see, what our Lord says to his Disciples, being scandalized at
those things which I showed you that he taught them in the Synagogue at
Capernaum, of attaining everlasting life by eating his flesh, John VI. 58-63.
Is this it which scandalizeth you? says he, What, then, if you see the Son of
man ascend where he was before? It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh
profits nothing: The words that I speak to you are Spirit and Life. The
spiritual sense, in which he commands them to eat and drink his flesh and
blood, is grounded upon that difference between the promises of the Law and the
Gospel, which I settled in the beginning. For, by virtue thereof, that Manna,
which maintained them in the Desert till they died, is the figure of his body
and blood, that maintains us not to dye. Whereupon S. Paul says, 1 Cor. III.
6. The Spirit quickens, but the Leter kills. Not only because the Law
covenants nor for the world to come; But also, because it was no further the
means to procure that righteousness which gives life, then the Spirit of
Christ was intimated and furnished, under the dispensation of it; Whereupon S.
Paul argues, that the Jews have as much need of Christ as the Gentiles, because
the Law is not able to bring corrupt nature to righteousness. Wherefore the
reason, why they were scandalized at this doctrine of our Lords, was not merely
because it was difficult to understand (he having so plentifully expressed his
meaning, and inculcated it, by often beating the same discourse there, and
otherwise made the condition of his Gospel intelligible to his Disciples) but
because it was hard to undergo, importing the taking up of his Cross, as I
have said. For, it is evident by common experience in the world, how men find,
or how they plead, their minds to be obstructed in the understanding of those
spiritual matters, which, if they should grant their understandings to be
convinced of, there were no plea left them, why they should not conform their
lives and conversations to that light, which themselves confess they have
received. So that the scandal was the same, that the rich man in the Gospel
took, when he was told, that, besides keeping Gods Commandments, one thing was
wanting, to part with all he had, and take up Christ's Cross, to wit, for the
observing of his Commandments. And this scandal he intends to take away, when
he referres them to his ascension into Heaven, because then, and from thence,
they were to expect the Holy Ghost, to enable them to do that which the eating
and drinking of his flesh and blood signifies spiritually. And his words he
therefore calls Spirit and Life, because they are the means to bring unto the
communion of his Spirit, wherein spiritual and everlasting life consists. So
that the flesh of Christ being exalted to the right hand of God, and his
Spirit, which first made it self an habitation in his flesh, being sent down to
make him an habitation in the hearts of his people; those who, upon faithful
consideration of his Cross, faithfully resolve to undertake it, do, by the
Spirit, eat his flesh and drink his blood. Therefore, when, in correspondence
hereunto, he pretends to institute the Sacrament of the Eucharist, that they,
who eat his flesh and drink his blood in that Sacrament, may eat and drink the
same spiritually (as unless they crucify him again, they cannot choose but do)
it behooves indeed, that he procure the flesh and blood of Christ to be there,
by the operation of that Spirit, which framed them for an habitation to it
self, in the womb of the Virgin; (that so, the receiving of his flesh and blood
may be the means of conveying his Spirit) But, how is it requisite, that they
be there in bodily substance, as if the mystical presence of them were not a
sufficient means to convey his Spirit, which we see, is conveyed by the mere
spiritual consideration and resolution of a lively and effectual faith? S. Paul
writes thus to the Corinthians; I would not that you should be ignorant,
Brethren, how that all our Fathers did eat the same spiritual meat, and did all
drink the same spiritual drink; For they drank of the spiritual rock that went
with them: Now that rock was Christ. 1 Cor. X. 1, 3, 4. The meat and drink of
the Fathers in the wilderness can no otherwise be understood to be spiritual,
then, as I have proved the Law of Moses to be spiritual; That is, as,
intimating spiritual promises, it intimates a contract for spiritual obedience.
So S. Paul's argument holds; If they, who were sustained by God in their travel
to the Land of Promise, not keeping their Covenant with God, fell in the
wilderness: Then shall it not serve our turn, that, being baptized, we are
fed by the Eucharist to everlasting life, if we perform not that, which, by
our Baptism, we undertake. The Rock, then, and the M^nn^ were spiritual meat
and drink, because they signified the flesh and the blood of Christ crucified
for us: Which, who so believes, as, thereupon to undertake Christianity, our
Lord, when he had not yet instituted the Eucharist, promises, that he shall
be nourished by his flesh and blood to life everlasting. The effect of which
promise all Christians find, that, by the assistance of his Spirit, overcome
the world in approving themselves Christians. When our Lord annexed the promise
of his Spirit to his Baptism and Eucharist, by instituting those Sacraments,
he tied the spiritual eating and drinking of his body and blood to the
Sacramental, in respect of all them, whom, the affirmative Precepts of using
those Sacraments should oblige. Christ, then, was the food and the drink of
them, who attained Salvation under Moses Law; because, by the faith of Christ
to be crucified they were saved, as we by the faith of Christ crucified: But,
to follow God in hope of Salvation by Christ to come, is not the same, as, to
undertake that Christianity, which, by his coming he has taught us. The signs
of good things to co^^^ed only those that were led by the promise of them; The
rest found by them only the nourishment of their bodies, in their travel to
the Land of promise. But when our Lord, having promised his flesh and blood,
for food to those Souls, that should conform themselves to his Cross,
instituteth the Eucharist, and confineth the spiritual eating and drinking of
his flesh and blood to it, so far as the precept thereof obliges; Shall he
not be understood to promise his body and blood, by that Sacrament, without
which, he will not grant it to those, that are tied to the Sacrament and
neglect it? The presence of his body and blood in the Sacrament is that, which
makes good the promise of his body and blood, made before the instituting of
the Sacrament, to them, who are obliged to use the Sacrament by the institution
of it.

CHAP. III. That the presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist depends not upon
the living Faith of him that receives, but upon the true profession of
Christianity in the Church that celebrates. The Scriptures that are alleged for
the dependence of it upon the communication of the properties. They conclude
not the sense of them by whom they are alleged. How the Scripture confineth the
flesh of Christ to the Heavens.
IF these things be true, it will be requisite that we acknowledge a change to
be wrought in the Elements, by the consecration of them into the Sacrament;
For, how should they come to be that which they were not before, to wit, the
body and blood of Christ, without any change? And in regard of this change, the
Elements are no more called by the name of their nature and kind, after the
consecration, but by the name of that which they are become. Not as if the
substance thereof were abolished, but because it remains no more considerable
to Christians, who do not, nor are to look upon this Sacrament, with any
account of what it may be to the nourishment of their bodies, by the nature of
the Elements, but, what it may be to the nourishment of their Souls, by the
Spirit of God assisting in and with his flesh, mystically present in it. But,
this change consisting in the assistance of the Holy Ghost, which makes the
Elements, in which it dwells, the body and blood of Christ; it is not necessary
that we acknowledge, the bodily substance of them to be any way abolished.
Nay, as I am persuaded, that the presence of Christ in the Eucharist cannot be
better expressed, than by that term which the Council of Trent uses, calling
it a Sacrament, and saying that the flesh and blood of Christ is Sacramentally
there; So, there is nothing more demonstrative to me, that no such thing as
the abolishing of the Elements is revealed by the Scriptures, than that the
sense of them is so fully satisfied by this term. So that, the anathema which
it decrees against them that do not believe them to be abolished, can by no
means be grounded upon the Scriptures. Nor do I think the term any less fit or
serviceable, because it serves them to signify the Local presence of Christ's
body and blood, under the dimensions of the Elements, the substance of them
being gone. For, I shall not be obliged to grant, that the Sacrament of Christ's
body and blood can properly be understood, supposing the sign and the thing
signified to be both the same subject; the dimensions of the Elements being
become the dimensions of Christ's body and blood, and by the means of them, all
the bodily accidents of the Elements subsisting in the same. And therefore, the
Sacramental presence of Christ's body and blood cannot properly be maintained,
unless acknowledging the true being and presence of the thing signified, we
acknowledge also the sign to remain. But if a man demand further, how I
understand the body and blood of Christ to be present in or with or under the
Elements, when I say, they are in, and with, and under them, as in and with and
under a Sacrament mystically; I conceive I am excused of any further answer,
and am not obliged to declare the manner of that which must be mystical, when I
have said what I can say to declare it. Only I will take leave to tell him,
that he will remain nevertheless obliged to believe the truth, both of the
sign and of the thing signified (and that by virtue of the Sacrament, that is,
of the consecration that makes it a Sacrament; not of the faith of him that
receives it) though I answer not all that he demands, upon the question; What
the Sacramental presence of the body and blood of Christ, in or with or under
the Elements of the Eucharist, signifies.

I would now consider wherein the Consecration of the Eucharist consists, that
I might thereupon infer, what kind of presence it inforceth. But I hold it
fit, first to set aside those two opinions, the one whereof, I said, ascribes
it to the Faith of them that receive, being accidental to the Consecration, and
not included in it; The other, to the Hypostatical Union, and that
communication which it infers between the properties of the united natures.
That which I have already said, I suppose, is enough to evidence the mystical
and spiritual presence of the flesh and blood of Christ in the Elements, as the
Sacrament of the same, before any man can suppose, that spiritual presence of
them to the soul, which the eating and drinking Christ's flesh and blood
spiritually, by living Faith, imports. Only, that I may once conclude, how
faith effects the Sacramental presence in the Elements, as well as the
spiritual in the Soul; I will distinguish between the outward profession of
Christianity, which makes us Members of Gods visible Church; and the inward
performance, or faithful purpose of performing the same, which makes a man of
that number, whom God owns for Heirs of his Kingdom, whether you call that
number an invisible Church or not. And then I say, that it is the visible
profession of true Christianity which makes the Consecration of the Eucharist
effectual, to make the body and blood of Christ Sacramentally present in the
Elements of it; But, that it is the invisible faithfulness of the heart, in
making good, or in resolving to make good the said profession, which makes the
receiving of it effectual, to the spiritual eating and drinking of Christ's body
and blood. For, supposing that God has instituted and founded the Corporation
of his Church, upon the precept, or the privilege, of assembling to communicate
in the offices of his service, according to Christianity; Whenever this
office is rendered to God, out of that profession which makes men Members of
Gods Church, there the effect follows, as sure as Christianity is true: Where
otherwise, there can be no such assurance. But, if eating and drinking the body
and blood of Christ, in this Sacrament, unworthily, be the crucifying of Christ
again, rendering a man guilty of his body and blood; then is not his flesh and
blood spiritually eaten and drunk, till living faith make them spiritually
present to the Soul, which the Consecration makes Sacramentally present to the
body. And, it is to be noted, that no man ^^n say, that this Sacrament
represents, or tenders and exhibites unto him that receives, the body and
blood of Christ (as all must do, that abhor the irreverence to so great an
Ordinance, which the opinion that it is but a bare sign of Christ crucified
necessarily ingendreth) but he must believe this; Unless a man will say,
that, that which is not present may be represented, that is to say, ^^n^r^d and
exhibited presently down upon the place. It is not therefore that living faith,
which, he that receives the Eucharist, and is present at the consecrating of
it, may have and may not have, that causes the body and blood of Christ to be
Sacramentally present in the Elements of it: But, it is the profession of that
common Christianity, which makes men Members of Gods Church; In the unity
whereof, wheresoever this Sacrament is celebrated (without enquiring, whether
those that are assembled be of the number of those, to whom the Kingdom of
Heaven belongs) thou have a Legal presumption, even toward God, that thou
receivest the flesh and blood of Christ, in and with the Elements of bread and
wine, and shall receive the same spiritually, for the food of thy Soul,
supposing that thou receivest the same with living faith. For, one part of our
common Christianity being this; That our Lord Christ instituted this Sacrament,
with a promise, to make, by his Spirit, the Elements of bread and wine
Sacramentally his body and blood; so, that* his Spirit that made them so
(dwelling in them, as in his natural body) should feed them with Christ's body
and blood, that receive the Sacrament of them with living faith; This
institution being executed, that is, the Eucharist being consecrated according
to it, so sure as Christianity is true, so sure the effect follows. So that,
the faith which brings it to effect, is the faith of them, who, believing Gods
promises, proceed to execute his Ordinances, that they may obtain the same.
Whereas, those that would have justifying faith to consist in believing a man's
own Salvation, or the decree of God peremp^orily passed upon it, and the
Sacrament of the Eucharist to be appointed for a sign to confirm this faith
(which is nothing else but the revelation of this decree) are not able to say,
how the signifying of the eating of Christ's body and blood conduces to such a
revelation as this, or, why any such thing is done, which conduces not to the
purpose. Besides that, having showed, wherein justifying faith indeed consists,
I have, by that means, made it appear, that the Sacramental nourishment of the
Soul, is the means of the spiritual nourishment of the Soul, as well as the
resemblance of it. Here, indeed, it will be requisite to take notice of that
which may be objected for an inconvenience; That God should grant the operation
of his Spirit, to make the Elements Sacramentally the body and blood of Christ,
upon the dead faith of them who receive it to their condemnation in the
Sacrament, and therefore cannot be said to eat the body and blood of Christ
(which is only the act of living faith) without that abatement which the
premises have established; To wit, in the Sacrament. But all this, if the
effect of my saying be thoroughly considered, will appear to be no
inconvenience. For, that the body and blood of Christ should be Sacramentally
present, in and under the Elements (to be spiritually received, of all that
meet it with a living faith, to condemn those for crucifying Christ again, that
receive it with a dead faith) can it seem any way inconsequent to the
Consecration thereof, by virtue of the common faith of Christians, professing
that which is requisite to make true Christians, whether by a living o^ a dead
faith? Rather must we be to seek for a reason, why, he that ^ateth this bread
and drinks this cup unmorthily, should be guilty of the body and blood of
Christ, as not discer^ing it, according to S. Paul, 1 Cor. XI. 27, 28. unless
we suppose the same Sacramentally present, by virtue of that true
Christianity, which the Church professing, and celebrating the Sacrament,
tend^eth it for spiritual nourishment to a living faith, for matter of damnation
to a dead faith. For, if the profession of true Christianity be, as of
necessity it must be, matter of condemnation to him that professes it not
truly, (that is to say, who, professing it, does not perform it) shall not his
assisting the celebration and consecration of the Eucharist produce the effect
of rendering him condemned by himself (eating the body and blood of Christ in
the Sacrament out of a profession of Christianity, which spiritually he
despises) for not fulfilling what he professes? Or that living faith, which
concurreth to the same as a good Christian should do, be left destitute of that
grace, which the tender of the Sacrament promises, because the faith of those
who join in the same action is undiscernable? Certainly, if the Sacramental
presence of Christ's body and blood, tendering the same spiritually, be a
blessing or a curse, according to the faith which it meets with; it can by no
means seem unreasonable, that it should be attributed to that profession of
Christianity, which makes it respectively a blessing or a curse, according to
the faith of them for whom it is intended.

As for that opinion* that makes this presence to proceed from the Hypostatical
Union passed so long before, it stands upon those Scriptures, which seem to
signify, that those properties, wherein the Majesty of Christ's Godhead
consists, are really communicated to this Manhood, in the doing, and for the
effecting of those works, wherein that assistance* and grace, and protection,
which he has promised his Church upon his Exaltation, consists. S. Paul
writes to the Colossians, that; It pleased* that all fullness should dwell in
Christ, (in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, as he
expresses himself more at large, Col. II. 9. that they by him might be filled)
and by him to reconcile all things t^ himself, making peace by the blood of his
Cross, by him I say, whether things on earth or in the Heavens. And you, being
once estranged, and enemies in your mind, through evil works, yet now has he
reconciled through the body of his flesh, by death, to present you holy and
without spot, and blameless before him. Here, it is plain enough, that our
Reconciliation is ascribed to the flesh of Christ's body, (as to his blood
after, in whom we have Redemption, even the remission of sins by his blood,
Col. I. 14, 19-92.) to wit, for the fullness of the Godhead, dwelling bodily
in Christ. When our Lord says; all things are delivered me by my Father, Mat.
XI. 27. in order to the revealing of his Gospel, that is, to the making of it
effectual; When he says; All power in heaven and earth is given me; Mat.
XXVIII. 18. a question is made, how given, if a necessary con^equence of the
Hypostatical Union? I answer; Because the exercise thereof was limited by the
appointment of God, and the purpose for which he caused the Word to dwell in
our flesh; which, though of force to do all things, should not have had right,
in our flesh, to execute that which God had not appointed. And therefore is our
Lord Christ justly said, to receive that power of God, which, by degrees he
receives commission to exercise. The sitting of Christ at the right hand of
God, I have showed, that the Apostle makes an argument of divine power and
authority, dwelling in our flesh, in the person of Christ, Heb. I. 3. Acts II.
33. V. 31. Ephesians. I. 20-22. where S. Paul ascrbies the filling of the Church, a
work of God alone, to it. And, as he sits on Gods own Throne, so he shall
judge all as man, says our Lord, John V. 21, 22, 23, 26-30. and raise them up,
and quicken them, to that purpose. For, the Throne of God, on which Christ is
set down, is the Seat of his Judgment. And therefore, as I live says the Lord
(God in the Prophet Es. XLV. 23. Christ in the Apostle Romans XIV. 11.) to me
shall every knee ^ow, and every tongue shall give glory t^ God. To the same
purpose is all that you read of anointing our Lord Christ with the Holy Ghost,
given him by God without measure, says the Baptist, John III. 34. if you
understand it, not of the habitual graces poured forth upon the Manhood of
Christ, from the fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in it, (of the truth
whereof, nevertheless, there is no disputes) but of the very Majesty of the
Godhead, communicated unto it in the person of Christ, as, of a truth, I have
said that they are to be understood. In fine, not only the ^erit, but the
appl^cation thereof, that is, the effecting of the cleansing of our consciences
from sin, is ascribed unto the blood of Christ, Ebr. IX. 14. 1 John I. 7. How,
or in what regard, but because, by the eternal Spirit he offered up himself
blameless to God, as the Apostle says? In which regard only it is, that our
nature in Christ is honored with the worship due to God, because, being for
ever inseparable from the Godhead of the Word, it is not to be apprehended, or
figured so much as in the imagination, but as the flesh of the Word.

This is a brief of the Scriptures which they allege, to infer that* seeing
he has promised to feed his Church with his flesh and his blood in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, which cannot be unless they be there; And, seeing
the like works are performed and executed by the flesh, that is the Manhood of
Christ, through the virtue of the Godhead united unto it; Therefore it is to
be believed, that, by communication of the Majesty of the Godhead to the flesh
of Christ, it becomes present, wheresoever his promise, and the comfort and
strengthening of his Disciples (which is the work of his Mediators Office,
whereunto, by sitting down at Gods right hand he^ is installed) requires the
presence of it. If it be said, that, by this position, the attributes and
properties of the Godhead are placed in the Manhood, as their own proper
Subject, into which they are transferred by the operation of the Godhead; (not
devesting it self of them, but communicating them to the Manhood, to be
thenceforth properties really residing in it, and therefore truly to be
attributed to it) I must do them right, and acknowledge that they utterly
disclaim this to be their meaning; Confessing thereby, that if it were, they
could not avoid the imputation of Eutyches his Heresy, condemned by the great
Council of Chalc^don; the confusion of the natures remaining unavoidable, when
the properties of the Godhead, being communicated to the Manhood, in this
sense, can be no more said to remain the properties of it. I undertake not thus
much for the rest of their Divines, who are commonly called Ubiquitaries,
because they are supposed to teach; That the o^ni-presence of Christ's Godhead
is communicated to his flesh, by virtue of the Hypostatical Union, so that, the
body and blood of Christ, being every where present, necessarily subsisteth in
the dimensions of bread and wine in the Euch^rist. This opinion I hold not my
self any way obliged here to ^^^pute, further than by barring it with this
exception; that it takes away that supposition, upon which the whole question,
concerning the consecration of the Eucharist, ^^^ndeth; To wit, that, seeing
the presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament cannot be attributed to
the invisible faith of him that receives, it is necessarily to be attributed to
the vi^^ble faith of the Church that celebrateth. For, according to this
o^inion, it is manifest, that the said presence can no way depend upon any
thing done by the Church in celebrating the Eucharist, being al^eady brought to
pass, and in being, when the Church goes about it. And this is all the
argument that I will use against this conceit, that all the premi^es require
(and so will also all that which follows) the presence of the body and blood
in the Eucharist to be of an other nature, and otherwise effected, ^^an can be
understood to belong to the Elements, by virtue of the Hyposta^ical ^nion;
Though we suppose, that which cannot be granted, that by virtue thereof ^hey
are every where. Which therefore, whether their Divines do really bel^eve, or
only in words, I will not here dispute. Thus much I can say, that, by the
agreement of the Churches pretending the Confession of Ausburg, con^ern^ng the
Articles once in difference among them, contained in the Bo^^ kno^n by the name
of Liber Concordiae, they are not tied to maintain so much. For, it is there
openly protested, not only in the Preface, but chiefly, in the eighth Article,
concerning this point, p. 769, 787. that they do not believe the properties of
the Godhead to be transfu^ed into the Manhood, nor that the Manhood of Christ
is locally extended all over heaven and earth, but that Christ by his
Omnipotence, is able to render his flesh and blood present where he please;
Especially, where he has promised the presence thereof, by in^^ituting the
Sacrament of the Eucharist. And Chemnitius therefore, one of the be^^ learned
of their Divines, in a Book writ on purpose to set forth the grounds of their
opinion, concerning the communication of attributes, expressly ^on^^neth himself
to these terms, as you may see, cap. XXX. p. 205, 206. declaring his meaning,
by the comparison of iron red hot, which, though the fire be so in it that they
are not discernable, much less seperable, and though they may do the act of
both natures at once upon the same subject, by burning and cutting the same
thing, remain notwithstanding distinct in their natures. What then would they
have? Why, this being set aside, they say nevertheless, most truly, that, in
the whole work of the Mediators office, the divine nature communicates with
the humane; Which, understanding the necessities of Christ's Members, both
intercedes with God for supply, and supplies the same by the proper will of it,
which, his divine will, always concurring, brings to effect. In which regard,
it is also most truly said, that the properties of the Godhead do communicate
with the Manhood, in regard of the concurrence of them, to execute that which
it resolves, being always conformable to the will and decree of the Godhead.
This indeed is no more than the faith of the Catholic Church imports, nor
infe^^^th the Ubiquity or Omni-presence of Christ's flesh, as an indowment
communicated to reside in it, by virtue of the Hypostatical Union, as
thenceforth the proper subject of it; But, the concurrence of both natures to
the effecting of those works, wherein the Mediators Office is seen, whereupon
depends that honor and worship, which the M^nhood challenges in the person of
Christ, as in^eparable from the Godhead, to which originally that honor is
due. And therefore, I shall never go about to return any manner of answer, to
any of those Scriptures which have been alleged for it, but only this, that
they infer nothing to the purpose in hand. For, if it could be said, that, by
virtue of the Hypostatical Union (that is, by the will of God effecting it) the
immensity of the Godhead were so transfused into the Manhood, as to make it
present wheresoever this Sacrament is celebrated (and so, in the Elements of
it) then were this an answer to the difficulty in hand; But such a one, as
would engage him that affirms it in the Heresy of Eutyches. But, saying no
more than this; That the will of the man Christ concurres with his Divine
Power, to do all that his promises to his Church imports; And that (the effect
of this Sacrament importing the presence of his flesh and blood) it is
necessary, that the will of the man Christ, by the Divine Power concurring to
the works of it, should make the flesh and blood of Christ present, wheresoever
his Ordinance requires; they cannot say, that Christ's flesh is present in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, by virtue of the Hypostatical Union, upon those
grounds; But, that, by virtue of the Hypostatical Union, the will and promise
of Christ is executed, by the power of the Godhead concurring with it, and
which it acts with. Which is to say, that, not immediately by the
Hypostatical Union, but, by means of Christ's promise, which must come to effect
by the power of the Godhead, which the humane will of Christ communicates
with. And truly, I conceive, no man ever was so impertinent, as not to suppose
the Hypostatical Union, when there was question, how the promise of the
presence of Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist should come to effect. But,
that being supposed, and not serving the turn alone, it remains that we judge
it by the institution of the Eucharist, and the promise which it contains; that
is to say, by those Scriptures, out of which the intent of them is to be had,
and not by the Hypostatical Union, which being supposed, the question remains
nevertheless. And, by the Hypostatical Union, we doubt not but our Lord
Christ has power, to represent his body and blood, that is, to make it
present, where he please; but that must be, not merely by virtue of the
Hypostatical Union, but by doing the same miracle which Transubstantiation
imports, though it be the Hypostatical Union, that inableth our Lord Christ to
do it. For, though there be a difference between the being of Christ's flesh and
blood under the dimensions of the Elements, the substance of them remaining,
and being reduced, by the power of God, under those dimensions; And, the
substance of them being abolished; Yet, I suppose, all men of reason will say,
that the Hypostatical Union contributes no more to that than to this. And
therefore, not doubting, that the Sacramental presence of the body and blood of
Christ in the Eucharist is a very great miracle, (taking that to be miraculous
which requires the infinite power of God to effect it, not that, which contains
a visible effect thereof, apt to bear witness to that truth, which it is done
to confirm) I must remit you to that which has been already said, to judge,
whether the miracle consist in abolishing the substance of the Elements, and
substituting the body and blood of Christ in their stead; Or, in placing the
substance of Christ's body and blood under the same dimensions, in which the
substance of the Elements subsisteth; Or, rather then either of both, that it
be enough to engage the infinite power of God, that, by his Spirit, he
tendreth the flesh and blood of Christ, so Sacramentally present in the
Elements, that whosoever receives them faithfully, thereby communicates as truly
in the Spirit of God, according to his Spirit, as, according to his body, he
communicates Sacramentally in his body and blood.

Here is the place for me to allege those Scriptures, which inform us of the
true nature and properties of the flesh and blood of Christ, remaining in his
body, even now that it is glorified. For, if, in the proper dimensions thereof,
he parted from his Disciples, and went, was carried, or lifted and taken up
into heaven, Acts I. 2, 9, 10. 1 Pet. III. 22. Luke XXIV. 50, 51. Mark XVI. 19.
If, in the same visible form and dimensions, he shall come again to judgment,
Acts I. 11. 1 These. IV. 16. if the Heavens must receive him till that time,
(for sure no man will be much tempted with that frivolous conceit, that S.
Peter's words, Acts III. 21. (...) are to be construed; whom it behooves to
contain the Heavens; but, whom it behooves that the Heavens contain; Unless it
could appear, how S. Peter should understand, the body of Christ to contain the
heavens, not the heavens it) sitting at Gods right han^ till his Enemies be
made his footstool, Psalm. CX. 1. if, to that purpose, he leave the world,
John XVI. 28. no more to be in it, XVII. 11. so that we shall have him no more
with us, Mat. XXVI. 11. it behooves us to understand, how we are informed,
that the promise of his body and blood in the Eucharist imports an exception to
so, many declarations, before we believe it. Indeed, there is no place of Gods
right hand, by sitting down at which, we may say, that our Lords body becomes
confined to the said place; But, seeing the flesh of Christ is taken up into
Heaven to sit down at Gods right hand; Though, by his sitting down at Gods
right hand, we understand, the man Christ to be put into the exercise of that
divine power and command which his Mediators Office requires; Yet his body we
must understand to be confined to that place, where the Majesty of God appears
to those that attend upon his Throne. Neither shall the appearing of Christ to
S. Paul, Acts XXIII. 11. be any exception to this appointment. He that would
insist, indeed, that the body of Christ stood over Paul, in the Castle where
then he lodged, must say, that it left Heaven for that purpose. For, that is
the miracle which the Text expresses, that he was there, whose ascent into
Heaven it had reported before. But, seeing the very body of Christ might, in a
vision of Prophecy, appear to Paul in the Spirit, without any contravention to
that determination, which the Scripture otherwise had expressed; Were it not
madness to go about to limit the sense and effect of it, upon pretense of a
promise altogether impertinent to the occasion in hand, and every whit as
properly to be understood without so limiting the sense of it? This is all the
argument that I pretend to maintain upon this consideration: Knowing well
enough, that, it is said indeed, that, the flesh of Christ remaining in Heaven
in the proper dimensions thereof, which the Exaltation allows, nothing hinders
the same to be present under the dimensions of the Elements, whether the
substance of them be there, which Consubstantiation allows, or whether they be
abolished, as Transubstantiation requires. Which he that would contradict,
must enter here into a Philosophical dispute, whether or no, the infinite power
of God can bring to pass either or neither of these effects; That is to say,
whether it imply a contradiction, that the body and blood of Christ, (which is
as sure in Heaven as the faith of Christ is sure) should at the same time be
present in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, under the dimensions of the
Elements, whether we suppose the substance of them to be abolished, or to
remain present. This dispute I am resolved not to touch at this time: Partly
for that reason which I have alleged upon other occasions; Because, I desire to
discharge this Book, being written in our mother tongue, of all Philosophical
disputes, tending rather to puzzle, than to edify the main of those that speak
English; Partly, for a reason peculiar to this point, because it has been
argued, that, if we deny Transubstantiation or Consubstantiation as
contradictory to reason, there can be no cause, why we should cleave to the
Faith of the Trinity, which every man sees to be no less contradictory to
humane reason, than either of both. For, though I do no ways admit this
consequence, because it is evident, that the nature of bodily substance is far
better comprehended by man's understanding, than the incomprehensible nature of
God, which, it is impossible to apprehend any thing of, but under the
resemblance of something belonging to sensible substance; yet, I am willing to
go to issue, without drawing this dispute into consequence, referring to
judgment, whether the evidence for Consubstantiation or Transubstantiation be
such, as for the holy Trinity, out of the Scriptures. That is to say, whether
the presence of the flesh and blood of Christ in the Eucharist is so to be
understood, as to void the confining of them to those dimensions, which the
Scripture allows them in Heaven; (And this as necessarily, by the Scripture,
as the Scripture necessarily obliges to believe the Holy Trinity) When as it
may be, more properly to the nature of the business, understood mystically, as
in a Sacrament, intended to convey the communion of his Spirit. In the mean
time, allowing any man that submits his reason to all that Christianity
imports, the sober use of it, in disputing, whether the presence of the flesh
and blood of Christ in the Eucharist as Consubstantiation, or as
Transubstantiation requires, be contradictory to the evidence of reason or not.

CHAP. IV. The opinion which makes the Consecration to be done by rehearsing
the operative words. That our Lord consecrated by Thanksgiving. The Form of it
in all Liturgies, together with the consent of the Fathers. Evidence, that
there is no Tradition of the Church for the abolishing of the Elements.
COming now to consider, wherein the Consecration of the Eucharist consists, I
find no opinion on foot, but that which has taken possession by the authority
of the School-Doctors, that it is performed by the recital of these words; This
is my body, This is my blood; in the Canon (that is, the Canonical or Regular
Prayer for the Consecration of the Eucharist) of the Mass. For, those that
have set aside this Prayer, and do not allow the opinion, that these words are
operative to the effecting of that, which the institution of the Eucharist
promises, though they retain the recital of them in the action, yet have not
declared any common agreement, wherein they intend to maintain the Consecration
of the Eucharist to stand. And is it not then free for me to declare, that I
could never rest satisfied with this opinion of the School-Doctors, as finding
it to offer violence to common sense, and the truest intention of that which
we may see done, in consecrating the Eucharist? For, when our Lord takes the
Elements in his hands, and blesses them, (or gives God thanks, over them) then,
breaks the bread, and, delivering them, bids his Disciples take and eat them,
because they are his body and blood; is it not manifest, that they are so
called, in regard of something which he had already done about them, when,
delivering them, he calls them, at that present time of delivering them, that
which he could not call them before, his body and blood? No, say they, that is
easily understood otherwise, from the common customs which men use in civil
conveyances; Nothing being more usual, by several customs of several nations,
then, to convey the right and possession of house or land by delivering
writings, testifying certain deeds done to that effect; to put in possession of
a house, by delivering the key, or the post to be held, or putting into the
house; by delivering a turf of the land to be conveyed, to put into rightful
possession of the same, adding the like words to these; Here is this house or
this land, take it for thine own. But in vain.

Those that use this escape consider not, that our Lord said these words; Take,
eat, drink, this is my body, this is my blood, when he delivered them; So
that, if, by saying these words, he made them that which the words signify,
then, by delivering them he made them that which they signify. For so the
like words serve, in delivering possession, to express the intent of him that
delivers it; To which overt act of delivering, the right of possession, and the
conveying of it, is as much to be ascribed, as to the words which animate it by
expressing the intent of it. Which if it be true, then were the Elements, which
our Lord delivered to his Disciples, consecrated by delivering them: And
therefore, by consequence, the Eucharist is never consecrated but by delivering
of it; Seeing, of necessity, the Eucharist is consecrated by the same means, as
the first, which Christ communicated to his Disciples, was consecrated. But
this can by no means stand with the intent of them that maintain this opinion,
supposing, as they do, that the Sacrament is consecrated before it be delivered
to them that receive it. And hence starts another argument. For these words, as
they are used in consecrating the Eucharist, are part of the rehearsal of that
which ou^ Lord Christ did, when he consecrated that Eucharist which he gave
his Disciples. And will any reason endure this, that the Eucharist be thought
to be consecrated, by reci^ing what Christ said, when he delivered that
Eucharist which he had consecrated; And not by doing what Christ commanded to
be done, when he appointed it to be celebrated? Certainly, he that says,
Christ took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, saying; Take, eat, this is my
body; says what Christ did and said, before, and when he delivered it. He
that says further, that he said; do this in remembrance of me, says that
Christ instituted this Sacrament. But to say that Christ instituted this
Sacrament, is not to consecrate that Sacrament which Christ instituted. That is
not done, but by doing that which Christ is said to have done. And is not
Christ said to have blessed the Elements? Is it not said, that, having taken
and blessed and broken the bread, delivering it to his Disciples, he affirmed
it to be his body at the present when he delivered it? Can the becoming of it
his body be imputed to the taking, or breaking, or delivering of it? Does it
not remain then, that it be imputed to the blessing of it?

Here, finding it evident, by comparing the Evangelists one with another and
with S. Paul, that blessing and giving of thanks, in this case, are both one
and the same thing signified by two words; I must needs infer, that blessing
the Elements, is nothing else, but giving God thanks over them (which at the
present our Lord had in hand) with intent to make them the Sacrament of his
body and blood. The people of God, in our Lords time, were wont to take nothing
for meat or for drink, without first giving God thanks solemnly for it, as they
had it in hand. You may see how scrupulous they were in this point, by the
title of Blessings, the first of the Talmud, where you have those forms of
thanksgiving recorded, and the circumstances at which they were to be used, in
receiving several kinds, which were, some of them, doubtless, more ancient
than our Lords time. A practice fitting for Christianity to continue, setting
aside that superstitious scrupulosity of forms and circumstances, wherein the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees consisted. Therefore S. Paul,
withstanding those Heretics, that taught to abstain from meats which God has
made to be participated with thanksgiving, by the faithful, and such as have
known the truth, 1 Timothy IV. 3, 4, 5. adds for his reason; Because every
creature of God is good, and none to be rejected, received with thanksgiving.
For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. The word of God inabling
Christians to receive it with a good conscience, so as they may expect Gods
blessing, which they have desired by their prayers. For, is it not manifest,
that, having said, that every creature is good which a Christian receives with
thanksgiving; when he adds, that it is sanctified by prayer grounded on Gods
words; he includes in that thanksgiving which he means, prayer to God for a
blessing upon it? The creatures of God then are sanctified to the nourishment
of our bodies by Thanks-gving, with prayer for Gods blessing; And shall we
think, that that Thanksgiving, wherewith they are sanctified to the
nourishment of our Souls, does not include prayer to the effect intended, that
they may become the body and blood of Christ, which God by this Sacrament
pretends to feed our Souls with? And, does not the execution of our Saviors
Institution, when he says, Do this; consist in giving God thanks for the
redemption of Mankind, with prayer, that we may be fed by the flesh and blood
of Christ in the Eucharist? Certainly, the word Do this, is that which the
whole action is grounded upon, as pretending to execute it; and therefore the
effect of it, so far as consecrating the Eucharist, is already come to pass
when the Church may say; This is our Lords Body, this is his blood; as our Lord
said; This is my body, this is my blood. But, the strength of this resolution,
I confess, lies in the consent of the Church, and those circumstances visible
in the practice thereof, which, to them that observe them with reason, are
manifest evidences of this sense. I have observed, in a Book of the Service of
God at the Assemblies of the Church. p. 347-370. the pass^ges of diverse of the
most ancient Writers of the Church, in which (...), or giving thanks, is put
for consecrating the Eucharist; Unto which add the words of Irenaeus in
Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. V. 20. concerning the then Bishop of Rome, Anicetus,
when Polycarpus was there, (...) that is, he gave way to Polycarpus to
celebrate the Eucharist; For, seeing that this Sacrament, that is, the Elements
consecrated are called the Eucharist all over the Church from this
thanksgiving, the act thereof passing upon them, to give them, by way of
Metonymie, this name; What can be more reasonable, than to grant, that it is
this act (and not the rehearsal of the words of the Gospel, which relate what
our Lord did and said, in instituting as well as celebrating it) by which the
consec^ation is performed; Though, on the other side, I insist, that these
words have always been rehearsed by the Church in consecrating the Eucharist,
and ought still to be frequented, and among them, those which our Lord said
when he delivered it; This is my body, This is my blood; which now the whole
School thinks to be the only oper^tive words in that change, which the making
of the Elem^nts to become the Sacrament imports. I have also showed in the same
place, that S. Paul, when he says, 1 Cor. XIV. 16, 17. For, if thou bless by
the Spirit, he that fills the place of an Id^ot, or private person, how shall
he say the Amen upon this thanksgiving? For he knows not what thou say.
For, thou indeed give thanks well, but the other is not edified; by blessing
and giving thanks, means the consecrating of the Eucharist: (which, those that
h^d the grace of Languages among the Corinthians, undertook then to do in
unknown tongues, and are therefore reproved by the Apostle) Because it may
appear, by the constant practice of the whole Church, that it ended with an
Amen of the people, which S. Paul therefore calls the Amen, (...), to wit, that
was used in that case. And also, that, when he writes to Timothy; I exhort
therefore, first of all, to make supplications, prayers, intercessions,
thanks-givings for all men; For Kings, and all that are in eminence, that we
may lead a peaceable and quiet life, in all piety and gravity; he intends to
ch^rge, that, at the celebration of the Eucharist, (which here he calls
Thanks-givings) prayers be made, as for all states of men, so especially for
public Powers and Princes: Because S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and the Author de
Vocatione Gentium, I. 12. do expressly testify unto us, that the custom which
the Church then, and always before and since has had to do this, came from this
Ordinance of S. Paul, and contains the fulfilling of it. And, because it is
manifest, by all the forms of Liturgy, in all Churches, that are yet extant,
and by the mention made of the manner of it, upon occasion, in the writings of
the Fathers, that the Eucharist was never to be celebrated, without prayer for
all states of Christ's Church. And this indeed is a great part of the evidence
which I pretend. There are extant yet, in several Languages, several Liturgies,
(that is, forms of that complete Service of God, by Psalms, and Lessons, and
Sermons and Prayers) the Crown whereof was the Eucharist, as that of S. Mark of
S. James, of S. Peter, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, which are the forms that were
used in their Churches of Alexandria, Jerusalem, Rome, Caesarea,
Constantinople; though not as they had from the beginning appointed, but as
Prelates of authority and credit had thought fit to add to, or take from, or
ch^nge that which they from the beginning had appointed. There is besides, the
Canon of the Roman Mass, (that is, the Canonical or Regular Pray^r which the
Eucharist is consecrated with) which is the same in Latin, with that of S.
Peter in Greek, upon the matter (as of a truth, the Greek is but the Translation
of the Latin, it seems, for the use of these Greeks in Italy that follow the
Church of Rome) and that of S. Ambrose at Milane, three translated out of
Ar^bi^k by the M^ronites at Rome, the Ethiopick translated ^into Latin, many
Canons (called by them Anaphora) in the Maronites Missal lately printed at Rome
in the Syriack, one of the Christians of S. Thomas in the East Indies in
Latin. In all these, you shall observe a Prayer to begin, where, the Deacon
formerly saying; Sursum corda; Lift up your hearts; the people answered;
Habemus ad Dominum; We lift them up unto the Lord. The subject of it is, (at
least where any length is allowed it) to praise God for creating the world, and
maintaining Mankind, through his providence, with the fruits of the earth:
Then, (after acknowledgement of Adams Fall) for using, first, those means of
reclaiming Mankind unto God, which we find by the Scriptures, that it pleased
God to use; under the Law of Nature first, by the Patriarchs; then, under the
Law of Moses, by the Prophets; then sending our Lord Christ to redeem the
world. Upon which occasion, rehearsing, how he instituted the Eucharist at his
last Supper, prayer is made, that the Holy Ghost, coming down upon the present
Elements, may sanctify them, to become the body and blood of Christ, so that
they which receive them, may be filled with his Grace. This being so visible in
so many of these Liturgies; shall we say, that all that follows after the
Deacons warning; let us give thanks; makes up that which the ancient Church,
after S. Paul, by a peculiar term of art, as it were, calls the Eucharist or
Thanksgiving? Or, that, the Sacrament, which takes the name from it, is
consecrated, only by rehearsing those words which our Lord said, when he
delivered it; This is my body, this is my blood? Especially, all reason in the
world enforcing, that the presence of the body and blood of Christ in the
Eucharist, (being that which God promises, upon the observation and
performance of his institution and appointment) cannot be ascribed to any thing
else.

In the Latin Mass, before the rehearsal of the Institution, they pray thus;
Quam oblationem, tu Deus, in omnibus, quaesumus, benedictam, ascriptam, ratam,
rationabilem, acceptabilemque facere digneris: Vt nobis corpus and sanguis fiat
dilectissimi filii tui, Domini nostri Jesu Christi. Which oblation, thou, O
God, we pray thee, vouchsafe to make, in all respects, blessed, imputable,
accountable, reasonable, and acceptable; That it may become to us, the body and
blood of thy wellbeloved Son our Lord Christ Jesus. Then after the Institution;
Jube haec perferri per manus sancti Angeli tui in sublime altar tuum, in
conspectu divinae Majestatis tuae; Ut quotquot ex hoc altaris participatione
sacrosanctum filii tui corpus and sanguinem sump^erimus, omni benedictione
coelesti and gratia repleamur. Command them to be carried, by the hands of thy
holy Angel, unto thine Altar that is above, before thy divine Majesty; that, as
many of us as shall receive the holy body and blood of thy Son, by this
communion of the Altar, may be filled with all heavenly benediction and grace.
These two parts of this Prayer are joined into one, in most of those Forms
which I have named, whether before the rehearsal of the institution or after it.
Only, in those many Forms which the Maronites Missal contains, the rehearsal
of the institution comes immediately after the Peace: Which was, in the
Apostles time, that Kiss of Peace which they command, going immediately before
the Deacons warning, to lift up hearts to the Consecrating of the Eucharist;
Though those words are not now found in any of these Syriack forms. For, after
the institution is rehearsed, it is easy to observe, that there follows
constantly (though not immediately, but interposing some other Prayers) a
Prayer to the same effect with these two; But in two several forms: For, in
all of them, saving two or three, (which pray, that the Elements may become the
body and blood of Christ, to the Salvation of those that receive, by the Holy
Ghost coming down upon them) Prayer is made, that this body and this blood of
Christ may be to the Salvation of the Receivers. Which may be understood, to
signify the effect of both these Prayers, in so few words: But it may also be
understood to signify, that, whosoever framed them, conceived the consecration
to be made by the rehearsal of the institution premised. Which if I did believe,
I should not think them ancient, but contrived at Rome, where they are printed,
upon the doctrine of the School now in vogue. For, in all forms besides, the
effect of these prayers is to be found, without excepting any of those, which,
we may have any confidence of, that they are come entire to our hands. I
demand then, whether I have reason to attribute the force of consecrating the
Eucharist (upon which the Sacramental presence of the body and blood of Christ
depends) to the recital of what Christ said or did, at his celebrating the
Eucharist, or instituting it for the future; Or, to the Prayer which all
Christians have made, and all either do make or should make, to the express
purpose of obtaining this Sacramental as well as spiritual presence. Hear how
Justine describes the action, Apolog. II. (...). Having done our Prayers, we
salute one another with a kiss. Then, (as I said, that the Peace was next
before the Consecration) is offered to the chief of the Brethren bread, and a
cup of water and wine mixed. Which he takes, and sends up praise and glory to
the Father of all, through the name of the Son and Holy Ghost; Giving thanks at
large, that we are vouchsafed these things at his hands (To wit, the means
which God used to reclame Mankind, under the Law of nature and Moses, and
lastly, the coming of Christ, and his death, and the institution of the
Eucharist) Who having finished his Thanksgiving and Prayers (for the making of
the Elements the body and blood of Christ by the Holy Ghost) all the people
present follow with an acclamation, saying, Amen. Afterward, he calls the
Sacrament, (...). The food which thanks has been given for, by the prayer of
that word which came from him. That is, which our Lord Christ appointed the
Eucharist to be consecrated with; when he commanded his Disciples to do that
which he had done. So Origin in Mat. XV. calls the Eucharist, Panem verbo Dei
and per obsecrationem sanctificatum; Bread sanctified by the Word of God and
Prayer. And contra Celsum VIII. Oblatos panes edimus, corpus sanctum quoddam
per preces factos. We eat the bread that was offered, made a kind of holy
body by prayer. Not that which is grounded upon that Word of God, by which his
creatures are our nourishment, (as Justine says afterward, that Christians
bless God, by the Son and Holy Ghost, for all the food they take) but that
Word of Christ, whereby he commanded to do that which he had done. S. Cyril
of Jerusalem, Catech. Mystag. III. says; That the bread is no more common
bread, after the calling of the Holy Ghost upon it; Because he says
afterward, Cat. Mist. V. that the Church prays God, to send the Holy Ghost
upon the Elements, to make them the body and blood of Christ; As I said. So S.
Basil calls the form of Consecration, (which, I showed you, he affirms to come
by Tradition from the Apostles, as here I maintaiu it does) (...) The words of
invocation; To wit, whereby we call for the Holy Ghost to come upon the
elements and consecrate them, de Spiritu Sancto cap. XXVII. S. Gregory Nyssene
de vita Mosis, says, the bread is sanctified by the Word of God, which is his
Son; But, to say further by what means, he adds; in virtue of the blessing. To
wit; which the Church consecrates the Eucharist with, as our Lord did. Optatus
describes the Altars or Communion Tables which the Donatists broke; (For they
were of wood, not of stone) Quo Deus omnipotens invocatus sit, quo postulatus
descendit Spiritus Sanctus. On which almighty God was called to come down. On
which the Holy Ghost, upon demand, did come down. S. Jerome describes the
dignity of Priests, Epist. LXXXV. Ad quorum preces corpus Christi sanguisque
conficitur. At whose prayers the Body and Blood of Christ is made: To wit, by
God. And, in Sophoniae III. Impie agunt in legem, putantes Eucharistiam
imprecantis facere verba non vitam: Et necessariam esse tantum solennem
Orationem, non Sacerdotum merita. They transgress the Law of Christ, thinking
that the Eucharist is made by the words, not the life of him that prays over
it: And that, only the customary prayer, not the works of the Priest are
requisite. In fine, as often as you read mysticam precem, or mysticam
benedictionem, when there is speech of the Eucharist in the Fathers, be
assured, that which here I maintain is there understood. True it is, Irenaeus
V. 2. affirms, that the Bread and the Wine, receiving or admitting the Word
of God ( accipientia) become the Eucharist of the Body and Blood of Christ. But
what word this is, he declares himself further, when he says, IV. 34. Panis
percipi^ns invocationem Dei, jam non communis est. The bread that has admitted
the invocation of God, is no more common bread. To wit, that word of
instituion, in virtue whereof, the Church calls upon God, to make the
elements his body and blood. Some of them say it is done by Gods word, as the
world was made by it. But, the world was made by the word of Gods command; And
in these words, This is my body, this is my blood; command there is none: In
these; Do this in remembrance of me; there is a command, which includes a
warrant or promise; Though the effect of it depend upon the execution of the
command, by the Church; whereas, immediately upon Gods word the world was made.
And this is that word S. Augustine meant when he said; Accedat verbum ad
elementum, and sit Sacramentum; The word being applied to the element, the
Sacrament is made: But this application is the execution of Christ's Ordinance*
not, saying that he said; This is my body, this is my blood. For he says,
the body and blood of Christ is only that; quod ex fructibus terrae susceptum,
ac prece mystica consecratum, rite sumimus; Which we duly receive, being taken
out of the fruits of the earth, and consecrated by the mystical prayer; which I
speak of. De Trinit. III. 4. To the same purpose Epist. LIX. A saying or two of
S. Chrysostomes indeed I remember, that name those words, speaking of the
consecration, as by which the flesh and blood of Christ became present in the
Eucharist. In II ad Tim. Hom. II. that, as the words which our Savior then
spoke are the same which the Priest now uses, so is the Sacrament the same, and
consecrated by Christ as that was. And Hom. de Jud^ he says, to infer the
same; The words are pronounced by the mouth of the Priest, but the elements are
consecrated by the Power and Grace of God. This is, says he, my body; By this
word the bread and wine are consecrated. Not by the rehearsing of these words,
but by virtue of his command; Do this; And by virtue of that blessing or
thanksgiving, upon which, our Lord affirms the elements which he had
consecrated to be his body and blood. For, the meaning may well be referred to
the institution of Christ, and the execution thereof by the Church; which S.
Chrysostom supposing, may well say, that, upon this affirmative of our Lord;
This is my body, this is my blood; depends the Consecration of the Eucharist;
Not as that which effects it, but, as that which evidenceth and assures it,
in as much as it was said by our Lord Christ, upon supposition of that blessing
or prayer which he appoints it to be consecrated with. So the Author de
Caena Domini in S. Cyprian; that since our Lord said, Do this in remembrance of
me; This is my body, this is my blood; the bread and the cup, being
consecrated by these words, become profitable to the salvation of man. True it
is indeed, in as much as the appointment of our Lord Christ is not completely
executed by consecrating the Eucharist, but by respectively delivering and
receiving it; you may truly say, that, by virtue of these words, Take, eat,
this is my body, this is my blood; that which every man receives becomes the
body and blood to him that receives it. For, as I have said, that it becomes
the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, in order to our feasting upon it; so
is that which I receive, completely and finally, the body and blood of Christ
to me, when I receive it. But this sense, supposing it already to be the body
and blood of Christ, to all that communicate in it according to Christ's
ordinance, cannot be to the purpose of them that would have it become such to
all that receive it, by virtue of these words, by which it becomes so finally
to him that finally receives it.

An Objection indeed there is, (but which lies against the other opinion as
much as against this) out of S. Gregory, Epist. VII. 64. Indict. II. Orationem
vero Dominicam idcirco mox post precem dicimus, quia mos Apostolorum fuit, ut
ad ipsam solummodo orationem oblationis hostiam consecrarent. Et valde mihi
inconveniens visum est, ut precem quam Scholasticus composuerat super
oblationem diceremus; Et ipsam traditionem quam Redemp^or noster composuit
super e^us corpus and sanguinem taceremus. But the Lords Prayer we therefore
say straight after the Prayer, because the custom of the Apostles was to
consecate the sacrifice of oblation, with that alone. And it seemed to me very
inconvenient, that we should say over the oblation, the Prayer which a School
Doctor had composed; And silence the Tradition which our Redeemer composed,
over his body and blood. For, if the Apostles consecrated the Eucharist by
saying the Lords Prayer, as S. Gregory here seems to affirm, th^n can there be
no Tradition of the Apostles, whereby a certain Prayer is prescribed, as that
wherein the consecration of the Eucharist consists. Therefore, if it should
appear, that S. Gregory did indeed believe, that the Apostles used the Lords
Prayer in celebrating the Eucharist, with an intent to consecrate the Sacrament
by the same; I confess, I should rather adhere to S. Basil, affirming, the
Apostles to have delivered certain words, (that is, the meaning of certain
words) to call upon God, for the consecrating of the elements into the body and
blood with. For, in so doing, I should not prefer^ S. Basil, but the whole
Church, (the practice whereof, so general, and so original as has been
declared, could have no beginning, but that which our common Christianity
pretends, from the Apostles) before S. Gregory. And truly, that the
Consecration should end with the Lords Prayer, I do easily believe to come from
the practice of the Apostles, so ancient and so general I find that custom,
which S. Gregory maintains. Nor is it any more that S. Jerome has said in his
third book against the Pelagians; though he is sometimes alleged for that
which S. Gregory says; Sic docuit Apostolos suos, ut quotidie in corporis
illius sacrificio credentes audeant loqui; Pater noster qui es in coelis. So
taught he his Disciples, that believers dare say every day, at the sacrifice
of his Body; Our Father which art in heaven. By and by; Pa^em quotidianum, sive
super omnes substantias, venturum Apostoli deprecantur, ut digni sint
assumptione Corporis Christi. The Apostles pray for daily bread (or, above all
substances) to come, that they may be worthy to receive the Body of Christ. All
this concerns the concluding of the Consecration with the Lords Prayer, as it
did always conclude. For ^^r ^ight he allegeth, that, as soon as a man is
baptized, coming to the Communion, he is to say; Forgive us our Trespasses.
But, before that form was made which S. Gregory says Scholasticus composed,
(whether he mean a man of that name, or, as I conceive, some Doctor that
professed the Scriptures) if S. Gregory should tell me, that some other form,
to the same effect, was not in use, I could not believe him, believing the
premises. The substance and effect whereof, under the name of Eucharistia, or
the Thanksgiving) is that which the Church, from the beginning, consecrated
the Eucharist with, by the appointment of our Lord, and according to the
practice of his Apostles. So Rabanus de Institutione Clericorum I. 32. affirms,
that the whole Church consecrates with Blessing and Thanksgiving, the Apostles
having taught them to do that which our Lord had done. Walafridus Strabus de
Rebus Ecclesiasticis cap. XXII. relates two several opinions concerning this
business, as it appears by his discourse: Et relatio majorum est, ita primis
temporibus Missas fieri solitas, sicut modo in Parasceve Paschae (in quo die
apud Romanos Missae non aguntur) communicationem facere solemus; Id est,
praemiss^ Oratione Dominica, and, sicut ipse Dominus noster praecepti,
commemoratione passionis adhibita, eos Corpori Dominico communicasse and
Sanguini, quos ratio permittebat. And there is a relation of our Predecessors,
that in the first times Mass was done, as now on Good Friday, (on which day
Mass is not said at Rome) the communion is wont to be made; That is, that, the
Lords Prayer premised, and, the commemoration of his death applied, those whom
reason allowed did communicate in the Body and Blood of our Lord. The practice
of the Church of Rome here mentioned is that which still continues, not to
consecrate the Eucharist either on Good Friday, or the Saturday following. For
then, Mass is said so late, that it belongs to Easter day. And, on Maundy
Thursday, the Eucharist is consecrated and reserved to be received on Good
Friday. That any commemoration of Christ's death is made at the receiving of it,
as Rabanus says, I find not. This is certain, that no man imagines, that the
Eucharist is consecrated by any thing that is said or done at the receiving of
it, but at the Mass on the day before. And this, in the Greek Church, is
called (...), The Liturgy of the elements that were consecrated before; Which
they use on other days besides. Therefore this opinion, that the Apostles
should celebrate so, would import, that they celebrated the Eucharist without
consecrating of it; That is, that they never appointed how it should be
consecrated: Which neither Rabanus, nor any of these whose opinion he relates
can maintain, Nor, supposing the premises, is it tenable. And therefore, I take
the true meaning of S. Gregory's words to be laid down in another opinion,
related before by Rabanus; Quod nunc agimus, multiplici orationum, cantilenarum,
and consecrationum officio, totum hoc Apostoli, and post eos proximi, ut
creditur, orationibus, and commemoratione passionis dominica faciebant
simpliciter. That which we act by an Office compounded of many and diverse
Prayers, Psalms, and Consecrations: all that the Apostles, and the next after
them did plainly, with prayers, and the commemoration of our Lords passion, as
it is thought. For, the consecration may well be understood to be made plainly,
by prayer, with commemoration of our Lords passion; in opposition to that
solemnity of Lessons, Psalms, and Prayers, which, at the more solemn occasions
of the Church, it was afterward celebrated with; Though we suppose it to
conclude always with the Lords Prayer, as S. Gregory requires. And herewith
the words of S. Gregory see^ to agree, when he ^aith; Vt ad ipsam ^solumm^do
orationem: To consecrate at or with it alone; not by it alone. But if this
opinion cannot pass, (having, indeed, no constraining evidence) but that S.
Gregory's words will needs require, that they con^ecrated the Eucharist by the
Lords Prayer alone; I will will then ^ay, that the Apostles understood the
petition of our daily bread; as S. Cyprian upon the Lords Prayer does; To wit,
of the bre^d and drink of the Eucharist, daily celebrated and received. For,
supposing this intent and meaning, there is nothing pretended to be done by the
consecration, which that Petition signifies not; Praying, that God will give
us this day, the daily food of our ^ouls, by the elements presently provided
for that purpose. And all this will no way prejudice that which has been said,
of the matter and form of the consecration, derived by Tradition from the
Apostles, to be frequented at more solemn occa^^ons of Christian Assemblies.
For that Assembly, which, believing that Christians are justified by
undertaking to profess the Faith, and to live according to it, and, that our
Lord has left us his body and blood of the Eucharist, to convey the Holy Ghost
to our ^ouls, that they may be able to perform what they undertake; should pray
the Lords Prayer over the Elements proposed, with that intent; I cannot doubt
of their receiving the Body and blood of Christ. Provided, that, where the
occasion will bear more solemnity, the Order of the Church received from the
Apostles be not neglected. Whereas, supposing Christians to believe, that they
are justified, by believing that they are justified, or predestinate, in
consideration only of Christ's sufferings, and that the Eucharist is instituted
only for a sign, to confirm this Faith; Though they should regularly use that
form of consecration, which, I maintain, to come by Tradition from the
Apostles; I would not therefore grant, that they should either consecrate the
Eucharist, or could receive the Body and blood of Christ by it: Sacrilege they
must commit, in abusing Gods ordinances to that intent, for which he never
appointed it, but Sacrament there would be none, further then their own
imagination.

And upon these premises, I am content to go to issue, as concerning the sense
of the Catholic Church, in this point. If it can any way be showed, that the
Church did ever pray, that the flesh and blood might be substituted instead of
the elements, under the accidents of them, then I am content, that this be
counted henceforth the Sacramental presence of them in the Eucharist. But, if
the Church only pray, that the Spirit of God, coming down upon the Elements,
may make them the body and blood of Christ, so that, they which received them
may be filled with the grace of his Spirit; Then is it not the sense of the
Catholic Church that can oblige any man to believe the abolishing of the
Elements, in their bodily substance; because, supposing that they remain, they
may neverthel^sse become the Instrument of Gods Spirit, to convey the operation
thereof to them that are disposed to receive it, no otherwise than his flesh
and blood conveyed the efficacy thereof upon earth. And that, I suppose, is
reason enough, to call it the body and blood of Christ Sacramentally, that is
to say, as in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. It is not here to be denied, that
all Ecclesiastical Writers do, with one mouth, bear witness to the presence of
the Body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist. Neither will any one of them be
found to asscribe it to any thing but the Consecration, or that to any Faith,
but that, upon which the Church professes to proceed to the celebrating of it.
And upon this account, when they speak of the Elements, supposing the
Consecration to have passed upon them, they always call them by the name, not
of their bodily substance, but of the body and blood of Christ which they are
become. Justine in the place before quoted; (...). For we take them not as
common bread and drink; but, as our Savior Jesus Christ, being incarnate by
the Word of God, has both flesh and blood for our salvation, so are we
taught, that this food, which thanks have been given for by the prayer of that
Word which came from him, by the change whereof are our blood and flesh
nourished, is both the flesh and blood of that incarnate Jesus. Where, by
comparing the Eucharist with the flesh and blood of Christ incarnate, (wherein
diverse of the Fathers have followed him) he justifies that reason of
expounding This is my body this is my blood; which I have drawn from the
communication of the properties of the several natures in our Lord Christ
incarnate. But chiefly, you see, the Elements are made the body and blood of
Christ, by virtue of the Consecration, as, by the Incarnation, humane flesh
became the flesh and blood of Christ. So Iren^us IV. 34. Quemadmodum qui a
terr^ panis, percipiens invocationem Dei, jam non communis panis est, sed
Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and coelesti: Sic and corpora
nostra, percipientia Eucharistiam, ^am non sunt corruptibilia, spem
resurrectionis ^^bentia. As the bread that comes from the earth, receiving the
invocation of God upon it, is not now common bread, but the Eucharist,
consisting of two things, the ^ar^^ly and the heavenly; So also our bodies,
receiving the Eucharist, are not now corruptible, having the hope of rising
again. For he had argued before, that, because our flesh is nourished by the
body and blood of Christ, (which, if they were not in the Eucharist, it could
not be) therefore they shall rise again. By virtue therefore of the
con^ecration they are there, not by the faith of him that receives, according
to henaeus. Tertul. de Resur. cap. VIII. Caro corpore and sanguine Christi
vescitur, ut anima de Deo saginetur. The flesh feeds on the body and blood of
Christ, that the soul may be fatned with God. Origin, in diver. loc. Hom. V. is
the ^^rst that advi^es to say with the Cen^u^ion, (when thou receive^^ the
Eucharist) Lord I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof; For
then the Lord comes under thy roof, says Origin. S. Cyprian upon the Lords
Prayer, having said, that Christ is our bread, makes that the daily bread which
we pray for, to wit, in the Eucharist: And in his book de lapsis, makes it to
be invading and laying violent hands upon the body of Christ, for them who had
fallen away in persecution, to press upon the Communion, without Penance going
before. The Council of Nic^a in Gelasius Cyzicenus II. 30. (...) -- Let us not
basely consider the bread and the cup set before us, but lifting up our minds,
let us conceive by faith, that there lies upon that holy Table, the Lamb of God
that takes away the sin of the world, sacrificed without sacrificing by
Priests* And that we receiving truly his precious body and blood -- S. Hilary
de Trin. VIII. censuring the Arians, who would have the Son to be one with the
Father as we are, maintains, that we are, not only by obedience of will, but
naturally united to Christ, because, as he truly took our nature, so we truly
take the flesh of his body in the Sacrament; Our Lord having said, My flesh is
truly meat, and my blood truly drink; And, He that cats my flesh, and drink*
my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. And much more to the same purpose; which
could signify nothing, did not our bodies, feeding upon the Elements, feed
upon that which is truly the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, or
mystically, not by virtue of our feeding which follows, but by virtue of the
Consecration which goes before. For, this natural union of the body with that
which feeds it* serves S. Hilary, for the argument of that unity, which the Son
has with the Father by nature; being the union of our flesh with the flesh of
Christ* by virtue of our flesh united to the Word incarnate. S. Cyril of
Jerusalem, Catech. Mystag. IV. and V. argues, that Christ, having said of the
bread and of the cup, This is my body, this is my blood; who otherwhiles
changed water into wine; we are not to doubt, that we receive his body and
blood, under the form of bread and wine. And therefore, we are not to look on
them as plain bread and wine, but as the body and blood of Christ, he having
declared it. All this, by Sanctification of the Holy Ghost, according to the
Prayer of the Church. But I will go no further in reh^arsing the texts of the
Fathers, which are to be found in all books of Controversies, concerning this;
for the examination of them requires a volume on purpose. It shall be enough,
that they all acknowledge the Elements to be changed, translated, and turned
into the substance of Christ's body and blood; though as in a Sacrament, that
is, mystically; Yet, therefore, by virtue of the Consecration, not of his faith
that receives.

On the other side, that this change is to be understood with that abatement,
which the nature and substance of the Elements requires, supposing it to remain
the same as it was; I will first presume, from those very Authors which I have
quoted. For, would not Justine have us take that for bread, which, he says,
we are not to take for common bread, when he says further, that our bodies
are nourished by it, which, by the flesh of our Lord they are not? Would not
Irenaeus have us think the Bread to be the earthly thing, as well as the Body
the heavenly, when he says the Eucharist consists of both? Tertullian, ad
Vxorem II. 5. persuades his wife, not to marry a Gentile when he is dead,
because, when he perceives her to receive the Eucharist, and knows it to be
bread, he believes it not to be that which Christians call it. Origin, when
he tells, upon Mat. XV. 11. that it was called the bread of our Lord, gives no
man, in his wits, occasion to think that the Elements vanish. When he says
further, that it is not the bread, but that which was said upon it, which
profits him that worthily receives it, he would have us take it for what it
was, whatsoever it is become. S. Cyprian says expressly, that it was wine which
our Lord calls his blood: And that the wine of the Chalice, (to wit, already
consecrated) demonstrates his blood; In his Epistle against those who
consecrated in water alone. The Council of Nicaea calls it Bread, which the eye
of Faith discerns to be the Lamb of God: S. Hilary will have us truly to
receive the body and blood of Christ, as Justine says, that our bodies are
nourished by it; but he adds in Sacramento, to signify the abatement which I
speak of, that is, mystically, and as in a Sacrament. S. Cyril, when he says,
we are not to look upon the Elements as plain, or bare, or simple bread and
wine, says, that we may look upon it as Bread and wine, though that is not it
which profits him that worthily receives it, as Origin said. There are a great
many more, that have named and described the Elements, after consecration, by
the name of their nature and substance; and say, that the bread and the wine
become and are the body and blood of Christ; Ignatius Epist. ad Philadelph.
Iren^us V. 2. Clemens Strom. I. Paedag. II. 2. Tatian before Irenaeus in
Diatessaron. Constitutiones Apostol. VIII. 12. Tertullian de Oratione cap. VI.
contra Marcionem IV. 40. III. 19. Gregory Nyssene de Baptismo. Origin contra
Celsum VIII. Athanasius in Synopsi. Eusebius in Parallelis Damasceni. S. Cyril
Catech. Mystag. I. and III. Macarius Hom. XXVII. Gaudentius Brixiensis in
Exodum Sermon. II. S. Austine de Civitate Dei XVII. 5. de diversis Sermon. XLIV.
cap. XXVIII. Sermon LXXXIIII. Sermon LXXXVII. Sermon ad Baptizatos. S. Jer.
in Esaiae LXVI. lib. ult. in Jeremiae XXXI. lib. VI. Isidore de Offic. Eccles.
I. 18. In fine, the Canon of the Mass it self prays, that the Holy Ghosts
coming down, may make this Bread and this Cup the Body and Blood of Christ. And
certainly, the Roman Mass expresses a manifest abatement, of the common and
usual sense of the body and blood of Christ, unto that sense, which is proper
to the intent and subject of them who speak of this Sacrament, when the Church,
in the consecration prays; ut nobis corpus fiat Dilectissimi Filii tui Domini
nostri Jesu Christi. That they may become the Body and blood of thy most dearly
beloved Son, our Lord Christ Jesus, to us. No man that understands Latin, and
sense, will say, it is the same thing, for the Elements to become the body and
blood of Christ, as to become the body and blood of Christ to those that
receive, which imports no more than tha^ which I have said. And yet there is no
more said in those Liturgies, which pray, that the Spirit of God may make them
the flesh and blood of Christ, to this intent and effect that those which
received them may be filled with the grace of his Spirit. For the expression of
this effect and intent limits the common signification of the words to that
which is proper to this action of the Eucharist, as I have delivered it. In the
words of S. Ambrose, de iis qui initiantur mist. cap. XI. ante consecrationem
alia species nominatur, post consecrationem, caro and sanguis Christi
appellatur; Before the consecration, it is named another kind: After the
consecration* it is called the flesh and blood of Christ. No man that
understands Latin can conceive, the word species to signify the outward
appearance, but the substance and nature of those kinds. For so we call
outlandish kinds spices, not the appearance of their outward accidents. And,
in the Roman Laws, species an non are the kinds that are stored up; for men
cannot live upon the outward accidents of them. Therefore when S. Austine
says; That the Eucharist consists of two things, visibili elementorum specie,
and invisibili D. N. J. C. carne and sanguine; he means, that it consists of
the nature and substance of the elements, which is visible, as of the body and
blood of our Lord Christ which are invisible. Again, when S. Ambrose says,
that they are called the Body and Blood of Christ, he signifies that
abatement, in the property of his words, that requires not the absence of the
elements. As when S. Austine says, (in Gratian de Consecratione distinct. II.
Can. Hoc est) Coelestis panis, qui est caro Christi, suo modo vocatur corpus
Christi, cum revera sit Sacramentum corporis Christi. That heavenly bread which
is the flesh of Christ, is, after the manner of it, called the body of Christ,
whereas it is indeed the Sacrament of the body of Christ. The same abatement it
is that S. Cyril before, Catech. Mist. IV. the Council of Nic^a, Victor Antioch.
in Marci XIV. 22. and Theodoret Dial. III. signify, when they will us, not to
consider the elements, but the things which they signify. For, does he that
wills us not to consider the bread and wine intend to say, that there is no
such thing there? Or, that our interest lies not in them, but, in the body and
blood of Christ which they ^ender us, well and good; So said Origin before. The
same abatement is signified evidently, by abundance of their sayings, importing
them to be called the body and blood of Christ, as types or antitypes (for type
and antitype differ not, but as relative and correlative) that is, figures,
symboles, images, similitudes, representations, paterns, pledges, and riddles,
in fine, as figures or sacraments of the same; Not as if they contained not the
thing signified, (which I have already settled) but because the heavenly grace
hinders not, nor destroys the earthly nature. This language then is used by S.
Gregory Nazianzene Orat. XLII. calling the Passover a more obscure Type of a
Type. By Ephrem de inscrutabili natura Dei. By Theodoret Dial. I. and II. and
III. By the Constitutions of the Apostles V. 13. VI. 29. VII. 26. By S. Basils
Liturgy. By Gregory Nazianzene again, in Gorgoniam. By Eusebius de demonstrat.
Evang. I. 10. V. 3. VIII. 1. By S. Chrysostom in Mat. Homil. LXXXII. By
Palladius in the life of S. Chrysostom, Chap. VII, VIII, IX. By Victor in
Marci XIV. By Dionysius Eccles. Hierarch. cap. III. By Origin in Mat. Hom.
XXXV. By Pope Gelasius de duabus naturis Christi. By S. Ambrose de iis qui
initiantur mysteriis. cap. IX. de Sacramentis IV. 4. VI. 1. By Tertulliane
contra Marc. III. 19. IV. 14, 40. By S. Austine contra Adimantum cap. XII. in
Psalmum III. Epist. CLXIII. de Trinitate III. 4. By Facundus Bishop of Hermiana
in Africa pro tribus capitulis IX. ult. And truly, the ancient Christians, when
they made a scr^ple of receiving the Eucharist when they were to fast, least
they should break their fast by receiving it, (as we understand by Tertullian
de Oratione cap. XIV.) must needs understand the nature of bread and wine to
remain, unless they thought they could break their fast upon the accidents of
them. Nor would it have been a custom, in some places, to burn the remains of
the Sacrament, as Hesychiu^ in Levit. VIII. witnesses; or at Constantinople to
give them to School-boies, had they not conceived, the change of the elements
to be in order to the use of them, and that this use, and that which is done in
order thereunto, expireth, when the occasion of giving them to those, for whom
the Church interideth them, cease. And upon these premises, I conclude, that,
as it is by no means to be denied, that the elements are really changed,
translated, turned, and converted into the body and blood of Christ; (so that,
whosoever receives them with a living faith, is spiritually nourished by the same,
he that with a dead faith, is guilty of crucifying Christ) Yet is not this
change destructive to the bodily substance of the elements, but cumulative of
them, with the spiritual grace of Christ's body and blood; So that, the body and
blood of Christ in the Sacrament turns to the nourishment of the body, whether
the body and blood in the truth, turn to the nourishment or the damnation of
the soul. And, upon these terms, if I read in S. Cyril of Jerusalem, where
before, that the elements in the Eucharist are not bread and wine, I should
think my self very simple to imagine, that, therefore, S. Cyril believed
Transubstantiation; Knowing, (as any man that pretends to understand the nature
and use of language ought to know) that any thing may be absolutely denied to
be that, which in some sort it is not, when a man intends to contest, that, in
some sort it is not. For so S. Cyril says; that the elements are not bread and
wine, to signify, that they are not bare bread and wine, but mystically the
body and blood of Christ, that is, as in the Sacrament of it. And, to speak
properly, whosoever believes Transubstantiation, ought not to believe, that the
elements are changed into the body and blood of Christ, in the Eucharist. For,
wheresoever there is a change, there, something of the subject that is changed
ought to remain, though it be not sensible. Whereas, in Transubstantiation, the
whole subject of Christ's body and blood is imagined to be substitured in stead
of bread and wine, under their dimensions and accidents; Which is, the absolute
ceasing of them to be, and the beginning of the thing signified, not absolutely
to be, but to be under those dimen^ions. So that, there remains no subject for
that change, which the Fathers understand; the accidents remaining unchanged,
the substance of the terms having nothing common, to bear the passion of that
change which must be attributed to it. But what can be said to them that
affirm, in express terms, that the substance of the elements remains
unchanged? Who are so many, as may very well serve, to interrupt and defeat any
pretense of Tradition, for the ceasing of them. For there can be no pretense,
that any thing should belong to the common Faith of the Church, the contrary
whereof, it has been free for men of note and rank in the Church to profess.
The Author de Sacramentis in S. Ambrose IV. 4. Si ergo tanta vis est in sermon
Domini Jesu, ut incipiant esse quae non ^rant* quanto magis operatorius est, ut
sint quae erant, and in aliud commutentur? If then there is that force in the
word of the Lord Jesus, that those things should begin to be which were not;
How much more is it so operative, that, remaining what they were, they be
changed into what they were not? Lan^ranck, I see, contra Berengarium, has
questioned the reading of these words, by saying, that other Copies read, ut
quae erant in aliud commutentur. But I see also, that he had so little
confidence in those Copies, that ^ee held himself obliged to expound the other
reading, and say, that they remain what they were, in their accidents; (Which,
whether it serve the turn, let common reason judge.) I see also that Guitmund
Bishop of Aversa has owned Berengarius his reading, de Sacram. III. and
therefore have no reason to distrust those who affirm that it is owned by
Algerus, Paschasius, Ber^ram, Ives of Chartres, Gratiane, and P. Lombard in
their quotations of it. The words of S. Chrysostom, Epistola ad Caesarium
contra Apollin. are these; Sicut, antetequam sanctificetur panis, panem
nominamus; divina autem sanctificante gratia, mediante Sacerdote, liberatus
quidem est ab appellatione panis, dignus autem habitus est Demini corporis
appellatione, etsi natura panis in ipso permansit, divina mundante natura. As,
before the bread be consecrated, we call it bread; But, when the grace of God
has sanctified, by the means of the Priest, it quitteth the name of bread, and
is held worthy of the title of the Lords Body, though the nature of bread
remain in it. So also here, the divine nature cleansing -- Cardinal Bellarmine
de Euchar. 22. allegeth, that there is no such Epistle of S. Chrysostomes,
neither is it found in his works. P. Martyr reports it, as he found it in a
written Copy of the Library at Florence. And it is found in the Bibliotheca
Patrum, and in several pieces collected by Canisius. What would it, then, avail
that it were not S. Chrysostomes, but some other ancient Church Writers? For,
neither the matter of the comparison between the in^amation and the Eucharist,
nor the terms in which it is delivered, will ever render it suspicious to any
man, that observes those conceptions and expressions of the Fathers, which I
have reported in the premises. Gelasius de d^abus naturis in Christo; Certe,
sacramenta qu^ sumimus corporis and sanguinis Christi divina res est: pr^^ter
quod, and, per eadem divinae efficimur consortes naturae; Et tamen esse non
de^init substantia vel natura panis and vini. Certainly, the mysteries of the
body and blood of Christ which we receive, is a thing divine: Therefore, by
the means of them, we become also partakers of the divine nature. And yet
cease not to be the na^u^e and substance of bread and wine. By and by; Sicut
in hanc transeunt, scilicet divinam, Spiritu Sancto perficiente substantiam,
permanent tamen in sua proprietate naturae; As, by the operation of the Holy
Ghost, they pass into this, to wit, a divine substance, and yet remain in the
property of their own nature; Ephrem Patriarch of Antiochia, in Photius Cod.
CCXXIX. (...). So also the Body of Christ which believers receive, neither
departs from the sensible substance, nor is divided from the intelligible
grate. And spiritual baptism, which becomes and is one whole, preserves the
property of the sensible substance: the water I mean; yet looses not that which
it is become. This comparison makes me add here that passage of those
extractions, out of Theodotus, which is found at the end of Clemens
Alexandrinus; (...). And the bread (of the Eucharist) and the oil (of the
Chr^^^ne, which comparison, S. Cyril of Jerusalem uses, in this case) is
sanctified by virtue of the Name, (of Christ) remaining the same for sensible
substance, (for I confidently maintain, that the negative (...) destroys the
sense, as the comparison justifies; for, who says, that the oil of the
Chrisme, or the water of Baptism is changed for substance?) but, for force,
changed into a spiritual virtue. So also the water, both, that is ex^rcized,
and that which Baptism is done with, not only retains the worse, but also
receives sanctification. Theodoret Dial. I. (...). Our Lord would have those
that receive the divine mysteries, not regard the nature of the things they
see, but, upon the change of their names, believe the change which grace
effects. For, he who called his natural body corn and bread, and again named
himself the Vine, honors the visible Symboles with the name of his body and
blood, not changing the nature, but adding his grace to it. And Dial. II.
(...). For neither do the mystical signs, after consecration, depart from
their own nature, but remain in the same substance, and figure, and form, and
may be seen and touched, as before. The P^eface to the Roman Edition of these
Dialogues, ^aith, that Theodoret uses this language, because the Church had as
yet decreed nothing in this point. An excuse, much like the censure of the
Epistles of Isidore of P^lusium, printed at Anwerpe, which are licenced, as
containing nothing contrary to faith o^ good manners. For, if the Church is
able to make new Articles of Faith, then may whosoever licenses books pass
this censure, because, by the act of the Church, making that Faith, which was
not so before, the dead might incurr the contrary censure. But, supposing that
the Church is not able to do such an act, that which was not contrary to the
Faith, when Theodoret writ it, can never be contrary to it. I will end with
Facundus, because the formal terms of my opinion are contained in his words;
Sicut Sacramentum corporis and sanguinis ejus, quod est in pane and poculo
consecrato, corpus ejus and sanguinem dicimus; non quod proprie corpus ejus sit
panis, and poculum sanguis: sed quod in se mysterium corporis ejus sanguinisque
contineant. Hinc and ipse Dominus, benedictum panem and calicem, quem
discipulis tradidit* corpus and sanguinem suum vocavit. As we call the
Sacrament of his body and blood, which is in the consecrated bread and cup, his
body and blood; Not because the bread is properly his body, and the cup his
blood, but because they contain in them the mystery of his body and blood.
Whereupon our Lord himself also called the bread and cup, which, having
blessed, he delivered to his disciples, his body and blood. This is, in few
words, the sense of the whole Church concerning this business. Ignatius, in
his Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, says that the Gnostics forbore the
Eucharist, because they believed not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which suffered for our sins, which the Lord raised again by his
goodness. But why believed they not this? because they would not believe
Transubstantiation, or because they would not believe that our Lord Christ had
flesh? Let Tertullian^ speak; contra Marc. IV. Acceptum panem and distributum
discipulis, corpus suum illum fecit, Hoc est corpus meum, dicendo; id est,
figura corporis mei. Figura autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus.
Caeterum vacua res, quod est phantasma, figuram capere non posset. That bread
which he took, and distributed to his disciples, he made his body, saying;
This is my body; That is, the figure of my body. But the figure it had not
been, if the truth of his body were not. Otherwise, an empty thing, such as an
apparition is, ^ad not been capable of a figure. For, as Maximus says, (in the
third of those Dialogues against the Marcionists, that go under Origens name)
what body and blood was that, whereof, he ministered the bread and the cup, for
signs and images, commanding the Disciples to renew the remembrance of them by
the ^ame? As for that which is alleged out of Irenaeus I. 9. of Marcus the
Magician and Heretic; Pro calice enim vino mixto ^ingens se gratias agere, and
in multum extendens serm^nem invocationis, purpureum and rubicundum apparere
facit, u^ putetur ea Gratia, ab eis quae sunt super omnia, suum sanguinem
stillare, in illius cali^em, (l. illum) per invocationem ejus. Making as though
he would give thanks for the cup mixed with wine, and enlarging the word of
invocation (by which I said the Eucharist is consecrated) to much length, he
makes it to appear purple and red; That men may think, that Grace drops the
blood thereof, from the Powers over all, into that cup, by the means of his
invocation. For, had Irenaeus said, that this Magician turned the wine into the
substance of blood, (in truth or in appearance) it might have been alleged,
that the Christians, (whose Sacrament this Magician counterfeited, though other
Gnostics, as Ignatius says, quite balked the Eucharist, and used it not)
believed that to be bodily blood which is in the chalice, and that, therefore
he did it. But when he says only, that he made it appear purple and red;
perhaps he used white wine, which by juggling he made seem red; However,
there is no appearance, that, because he made that look red which was in the
cup, therefore, those Christians whom he labored thereby to seduce, did
believe, the bodily substance of Christ's blood to be in the Eucharist, in stead
of the substance of wine, and, under the dimensions of it.

It remains that I take notice, (in as few words as is possible) of those
contentions that have passed about this presence, and the dissiculties which
Transubstanhath found, in getting the footing which it has in the Western
Church. The book which Paschasius Radbertus, Abbot of Corby near Arniens writ,
under the Sons of Charles the Great, to prove, that the Body of Christ in the
Eucharist is that same which was born of the Virgin, is yet extant. Though, the
more curious find no such thing as Transubstantiation in it, but rather a
conceit of the impanation of Christ's body, (if such a hideous term may pass)
that is, that, the Godhead of our Lord Christ being, by the operation of the
Holy Ghost, united to the elements; the body and blood of Christ is, by the
same means, united to the fame. A conceit not far wide of that which Rupertus,
Abbot of Duitsh near Cullen, about the year MCX teaches, that the bread is
assumed by the Word of God to be his body, as that is his body, which was
formed of the flesh of the Virgin. Nor is there, in effect, much difference
between this conceit, and that of Consubstantiation, (at least according to
those that ground it not upon the Ubiquity of our Lords body, but upon his
will, executed by celebrating the Sacrament) or that of some later Greeks.
Damasc. de ^ide Orth^d. IV. 14. to contradict the Council of Constantinople
against images under Copronymus (which had recommended the Eucharist for the
true image of our Lord) maintains, that it is not to be called, no^ is called
in S. Basils Liturgy, after the consecration, the type, figure, image, or
antitype of the body and blood of Christ. Which nevertheless, Cardinal
Bellarmine, de Euchar. II. 15. judges not tenable. The II Council of Nicaea
that decreed for Images, taking up this man's doctrine, seems to have obliged
those that follow to the same terms. That is, as he there expresses himself;
That God joins his Godhead to the elements, to make them his body and blood:
and that, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, which took him flesh of the
Virgin; so that, they are no more two, but one and the same. Thus he
expresses the change he pretends, which Transubstantiation admits not. The
Greeks at Venice, in their answer to the first of XII questions proposed them
by the Cardinal of Guise, published by Lionclavavius, will, hereupon, have
neither the substance nor the accidents of the elements to remain the same as
they were, but to be transelemented, say they, into the divine substance. It
would be great skill to reconcile this with Transubstantiation. But, for the
opposition made to Paschasius at the time, the book of Bertram (or Ratran) yet
extant, the remembrance of John the Irish Scot, one of the learned men of that
time, (who is thought, for the hatred of his opinion, to have died by the hands
of his Scholars the Monks of Malmesbury) the opposition of Amalarius of Triers,
and Rabanus of Mence, (expressed by their sense, in the works extant, de
Officiis Ecclesiasticis, and de Institutione Clericorum are sufficient
witnesses. The recantation of Berengarius, indicted by Cardinal Humbertus, at
Rome MLIX. comes not yet home to the business, as it lies in the Canon Ego
Berengarius. For the Gloss of the Canon Law is fain to advise, that, if it be
not well understood, it creates as great an Heresy as that of Berengarius, in
that it says; That the body and blood of Christ are man^ged by the hands and
broken by the teeth of believers, not only in the Sacrament, but in the truth.
Which, Mirandula, in his Apology, says; cannot be clearly understood, but in
the way of Damascen^ and Paschasius. And yet, understanding the Sacrament to
consist as well of the thing signified, as of the sign; though the body of
Christ is not touched no^ broke, because the Sacrament is not the body of
Christ according to the sensible substance which we touch and break, yet is it
truly touched and truly broken as in the Sacrament, because the Eucharist is
truly the body and blood of Christ, as the Sacrament is, and out ought to be
truly that which it signifies and conveyes. But, as it is hereupon, no mervail,
that he was brought to a second recantation, in a Council at Rome under
Gregory VII. so is that a pre^^mption, that Transubstantiation was not yet
formed. And truly, for England, the Paschal Homily of Alfrick Archbishop of
Canterbury, together with those Extractions which you read out of him, in the
annotations upon Bid, p. 332-335. are sufficient evidence of a difference
between the sense of that time, and, after that Lanfranck, Berengarius his
adversary, was Archbishop of Canterbury. And, Pope Innocent III having in^erted
the word Transubstantiation in the LXX Articles, which he proposed to the
Council of Lateran in MCCXV. what is the reason why they past not the Council,
as Matthew Paris with others testify, but that they were found burthensom? And,
Gregory IX, the nephew of Innocent cent, having contrived these Articles into
his decretals, (though under the name of the Council, but of Innocent III in
the General Council) though the School Doctors, depending on the Pope for the
most part, not on the Council, were content to own them, yet have we no decree
of any Council for them, till that of MDLV under Leo X. For, as for the
institution of the A^^enians in the Council of Florence, (which, though it use
not the term of Transubstanciation, seems to come up to the sense) being
advanced after the departure of the Greeks, and not voted by the Council, but
only published as the act of the Pope in the Council, it cannot be called the
decree of the Council, though done in a public Session of the Council, in the
great Church at Florence. Certainly, adding to the opinions of the School
Doctors, Scotus, Durandus, Ockam, Cameracensis, Bassolis, and Gabriel, (besides
those, who, living since Luther, have acknowledged the same; Ca^etane, Fisher,
Canus, Suarez, Vasquez, and Bellarmine) that it is not to be proved by express
text of Scripture, nor by reason grounded upon the same; that which has been
alleged; If this be not enough, to evidence all interruption of Tradition,
which is pretended for Transubstantiation, nothing is. For, that which Church
Writers declare, that they did not believe when they writ, that they cannot
declare, that they received of their Predecessors for matter of faith. And, that
which at any time was not matter of faith; how far soever the decree of the
Church may oblige particular sons of the Church not to contradict it, for the
peace of the Church; yet, at no time can ever become of force, to oblige a man
to believe or to profess it for matter of faith.

CHAP. V. It cannot be proved by the Old Testament that the Eucharist is a
Sacrifice. How, by the New Testament it may be so accounted. Four reasons
thereof, depending upon the nature of Justifying Faith premised. The consent of
the Catholic Church. The concurrence of the Church of England to the premises.
I Come now to the question of the Sacrifice, the resolution whereof must needs
proceed according to that which has been determined in the point now
dispatched. For, having showed the presence of the body and blood of Christ in
the Eucharist, because it is appointed, that, in it, the faithful may feast
upon the Sacrifice of the Cross; We have already showed, by the Scriptures,
that it is the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, in the same sense, and to
the same effect, as it contains the body and blood of Christ, which it
represents; that is, mystically and spiritually, and sacramentally, (that is,
as in and by a Sacrament) tendereth and exhibiteth, For, seeing the Eucharist
not only tendereth the flesh and blood of Christ, but separated one from the
other, under and by several elements, as his blood was parted from his body by
the ^^olence of the Cross; it must of necessity be as well the Sacrifice, as
the Sacrament of Christ upon the Cross. And, without all doubt, it is against
all the reason of the world to think, that any more can be proved, by any
Scriptures of the Old Testament, that are, or can be produced, to depose for
the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, than the sense of those Scriptures of the New
Testament already handled, (which are in a manner all that have any mention of
it) will infer and allow. There is much noise made with the Priesthood of
Melchisedeck, of whom we read, Genesis XIV. 19, 24. And Melchisedeck King of
Salem brought forth bread and wine, for he was the Priest of the most High
God: And he blessed him, saying; Blessed be Abraham of the most High God,
which owneth heaven and earth; In reference whereunto the Psalmist, speaking of
Christ, Psalm. CX. 4. The Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedeck; And the Apostle, taking for granted, that
he is a figure of Christ, in the mystical sense, Ebr. VII. 13. argues the
voiding of the Levitical Law, from the purpose of setting up another
Priesthood, declared by the Psalm; But no where, in all that Chapter, which is
all spent about the Exposition of it, so much as intimates the Priesthood of
Christ to consist in any thing, but in offering up to God in heaven, his own
body and blood sacrificed upon the Cross, to make expiation for the sins of
his people, and to obtain of God, that grace and assistance, that comfort and
deliverance, which their necessities from time to time may require. Be it
granted nevertheless, that, seeing of necessity Melchisedeck is the figure of
Christ, those things which Melchisedeck is related to have done are also
necessarily figures of things done by our Lord Christ. For, otherwise, were not
the mystical sense of the Old Testament a laughing stock to unbelievers, if it
should hold in nothing, but that which the Spirit of God has expounded in the
New Testament, by our Lord and his Apostles? I have therefore, to the best
advantage, translated the words of Moses; For (not and) he was the Priest of
the living God: That whosoever will may argue thereupon, that his bringing forth
bread and wine was an act of his Priesthood; Which, if I would deny, no man can
constrain me by virtue of these words to acknowledge. But I cannot therefore
allow that Translation which says; Obtulit panem and vinum; that, as Priest,
he offered bread and wine in sacrifice to God: The Hebrew word (...) so
evidently signifying protulit not obtulit; he brought forth, not that he
offered; that he brought forth bread and wine, to refr^sh Abraham and his
people, returning weary from the slaughter of the Kings, (not, that he offered
them in sacrifice to God as his Priest; the mention of his Priesthood r^ther
advancing the reason why he blessed them, than why he fed them) As, both
Moses in the words next before, and the Apostle also Ebr. VII. 1. intimates or
declares the intent why he brought them forth. Though if I should gr^nt, that
custom which was common to all Idolaters, to have been in for^e under the Law
of nature, (because we see it retained and in^cted by the Law of Moses) not to
taste of any thing, till some part of it had been dedicated to God, in the
nature of first fruits, to the sanctifying of the whole, till when it was not
to be touched; I say, though I should grant this, for a reason why he may be
thought to have offered bread and wine to God, not why (...) should be
translated protulit, he brought forth, no man would have cause to thank me
for any advantage, from thence. For still, the correspondence between
Melchisedeck and our Lord Christ would lie in this; that our Lord, by
appointing this Sacr^ment, brings forth bread and wine, to strengthen the
peo^l^ of Abraham, in their warfare against the powers of darkness; as, in the
days of his flesh, he fed those that attended upon his doctrine, least they
should faint in their travail. Now, this will first infer, that it is bread
and wine which our Lord feeds us with, in the Eucharist; And again, that it
has the virtue of sustaining us, by being made the body and blood of Christ,
as in a Sacrament, by virtue of the consecration past upon it: Which is all
that which I say to a hair; that, by being made a Sacrament, it becomes the
Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, to be feasted upon by Christians. In like
manner, be it granted, that the words of the Prophet Malachy I. 11. From the
rising of the Sun, to his going down, my name shall be great among the
Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered to my name, and a pure
meat offering; For my name shall be great among the Gentiles, says the Lord of
Hosts; is a Prophecy of the institution of this Sacr^ment, because it is
contained in those kinds of bre^d and wine, which served for meat and drink
offerings in the Law of Moses. But, this being granted; what shall we do with
the incense and the meat offering which the Prophet speaks of, unl^sse we say,
that they signify that which corresponds to the me^t and drink offerings of
the Law, and their incense, under the Gospel? And will not that prove to be the
spiritual sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, which God, under the Gospel, is
served with by all Nations? Though, those prayers and pr^^es of God being, by
the institution of the Eucharist, limited and determined to be such as the
celebration thereof requires; it is no inconvenience, nay, it will be necess^ry
to grant, that the sacrifice thereof is foretold by these words, not
signifying, nevertheless, the nature of it to require any thing more, th^n is
expr^ssed by the premises. Be the same therefore said, if you please, of all
the Sacrifices of the Old Law, of all the Prophesies, in which, the service to
be rendered to God in the New Testament is described by the offering of
Sacrifices. As for the words of our Lord to the woman of Samaria, John IV. 23.
The hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father
in spirit and truth; For the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a
Spirit, and those that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth;
Though I grant, as before, that this is fulfilled by the celebration of the
Eucharist, when once we suppose our Lord to have limited the worship of God
under the Gospel to the form of it; yet, there can be no consideration of a
sacrifice signified by these words, which neither suppose nor express the
sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, the Eucharist no way bearing the nature of
a sacrifice, but, as it is the same with it.

But, for the same reason, and, by the same correspondence between the
sacrifices of the Law and that of Christ's Cross, it may be evident, that it is
not, nor can be any disparagement to the Sacrifice of our Lord Christ upon the
Cross, to the full and perfect satisfaction and propitiation for the sins of
the world which it has made, that the Eucharist should be counted the
Sacrifice of Christ crucified, mystically, and, as in a Sacrament, represented
to, and feasted upon by his people. The Apostle says; that Christ is gone into
no holy place made with hands, figurative of the true, but into heaven it self,
to be presented before God for us; Nor to offer himself many times, as the High
Priest goes once a year into the Holy places, with that blood which is not his
own; For then must he many times have suffered since the foundation of the
world. But now once, in the end of times is he manifested, by the sacrifice of
himself, to the voiding of sin. And, as it is appointed for men once to dye,
and after that judgment; So Christ, once offered to take away the sins of many,
shall appear the second time without sin, to those that look for him to
salvation, Ebr. IX. 24-28. But have I said any thing, to cause any man to
imagine, that I suppose Christ to be crucified again, as often as the Eucharist
is celebrated? Do I say, those that celebrate it are those Jews that crucified
him once? Or do I, or can I imagine them to be Jews at all, that would have
the sacrifice of our Lord Christ upon the Cross repeated again and again, as
legal sacrifices are? Certainly, I will speak freely, neither can they that
hold Transubstantion be truly said to stand obliged to any such consequence, so
long as they acknowledge with all Christians, that the Covenant of Grace is for
once settled, by the one Sacrifice of our Lord upon the Cross. Why? because,
though they believe the natural flesh and blood of Christ, as crucified, to be
there, yet not naturally but sacramentally; (that is, in their sense, under the
accidents of bread and wine, which is, indeed, and in the sense of the Church,
under the species or kinds) which difference is so great an abatement of that
common and usual sense, in which, all Christians understand that Christ was
sacrificed upon the Cross, that, all that know it to be their profession,
(which all must know, that will not speak of they know not what) must
acknowledge, that the repeating of the Sacrifice of Christ crucified by the
Eucharist, is not the repeating of that Sacrifice by which mankind was
redeemed, otherwise than, as a Sacrament is said to be that whereof it is a
Sacrament. What ground and advantage this gives me, and any man of my opinion,
to argue, from those things which themselves acknowledge, that there is no cause
why they should insist upon the abolishing of the substance of the Elements in
the Eucharist, I leave to them that shall think fit to consider the premises,
to judge. But, for me, who demand no more than this; That, in as much as the
body and blood of Christ is in the Eucharist, in so much it is the Sacrifice of
Christ upon the Cross; I cannot foresee, what occasion slander can have, to
pick any such consequence out of my sayings. Certainly, the Sacrifices of the
Old Law ceased not to be Sacrifices, because they were figures and Prophesies
of that one Sacrifice upon the Cross, which mankind was redeemed with. And,
why should the commemoration and representation (in that sense of this word
repraesentation which I determined before) of that one Sacrifice of Christ upon
the Cross, which mankind was redeemed with, be less properly a Sacrifice, in
dependence upon and denomination from that one, which, the name of Sacrifice
upon the Cross was first used to signify? For, all conceit of legal Sacrifice
is quite shut out, by supposing that Sacrifice past, which the Sacrifice of the
Eucharist represents and commemorates; Whereas, all Sacrifices of the Old Law,
are essentially, (at least to Christians) figurative of the Sacrifice of Christ
to come.

Indeed, by that which I have said, concerning the nature of a Sacrifice in the
Eucharist, as it is intended for Christians to feast upon, it is evident, that
this comme^orative and representative Sacrifice is of the nature and kind of
Peace Offerings, which, by the Law, those that offered were to feast upon. I
will take the Cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. I will pay
my vows now in the presence of all his people: Right dear in the sight of the
Lord is the death of his Saints; says the Psalm CXVI. 12, 13. And that, in
answer to the question made; What reward shall I give unto the Lord for all the
benefits that he has done unto me? At feasting upon the parts, or remains of
Peace Offerings, the Master of the Sacrifice began the Cup of Thanksgiving for
deliverance received, in consideration whereof, he pays his vows; And the
Sacrifices which he pays are called (...), or Sacrifice of Thanksgiving for
deliverance received. Is not this the ^ame that Christians do, in celebrating
the Eu^harist, setting aside the difference between Jews and Christians?
Wherefore, I have showed, that it is celebrated, and is to be celebrated, with
commemoration of, and thanksgiving for the benefits of God, especially that of
Christ crucified. Which thank^giving, as it tends to the consecrating thereof;
so, in as much as the consecration tends to the receiving of it, another
thanksgiving, at the receiving of it, becomes also due, as at feasting upon
Peace Offerings. And hereupon, I have showed, that it is called by the Apostle,
the sacrifice of Praise, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to God: And that,
h^ving showed, that Jews have no right to it as a Propitiatory Sacrifice, that
is, not to it, because not to the Propitiatory Sacrifice which it represents;
But therefore, that Christi^ns have right to feast upon it, as the Jews upon
their Peace Offerings. But if it be true, as I have showed, that the
celebr^tion of the Eucharist is the renewing of the Covenant of Grace, which
supposes propit^ation made for the sins of mankind, by that one sacrifice
which it commemor^teth and represents; the celebration thereof being
commanded, as a condition to be performed on our part, to qualify us for the
promise, which it tendreth to those that are qualified as it requires; Shall
it be a brea^h upon Christianity, to say also, that it is such a Sacrifice,
whereby we make God propitious to us, and obtain at his hands the blessings of
Grace, which the Covenant of Grace tendreth?

This indeed requires yet further consideration, for what reasons the
Sacrament of the Eucharist may be accounted and called a Sacrifice, that we
may be able to judge, in what sense, and for what reason it may be accounted
Propitiatory and Impetratory, without prejudice to Christianity. First then,
let it be remembered, that, by the institution and ordinance of God, those that
dedicate themselves to the service of God, in the faith of Christ, by Baptism,
are to dedicate their goods to the maintenance of the Communion of the Church
in the said service, the chief Office whereof is the celebration of the
Eucharist, proper to Christianity, as I showed a little before. Then, be it
observed, that there were two sorts of Oblations commanded by the Law, and
practiced by Gods ancient people. For, First Fruits, Tithes, and accursed
things (that is, things dedicated to God, under a curse upon them that should
convert them to any other use, Levi^* XXVIII.) were not dedicated to be spent
upon the Altar in Sacrifices, but, to the maintenance of the Temple, or of them
that attended upon the service of it. But, seeing we have now showed, that the
Eucharist is a Sacrifice, it follows, that those Oblations which are
ded^cated to God to be spent in the cel^bration of the Eucharist, (in reference
whereunto, I have already showed, that all Oblations of Christians are
consecrated to God, because dedicated to maintain the Communion of his Church,
whereof the Eucharist is that Office which is peculiar to Christianity) are not
barely consecrated to God, but to the service of God by Sacrifice. For those
things, which, under the Law, were consecrated to God to be sacrificed upon the
Altar, were not then first offered to God when they were killed, and the parts
of them burnt upon the Altar; But, from the time that they were declared Gods
goods for that purpose: as by the Law it self may appear, in the precept of the
second Tithe, which, for two years belonging to the poor, the third year was to
be spent in sacrificing at Jerusalem, and so by Law, and by no man's act,
consecrate to the Altar, Deuteronomy. XIV. 22-29. In as much then as I have showed,
that the Eucharist is a Sacri^i^e, in so much, and for that very reason, that
which Christians offer to God for the celebration of the Eucharist is no
otherwise a Sacrifice, than those things which were appropriated to the Altar
under the Law were Sacrifices, from the time that they were dedicated to that
purpose; Saving always the difference between Sacrifices figurative of the
Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, (such as Christianity supposes all the
Sacrifices of the Old Law to be) and the commemoration and representation of
the same past, which, I have showed that the Eucharist pretends. And truly,
having showed, that this representative and commemorative Sacrifice is of the
nature and kind of Peace Offerings, in as much as it is celebrated on purpose,
to communicate with the Altar, in feasting upon it; And knowing, that every
beast that was sacrificed for a Peace Offering was attended with a
Meat Offering of flower and a Drink Offering of wine, which are the kinds in
which the Eucharist is appointed to be celebrated; I must needs say; that those
species, set apart for the celebration of the Eucharist, are as properly to be
called Sacrifices of that nature which the Eucharist is of; (to wit,
commemorative and representative) as the same are to be counted figurative
under the Law, from the time that they were deputed to that use. This is then
the first act of Oblation by the Church, that is, by any Christian that
consecrates his goods, not at large, to the service of God, but peculiarly, to
the service of God by Sacrifice, in regard whereof, the Elemen^s of the
Eucharist, before they be consecrated, are truly counted Oblations or
Sacrifices.

After the Consecration is past, having showed you, that S. Paul has
appointed, that, at the celebration of the Eucharist, prayers, supplications
and intercessions be made for all estates of the world, and of the Church; And,
that the Jews have no right to the Eucharist, (according to the Epistle to the
Hebrews) because, though Eucharistical, yet, it is of that kind, the blood
whereof is offered to God within the Vail, with prayers for all estates of the
world, as Philo and Josephus inform us; Seeing the same Apostle has so plainly
expounded us the accomplishment of that figure, in the offering of the
Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross to the Father in the highest heavens, to
obtain the benefits of his passion for us; And that the Eucharist is nothing
else but the representation here upon earth, of that which is done there; These
things, I say, considered, necessarily it follows, that, whosoever believes, the
prayers of the Church, made in our Lords name, do render God propitious to them
for whom they are made, and obtain for them the benefits of Christ's death,
(which he that believes not is no Christian) cannot question, that those which
are made by S. Paul's appointment, at the celebration of the Eucharist, offering
up unto God the merits and sufferings of Christ there represented, must be
peculiarly and especially effectual to the same purposes. And, that the
Eucharist may very properly be accounted a Sacrifice propitiatory and
impetratory both, in this regard; because the offering of it up unto God, with
and by the said prayers, does render God propitious, and obtain at his hands
the benefits of Christ's death which it represents; there can be no cause to
refuse, being no more than the simplicity of plain Christianity inforceth.

But whether the Eucharist, as in regard of this Oblation, so, in regard of the
Consecration may be called a propitiatory Sacrifice, this, I perceive, is yet a
question even among those of the Church of Rome. For it is acknowledged, that
there is yet among them a party, even since the Decree of the Council of Trent,
who, acknowledging the nature of a Sacrifice propitiatory in the Eucharist, in
regard of the offering of it already consecrated, (according to the order of
the Latin Mass) to God, for the necessities of the Church, utterly deny any
nature of such a Sacrifice in it, by virtue of the Consecration otherwise. True
it is, these men are looked upon as bordering upon Heretics, in regard they
acknowledge no other nature of a Sacrifice, but that, which those who acknowledge
no Transubstantiation may grant, without prejudice to their positions. And, if
my aim were only to hold a mean opinion between ^wo extremes, and not freely
to declare what may be affirmed with truth, it might seem very convenient, to
take up that position, for which I may allege a party at present extant, in the
Communion of the Church of Rome. But, having resolved to set all regard of
faction behind the consideration of truth manifested by the Scriptures; I
stick not to yield, and to maintain, that the consecration of the Eucharist, in
order to the participation of it, is indeed a Sacrifice, whereby God is rendered
propitious to, and the benefits of Christ's death obtained for them that
worthily receive it; But this, perhaps, neither in the sense, nor to the
interest of them, who make it their business to maintain the present abuses of
the Church of Rome, by disguising the true intentions and expressions of the
Catholic Church.

That I may be understood without prejudice in this point, I will lay down the
difference of opinion that remains in the Church of Rome ^^nce the Council of
Trent, as I find it reported by Jacobus Bayus, de Eucharistia III. 15-18. He
complains of an opinion, that the nature of a Sacrifice is not seen in
con^ecrating the Elements to become the body and blood of Christ; but, that
they are thereby made fit to be offered, and therefore, there must be some
other act, whereby they are offered in Sacrifice. And this they find in the
Canon of the Mass. For, having rehearsed the Institution, (whereby the parties
agree that consecration is done) it follows; Vnde and memores Domine, nos servi
tui, sed and plebs tua sancta, ejusdem Christi filii tui Domini nostri, tam
beatae passionis, and ab inferis resurrectionis, sed and in coelis gloriosae
ascensionis; Offerimus praeclarae Majestati tuae, de tuis donis ac datis
hostiam puram, hostiam sanctam, hostiam immaculatam, Panem sanctum vitae
aeternae, and Calicem salutis perpetuae. Supra quae propitio ac sereno vultu
respicere digneris: Et accepta habere, sicut accepta habere dignatus os munera
pueri tui justi Abel, and sacrisicium Patriarchae nostri Abrahae, and quod tibi
obtulit summus Sacerdos tuus Melchisedech sanctum sacrificium, immaculatam
hostiam. Whereupon we also thy servants O Lord, and holy people, (mindful,
as well of the blessed passion and resurrection from the dead, as the glorious
ascension into heaven, of the same thy Son Christ our Lord) Offer to thy
excellent Majesty, of thy own free gifts, a pure sacrifice, a holy sacrifice, a
spotless sacrifice, the holy Bread of everlasting life, and Cup of eternal
salvation. Upon which vouchsafe to look with a gracious and clear countenance,
and accept them, as thou deignedst to accept the gifts of thy just child Abel,
and the sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and that holy sacrifice, that
spotless oblation, which thy High Priest Melchisedech offered thee. Then
follows that which I quoted before; Supplices te rogamus Domine, jube haec
perferri -- And this they think to be the offering of the Sacrifice, which the
consecration exhibiteth only to be offered, at the elevation, by these words.
But the common opinion is offended at this, for placing the Sacrifice in that
act of the Church, which says; We offer to thee; in which there is only a
general reason of sacrificing, by offering, without changing that which is
offered. And therefore, as offering is nothing but dedicating and presenting to
the worship of God, so that, if the substance of the thing be changed in
offering it, then is it Sacrificing; Supposing the substance of the Elements to
cease, and the body and blood of Christ to succeed; in this doing, this opinion
places the nature of the Sacrifice. For, the change of the Elements, says mine
Author, acknowledges Gods power, and the dependence upon him, of his creature.
And, the body of Christ being under the dimensions of the bread, his blood of
the wine, Christ is present as sacrificed, his flesh and blood being divided.
Wherefore that change, whereby the Sacrifice is produced, suffices to the
offering of it, which is produced as sacrificed; The power of God being
sufficiently testified by the change, though, in sacrificing living creatures,
it is testified, by destroying them for Gods service. And this, he thinks, our
Lord signifies, when he says; This is my body which is given for you; This is
my blood which shall be poured out for you; For, to whom, but to God? seeing
he says not, that is given you; But, for you. And, immediately hereupon there
is no doubt but it has the nature of a Sacrifice. The offering whereof must
consist in that action which is done in the person of Christ, as the
Consecration, they agree, is done, by using the words of Christ. And thus,
though this Sacrifice by typical, and representative of the Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross, which the parting of his body and blood signifies, yet is it
nevertheless a true Sacrifice, as the Sacrifices which figured Christ to come,
cease not therefore to be true Sacrifices. And from this nature of a Sacrifice
he deriveth the reason why the Table is an Altar, the Church a Temple, the
Minister Sacerdos, or one that offers Sacrifice. I have made choice of this
Autho^, because I meet not this difference of opinion among them reported any
where else. That which I shall say to him will show what we are to think of
others.

For, having maintained, that the elements are really changed, from ordinary
bread and wine, into the body and blood of Christ mystically present, as in a
Sacrament; And that, in virtue of the Consecration, not by the faith of him
that receives; I am to admit and maintain, whatsoever appears duly consequent
to this truth; Namely, that the Elements so consecrate, are truly the Sacrifice
of Christ upon the Cross, in as much as the body and blood of Christ crucified
are contained in them, not as in a bare sign, which a man may take up at his
pleasure, but as in the means by which God has promised his Spirit. But not
properly the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, because that is a thing that
consists in action, and motion, and succession, and therefore, once done, can
never be done again, because it is a contradiction, that that which is done
should ever be undone. It is therefore enough, that the Eucharist is the
Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, as the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross
is represented, renewed, revived, and restored by it, and as every
representation is said to be the same thing, with that which it represents;
Taking representing here, not for barely signifying, but for tendering and
exhibiting thereby that which it signifies. On the other side I insist, that,
if sacrificing signify killing and destroying, in the Sacrifices of the Old
Testament, and the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross; it is not enough to
make the Eucharist properly a Sacrifice, that the Elements are deputed to be
worship of God, by that change which Transubstantiation imports, and
therefore much less, not supposing any change in their bodily substance. For,
this difference will ab^te the property of a Sacrifice, the truth of it
remaining. I grant, that Gods Power is seen in this change according to the
terms already settled; For, what Power but Gods can make good the promise of
tendering the Body and Blood of Christ, as a visible mean to convey his Spirit?
And he that goes about to make this change, by consecrating the Eucharist,
must needs be understood to acknowledge this Power of Gods; But this is not that
acknowledgment which sacrificing imports, but that which every act of
Religion implies. He that Sacrifices, acknowledging that which he
sacrifices, with all that he has, to God, to testify this acknowledgment,
abandoneth that which he sacrifices to be destroyed in testimony of it. And
therefore the Power of God is not testified in this change, as the nature of a
Sacrifice requires that it be testified: For certainly, he intends not to
abandon his interest in Christ, that consecrates the Elements into his body and
blood. And therefore, the consideration of dedicating the Elements to the
service of God in this Sacrament, makes them properly oblations: But the
consideration of their being changed into the Body and Blood of Christ,
represented, sacrificed upon the Cross, makes them properly no Sacrifice. In
the former consideration, being properly Oblations, let them be improperly
Sacrifices. For in this sense, in the Canon of the Mass; Te igitur,
Clementissime Pater, per Jesum Christum filium tuum Dominum nostrum, supplices
rogamus ac petimus, uti accepta habeas ac benedic as h^c dona, haec munera,
haec sancta sacrificia illibata. We therefore, humbly beseech and desire thee,
most merciful Father, through Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord, to accept and
bless these gifts, these presents, these holy unstained Sacrifices. And not
only here before the Consecration, but just before the Lords Prayer and the
Communion; Per Christum Dominum nostrum: Per quem haec omnia semper Domine bona
creas, sanctificas, vivificas, benedicis, and praestas nobis. Through Christ
our Lord: Through whom, thou, O Lord, always createst, sanctifiest,
quickenest, and furnishest us with all these good things. The repetition of
which consideration shows, that they are presented to God, to be consecrated
and made the Eucharist, as Oblations out of believers goods: According to the
form used in diverse Greek Liturgies, from the words of David, (...). We give
thee thire own of thine own. But, when our Lord says; This is my body which is
given for you; This is my blood which is poured out for you; Will any man of
sense understand; That is now, by that which here I do, offered up to God for
you, and the blood as poured forth? Or rather, this is that body and blood that
is given to be crucified, and poured forth for you shortly, upon the Cross?
Let it therefore have the nature of a Sacrifice, so soon as the Consecration is
past. It shall have that nature improperly, so long as it is not the Sacrifice
of Christ upon the Cross; Though truly, so long as the Sacrament is not empty
of that which it signifies. And, accor^ing to this truth, true Altars they
are, true Temples, true Sacrifices, though improperly, where, and by whom it is
ministered. But I will not therefore grant, that this Sacrificing, (that is,
this consecrating the Elements into the Sacrifice) is an action done in the
person of Christ: Though they are agreed, that it is done by the rehersing of
the words of Christ. For, the rehersing of Christ's words is not an act done in
the person of Christ; Nor do I take upon me his person whose words I recite.
And, I have showed, that the Consecration is done by the Prayers of the Church
immediately, though these Prayers are made in virtue of Christ's order,
commanding to do what he did, and thereby promising, that the Elements shall
become that, which, he says, those which he con^ecrated are.

As for the other opinion, (which I am not to be the more in love with, because
I am not satisfied with this) it is to be considered, that the Elements are
offered thrice in the Canon of the Mass. The first is that offering which I
rehearsed last, beginning; Te igitur -- going before the Consecration, as ^^
agree. The second is that which this opinion intends, agreeing with the
other, that the Consecration is past by rehersing the words of institution. But
mine opinion allows not this. For, I conceive the Consecration is yet in doing,
till that Prayer be past; Vt quotquot ex hac Altaris participatione
Sacro-Sanctum filii tui corpus and sanguinem sumpserimus, omni benedictione
coelesti and gratia repleamur. That as many of us as shall have received the
Holy body and blood of thy Son, by this communion of the Altar, may be filled
with every heavenly blessing and grace. Which is the later of the two, in which
I conceive the Consecration to consist, as, in all other Liturgies, in
something correspondent to it. And truly, the very words of the second offering
do bear, that the Elements are by it offered to God, not as consecrated, but,
as to be consecrated, supposing the blessing of them to be the consecrating of
them, as I proved before. Therefore the offering, and the presenting of them to
God as consecrated, is that which is done by the Prayer which follows; Memento
Domine famulorum famularumque tuarum -- And, nobis quoque peccatoribus famulis
tuis -- whereby, the several estates of Christ's Church are recommended to God,
in virtue and consideration of Christ's passion here represented and
commemorated. Not that I intend here to justify that Prayer for the dead,
which this contains; but because (referring that to consideration in due
time) all Liturgies have a place, where, according to S. Paul, intercession is
made for all States of Christ's Church, in consideration of the Sacrifice of
Christ's Cross represented by this Sacrament: And because this intercession is
properly, the offering up of the the said Sacrifice to God, for their
necessities. And therefore, this opinion says well, that the Consecration
exhibiteth only the Sacrifice, to be offered up to God by the Prayers of the
Church: But, not by the Prayer which desires the blessing of the Elements,
wherein the consecating of them is contained, (which is that of the elevation,
in the Canon of the Mass) but by those Prayers, whereby the effects of Christ's
Cross are prayed for, in behalf of his Church. According to which opinion, the
consecrating of the Elements will be the Sacrificing of Christ no further,
than, as the body and blood of Christ are thereby represented as Sacrificed.
But, there will be no further cause of complaint in this, then there is cause
to complain, that there is not such ground for division as the parties would
have.

For, though there be only a general reason of offering, no particular
consideration of destroying, seen in the act of the Church, offering, either
the Elements to be consecrated, or the consideration of Christ's Cross
represented, to render God propitious to his Church; Yet are the consecrated
Elements no less the Sacrifice of Christ's Cross, than the presence of Christ's
body and blood in them will allow; though in order to that Evangelical banquet
upon them, at which, and by which, the Covenant of Grace is renewed. For, the
Apostles having made the Eucharist a Sacrifice in this regard, I must not count
the making of it one offensive. I say then, that, having proved, the
consecration of the Eucharist to be the production of the body and blood of
Christ crucified, or the causing of them to be mystically present in the
elements thereof, as in a Sacrament representing them separated by the
crucifying of Christ; And, the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross being
necessarily propitiatory and impetratory both; it cannot be denied, that the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, in as much as it is the same Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross, (as, that which represents is truly said to be the thing
which it represents) is also both propitiatory and impe^ratory by virtue of
the consecration of it, whereby it becomes the Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross. For, is it not all the reason in the world, that, if the Eucharist be
the Sacrifice of Christ crucified, the consecrating of the Eucharist, that is,
the causing of the Elements to become this Sacrifice, should be, and be
accounted and called the sacrificing of Christ? And, if the participation of
the Eucharist be, as I have showed it to be, the renewing of the Covenant of
Grace, (by virtue whereof, the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross becomes
propitiatory and impetratory in behalf of Christians) shall not the Sacrifice
of the Eucharist, whereof they participate, be counted propitiatory and
impetratory, by virtue of the consecration indeed, though in order to the
participation of it? For, if the profession of Christianity be the condition
that renders God propitious to us, and obtains for us the benefits of Christ's
passion; And, that the receiving of the Eucharist is the renewing of that
profession, by virtue whereof, the Faults whereby we have failed of that
profession, for that which is past, are blotted out, and we, for the future,
are qualified for the blessings which Christ's passion tendereth; Then is the
Eucharist a Sacrifice propitiatory and impetratory, by virtue of the
Consecration, though in order to the participation of it. Which, whether those
that are so much for the Sacrifice, in the Church of Rome, rest con^ent with it
or not, seems to me so natively proper to the simplicity and holiness of
Christianity, that nothing can be held forth more pertinent to advance the zeal
of frequenting, together with the devotion and reverence of communicating in
this most precious of Gods Ordinances to Christians. For, what can more oblige
a Christian to the frequent and worthy communion of this Sacrament, then to
consider, that, by receiving it, he is re-estated in his right to those
promises which the Gospel ^endreth; provided, that he, on his part,
reestablish in his own heart that resolution to Christianity, by professing
which, he was at the first estated in Gods Kingdom? Hereupon arises a fourth
reason, why this Sacrament is a Sacrifice; to wit, of the bodies and souls of
them, who, having consecrated their goods to God, for the celebration of it,
do, by receiving it, profess to renew that consecration of themselves to the
service of God, according to the Law of Christ, which their Baptism originally
pretends. For, in as much as we revive and renew the first profession of our
Christianity, in receiving the Eucharist, we do also, by the same means, offer
up our bodies for a living Sacrifice, holy and well pleasing to God, which is
our reasonable service of God, as S. Paul commands, Romans XII. 1. And, by that
which has been said, it is easy to resolve that which is further questioned
in the School, whether the breaking, the pouring forth, the taking and the
consuming of the Elements by eating and drinking belong to the nature of the
Sacrifice or not. For, I have already allowed the consecrating of the Elements
apart, to be a necessary ingredient of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, as
necessary to represent the Sacrifice of the Cross. And if men did consider
that the Eucharist had never been instituted but to be participated, they would
find it impe^tinent, to allege any reason why it should be a Sacrifice, that
^endeth not to the participation of it. There is then, in the Mass, a peculiar
ceremony of breaking the Host into the Chalice, not tending to the distributing
of it, but, all the portions to be taken by the Priest. Of this I speak not;
Otherwise, breaking, pouring forth, distributing, eating, drinking, are all
parts of the Sacrifice; as the whole action is that Sacrifice, by which the
Covenant of Gace is renewed, restored, and established against the interruption
of our failleurs.

And now, I confess, that all they, who do not believe the promises of the
Gospel to depend upon any condition to be performed by our free will,
qualifying us with a right title to them, may very well say by consequence;
that it is a disparagement to the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, to make
the Eucharist a propitiatory and impetratory Sacrifice in behalf of the Church,
in that sense, and to that effect as I have said. But, supposing that
condition, I challenge all the world to say, wherein any such disparagement
lies. For, let any man think either me, or the Doctors of the Church of Rome
so mad, as to ascribe that propitiation, which is once made for the whole world
by the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, to the representation and
commemoration of it, by the Sacrifice of the Eucharist. But, in regard the
Gospel requires a certain condition at thine hands, which being not performed,
to thee Christ is neither born, nor crucified, nor ^^en again, as S. Prosper
says; And, that the communion of the Eucharist professes the performance
thereof, and that truly if it be worthy, (so that the Propitiation wrought by
Cross, thereby becomes effectually thine) in that regard, the Eucharist
becomes to thee a propitiatory Sacrifice, by virtue of the Consecration indeed,
(which makes the Elements to become the body and blood of Christ mystically, as
in a Sacrament) but yet in order to the participation of i^* And is not this
the applying of the propitiation wrought by the Sacrifice of Christ's Cross,
when as, by the Sacrament of the Eucharist, a man becomes entitled to the
benefit of it? Nor let any man tell me, that this application is wrought by
living faith, as if that were evidence enough, that, not by the Sacrament of
the Eucharist: For if, notwithstanding this faith, the Sacrament of Baptism is
necessary to estate us in this right, because there is no living faith, without
being baptized into Gods Church; By the same reason, supposing the
frequentation of the Eucharist commanded for the daily redressing and
maintenance of the same title) of necessity it follows, that the application of
that propitiation is to be ascribed to the Eucharist, which is not applicable
without it. Again; If S. Paul enjoin the Church, to offer up their Prayers,
Supplications, and Intercessions, for all estates in the world, at the
celebration of the Eucharist, as recommending them in the name of Christ, there
mystically present, in the commemoration of his death upon the Cross; can it
seem strange, that the Prayers which are so powerfully presented, by alleging
an Intercession of such esteem, should have a special virtue, and take a
special effect, in making God propitious to his Church, and all estates of the
same, and obtaining for them those benefits which Christ's passion tenders? And
if so, is not the Sacrament of the Eucharist a propitiatory and impetratory
Sacrifice, by virtue of the Consecration, though in order to the Oblation and
presentation of it, by the prayers of the Church, for the obtaining of their
necessities? What is there in all this, that the tongue of slander can asperse
with the imputation of Popery, unless they will have Popery to be that
Christianity, which we have received from our Lord Christ and his Apostles?
But, if from hence any man would infer, that, seeing the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, that is to say, the body and blood of Christ crucified there present
by virtue of the Consecration, is a propitiatory and impetratory Sacrifice for
the Congregation there present, for their relations, and for the Church;
therefore it is so, whether they proceed to receive the Eucharist or not,
therefore it is so, whether they proceed to offer up the Eucharist present, by
their prayers, for the necessities of the Church, or not* therefore it is so,
whether they pray with the Church or no^; the consequence will straight appear
to fail; because those reasons which make it such a Sacrifice make it so, in
order to the receiving, or to the offering of it by the prayers of the Church,
in behalf of the Church.

It is well enough known, what opinions and abuses in the use, and concerning
the virtue of Masses, had vogue under the dark time of the School, though no^
authorized by the Catholic Church. For, in regard the Eucharist can pretend no
virtue by the nature of the work, (impertinent to any spiritual effect) but
merely by the institution of Christ; the efficacy thereof, ex opere opera^o
(according to the language of those days) and by virtue of the very ^o^ke, was
so extended, as to take effect without any good motion in them that celebrate
it. And the intent of the Priest, (whose act the consecration was taken to be)
was thought to extend it, to whom, and to what he pleased. And ^^^^, so far
from requiring, that any but the Priest should communicate, that even at this
day, it is not thought necessary, by the looser sort of that side, that the
people should understand what the Priest does or says, much l^sse ass^t him
with their devotions, the intent of the Priest, (which the Canon it self
always extends to all that are present) serving to give it virtue. On the
other side, how has this been taken and construed? As if every Mass pretended
to sacrifice Christ a new, who, by offering himself once, has perfited for
ever those who are sanctified, as says the Apostle, Heb. X. 14. And therefore,
as if every Mass did challenge the virtue of Christ's sacrifice upon the Cross.
And it is true, the properties and ef^ect of things signified, are in some
certain sense, truly attributed to the signs. But he that inlarges his Language
beyond that sense may give, and he that understands not the limitations
requisite, may take offense, when there is no need. Otherwise, the reasons of
those limitations are evident enough, to save any sober and charitable men,
either from inflan^ing, or taking up offenses. For, common sense, which tells
all men, that what is once done can never be done again, obliges them to
understand an abatement in the property of that Language, which attributes the
sacrificing of Christ to a Priest; because, once done upon the Cross, it can
never be done ag^in. Neither can it be, in reason, supposed, that he who
inflames the improperty of his Language, intends therefore to renounce the
common faith, concerning the redemption of mankind by the sacrifice of the
Cross. But when all derive all virtue in the Mass from it, to take such
Language for equalling the Mass to it, will require a great lust to maintain
partiality in the Church. And make but once the consecrating and offering of
the Eucharist, for the necessities of the whole Church, by the prayers of those
who celebrate it, to be the act of the respective assembly, by the ministry of
him whom the Church deputes for the purpose; it will easily appear what
follows. For, the virtue thereof will still be ex opere operato, in opposition
to the Sacraments of the old Old Law: The spiritual intent whereof not being
discerned by all, because not openly preached at that time, the spiritual
effect of them could not be attributed to the common work, but to the
particular intent of those, that belonged to the Gospel, under the Law, which
is a true ground of opposition between opus operatum, and opus operantis; The
work merely done, and done by such a one. Besides, seeing the truth of Christ's
body and blood, is eaten and drunk by living faith, without the Sacrament; He
that believes, that God instituted not the Sacrament to no purpose, though he
abhor to think, that the effect thereof can be had without any good motion,
must of necessity allow the devotion which a living faith is exercised with, in
assisting the celebration of it, an effect, by virtue of that work, which,
without it, it cannot challenge. As for the effect of the Prayers which it is
offered with, it is not to be ascribed to the quality of the Priest, and
therefore in that regard also it may be ascribed to the work it self, not to
the quality of him that does it. But, seeing the common obligation of all
Christians, extends their Prayers to all necessities of Christ's Church; it
will not lie in the intent, either of the Priest, or of the whole assembly
(whose act more properly it is) to make it more beneficial to particular
Christians, then it can be thought, that God accepts the charity and devotion
of particular Christians more particularly, for their particular relations. As
for the matter of private Masses, and the assistance of the people, with their
devotion as well as presence, of an unknown tongue in Gods service, of the
extending of the benefit thereof, to the dead; Thus much being said generally
here, I refer the rest to their own places. In fine, what other reason soever
can be pretended (by any that shall make it his interest, to maintain not to
excuse the abuses of the Church of Rome) why the Eucharist should be counted
such a Sacrifice; if it be not contained in that which has been said, will
easily be wiped off by that which has been said. Those Scriptures which we
ground our selves upon, when we make the Eucharist a Sacri^^ce, being the
only ground to determine, (though not the only means to evidence) for what
reason, and to what purpose it is to be counted such a Sacrifice.

For, how much regard soever we ought to have to the consent of the Church in
this point; (as, without doubt, if in any, then in this) without doubt, the
agreement and correspondence, visible to common sense, betwe^n the original
practice and sense of the Church, and that which has been alleged out of the
Scriptures, will be evidence enough of the right reason, or reasons, for which
the Eucharist is not or is to be esteemed a propitiatory Sacrifice. There is no
man can thrust his nose into the writings of the Fathers, even of the first
times, but he shall find the Oblations of the faithful, that are once
deputed to the celebration of the Eucharist, called Sacrifices in that regard.
This consideration therefore, is not owned by them that strive most, to make
the Eucharist properly a propitiatory Sacrifice; because, though it have the
stamp of primitive Christianity upon it, yet it makes nothing to that purpose.
And yet the M^sse is never celebrated, but they hea^ the Oblations of the
faithful called Sacrifices (in the words quoted before) and that, for the
redemption of their souls, for the hope of salvation, for the discharge of
their vows. All which, understanding the renewing of the Covenant of grace by
the Communion, is properly true in order to it. As for the sayings of the
Fathers, whereby the Eucharist is declared to be a Sacrifice, in regard of the
Consec^ation; I do no way doubt, that they are utterly innumerable. For
wheresoever the whole action, including the propitiation which the Church
intends to procure by it, is called a Sacrifice, (which is most ordinary in the
language of the Fathers) there the Consecration cannot be excluded, though,
referring it to the Communion, not the Communion to it, as some would have: For
if it be con^idered on the other side, that they were all said, at such time as
the Communion was no less usual than the Consecration thereof; (that is to
say, when it was a strange thing to hear of the Eucharist celebrated, and none
but the Priest to receive) it will not be strange, that I demand it to be
understood, in order to the communion of the same. Especially, when the
Liturgies themselves, that is, the form of Consecration used in the most
eminent Churches* (from whom the less must necessarily be thought to have
received their pattern) do limit the being and presence of Christ's body and
blood in the Elements, to the benefit of them that shall communicate; As it
appears by the forms of Consecration that have been alleged. And though the
Fathers diverse times ^all the celebrating of the Eucharist the death and
passion of our Lord, which it commemorates, and, the Sacrifice of his Cross;
S. Cyprian, Epist. LXIII. S. Chrysostom, in Mat. Hom. LXXXIII. in A^la Hom.
XXI. in Epist. ad Heb. Hom. XVII. S. Austine, in Psalm. XXI. yet, the addition
of words which they use, of reasonable and unbloudy, o^ commemorative, of
symbolical, of sign and image, are necessary evidence of an abarement in the
property of the words, according to their meaning. Constitutiones Apost. VI.
23. S. Cyprian, Ep. LXIII. E^sebius, demonst. Evang. VIII. 1. S. Ambrose, de
O^^ic. I. 48. Macariu^, Hom. XXVII. S. A^stine, Qu^st. LXI. ex LXXXIII. contra
Fa^stum* XX. 21. de Civ. X. 5, 20. XVII. 17. Dionysius Hierar. Eccles. cap.
III. and even the Canon of M^^sse, calling it a Sacrifice of Praise, for the
redemption of souls, that pay their vows. And therefore S. Ambrose, de i^s qui
initiantur mysteriis cap. VIII. says, that Christians then, seeing the Altar
prepared, cried out; Thou have prepared ^ Table before me; And in the Fathers,
that which is sometimes called an Altar, is other while called a Table,
especially with the additions of mystical, holy, spiritual, divine, and others.
All abating the property of a Sacrifice, or rather the Sacrifice of Christ upon
the Cross, when speech is of the Eucharist. The words of S. Austine* Epist.
XXIII. are express. Nonne semel immola^us est Christus in s^ips^? E^ ^amen in
Sacramento, non sol^m per omnes Pasch^ solemnitates, sed omni dis populis
im^ola^^r, nec utique men^itur, qui interrogatus, ^um respondet imm^la^^^* Was
not Christ in person sacrificed once? and yet in mystery not only all the
Easter Holidayes, but every day is he sacrificed for the people: Nor shall he
lie, who, being asked, answers, that he is sacrificed. That truth of a
Sacrifice, which serves but to ^^v^^^lye, makes not a proper Sacrifice. And the
words of S. Chrysostom in Epist* ad Heb. H^^. XVII* are not to be o^itted.
(...). What then? do we no^ offer every day? We offer indeed, but, making
comm^moration of his death. And this is one and not many. How one and not many?
Because he was once offered, not) as that which was carried into the Holy of
Holies. That is the figure of this, and this of that. For, we offer always
the same, not now one Lamb, and another to morrow, but always the same.
Therefore the Sacrifice is one. Otherwise, by that reason, being offered in
many places, there should be many Christ's. But by no means. But there is one
Christ every where, here full, and there full: One Body. As therefore, being
offered in many places, he is one Body, and not many Bodies; So is he one
Sacrifice. He is our High Priest, who offered the Sacrifice that cleanses us.
The same we also offer, that then was offered, that is invincible. This is
done in remembrance of that which was then done; For, d^ this, says he, in
rememb^ance of me. We make no other Sacrifices as then the High Priest, but
the same always, or rather the remembrance of a Sacrifice. Now that, in the
sense of the Catholic Church, the Sacrament of the Eucharist is a Sacrifice
propitiatory for the Church, and impe^ratory of the necessities thereof, in
regard of those prayers wherewith it is offered and presented to God, in virtue
of the Sacrifice of the Cross, which it is mystically; (that is, represents
and commemorateth) a few words will serve to persuade him that knows the
practice and custom of the Church in all ages, at the solemn and regular times
and occasions of celebrating the Eucharist, to make mention of all states and
qualities belonging to the Church. And not only so, but, upon occasions
incident, of going to God, for the necessities, either of the Church, or of
particular Christians; to celebrate the Eucharist, with an intent, of
presenting and offering the Cross of Christ there present, for their
necessities. You had before out of Tertul. de Cor. cap. V. Oblationes pro
defunct^s, pro natalitiis, annua die facimus. We make Oblations for the dead,
for the birth of Martyrs, on the anniversary day. And further, de Exhor.
Castit. XI. speaking of him that had married a second wife; Neque enim pristinam
poteris odisse, cui etiam religiosiorem reservas affectionem, ut jam recept^
apud Dominum, pro c^jus spirit^ postulas, pro qua Oblationes annuas ^eddi^.
Stabis ergo ad Dominum cum tot uxoribus quot in oratione commemoras? Et offeres
pro d^abus? and commendabis illas duas per sacerdotem de monogamia ordinatum,
a^t etiam de virginitate sancitum? circundatum virginibus ac univiris? Et
ascendet sacrifici^m tuum libera front? Et inter caeteras voluntates bon^
mentis postulabis tibi and uxori tu^ castitatem? For, the former thou can not
hate, for whom thou reservest a more religious affection, as received already
with the Lord, for whose spirit thou make request, for whom thou rendrest
yearly oblations. Will thou then stand before the Lord with as many wives as in
thy prayers thou mentionest? And will thou offer for two? And commend those two
by a Priest ordained after one wife, or confirmed of a virgin? compassed with
virgins and once married people? And shall thy sacrifice freely ascend? And,
among other affections of a good mind, will thou desire chastity for thee and
thy wife? I dispute not here how lawful it is to pray for the dead; which
Tertullian touches again de Monogamia X. de Anima LVIII. This Tertullian
supposes, that, if a Christian have two wives, he must offer, that the
Eucharist may be celebrated, and that, at the celebrating of it, the Priest may
pray for those whom he mentions, as the occasion of celebrating it. The
birth-dayes of Martyrs, that is, the Anniversaries of their sufferings was
another occasion of celebrating the Eucharist, as in Tertullian, so in S.
Cyprian. Epist. XXXIV. Sacrificium pro eis semper, ut memini^^is, offerimus,
quoties Martyrum passiones and dies annua commemoratione celeb^an us. We
always offer sacrifice for them, as you remember, when we celebrate the
yearly commemoration of the Martyrs suffering days. Therefore, where the ^ame
S. Cyprian forbids offering the names of those that had fallen away in
persecution, and offering for them, Epist. IX. XI. he forbids the receiving of
their offerings, and, by consequence, praying for them at the Eucharist.
Epiphanius Haer. XXX. speaking of the Patriarch of the Jews baptized in
private: (...). The said Patriar^^ ^a^in^ ^^ his hand a very considerable sum
of gold, stre^ched out his hand, and gave it to ^^e Bishop, saying; Offer for
me. S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catech. Mystag. V. E^roe (...) Then, that spiritual
sacrifice, that unbloudy service, being done, (consecr^t^^) over that
propitiatory sacrifice, we beseech God for the common peace of the Churches,
for the State of the world, for the Kings, their armies and allies, for the
sick, etc. adding, that, praying for the departed, we offer to God, Christ,
cruci^^ed ^or our sins, to render him propitious to them, and to us. Of which
effect in due place, the intent hereby appears. For here, as he calls it a
Sacrifice upon the Consecration, so he plainly sets down, wherein the
propitiation which it effects consists, according to the Catholic Church.
For, to say truth, to the purpose in hand, I can produce nothing like that
which I have said already, in my Book of the Service of God at the Assemblies
of the Church, (to which I remit you for the rest, page 370-382.) that, in all
the Liturgies, there is a place, where mention is to be made of all States of
the Church, for whom the Oblations, out of which the Eucharist is consecrated,
are offered. And likewise a place, where, the Eucharist being consecrated,
prayer is made, in behalf of all States in the Church; that is to say, the
Sacrifice of Christ his Cross, there present, is offered up, to move God, to
grant them all that is desired by the regular and continual prayers of the
Church. And among them, there is a special place for those that offer at
present.

If any man be moved to imagine, that any part hereof is prejudicial to that
Reformation which the Church of England professes, (for, I profess from the
beginning, not to be s^rupulous of offending those that offend it) I remit him
to that learned Appendix of Dr Field, to his third book of the Church; the
purpose whereof (in answer to the question; where the Reformed Church was
before Luther) is, to show, that in this point, as in others there handled, the
sense of the whole Church of Christ, even to the time of Luther, and to the
Council of Trent, was no other than that which the Church of England embraces
and cherishes. Thereby to show, that the Reformation thereof never pretended
to found a new Church, but to preserve that which was, by taking away those
corruptions, which time, and the enemies of Christianity had sown, in the Laws
and customs of it. Which he does so evidently perform, in this point, that, I
must needs challenge any man, that has a mind to blast any thing here said,
with the sta^e calumny of Popery, to consider first; Whether he can prove
those things, which, the Authors past exception there quoted declare to be the
sense of the Catholic Church, at that time, to contain any thing prejudicial
to the Gospel of Christ, and that purity thereof which the Reformation
pretends. And, because I know he cannot do it, I rest secure of all,
blasphemies or slanders, that can be forged upon this occasion: Openly
professing, that, those who will not acknowledge that condition of the Gospel,
and the promises thereof, which I have demonstrated to be essential to
Christianity; it is for their interest, to defame the sense of the Catholic
Church, with the slanderous aspersions of Popery, that so they might seduce
miserable creatures to believe, that there is a faith which in^itles them to
the promises of the Gospel, not supposing them converted to the Christianity
which it rendereth. For, seeing that propitiation which the Sacrifice of the
Eucharist pretends is grounded upon this condition of the Covenant of Grace;
(as I have showed) it is no mervail if they, who pretend to reconcile the
promises of the Gospel to the lusts of the flesh, by which this world is
enjoyed, endeavor to slander the purity of Christianity with those aspersions,
which they have seduced wretched people to count odious. In fine, it is not
that consideration of a Sacrifice in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which the
sense and practice of the Catholic Church inforceth; but the violent
interpretations of it which are made on both sides, to both extremities, that
can give the leass pretense for division in the Church. For, while on the one
side, the sacrificing of Christ a new, is so construed, as if, to doubt of the
virtue of it in behalf of all that assist in it, (whether they communicate in
it or not, whether their devotions concur to it or not) were to doubt of the
virtue of Christ's Cross; it is no mervail if this create so great offense,
that the receiving of the Eucharist, nay, the assisting of it with the
devotions of Christian people, comes to be a matter of indifference. On the
other side, while, the renewing of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, by
that representation thereof which the Eucharist tendreth, for the redressing of
the Covenant of Grace between God and those which receive, is construed as
prejudicial to that one Sacrifice, whereby our Lord for ever has perfected
those whom he sanctifies; no mervail if the very celebrating of it come to be
a matter of indifference, the effect whereof, by believing that a man is
predestinate or justified, is had before and without it. The matter of the
Sacrifice then being so great a subject for the divi^ion, upon so little cause;
it is time for good Christians to awake and look about them, and see, that, the
less cause there is, the greater good will the parties have to continue at
distance: In the mean time, it is the common interest of Christianity, even the
means of their salvation, by the worthy frequenting of this holy Sacrament,
that suffers. As for the Church of England, I referr my self to the very form
of those Laws, according to which, as many as have received Orders in it, have
promised to exercise the Ministry to which they were appointed by the same,
and that before God and his Church, at so solemn an occasion, that nothing can
be thought obligatory to him that would transgress it. For, the Offertory
which the Church of England prescribes, if it signify any thing, signifies
the dedication of that which is offered, as, at large, to the necessities of
the Church, so in particular, to the celebration of the Eucharist then and
there. At the consecration the Church prays; That we, receiving these thy
creatures of Bread and Wine, according to thy Son our Savior Christ's holy
institution, in remembrance of his death and passion, may be partakers of his
most blessed body and blood; And after the Communion; We thy humble servants,
entirely desire thy fatherly goodness mercifully r^ accept this our Sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving: Most humbly beseeching thee to grant, that, by the
merits and death of thy Son Jesus Christ, and through faith in his blood, we
and thy whole Church may obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits
of his death and passion: All this, having premi^ed prayer for all States of
Christ's Church. Which whether it make not the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by
virtue of the Consecration, the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross,
propitiatory and impetratory for them who communicate in it, by receiving the
Elements; whether or no, by virtue of this Oblation, propitiatory and
impetratory for the necessities of the rest of the Church, as well as the
Congregation present; I leave to men of reason, but not to Puritanes, to judge.
This I am sure, the condition of the Gospel, (which is the fourth reason, for
which, I have showed, that the Eucharist is counted a Sacrifice in the sense of
the Church) is exactly expressed in the words that follow, to the confusion of
all Puritanes, that would have us expect the blessings promised, from such a
kind of faith, which supposes it not, neither implies ^; And ^^^e, we offer
and present to thee, O Lord; our selves, our souls and bodies, to be a
reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice unto thee; humbly beseeching thee, that
all we, which be partakers of this holy Communion, may be fulfilled with thy
grace and heavenly benediction. For, the reason which obliges us to profess
this at receiving the Eucharist, (which is the New Testament in the blood of
Christ) is, because the promises which the Gospel covenanteth for, depend upon
it, as the condition which renders them due. And, upon these premises, I may
well conclude, that all the reasons, for which I have showed that the Eucharist
is a sacrifice in the sense of the Church, are recapitul^ted and comprised in
which follows; And though we be unworthy, through our manifold sins, to
offer unto thee any sacrifice; yet we beseech thee to accept this our bounden
duty and service, not waying our merits, but pardoning our offenses.

CHAP. VI. The reason of the Order by which I proceed, brings me to the Baptism
of Infants in the next place. The power of the Keys seen in granting Baptism,
as well as in communicating the Eucharist. Why Socinians make Baptism
indifferent: Why Antinomians make it a mistake to Baptize. The grounds upon
which I shake off both: With answer to some objections.
WHen I proposed to write of the Laws of the Church (that is to say, of those
controversies concerning the same, which are the subject of division in matter
of Christian amity to the English at this time) I proposed my subject in
aeqivocall terms, till it be further distinguished, that the Laws of the Church
may be understood to be those, which God has given the Church, to conduct the
body of the Church in the exercise of their Christianity; And they may be
understood to be those, which God has enabled the Church to give themselves,
according to that which I showed from the beginning; That Gods giving such Laws
to Christians, as are to be kept and exercised by the community of Christians,
at their respective Assemblies, is a demonstration, that God has founded a
Society or Corporation under the name of the Church: And that, supposing the
Church to be such a Society or Corporation of necessity infers; that it is
enabled by Gods Law, to give Laws unto it self, in such matters, as, not being
determined by Gods Law, become necessary to be determined, for preservation of
the Body in unity, and communion in the offices of Gods service. The Laws,
therefore, that God gives his Church, are so far the subject of this inquiry,
as may make it to appear, what is left to the power and duty of the Church to
determine. And to this purpose, it seemed requisite in the first place to
determine, what the rule of Faith contains to be believed of the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, which is the ground of whatsoever can be pretended that he has
enjoined his Church, as concerning the frequentation of it; having determined
the like before, not only concerning the Sacrament of Baptism, but also
concerning Penance, in as much as they contain qualifications requisite by the
Gospel to render the promises thereof due to particular Christians. Whereas the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, being, as I said before, the most eminent of those
offices which God has enjoined to be celebrated by the Assembles of his
Church, (having first founded his Church upon the duty and the command, or upon
the charter or privilege of holding those Assemblies, even when the Powers of
the world allow it not) required a tea^y express, to determine the true intent
why it was instituted; that it might the better appear in due time, how those
circumstances in the celebration of it, which are a great part of the subject
of that division which prevails among us in point of Christianity, may best be
determined to the intent of Gods Law: And also, that the true intent of other
Powers given the Church (evidently ^ending to the maintenance of Christianity,
and the purity thereof, but, alwaie^ with a respect to the unity of the Church,
in the communion of those offices whereof this is the chief) might the better
be estimated, by a right understanding of the end which they seek. You have
then the first, that is, the original and primitive, and also if you demand
that, the prime and chief power of Gods Church, consisting in celebrating the
Sacraments of Baptism, and the Eucharist. Not in washing away the filth of the
Body, as S. Peter says (that is, not in ministering the outward ceremony of
washing the body with water, or any part of it) but in admitting and allowing
that professinn of a good Conscience, which qualifies a man to be a member of
the Church. For, this allowance is no less then a declaration, on the part of
the Church, that he who upon these times is admitted to Baptism, is likewise
invested with a right and due title to the promises of the Gospel, remission of
s^nnes, and everlasting life: As it may appear to all that h^ve contracted with
the Church of England in Gods name, that, continuing in that which they
professed and undertook, on ttheir part, at their Baptism, they are ^ssured of
no less by the Church.

And therefore this is, and ought to be accounted that power of the Keys, by
which men are admitted to the House of God, which is his Church, as S. Paul
says; At least that part of it, that is seen and exercised in this first
office that the Church can minister to a Christian. And, seeing no man can
challenge the privilege of that communion, to which he is admitted upon
condition of that profession which Baptism supposed, unless he proceed to live
according to it; it cannot seem strange, that the same should be thought to be
exercised in the celebration of the Eucharist, as it is done, with a purpose to
communicate the Sacrament thereof to those that receive. I shall desire any man
that counts this s^r^nge, to consider that which I quoted even now out of
Epiphanius, That the Patriarch of the Jews at Tiberias, being baptized by the
Bishop, put a considerable sum of Gold into his hand, saying; Offer for me: For
it is written; Whatsoever ye bind on ^atrh, shall be bound in heaven; and
whatsoever ye lose on earth, shall be losed in heaven: For so it follows in
Epiphanius. And when S. Cyprian blames or forbids offering up the names, or
offering up the Eucharist in the names of those that had fallen away from the
Church in time of persecution, till they were reconciled to the Church by
Penance; does he not exercise the power of the Keys, in his hands, by denying
the benefit of those Prayers which the Eucharist is celebrated with, to them
who had forfeited their right to it, by failing of that, which, by their
baptism they undertook? As on the other side, whosoever the Eucharist is
offered for, (that is, whosoever has a part in those Prayers which it is
celebrated with) is thereby declared loose by the Church, upon supposition,
that he is indeed what he professes. And whatsoever Canons of the Church there
are (of which there are not a few) which take order, that the offerings of such
or such shall, or shall not be received; they all proceed upon this
suppo^^tion, that, by the power of the Keys, they are to be allowed or refused
their part of benefit in the Communion of the Eucharist, and the effects of i^.
For, not to speak of what is, by the corruption of men; but what ought to be,
by the appointment of God, it is manifest, that, the admission of a man to the
communion of the Eucharist is an allowance of his Christianity, as con^ormable
to that which Baptism professes; though, in no s^ate of the Church, it is a
sufficient and reasonable presumption, that a man is indeed and before God,
entitled to the promises of the Gospel, that he is admitted to the communion of
the Eucharist by the Church; because, whatsoever profession the Church can
receive may be coun^erfeit. But so, that it is to be endeavored, by all means
possible for the Church to use, that the right of communicating with the Church
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, be not allowed any man by the Church, but
upon such terms, and according to such laws, that a man, being qualified
according to them, may be really and indeed qualified for those promises which
the Gospel tendreth. Which being supposed, every Christian must of necessity
acknowledge, how great and eminent a power the Lord has trusted his Church
with, in celebrating and giving of the Eucharist; when he is convinced to
believe, that the body and blood of Christ is thereby tendered him, though
mystically and as in a Sacrament, yet so truly, that the spirit of Christ is no
less really present with it, to enable the souls of all them that receive it
with sincere Christianity, then the Sacrament is to their bodies, or, then the
same spirit is present in the flesh and blood of Christ, naturally being in the
heavens. For, suppose, that by faith alone, without receiving this Sacrament, a
man is assured of the spirit of Christ, (as, by faith alone, understanding
faith alone, as S. Paul meant it, I shall show that he may be assured of it)
yet, if he have determined a visible act to be done, to the due performance
whereof he has annexed a promise of the participation of the Spirit of Christ
by our Spirit, no less then of the body and blood of Christ Sacramentally
present by our bodies; And, if he has made the doing of this a part of the
Christianity, which, under the title of Faith alone, in^i^leth to promises of
the Gospel; (for who can be said to profess Christianity, that owneth not
such an Ordin^nce, upon such a promise?) Then has he determined and limited
the truth of that faith, which only justifies us, at the beginning of every
man's Christianity to the Sacrament of Baptism, but in the proceeding of the
same, to that of the Eucharist. These being the first Powers of the Church,
and, having resolved from the beginning, that the power of the Church extends
to the deter^ining or limiting of any thing requisite to the communion of the
Church, the determination or limitation whereof (by such an act as ought to have
the force of Law to them that are of the Church) becomes requisite* to the
communion of Christians in the offices of Gods service in unity; I cannot see
any of the controversies, whereby we stand now divided, that can deserve a
place in our consideration, before that of the Baptism of Infants. For, as it
is a dispute belonging to the first and original power of the Church, to
consider whether it extend so far, as (when it is acknowledged that there is
no written Law of God to that purpose) that it may, and justly has provided,
that all the Children of Christian Parents be baptized Infants; so it will
apear to concern their salvation more immediately, then other Laws, limiting
the exercise of the Churches power, or the circumstances of exercising those
offices of God service which it tends to determine, can be thought to do.

But Before I come to dispute this point, I will here take notice once more of
the Book, called the Doctrine of Baptisms, one of the fruits of this blessed
Reformation, commonly attributed to the Master of a College in Cambridge,
proving by a studied dispute, that it was never intended by our Lord Christ and
his Apostles, that Christians should be Baptized at all: That John indeed was
sent to baptize with water, but that the Baptism of Christ is baptism with the
Holy Ghost and fire: And, so long as the Ceremonies of the Law were not
abolished in point of fact, (though become void in point of right) so long also
baptism by water was practiced by the Apostles, as by John the Baptist and his
Disciples; But that since then, the continuance of Baptism by water in the
Church, is nothing else but an argument, that it has been destitute of Baptism
by fire, which is the Holy Ghost, which this Reformation, or, forsooth, this
Dogmatist pretends to. Which opinion obliges to mention again that of S^cinus,
who allows no further of Baptism, then of an indifferent Ceremony, which the
Church may use still at pleasure, to solemnize the profession of Christianity,
when a man is converted from Infidelity to it; (as it was prescribed by our
Lord, to signify the washing away of sin from those, who, having been Jews
and Gentiles, were converted to be Christians) But, that the obligation thereof
is utterly ceased in respect of those, who, being born of Christians, and bred
up in the Church, have, by the exercise of that Christianity which their years
intitles them to* made continual profession of it. These two opinions, like
Samsons Foxes, though ^ied together by the tails to set the Church on fire, yet
may proceed upon several grounds. For, we know that Socinus, denying Original
sin, has reason enough to reject the baptism of men, as well as of Infants;
as not acknowledging any thing but the will of man requisite to make him a good
Christian, and consequently, suspending the premises of the Gospel only upon
that act thereof, which resolves a man to become a good Christian. Which how
well it agrees with Sovinus his acknowledgement of the gift of the Holy Ghost,
promised to them that have made this resolution, to ^^able them to perform it,
is clear to them who shall have perused the premises to give sentence. As for
the other opinion last mentioned, I must profess, that I do not take upon me,
that it is his work who is said to be the Author of it, though I name him upon
common fame, as an instance to evidence, that there is no Church of God in
England, by the present Laws, when there is no means to bring to light the
Authors of such pestilent Doctrines; and when those who pretend to be an
University, do acknowledge such a man Master of a College, (partly of Divines)
as, if they were an University, they ought not to acknowledge as a Christian;
to wit, belonging to the communion of the Church. For, though I mean not to
charge him with this Book, yet, so long as he owns all that he is charged with
by Rutherford, the Scots Presbyterian; I do charge him with the Heresy of the
Antinomians, which here I mention, because it seems reasonable to conceive this
opinion to be a branch of it: wherein, how well he is re^uted by his adversary,
how clear his adversary is of the same blame, is to be judged by that which I
have determined, concerning the condition of the Covenant of Grace. For the
Heresy of the Antinomians consisting in voiding the condition of the Covenant
of Grace, it is free for them to make the justification of Christians to go
before justifing faith, being nothing else, but the revelation of Gods mercy
which he has form everlasting for the Elect, whom he, determining to save,
sent Christ to rede^m them alone. It seems therefore very consequent in reason
to this position, (if that operation of the Spirit, which they pretend, admit
any dispute of reason about their positions) to say, that, the gift of the Holy
Ghost being due to the Elect by virtue of Christ's merits and sufferings,
provided for them alone, and imputed to them alone from everlasting, to the
remission of sins; There can be no reason why Baptism should be requisite.
Those that are not elect, not standing in any capacity, either of admitting the
Gospel, or attaining the promises of it: those that are, being from everlasting
estated in the right of them. Now, if that Presbyterian make justifying faith
to consist in the knowledgs of man's Predestination to life, in consideration of
Christ sent for him, revealed to him by Gods Spirit, but limited to take effect
upon the said revelation of it; (as I have said that some of them do) then I
refer my self to that which I have said already, to show this opinion to be
no less destructive to Christianity then the former, but not so agreeable to
it self, nor to reason, to make remission of sins and salvation, (appointed
them merely in consideration of Christ) to depend upon the revelation of Christ
to them, altogether impertinent to any act required of them to procure it. But,
if he make justifying faith to consist in a confidence in God, (such as men may
have, that are assured of remission of sins, and of life everlasting, not
supposing on their part any condition of turning from the world to God, as
requisite by the Gospel) I refer my self still, to that which I have said,
to show how this is destructive to Christianity. But, why those that have these
opinions, should nevertheless maintain the necessity of Baptism, whereof they
have no reason to give according to the Scriptures, I confess I am to learn.
For if we believe Christianity to come from God, (and therefore all the Laws of
it) how shall we believe, that, for one of these Laws, he has provided, that
all that will be saved be baptized, having given assurance of remission of
sins, and salvation, without consideration of it, or dependence upon it? He
that comes to be Baptized, either have saving faith, or not; if he have it, he
has it never the more for being baptized, being such an assurance, as no man
may doubt in, without failing of all Gods promises; If he have it no^, can
baptism bring it? unless we say with the Church, that the promise of the Holy
Ghost depends upon it: which he that says, (if he will give a reason of what
he says) must have recourse to the condition of the undertaking and professing
of Christianity, in consideration whereof, God has promised the gift of the
Holy Ghost, to enable Christians to perform that which they undertake.

This is then to say, that, though I take notice of these Heresies in this
place, where I purpose to speak of the power of the Church in baptizing, yet I
hold not my self obliged to say any more, for the rooting of them out, or
preventing them, then I have said, in demonstrating the nature of the Covenant
of Grace. For, I have showed on the one side, that the condition required on
our parts to undertake, if we would be entitled to the promises which it
tendreth, consists in an act of our free choice, whereby the course of our
lives is dedicated to the service of God, as the end for which we were made;
and that this course is determined by the Law of Christianity, and
consequently, the act whereby we undertake to profess Christianity; (called
faith by S. Paul) that which intitles us to remission of sins and everlasting
life. And I have showed on the other side, that the nature of man, being
corrupted by the fall of our first Parents, could not be repaired, but by the
second coming of the second Adam; and those helps of grace, which by* his
obedience in the flesh, he purchased* to enable us to embrace and undertake the
condition proposed, and to proceed in the performance of it, to that which God
accepts. In fine, I have showed, that the Sacrament of Baptism is that
visible act, which legally determines and limiteth that profession of
Christianity which intitleth to the Kingdom of God; as consigning the
profession of a Christian unto the hands of the Church, by the means whereof
Christianity is conveyed to us: Therefore having showed these things, I have no
reason to think my self obliged to unty these Cobwebs thread by thread, which I
can sweep away at once with this besome.

Only I will stand here so long, as to admire, whether the boldness or
ignorance of these new dogmatists of new Religions be the greater; when I see
the baptism of John counted among the Ceremonies of the old Law, for a
foundation of this new doctrine of Baptisms, never heard of by any Christian,
till this blessed Reformation was on foot: which must be said, a fortiori, of
that Baptism by water, which our Lord Christ instituted, by them that esteem it
not the same. Is it possible that any man, that believes Christianity to be the
Religion now in force to salvation by Gods appointment, in opposition to
Judaism, should imagine, that John the Baptist, (sent to declare our Lord to be
the Christ that was sent of God to introduce it, to the voiding of Moses Law)
should set on foot that Baptism, whereby he prepared his Disciples for Christ,
or brought them to Christ, by virtue of that Law which he intended to void? Is
it not essential to all the observations of the old Law, that they be thought
to be figurative of Christ to come, at least supposing Christianity? Can that
Baptism figure Christ to come, the intent whereof supposed him to be already
come, pretending to prepare his Disciples to receive him that was come? But,
whether we say, the Baptism of Christ was the same with John's Baptism, or
another; to say, the Apostles of Christ, when they baptize, with water,
intended to figure that the Messiah was coming, from whom they had their
commission to Baptize, would be no less then a spice of madness.

I will also stay so long for Socinus, as to answer that suspicion which he
draws from the words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. I. 13.-17. to his purpose; Is Christ
divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized into the name of Paul?
I thank God that I baptized none of you but Cri^pus and Gaius; that no man say,
that I baptize in my o^n name; yet I baptized also the house of Stephans:
further, whither I baptized any, I know not. For, Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel. If there were any thing in these words to
intimate, that the precept of baptizing is not of pe^emptory and perpetual
necessity, then must they signify more, then, that it was not necessary that
it should be done by S. Paul's own hands, which is all they contain. For, he
that would say, that which was not necessary to be done by S. Paul, was not
necessary to be done; would deserve to be laughed at for his pains. The question
is then; was any of them whom S. Paul baptized not, left unbaptized, or not? If
not; how is it inferred, that a man need not be baptized now, because then they
were not baptized by S. Paul? If so, how comes Socinus to grant, that those who
were first converted to Christianity, were to be baptized? And therefore,
before Socinus, or any man go about to teach a new Religion, it were fit for
him to learn from the custom and practice of the Church, that there is a
difference between authority in ordering, and ministry in executing; And, from
the custom of the world, that, what a man does by his minister or officer,
that he does himself in Law, though another do it in point of nature. Which
being supposed, a little reason will serve to infer, that the Apostles, being
principal in the commission of the Gospel, were to be employed in the
principal part of it; that is, in reducing men to Christianity: And therefore,
so far as that required their attendance, inferior offices, which depended
upon their order, were to be left to the execution of their Ministers. But to
both these Heresies, I say at once, in the last place, that they belie the very
ground which they profess to be Christians. The reason why the motives of
faith cannot be doubted for truth, is, because all that are Christians, have
taken upon them their Christianity for a Law, and entered into a communion and
body of the Church, to live and communicate in the faith and service of God*
according to certain Laws, upon evidence that they come indeed from God.
Therefore, that which all this body has taken upon it, to observe for Law from
the beginning, and constantly observed till Socinus his, or the Antinomians
time, that belonged to the matter of Christianity, as evidently, as it is
evident, that the motives of Christianity recorded in the Scriptures are true;
which are therefore evidently true, because it is evident, that they have moved
the world to receive Christianity, which could not have been done, had they
been false. For, if all Christians could be deceived, to believe, that their
Christianity requires them to be Baptized, if they will be saved; why might
they not be deceived to believe, that those things were truly one, which the
Scripture alleges to evidence the Gospel to come from God, when as indeed
they were not? Which is to say, that who so pretends to void that which the
whole Church observes for a Law, must not think that he can do it, by showing
that it is not commanded in the Scriptures; until he can show, that it is come
into the Church, not according to right, having been from the beginning
otherwise. He must therefore first refuse all that I have said in the first
Book, to demonstrate, that the Church always was from the beginning one body,
governed by certain Laws, originally proceeding from the Apostles; by whom
power was left it, to determine and limite further all that the future estate
thereof should require to be further determined, for the maintaining of unity
in the communion of the Church. For, granting this, it will be impossible to
show, how so great a body should agree to receive that for a Law, and that
necessary to salvation, as Baptism has always been esteemed, which they
received not for such at the beginning, from our Lord and his Apostles.

CHAP. VII. The ground of baptizing Infants Original sin, though not
instituted till Christ rose again. No other cure for it. Infants of Christians
may be Disciples, are holy. The effect of Circumcision under the Law, infers
the effect of Baptism under the Gospel.
ANd these same are the reasons that I must have recourse to, now that I come
to conclude against the Anabaptists. Our Lord says to Nicode^^us, Joh. III. 3.
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, unless a man be born again he cannot se^ the
Kingdom of God. And what this new birth is, he sets forth in answering that
impertinent question, which Nicodemus, not understanding him makes; how a man
should come out of his Mothers belly the second time* Verily, verily, I say
unto thee; unless a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that
which is born of the spirit is spirit. Here I will grant the Anabaptists, that
the Sacrament of Baptism is not instituted by these words, but by the act of
our Lord after his Resurrection, when he gives his Apostles their Commission;
Go, make Disciples all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things that I have
commanded you, Mar. XXVIII. 18. But for reasons, which perhaps they will not
thank me for, though they be not able to refute. As yet, when this discourse
was held, it was not declared, to all that took our Lord for a Prophet, that he
was the Son of God. Nicodemus himself, that comes to him as a Prophet,
saying, Master, we know thou art a Prophet come from God: For no man could do
the works that thou do, unless God were with him; If he go away instructed,
that the same which obliges him to take our Lord Christ for a Prophet,
concludes him to be the Christ the Son of God, he is beholden to the freedom of
our Lord, in declaring to him the pretense of his coming, by this discourse.
But, for the purpose of sending the Holy Ghost, it cannot be imagined, that it
was declared from the beginning of our Lords preaching, who reveals not the
intent of his death to his Apostles, till he grew toward the time of it; The
privilege of sending the Holy Ghost being part of that state, to which he was
to be exalted, rising from death. How then can it be imagined, that our Lord,
should, from the beginning of his preaching, appoint all to be baptized in the
Name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, which is the Sacrament of Baptism that
makes us Christians? Certainly, it is not the same thing for John to baptize in
the name of him that should come, as for the Apostles in the Name of Father Son
and Holy Ghost; Unless we think, that all the people of God, who expected a
Messiah, expected him to be the Son of God, which Christians worship our Lord
Christ for, and they crucified him for pretending to be. There is therefore no
cause why we should offer that violence to the Scripture, Acts XXX. 4. 5. John
indeed baptized the baptism of repentance, saying to the people, that they were
to believe in him that came after him, that is, in Christ Jesus. And hearing
this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; which I showed you, is
offered by those that would have it to signify; That those who were baptized
by John Baptist, were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. For other answers
that are devised, to avoid to clear a Scripture, I count them not worth the
refuting, so eviden^ly they force the express sense of the words. And among
them, none more unreasonable, th^n that which says; that these men were not
indeed baptized with the baptism of John, though they thought they were: And
that S. Paul, when he says; John indeed baptized with water, saying to the
people, that they should believe in him that was to come, even in Christ Jesus;
argues and persuades them, that they were not, indeed, baptized with the
Baptism of John, though they thought they were. For, of all things in the
world, could men be deceived, to think, that they professed that which the
Baptism of John must oblige them to profess, and did not? Nor can it be said
with any appearance of truth, that John baptizing unto repentance, those whom
he sends for the means of salvation, for the future, to him that was to come,
did baptize in the Name of the Lord Jesus; in as much as it is necessary to be
said, that the Apostles, when they baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus,
Acts, II. 38. VIII. 16. X. 48. did sufficiently intimate the name of the
Father, whose Son they preached our Lord to be, and also of the Holy Ghost,
whom our Lord had promised to those that are baptized; as Irenaeus, so long
since, has exquisitely cleared the difficulty, how they observed their
Commission of baptizing in the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost;
Baptizing, as S. Luke reports, in the Name of the Lord Jesus. But of John the
Baptist, it is said, Ioh. I. 29-34. That, the morrow after he baptized our
Lord, he declared him to be the man that was to come after him, in whose name
he had baptized; that he knew him not, but came to declare him; and that by the
coming down of the Dove upon him, it was revealed to him, that he should know
our Lord to be the man that came to Baptize with the Holy Ghost. Whereby it
appears, that he cannot be thought to have baptized in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, as that imports, as much as baptizing in the Name of the Father Son
and Holy Ghost. For, though it is evident, that John knew our Lord when he came
to be baptized, that he knew him to be in the world, from the time that he
began to preach, and, that he should baptize with the Holy Ghost; Yet, not
knowing the man from the time that he began to baptize; how could he baptize in
his name, and, as the Son of God, that was to give the Holy Ghost, before our
Lord himself had preached and declared, upon what terms it was to come? I
suppose it is easy enough to distinguish, between baptizing in the name of
Christ, and baptizing with an intent, of sending them whom he baptized to
Christ, to be baptized with the Holy Ghost. Neither is this to say, that John's
Baptism availed not to remission of sins, for the time that it was on foot by
Gods appointment; when as we acknowledge that dispensation of Grace which was
intimated and conveyed by the Law, to have been the means to bring some to the
righteousness of faith; How much more the twilight of the Gospel under John
the Baptist? But that, before the Covenant of Grace was published by the
preaching of our Lord, and inacted on Gods part, by his death upon the Cross,
(or rather by raising him from death) it was not time to determine that act, by
which God intended, that profession which he requires for the condition of it,
should be solemnized and celebrated. Therefore, there came water and blood out
of our Lords side upon the Cross, to intimate the ground upon which this
Sacrament should be in force for the future. And, if this be the condition,
upon which the Holy Ghost, which Christ promises upon his ascension, is
granted, as I have showed, then can it not be thought to have been in force
from any other date, then that of the promise. This is the reason, why I am to
expect no thanks from the Anabaptists, for granting, that the Sacrament of
Baptism was not in force when these words were said. For, the regeneration here
required in them, that shall come to the Kingdom of heaven, being expressed
here to be that which the Holy Ghost works; and the sending of the Holy Ghost
depending upon the profession of Christianity solemnly made by Baptism, from
the time that Christianity came in force; Whatsoever Nicodemus understood by
being born again of water and the Holy Ghost, after the institution, they
cannot be understood to take effect without it. There were then diverse customs
of baptizing in force among the Jews, by virtue of the Law. There was a custom
to admit Proselytes into the Synagogues, by circumcision, by a sacrifice, and
by baptism. And they that look upon this custom with judgment, cannot doubt,
that our Savior, intending to prescribe a course for the bringing of true
Proselytes, which are Christians, into the true Israel of God, which is the
Church, made choice of the ceremony of Baptism, because of the correspondence
between the Law and the Gospel. In fine, John had taken it up for the fittest
expression of that repentance and conversion from those evil ways, which he
charged those that bore themselves high upon the privilege of Gods people
with, which those whom he baptized were to profess. This was enough to make
Nicodemus understand by these words, the declaration of a purpose to institute
some such Ceremony, as those which he knew to be in use: But when he adds the
Holy Ghost, as a promise annexed to it, he sends us John's Gospel, to learn
further what this promise requires: And therefore, I must resume here that
which I observed before, that our Lord, intending to institute the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, for the eating of his body and blood mystically, as in a
Sacrament, prepared his Disciples for it, by discoursing to them of eating his
flesh, and drinking his blood, by considering his doctrine, and turning it to
the nourishment of their souls, by taking up his Cross and professing
Christianity, Joh. VI. For one egg is not liker another, then, the course he
takes here, to intimate what he intended to ordain for the qualifying of his
Disciples, to be capable of the Holy Ghost, (whereby he declares a promise)
is, to his proceeding in bringing in the other Sacrament. If then our
Anabaptists can show us a new Gospel, to assure us of the gift of the Holy
Ghost without Baptism, then may they take upon them, to assure us of the
Kingdom of Heaven without it. But, if the Kingdom of Heaven depend upon the new
birth of the Holy Ghost, and there be no possible means to assure any man of
this new birth, without the Sacrament of Baptism; either Infants must be
baptized before they go out of the world, or go out of the world without that
assurance.

Here, I profess, it is all one to me, as to this dispute, whether those whom
I dispute with, believe Original sin or not. For if they believe it not, I
remit them to that which I have said, in the second Book, to maintain it. If
they believe it, I remit them to all that I have said there, to show, that it
is not cured by Predestination alone, but by that condition which the Covenant
of Grace requires. To this condition he that is predestinate, is cured of it
by his predestination, which appoints him the cure. But, not being
predestinate to the cure, cannot be presumed to be predestinate to the Kingdom,
which supposes the cure. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, that which
is born of the spirit is spirit, says our Lord. How shall that which is born
flesh, be born again spirit? did our Lord promise it any man, that should not
first profess Christianity, and be baptized? He that stands upon that, let him
dispute with that which I have said in the second Book; let him show me how the
Gospel, how Christianity can stand, if the promises of it be assigned to Gods
Grace and purpose immediately, without supposing any condition qualifying for
the same. It is plain what will be said; Infants are not capable of making this
profession, of knowing what it means, of judging that it ought to be made.
Therefore not capable of Baptism, or the promises depending upon it, if, in
that consideration, they depend upon it. And truly, set aside that
consideration, and I do not marvail that man cannot believe, God should make
the spiritual and everlasting promises of his Gospel to depend upon a little
water, and so many words as it is used with. Besides that, S. Peter, finding it
inconvenient to attribute such effects, to laying down the filth of the flesh,
establishes instead of it, the profession of a good conscience to God, as that
to which he would have them ascribed. They then that believe, that God provided
and procured the fall of Adam; or, foreseeing the means by which it would come
to pass, permitted it no purpose, that, all his posterity being liable to
Original sin, he might choose whom he would save, and whom he would damn for
it, without respect of any compliance with those terms of salvation which he
should hold forth; do not stand to their own opinion, if they refer not the
salvation of Infants, to the mere appointment of God, without respect to any
thing that the Church may do in it. But, they that will not part with their
Christianity, for so gross a presumption as that is, will take heed how they
become murderers of the Childrens souls first, denying them that help to Gods
Kingdom which is in their power to give, and that of their own, by breaking the
unity of the Church, rather then do that which the Church always did do.

Indeed, if there were any thing in the precept of Baptism to signify, that it
is not to be given them who do not actually make profession of Christianity,
reason would that it should be obeyed; referring our selves to God, for the
issue of those inconveniences which his commands breed, though never so
visible. But what says the Apostles commission? Go make Disciples all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost; teaching them to
observe whatsoever I have commanded you. For I do except against the
translation of it; Go teach all Nations; Being in the Greek, (...), and in the
Syriack, TALMED, which can signify nothing but make Disciples. Now, those that
were first called Christians at Antioch, Acts XI. 26. were called Disciples
before, and afterward also, almost throughout the Scripture, which uses the
name of Christians but seldom. And is there not reason to take them for
Disciples, who, being engaged to Christianity, by being baptized Infants, stand
obliged to inform themselves in it, when they come to age? Indeed, all that
has been said of the Covenant of Grace, and the terms of it witnesses, that
they are first to be proposed to them that understand, then choice is to be
made, baptism following, to solemnize the profession of that choice: But this
text is so far from signifying, that Infants should not be baptized till all
this is done, that it rather serves to intimate an exception to the generality
of the propo^ition, in behalf of them; seeing those who shall be taught the
obligation they have to be Christians, whither they will or not, are very
regularly and legally called Disciples, and therefore comprehended in the
precept of making Disciples. This intimation appears clearer in the words of S.
Paul, 1 Cor. VII. 14. where he persuades Christians, that were married to
Infidels, not to forsake them, in these words; For the unbelieving Husband is
sanctified by the wife: And the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the Husband;
else were your Children unclean, but now they are holy. For the meaning
whereof, I will have recourse to the Book of Wisdom, III. 11-19. where,
describing the miseries of the Idolatrous heathen, under the title of those
that neglect wisdom, among other things, he says; Their ways are foolish,
their hearts wicked, and their generation accursed. For, says he; Blessed is
the barren that is clea^, and has not known the bed of sin: And again, The
fruits of good labors, (that is, of those that labor in the Law) are
glorious, and the ro^t of wisdom never fades. But the sons of Adulterers
shall decay: And the generation that is born of evil bed, shall be destroyed.
For, the ex^esses of the Gentiles that knew not God, in the ^usts of carnal
uncleann^sse, were so great, that it always was to be presumed, that children
so bred, could have no means of ins^ruction to preserve them from the same. And
the difference between the people of God, and Idolatrous Nations, was visible
ev^n in this point, from the first separation of them, upon that account; as
appears by the zeal of Simeon and Levi for their Sister so dishonored;
Should they deal with our s^ster as an harlot? say they, Genesis XXXIV. 31. Which
zeal Judith IX. 3. understands to have proceeded upon this reason; That they,
being abandoned to the service of strange Gods, had done that uncle^nesse which
God had forbidden, and which his servants abho^red, as the pollution of their
blood. For there is no man that knows what belonged to Heathenism, that can
doubt, that all uncleanness of this nature, was always reckoned among them
for a thing indifferent, and no account had of it but in civil regards, as it
dishonored the house, o^ tainted the issue. But the people of God, being bred
to the knowledge of the true God, and the abomination in which he has it,
stood upon it chiesty in that regard, because, should they do as Idolaters,
they could not be taken for Gods people. Wherefore, when S. Paul advises them
that were married to Infidels, not to part from them, in case they were content
to continue with them, (...); this content is to be understood to be such, as
might stand with Christianity; that is, that the Christian party should have
interest to teach the issue Christianity, and to guide them according to the
Law. For, by this interest, they are, in S. Paul's esteem, legally holy, as to
the Church, because of a legal presumption of their Christianity, by the means
of their education under that Parent that was Christian; and, by the consent of
that party which was not Christian, had all freedom, to propose unto their
Posterity the obligation of* Christianity. If this be the case of those that
are born of one side Christian^; what shall we say of them that are born of
Christian Parents? For, being sure (as humane things can be sure) that they
shall come to the knowledge of Christ, and then be under the obligation of
Christianity; they are already, as to God, and to all Christians, (not to them
that do not believe Christianity) under the obligation of living and of
behaving themselves as Christians. But we are not therefore to imagine, that
the guilt of original sin cease in them, any more then in those that are
not Christians, or that this guilt can be taken away otherwise then by
Christianity. And has an Infant any thing but Baptism to entitle it to
Christianity? And shall they not cry out to God upon those Parents, that suffer
them to go out of this world not Christians?

Surely, if we look upon the provision of the Law with a single eye, (that is,
always observing the difference formerly settled between the Law and the
Gospel) we shall have great cause to conclude; The Law, that is, the Covenant
made with Abraham, having entitled his posterity to the Land of promise,
provideth, that every male child of his, that shall not be circumcised the
eighth day, shall be cut off from his people, Genesis XVII. 14. that is to say;
The life thereof shall be forfeit in Gods hands, not to give him any share in
the right of that people, who, by being circumcised became Gods people. So, you
have here the condition of Circumcision, requisite to entitle even those that
are born of Abraham, to the promise made to him and his seed. The consequence
hereof is that which the correspondence, between the Law and the Gospel,
between the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of* Grace, inferres. If, by
entering into the Covenant made with Abraham and with his seed, they become
heirs of the land of promise, then, by entering into the covenant made with
Christ and Abraham's, that is Christ's spiritual seed, we become heirs of the
world to come. If by circumcision they entered into the Covenant made with
Abraham, and with his seed; then, by Baptism we enter into the Covenant made
with Christ, and with Abraham's spiritual seed. If, by the neglect of
Circumcision, the temporal life of Abraham's seed were forfeit, by the terms of
this Covenant, in Gods hands, then, by the neglect of Baptism, is the spiritual
life of those that are born of Christ's spirtuall seed, forfeit in Gods hands.
For, if the Land of promise, and the inheritance thereof, estated upon Abraham
and his seed, according to the flesh, required nevertheless the execution of
that condition, by which they were admitted into the Covenant; How much more,
shall the inheritance of the world to come, promised to the children of
Christians, as the parties agree, require the execution of that condition, by
which the Covenant of Grace is inacted? Indeed, if the Covenant of Grace were
inacted between God and man, by the publishing of the Gospel, as most men seem
to imagine, there were some color for such a consequence. But, if the Covenant
of Abraham was to be inacted upon the flesh of them that were Circumcized, even
after that the whole people of Israel had entered into Covenant for themselves
and their posterity; and that, till this were done, no child was entitled to
the benefit of it: How can it be imagined, that the Covenant of Grace, which is
(as all Covenants necessarily are) the act of two parties, should be inacted by
the act of God alone, in publishing the Gospel? Indeed* by that Declaration,
God, of his infinite goodness, has obliged himself before, to stand to all
the promises of the Gospel, with any man, that shall profess and stand to his
Christianity. But, till his prof^ssion be made, as Gods Law has appointed;
that is, by Baptism, the Covenant is not inacted. And therefore, I allow, that
which S. Paul says, Romans IV. 2. That Abraham received the sign of Cirumcision,
for a seal of righteousness of that faith which he had being uncircumcized:
But I do not allow, that his circumcision was a bare sign of that right, which
he and his posterity had to the promise, without it and before it, speaking of
the time, after it was once inacted for a Law of that Covenant; For, before
indeed, that it was so requi^ed, his faith entitled him to the same promise
without it. For, if the Law require, that writings be drawn, and sealed; though
these writings, of themselves, are mere evidences, and signs to record the
consent of the parties, by which every contract subsists; yet in as much as the
Law requires* them, the consent of parties avails not to bring the contract Io
effect without them. Even so, if the Law of God appoint the first Covenant to
be signed by Circumcision, the second by Baptism; though it may be said to be
in force, conditionally, toward them that have not yet signed it upon
themselves; yet are they not absolutely within it till that be done. If the
Roman Emperors Law require, that their Soldiers, when they were listed and
imprested, should also be marked wi^h the mark of a hot Iron, recording upon
their flesh, that from thenceforth they were Soldiers; it is reasonable to
think, that thenceforth, and not before, they were entitled to the privileges
of Soldiers, and liable to the penalties of leaving their colors. This is
that character of Baptism which S. Austin has so much of; and S. Chrysostom
compares Circumcision to the same, which therefore, not only signifies, but
brings with it the burdens and privileges of Abraham's seed, or Christ's
offspring. If therefore circumcision, bringing with it the obligation of living
according to the faith which Abraham had being uncircumcised; and, when the Law
was afterward given, of living according to the Law; do also bring with it a
title to the promise made to Abraham and his seed; Is it strange, that Baptism,
visibly and necessarily bringing with it the obligation of Christianity, upon
them who are dedicated to God by the Church, in giving that Sacrament, should
be entitled thereby to the regeneration of Gods spirit, the earnest of our
future inheritance? In the children of the Israelites, as there was nothing to
entitle them to the promise made to Abraham's seed, setting aside Circumcision,
and the Covenant that required it; so was there nothing to hinder them, or
render them incapable of a temporal pro^ise. In the children of Christians,
either we believe original sin to be no bar to Gods Kingdom, and fall into
the Heresy of Pelagius; Or, that the New Covenant, which is an act of two
parties, is inacted by the appointment of one, in regard of the Elect, who
never knew of it; but signifies nothing in regard of those that are not elect,
though never so much convict of it, and yet have force to damn them, whom only
Gods appointment could make it concern. But, if these extremes be equally
destructive to Christianity, it behooves us to i^br^ce that which the
correspondence between the old and new Covenant necess^rily infers, upon
that proportion, which must be the same between Circumcision and B^ptism, and
the promises to which they entitle us. Neither is this Argument to be avoided,
but by avoiding the ground of all mystical sense in the Scripture, which is,
indeed, the avoiding of all Christianity, by acknowledging, that there is no
ground for i^ in the Scriptures of the old Testament, which all acknowledge.
For, if the children of Christians are no less ^n^i^led to the promises of the
New Testament, then the Children of Abra^am under the Law, were to the L^nd of
promise; granting origin^ll sin to be a bar to the effect of them, neither
is it removed, but by bringing them under the Covenant of Grace; nor are they
brought under it, but by the act of the Church baptizing them, and so obliging
them to it.

And here comes in the saying of S. Paul. exhorting them that were pricked in
heart with the remor^e of our Lords death, Acts II. 38. 39. Repent and be
baptized, every one of you, in the name of the Lord Jesus, unto remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: For to you is the
promise made, and to your children, and to all that are far of, whom the Lord
our God shall call to you. Indeed, it seems that, when the Apostle says, the
promise is made to their children, he meant to prevent a mistake, that the
promise which he speaks of, conce^ns not only the present generation, but all
succeeding ages of Gods people. For, when he adds, all those whom God shall
call to you; it seems that he intends not, for the present, to deter^ine,
whether those that were to be called to the same promises, were to be ingr^^fed
into the Commonwealth of Israel by circumcision, or not. But, all this being
admitted, seeing no age can succeed, wher^of Infants are not one part; and,
seeing that the Apos^le decl^res, the promises of the Gospel by Christ to
belong to them, no otherwise then they understood the promises of the Law to
do; of necessity it must follow, that, upon correspondent ter^s, they obtain
interest in correspondent promises: Which correspondence, wherein it consists,
has been often enough said. And this Argument is much enforced by the act of our
Savior, commanding little children, of the state of Infants, to be brought to
him, reproving them that would not have him troubled with them, l^ying hands on
them, and blessing them, Mat. XIX. 15. Mark X. 15. 16. Luke XVIII 16. 17. for,
by this means, it is effectually declared past all contradiction, that the
b^ssing which Christ came to give belonged to Infants; For, though this were
all done upon another occasion; to wit, That our Lord had made them the pattern
of that humility, which he preaches to Christians; yet, the very doing of it
is evidence enough, that he meant not to leave that estate u^provided of his
blessing. What his blessing is the Apostle expresses, Act. III. 26. To you
first, God, having raised up his Son Jesus, has sent him to bless you, by
turning every man from his sins. If therefore, that which barreth Infants of
this blessing, be nothing but Original sin; and that, neither Gods
appointment alone, nor the publishing of his Gospel, nor the faith of their
Predecessors, can make any appearance of freeing them from it; what madness
will it be, not to expect it from, not to impute it to that condition, which
succeeds the condition, by which the children of Gods ancient people stood
entitled to the Land of promise?

CHAP. VIII. What is alleged to impeach Tradition for baptizing Infants;
Proves not, that any could be saved regularly, who dyed unbaptized; but, that,
baptizing at years was a strong means to make good Christians. Why the Church
now Baptize, Infants. What becomes of Infants dying unbaptized, unanswerable.
What those Infants g^t who dye baptized.
ANd thus, from the Scriptures alone, I have proved, that Infants are capable
of Baptism, and that the Church is bound to provide them of it; unless we will
say, that the Church is not bound to provide them of that means of salvation
which the Church alone dispenses. And, upon these terms, I conceive, I may
safely acknowledge, that there is no Precept for baptizing of the Infants of
Christians written in the Scripture; presuming that it is written in the
Scripture, that Infants are to be provided of the necessary means of salvation
by the Church. For, though it be not necessary, that all Infants be baptized,
because they are Infants, yet will it be necessary that they be baptized before
they go out of the world; And therefore, while they are Infants, rather then
they should go out of the world unbaptized. But, the practice of the whole
Church and that from the beginning, challenges the effect of S. Augustines
rule; that, what is received of the whole Church, and not by any express act
of the Church, from which the beginning of it may be demonstrable, must of
necessity be imputed to the Tradition of the Apostles. For, the judgments of
men being so diverse as they are, how can it be imagined, that so great a body,
and so far dispersed, as the Church, should agree to impose such a b^rthen
upon themselves, had they not understood the obligation of it, by the means of
them from whom they received their Christianity? The testimonies of Tertullian
de Bapt. cap. XVIII. of S. Gregory Nazianzene Orat. XL. in sanctum baptisma,
and of Walafridus Strabus de Reb. Eccles. cap. XXVI. that deho^t from baptizing
Infants, or declare that the Church, in the first ages, did not baptize during
infancy, are so far from making any exception to this evidence, that they
contain sufficient evidence for the same truth; if we be so considerate as to
understand, this Tradition not to require, that all be baptized during infancy;
but that no Infant go out of the world unbaptized. For, he that will employ a
little common sense may see, that there may be reasons, to make men think it
better, that Baptism be ministered to those that can understand what it imports,
and what they undertake, provided that they go not out of the world unbaptized;
but, that there be an effectual course taken, for the baptizing of them in
danger of death. For, that it is not my sense, but the sense of the Church,
that makes the Baptis^ of Infants necessary, not because Infants, but, least
they dye unbaptiz^d; I appeal to S. Austine, Enchirid. cap. XLIII. A parvulo
enim recens nato usque ad decrepitum fenem, sicut nullus prohibendus est a
baptism^, ita nullus est qui non peccato ^oriatur in baptism^: Sed par^uli
tantum Orginali -- For, from the little one new born, to the decrep^t old man,
as none is to be hindered of Baptism, so is there none that does not dye to sin
in Baptism: But little ones only to Original -- He ^aith not, that, from young
to old, all are to be Baptized, but none is to be refused Baptism, supposing
the necessity of his case, and the rule of the Church, to require it. The same
is to be said of the Canon of Neo-caesarea, that allows the baptism of a woman
with child, because it ex^nds not to the baptizing of the Infant in her womb,
before confession of faith; And, of the custo^^ of the Greeks to this day,
testified by Balfanum and Renaras upon that Canon. For, what need more words? I
acknowledge, that Vives upon S. Austin, de Civit. dei l. 27. gives very great
reasons, why it were better, that the Baptism of Infants were differred till
they come to the discretion of underst^nding to what they engage themselves.
But, shall I therefore believe, that Vives was an Anabaptist? that he did not
believe Original sin? that he acknowledged any cure for it without Baptism?
that he thought it not necessary to salvation, that all should be Baptized
before death? A ridiculous thing once to imagine. Thus much for certain, so
sure and evident as it is, that, when he writ this, the custom of the Church
was to baptize Infants; so certain it is, that, when all that I have alleged
was written and done, that men should not be baptized in infancy, there was a
constant custom and practice in force in the Church, whereby care was taken,
that no Infant should dye unbaptized. And though they express reasons, for
which they had rather Christians should be baptized at years; yet never any
Christian expressed any opinion, or any reason, why Infants should not be
baptized, rather then dye unbaptized. Never was there any opinion heard of, and
allowed in the Church, that Gods Predestination adore, without Baptism, or any
thing else beside it, can be taken for a cure of Original sin. Irenaeus is one
of the next to the Apostles that we have: He, when he says, II. 39. Christus
venit per seipsum omnes salvare, omnes, inquam, qui per eum ren^scuntur in
deum, infantes and parvulos, and parvos, and juvenes, and seniores. Christ came
to save, by himself, all who by him are born anew unto God; Infants and little
ones, and children, and young men, and old ones. If any man think fit to
question, whether, in his language, renati in deum, can be understood without
Baptism, when he speaks of Infants, must suppose, that one that is not an
Infant, may be regenerate without it. Such a one must know, that though he
dare understand that which S. Paul never said, when he calls Baptism, the laver
of regeneration, Titus III. 5. yet Irenaeus, with the whole Church of God,
never understood any regeneration without it. Thus much for certain, as to
these words of Irenaeus, if he understand the regeneration of men to be by
Baptism, he cannot understand the regeneration of Infants to come otherwise. S.
Cyprian, whatsoever his reasons be, when he contendeth for the baptizing of all
Infants, as he evidences the practice of the Church, so he maintains the same
grounds, upon which I have showed, that it did proceed. Tertullian de Anima
cap. XXXIX. S. Gregory Nazianzene Orat. XLII. abundantly prove mine intent. The
words of Tertullian: Huic enim and Apostolus, ex sanctificato alterutro sexu
sanctos procreari ait, tam ex seminis praerogativa, quam ex institutionis
disciplina. Caeterum, inquit, immundi nascerentur; quasi designatos tamen
sanctitati, ac per hoc etiam saluti, intelligi volens fidelium filios: Ut hujus
spei pignore matrimoniis, quae retinenda censuerat, patrocinaretur. Alioquin
memin erat dominicae definitionis; Nisi quis nascetur ex aqua and spiritu, non
ibit in regum dei; id est, ^o^ erit sanctus. Ita omnis anima eo usque in Adam
censetur, donec in Christo recensea^ur. For hereupon, the Apostle also says,
that men are born holy of either sex sanctified, as by prerogative of seed, so
by breeding and discipline. Otherwise, says he, they should be born unclean;
giving to understand, that the children of Christians are, as it were, designed
to holiness, and thereby to salvation, that he might patronize those marriages,
which he thought fit to be maintained, by the pledge of this hope. Otherwise,
he remembered the determination of our Lord; Unless a man be born of water and
the spirit, he shall not go into Gods Kingdom; That is, he shall not be holy.
So, every soul is so long listed in Adam, till it be listed again in Christ.
Which, you see, is not done but by Baptism, according to Tertullian. Therefore,
in the end of the next Chapter; Proinde, cum ad fidem pervenit, reformata per
secundam nativitatem ex aqua and superna virtute, detracto corruptionis
pristinae aulaeo, totam lucem suam conspicit. Therefore, when it comes to the
faith, being reformed by a second birth of water and the power above, and the
curtain of former corruptions drawn, she sees her whole light. And de Bapt.
cap. XVII. showing in what case a Layman might baptize; Sufficiat scilicet, in
necessitatibus utaris, sicubi, aut loci, aut temporis, aut personae conditio
compellit. Tunc enim constantia succurrentis excipitur, cum urget circumstantia
periclitantis. Let it suffice thee to use it (the right of baptizing) in cases
of necessity, if at any time the condition of place, or time, or person
constrain. For, then is the resolution of him that helps accepted, when the
case of him that runs bazard presses. There is no such thing as any case of
such necessity, in the opinion of our Anabaptists: therefore it is not
Tertullians. He shows, that the Church allows a Layman to baptize, because
it believed, that the children of Christians could not enter into the Kingdom
of God otherwise. The words of Gregory Nazianzene; (...). Be all this, says he
(that delays Baptism) in those that demand Baptism. But what would you say of
Infants, that are neither sensible of the loss, nor of the Grace? Shall we
baptize also these? By all means, if any danger should pres^. For it is better
they should be sanctified insensible, then depart unsealed and not persued. And
of this, circumcision, that is applied on the eighth day, to those who cannot
reason, is a reason to us. The daubing of the door-posts also, preserving the
first born by things unsensible. For the rest, I give mine opinion, staying
three years, or something over or under that, (at which age they may hear and
answer something of Religion, though not perfitly, but grossly understanding it)
then to sanctify their souls and bodies with the great Sacrament that
perfecteth us. By and by, (...). And it is in all reason, of more advantage, to
be fortified by the Laver, for the sudden accidents of danger that encounter
us, not being capable of help. He proceeds disputing against those that would
not be baptized a^ore thirty, because of our Lords example. All this is so
plain, that I will add nothing to point out the effect and consequence of his
words. Nor does the VI Canon of Neo-caesarea signify any more then this;
providing, that women be baptized while they are with child: And that it be
not thought that the baptism of the Mother concerns the child; (...); Because
every ones proper purpose, upon profession is declared. Nor, Walafridus Strabus
de Rebus Ecclesiasticis cap. XXVI. saying plainly, that, in the primititive
times, the Grace of Baptism was wont to be granted only to them that were
found in body and mind, to understand what they expected, and what they
undertook, by being baptized. For, though the solemn profession of Baptism be a
powerful means to make it effectual; yet, what is that to the necessity of
baptizing before death? And, that the custom here testified was not general;
the Infant that received the Eucharist in S. Cyprian de Lapsis, besides the
opinion of Nazianzene which you had even now will witness. Neither do the
examples of S. Chrysostom, who, being bred under Meletius, Bishop of
Antiochia, was not Baptized till one and twenty; or of the same Nazianzene;
who, having a Bishop to his Father, was not baptized till he came to man's age;
prove any more, than the then custom of the Church allows; that it was, by
particular men, thought fit to be deferred, supposing that in case of necessity
it were secured. But a great many witnesses speak not so much, as the Law, the
rule, the custom of giving Baptism by any man that was a Christian, in that
case of necessity. For, out of that case of necessity, the office of baptizing
belonged to the very highest in the Church, to wit, to as might stand with the
more weighty employments of their office. For otherwise, a little common sense
would serve to inform them, that those offices, which required more of their
personal knowledge, skill, wisdom and goodness, were to be preferred before
the office of Baptizing, which, though it concerns salvation, yet requires no
such qualities. Can any man then imagine any reason, why all Christians are
licensed, or rather commanded to baptize, in that case, but the necessity of
the office; and, that no Infant should go out of the world unbaptized? And this
chokes all the exception that is made, from the custom of giving Infants the
Eucharist in the ancient Church. For, as I have showed before, that it was not
held necessary to salvation, as Baptism was; so here I must allege, that it
cannot be said, that the Eucharist was celebrated; and, that all Christians
might celebrate the Eucharist, in this case of necessity, to the intent that
Infants might not go out of the world, either unbaptized or without the
Eucharist.

As for Origin upon the Romans, and S. Austin de Genesis X. 43, who affirmed the
Baptism of Infants to come from the Tradition of the Apostles; suppose we for
the present, that it is not Origin that speaks them, but Ruffinus that
translated him, and that this is said, IVC years after the birth of Christ,
CCC. and more, after the death of the Apostles; was it not visible to them what
came from the Apostles, what from the determination or practice of the Church?
For, that it should come from abuse, he that would tell me, must first persuade
me that Antichrist was in being, and ruled the whole Church, and might as
easily make his corruptions general, as Christ Christianity. But, if it were
merely their saying, to make it a Tradition of the Apostles; what shall we say
of Pelagius? For, they must pardon me, who think, that the hatred of his
Heresy brought the baptism of Infants into force. More general it might
deservedly make it. For, by the condemning of his Heresy, the danger of
Infants going out of the world was con^e^^ed. But it was the Baptism of
Infants, being in force before, that made his opinion an Heresy, as making the
necessity of Baptism visible, as supposed by all Christians, and therefore the
truth of Original sin. Pelagius was not so very a fool as they imagine; If all
the knowledge that a man of his time could get, by seeing all parts of the
Church, would have served for an exception, to the authority of the baptism of
Infants, he might have wrangled with his adverse party, about the exposition of
those Scriptures which are alleged in the point, till this day, and his
opinion have found footing in the Church. But, because he could not s^op men's
eyes, so as not to see what they saw; we may, for wantonness, betray the cause
of God, by letting the interpretation of the Scriptures loose to every man's
fancy, which God had appointed to be confined within the Tradition of his
Apostles, but they could not choose but condemn that position, which the visible
practice of the Church proclaimed to be Heresy.

Thus far then, I proceed upon the Tradition of the Apostles, to make the
Baptism of Infants necessary, in case of necessity, that is of danger of death.
But I, that condemn not the ancients, for disputing, that it ought not to be
general, nor the Greek Church, for reserving it till years of discretion,
supposing the means of it reasonably secured in that case; am not like to
attribute the necessity of baptizing all Infants, which the present Laws of the
Church do introduce, to the tradition of the Apostles; but to the original
power of the Church, founded upon the constitution thereof, in determining the
circumstances of those offices, which being incumbent upon the Church, are not
determined by any law of either of his Apostles. For, though I take not upon me
to say, that, there can no reason be given, why this particular should not now
be so determined as we see it is; who do acknowledge great reasons to have been
alleged by the ancients to the contrary, for their time; yet, I see so many
ways for the misunderstanding, and the neglect of Christianity to creep upon
the Church, that I cannot see sufficient reason, why the Church should trust
the conscience of particular Christians, whom it concerned to see to the
baptism of all Infants that might come into that case, now that the world was
come into the Church; and that therefore, the Church could not have the like
presumption, of the conscience of all that professed Christianity, in the
discharge of an office of that concernment, to that which it might reasonably
have, while it was under persecution, and men could not be thought to embrace
Christianity, but for conscience sake. And therefore, as I do maintain it
always to have been within the lawful power of the Church, to make a general
Law, as now it is; so I must aver, that there was just reason, and ground,
for the exercise of that power, in determining this point, whither as in the
East, with some toleration of those whom they had confidence in, for seeing to
the baptizing of their Infants in danger of death; or generally, as in the
West, to see the occasion of mischief and scandal prevented, by doing it
presently after birth. And therefore those that forsake the unity of the
Church, ^ather then be subject to a Law, which it may lawfully make, as I have
showed, if that which has been resolved of the difference between Heresy and
Schism be true, cannot avoid being schismatics. As for the ground of that
opinion, which moves them to break up the seal of God, marked upon those that
are baptized unto the hope of salvation, upon the obligation of Christianity,
by baptizing them anew, to the hope of salvation, without the obligation of
Christianity; whether they are to be counted Heretics therefore or not, let
who will dispute. This I may justly infer; they take as sure a course to
murder the souls of those whom they baptize again, as of those whom they let
go out of the world unbaptized.

There remains two questions, which seem to make this resolution hard to
believe. If there be no salvation without Baptism, no not for the Infants of
Christians; it is demanded, what becomes of their souls, and whither they go. I
must needs allow, that those ancient and later Divines, alleged by Cassander,
and our Hooker after him, had reason to entertain a charitable hope of the
happiness of those, who, being prevented (by the inevitable casualties of man's
life) of attaining the Sacrament of Baptism, are accompanied out of the world
by the prayers of Christian Parents, commending them to God, with the same
affections, wherewith they always vowed them to God, by bringing them to
Christianity, so soon as they should become capable to be instructed in it.
But, if I will stand to the bounds of Gods revealed will, I must also say, that
this hope is presumed without book; that is, without any Law of God, to warrant
the effect of it. For, if God promise the Kingdom of heaven to Infants that
depart after Baptism, (as the reasons premised, and the practice of the Church
make evidence) nothing hinders the mercy of God to extend to those that depart
without it, where nothing hinders the power of his grace to regenerate,
without the Sacrament, those, whom he has not expressed that he will not
regenerate. But, this shall not proceed from any obligation of his Covenant of
Grace, nor tend to make good the evidence thereof, which the practice of the
Church creates: And therefore shall make only a presumption of what may be,
and not of what is. I find that Arminius had further a doubtful conceit, that
all Infants, departing without Baptism, are to be saved, by the virtue of Gods
second Covenant, and the death of Christ upon which it is grounded; God having
extended both as far as sin by the first Adam extends. But, the
publication of the second Covenant, and the intent of Christ's death upon which
it is grounded, being conditional, as has been showed; I suppose, it is not
enough to entitle Infants to the benefit thereof, that they never did any thing
to refuse it. Otherwise, what cause is there, why all the Gentiles, that go out
of the world without hearing of Christianity, should not be saved by virtue of
it, notwithstanding all that they sin against the Law of nature? Because the
New Covenant is to take effect, where it is not refuted; and, sins against
the Law of nature cannot be constrained, as a refusal of the Covenant of
Grace. And, supposing that, excluding themselves from Gods mercy, by sinning
against the law of nature, as I said in the second Book, they are thereby
necessarily excluded from all benefit of the second Covenant; It is not because
they were born under the benefit of it, (entitled thereunto by the same birth
which makes them need it) but because, as by their birth they need it, so by
their birth (supposing the coming of our Lord Christ) they are only capable of
it. Therefore it remains firm, that, though God, by Christ's death, stand
obliged to receive those that turn to Christianity; yet the Covenant is not
inacted, till the party become obliged to it. And so it remains, that I answer
negatively; that, whosoever hope charity, may be allowed, there is no legal
assurance or presumption of salvation, for Infants that depart before Baptism.
If this will not serve, unless I affirm where they are, and in what estate, I
will affirm that I know not; but I will affirm further, that it is an effect of
the tree of knowledge, to demand a further answer, being well resolved that God
has given none. They that will not believe the Mystery of the Trinity, till I
demonstrate to them, how three persons can subsist in one nature, one in two
natures, must be Arians or Socinians, for any thing that I have here said. They
that will not believe the Covenant of Grace, till they have a reason, why God
has taken such a course, as will not save those whom he might have taken a
course to save, must for me be Pelagians, or Stoicall Predestinations. They
that will not submit to the Baptism of Infants, till I can tell them, where
those are, and in what estate, that depart unbaptized; must, for me, be
Anabaptists. But, when that is done, how will they be Christians, unless
Christianity pre^end to resolv^ these ques^ions, before a man is obliged to be
a Christian, which no Christian can imagine? I can easily say, that they are
not to be in the estate of them, that are condemned to punishment answerable to
their works; seeing original sin, howsoever foul, is not the work of him
that has it. And he that undertakes to press me by the Scriptures, will as
soon be dumb* as he finds the torments of hell no where assigned by the
Scriptures, but to the works of those that actually tran^gress Gods L^ws. As
for that condemnation of all mankind by the first Adam, our of which it is
recovered by the second Adam, according to S. Paul, Romans V. I suppose all the
world will allow, that I acknowledge it, when I allow not those Infants the
Kingdom of God, that depar^ unb^ptiz^d. If it be ^^id, that Fulgentius, in his
Book de fide ad Petrum, reckons it for a part of the Catholic faith, that
Infants, departing without Baptism, are in hell torments; it will be as easy
for me to say, that Gen^adius in his Book de dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis,
acknowedges it not. For, though Gennadius was on^ of tho^^, whose opinion
concerning Grace was prohibited by the Council of Orange; and that there is
appearance enough, that Fulgentius writ expressly to contradict him, in the list
of positions received by the Church; yet, seeing this point is not defined by
the Council (much l^sse by any act of the Church against Pelagius, still much
less by any Tradition of the whole Church before and after Pelagius) though it
may pass for dogma Ecclesiasticum, such a position as the Church allows to be
held and professed, yet it cannot be pr^ssed for any part of the rule of faith,
which cannot but be acknowledged by all the Church. I will add the words of
Gregory Nazianzen^ in the same Oration a little before; (...). Some delay for
negligence, others for covetous^esse; others are in no capacity to receive it,
for infancy perhaps, or some accident utterly involuntary; whereby, though they
would, they could not attain the Grace. As therefore we found much difference
among those, so these. They that wholly scorn it in deed, are worse then the
more covetous or negligent. But these are worse then those who fail of the Gift
for ignorance or constraint. For constraint is no other thing then to fail
against a man's will. And I truly think that those shall be punished, as for
their other wickedness, so for neglecting Baptism. Those also, though l^sse,
because guilty of failing, rather for folly then malice. But that the last
shall neither be punished nor glorified by the just Judge, as without malice,
though unsealed, and suffering rather then doing harm. For, he who is not
worthy of punishment, is not therefore of honor, as he that is not worthy of
honor, is not therefore of punishment. And I consider also thi^: If thou
condemnest him for murder, that would have murdered, only because he would,
without murdering; let him that desired baptism, without being baptized* be
counted baptized. In this last c^se, supposing a man's resolution to be a
Christian so complete, that only opportunity of being baptized, is wanting, I
conclude with the Church since Gregory's time, that there is no doubt in the
salvation of such a one. And that, by virtue of his own words, that Baptism is
the Covenant of a new life, which, if a man's heart fully resolve upon between
God and himself, to doubt of his salvation because his baptism is prevented,
is, contrary to S. Peter, to ascribe his salvation to the cleansing of the
flesh, not to the profession of a good conscience. In the mean time, he who
acknowledges that such a one is not punished for not being baptized, though not
glorified, can neither allow the Kingdom of heaven to an Infant that dies
unbaptized, nor condemn him for Original sin, which is, for not being
baptized. As for the opinion of P^lagius, who, because our Lord said, Except ye
be born of water and of the spirit, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God;
grants Infants that dye unbaptized, no^ to come to Gods Kingdom, but would
have them come to everlasting life neverthel^sse; the Anabaptists may learn
mode^ty of him, in handling the Scriptures with reverence, and not allowing
regeneration by water, and the Holy Ghost, where the Church never allowed the
Kingdom of God. But on the other side, when he makes life everlasting, which
himself cannot ^istinguish from the Kingdom of God, due to nature and birth,
he voideth the grace of Christ, and the intent of his coming; seeing nothing
but their own choice, can hinder men to attain that without Christ, which is
due to infants by their birth. And if any man think to blast this with the
reputation of Popery, (as the conscience of this time is, to make that Popery
which they understand no^, and may ju^^ly give reason^ble and conscionable men
a good opinion of Popery, the imputation whereof is so brutishly abused; what
will he think o^ himself* when he finds himself in the company of so many
Doctors of the Church of Rome, as at this day, and always have maintained
that, which, you see, I dare not affirm, but he dares; namely, that all
Infants, who dye unbaptized, go into everlasting fire?

It is demanded in the second place, what is that regeneration by the Holy
Ghost, and wherein it consists, whereof, Infants that are baptized can be
thought capable. For, the wild conceits of those, that imagine them to have
faith in Christ, (which, without actual motion of the mind, is not) require
miracles to be wrought of course, by baptizing, that the effect thereof may
come to pass. And, if the state of Grace, (which, the habitual grace of Gods
spirit either supposes or infers) is not to be attained, but by the
resolution of embracing the covenant of Grace, (as, by all the premises, it is
not otherwise attended) it will be every whit as hard to say, what is that
habitual Grace, that is said to be poured into the souls of Infants that are
baptized, being nothing else, but a facility in doing what the covenant of
Grace requires. But, if we conceive, the regeneration of Infants that are
baptized, to consist in the habitual assistance of Gods spirit, the effects
whereof are to appear, in making them able to perform that which their
Christianity requires at their hands, so soon as they shall understand
themselves to be obliged by ^it; we give reason enough of the effect of their
Baptism, whither they dye or live, and yet become not liable to any
inconvenience. For, supposing the assistance of Gods spirit, assigned them by
the promise of Baptism, to take effect, when their bodily instruments enable
the soul to act as Christianity requires; if the soul, by death, come to be
discharged of them, can any thing be said, why original concupiscence, which
is the Law of the members, should remain any more, to impeach the subjection of
all faculties to the law of Gods spirit? Or will it be any thing strange, that,
when they come to be taught Christianity, the same spirit of God should be
thought to ^way them, to embrace it of their own choice, and not only in
compliance with the will of their Parents? yet is this no more, then the
regeneration of Infants by water, and the Holy Ghost imports; that the spirit
of God should be habitually present, to make those reasons, which God has
given to convince the world, that they ought to be Christians, both discernable
to the understanding, and waying down the choice; whereas, those that are
converted from being enemies to God, (that is to say, at those ye^rs, when no
man can be converted to God, that is not his enemy before) though the spirit of
God knock at their hearts without, striving to cast out the strong man that is
within doors, and to make a dwelling for it self in the heart, are possessed
by a contrary principle, till they yield Gods spirit that entertainment which
God requires. If this habitual assistance of Gods spirit, (by the moral
effect of Gods promise, not by any natural change in the disposition of that
mind, which never used reason to make choice of it) can be called habitual
grace, (as, for certain, it is a grace of God, in consideration of our Lord
Christ, and no less habitual, then any quality which the soul of man, or the
faculties thereof can be endowed with) I shall not need to quarrel the decree of
the Council of Vienna, which has determined the gi^t of habitual grace to be
the effect of Baptism in Infants. Only I expr^sse more distinctly, and, to the
preventing of the inconveniences mentioned, wherein it con^isteth. But I shall
infer, as a consequence of this resolution, that we are not to look upon
Christians that are baptized in their Infancy, as those, who are all of them
necessarily enemies to God, before they ^e converted again to become true
Christians. For, though that very age, when they come first to years of
discretion, obliging them to act as Christians, be liable to ^o many and so
great temptations, that few c^n pass through it without falling away from the
profession of Christians; yet, because it is not incredible, that there are
many cases, in which the Ministry of education, blessed by Gods providence, as
acted by his grace, brings it to pass, it is by no means to be supposed, that
all those, who are baptized Infants, are necessarily to pass through the state
of Gods enemies: And therefore, that, as many as come into that state, do fall
from the state of Gods grace into which they are baptized. Which is none of the
least demonstrations, of that which has been maintained in due place, that the
state of Gods grace, is as well lost and forfeited, as it is to be recovered
again by Christians. And upon this ground, and to this pur^ose it was, that the
ancient Church (at such time as the solemnity of Baptizing became tied to
Easter and Whitsuntide, and the young were baptized with the old, not
absolutely Infants, but according to the opinion of Gregory Nazianzene related
before, at three or four years of age) used to give them al^o the Eucharist, as
soon as they were baptized. For, the Eucharist being nothing but the confirming
and seconding of the covenant of Baptism, the reason why they were baptized
inferred the giving of them the Eucharist. Which reason, being rendered by the
supposed Dionysius in the end of his Book de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia, (where
he tells us, that little ones received the Eucharist as soon as they were
baptized) as I do here, that they might be always, (from thence forwards) in
the state of Grace; The Eucharist, being the Body and Blood of Christ, because
the means to convey his Spirit, may well be judged the means, to secure, and
confirm that promise thereof which Baptism imports. Yet does not this
infer, that, since it is become necessary for the Church, to baptize all in
the state of mere Infants, it is not for the best to defer the communion of
the Eucharist, till little ones may know what they do; (though in my opinion, it
is deferred far longer then it ought to be; nothing but a disposition
positively opposite to Christianity, defeating the effect of it, which may
prevent the said disposition in innocents) much less, that this can be any
just ground for division in the Church; so that the division, which shall be
raised upon this ground, necessarily renders those who are the cause of it
Schismatics. In fine, seeing it is excellently said by S. Gregory Nazianzene,
in sanctum Bapt. Orat. XLII. (...) That we are to think the force of Baptizing
to consist in the Covenant of a second life, and purer conversation, with God;
And, that the Eucharist is nothing else but the seconding of this Covenant;
where Baptism, in that regard, is necessary to salvation, there the Eucharist,
though not necessary, (as the ancient Church never held it) cannot be unlawful.
Whether expedient or not, he that contents himself with the practice of the
Church, for Unities sake, will prove the best Christian. I do not therefore
condemn this custom, for a profanation of the Sacrament, when it was in use.
Infants cannot examine themselves, neither can they presume, in eating that
bread, and drinking of that cup. But, neither can they be taught to do all
things which Christ commands, so soon as they are made his Disciples, by
being baptized. If the Church duly presume, that, with remission of sins,
they attain the gift of Gods spirit, by being baptized,; did it unduly presume,
that, remission of sins remaining uninterrupted, the gift of the Holy Ghost
may be strengthened by receiving the Eucharist? Let us rather watch over our own
customs, then condemn the customs of the Church. The grace of the Holy Ghost
may be fortified by the Sacrament of the Eucharist, against those occasions of
re-entry, which the evil Spirit espieth in those that begin to perceive the
difference between good and bad, though unable to reflect upon themselves, and
to judge, whither in the state of Grace or not* If the Eucharist be proph^ned
where they take it too young; what pretense of Christianity, or of a Church,
remains, where neither young nor old take it?

CHAP. IX. What controversy the Reformation has with the Church of Rome about
Penance. Inward repentance that is sincere, obtains pardon alone. Remission
of sins by the Gospel only: The condition of it by the Ministrey of the
Church. What the power of binding and loosing contains more then Preaching, or
taking away offenses. Sin may be pardoned without the use of it. Wherein the
necessity of using it lies.
I Have showed, from the beginning, that the Power of the Keys, which is the
foundation of the Church, is seen much more toward them that are already of
the Church, then them that are not of it. For, in those, there is but one thing
for the Church to judge, whether their persuasion and resolution be such as
qualifies them to be baptized Disciples of Christ, that is Christians: But in
these, so many particulars as the profession of a Christian is employed about,
so many are there for this power to judge, whether the profession of a
Christian be discharged in them or not. And this ground must needs be much
strengthened, by that which has been resolved, concerning the Covenant of
Grace, and the terms of it. For, if the profession of Christianity be that
which qualifies a Christian for remission of sins and life everlasting; then,
he that fails of this profession, by any such sin, as cannot stand with it;
as he attained the communion of the Church, upon presumption that he stood
qualified for the promises of the Gospel; so he fails of it upon evidence,
that he is not so qualified. Therefore, though the Power of the Keys is seen
in free admitting to the Communion of the Church; yet is it more visible, in
excluding from the same, as well as in readmitting to it. And this is the next
act, or the next object, which the the power of the Church is employed about,
that comes here to be considered. The difficulty whereof seems to stand in
that, which the Church of Romes by the Law of confessing once a year all sins
that come to remembrance, seems to teach; That no sin, or at least, none of
those which a man is bound to confess, (which, in what sense they may and are
to be allowed mortal sins, I have showed in due place) can be remitted him
that falls into them after Baptism, unless the Keys of the Church pass upon
them. The opposite whereof, in the other extreme, seems to be the opinion of
those that p^etend for a point of Reformation, and of that freedom to which the
Gospel calls Christians; That, though it be necessary to give satisfaction to
the the Church, which shall have been scandalized by the evil example of a
notorious offense; yet, that no office of the Church, and of the Keys which it
is ^rusted with by our Lord, concurs to the loosing of that sin, which the
Church has first tied a man with, by excluding him from the communion of the
Church; But that it is wholly to be imputed to the preaching of the Gospel
ministered by the Church, when it is received by faith. Though, for the present,
I inquire not what they would have this faith to be, having distinguished the
consequences of the several conce^ts which may be had about it before. For, this
difficulty being here proposed in the beginning, I do not foresee any thing of
moment in question, concerning this power of the Church, the effect and intent
of it, that will not come to be determined by vir^ue of the re^olution ther^of,
and in consequence to it. Which resolution shall bri^fly be this. That inw^rd
repentance, (with confession to God alone, that is ^^ncere and effectual to the
reforming of that which a man repents of, for the future, is a di^position
qualifying a man for pardon of s^^ne, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace,
without any act of the Church passing upon it. But, that God has charged his
Church, (and therefore given it power and right) to call all those that
notoriously transgress that Christianity which once they have professed, to
those demonstrations of inward repentance, and amendment of mind, by visible
actions, that may satisfy the Church, that Gods wrath in regard of that sin
is appeased through Christ, and, upon these demonstrations, to readmit them to
communion with the Church. And further, that God, having provided this means of
procuring and assuring the pardon of sin by the Church, has also obliged all
Christians to make use of the same, by bringing their secret sins to the
knowledge of the Church, so far, and in as much as they ought to stand
convict, that the ministry of the Church is requisite, to procure in them that
disposition, which, by the Gospel, intiles them to forgiveness^.

This resolution has several parts, which I have thought fit to be thus wound
up in one, not only for brevities sake, (which I seek so far as it will let
me be understood) but, for the dependence they have one upon another, in point
of reason and truth. And first, to clear the foundation in the first place, I
suppose what our Savior preached himself, in publishing his Gospel, according
as it stands declared and settled by the premises; to wit, that mankind, being
lost in sin, and neither the law of Nature, nor that of Moses, being able to
reduce it to righteousness, and so to happiness; God, by our Lord Christ,
requires all them that find themselves surprised in this estate, to believe him
to be sent for remission of sins and life everlasting, to all, that, turning
from that conversation in which they are overtaken, do make the glory of God
the end, and his will the rule of their actions for the future, by undertaking
to live like Christians, in hope of being enabled, by Gods spirit, to perform
the same, for Christ his merits, and of being accepted for his suffering. This
being the sum of Christ his Gospel, according to the premises, and, the
reason, why this profession is limited by the Gospel, to be solemnized by the
Sacrament of Baptism, being so clearly rendered, that it is impossible to rend^r
any other reason, how the spiritual and everlasting promises of the Gospel
should depend upon a material and bodily act, of washing away the filth of the
flesh; I suppose the way is plain to infer, that, suppo^^ng God allows
pardon to all that fall after Baptism, so often as they return by true
repentance, it cannot be refused those that return by true repentance, whether
it be obtained by the ministry of the Church, or without it. It is not
necessary for me here to repete all those sayings of the new Testament, wherein
the motion from, the state of damnation, in which the Gosp^l finds us, to the
state of salvation by the Gospel, expressed under the ^er^ of Repentance. John
Baptists, and our Lords first Sermon is upon this Text; Rep^nt, for the Kingdom
of heaven is at hand, Mat. III. 2. IV. 17. in Mark* Repent, and believe the
Gospel, I. 15. and both a thing. For, he that is moved to repent, either by the
preaching of John Baptist, or of our Lord Christ, must needs take the rule and
measure of that which he turns to by repentance, from him whose Doctrine he
follows, whether John, or our Lord Christ whom John decl^reth. The same is
the theme that the Apostles preach upon Mar. VI. 12. And the same is the case,
whether the Apostle say, Repent and be baptized, Acts II. 38. or Repent and
turn, as Acts III. 19. seeing he must needs be understood to mean, that they
turn to Christianity by repentance. And still the same, when S. Paul,
publishing the Gospel, declares, that God by it calls all men to repentance,
Acts, XVII. 30. that it consists in preaching repentance and faith in our Lord
Christ Jesus, Acts XX. 21. or in calling men to repent and turn to God, doing
works worthy of re^entance, Acts XXVI. 20. therefore all our Lords Sermons of
repentance in the Gospels, Mat. XI. 20. 21. XII. 41. Luke X. 13. XI. 32. XIII
2-9. XV. do imply and presuppose the same limitations, to determine the
repentance which his Gospel requires. Which he that receives not, is called the
impenitent heart, Romans II. 5. And St. Paul directs Timothy to instruct the
adversaries with meekness^, if perhaps God may give them repeutance to the
acknowledgement of the truth, 2 Timothy II. 25. And S. Peter, when he commends God
as long suffering toward us, Because he would have none perish, but all come
to repentance, 2 Pet. III. 5. speaks of those that mock at Christianity,
saying, Where is the promise of his coming, for since the Fathers fell asleep,
all things remain as they were from the beginning? Since then, conver^^on to
Christianity is that which qualifies for remission of sins, those whom it
overtaketh in sin; can any reason be given, why it should not be effectual to
the loosing of any sin, whereby a Christian, transgressing his Christianity,
forseiteth the privileges of it? For, the profession which he sealed by being
baptized, as to the Church, fails not by a ^inne that the Church sees not, and,
as to God, revives by that new resolution which repentance introduces. There
is not, indeed, much mention of priv^te repentance, in those which are already
Christians, in the writings of the Apostles: But there is frequent mention of
sins, without mention of any cure by the Church, without any appearance or
signification of any cure applied to them by the Church. As, the eating of
things offered to Idols, when it might be the occasion to make another
Christian commit Idolatry, 1 Cor. VIII, 12. which, if public, and yet cannot
be thought to come under the Keys of the Church; how much more those that are
are not public? I have proved in another place, that S. Paul instructs
Timothy, not to ordain sinful persons, least he communicate in their sins:
Because, says he, Some men's sins are manifest aforehand, going before them
to judgment, 1 Timothy V, 22. 24. But, those that stood for Ordination, could not
pretend to be cured of their sins by the Church, because, coming into that
rank, they could no^ aspire to be preferred in the Church. But the words of S.
John are unavoidable, for he writ to Christians, 1 Ioh. I. 7. 8, 9, 10, If we
walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have communion with one another,
and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins, and
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say we have no sin, we make him a
liar, and his word is not in us. And immediately; My little children, I write
these things to you that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation
for our sins: But not for ours alone, but for the sins of the whole world.
The precept of God to John, and by John to the seven Churches to repent, Apoc.
II, 5. 16. 21. III. 3. 9. is to Christi^ns, and to Churches. For, though it be
directed to the Angels of those Churches, yet in behalf of the Churches
themselves. Now, can the Church be cured by the Church? If not, then are some
sins of Christians cured without the Keys of the Church. If so, why not the
sin of a man by that man, as well as the sin of a Church by that Church.
The cure of the sin of a Church being nothing else, but the repentance of
that Church, o^, perhaps the greatest part of that Church. For otherwise no
man's sin of that Church could be cured, till every man of that Church should
return by repentance. What say you to S. Paul's invections *against wronging
Christians, and against uncleanness, 1 Cor. VI. 6-10. 15-20. Shall we think,
that they who sued Christians before Infidels came to confession for this
sin? that these, whose sinn^ S. Paul aggravates above this; (for, it is worse
to wrong a Christian, then to seek right of a Christian by an Infidels means)
acknowledged any way the Church had to constrain them to do right? Nay, that
those, whom he reduces there from fornication, did acknowledge the cure of it
by the Church? What then needed S. Paul to persuade them, that they could not
be saved, without turning to God from it? For, had they been persuaded, that it
could not be cured* without confession to the Church, they must have supposed,
that it could not be cured without confession to God. And, what say you to S.
Paul's instruction; Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread,
and drink of that cup, 1 Cor. XI. 28. For, though this may be subject to some
limitation, (as by that which follows, it will or may appear, that it is to be
limited) yet must not this limitation be such, as shall abate any thing of the
promise of the Gospel, which the Sacraments bring with them, to those, who, by
a competent resolution for their Christianity, are qualified for it.

Turn we to the Law and the Prophets, and observe, according to the premises,
that there was no expiation prescribed by the Law, for the inward guilt of
sin; but for outward uncleanness, or incapacities of conversing among the
people of God, (and, by consequence, of enjoying the benefit of the Land of
promise) together with some sins, which the Law specifies, but condemns not
to any bodily or pecuniary punishment. Wherefore, seeing we read in the Law and
the Prophets, so many exhortations to repentance, which, if we suppose to come
from God, we cannot suppose to be void of a promise employed, tendering pardon
and favor at Gods hands upon repentance, it is necessary to acknowledge, that
inward repentance, under the Law, qualified for remission of sins*. Read the
seven Penitential Ps^lms, and tell me how men came then to be cleansed of
their sins, ( David affirming Psalm. LI. 18. Thou desire no sacrifice, else
would I give it thee, but thou delightest not in burnt-offerings) but, by that
faith, which moved them to seek reconcilement with God by repentance, and, by
that conversion to righteousness, which their faith supposed acceptable to
God. So the Prophets Ezekiel. XVIII. 32. XXXIII. 9-20. Esaias I. 18. 1 King. VIII.
33. 2 Chronicles. VI. 24. besides infinite more. For, if we say, that men were then
bound to confess their sins, that they might be cleansed by the Synagogue;
he that confessed a capital crime, must incur a capital punishment; and
without death, there was no way to cleanse him of it. If we say, he might be
cleansed by sacrifice, by the Synagogue, without confessing the sin; why not
under the Gospel by means answerable, that is, by the Eucharist, and the
oblations out of which it is celebrated, without confessing in particular to
the Church? I do not therefore here dispute, what sins might be, and what might
not be purged by sacrifices; not doubting, by many passages of the Prophets and
Ecclesiasticus, that the righteous and spiritual men of that people, under the
Law, did offer sacrifices for the expiation of those sins, which, there was
no particular promise in the Law, that God would pardon upon those sacrifices:
But first, I suppose, that, though God allowed their conformity to his present
Law, in offering sacrifices, that were not expressly required by it, but
customed by Gods people upon it; yet he accepted them not for those sacrifices,
but, for that repentance and conversion of heart from whence they came:
Thereupon then I argue, in the second place, that, if without declaring the
kind of sin under the Law, under the Gospel much more. For, seeing that there
is no expiation for capital crimes, without death, by the Law, he that should
offer sacrifice for such a sin, declaring it, must become liable to death.
And the same is the case, in the second rank of offenses against the Law, which
it punishes with scourging: Those also belonging to that rank, which the Law
threatens with death by the hand of God, which renders their life forfeit into
Gods hands; Because of the Rule which they have, that if they come to be know
to the Synagogue, they are to be punished with scourging. For who can imagine,
that these can be purged by the Law, without undergoing the penalty of the Law?
And therefore, if sacrifices were offered for them, they were not confessed,
seeing that all estates in the Synagogue, which was bound to punish them, were
also bound to bring them to punishment.

As for the Church, it has been already declared, that the constitution
thereof presupposes, in order of nature and reason, the covenant of Grace,
that is to say, the condition upon which the Gospel tendreth remission of
sins: So that, as we have all the reason in the world to think, that God has
founded the corporation of his Church, to be the means of affecting or
procuring that dispo^ition, which qualifieth for the promises of the Gospel;
So, if the same di^po^^^ion c^n be procured, without the ministry of the
Church, which suppo^^th the knowledge of particul^r sins, there can be no
cause, why God should enjoin that, the effect whereof is to be had without it.
Now, I suppose from the premi^es, that, those who live within the Church, have
sufficient helps of Gods Grace, to ^^able them to return from their sins by
repentance. As for those helps which ^h^y may have by the ministry of the
Church, making known their ^^nnes to it; Though they may be of such vir^ue, as
to make that more (...) which is po^sible without them; Yet, when all is done
that man c^n do, it ex^^ed^th not the same kind of helys, which man outwardly
may rend^r^^o Go^s inw^r^ ^r^ce; Which, as it is more prob^ble that Gods good
providence should ^^ke ^ffectuall, then where the same outw^rd mean^ are not
employed, or where they are employed in a less measure; So is it possible,
that, b^ing on^e ^^ffi^^^nt, they may become effectual by Gods grace, though in
a (...) measure. But, I confess, there is nothing prevails more with me to
conclude this, then that which the Scripture affords us, to evidence, that God
h^^h instituted and appointed the Ministry of his Church, for the reconciling
o^ those ^^nnes, which must, or which may come to the knowledge of his Church.
For, when God gives first to S. Peter, the Keys of his Church, Mat. XVIII.
19. and afterward, to all his Disciples, the power of binding and loosing
sins, Joh. XX. 19. it is evident, that, by this power, they are able to do
nothing to unbelievers, but per^wade them, by pre^ching the Gospel, to embrace
that cour^^ by which it tendreth r^mission of sin; until, having persuaded
them to it, they oblige them to enter into the Church by Baptism, as that, to
which God has li^ited that profession of Christianity which he requires to
remission of sin. Thus is the power of the Keys, or of binding and loosing
sin, first seen and exercised in baptizing, understanding thereby, not only
the ministering of the Sacrament, but the bringing of a man to that disposition,
to which Baptism is due. The same is still exercised toward those that are
come into the Church, by laying forth to them the doctrine of Moses and the
Prophets, of our Lord and his Apostles, obliging them to return from sin by
Repentance: So that, it cannot justly be said, that Preaching, as we call it,
(that is, further instructing in the doctrine of Christianity, those that by
the preaching of the Gospel, have been moved to embrace it) is a thing
impertinent to the power of the Keys, not concerning the office of it: Unless
we think, ministering the helps of sufficient grace imper^inent to effectual
grace, which always supposes them; Having already showed, that before
conversion to Christianity, the power of the Keys is seen in ministering the
same. But he that thinks, that, within the Church, the power of the Keys goes
no further then Preaching, and clearing the scandal of notorious offenses, can
give no reason, why those that ar^ converted to believe Christianity by
Preaching the Gospel, should be bound by their own profession to oblige
themselves to it, and, by that means to en^^r the ^ociety of the Church. For,
they are as well certified before baptism as after, that, without repentance
and conversion from sin, there is no remission of sin, or hope of
everlasting life; which, if a m^n be left to his own choice, whether he will
embrace or not, after that he is come into the Church, why not before? Why came
he into the Church? Or, why was there provision made, that the Church should be
a corporation, the communion whereof, all Christians should be be bound to hold
and embrace? Therefore our Lord, when he declares the depositing of the same
Keys (or, power of loosing and binding) with his Church, which he he gave
elsewhere to S. Peter, and the rest of his Disciples, Man. XVIII. 15-20.
commanding, that, he who will not hear the Church, be to the Church, as
Public^ns und Sinners were then to the Jews; infers, that, Whatsoever they
should bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever they should
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And again, that, where two of you,
(that is, of the Church) shall agree upon any thing to ask it, it shall be done
for you by my Eather in heaven. Where, reducing him that hears not the Church
into the State of a Publican or a sinner to the Jews, being the binding of
sin, as to the Church, upon supposition that he is bound by it already, as to
God, (in order to the loosing of the same as to the Church, upon supposition
that it is first loosed as to God) is something else besides preaching, or
clearing the scandal of notorious sin. And if our Lord, by inferring
immediately a general promise of hearing the prayer* of Christians, intend to
intimate, that he would accept of the prayer^ of the Church, for the
reconciling of those whose sins were bound, as I observed before; then of
necessity, something more then showing the guilt of sin, by Preaching, is
referred to the Church, in procuring the loosing of him that is bound from the
debt of sin, not from the scandal of it.

And what is this, but that which we see done by S. Paul, and by the Church of
Corinth, in obedience to S. Paul's commands, concerning him that had married his
Father^ widow, 1 Cor. V. 2.-2 Cor. II. 5-11. VII. 8-11. For, when S. Paul
blames them, that they did not all mourn, that he who had done the act, might
be removed from among them; Certainly he means, that he who had done the act,
was to mourn so much more, that he might be restored unto them again. For so it
came to pass, and upon such terms he is restored; If any man has grieved, it
is not me that he has grieved, but in part, that I may not charge you all.
Enough to such a one is this rebuke of many. So that, contrariwise, ye ought
rather to pardon and comfort such a one, least he be swallowed up with
abundance of sorrow. The reason follows; For I see, that that leter of mine
griev^d you, though but for a time. Now I am glad, not that I grieved you, but
that you were grieved to repentance. For ye were grieved according to God, that
ye might in nothing be punished, as from us. For, the sorrow that is according
to God, works repentance to salvation not to be repent^th of: But the sorrow
of the world works death. I demand, whether the repentance which S. Paul's
censure brought forth, were the repentance of that Church, or the repentance
of, both the person guilty and of the Church. For* without question, if this
were the crime, and that he was born out in it by a faction in the Church, (the
act whereof prevailing, redounds to the account of the whole) then S. Paul
justly blames the Church, because they had not cleared their hands of it, by
putting from them the guilty person, with demonstration of that sorrow, which
might evidence their adherence to the Christianity which they had once
professed. And accordingly, if the Church were grieved to repentance, such as
procures salvation, being according to God; and that having so done, they are
enjoined to restore the guilty person; Therefore, that the guilty person had
been reduced to so much more sorrow, as the crime concerned him more; and that
this sorrow, also, was repentance to salvation, according to God, wrought by
the censure inflicted upon him by S. Paul's Bpistle. Whether then S. Paul
require them to readmit him, least Satan should get advantage upon the Church,
by this breach, (whose conceits we are not ignorant of, says S. Paul) and
least the party should be swallowed up with excessive sorrow; Or least, the
party, by despair of reconcilement with the Church, should be reduced to
renounce Christianity, or a division be made in the Church from under the
authority of S. Paul; This he plainly declares, that he pardons the man whom
they pardon, in the person of Christ, that no such thing come to pass; That
is, acting by Apostolical commission, according to which, that which any man's
Apostle or Commissary did, was as if himself did it; So that, either we suppose
the repentance wrought by the censure to be sufficiently evidenced, or that S.
Paul's commission is not trustily discharged. This is more then, then preaching
the Gospel, or removing offense from before the Church: It is removing the
sin, by procuring repentance, and thereupon, assuring of pardon, which seems
not well assured, when there is not competent means used, much less the effect
of the means visible, in procuring repentance. But if a Physician, only
prescribing and applying the means of curing a disease, is said to cure it,
much more* the Church, not only prescribing and applying the means of curing
sin, (by the exercise of repentance, in prayer, with fastin^ and alms-deeds)
but also, constraining the sick person, effectually to use the cure prescribed,
by excluding him the communion of the Church, so long as he refuses to use it.
Now, when S. Paul commands, to deliver such a one to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the Spir^t may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus, 1 Cor. V. 5. proving the powing of Excommunication necessary to the
constitution and being of the Church, and that, who so is excommunicate falls
under the power of Satan, as excluded Gods Church; I alleged, that those
miraculous operations which God gave the Church under the Apo^tles, to witness
the truth of Christianity, by the evidene of his presence in the same, were
seen upon those which were cast out of it; And that, in that regard, this man
is commanded to be delivered to Satan. The destruction of the flesh then, for
which he is so delivered, may signify the incursions of Satan upon such
persons, then visible, and so I understood it before. But I must not, therefore,
omit that sense of these words, which the ancient Church frequeneth,
understanding this destruction to be the mortification of the flesh by works of
Penance. For this is that sense which Tertullian, then a Mo^tanist labors to
confute, but Origin in Levit. Hom. XXIV. Pacianus, Paraenesi ad Paeniten^iam.
S. Basil ad A^philochium. C. VII. S. Ambrose de Paenitentia. I. 12. S. Austine,
de fide and operibus cap. XXVI. suppose and use. Neither is it any way
inconsequent, that the excommunicate, believing themselves to come thereby,
under the power of Satan, should betake themselves to those demonstrations of
humiliation and mortification, whereby the Church might be moved to admit them
to the means of their reconcilement. And in this there is more then preaching
the Gospel, or taking away offense: There is authority obliging to use the
cure, and granting reconciliation upon the same. Again, when S. Paul says to
them again, 2 Cor. XII. 20. 21. I am afraid, least, when I come, I find you not
such as I would, and be found of you, such as you would not; least there be
strifes, envies, animosities, con^en^ions, back-bitings, whisporings,
inflasions, commotions. Least, when I come to you again, God humble me in
regard of you, and I mourn for many that have sinned before, and have not
repented of the uncleanesse, and whoredom, and wantonness which they have
done; How should S. Paul be humbled in regard of, or mourn for many of them,
but, in regard of the necessity which he fears to find, of putting them out
of the Church, or to penance, in case they adhere to the Church? And, if, by
appearance and demonstration of their repentance, S. Paul was to be moved not
to do this; is it not evident, that this is the means which he imployes to
procure repentance, and assure pardon, by discharging them of it? I do here
repet^ that which I said before, to show, that it is the Apostles intent, Heb.
VI. 4. 5, 6. X. 26* 27. XII. 15. 16, 17. to deter them from falling away from
Christianity to Judaism, for fear of persecution from the Jews, by putting them
out of hope of being readmitted to the communion of the Church. Not as
pronouncing sentence of damn^tion against them; but, as demonstrating it so
difficult to be presumed upon* in behalf of him that had once violated the
profession of Christianity, that the Church was not to become the warrant for
it. If this be the case of those, whose interest in the promises of the Gospel
the Church warrants not, then, the warrant of the Church, (either in
pronouncing sentence of absolution formally, or in admitting really unto the
communion of the Eucharist) proceeds, o^ ought to proceed upon supposition of
that disposition which qualifies for pardon, wrought in the penitent by the
censure of the Church. And, that this is the case, I have further inferred from
the words of the Apostle, 1 John V. 16. 17. If a man see his Brother sin a
sin ^^t to death, he shall pray, and life shall be given to them that sin not
to death: There is a sin to death, I say not that ye pray for it. All
unrighteousness is sin; But there is a sin not to death. For, seeing it is
manifest, that the Church is to pray for all sinners, be they never so great
enemies to the Church; it cannot be understood, that, absolutely, the Church is
not to pray for the sin to death; but, that, as he forbids not, so he
obliges not the Church to pray for the sin unto death, those prayers, which
tend to reconcile the sinner to the Church, upon supposition, and for a
warrant, of the reconcilement thereof with God. If this seem not to agree with
the words, because S. John seems to speak to particular persons, and not to the
body of the Church, when he says, If any man see, let him ask; Let him
consider the words of another Apostle, James V. 14. 15, 16, For, when he
promises forgiveness of sins to him that shall call for the Priests of the
Church, and they pray over him; Adding immediately, Confess^ your sins to one
another, and pray for one another, that ye may be healed; It is necessary that
we make good a reason, why this admonition follows upon that which went before:
Why the Apostle, having taken order for the cure of their sins, who are here
ordered to send for the Priests of the Church, proceeds to say, Confess your
sins to one another; Namely, because the way of curing sin is the ^ame,
when a man confesses his sin to a Brother (that is, a private Christian) and
when h^ submits it to the authority of the Church. For, as here the Apo^tle
makes the means of obtaining pardon* to consist in the prayers of the Priests,
in whom the authority of the Church rests; ^o there, in the prayers of one
Christian for another, that confesses his sin to him. And h^reupon, it is
necessarily to be presumed, both that the Apostle means, that the Priests of
the Church impose upon him that course of c^re, which his sin requires in
case he survive; And also, that a private Christian, by his advice, reduce his
Brother to use the same means: Otherwise, to what purpose should the one or the
other declare his sin, seeing he might be prayed for at large, without
declaring the same? It is therefore no marvail, that the words of S. John,
manifestly concerning particular Christians, should extend to the Keys of the
Church, and the public office thereof. For though, in the beginning when he
says; If a man see his Brother sin a sin not to death; he addresseth only
to particular Christians; yet the and there is a sin unto death, I say not
that ye pray for it; manifestly addresseth to the Body of the Church; implying,
that it is to be acquainted therewith, by him that sees this, if the case
require it. Whereupon S. Paul thus exhorts, Gal. VI. 1. Brethren, if a man be
overtaken in any transgression, ye that are spiritual restore such a one with
the spirit of meekness, considering your selves, least ye also be tempted.
Here the title of spiritual, may extend to particular Christians; But there is
a presumption concerning public persons in the Church, that they are such,
because, it is the opinion that they are such which qualifies them to be made
public persons in the Church. Now, when he speaks to the brethren in general,
to do this, he shows, that it may concern the Body of the Church, as well as
particular Christans. But when he speaks of the spirit of meekness, it is
manifest, that the intent of his speech concerns those Penances which were
imposed upon sinners, for trial of their convesions, in which he requires that
meekness, which the consideration of a man's own meekness recommends. And
therefore, the same thing is taught by S. James, by and by after the words
before quoted, James V. 19. 20. Brethren, if any man of you go astray from the
truth, and some body bring him back; let him know, that he who brings back a
sinner from the err^r of his way, shall save a soul from death, and cover a
multitude of sins For, it is plain by S. Paul, that this extends to the
recovery of a sinner by the Keys of the Church, as they were managed during
the Apostles time. Certainly, if we understand S. Paul's words, 1 Timothy V. 22.
24. of imposition of hands in Penance (as I have showed, in my Book of the
Right of the Church, p. 23. that they may and ought to be understood) it is
necessarily to be inferred; seeing they who admit those sinners, to be
reconciled unto God by the Prayers which the Church makes for them, with
imposition of hands, (signifying thereby, that it allows them to be s^ncerely
penitent) are partakers of their sins which shall follow upon the readmitting
of them to the Church, being not worthy qualified for it; Therefore, the Church
is to see, that a man be qualified for reconciliation with the Church, upon
supposition of his reconciliation with God, before he be reconciled to the
Church. And in, first procuring him, and then judging him, to be so qualified,
consists the right use of those Keys which God has given the Church, toward
them that transgress the profession of Christianity after they have made it.

The reason of all this is derived from those things which have been settled by
the premises. The condition which the Gospel proposes for the remission of
sins, to them who st^nd convict by it, that they are under sin, is, that
they return from sin, and, believing that our Lord Ch^i^t was sen^ by God to
cure it, undertake to profess that which he taught, and to live according to
the same. Those which profess so to do, the Church accepts of without
exception; because, this being the first account she has of them, she cannot
expect more at their hands, then, that they submit the rest of their lives to
that Christianity which she obliges them to. If, by tr^n^gressing this
obligation, which they have undertaken, they forfeit the right which they
obtain^d thereby, is it in the power of the Church to restore them at pleasur^?
In vain then, is all that has been said to show, that the Gospel and
Christianity, in order of nature and reason, is more ancient then the
constitution of the Church, and the corporation of it; And, that all the power
of the Church presupposes the condition, upon which, those blessings which it
tendreth are due. And certainly, our Lord, when he says to his Di^ciples, Joh.
XX. 23. Whosesoever sin ye remit, they are remitted -- intended not to
contradict the sense of the S^r^bes, when they say, Who can forgive sins but
God alone? Mark. II. 7. Luke V. 21. Much less to reverse the word of his
Prophets, ascribing this power of him alone, Esaias XLIII. 25. Mich. VII. 18.
Psalm. XXXII. 5 What is then the effect of this promise to them, that have
forfeited the right of their Baptism; supposing, that, when men first become
Christians, the Disciples of Christ and his Church, remit sins by making them
Christians, according to that which has been declared? Surely the same,
observing the difference* of the case. For he, who, being convict of his
disease, and of the cure of it, by the preaching of Christianity, is
effectually moved, by the help of Gods Spirit, to embrace that cure, which,
none but the Church which tenders it can furnish, attains it not but by using
it; That is, by being baptized. But, he, who, being baptized, has failed of
his trust, and forfeited his interest in Christ, cannot so easily be restored.
I have showed you, what works of mortification, of devotion, and mercy, the
recovering of Gods grace and favor requir^s. Let no man therefore think, that
the power of remitting sins in the Church, can abate any thing of that, which
the Gospel* upon which the Church is grounded, requiteth to the remission of
finne done after Baptism. The authority of the Church is provided by God, to
oblige those who are overtaken in sin, to undergo that, which may satisfy
the Church of the sincere intent of their return; And the Church, being so
satisfied, warranteth their restitution to the right which they had forfeited,
upon as good ground, as it warranteth their first estate in it. But, this
presupposes the wrath of God appeased, his favor regained, and the inordin^te
love of the creature which caused the forfeit, blotted out, and changed,
(through that course of mortification which has been performed) into the true
love of goodness for Gods sake.

The Church therefore, has received of God no power to forgive sins
immediately; as if it were in the Church to pardon s^nne, without that
di^po^ition, which, by the Gospel, qualifieth a man for it: Or, as if the act
of the Church, pardoning, did produce it: But, in as much as the knowledge
thereof directs, and the authority thereof constrains to use the means
which the Gospel prescribes, in so much is the remission of sins, thereby
obtained, truly ascribed to the Church. Lazarus was first dead, before he was
bound up in his Grave clothes: And, when he was restored to life, he remained
bound, till he was loosed by the Apostles. The Church binds no man, but him
that is first dead in sin. If the voice of Christ call him, out of that
death, he is not revived, till the love of sin be mortified, and the love of
God made alive in him, by a due course of Penance performed. If the motion of
Gods spirit, upon the preaching of the Gospel, convincing a man that there is
no means but Christianity to escape out of sin, and prevailing with him to
embrace it, be effectual to obtain the promises of the Gospel; Much more shall
the actual operation of the same, moving him that is dead in sin, to put
sin to death in himself, that he may live a Christian for the future; be
effectual to regain the grace of God for him, who has not yet the life of
grace in him, but is in the way of recovering it by the help of Gods grace.
But, he who is thus recovered to life by the ministry of the Church, is not
yet loosed of the bands of his sin, till he be loosed by the Church, because
he was first bound by it; as our Lord, having raised Lazarus to live, commands
him to be loosed by his Apostles. For if, he who accepts of the Gospel and
the terms of it, remain bound to be baptized by the Church, for the remission
of his sin; Is it strange, that he who has forfeited his pardon, obtained by
the Church, even in the judgment and knowledge of the Church, should not
obtain the restoring of it but by the act of the Church? And therefore the
Church remitteth sin after Baptism, not only as a Physician, prescribing the
cure; but as a judge, admitting it to be effected. And, the satisfaction of the
Church, presupposes that God is satisfied, that is to say, his wrath appeased,
and his favor regained, by the means which the Church prescribes; But
requires also, that he submit, not only to use the cure which the Church
prescribes, but to the judgment thereof, in admitting the effect of it. And
upon these terms, and upon no other, the virtue of Baptism, mortified by sin,
reviveth again, according to the doctrine of the School. For, if nothing else,
but the sincere resolution of living and dying as a Christian, can entitle any
man to the promises of the Gospel, what is it that must entitle him to them,
that has once forfeited his title? Surely nothing but the renewing of that
trust, which is forfeited by failing of it. And surely that trust is not so
easily re-established, as it is first contracted. I have showed you in the
second Book, what reason we have to believe, that the severity of the ancient
Church, in readmitting those that failed of their profession at their Baptism,
necessarily argues the difficulty of being re-estated in the favor of God.
There goes more, indeed, to the satisfying of the Church, that he who had
failed of his Christianity, has sincerely renewed his resolution for it, then,
to the renewing of it. But, that this resolution will as well be effectual and
durable, as it is sincere; it is as difficult to assure a man's self, as to
satisfy the Church. The power of the Church, then, in binding and loosing,
that is, in remitting or retaining sin, consists not only in declaring a
sinner, either bound or loose; Whether in general, by preaching the Gospel; or
in particular, by refusing or restoring him to the communion of the Church,
For, whom the Church binds, for sin known to the Church, his pardon is not
to be had without the act of the Church: But, in constraining him that will be
a Christian, to mortify the love of sin in himself (as his sin declares it
to be alive in him) is the power of the Church in remitting sin, exercised;
And, in pronouncing sentence of absolution, in what form soever, the power of
assuring the same.

Let us now look over these same Scriptures again, for by them, having no
other, we must judge, whether this power extends to all sins, so that no sin
after Baptism can be pardoned, without the ministry of the Church, and the use
of it; Whether it extend only to notorious sinners, as an abatement of the
sentence of excommunication, (which being liable to, upon demonstration of
repentance, they are admitted to be reconciled by it) or lastly, whether there
be some other reason to determine the extent of it. Surely he that argues,
because God has given his Disciples this Power, and the Church after them,
therefore he has commanded all sinners to use it, denying all hope of pardon
to them that do not use it, by declaring their sins to them, whom the Church
trusts for it, makes a lame consequence. For, will any reason allow him to say,
that, otherwise, this power signifies nothing, when it is granted to extend to
the curing of all notorious sins? That which we learn of it from S. Paul to
the Corinthians, without all controversy, concerns no sins but but such. The
sin of him that had married his Fathers wife, was so well known, that it had
raised a party in the Church, of such as pretended it to be consistent with
Christianity. And, when S. Paul is afraid, that, coming to them, he shall be
fain to put many of them to Penance, for the sins, which having committed,
they would have made no demonstration of conversion from them, before his
coming; it is evident enough, that he speaks of no secret sins; because, the
punishment which he pretends to inflict, is for standing out against his leters
in their sins. As for that sin, which, the Epistle to the Hebrews, seems to
exclude from reconcilement with God by the Church; Apostasy from Christianity;
it is necessarily and essentially a manifest sin, because it consists in the
visible renouncing of that profession, which had been visibly made. But, coming
to S. James, we find that he commands the Priests of the Church to be sent for,
promising forgiveness of sins upon their Prayers. And therefore, when he
proceeds to say: Confess your sins to one another, and pray for one
another; we gather, that he promises the pardon of those sins, which the
sick person shall have confessed to the Priests of the Church. For, if it be
requisite, for obtaining the prayers of a Brother, for the pardon of our
sins, that we confess them to him; he that prescribes it must needs
understand, those sins, which he promises forgiveness, upon their prayers,
to be declared to them before. It is therefore manifest, that the Apostle here
delivers a precept of confessing sin both to one another, and to the
Priests of the Church; supposing the cure of sin be known to all Christians,
by the Tradition of our common Christianity, and the visible custom and
practice of all Churches; by works of humiliation and mortification, of
devotion and mercy, whereby satisfaction is made not only to the Church, which
receives offense by visible sin, but also to God, who is offended by all
sin, in that sense, and to that effect, which has been justified in the
second Book: Namely, to the appeasing of his wrath, to the regaining of his
grace and favor, to the restoring of the Covenant of Grace contracted at our
Baptism, which sin had made void; And therefore in virtue of that
satisfaction for all sin, which was once made by our Lord Christ upon the
Cross, without which, that which we are able to do toward this effect, would
all have been to no purpose. Whereupon, that the Church is not satisfied, in
such a case; but, supposing that God is satisfied first, and, that the prayers
which the Church makes for the pardon of sin, are granted and made, or ought
to be granted and made, upon presumption, that the sinner is in a way of
obtaining pardon of God by those Prayers, upon his submission to the use of
those means, which, either the Priests of the Church, by the authority thereof
shall enjoin, or a Brother by his skill and discretion shall advise. This being
unavoidably the meaning of the Apostles; first it is manifest, that, all
Christians being directed by the Apostle to have recourse to the Keys of the
Church, for the cure of sin in the danger of death, they may be more obliged
to the same course in time of health; because it may then be used: whereas, in
danger of death, though it must be prescribed, yet it cannot be used but by him
that surviveth; Secondly, it is further employed, that the sin which a man
confesses to his Brother, if he be not able to advise a meet cure for it, is,
not only by the party, but, by him also, to be brought to the Church. And so,
in both cases, you have an injunction of the Apostle, for the submitting of
secret sin to the Keys of the Church. But, you have also a possibility for
the cure of sin, without the authority of the Church, in as much as it had
been too impertinent for the Apostle to have given a Precept of confessing
sin to one another, if no sin could be pardoned without having recourse to
the Church. The same is the effect of S. John's words; If a man see his Brother
sin a sin not unto death, -- For, it is manifest, that, that sin which
one man sees, is not notorious to the Church. And yet, the distinction which S.
John makes between the sin which he commands a private Christian to pray
for, and the sins which he commands not the Church to pray for, with the
difficulties which the primitive Church had about it, show, that those sins,
which private advice cannot cure, he would have brought to the Church. And S.
John's meaning is, that a man should pray for such sins of his Brother, as he
is sure are not to death: Supposing first, his Brother disposed by himself, or
by his advise, to take the course that may qualify him for forgiveness. But,
if it prove doubtful, whether to death or not, the Apostle, by saying, that
there are some sins, which he refers to the Church, whither to pray for
pardon of them, (to wit, in order to restoring them to the communion of the
Church) or not, supposes, that they are reported to the Church by him that saw
them, when the Church saw them not. But first supposing, that they might
possibly have been cured without bringing them to the Church. And if these
things be true, then is the bringing of a sinner back from the error of his way
(according to that Precept of S. James, which follows) an obligation that is
to be discharged, not only by the office of a private Christian, in convicting
a private Christian of his sin, and of the means that he is to use for his
recovery, but also by bringing him to the Church, if the case require it; Which
obligation will neces^atily lie upon the sinner himself, in the first place.
But so, that his own skill and fidelity to his own salvation, may possibly
furnish him his cure at home. The tenor of our Saviors words thoroughly
inforceth the same, according to that which I observed in the first Book. p.
140. that all Christians may be said to bind sin, by showing a Christian his
sin, in case he refuse that cure, which, he that convicts him of his sin,
convicts him that is to use; And to loose sin, in case he embrace it: But this,
in the inner Court of the Conscience, between God and the soul. For, though the
words of our Lord; If thy Brother offend thee, tell him of it, between him and
thee -- extend to private injuries, obliging a Christian, first to seek
reparation by the good will of his party, upon remonstrance of the wrong: Then,
not to seek it out of the Church, but by the Church; yet, they necessarily
comprehend all sins which another man knows, which, to him are offenses. And
therefore, when our Savior says; If he hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother; it is manifest, that the effect of his promise which follows;
Whosoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; is obtained by the act of
a private Christian, without recourse to the public authority of the Church.
And who will believe, that the skill and fidelity of some private Christian may
not furnish him as good a cure, as he can expect to learn from any private
Christian, to whom he can have recourse? And yet, the process of our Lords
discourse shows, that the intent of it concerns in chief the exercise of the
Keys of Gods Church, even upon those sins which are not notorious. Which who
so considers, cannot refuse to grant, that S. Paul's injunction, for the
restoring of him that is surprised in sin, concerns both the office of
private Christians, and also of a whole Church, and the Body of it. And truly,
considering what has been said concerning Scripture and Tradition, it cannot
seem strange, that the Apostles, leaving such authority with the Churches of
their founding, with general instructions to those whom they trusted them
with; writing to the Bodies of those Churches, things respectively concerning
all Christians, should give directions concerning all in general terms, which,
the visible practice of the said Churches might determine to the respective
office of each quality and estate in those Churches. No more, then that our
Lord, finding the power of the Keys, not yet visible before Christianity,
should propose his instructions in that generality, which only his Apostles
orders, and the practice of their Churches, upon their instructions,
determines. For, the power of the Keys in the Church inables it further
until the worlds end, to limit further, whatsoever shall appear to require
further determination, to the end of binding and loosing of sin which it
imports, according as the present state of the Church in every age shall
require. Let us now consider, that, though I have made evidence, by consequence
from the writings of the Apostles, that remission of sins committed after
Baptism, may be obtained without the Keys of the Church; yet, it is hard to
find any express promise to that effect, in their writings, unless it be that
of S. John's first Epistle; In which, notwithstanding, a limitation, of that
confession which the Apostle requires, to the Church, and to those that are
trusted by the Church, may reasonably be understood, supposing, the way of
curing sin, by the ministry of the Church to have been customary, and
therefore known at that time. And, on the contrary, though I do believe these
consequences to be unreproveable; yet it is to be considered, that S. Paul's
indulgence seems to be granted upon a particular occasion, incident to
distemper the ordinary course of the Church; Namely, the prevailing of some
sin, to a faction of some great, or the greatest part of the Church. Which,
as it necessarily intercepted the use of the power of the Keys, though
provided and ordained by God for the curing of the said sins; so can it by no
means argue, that God has not appointed it for the ordinary means of curing
them.

As for the consequence which was made, from the testimonies of the Law and the
Prophets, and of the Gospels, before the establishment of the Covenant of
Baptism, to show, that they take effect also in sins after Baptism; It may
easily be considered, that they take place no further, then that disposition
which is requisite to the forgiveness of those sins, whereby the grace of
Baptism is violated, may be supposed to be produced without help of the
Church. Which as, I conceive, I have proved to be possible; so, I conceive, no
man living can prove to be so easy, that all those who stand in need of the
remedy can presume (upon so good ground as the safety of the soul requires) to
obtain it, or to have obtained it of themselves, without that help, which the
ministry appointed by God in his Church furnishes. Which if it be true, it
will inevitably follow, that the most part of Christians, are, for the most
part, bound in conscience, to have recourse to the power of the Church, and the
Keys thereof, for the cure of those sins which are not of themselves
notorious; And that other Christians may be tied in conscience, to bring them
to the Church for it, by making known those sins, which otherwise are not
notorious; To wit, when they cannot reasonably presume, that of themselves,
they will apply themselves to the means which the cure requires. And if this be
true, it will also follow, that it is in the power of the Church, to make
Rules, (of force to bind the consciences of those who are of the Church)
limiting the terms, upon which they shall stand bound to have recourse to the
Church, for that purpose. Indeed, had the Apostles delivered any such faith;
That a man is justified, by believing, that he is appointed by God to
salvation, immediately upon consideration of Christ, without any disposition
qualifying him for it; (only limiting his right in this appointment, to the
time that this appointment is revealed to him, which revelation is that faith
which alone justifies) I would then confess, that this interpretation of
Scripture would no way be receivable; because, indeed, no such Scriptures could
have proceeded from those that delivered such a faith. It would then be
sufficient, that he to whom this predestination is revealed by justifying
faith, should say, Lord have mercy upon me, at breathing out his last; Or
rather, it would be needless, nay damnable for him, to desire that mercy,
which if he were not sure of before he said it, he must be damned for want of
that faith which only saves. But if all Christians be justified, by sincerely
undertaking the profession of Christianity, and, that this sincerity is
inconsistent with doing contrary to that which this profession contains;
then, let all men of discretion and conscience judge (not, whether the Church
has reason to believe, that every such a one will voluntarily charge himself
with that humiliation which may seem to mortify the passions that made him sin
before, and make his profession sincere for the future) but, whether himself
has reason to believe, that either he knows how to value it, or will
effectually perform it, not being instructed and obliged to it by the Church.
Seeing then, on the side, that God has provided the Ministry of the Church
for the purpose; (the effect of it in reconciling notorious sins being
undeniable) On the other, no reason can presume, that all Christians either
know, or will supply to themselves, the work and effect of that Ministry,
being left to themselves; It follows, that, though voluntary Penance is not
necessary, for obtaining remission of every sin; yet, it is necessary for the
body of the Church, because there is no ground of presumption, that the sins
thereof are or can be cleansed without it.

CHAP. X. The Sects of the Montanists, Novations, Donatists, and Meletians,
evidence the cure of sin by Penance, to be a Tradition of the Apostles. So
does the agreement of primitive practice with their writings. Indulgence of
regular Penance from the Apostles. Confession of secret sins in the Primitive
Church. That no sin can be cured without the Keys of the Church, there is no
Tradition from the Apostles. The necessity of confessing secret sins,
whereupon it stands.
ANd this is that whch the Tradition of the Church, that is, the original and
universal practice of Penance, (evidencing that it could have no other
beginning then the authority of the Apostles, which only could oblige the
whole Church) thoroughly justifies. I told you at the beginning, how near
Montanus his Heresy was to the death of S. John, when the age of the Apostles
ended. And, it will not be amiss to tell you here, that, I shall show you in
another place, that, in all probability, it is still elder by above twenty
years, then Eusebius his account, which there I allowed, does make it. The
pretense thereof, (among other austerities, which they pretended to impose for
Rules upon the whole Church, upon the authority of Prophesies, Inspirations,
and Revelations which they had, or pretended to have) was to exclude some great
crimes, from reconcilement with God, by the means of the Church; that is to
say, in the language of those times, from being admitted to Penance. I demand
now, of any man that will employ a little of his common sense upon the
business, whether there had been any subject for Montanus, to pretend the
introducing of greater austerity then was practiced in the Church, in this
point, if there had been no practice of Penance then in the Church, capable of
greater strictness then was commonly practiced. And if his common sense gives
no sentence, let him advise, either with that which remains of Tertullian for
Montanus, or, against him, in the records of the Church; and tell me, whether
they do condemn the reconciling of sin by Penance prescribed in the Church,
or that strictn^sse which Montanus pretended to introduce over and above the
common practice; evidencing therefore the force of that Penance which as
generally practi^ed, by condemning him for endeavoring to inhanse it. Thus
much for certain, had not Montanus pretended to impose the austerity which he
affected, for a Rule, upon the rest of the Church, the occasion for which he
was excluded out of the Church had not been. He had reduced the Churches of
Phrygia to his sense, rather by the credit of those Revelations, then by any
authority which he stood professed of in them, so far as I learn; And from
thence it came to pass, that his Doctrine continued so long in force there,
that the sect is call (...), that which the Phrygians follow, and the
Sectaries, Cataphryges in Latin. But when (according to the strict
correspondence that then was exercised between all Churches) it came to be
communicated to the Churches of Asia; we find by Eusebius, how his pretense of
Revelations was rejected as counterfeit, or as unsufficient, and by
consequence, the Law, which, upon the authority of them, he pretended to impose
upon the Church. That, being rejected by the neighbor Churches, he travailed
to Rome, or sent to Rome to approve them there (that, being so received, he
might, upon new grounds, tender them to his neighbors) we learn by Tertullian.
That, being rejected there also, Tertullian, out of the passion he had for
them, being drawn away from the Church, maintained their profession in a Church
erected by Schism, upon that account at Carthage, till the times of S.
Augustine, (by whom they were reduced to the communion of the Catholic Church)
we learn by Sirmondus his Praedestinatus, and the same S. Augustine; But
otherwise the Phrygians, were counted Sectaries by the rest of the Church, that
is necessarily Schismatics, and perhaps Heretics, if indeed, by being
separated from the body of the Church, they became guilty of those excesses,
which they are charged with by Epiphanius, S. Jerome, and others. Of these
particulars, you may see in S. Augustine de Haeresibus, and Sirmondus his
Praedestinatus both of them Haeresi. XXVI. and LXXXVI. But all the while, the
subject of this separation is the discipline of Penance, received by the whole
Church, as from the Apostles; the limitation of the practice thereof being the
ground, upon which the difference is stated. And, for the ground of this
ground; Whether it could then be pretended, that the Keys of the Church could
do no more then cure the scandal of notorious sin on the one side; Or,
whether it could then be pretended on the other side, that the Keys of the
Church import any Power to pardon, sin immediately, not supposing that
disposition which qualifieth for pardon visible to the Church, and procured by
those actions, which the authority of the Church injoyneth; All this, I am
content to refer to that common sense which is capable to understand these
particulars. I shall not need to say much of the Novatians at Rome, and
elsewhere, the Donatists in Africa, of the Meletians in Egypt, having said
this of the Montanists; all of them, (if we regard the subject of the
separations, which they made in several parts of the Church) being nothing
else but branches of the same sect, and, forsaking the unity of the Church, for
their part of that cause which engaged Montanus. The Novatians, because they
would not endure, that those who fell away from the Faith, in the persecution
of Decius, should be readmitted to the communion of the Church, upon
demonstration of repentance. The Meletians, for the same cause, in Egypt,
under the persecution of Diocletiane. The Donatists upon some apperten^nce of
the same cause. Only they serve to evidence the discipline of Penance to have
been as universal as the Church of Christ; when no part of it is found free
from debates, about the terms li^iting the exercise of it. They serve also to
evidence the ground and the preten^e of the Power of the Keys, in the
discipline of Penance, by the same reason which I alleged before.

After these times, when the customs of the Church, (which, from the
beginning, was governed by un-written Law, delivered by word of mouth of the
Apostles, but limited more and more by the Governors of several Churches)
began to be, both reduced into writing, and also, more expressly determined, by
the Canons of several Councils, greater and less it were too vain to prove
that by dicourse, which of it self is as evident, as it is evident that there
are such Rules extant, which, in their time, had the force of Law to those
parts of the Church, for which they were respectively made. Only I do observe
the agreement that is found between the original practice of the Church in
this point, and that order which I have showed you out of the Apostles
writings, evidencing that interpretation which I have given of them, by that
rule which common sense inforces, that the meaning and intent of every Law, is
to be measured by the primitive practice of it. For, we see so much doubt made,
whether those three great crimes of Idolatry, Murder, and Adultery, were to be
reconciled by Penance (that is, by the visible and outward demonstration of
inward repentance) to the Church, not only by Montanus, but partly by
Novatianns, that that great Church of Antiochia remained doubtful a great
while, whether Cornelius or Novatians should be acknowledged the true Bishop of
Rome, We see the Eliberitane Canons (which were unquestionably made diverse
years before the Council at Nicaea, and therefore may be counted as ancient as
any that the Church has) exclude some branches of those sins from
reconciliation with the Church. We see this vigor abated by the succeeding
discipline of the Church. It is indeed said, in the Church of Rome at this
time, that the ground of the Heresy (as without ground they call it) of the
Montanists and Novatians was this; that, acknowledging the Church to have power
to forgive less sins, they, (the Novatians) denied it the Power to forgive
Apostasy or Idolatry: To which the Montanists added Murder and Adultery. But I
have showed, in my Book of the Right of the Church, p. 17-27. that, within the
Church also, as well as among the Montanists and Novatians, some of these
sins were not admitted to communion, no not at the point of death. And, that
there never was any opinion in the ancient Church, that the Church has any
Power to forgive sin immediately, but only by the medicine of Penance which
it injoyneth; I refer my self to that which here follows. Now it is plain,
that neither those parts of the Church, nor the Novatians, did hold those
sins desperate, but exhorted them to Penance as their cure in Gods sight;
agreeing in not readmitting them, whither for the maintenance of Discipline, or
for fear the Church, warranting their pardon, who might prove not qualified for
it, should become guilty of their sins, according to S. Paul, 1 Timothy V. 22.
Lay hands suddenly on no man, nor partake in other men's sins. For, S. John,
and the Apostle to the Hebrews, had authorized the Church to make difficulty of
it, though S. Paul had readmitted a branch of one of them, (the incestuous
person at Corinth) whether for the unity of that Church, then in danger to be
divided upon that occasion, or, as reasonably satisfied of the truth of his
repentance. But, when the zeal of Christianity decreased as the number of
Christians increased within, and persecution without withdrew so many, that
there was no means left to preserve the Body without abating this severity;
(the number of Apostates in some persecutions, being considerable to the number
of Christians) we need seek no other reason why the Montanists and Novatians
should be Schismatics, (not properly Heretics) then their separating from the
Church, rather then condescend to that which the Body of the Church found
requisite to be granted. Let us see what crimes they are which the Eliberitane
Canons, that is, the Canons of the Council of Elvira in Spain) exclude from the
communion, even in case of death. As, if a man at age, after Baptism, commit
adultery in the Temple of an Idol. cap. I. If an Idol Priest, having been
baptized, shall sacrifice again. II. If such a one, after Penance, shall have
committed adultery. III. If a Christian kill a man by Witchcraft, wherein there
is Idolatry. VI. If a Christian commit adultery after Penance, VII. If a Woman,
leaving her Husband without cause, mary another, VIII. If a Father or Mother
sell a child into the Stews, or a child it self, XII. If a professed Virgin
shall live in uncleanness, XIII. If a man marry his daughter to an Idol
Priest, XVII. If a Clergyman commit adultery, XVIII. If he who is admitted to
communion, (upon adultery) in danger of death, shall commit adultery again,
XLVII. If a Woman kill the child which she has conceived of adultery, LXIII.
If a Clergyman, knowing that his wife has committed adultery, dismiss her
not, LXV. Sodomites, LXXI. If a woman forsaking an adulterer whom she had
married before, marry another, LXXII. If a Christian be slain or confiscate upon
the information of a Christian, LXXIII. If a man accuse a Clergyman (to wit,
criminally, as a subject a subject, before secular Powers) of a crime which he
cannot prove, LXXV. We see by these very particulars, an abatement of that
which Tertullian stood upon, that no adultery should ever be restored to
communion again; For here, Penance is allowed adultery the first time, by the
VII. And, she that leaves her Husband and maryes another, is allowed the
communion in danger of death; As also after her first Husband is dead, by the
IX. And so are Virgins that turn Whores, if afterward they repent and abstain
before death, by the XIII. So for murder, a Christian Woman that kills her
maid, is admitted to Penance, by the V. And a Catechumena, (that is a woman
professing Christianity before Baptism) that kills the child conceived of
adultery, by the LXVIII. So in Idolatry; Those who only wear such a Crown as
those that sacrificed did wear, but sacrifice not, nor are at the charge of
sacrificing, by the LV. And truly, that VII Canon which allows Penance upon
adultery only the first time, but refuses the communion of the second time,
even in danger of death, is manifestly more severe then that Rule which diverse
of the Fathers, ( Origin in Levit. XXV. Hom. XV. S. Ambrose de Paenit. II. 10.
11. S. Augustine, Epist. LIII. LIVE. Hanil. L.) do mention, as in force and use
at their time, to wit, that Penance cannot be done the second time. For, though
a man be not readmitted to communion by Penance, upon falling into the same, or
a more grievous crime, the second time, yet may be allowed the communion in
danger of death. Just as S. Ambrose ad Virgin^^ Lapsam cap. VIII. censures her
to do Penance till death.

Innocent I. Pope, Epist. II. expressly affirms that this was done in
consideration of the times; because, if men were lightly admitted, after having
fallen in persecution, who would hazard life for the profession of his faith?
But, that afterward, either the Church must be Novatians, or grant Penance in
danger of death. And truly, the breach which the Novatians made, must needs
oblige the Church to readmit unto communion in danger of death. But, if the
Church were obliged to be strict, when there was fear of persecution, least all
should fall away, then was it obliged to abate, when many were fallen away,
that the Body thereof might be recovered and restored. And the words of
Innocent that follow, are sufficient to show, how much the Church then presumed
upon that Penance, that Absolution, that communion which a man was admitted to
upon confession of sin, in danger of death: For he says, Tribuetur ergo cum
Poenitentia extrema Communio; The last Communion therefore shall be allowed,
with Penance. Now it is evident, by the Canons which Gratiane has compiled,
XXVI. Quaest. VI. VII. VIII. and Quaest. VII. cap, I. that, when a man was
admitted to Penance upon confession in danger of death, the communion was given
him provisionally, as well to obtain the grace of God to strengthen him in that
exigent, as for the quiet of his conscience; but nevertheless, he stood bound
over to perform the Penance which was, or should be enjoined, in case he
recovered. And therefore, when Pope Caelestine I Epist. I. invayes against
those, who refused Absolution, and the communion in danger of death; and Leo I.
Pope, Epist. LIX. orders, that they be reconciled, by giving them the
Communion; It is to be supposed, that they understand this Penance to be
enjoined in that case, because the custom of the Church required it. And this
serves to void the doubt that may be made, what the Keys of the Church can
have to do in the remitting of sins as soon as they are confessed, which
serve to loose sin, no further, then they serve to procure and to create that
disposition which qualifies for forgiveness. You saw before in the second Book,
what difficulty the ancient Church made in warranting the salvation of those
that repented upon their Death bed, though they proceeded to submit themselves
and their sins to the Keys of the Church, for their absolution, and the
communion of the Eucharist at their departure. And though, Gennadius de
dogmatibus Eccles. cap. LXXX. say freely, that he is a Novation and not a
Christian, that presumes not faithfully of Gods merciful purpose to save that
which was lost, even in him that departs upon confessing his sin; yet still
this is but a presumption of what may be, not a warrant of what is, which the
power of the Keys, regularly used, promises. Otherwise, what would Gennadius
say to the great Council of Arles under Constantine, which denies absolution
in that case, Can. I. as you see the Eliberitane Canons do? True it is which S.
Cyprian says, Nunquam sera est poenitentia, si sit vera: Repentance is never
late, if it be true. But who will maintain that to be true, which the terror
of death, and remorse of conscience may rack out of him, in whom the love of
God and goodness has not formed that resolution, of maintaining his professed
Christianity, which makes God the end of all his actions? when as all that is
done in such a case, by common experience, may be imputed to a true grounded
desire of avoiding punishment for his own sake, with a superficial desire of
doing well for Gods sake. Though, on the other side, it may be presumed, that
such a one is not first moved with dislike of his sin, when first he submits
it to the Keys of the Church; but has first done many such acts of sincere
contrition, as his own judgment directed him to, for the gaining of Gods
grace: And at length, to give himself further satisfaction, resolves to humble
himself, not only to the declaring of his own shame, but to the undergoing of
that Penance, upon performance whereof, the Rules of the Church* also warrant
his forgiveness.

Between these contrary presumptions, the primitive severity of the Church, it
appears, refused absolution, and the communion, even in danger of death, to
some of the most grievous sins: Which afterward was thought fit to be abated.
Not proclaiming despair to any sinner, but to oblige him, not lightly, to
presume upon pardon of that sin, which, the Church could never presume, that
a man can repent him of enough. For, on the other side, it appears, what
inconvenience the granting of reconcilement to all, at the point of death, may
produce, if the intent of the Church, in binding over to Penance him that
escapes, be not understood: Namely, to give men cause to presume of pardon by
the Church, when the Keys thereof cannot have their operation, in producing
the disposition that is requisite. And thus, the primitive practice of the
Church, seems to demonstrate not only the Tradition of the Apostles concerning
Penance, and Excommunication which it abateth, and the Keys of the Church,
which it manageth; but also the Power which it exercises, not to consist in
pardoning sin at large, and immediately, but, in procuring that disposition
to which the Gospel has proclaimed forgiveness, and (upon knowledge thereof)
in assuring the pardon which it pronounces. For, whosoever considers the
premises, can never be so madd as to imagine, that men were refused
reconcilement even at the point of death, or reconciled with a reservation of
Penance to be performed if they survived, merely for the satisfaction of the
Church, and the example of others; But, because the Church remained not
satisfied, that God was satisfied with their present disposition, as qualifying
them for pardon according to his promise. Some men have mistaken themselves so
far, as to imagine, that when a man was admitted to absolution by imposition
of hands, and the Communion, in danger of death, by the anc^ient Church, he
could stand bound no further to any Penance. But it is very evident in the
practice of the ancient Church, that, in regard some sins were not admitted
to reconcilement by Penance, therefore it concerned the Penitent, in the first
place, to make suit to be admitted; Which being granted, and, he having
undertaken the Penance imposed upon him, in the next place, he was admitted to
the Prayers of the Church, (at all the solemn Assemblies of the Church, during
the time of his Penance) with imposition of hands, as the means to obtain
pardon at Gods hands. So, Imposition of hands, signified not Absolution, but
the way to it, and, capacity of it, supposing the performance of Penance
imposed. And this is petere poenitentiam, and accipere poenitentiam propter
manus impositionem; in the ancient canons, by name Council. Tolet. XI. can. XII.
to demand Penance, and to accept of Penance by imposition of hands; As appears
by that form of the public service of the Church, which you have in the
Constituions, II. 8. 9. where you have the form of prayer to be offered for
Penitents, when they were dismissed, before the celebration of the Eucharist,
he that prays holding his hands over them kneeling. Neither was there any
other absolution then this in use, according to the ancient custom of the
Church; He who, having declared himself offended at himself, for that which he
had done, had obtained of the Church, to be admitted to Penance, for the time
that his Penance continued, was prayed for by the Church, that his sin might
be pardoned, in order to communion with the Church. The time of his Penance
being completed, his absolution was the restoring of him to communion with the
Church, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. This is that absolution upon which
the Church warranteth his pardon, not by pronouncing him pardoned, but
supposing him qualified for it, by that disposition which his Penance had
produced. And though, afterward, the form of absolution changed, and was
pronounced by way of sentence, not by way of Prayer desired; yet was there
still the more doubt to be made of the validity thereof, the more confidence it
signified; because the more trust was reposed in the power of the Church, the
less provision was made for that disposition which the Gospel, before the
being of the Church, requires. One thing more I desire may be considered in
the practice of the ancient Church, to evidence the same, which is this; The
Church, being necessitated to abate of the primitive strictness, and to admit
all manner of sins to reconcilement by Penance, that they might the better
answer their trust to God, in not warranting the pardon of sin without
reasonable trial of repentance, took a course of lengthning the time of
Penance, during which, the conversation of the Penitent might yield assurance
of it. For the Canons, whereby so many years Penance is prescribed upon such
and such sins, were couched in writing long after the times of Montanus or
Novatians; And therefore the customs, whereby they came in force before they
came in writing, had their beginning from that obligation which the Church
desired to discharge, of not warranting forgiveness of sin, but upon due
grounds. In this case then, and generally, whosoever was enjoined Penance, to
qualify him for communion with the Church, if he did any eminent act which
might evidence the sincerity and zeal of his conversion, or his forwardness and
eagerness in taking revenge upon himself, was not only of custom and course,
so much the easier readmitted by the Church, but was ordered by the Canons to
be so much the easier and sooner readmitted. For evidence whereof, as also of
diverse other particulars here alleged, I will remit the Reader that would be
informed to Morinus his great work de administratione Poenitentiae. It shall
serve my turn here to point out to you, the ground which these effects evidence
to be this; That the Catholic Church proceeded not in binding and loosing, as
if it had any power to give pardon at large; But as supposing, that those that
are bound by the Church, cannot be loosed but by the Church; nor loosed by the
Church, but supposing the disposition that qualifieth for pardon produced in
them by that Penance, which the authority thereof constrains to undergo. And
therefore, that, in the power of injoyning Penance fitting, as well as of
declaring pardon, the power of forgiving sins in the Church, is by the
tradition of the Church declared to consist, I will conclude with the words of
Firmilianus, Bishop of Casarea Cappadocia, in his Leter to S. Cyprian, among S.
Cyprians LXXV. He says, that they used in their parts to hold Synods every
year, Ut si qua graviora sunt, communi consilio dirigantur; Lapsis quoque
fatribus, and post lavacrum salutare a Diabolo vulneratis, per poenitentiam
medela quaeratur; Non quasi a nobis remissionem peccatorum consequantur, sed ut
per nos ad intelligentiam delictorum suorum convertantur, and domino before
satisfacere cogantur. This business of greater weight may be ordered by common
advice; And remedy found by Penance, for brethren that have fallen away, being
wounded by the Devil, after the laver of salvation; Not as if they got pardon
of sins from us; but that, being, by our means converted to understand their
own sins, they may be constrained to make the fuller satisfaction to God.
These are the very terms upon which my opinion stands.

Let us now compare the Original and general practice of the Church, with that
which we have in the Apostles writings, and say, by the agreement, whither
their authority were the beginning of it or not. Shall we think that all who
ever questioned the reconciling of some sins, were utterly void of common
sense, in imagining, that the Apostle to the Hebrews, and S. John, writing of
the sin unto death, intended not to speak of that pardon which the Church may
or ought to give or not give, when we find no other motive for that severity,
but never see any of the Church except, that they concern not that purpose,
but, well and good, that they serve not to prove it? In like manner you have
seen S. Paul witness the order then in the Church, to mourn for those that
were excluded the communion of the Church: You have seen S. John and S. James,
after our Savior, signify, that the means of procuring remission of sin by
the Church, is to be expected from the prayers of the Church. You may see on
the other side, the primitive Church make great demonstration of sorrow, at the
discovery of those sins, for which some body is shut out of the Church, or
reduced to Penance; As you may see by the authorities alleged in Grotius, upon
1 Cor. V. 2. and by Epiphanius his Exposition of 2. Cor. XII. 21. Haer. LIX.
especially by that eminent example of Natalis in Eusebius Eccles. Hist. V. 28.
And, in the solemn service of the Church, before the celebration of the
Eucharist, from the beginning, you have seen a Prayer appointed to be made for
those that were under Penance, (as well as for those that were not baptized,
and those that were vexed with evil Spirits) that so they might be dimissed
before the Eucharist, to which they were not to be admitted: I say, therefore,
they who see this, if they will see what they do see, have evidence, what the
Apostles instituted in the Church; as also upon what ground, and to what
purpose, by what the Church immediately after them did practice.

A third thing there is, which visibly derives, not only these Ordinances, but
the true intent and meaning of them, from the institution of the Apostles; and
that is the indulgence which S. Paul uses, in abating the Penance of that
incestuous person whom I spoke of at Corinth. Indulgence in Ammianus, signifies
the discharging of taxes imposed upon the Provinces of the Roman Empire, by an
act of Grace of the Emperors, upon remonstrance of reasons, wherefore this or
that Province might deserve to be eased. What can be more like this, then the
abatement of that hardship, whereby, those that were prescribed Penance, were
to demonstrate their inward repentance to the Church? S. Paul, we see, upon
representation of the submission of the Church, and the guilty person both, to
the censure which he had ordered, and of the real demonstration of sorrow made
on his part, and the intercession of the Church for his reconcilement, thus
condescends; To whom you grant any thing, I also grant it. For if I have
granted any thing, it is for your sakes that I have granted it to him whom I
have granted it, in the person of Christ, that Satan may have no advantage over
us. For we are not ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor. II. 10. 11. I showed you
before, two reasons, which S. Paul may be thought to point at by these words.
For, he acknowledges by the premises* ^ ^ery considerable demonstration of
conversion in the penitent, sufficient to argue, that S. Paul thought him
really qualified for remission of sin. But, in regard he declares here, that
it is for the Churches sake, that he condesce^^eth, to prevent the advantage
that Satan might have against them, he intima^^^ a jealousy of some mutiny in
the Church, against his authority, in case he condescended not. For, though he
grant absolution in this regard; yet, he may well say, he grants it in the
person of Christ, though we suppose the party not really qualified for it,
supposing that he does it to preserve the Unity of the Church, chiefly
concerning the common good of Christ's flock. For, what S. Paul does by virtue
of the office committed to him by Christ, that, he may well say he does in the
person of Christ, as tending to the upright discharge of his office. By the
former of these reasons, we evidently see the intent and effect of the Keys of
the Church, in purging of sin, by the discipline of Penance. For, if
indulgence be granted in consideration of evidence that appears, to ground a
presumption, that the party is qualified for remission of sins, in the
judgment of the Church; then is all the discipline of Penance to no other
purpose, but, to oblige sinners to take that course, whereby they may appear to
the Church qualified for remission of sin. But that which S. Paul here does,
is the very same, that the primitive Church always did from the beginning.
For, whosoever showed such zeal in taking revenge upon himself for his
transgressions, that the Church might be satisfied, that God remained satisfied
of his repentance; to him, the severity of this discipline was so fully
released, that those strict Canons, that enjoined so many years Penance for
diverse great sins, may seem to have been but threatenings, inviting to show
that zeal in conversion from sin, that the Church might have cause to be
satisfied of their inward repentance. And, as often as there was fear of schism
in any Church, the practice of the primitive Church witnesses, how ready they
were to receive those that would return, abating the hardship of Penance. The
reason being this, that, what the Church condescended to for the avoiding of a
greater mischief to the body thereof, which is Schism, in that, she could not
be understood to warrant forgiveness of sins, to those whom she received,
further then that disposition of mind, which the parties themselves know that
they returned with, might warrant it. For, in as much as it was evident, that
the Church waved the rule, by which they used to proceed, for unities sake; it
remained also evident, that the charge of making good that disposition which
qualifieth before God for the communion of the Church, devolves upon the
conscience of them, that impose the necessity of waving such wholesome rules
upon the Church, whatsoever the form were, in which they were reconciled.

Let us now see, whether the primitive practice of the Church will justify the
voluntary confession of secret sins to the Church, as the means to obtain the
pardon of them at Gods hands. Tertullian in his Book de Poenitentia, is very
earnest in persuading, not those that were fallen into notorious sins, (for
what need he persuade them to undergo Penance, who, if they would continue
Christians; that is, if they would enjoy the communion of the Church; could not
avoid it?) but as it appears by his words, those that could not be constrained
to have recourse to that Penance, which the Church required for the purging of
their sins, or, for assurance that they were purged. For, when he
pronounces, that, sins of the will, which no man but the party is guilty to,
are to be purged by this Penance, (as he does in the third and fourth Chapters
of that Book) shall we imagine, that he undertakes of his own head, to bring in
a thing that was not wont to be done in the Church? Then might he have been
rejected as well as his Master Montanus, when he went about to impose new Laws
upon the Church. But those new Laws, I show you, were excepted against from the
beginning of pretending them. Let any man show me, that voluntary confession of
secret sins was ever exceped against in Tertullian, who writ that Book when he
was of the Catholic Church, earnestly persuading to it. Likewise, though he
writ his Book de P^dicitia, when he was become a Montanist; yet it is easy to
discern what he speaks in it as a Montanist, by discerning, what the Catholic
Church contests, and what it allows, of his doctrine. In the seventh Chapter of
that Book, it is manifest, that he calls those sins to Penance, which, he
were a mad man that should take, either for scandalous, or for notorious. The
Novatians, being a branch of the Montanists, and refusing to reconcile the
greatest sins, are to be thought to have followed their order, in reconciling
less sins, as it is manifest by S. Ambrose, de Poenit. V. 2. that they did.
Therefore they, and therefore the Catholic Church did practice the discipline
of Penance, upon sins neither notorious nor scandalous. In S. Cyprian^ you have
several places, where he mentions Penance for those sins, which were to be
confessed, according to the custom of the Church, after a certain time of
humiliation; when* they were to be admitted to imposition of hands, that is, to
the prayers of the Church, for the pardon of him, whom the Bishops blessing
(which the ^mposition of hands signifies) acknowledged hopeful for remission
of sins. Epist. X. and LV. The same S. Cypriane de lapsis, manifestly
instances in those that had committed Idolatry secretly, or had resolved
toward it, what befell them, because they revealed it not to the Church; so
that sometimes, they did reveal it. Here comes in the fact of Nectarius,
related by Socrates V. 19. because, the custom being, to confess to a Priest
deputed to that purpose, sins not otherwise known (who was to direct what she
should publicly declare, when she came before the congregation) a certain
noble Woman, whose case is there related, proceeded to declare that, which
caused such scandal, that thereupon Nectarius, then Bishop of Constantinople,
thought fit to put down the office which that Priest then held and executed, of
receiving the confession of those sins, which were afterward in part to be
made known to the Church, as the Priest entrusted should direct. For Socrates,
relating the discourse which he had with the Priest, which advised Nectarius to
abolish the office aforesaid; says that he told him, it was to be feared, that
he had given occasion to bring S. Paul's precept to no effect, which says,
Communicate not in the fruitless works of darkness, but rather reprove them;
Which must suppose the publishing of those sins, which a man may pretend, by
brotherly correction, to restore. And it is manifest, that secret confession of
sins has remained in the Eastern Church, and in that of Constantinople
particularly, even to this time* So that no man can imagine, that it was
abrogated by Nectarius. Origin in Psalm XXXVII. Hom. II. advises, indeed, to
look about you for a skilful Physician, to whom you may open the disease of
your soul; good reason. For, there being a number of Presbyters by whom every
Church was governed; and, it being in a man's choice, whom he would have
recourse to, were he not to blame, that should not make diligent choice? But,
when he advises further, that, if he think the sin fit to be declared to the
assembly of the Church, as, where it is to be cured; does he not require
necessary Penance, upon voluntary confessions? S. Ambrose de P^nit. II. 7. I.
6. II. 8. 9. labors to abate the shame of confessing sins. If he speak of
public sins, there can be no reason why: For, what has he to do to abate
that shame that cannot be avoided? That which may be avoided, is that, which
comes by confessing such sins, as it is in a man's power to conceal. The same
is evident in S. Augustin^, Hom. ult. ex L. And is further cleared by this,
that it is evident, that, he who was discovered, not to have discovered to the
Church that sin, which he was privy to, but the world was not, is, by many
acts of the Church, constrained to undergo Penance for that default. And, in
the Eliberitan^ Canons, it is provided, that he who confesses of his own
accord, shall come off with a lighter Penance; he who is revealed by another,
shall be liable to a harder censure. Can. LXXVI. But no evidence can be so
effectual, as the introducing of the Law of auricular confession; that is, of
confessing once a year, as well as receiving the Eucharist once a year. For, be
it granted, as it is most true, that this Law comes into force and effect, by
the secular power of those soveraignties of Christendom, which, complying with
the interest of the Church of Rome, have agreed, and do agree to inact the
decrees of those Councils, which have been held by the authority of it, (or the
provisions thereof, during the time that no Councils are held) by temporal
penalties upon their iubjects; Is it therefore imaginable, that the Council
could have pretended to introduce this limitation, and demand the secular power
to inact it, had it not been a custom in force before that act was done, that
people should submit themselves to Penance for those sin^es, which the Church,
without themselves, could not charge them with? Could any man offer so much
violence to his own reason, as to affirm that which himself cannot believe, he
would easily be convinced, by producing the fashion of Ashwednesday, and the
order, for the greatest part of Christians, to declare themselves Penitents, at
the beginning of Lent, with a pretense of obtaining absolution, to the intent
of receiving the communion of the Eucharist at Easter. Which, being more
ancient then that law, sufficiently demonstrateth, that the effect of it was
not to introduce the confession of secret sins, which always had been in use
and force in the Church* but, expressly to limit and determine that which had
been always done formerly, for the future to be done by all, and at the least
once a year.

It remains now, to show, the original and general practice of the Church,
that there is no Tradition to evidence, that no sin after Baptism can obtain
remission but by the Church; (speaking of such sins as make the grace of
Baptism void) which is sufficiently done already, if we remenber, that, not
only the Mont^nists, or the Novatians, but the Church also did sometimes
exclude some sins from all hope of reconciliation by the Church, not
excluding them, nevertheless, from hope of pardon with God; but, not engaging
the Church to warrant it. For I demand, in what consideration that pardon is
obtained, which the Church supposes possible for them to obtain. Is it not upon
the same, score as all Christians obtain padon of sin? To wit, by being
qualified for it, with that disposition of mind, which the Gospel requires;
which therefore may be obtained, without the Ministry of the Church. For, if
it be said, that these persons would willingly undergo Penance, upon condition
of being restored to the Communion of the Church (upon supposition, that, by
the Ministry thereof they are restored to Gods grace) and that, therefore, the
desire of reconciliation by the Church supplies it, as the desire of Baptism is
accepted, when it cannot be had; If this be said, I will allow, that he who
refuses the Ministry of the Church, (tendering him a reasonable presumption of
attaining reconcilement with God, by the means of it, according to the just
Laws of Christianity) can have no cause to promise himself pardon without it.
In the mean time, it is not the desire of reconcilement by the Church, that
qualifies him for remission of sin, but only takes away the bar, that
hinders Gods grace, to work that disposition in him, which qualifies for it.
For, if it be a part of Christianity, to be a member of the Catholic Church,
then are not they capable of the promises made to Christians, that will not
seek them by the Ministry of the Church, when, and how far, and according as
their Christianity shall* oblige them to seek them. To the same purpose, I
allege also the second reason of S. Paul's indulgence, and the effects of it,
in the practice of the primitive Church; To wit, the admitting of those that
had committed Idolatry in time of persecution, (or, who were otherwise born out
in their sins by faction in the Church) to communicate with the Church, when,
in such cases, there could be no presumption of sufficient disposition in the
parties for forgiveness from God, but only to avoid a breach in the Church,
of all things most prejudicial to the general good of the Body. For, can
there be any appearance, that the Church, in such cases, could be satisfied of
the true and sufficient conversion of those that are admitted upon such terms,
when, it is manifest, that they are not admitted of choice, but to avoid a
further inconvenience? Wherefore, seeing the Church could not justify the
doing of it, if there were not possibility of their being qualified for the
Communon of the Church; it follows, that this possiblity consists, in that the
means of grace, being sufficient for all within the Church, may be effectual
without the ministry thereof, provided it be within the unity of it.

Here I must allege the custom, even of the primitive Church, imposing no
Penance upon Clergymen ^ that weae degraded for those crimes, for which Laymen
were reduced to Penance. I remember the first Book de Synedris, alleges this
for an objection against the necessity of excommunication, seeing it was not
necessary for the Clergy. Not considering that excommunication is abated by
Penarice, as Penance is abated by degradation, in the Clergy. But, casting a
foul aspersion upon the whole Church, for imposing Penance upon the people,
when as nothing required it, if the Clergy needed it not: And this upon a
mistake, whether in point of fact, or, in point of right. For, it is not true,
that the Clergy were not subject to Penance, especially in the first times of
Christianity, either when the crime* was of a deeper nature, then such as
ordinary Laymen did Pehance for; Or, when a Clergyman, having been censured to
communicate among the People (which was degradation at that time) relapsed.
Though afterward, they were remitted to do their Penance in private, not
bringing them before the Congregation, for the prayers thereof with imposition
of hands. Neither is the reason which the ancient Canons give to be neglected,
in point of right. For, the loss of their rank in the Church, being to them a
rebuke, whereof Lay Christians are not capable; it is necessary that a
difference should be made between them and the people. Especially, the interest
of the Church requiring it, in regard of another rule, that, no man that had
done Penance, should ever be admitted to the Clergy, because of the common
Christianity imbased in them who have done Penance, which, in those who are
promoted to the Clergy, is required, of the best. For those, who, for their
qualities might best serve the Church, if they had done Penance, were ever
after unserviceable; i^ not, might be restored. Whereby it appeateth, that the
Church presumed of them who knew their duty better then ordinary Christians,
that the loss of their rank would be sufficient to reduce them to true
repentance, without further constraint from the Church: As afterward they were
trusted to do their Penance in private. But this is full evidence, that the
Church did not think all sin incurable without the Keys of the Church; For
then, the Church could not have referred the applying of the means of pardon
which they procure, to any presumption of any man's good conscience. The like
appears in the reconciling of Heretics and Schismatics, to the unity of the
Church, by sholes, that is, by whole Churches at once; upon whom, as it is
impossible to imagine, that the discipline of Penance should pass, so is it
known, upon evidence of Historical truth, that those who were not to be
baptized again (as some Heresies were by the Canons in force) were admitted
only with Imposition of hands, that is, with the blessing of the Church,
acknowledging thenceforth to pray for them as Christians, not as those for whom
she prays that they may become Christians; Which, not supposing possibility of
pardon for them, not undergoing the discipline of the Church, could not have
been granted. I avow it to be truly said, in this case, that the Baptism
received among Heretics revives, and comes to effect, by this blessing of the
Church. For, seeing that the only necessary bar to the effect of it was, the
denying of that point of Christianity, which distinguishes every Heresy from
the Catholic Church; (or, the destroying of the unity of the Church, speaking
of Schismatics) those that so return, professing thenceforth the whole faith,
and maintaining the communion of the Church, cannot be said to want any thing
necessary to qualify them for the promises of Christianity. Seeing then this
possibility is not grounded upon the Ministry of the Church, which passes not
upon them, but upon the common profession of Christians, made by them when they
were baptized, and the taking away of that bar which made it ineffectuall
before, by returning to the unity of the Church, though without any ministration
of Penance; neither can it be said, that the disposition qualifying for
remission of sin, is not to be attained in the Church, without the Ministry
of the Church, by the discipline of Penance, nor, that it is attained by the
desire of it; but only, that the bar is removed by submitting to it. A
visible instance hereof I will propose, in the reconciling of England to the
Church of Rome in Q. Mary's days, an act of the highest nature that the power
of the Keys could do; And yet it is notorious, that pardon and absolution, and
the blessing of the Church was given them, who could not be induced to restore
the Church goods, seized by Hen. the eighth. A thing excluding all pretense,
for any presumption of true conversion in them whom it concerned, and yet ^ound
necessary, for the restoring of the Body in unity. But so, that the said
necessity made it to be evidently for the general good, even upon these terms.
For, maintaining those, who could not be induced to do right in the point, in
the unity of the Church, there was no reason why the Church should be thought
to warrant that absolution, as to God, which it grants, as to the Church;
Because it appears, that it is granted to avoid a greater mischief: Leaving
them who find themselves concerned, by the ministry of the Church, the
communion whereof they regain, to be reduced to that course which may assure
their absolution as to God. But, I use this instance only ad hominem, that my
reason may be understood, not intending to justify the proceeding in point of
right; as I do undertake to justify the Council of Nicaea, in admitting the
Meletians, who were guilty of the crime of Schism, not only without
satisfaction of their repentance, but all in their ranks, only suspending the
exercise of their offices, till those that were presently possessed should
depart. Or, as I might undertake to justify Pope Melchiades, in offering to do
the like, for the Denatists, for which he is commended by S. Austine Epist.
XLVII. which the Church, supposing Schism to be a mortal sin, (that is, of
that number which the now Church of Rome injoyns Penance) could not do upon
other terms then I have said; and, if it had thought no sin reconcilable
without the Church, could by no means have done. The same is to be said of
those that are excommunicated, and cast out of the Church without cause. For,
as no man ever doubted that to be a case which comes to pass, so can no
Christianity allow, that a man should be excluded the Kingdom of God for
another man's fault. He therefore, that has the knowledge in Christianity, and
the resolution for it, to keep himself to the duty of a Christian in such a
case; (though, being destitute of all advantage by the communion of the Church,
it is difficult to do) he, I say, shall obtain pardon of sin, without help of
the Church, and not by desiring the Ministry thereof, otherwise then, as not
desiring of communion with the Church, remains a bar to the work of Gods
grace.

In fine, consider the primititive order of the Church, and that of the Church
of Rome at this day, by the law of secret confession once a year. For, he that
considers, how much business the reconciling of a Penitent made the Church in
those days, will never imagine, that it could be presumed, that all sins, which
now come under secret confession, should then be expiated by the Keys of the
Church. I have given you the testimony of Origin, directing, to make choice of
some of the Presbyters of the Church, to make acquainted with secret sin,
that, if he should require Penance to be done in the face of the Congregation,
his prescription might be followed. This inforces us to understand the other
part of the alternative; that, if he required no such thing, it should be
enough, to take that course of humiliation and mortification which he should
prescribe, in private. And truly, one of the Canons of the Council at Elvira
XXXII. orders Penance to be enjoined by a Priest, not by the Bishop. Which I
understand to be, in private, and not in public. Allowing it very probable,
that this is not* properly counted Penance, but only suspension from the
Eucharist, enjoined by some of those Canons in some case, XXI. L. LXXVII. and
is opposed to Penance, Can. XIV. So that, probably, one of the Presbyters might
enjoin it in* secret by these Canons. But otherwise, seeing that, all this
while, there was no Penance, but by order of the Bishop, (or as in some of S.
Cyprians Epistles, of the Bishop and Presbyters, sometimes, when the case was
difficult, as in Firmilianus quoted before, by order of a Synod) what appearance
is there, in common reason, that all sins, that now come under secret
confession, could then come under the Keys of the Church? In the order which
Nectarius abolished, any man may discern, there was nothing but a course of
abridging public business of the Church, by referring Penitents to one Priest
set aside to that purpose. When that course was abrogated, still they had
recourse to the Bishop and Presbyters; but it is manifest, so many could not be
dispatched as before. And now it is manfest, that* to require of every man, to
confess all the sins that ever he did since he confessed last, would be an
unsufferable torture to men's consciences: And therefore, it is only required,
that they confess those which they have in remembrance. I ask then, how those
which they have not in remembrance come pardoned? If by inward repentance,
restoring the disposition of a Christian, it is that which I seek. If, by being
willing to confess them, if I had them in remembrance, he that is not
qualified for remission of sins as Christianity requires, is not qualified,
because he would have been so qualified, had it not been his own fault. I add
further, that it is at this day resolved by Casuists of very good note, that a
Penitent is bound in conscience to impose upon himself further Penance then
that which his Confessor injoyneth, in case he be satisfied in conscience, that
he has not imposed that which is sufficient. For, in the case of clave
errante, it is manifest, that there is no remission by the Keys, and yet
remission is to be had, by the Gospel, antecedent to the Church. If then, a
man's own Christianity may supply that means of forgiveness which the Keys of
the Church fail of procuring, it is manifest, that the use of them is not
absolutely necessary, for every particular Christian, though absolutely
necessary for the whole Body of the Church. Add hereunto the restimonies of
Ecclesiastical Writers, by which it appears, that, as they maintained the
discipline of Penance, (which I also would maintain so far as truth will
allow) so they supposed remission of sins attain^ble without it. The
exhortations of Tertullian and S. Ambrose, to Ecclesiastcal Penance, will no
way infer, that it was then actually a Law in force, that all sins, that void
the grace of Baptism, should be made known to the Church, for the obtaining of
pardon by the Keys of it: For how ill does i^ become any Law to beg
obedience, by alleging reasons which must enforce it, if they be good, were
there no Law? But, on the other side, what express testimonies, what necessary
consequences there are to infer, that there was no such Law in the primitive
Church, I remit the Reader to the Collections of the A^^hbishop of Spalato 5.
VII. 10-20. and to the answer to the Jesuits challenge in Ireland.

CHAP. IX. Penance is not required to redeem tho debt of temporal punishment
when the sin is pardoned. What assurance of forgiveness, the law of
auricular Confession, as it is used in the Church of Rome, procures Of
injoyning Penance, after absolution performed. Setting aside abuses, the Law is
agreeable to Gods. Of the order taken by the Church of England.
ANd now it is time to infer from the premises, the judgment that we are to
make, of the law of secret confession and Penance, in the Church of Rome,
premising in the first place, (that which is evident; supposing the premises)
that the works of Penance (which they call Satisfactions, because they will
have them to make satisfaction for the debt of temporal punishment remaining,
when the guilt and stain of sin is abolished) were never required by the
Church, but according to the word of God, to render the conversion of the
Penitent so sincere and resolute, as may qualify him for pardon and Gods
grace. It is not necessary, for this purpose, that I undertake here to show,
that God, pardoning sin, cannot, or ever does reserve a debt of temporal
punishment, to be inflicted in consideration of it. It is manifest to any man
that is neither acted by passion, nor by faction, that, the death which God
inflicted on David's child gotten in adultery, and the other judgments which
the Prophet pronounces against him, 1 Samuel XII. 10-11. were punishments
inflicted in consideration of those sins which the nature and kind of them
answers expressly, for murder; that the sword shall not depart from his house:
for adultery; that his wives should be defiled before the Sun. Therefore, when
the Prophet says to him; The Lord has set aside thine iniquity, thou shall
not die; It will be requisite to take notice, that, though his sin is
pardoned, speaking absolutely, because his life his spared, which was forfeit
by Gods Law, (though into no man's hands but Gods) yet, this pardon extended not
to extinguish the sentence pronounced, nor yet that which he proceeds further
to pronounce, concerning the child's death. Whither you will say, that, in such
a case, sin is remitted; because, absolutely, the man is restored to Gods
grace; or not remitted, because, as to the punishments allotted, he suffers by
Gods vindicative justice; is a controversy about words, which I will not spend
words to determine. This cannot be denied, that, neither Gods original
justice, nor any covenant of his with man, hinders him so to proceed. But what
is this to the intent of Penance imposed by the Church; which, I have
evidenced, both by the Scriptures, and the original practice of the whole
Church, to have pretended the abolishing of the guilt and stain of sin?
Indeed, it is not to be denied, that there is something more in that Penance
which the Church imposes. For, he that exacts the same revenge upon himself,
at his own discretion and conscience, which the Church, by the Canons thereof,
should exact, pretends onelp to satisfy his own discretion and conscience,
that God is satisfied with his repentance; (And there lies the danger, of
satisfying a man's self with a palliative cure, instead of a sound one) whereas,
he that does it upon the sentence of the Church, pretends to satisfy the
Church, that God is satisfied with it, and to assure himself of his cure. But,
when this satisfaction to the Church presupposes satisfaction to God, (at
least, a presumption thereof, whither only legal, or also reasonable) well
may I, without this exception, make this the pretense of Ecclesiastical
Penance. Neither had there been any cause, to question the doctrine and
practice of the Catholic Church, concerning the satisfaction of Penance, had
not the Church of Rome suffered it to be taught, (for, I should do them wrong
to say, that they have enjoined it to be taught) that it tends to recompense
the debt of temporal punishment, remaining when the sin is remitted. For
though, under the Gospel also, God may decree temporal punishment upon that
sin, which afterward comes to be remitted repentance; yet, he who is restored
to the state of Gods grace, (to whom all things cooperate to good, as S. Paul
says Romans VIII. 28.) though he suffer temporal punishment for his sin by Gods
justice, yet by Gods grace, to which he is restored, it is converted into the
means of salvation, and of bringing to pass Gods everlasting purpose of it.

Before I go further, I must call you to mind that which I said of the change
of attrition into contrition, how it may be allowed by the covenant of Grace,
and how it intimates an abusive opinion, that the change which qualifieth a
man for the promises which the Gospel tendreth, takes effect in consideration
of the intrinsecall worth of it; and not only of Gods promise, which you have
seen to be false. This dispute was a long time canvased in the Schools, without
any reference to the remission of sin by the Keys of the Church. But, the
difficulty being started, that Confession not made in charity, (that is, out of
the love of God above all things) may satisfy the positive precept, but cannot
avail to the remission of sin; Some sought a salve for this sore in the form of
Absolution: which then proceeded, partly as a Prayer, partly as a definitive
sentence: For, they thought the Prayer obtained that Grace, which might be a
due ground for the sentence. But, when the opinion prevailed, that the form
ought to be indicative, it remained to say, how Confession and Absolution
should render him contrite, that comes only attrite. Thomas Aquinas, to say
how the Keys of the Church may be understood to attain the production of Grace,
imagined the immediate effect of them to be a certain ornament of the soul,
fitting it for Grace; by virtue whereof, that Grace which a man gets not by
Penance when he is not contrite, quickens in him when he becomes contrite; As
he that is baptized without that resolution which obtains the promises,
becomes estated in them when it is rectified. And this opinion had vogue among
his followers till the last age before this; when, finding it more proper to
raise then to resolve questions, it was laid aside by Cardinal Ca^etane first,
then by the rest of his followers. In the mean time, the dispute of the change
of attrition into contrition remained, most maintaining contrition to be
necessary before absolution, till the Council of Trent; upon the decree whereof
Sess. XIV. cap. VI. Melchior Canus first maintained, sorrow conceived upon meet
fear of punishment, with the Keys, to qualify for pardon of sin. Whose
opinion is now grown so ordinary, that those, who hardly satisfy themselves in
giving warning of the harm their own doctrine may do, go down the stream,
notwithstanding, in yielding to an opinion that has so great vogue. I do not
intend hereby to say, that that the Council of Trent has decreed this opinion,
and obliged all to maintain it. The terms which it pitched upon are these;
That, sorrow for sin in consideration of the deformity of it, and the fear of
Hell, with hope of pardon, but without any intent to sin again, though of it
self it bring not pardon, yet disposes to the attaining thereof, by the Keys
of the Church. Which may be true, though, only sorrow for the offense, and for
Gods sake, qualify for pardon by the Keys of the Church; if we suppose, that
sorrow for a man's own sake, which, of necessity must first arise in him who
discovers himself surprised in sin, to be the way and the mean, which Gods
spirit actually assisteth him with, that has forfeited the gift of it, to work
him to that sorrow for Gods sake, which qualifieth for pardon by the Keys of
the Church.

Now, what I am to say, will easily appear before I say it, to him that
considers what I have said concerning the disposition that qualifieth for
remission of sin, without consideration of the Church, and the Keys of it:
The Ministry whereof, suppose instituted to procure that disposition, as
supposing the Covenant of Grace which requires it. That he who finds himself in
the state of damnation by sin, must, if God send him justifying faith, in the
next instance, believe, that he is predestinate to life; (without that
resolution for his future Christianity, which necessarily includes sorrow for
the offense of sin, and for Gods sake; without ground to presume of his
perseverance till death in it) I have showed to be an imagination utterly
destructive to Christianity. That he who confesses out of slavish fear, being
absolved, should get that love of God above all which his pardon supposes;
though an imagination not more destructive to Christianity then that, may be
destructive to the salvation of more Christians. That slavish fear of the
punishment due for sin, though in a person guilty of sin, and not cured of
the love of sin, is the work of the Holy Ghost, helping him that has
forfeited the gift of it; the way of recovering the state of Grace lost
demonstrateth. For, if the Holy Ghost work not upon him that is in ^^n, how
shall he recover out of it? But is it strange, that he, who finding himself in
the state of damnation by sin, knows, the only means to be saved is to live as
a Christian for the future, should resolve so to do in obedience to God and for
his service, which he cannot do without that sorrow, which the present loss of
his favor implies? Surely, supposing the assistance of Gods spirit, it cannot
be otherwise. If this be the case of a Christian as a Christian, what can the
Keys of the Church (founded by God upon supposition of Christianity, to bring
men to it, and to salvation by it) do, but be instrumental and ministerial to
the work of grace in this case? Confession therefore cannot require contrition
(that it, sorrow for Gods sake) nor absolution effect it; But confession must
be the means to procure it, absolution the effect that must suppose it. When
that course of humiliation and mortification, which the Keys of the Church
require, shall have had the operation, in settling that resolution for
Christianity, which they may presume upon for the future, the sentence of
obsolution recovereth the effect of Baptism, and renews* the gift of the Holy
Ghost, which, perfect love that casts out fear (according to the Apostle)
attends. This, the primitive and Catholic practice of the Church, as well as
the covenant of Grace, and the condition thereof, demonstrateth. It was not
then the custom to receive confession of sin, and immediately to give
absolution; binding the Penitent over to make satisfaction for a debt of
temporal punishment, remaining when the sin is done away. The first thing was
to be admitted to Penance; to undertake the state, and habit, and fashion of a
mourne^ during the time: and so, to gain the prayers of the Church for his
pardon, to be joined with a man's own endeavors. Is not the means of changing
attrition into contrition visible, according to this course? Can it be visible
by a word of the Penitent, though professing, at the present, to love God, and
hate sin above all things? That the sentence of absolution should create that
disposition which it finds not, agrees no beter with the original practice
of the Church, then with the original condition upon which we are baptized.
And, whatsoever Ornament the soul may be imagined to get by it, that grace,
which quickens in him that becomes contrite, can never be imputable to the Keys
of the Church in Penance, which were employed without effecting it. Nor can it
be said to quicken by virtue of any such imaginary ornament, which, by virtue
of the Covenant of Baptism, quickens of course, without imagining of it. The
bringing in of a definitive sentence of absolution, instead of the Prayers of
the Church, which a man was admitted to by undertaking Penance, (the communion
of the Eucharist being his actual and final reconcilement) argues as much
change in the inward Christianity, as in the outward form of the Church. But,
If the Prayers of the Church, joined with the Penance of the Penitent, be a
competent means to regain the state of Grace, a Prayer, immediately upon
confession, immediately before absolution, is not. How much less since the
Council of Trent, which makes the definitive sentence the substance, the
Prayers that are used, but the accessories, of the means of regaining the state
of Grace by Penance.

I proceed not hereupon to say, that the Ministry of Penance becomes void and
uneffectuall to the purging of sin, where it is exercised upon these terms.
For, as he who relies upon the sentence of absolution, for the producing of
that disposition which is necessarily requisite to the remission of sin, must
needs ^ail of that which he promises himself, from that power of the Church,
which God never granted upon such terms; So, the imposing of Penance may be
understood to pretend the ransoming of temporal punishment no otherwise, then,
loosing the bond of sin, whereby it may be turned into a spiritual blessing.
For, though the granting of absolution, and the communion of the Eucharist
before Penance, is, in reason, and according to the original practice of the
Church, a contradiction to that sense; yet, nothing hinders the reason and the
faith of Christians to bear up, and not be carried away with those corruptions,
to which, the imperfection of Laws naturally induces the perverse inclinations
which we are born with. In the mean time it is worth the while to consider,
what consequences the conceit of infallibility in the Church (not
distinguishing whither the present or the Catholic) creates, as well in the
opinons of Doctors, as in the practice of people. There is so much difference
between the way of ministering of Penance in the primitive Churdh, and the
practice of Auricular Confession in the present Church of Rome, as must needs
signify, the hope of pardon to suppose the performance of Penance in the one;
in the other, to be grounded upon a sentence of absolution that supposes it
not; And yet, it will not be acknowledged, that there is any decay of
discipline, any fault, any defect in the Laws and Customs (for what is Law but
Custom; what rule is there for men's actions, that custom inforceth not?) of
the Church, that cause so much difference in the proceedings of it. Howsoever
the custom of redeeming Penance came into the Church, and, how prejudicial
soever the voyage of the H. Land, or the like, may have been to the discipline
of it; the application of temporal good to some spiritual end, was a poor
cloak for such a corruption, in comparison of that zeal to Christianity, which,
fighting for Christians against Infidels pretends. This is the most material
occasion that I find alleged, for that change which the discipline of the
Church has suffered, in granting absolution before Penance, To wit, the
indulgences granted them that undertook to fight for Christians against
infidels. And this is enough to render the abuse, and the decay of discipline
by the means thereof, visible. But when Indulgences are proposed for a small
sum of Money, (pre-supposing indeed such qualifications, as need not the
Indulgences, if rightly understood, and had, but as, not being rightly
understood and had, render the Indulgences dangerous delusions) whither poor
people will not rather be induced by our common corruption, to embrace that
sense which makes the pardon of their sins void, as so had; then that which
makes them to be deceived of their money to no effect by the Church, I leave to
the conscience of discreet Christians to judge. And, whither this be not
horribly to abuse the Keys of the Church, I leave to God and man to judge. In
the mean time, I only remind you of that difficulty which the ancient Church
made, in believing and admitting that those were saved, who, being admitted to
the communion of the Eucharist in danger of death, died before they could
accomplish that Penance, upon undertaking whereof they were admitted to it.
For, is not the case of him, that steddily purposes, to perform that Penance
which the Church imposes according to Rule, if he survive, much more hopeful
for salvation dying before, then his, that thinks his sin purged by the
sentence of absolution, without undertaking or performing any Penance at all,
in order to the pardon of it?

And here, I summon the Consciences of the Doctors of the Church of Rome.
Suppose a man take revenge upon himself, according to a good conscience, that
is, proportionably to the weight of his sin, according to the Rules that were
in force in more incorrupt times of the Church; another, according to the
doctrine that is current in the Church of Rome, professing himself truly sorry
for his sin, and receiving absolution, presumes of pardon for it, intending
to satisfy for temporal punishment that remains, as he is directed; whether
of these is upon the better ground? whether of them pretends to pardon upon the
better title, supposing the premises, concerning the Covenant of Grace? He,
who, satisfying his conscience, upon the original word of the Gospel, and the
primitive practice of the Church, that he has appeased the wrath of God by
taking revenge upon himself, and is thereby returned to his first resolution
for Christianity; Or he, who, being touched with sorrow for his sin, and
submitting the same to the Keys of the Church, has done what the current
practice thereof requires him to do, for redeeming the temporal punishment of
i^? For it is evident, in the doctrine of the Apostles, and the primitive
practice of the Church, that the satisfaction of Penance appeaseth the wrath of
God upon this ground, because it evidenceth that resolution for Christianity to
be restored, which a man otherwise ought not to presume of in himself, when he
knows in himself, that it has been interrupted; much less ought the Church
to presume of it in him, when the interruption thereof has been visible to the
Church. He then, who, having conceived sorrow for his ^^nne, submits himself
to the Keys of the Church, to be restored to Gods grace by the ministry
thereof, and does as he is enjoined to do, if the Church, and the person whom
the Church trusts for him do their duty, (that is, supposing the Laws of the
Church to be good and sufficient, and well and sufficiently exercised) has a
good and sufficient presumption that he is restored. But he who proceeds upon
the common faith of the Gospel, and the primitive practice of the Church,
(whereby all that is doubtful in Christianity must be resolved) attaineth that
assurance of his restoring to the state of salvation, which, I have showed, is
attainable. But, not supposing the Laws of the Church to be either sufficient,
or sufficiently executed, that presumption of pardon, which can be built upon
it, is neither good nor sufficient, but rather peremtory to salvation, by
palliating the crime which it ought to cure. Now, for the ground which the
Church of Rome gives a reasonable man to presume hereof, it is not to be denied
or dissembled, that the Council of Trent, Sess. XIV. cap. VIII. declares, that
it is the duty of all Confessors, to enjoin wholesome and competent Penance upon
all Penitents, (and, that, by virtue of S. Paul's charge, 1 Timothy V. 22. (upon
which the Power of the Church in imposing Penance, is truly grounded; seeing
the blessing of the Church, signifies by imposition of hands, is as much
granted in Penance, as in ordaining) least they become partakers of other men's
sins) declaring withal, the intent which they ought to aim at in imposing
them; But we know also and see thereby, that there is no effectual course
taken to see that this be done: (whither it be possible, to take a course that
may be effectual to be done or not) And we know besides, how great vogue that
opinion has) which makes attrition with the Keys of the Church, (that is,
the shame of declaring a man's sin to his Confessor) a sufficient disposition
to forgiveness: And therefore it is justly to be questioned, whither the Law
of secret confession, with these abusive opinions, and scandalous practices,
under which it is now exercised in the Church of Rome, is for the best or not;
That is to say, whether the greatest part of them who submit to it, do not
unduly persuade themselves that their sins are cured by it, when indeed they
are not. For, considering the ground of all superstition, and counterfeit
religion to be this, that man, sensible of the wrath of God due to his sin on
the other side, yet favorable to that concupiscence which sin pleases on
the other^side, desires a color to persuade himself that he is reconciled to
God, by such means, as indeed serves not the turn; I know not whether
persuasion is the more catching, (supposing the present division between the
Reformation and the Church of Rome) that a man is justified by believing that
he is predestined to life, and by calling to mind the assurance which once he
has had of it; Or, that he has no more to do but to talk with his Confessor
and give him content, who, it is great odds, does not believe any Penance to be
required to qualify him for pardon, but to redeem the debt of temporal
punishment remaining after it is had.

Whereby we may conclude, what to think of the performing of Penance, after
absolution is pronounced. I do remember what I have said of S. James; that,
when he commanded the Presbyters of the Church to be sent for to the sick, and
to pray for him, with assurance of pardon for his sins, he supposes those
sins to be declared by him to them, (whereupon it follows immediately;
Confess your sins one to another, and pray for one another) together with his
present disposition in regard of them; and that, if the case were such as
required the hardship of laborious Penance, to satisfy the Church of the
sincerity of his conversion, though they prayed for him, (that is, suffered him
not to go out of the world without the communion of the Church) yet they bound
him over to perform that Penance, if he recovered, which the Church required in
the like cases. For, can any man certainly know, that the whole Church used so
to do, from the most ancient times that we have record of, and doubt, that the
Apostle, speaking of that very subject, should suppose the same? Neither do I
doubt, knowing what varieties fall out in all kinds of moral matters, that the
same proceeding may be either necessary, or reasonable, in other cases. But,
that the regular proceeding of the Catholic Church should be laid aside, that
no further satisfaction should be demanded, then, whether a man has performed
all that was enjoined him when he confessed last or not; this I say, leaves it
free to every man's interpretation, whether it tend to abolish the sin or not;
and by consequence, whether a man can, or ought so to rest satisfied, or
further, be bound to see himself qualified for pardon, according to the
Covenant of Grace. To which purpose, the form of absolution, by way of
pronouncing sentence not of seeking pardon from God, is to be considered. Not
that I doubt, that the Church has power to restore to communion with the
Church (which this sentence effects) and to loose the bond of that sin
which it has tied. For, if it be necessary for every Christian to be of the
Church, then is it necessary for him, to seek remission of those sins which
are under the Ministry of the Church, by the means which the Church has
appointed. But because I know, that the primitive form of absolution must needs
agree with those Scriptures, which show, the means of obtaining remission of
sin by the Church, for a great part, to consist in the prayers of the Church;
And that the effect thereof did consist in nothing else, but in being admitted
to the prayers thereof for Peniten^^, with imposition of hands signifying the
same. And therefore, the present form is an evidence, that the discipline of
the Church is decayed in the matter of Penance, since the zeal of Christianity
came to decay, after that the Powers of the world, professing Christianity,
could not but countenance it with those privililedges and penalties, which
necessarily follow the Religion of the State; and, by consequence, temporal
respects were great ingredients in persuading men to be Christians. What the
effect hereof may have been, I will not undertake. But, when the world is
obliged to take the sentence for good, as from God, and not obliged to
presuppose the means to produce that disposition, which only quilifieth for
pardon; is not the scandal probable, in, and to those, that have not more care
of their souls then they see the Church have? Sentence of absolution is
pronounced, Penance is reserved in regard of temporal penalties due; what does
this proceeding pretend, but, that he who says he is sorry for his sin, so
he be content to sue out his pardon from the Church, is qualified for it by the
Keys of the Church; that, is by the sentence of it, not by the Ministry of it,
in producing that disposition which qualifies for it. It is not then to be
said, that the Church, in the discipline of Penance, has not a certain
Jurisdiction, as every Corporation must necessarily have, in imitation of that,
which, by the Roman Laws, is first and originally called Jurisdiction, which
the sword of the Empire inforceth. For, if no Corporation can stand, without
power to provide Laws for themselves; if all such are mockeries, if they be not
enforced by penalties obliging obedience; then is the corporation of the
Church, if ordained by God, by God enabled to enforce and constrain obedience,
upon supposition, that a man desires to be saved by his Christianity; and, that
the communion of the Church is a part of it. And, the exercise of this power is
rightly called the Jurisdiction of the Church, which arises upon the orignall
constitution of it. But if this Jurisdiction suppose the Covenant of Grace, and
therefore, cannot discharge any man that is not qualified as it requires; then
is the sentence of absolution to presuppose, the disposition requisite for
pardon to have been produced by the Keys of the Church; that is, by using the
means, which the Church, as a Physician, prescribes; but further, as a Judge,
constrains him to ta^^^* that finds it requisite to be reconciled to the
Church, because he is a Christian.

And now, it will not be difficult to judge of the Law of auricular Confession
once a year, now in force, by the Council of Lateran, in the Church of Rome.
For, having marked the abuses hitherto reproved, so, that I cannot be taken, by
any man that has any conscience left, to allow any of them; and, having
formerly inferred, by necessary consequence, that it is in the power of the
Church, to limit and determine the circumstances of doing that which a good
conscience always will endure, and probably will require any man to do; I must
conclude it to be a Law which the Church has power to make. Not as if God had
commanded the Ministry of the Church to be secret; For, as I have showed from
the beginning, that the prayers of the Church are, by the appointiment of our
Lord Christ, and the practice of his Apostles, the means to obtain pardon; so I
have showed, that it was also practiced by the primitive Church. And therefore
I do maintain, that, from the beginning, there was not, nor could be any
difference, between the inward and outward Court of the Church, as now there
must needs be, wheresoever Excommunion is inflicted upon notorious sins, and,
sins that are not notorious, are cured in secret by the the Keys of the
Church. For, whether it were the knowledge of others, or a man's own conscience,
that brought his sins to be cured by the Ministry of the Church, they came
before those that managed the power of the Keys in behalf of the Church; and,
by their judgment, whether at large, or limited by Canons provided aforehand
for the Church, was the cure appointed. The Council of Trent grants, that God
has not forbidden public confession of secret sin. My reasons infer more;
That confession of sin in secret, is an abatement of that discipline, which
our Lord and his Apostles instituted, for the cure of sin by the Church; and
by consequence, an abatement to the efficacy of his Ordinance. Neither can any
thing be alleged for it, but the decay of Christianity, by the coming of the
world into the Church, and, the necessity which that brings upon the Church,
to abate of that which the primitive institution requires, that the Ordinances
of our Lord may be preserved, to such effects as can be obtained with the unity
of the Church. And therefore, I deny not, that this Law may be abused, to
become a torture, and snare, and an occasion of infinite scandals, to well
disposed Consciences. For, who will provide Laws for so vast a Body as the
whole Church of Christendom yet is, that shall give no occasion of offense?
They that pretend it are but Absoloms Disciples, that, to cure one, advance
innumerable. No more do I deny, that the skill of all Confessors, (that is, all
that must be trusted with that power which this Law constituteth) is not, nor
can probably be able to value the sins that are brought to them, and to
prescribe the cure which they requite; supposing their conscience such, as will
not fail to require that, which their skill finds to be requisite. In questions
of this nature, though it were to be wished that such Laws could be provided
for the Church, as, being unblameable, might render the Church unblameable;
Yet, they that are capable of giving sentence, what is best for so vast a body,
will find it best, (as in all other Corporations or Commonwealths) to improve
the Ordinances of God, to the best of that which can be obtained with the unity
of the Church.

And therefore, setting aside those gross abuses, which may follow upon the
persuasion, that those penalties which are to be imposed by the power of the
Keys, to produce that disposition which qualifieth penitents for remission of
sins, tend only to satisfy for the temporal penalty, remaining due when
the sin is pardoned; And, setting aside those abuses in the practice of
Penance which tend to introduce this persuasion; I must freely glorify God, by
freely professing, that, in my judgment, no Christian Kingdom or State, can
maintain it self to be that which it pretends, more effectually, then by
giving force and effect to the Law of private confession once a year, by such
means, as may seem both requisite and effectual to enforce it. Not that I do
condemn that order, which the Church of England, at the Reformation, contented
it self with, (as rendering the Reformation thereof no Reformation, and leaving
men destitute of sufficient means for the remission of sin after Baptism) to
leave it to the discretion and conscience of those who found themselves
burdened with sin, to seek help by the means of their Pastors, as appears
both in the Communion service, and in the visitation of the sick. But, because
I see the Church of England has failed of that great piece of Reformation,
which it aimed at in this point; To wit, the receiving of public Penance. This
aim, you shall find expressed, in the beginning of the Commination against
sinners, in these words; Brethren, in the primitive Church there was a godly
discipline, that, at the beginning of Lent, such persons as were notorious
sinners were put to open Penance, and punished in this world, that their souls
might be saved in the day of our Lord: And that others, admonished by their
example, might be more afraid to offend. In the stead whereof, until the said
discipline may be restored again (which is much to be wished) it is thought
good -- What is the reason, that ^o godly a desire of so evident a Reformation
could not take place, when Reformation in the Church was so generally sought,
(besides those common obstructions, with all good pretenses will necessarily
find, in all communities of Christians) I shall not much labor to persuade
him, that shall consider, the ^ares of Puritantism to have been sowed together
with the grain of Reformation, in the Church of England. This I will say, that,
where visible Penance is exercised, for sins of themselves visible, (and much
more, which the conscience of those who commit them makes visible) there is a
reasonable ground of presumption, that those, who see this done upon others,
will not advance to the communion of the Eucharist, without visiting their own
consciences, and exacting competent revenge upon their sins, though they use
not the help of their Pasto^s in taxing it. That vulgar Christians would have
been moved voluntarily to seek the help of their Pastors, in taxing the cure of
their sins, without seeing the practice of that medicine upon notorious sins
which the discipline of the Church required, who can imagine? For, nothing but
example teaches vulgar people the benefit of good Laws: No^ did secret Penance
ever get the force of a general Law, but by example. But, where there is no
pretense of casting notorious offenders out of the company of Christians, that,
thereby, they may be moved to submit to the cure of their sins, by satisfying
the Church of their Repentance, because the secular Power inforces no sentence
of excommunication; it is no Christian Kingdom or Commonwealth, though
Christians may live in it, ^as Christians may be cast upon a coast that is not
inhabited by Christians. For, he that believes, not only that there is a
Catholic Church in the world, but, that he must be saved by being a member of
it, may and will find imperfection enough, in those Laws, by which the Keys of
the Church are employed and exercised; but, if he find no reconciliation of
sin by the Keys of the Church, because no excluding of sinners from the
communion of it, will find no part of the Catholic Church there, because no
part of the Catholic Church was ever without it. And therefore, I must not
fail to declare my opinion in this place; that, in a Christian Commonwealth,
if by any means, those that are convicted of capital crimes by Law, come to
escape death, either by favor of the Law, or, by Grace of the Sovereign (as
many times it falls out) and likewise, all those that are convicted of crimes
that are infamous, having satisfied the justice of the Law, ought to stand
excommunicate till they satisfy the Church. And, for the same reason, those
whom the Church convicteth of crimes, which civil justice punishes not, but
Christianity makes inconsistent with the hope of Christians, being
excommunicate upon such conviction, ought not to be restored to the communion
of the Church, until, by just demonstrations of their conver^ion, the Church be
satisfied of them, as qualified for reconcilement with God. For, where there is
means, for those that are detected of notorious sins, to be restored to the
Communion of the Church, without the hardship of Penance; there can be no
reason to imagine, that those, whose sins are secret, will, of themselves,
submit themselves to the Keys of the Church, to procure pardon, or to assure
themselves of it. I find great reason to believe, that at the first, those
sins which were brought under public Penance by the primitive Church, were
only those three great crimes of Murder, Adultery, and Idolatry, which, the
Montanists, and Novatians, excluded from reconcilement by Penance, and the
branches that were reducible to the same. For Pacianus, Paraenesi ad
Poenitentiam, speaking expressly of this matter, expresses no more. But when the
Empire was Christian, and the Church became ingraffed into the State; then was
the Rule enlarged to all crimes that the Laws of the State made capital, to
which, in point of conscience, those that are infamous by Civil Law are not
inferior, though, being not so pernicious to the world, they are not by Civil
Law punished with death. The Reformation of Ecclesiastical Law intended here
under Edward VI. has taken notice of these terms. As for the Presbyterians,
that would so fain be authorized by the State to swagger and domineer over the
consciences of their poor Neighbors, that they have not been ashamed to submit
the Original power of the Church to an appeal to the secular; (which is in
English, to let Parliament men live as they list, so themselves might be
enabled to do what they listed with little ones) to give them the power of the
Church, is to destroy the Church, the power whereof they pretend not to
exercise to the curing of sin, but only to the abolishing of scandal, which,
the Church never pretended to abolish, but by curing the sin. And yet, they
must give me leave to ask further, either how that conscience can be cured of
sin, that is not wounded with it: or how it can be wounded with it, that is
bound to believe the pardon of sin before repentance. So necessary it is,
that they be required to disclaim the remission of sin, and the opinion of
saving faith, without supposing repentance, and the same to be procured by the
Keys of the Church, before we suppose them to be a Church.

CHAP. XI. The Unction of the sick pretends only bodily health, upon
supposition of the cure of sin by the Keys of the Church. Objections
answered. The Tradition of the Church evidenceth the same.
BEfore I leave this point, I am here to consider, what Ecclesiastical power
it is, and how well grounded, which the Church of Rome pretends to exercise
in extreme Unction; so called, because it belongs to the sick in extremity;
and, being accounted by them in the number of the seven Sacraments, is applied
unto the sick, over and above the Sacraments of Penance, and of the Eucharist.
The question of the Sacraments, wherein the nature of them consists, and, by
consequence, how many of them there are, I wholly set aside, from the present
discourse: Because, I conceive, it will be determined more briefly, and upon
more settled grounds, all at once, when I shall have discovered, what powers
they are, which the Church indeed exercises, by those actions, which are, or
which may be pretended to be Sacraments. But, it is plain enough, that the
Church of Rome pretends also to exercise the power of the Keys in extreme
unction, because, according to the words of S. James before quoted, they assign
the effect of it to be the remission of sin. On the contrary, they who, by
the promise of bodily health, to be restored to the sick upon the unction which
the Apostle prescribes, do gather, that the whole office there commanded was
temporary, (as only intended for those ages when the miraculous grace of
healing was in force in the Church) by consequence, do not admit any office to
be incharged, or any power estated upon the Church by it. That which has been
premised, to show, that the circumstances of the Apostles words, together with
the original and general practice of the Church argues aloud, his intent to
concern the exercise of the Keys of the Church, and the power of them, toward
those that are in danger of death, ingageth my resolution to be this; That the
unction of the sick, together with the prayers of the Church, for the recovery
of their bodily health, (which Christianity allows not, without praying
principally for the health of the soul) is no way commanded by S. James, but as
an appertenance or an appendant to the exercise of the power of the Keys, in
reconciling the sick to the Church, whereupon the prayers thereof become due;
and therefore, without further promise of remission of sin, or grace, then
that general promise, which the injoyning of prayer for the sick presupposes.
The reason of this assertion is now to be deduced out of the Scriptures,
supposing for grounds, those things which hitherto have been settled.

When our Lord sent his Disciples to preach the Gospel, and to do those works,
that might witness them to be the Disciples of him that was sent by God, it is
said, Mark. VI. 13. That they cast out many Devils, and anointed many sick
with oil, and healed them. Now it is evident, that the miracles of the
Apostles, as did their Masters, tended to one general purpose; by bodily
cures, to intimate the cure of sin, and the recovery of life and health to
the soul, which our Lord pretended to bring and tender them; though, by his
works convincing them, that he was the Messiah, whom they expected to bring
them deliverance from their bodily enemies, and the happiness of enjoying
freely the Land promised by their Fathers. Whereby we may see, what
consideration those Writers of Controversies have of the Scriptures, that
ground the unction of the sick, (which they will have to be a Sacrament of the
New Testament) upon this action of the Apostles; when as the Gospel, though now
in preaching, by the Apostles as well as our Lord, yet was not established till
his death past and accep^ed by God, and by his resurrection declared to be
accepted, as the ratification of that embassage of reconcilement and peace
which he came to publish. Far more discreet is that which the Council of Trent
has said; that, being intimated by S. Mark, it is published by S. James; At
least if we understand the ground, whereupon we maintain, that the cure of sin
is intimated by that bodily health, which S. Mark relates to have been
restored by the Apostles. For so indeed it is. The bodily cures which the
Apostles then did, seemed to intimate, that the embracing and undertaking of
Christianity, is, from Christ's death forwards, in consideration thereof, the
cure of the soul, and the restoring of it from death to life. Which if it be
so, then has the Church no further power, in the pardoning or abolishing of
sin, then the absolute necessity of this condition will allow: That is to
say, that it be understood to pardon sin, in as much, and no otherwise, then,
as the ministry thereof moves to induce men to be Christians, whither in
profession or in performance. Thus those, who, by that Christianity which the
Church maintains, are induced to believe, that they are lost for ever,
unless they undertake the profession of Christianity, being induced so to do,
are cleansed from sin, and made Heirs of everlasting life, by the Baptism
which the Church gives. Thus those, who have forfeited the right which they
attained by being baptized, by forfeiting the profession upon which they
attained it, being reduced by the Church, to a disposition of making it good
for the future, are thereby re-estated in the same right again. And, all the
prayers which the Church can tender ^o God, for remission of sins, can no way
be presumed, or understood to be of force with God, but upon supposition, that
those for whom they are made, are either in the state, or in the way of
performing that which their Christian profession undertaketh. This reason,
added to those circumstances of S. James his words, and the original practice
of the Church before quoted, which show, that he intends to speak of the
applying of the Keys of the Church to the sick; thoroughly convinces, that
remission of sin is not attributed to the anointing of the sick, but as an
appertenance of the power of the Keys passing upon them, and, upon
supposition, that, by submitting to it, the Church, being enabled to warrant
their pardon, could with confidence pray for that bodily health, which they
chiefly need in that estate. For if, supposing this condition, nothing can
hinder remission of sin, if, not supposing the same, nothing can warrant it;
what reason can we imagine, why the power of the Church, and those persons
which are entrusted on behalf of it, should be employed in this business, but
to procure that disposition, which only qualifieth for remission of sin? And
therefore, I cannot allow the excuses which the School Doctors use, to maintain
the effect of this unction, in the remission of sin, considering it
precisely, without that dependence, which, in the words of the Apostle, it
has, upon the Keys of the Church. They say, the effect of it is to wipe away
the remains of sin, whether original or actual, consisting in that
pronenesse to the enjoying of the creature, that faintness and sluggishnesse
in following true virtue, that weakness in tending to God, which remain even
in him that is perfectly restored to Gods grace. For these, if they be sin,
then are they cured by the same means by which his sin is cured (which, how it
is effected by the Church) has been often enough said; If not sin, God forbid
but the prayers of the Church should prevail to weaken them in the sick; But,
as those Prayers have their force upon supposition of the condition, so must
they be understood to have the effect of forgiveness ascribed them here by the
Apostle, in virtue of that disposition, which the Ministry of the Church shall
have produced.

And therefore, I am not moved with those arguments which are produced, to
prove, that the bodily health here promised, has no relation to the miraculous
graces of the Apostles time. It is said, that those Graces are not given
according to men's ranks in the Church, but according to Gods good pleasure, as
S. Paul says, 1 Cor. XII. 4-11. where he reckons up that variety of Graces,
which the spirit of God then stirred up in the Church, without any intimation,
that they were given rather to public, then to private persons in the Church;
And therefore, that it had been impertinent for S. James to name the Presbyters
of the Church, had he intended to speak of curing the sick, by any such grace.
But it is easy to answer, that such graces, though common to private persons
in the Church, yet in reason, were most frequently imparted to those that were
most eminent in Christianity: And, that public persons in the Church were made
such, upon presumption of their eminence above others in Christianity; which
presumption, though it possibly may fail, yet, of necessity, must hold good for
the most part. And that, upon this account, as the Apostles, the Heads of the
whole Church, were most eminent in all Graces, so it is in reason to be
presumed, that the Presbyters of the Church (whatsoever were the office of
Presbyters of the Church for the present) were after endowed with those Graces
then private Christians. Whereupon it will follow, (for a thing, which, no
reason can be showed why it should not come to pass, though the Scripture
offered no further evidence, that it did come to pass) that private persons,
enjoying the Grace of healing by the Holy Ghost, might restore to bodily
health, by anointing with oil; Not extending their function to the procuring of
forgiveness for sin, which the public ministry of the Church pretends to
procure. For, on the other side, notwithstanding the promise of bodily health
in S. James, it is no inconvenience to grant, that the Prayers of the Church
might fail of it, though it be not granted, that they fail of forgiveness of
sin, when the person is qualified. The reason is, because the promise of
forgiveness of sin, by the Gospel, is absolute, the condition being cleared;
that is, supposing the person qualified for it: But for bodily health, there is
no further promise, by the Gospel, then it shall seem to God, that the
condition of bearing Christ's Cross, in this or that man, requires.

It is also said, that, according to S. Paul, 1 Cor. XIV. 22. Tongnes are a
sign to unbelievers, not Christians; And therefore, it is not to be supposed,
that the grace of healing was to be exercised to the benefit of believers, but
to the conversion of Infidels. For, S. Paul, that cured Publius of a fever,
Acts XXVIII. 8. left Trophimus at Miletum sick, 2 Timothy IV. 20. and had
Epaphroditus by him sick to death, Phil. II. 26. 27. and cured not Timothy of
his frequent infirmities, 1 Timothy V. 23. But I answer again with S. Paul, 1 Cor.
XII. 7. that, the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
with. That is to say; Those ^ra^es which do manifest, that the Spirit of God is
in the Church, and therefore, that Christianity comes from God, are given
nevertheless to Christians, to do good to Christians with, though not to all
always, but to such as God, who has given them the Grace, shall move them to
do good so with it. But, though I maintain, that the promise of bodily health
upon the Prayers of the Church belongs to those graces, by which, it then
appeared, that God is in his Church; yet, in that he requires the Presbyters of
the Church, in that he promises remission of sin; it is not to be imagined,
that bodily health, and the exercise of that Grace which procured it, is only
intended, and so, that the precept concerns the Church no more then that grace
appears: But, that the effect of it reaches to all ages of the Church, abating
that which depended upon the miraculous graces proper to the Apostles time.
For, suppose remission of sin past warranted the sick, by the Keys of the
Church that have passed upon him; Yet all Christians are to assure themselves,
that their spiritual enemies are most busy about them in that extremity:
Whither out of despair to prevail, if not then, or, out of hope then to
prevail; Their malice being heightened to the utmost attempt of casting him
down, by the extremity of that instance. God forbid then, that the Prayers of
the Church should be counted unnecessary in such an instance; though the
remission of sin be provided for otherwise. For, all obstructions to Gods
grace, (requisite, in so great weakness, to overcome) being the effect and
consequence of sin; Neither can it be said, that the Apostle attributes the
remission of sin to the Unction, by the promise which he annexeth to the
injunction, whereby he imployes the Keys of the Church to that end; Nor can it
be endured, in a Christian, to count the removing of them, unnecessary and
superfluous; especially, the patient being so disposed, and in such a capacity
for the effect of them, by submitting to the ministry of the Church, for the
remission of his sin. And therefore certainly, as it is necessary to presume,
that the promise of bodily health is not absolute and general, but, where it
pleases God to give evidence of his presence in and to his Church, by the
effect of his temporal blessings; So, that health of mind, necessary to resist
the tempter with, which, Christianity obliges us to suppose, that Christians
prayed for with bodily health, the Prayers of the Church are not effectual to
obtain, but, upon supposition of that disposition which the Church requires;
and that, procured by the Keys of the Church, supposing the party obliged to
have recourse to the Church for it.

How well this opinion agrees with the sense of the Catholic Church, I have
argument enough, both in the sayings of the Fathers, whereby they express the
reason of anointing the sick, and in the practice of the Church. Origin Homil.
II. in Levit. Est and adhuc dura and laboriosa per paenitentiam remissio
peccatorum, cum lavat peccator in lachrymis stratum suum, and fiunt ei
lachrymae suae panes die ac nocte, and cum non erubescit sacerdoti domini
judicare peccatum suum, and quaerere medicinam, secundum eum qui ait; Dixi
pronunciabo adversum me iniquitatem meam domino, and tu remisisti impietatem
cordis mei. In quo impletur and illud quod Apostolus dicit; Si quis autem
infirmatur, vocet Presbyteros Ecclesiae, and imponant ei manus, ungentes eum
oleo in nomine domini, and oration fidei salvabit infi^num, and si in peccatis
fuerit, remittentur ei. There is yet a hard and painful remission of sins by
Penance, when the sinner washes his Couch with tears, and his tears become his
bread day and night; and when he is not ashamed to declare his sin; o the
Priest of God, and seek his cure, according to him that says; I said, I will
declare my sin to the Lord, against my self, and thou forgavest the impiety
of my heart. Wherein is also fulfilled that which the Apostle says; But if a
man be sick, let him send for the Priests of the Church, and let them lay hands
on him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith
shall save the sick; and if he be in sin it shall be forgiven him. Here, he
gives Priests the power of forgiving sin from S. James. S. Chrysostom de
Sacerdotio ^ II. 8. (...). For, not only when they regenerate us, (by Baptism)
but afterward also, have they power to remit sins. For, is any man sick
among you? says he; let him call the Pastors of the Church, and let them pray
over him, anointing him with oil in the name of Lord. Shall we then ascribe the
effects of this power to the bodily act of anointing with oil? or to their
Prayers, not supposing that disposition to be procured by their ministry,
which the promise of remission supposes? Neither of both will stand with the
premises; seeing the Prayers of the Church cannot be effectual to them, that
submit hot to the Ministry of the Church, when it becomes uecessary for the
procuring of that disposition which qualifies for remission of sin; so that,
the sense of the ancient Church, declared here by Origin, and S. Chrysostom,
must be understood to proceed upon consideration of the power of the Keys,
exercised upon the sick person that receives the unction, with prayers for his
ghostly and bodily health. S. Augustine, de Tempore Sermon. CCXV. Quoties aliqua
infirmitas supervenerit, corpus and sanguinem Christi ille qui aegrotat
accipiat. Et inde corpusculum suum ungat, ut illud quod scriptum est impleatur
in eo; Infirmatur aliquis -- Videte fratres, quia qui in infirmitate ad
Ecclesiam accurrerit, and corporis sanitatem recipere, and peccatorum
indulgentiam merebitur obtinere. As often as any infirmity comes, let him that is
sick receive the Body and Blood of Christ: And then let him anoint his Body,
that that which is written may be fulfilled in him; If any man be sick -- See
brethren, that he who shall have recourse to the Church in sickness, shall be
thought worthy to obtain both the recovery of bodily health, and indulgence for
his sins. Now I ask, whether the Rule of the Church will allow the communion
of the Eucharist to him that has not recourse to the Church for the cure of
his sin, when he ought to have recourse to it. For, if we suppose the
Eucharist to be given him upon confession of sin, then the reason which I
pretend appears. If without, it is because nothing obliges him to have recourse
to the Keys of the Church at that time: And so, the prayers of the Church, and
the Eucharist, and the unction are therefore effectual, because the Church
rightly supposes him qualified for remission of sins, without recourse to
other means; For, daily sins and hourly, are abolished by daily and hourly
devotions, with detestation of the same, and yet more firmly abolished by
partaking of these offices ministered by the Church. Here I must give notice,
that I undertake not that this Sermon is S. Augustines own, which, I see, is
censured among those pieces that have crept under his name by mistake, or by
imposture: For, the style also seems to make it some hundreds of years later
then his time. But I think it more advantage to my opinion, that it held
footing in the Church so long after S. Austin, then, that it appears to have
been the sense of his time. For, the sense of the now Church of Rome, that
remission of sin is to be attributed to the Unction, appears to be of so much
the later date. And therefore I allege also the words that are quoted out of
the Book de rectitudine Catholicae conversationis, among S. Austines Works; Qui
aegrotat, in sola dei miserecordia confidat, and Eucharistiam cum fide and
devotione accipiat, oleumque benedictum fideliter ab Ecclesia petat, unde
corpus suum ungatur: Et, secundum Apostolum, oration fidei salvabit infirnuim,
and alleviabit eum dominis; Nec solum corporis, sed and animae sanitatem
accipiet. Let him that is sick trust only in the mercy of God, and receive the
Eucharist with faith and devotion, and faithfully send for the consecrated oil
from the Church, that his body may be anointed with it; And according to the
Apostle, the Prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall give him
ease; And he receive health, not only of Body, but soul also. This, indeed, is
something like that which they say now in the Church of Rome, that, our
original inclination to evil, dullness, and faintness to good, and
averseness of the mind from spiritual exercises, are those relics of sin,
which this Unction cures. In the mean time, remission of sin is or ought to
be presupposed by the Keys of the Church, passed upon him that duly receives
the Eucharist; Nor can that health of the mind, which cures these infirmities,
be attributed to the Unction which pretends bodily health, but to the prayers
of the Church, prescribe to be made for the sick in that estate. And, since
those that deduce the office of anoiniting the sick, and, by consequence, the
effect of it, from the practice of the Apostles curing with oil, as Bede,
Theophylact, and Euthynius upon Mark VI. how will they justify the spiritual
promise of remission of sin, to depend upon the bodily act of anointing the
sick, but upon supposition of that disposition of the soul which qualifieth for
it, which cannot be supposed, when recourse ought to be had to the Keys of the
Church for obtaining it, and is not? And therefore, there can be no greater
argument thereof in the practice of the Church, then this; that the or^inary
use of this unction, both in the Eastern and Western Church, is after receiving
the Eu^hari^l, which supposes in the Church, a legal presumption at least, of
the par^^es being in the state of grace. The words of venerable Bede, upon Mark
VI. 13. are by no means to be neglected, Dicit Apostolus ^acobus; Infirmatur
quis in vobis? Inducat Presbyteros Ecclesiae, and orent super ipsum, ungentes
eam ^leo in nomine d^mini. Et, si in peccatis sit, dimittentur ei. Unde patet,
ab ipsis Apostol^^ hunc Sanctae ^cclesiae morem esse traditum, ut energumeni,
vel alii quilibet aegroti u^gantur oleo, pontificali benedictione consecrato.
The Apostle James says; Is a^y man among you sick? let him bring the Priests
of the Church, and ^et them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name
of the Lord. And, if he be in sins, they shall be forgiven him. Whence it
appears, that this custom was delivered to the Holy Church by the Apostles,
that the vexed with evil Spirits, and other sick persons be anointed with oil,
consecrated by the blessing of the High Priest. I believe no less. By that
which the Apostles did then it appears, that thereupon S. James ordered, and
the Church used to anoint the sick in hope of bodily health; but with prayers
for the soul also, and that, by the ministers of the Church, when the case
required their presence, that is, when the ministers of the Keys was
requisite. But when he says; That the vexed with un^le^n spirits, as well as
the sick, were to be anointed with it, he touches thar which he declares more
at large upon James V. 14. 15. Hoc and Apostolos fecisse in Evangelio legimus,
and nunc Ecclesiae consuetudo tenet, ut infirmi oleo co^secrato ungantur a
Presbyteris, and oratione comitante sanentur. Nec solum Presbyteris, sed, ut
Innocentuis Papa scribit, etiam omnibus Christianis uti licet eodem oleo, in
sua aut suorum infirmitate, ungendo. Quod tamen oleum non nisi ab Episcopis
licet confici. Nam quod ait in nomine domini; significat oleum consecratum in
nomine domini. Vel certe, quia, cum ungunt infirnium, momen domini super eum
invocare debent. This, was not only read in the Gospel that the Apostle did,
but also the custom of the Church now holds, that the sick be anointed with
consecrated oil by the Priests, and cured by Prayer accompanying the same. Nor
may only Priests, but also all Christians, as Pope Innocent writes, use the
same oil, when they or theirs are sick, by anointing. Which oil,
notwithstanding, is not to be consecrated but by the Bishop. For, that which he
sath, in the name of the Lord, signifies that the oil must be consecrated in
the name of the Lord. Or he says it, forsooth, because, when they anoint the
sick, they are to call upon the Name of the Lord over him. The words of Pope
Innocent, Epist. I. Quod non est dubinum, de fidelibus aegro tantibus accipi
vel intelligi debere, qui sancto oleo Chrismatis perungi possunt, quo ab
Episcopo confecto, non solum sacerdotibus, sed omibus uti Christianis licet, in
sua aut suorum necessita^e, inungendo. Which (words of S. James) are without
doubt to be taken and understood of believers that are sick, who may be
anointed with the holy oil of anointing. Which, being consecrated by the
Bishop, not Priests only, but all Christians may use, when they or theirs need
it, by anointing. And by and by; Nam poenitentibus istud infundi non potest,
quia genus est Sacramenti. Nam quibus reliqua Sacramenta negantur, quomodo unum
genus putatur concedi? For it cannot be poured upon Penitents, because it is a
kind of Sacrament. For, how should it be thought that one kind can be allowed
them, whom the rest of the Sacraments are refused? Bid ag^in; Si ergo infirmi
in peccatis sint, and haec Presbyteris Ecclesiae confessi fueri^^, ac perfecto
cord ea relinquere atque emendare sategerint, dimittentur eis. Neque enim sine
co^fessione emendationis peccata querunt dimitti. Unde recte subiungitur;
Confitemini ergo alteurtium peccata vestra, and orate pro invicem, ut
salvemini. In hac autem sententia illa debet esse discretio, ut quotidiana
leviaque peccata alterutrum coaequalibus confiteamur, eorumque quotidiana
credamus oratione salvari. Porro, gracioris leprae immunditiaem juxta legem
sacerdoti paudamus, a^que ad ejus arbitium, qualiter and quanto tempore
jusserit, pacificari curemus. If the sick, then, be in sins, and shall have
confessed them to the Priests of the Church, and endeavored to leave and mend
them with a perfect heart, they shall be forgiven them. For sins cannot be
forgiven without profession of amendment. In which sentence this discretion is
to be, that we confess daily and light sins to one another equals,
believing that they are cured by their daily prayers. But open the uncleanness
of greater leprosy, to the Priest, according to the Law, and see them
reconciled at his discretion, how, and how long he orders. This is the very
sense that I give the Apostles, according to that strait communion Christians
then held with Christians as members of the Church: Why not rely upon the
advice and prayers of Christians as Christians, who are commanded to procure
the salvation of Christians next their own, in matters whereof they may be
thought capable? Therefore, those sins which S. James directs the Priests to
pray for, are such, as, for the weight of them, must resort to the Keys of the
Church for their cure. But when Bid, when Pope Innocent allows all Christians
to anoint themselves, or theirs, with consecrated ovl; when the Sermon de
Tempore commands them to anoint their bodies; when the Book de rectitudine
Catholicae conversationis, directs them to send for it from the Church; it is
manifest that they speak of Unction alone, whereas S. James, speaks of Unction
joined with the Keys of the Church, and that the Priests office is required in
that case. It is also manifest, that Pope Innocent calls that unction a
Sacrament which Christians give themselves, which, though he refuses Penitents,
yet, those whom the Priest shall have given the Communion to, could not be
refused it. Which referres remission of sin to the Keys of the Church, but
the hope of bodily health to the unction, with prayer, such as the case
requires. In the Penitential of Theodore of Canterbury, thus it was read,
according to Buchardus his collection, XVIII. 14. Ab infirmis, in periculo
mortis positis, per Presbyteros pura inquirenda est confessio peccatorum, non
tamen illis imponenda quantitas poenitentiae, sed innotescenda, and cum
amicorum orationibus and studiis elemosynarum, pondus poenitentiae sublevandum:
Ut, si forte migraverint, ne obligati excommunicatione, alieni vel ex consortio
veniae fiant. Aquo periculo si divinitus ereptus convaluerit, poenitentiae
modum a suo confessore impositum diligenter observet. Et ideo, secundum
Canonicam authoritatem, ne illis ^anua pietatis clausa videntur, orationibus
and consolationibus Ecclesiasticis, sacra cum unctione olei animati, juxta
statuta sanctorum Patrum communione vietici reficiantur. Of the sick that are
in danger of death, a clear confession of sins is to be demanded by the
Priests; yet is not the quantity of Penance to be imposed upon them, but to be
notified, and the weight of it to be eased with the Prayers of their friends,
and zeal in giving alms; That, if they chance to depart, they be not (as bound
by excommunication) strangers, and without the participation of paradox. From
which danger if God save him, and he recover, let him diligently observe that
measure of Penance which his Confessor i^^posed. And therefore, according to
the authority of the Canons, that the door of pity seem not shut upon them,
being comforted with the prayers and consolations of the Church, with the holy
ointing of oil, let them, according to the constitutions of the Holy Fathers,
be refreshed with the communion of the Eucharist. The same Burchardus XVIII.
11. quotes that which follows out of the decrees of Pope Eusebius, cap. X. in
whose decretals now extant, (which Isidorus Mercator is thought to have forged)
I find it not; But, he who observes, how proper the order which he prescribes
in the case is, to that which the former passage prescribed in that case, may
perhaps have reason to think, that it is out of the same Penitential of
Theodore, and that, the passage premised, is the very order to which he
referres; Si quis poenitentiam petens, dum sacerdos venerit, fuerit officio
linguae prinatus, constitutum est, ut, si idonea testimonia habuerit, quod ipse
paenitentiam petisset, and ipse per motus aliquos, suae voluntatis aliquod
signum facere potest, sacerdos impleat omnia sicut supra circa aegrotum
poenitentiam scriptum est, id est, orationis dicat, and ungat eum sancto oleo,
and Eucharistiam ei det, and, post quam objerit, ut caeteris fidelibus ei
subministret. If a man that demands Penance, while the Priest is in coming, be
deprived of the office of his tongue, it is decreed, that, if he have competent
witness that he had demanded Penance; and he, by some motion, is ablo to make
some sign of his will, the Priest fully do all that is written before about the
sick under Penance; That is, say the Prayers, and anoint him with the
consecrated oil, and give him the Eucharist; and, when he is dead, do service
for him as for other believers. By these remarkable passages you see, that,
even when Penance and the Unction both were ministered, and prescribed to be
ministered by the Priest, bodily health was expected from the Unction, remission
of sins from the Keys of the Church. How much more, having showed, by Pope
Innocent, and venerable Bede, and others, that the anointing of themselves and
theirs, was referred to particular Christians; is there reason to presume, that
this was done, in case, when there was no question of binding and loosing sin
by the Keys of the Church? We have, lately published at Paris, a Leter of
Amulo, Bishop of Lions under Carolus Calvus, next successor to Agobardus,
concerning some forged relics, pretending that, fits of convulsions and
Epilepsies were stirred at the presence of them, for evidence that they were
cured by them, as true relics. To which he says; Si autem and languores
aliqui ac debilitates accidunt, juxta Evangelicum and Apostolicum praeceptum,
praesto habet unusquisque ut inducat Presbyteros Ecclesiae, and orent super
cum, ungentes eum oleo in nomine domini, and oration fidei salvabit infirmum.
But if any sickness or infirmity happen, it is ready for every man, according
to the precept of the Gospel and Apostle, to bring in the Priests of the
Church, that they may pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the
Lord; and the prayer of faith shall save the sick. Here, because the occasion
is public, and notorious to the Church, the Prayers of the Priest are
directed, though without reference to the ministry of the Keys. Certainly,
Proculus the Christian, that cured Antoninus, Son of Severus the Emperor, by
anointing with oil, according to Tertullian, ad Scapulam IV. did it not as a
Priest, which he did to an Infidel, but as a private Christian, having hope in
God, by himself, to make his presence in the Church appear. Only this
difference we find, that, whereas Proculus did this as a simple Christian,
endowed with one of those miraculous graces, whereby God manifested his
presence in the Church, at the beginning of Christianity; Afterward, it was
provided, that the oil should be consecrated by the Bishop, with the Prayers of
the Church, in virtue whereof, whither applied by the Priests, or by private
Christians, there might be hope that it might operate. S. Chrysostom in Mat.
Hom. XXXII. Eth. comparing the entertaining of the Apostles at home, there
mentioned, with obeying their successors in the Church; (...). For both this
Table is far more precious and pleasant then that, and this light: which all
know, who, anointing themselves with oil seasonably, and with faith, have
avoided diseases. S. Austine, de Civ. XXII. 8. Hipponensem quandam virginem
scio, cum se oleo perunxisset, cui pro illa orans Presbyter lacrymas suas
instillaverat, mox a daemonio fuisse sanatam. I know, a certain maid of Hippo,
having anointed her self with oil, in which the Priest praying for her had
dropped his tears, was straight cured of a Devil. Here is nothing but the cure of
the body, by consecrated oil, only, that the Priest who gave it the maid,
prayed for her when he gave her it. Therefore, when Hilarion cured the Son in
law and daughter of Constantia with oil, we are to understand the consecrated
oil, with which, the hinds and shepherds of Egypt cured themselves of the
bitings of Serpents, by his direction. Hieron. in Hilarione. Nor did Malachias
in S. Bernard, pretend any more thereby, then bodily cure. Therefore I do not
marvail, that Innocent I. should speak of unction without Penance, who seems
expressly to grant, that sick persons should anoint themselves with that oil
which the Church should send them for that purpose: To wit, upon supposition,
that they need not the Keys of the Church, for the cure of their sins. For,
Friar Thomas of Walden de Sacram. Tomo. II. cap. penult. understands him, as
indeed his words impart, if you offer them no violence, and the practice of the
practice of Egypt, who are said to have sent it to the sick, and of the Greek
Church, in giving it to those that are well, seems to imply; to wit, that, as
when the oblations of those who cannot be present at Church, are received, they
are partakers ^of the benefit of those prayers which the Eucharist is
celebrated with, because they are thereby acknowledged to belong to the
communion of the Church; So, the sending of that unction which they apply to
themselves, imports the blessing of the Church to go along with their
Prayers, which it is used with. Thus much for certain; when the Greeks contend,
that this unction belongs also to those that are well, as the complement of
their Penance; arguing from the act of the Apostles, who anointed those to whom
they preached repentance, and allowing it to the sick, as that, which, for the
present, may be applied unto them, when as the exigent of their case will not
allow them to perform Penance as you may see by Arcudius V. 4. they do clearly
enough express the reason which I give.

CHAP. XII. The ground of the Right of the Church in Matrimonial causes.
Marriage of one with one insolubly is a Law of Christianity; The Law of Moses
not injoyning it. The Law of the Empire not aiming at the ground of it.
Evidence from the primitive practice of the Church.
IN the next place we are to consider what Interess the Church has in the
Marriages of Christians: And that, without granting Marriage to be one of the
Sacraments of the Church, or any thing implying what a Sacrament is, and by
consequence, how many there are; But yet, supposing, for disputations sake,
that it were a Sacrament; that is, not supposing the contrary, but, demanding
nothing but that which must be granted, whither it be so or not, that our
discourse may proceed. Two things I suppose, the one as proved in due place.
That the Church is, by Gods Law, a society which all Christians are bound to
have communion with; And, that God has given a peculiar Law concerning the
Marriage of one with one, and that indissoluble, to all Christians; For, upon
supposition hereof, all the interest of the Church in Matrimonial causes
stands. Which is, therefore, now to be proved; thence enforcing, that,
whatsoever grows questionable among Christians, concerning Marriage, upon the
account of that Law which is proper to Christianity, belongs to the Church to
determine. For, it is not my purpose to say, that Christian States have nothing
to do in Matrimonial causes; But, that the Interess of the State and of the
Church, (though not distinguishable by the persons, when the fame persons
belong to both) are to be dis^inguished by the causes, and grounds, and
considerations, upon which they arise and stand. So that, what comes from a
reason concerning civil society, belong to the State; what from the Law which
Christians only acknowledge, to the Church, to limite and determine. If then,
any difference arise among Christians concerning Marriage, that supposes not
some provision brought in by the Gospel, I will not undertake that the
determination of it belongs to the Church by Gods Law. On the contrary
therefore, that which becomes questionable upon that account, I challenge to
belong to the Church to determine; that is, to those that have right to
determine on behalf of the Church. For, I appeal to the common sense and
experience of the world to evidence this; That, when any Law is given to any
society or body, founded upon reasons, which, before the founding of it were not
in force; there will of necessity fall out new Cases, in which it will be
questionable, whether the reason of the Law is to take place or not. And, let
the Christian world be witness, whether it be not requisite to acknowledge,
that, if Christianity come from God, then, God has provided a course to secure
Christians in conscience, that their Marriages are not against the will of God.
Therefore, according to Aristoles reason, the law which God has given
Christians concerning Marriage being general, and, the cases which men's
particular occasions produce being infinite, and so, not determined by the Law;
it follows, that they are referred by God to the determination of that
society (that is, of those that act in behalf of it, with right to conclude
it) which God has founded upon the acknowledgement of those Laws, whereof
this is one.

In the first place then, I am not afraid to undertake, that the Law of the
Marriages of Christians. (that they be of one with one, and indissoluble) is
given by our Lord to his Church, and maintained by it. For, I am confident to
make evidence, out of that which is received by all Christians, together with
the premises, that it could neither have come into the world, but by
Christianity, nor have been maintained so inviolable, as it has been by the
Canons of the Church. I say then, that it is impossible for any reasonable man
to imagine, that, so difficult a Law, as, for all men to be tied to one wife
indissolubly, as marriage has always been indissoluble among Christians, could
have taken effect among all Christians, had it not been received from the
beginning for a part of that Christianity, which our Lord Christ and his
Disciples delivered to the Church; nor preserved so inviolable as it has been,
but, by the society of the Church. He that will give a reason how this Law
could have taken place otherwise, must either allege the Law of Moses, or the
Law of the Roman Empire; There being no other Law extant, when Christianity
took place. For the law of Moses, it is evident, that, at such time as
Christianity came into the world, it was counted lawful, according to it, to
have more wives then one, and, to put away away a man's wife by a Bill of
divorce. I demand then, how this should come to be prohibited by virtue of that
Law, which was hitherto thought to allow it.

It will be said, by the true interpretaion of the Law; which, having been
obscured by the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, our Lord by his
Gospel, Mat. V. 31. 32. XIX. 3-9. Mark. X. 11. 12. Luke XVII. 18. clears, and
injoyns upon Christians for the future. But, I showed before in the second
Book, that, when our Lord says, so often, in his Sermon on the Mount, You have
heard it was said to those of old; his meaning is, that Moses said so to their
Fathers, when he gave them the Law; not, that the Scribes and Pharisees said so
to their Predecessors, when they corrupt it: Besides, there are two things
evident in the Scripture beyond contradiction. The first, that diverse Laws of
Moses either make it lawful, or suppose it lawful to have more wives then one,
Deuteronomy. XXI. 15-17. the Law supposes a man to have two wives, the one beloved,
the other not, and provides accordingly, Ex. XXI. 6-11. the Law gives him leave
that has bought the daughter of a Jew, to mary her to his Son; (who, if he
have another, is ^bound to pay her the marriage debt of a wife) so that, if he
do not, she is to go free, Deuteronomy. XXI. 1-14. the Law inables him that has taken
a captive in the War whom he likes, to marry her: not conditioning, if he have
no other wife. Call these two later, wives, or call them Concubines, so long as
the Law of God allows them, evident it is, that it allows that which Christians
by their Christianity think themselves bound to forbear. Add hereunto, that
the King is bound not to take too many wives, Deuteronomy. XVII. 16. 17. that David is
not reproved as transgressing this Law, though Solomon is; But on the contrary,
that God imputes it as a favor to him, that he gave him many wives, 2 Sa^.
XII. 8. which he could not do, had he not allowed it; I say, add the practice,
as the life of the Law, to the leter, as the carcass of it, and, I may justly
conclude that Polygamy is not prohibited by the Law of Moses. Besides, the Law
provides, that an Ebrue slave, who may go free at the seventh year* if his
Master have given him a slave of his own to wife, and he have children by her,
must part wedlock with his wife, and leave her and children to his Master for
his goods, Exodus XXI. 3. 4. nullifying the contract of Marriage, by the choice
of him who proffers his freedom before his wife and children in bondage; a
thing utterly inconsistent with the insolubility of Marriage by Moses Law.

Secondly, our Lord in the Gospel says not only; It was said to them of ^ld;
He that puts away his wife, let him give her a Bill of Divorce; But, I say unto
you -- as Mat. V. 31. 32. But further, when they ask him, Mat. XIX. 7. Why did
Moses then command to give a Bill of divorce, and se^d her away? He answers;
Moses for your hard-heartednesse, suffered you to put away your wives; But from
the beginning it was not so. Now I say unto you, that he that puts away his
wife for fornication, and mary's another, commits adultery; and he that mary's
her that is put away, commits adultery. And all this, having laid his ground
before; He that made them from the beginning, made them male and female, and
said; therefore shall a m^n leave father and mother and cleave to his wife, and
they two shall be one flesh. So they are no longer two, but one flesh.
Therefore, what God has joined let no man part. Whereby it is evident, that he
derives not the prohibition of putting away a wife to take another, from any
interpretation of Moses Law; to the provision whereof he opposes the provision
which hereby he introduces; But, from the commission which he pretends, by
virtue whereof, he restores the primitive institution of Paradise, which, the
Law of Moses had either dispensed with, or, did suppose it to have been
formerly dispensed with. For, he says not only, You have heard that it was
said to them of old, which may be thought to be understood of the Scribes and
Pharisees; But also, Moses said, and I say, opposing his own saying to that of
Moses, so far, as prohibiting that which he had allowed imports, without
licensing that which was prohibited by the Law. And upon this ground; that by
marriage, man and wife become one flesh; he proceeds to prohibit the divorces
which Moses Law allows; so that, the reason why marriage is indissoluble is,
because man and wife are one flesh by the Gospel of Christ, according to the
first institutions in Paradise. This indeed, is the difficulty which I here
suppose already declared; how this first institution lost, or, may appear to
have lost the force of a Law, till revived by our Lord Christ: though I
conceive, the evidence of this truth cannot be obstructed, by not declaring the
reason of it here, S. Paul having so fully laid down the effect and intent of
his masters Law, 1 Cor. VII. 1-6. Now, of that you writ to me about, it is good
for a man not to touch a woman. Nevertheless, because of fornications sake,
let every man have his wife, and every woman her husband; let the man render
his wife the benevolence that is due; likewise the wife to the Husband. The
woman has no power of her Body, but the man. Likewise, the man is not master
of his own Body, but the wife. Defraud not one another, unless upon agreement,
for a time, that ye may attend to fasting and prayer, and come together again^,
least Satan tempt you for your incontinence. For here, it is manifest, that,
because man and wife are one flesh, they have an interess in one another
bodies, not to be disposed of upon any other, to the prejudice of it. And, upon
this supposition, the marriage of the first Adam in this earthly Paradise, being
the figure of the marriage between the second Adam and his Church, becomes the
rule and measure of the Marriages of Christians in the Church, as the same
Apostle declares at large, Ephesians. V. 22-33. And this will serve also to make
evidence, that the Law of Christians marriage cannot be imagined to come from
the Laws of the Empire, granting, as the truth is, that they allowed no man to
have more wives then one at once.

For. there is nothing more evident then this, that this mutual interesse in
one another body, was never acknowledgeded by Pagans, no^ cannot be thought to
have stand by their Laws. It were to be wondered at, otherwise, that, (whereas,
not only the Romans, but, in Greece, the Athenians, and the Germans among the
Barbarians, as Tacitus says, contented themselves with, one man one wife) Gods
people should be licensed to have more then one. But, he that reflects upon the
consideration, in which these Pagans restrained themselves, will not find it
strange, that Gods people should be permitted that, which they denied
themselves. For, this mutual Interest in one another bodies, which God
provided, for the means to prevent the sad effects of man's inbred
concupiscence, in dishonouring their bodies with uncleanness, we shall not find
to have been had in consideration among them, or, that uncleanness seemed at
all dishonorable to man, but prohibited as injurious to men's beds, and the
successions of families. The Laws of the Empire made it no adultery for the
man to lie with another woman, which, in the woman it was, as the Christians
complain. Lact antius Hist. VI. 23. Non enim, sicut juris publici ratio est,
sol^ mulier adultera est, qu^ habet alium; maricus autem, etiam si plures
habeat, a crimine adulterii solutus est. Sed divine lex ita duos in
matrimonium, quod est in corpus unum, pari jure conjungit, ut adulter habeatur,
si ^uis compagem corparis in diversa distraxerit. For the Woman only is not
the adulteress, having another man, but the husband free from the crime of
adultery, having more women, as is the course of public Law. But the Law of
God joins two in wedlock; that is, into one body; upon so equal right, that
the party is to be counted an adultererer, which shall part the body so
compacted into more. S. Hierome Ep. ad Oceanum. Ali^ sunt leges Caesarum aliae
Christi, aliud Papinianus aliud, Paulus noster praecipit. Apud illos viris
impudiciti^ fr^na laxantur, and solo stupro atque adulterio condemnatis, passim
perlupana^ia and a^cillulas libido permi^titur, quasi culpam dignitas faciat
non volunt as. Apud nos, quod non licet uxoribus, aeque non licet viris, and
eade^^ servitus pars condition censetur. Other are the Laws of the Caesar's,
then that of Christ; other is that which S. Paul, then that which Papinian
prescribes. Among them, the rains are let loose to men's uncleanness, and
rape, and adultery only prohibited, ^ust walks free all over stews, and
maid-slaves, as if the estate, not the will, made the fault. Among us, that
which Wives may not do, neither may Husbands; the same obligation is taxed upon
equal condition. S. Augustine, de adult. Conjug. II. 8. Sed^isti, qu^ bus
displicet, ut, inter virum and ^xorem par pudicitiae forma servetur, and potius
eligunt, maximeque in hac cavsa, mundi legibus subesse quam Christi, quoniam
jura forensia non eisdem f^minas quibus viros pudicitiae nexibus videntur
astringere; legant quid Imp. Antoni^us -- But those, who like not, that the
same form of chastity should be observed between man and wife, and had rather,
especially in this cause, be under the Laws of the world then of Christ;
because the Court Laws do not seem to tie women by the same bond of chastity
as men; Let them read what the Emperor Antoninus -- Who knows not the
lawfulness of unnatural lusts among the Pagans, that reads the first Chapter
to the Romans? And, can we think it strange, that Husbands should not be
forbidden unmaried persons? Wherefore, where the Laws allowed not one man more
wives then one, there they punished not wandering lusts, but provided for men's
reputation, and their successions. Whereas, the law of Moses, which gives a man
leave to mary a Jewess, sold him for a slave, to himself, or to his Son,
provides her an interess in his body, for the preventing of uncleanness; as you
saw before. And, all those Idolatrous Nations which Gods people were environed
with, using more wives then one, it is the less marvail, that God allowed his
people something in it, that the race of those that feared him might not be
quite extinguished and overrun, by the multitude of them that served Idols.

And this is the true reason, why S. Paul declares those that are converted to
Christianity, not to stand obliged to the Wives or Husbands which they had
taken before, 1 Cor. VII. 12-15. Supposing first, that, by Moses Law, the
marriages of Jews with Idolaters were void, and unlawful to be used, as we see
by Ezra IX. X. and Nehem. X. 30. On the other side, that, in the Romam Empire,
the wife as well as the Husband, had power to divorce her self, and to
dissolve wedlock: which is argument enough, how far they were from being the
marriages of Christians. Whereupon I say, that, the marriages of Pagans not being
made upon the same ground as the marriages of Christians, which is the mutual
interess in one another bo^ies; as it is no marvail on one side, that S. Paul
obliges them not to part as Moses did, (because, those that were not tied by
Law, might, for the particular love they had to their wives turned Christians,
tie themselves to them alone, and, upon those who did so, the wives had great
advantage to grant them to Christianity, as he alleges) So it is evident on
the other ^^de, why he allows them to part; to wit, having no confidence of
that faith in wedlock from them, which Christians of necessity profess. The
reason, why the marriages of Jews, with Gentiles were void by the Law, is thus
given by S. Augustine, de adult. Conjug. I. 18. Namque hoc dominus aliquando
per Ezdr^m Prophetam fieri jussit, and fact^m est; dimiserunt Israelit^ uxores
alienigenas, qui^unque tunc haber^ ^^tuerunt, per quas fiebat, ut and ipsi ad
alien^s seducerentur deos, non ut ill^ per ^^^rit^s vero acquirerentur deo.
No^dum enim tanta gracia salvatoris illuxer^^, and promissis temporale^us
v^teris T. ad^^^ inhiabat illius populi multitud^. Et propterea, cum b^na
terrena, qu^ pro magn^ expecta^a^^ a domino, viderent etiam his abundar^ qui
mult^s fals^s colebant d^os, blanditiis uxorum prius ^^s verebantur offendere,
d^i^d^ indicebantur and colere. For, this the Lord once commanded to be done by
Ezdras the Prophet, and done it was: The Israelites dismissed their stranger
wives, as many as then had of the^, by whose means it came to pass, that even
they were seduced to strange Gods. For as yet so great grace of our Savior bad
not shined o^ them, and the multitude of that people yet gaped for the
temporal promises of the old Testament. And therefore, seeing those who
worshipped many false Gods abound with earthly goods, which they expected at
Gods hands for great matters; first, upon the blandishments of their wives, they
were afraid to offend, then, they were induced also to worship them. But under
the Gospel, the marriage of Gentiles, not being against Gods Law, becomes not
unlawful, when the one turns Christian. And, justice allowing to part for
fornication; unbelief being a greater fornication, justifies him or her that
parts in consideration of it, having never contracted it insoluble. All this is
evident, by the ancientest instance of this case that the Church has; in
Justine the Martyrs Apology for the Christians, or rather in Eusebius Eccles,
Hist. IV. 17. where the passage of Justine is related entire, which, in R.
Stevens Copy of Justine, is maimed in this part. It is the case of a Gentleman
so debauched to the ^ust of women, that he was content his wife should play the
good fellow as well as himself, that she might not have to reproach him with.
It pleased God, the wife, being reclamed to Christianity, thought it necessary
to relinquish so riotous a Husband: But, being persuaded by her friends, had
the patience to try, whether there remained any hope of reducing him. And when
he, being gone to Alexandria, had flown out more loosly then ever into the
debauches of the place, that she might not seem a party to his wickedness,
dweling with him, whom it was in her power to part with, she sent him (...),
says Justin; such a Leter of divorce, as the Law allows the wife to
discharge her self with. Which example justifies the relation of Basil of
Sel^^cia, concerning S. Thecla, the first Martyr of the Womankind, in his
first Book of her life; that being contracted to a noble man of the Country,
called Th^^^yris, being converted to Christianity, by the preaching of S. Paul
at Iconicus, forsook her spouse, a declared enemy to Christianity. I say, that
there is in all this, nothing contrary to Christianity, the other example
justifies. Only, both of them give us sufficient occasion to say, that S. Paul
is not well understood, by them, that would have him to extend that cause of
divorce which our Lord had delivered, unto the case of desertion, upon the
conversion of the other to the faith. For, if the premises be true, it is not a
divorce which S. Paul allows, but a nullity, which he pronounces, of those
marriages, which stand not upon profession of that interess in one another
bodies, which Christianity requires. And therefore S. Augustine, in his Book de
Fide and operibus cap. XIX. doubts of her, who, being a Concubine, professes,
that if her Lord should dismiss her, she will never mary any body else, whether
she is to be admitted to Baptism or not. For indeed there is no doubt in the
case. Not because the Church, from the beginning, generally condemned those
Concubines, who, under a profession of fidelity to their own Lords, (professing
interchangeably to know no woman else) contented themselves with that right of
a wife which Christianity requires, without the secular privilege of d^wry, or
the right to it, which obliges the Husband to expense answerable. For the same
Augustine, de bon^ conjug. cap, V. declares such a conjunction as this to be
marriage, as to Gods Law, though not, as to the privileges of the world;
whereas, not supposing this profession, he condemns it for mere adultery: And
they are expressly allowed by the Council of Toledo, can. XVII. Though S. Leo
Ep. XCV. allow the marriage of a woman to a man that already has a Concubine,
as no married man. For, that may be, upon supposition, that there never was any
such troth between him and his Concubine; Which must be the reason, why S.
Austine condemns them in another place, Hom. XLIX. and L. S. Jerome truly, and
Gen^adius de Eccles. dogmat. cap. LXXII. allow the (...) effect to a
Concubine, as to a Wife, in making a man digamus as to the Ca^ons: And for this
reason, Conjugales ergo tabulae and jura dotalia, n^n coitu^ ab Ap^st^^^
condemn^^tur? In the words of S. Jerome; Is it then the deed and right of
(...), or carnal knowledge, that the Apostle condemns? This is not then the
reason why S. Austine refuses a Concubine Baptism; but, because she is a
Concubine, without mutual profession of that interess in one another bo^^^s,
which makes her a wife as to Christianity. Nor am I moved to the contrary, by
seeing, that S. Austine refused Baptism to those that put away their wives,
and married others, as Adulterers manifest. Which is the occasion of his Book de
^ide and operibus, as he says in the beginning of it. It was but his opinion,
or at the most, a local custom. For Council. Eliber. can. X. Si^^a quam
C^tech^^e^^^ reliquit duxerit maritum, potest ad fontem lavacri admitti. Hoc
and circa feminas Catech^^e^^^ ^^it observandum. If a woman dimissed by a
pretender to Christianity m^ry a Husband, she may be admitted to the F^nt of
Baptism. The sam^ ^s to be observed concerning women that pretend to
Christianity; In case they dismi^^* a Husband that mary's again, and then
desires Baptism, because of the nullity of marriage made in unbelief, when one
party turns Christian. In the Constitutions of the Apostles, VIII. 33 (...), A
Christian man or woman, married in bondage, let them either part or be ejected.
Here, the marriage of slaves is supposed void to the party that turns Christian.
The Church further commands it to be voided. How stands that with that which
went before? VIII. 32, (...). If he have a wife, or a woman a husband, let them
be taught to contain themselves to one another; according to Christ's Law. But,
if the one party be not under Christ's Law, so that it cannot be presumed that a
slave will do so, they must be parted. And by this means it remains
demonstrated, that it is our Lord Christ alone that has introduced a new Law
into his Church of the marriage of one to one alone. Which, though it be
expressed in the Scripture rightly interpreted; yet, had not the practice of
the Church, having received this right sense for Law to their conversation,
giving bounds to the licentiousness of those wits, whose interess might be to
destroy the strictness of the Law; it cannot be imagined, that there should
never be any visible attempt, within the body of the Church, to infringe the
validity of it. For, seeing there is no more mention in the Scripture, of that
dispensation in the first Ordinance of marriage in Paradise, whereby it was
lawful, under the Law, to have more wives then one; and, seeing it is a
maxim of such appearance in the Scripture, that, nothing is prohibited by the
Gospel which the law allows, would no such pretense have framed a plea
for those, that never wanted will, to study the reconciling of carnality with
Christianity? Supposing the consent of a body, whereof they thought themselves
to be members, it is no marvail that there would not; Not supposing that, it
must needs appear utterly unreasonable.

As for the insolubility of marriage by divorce, I will not say there has been
so absolute a consent in it, by the practice of Christians, as in the marriage
of one to one. It is argued indeed, in the late Book, called Vxor Ebraica,
(pretending only to relate the opinions and practice of Christians in matter of
divorce, but intending, (as it should seem by the Authors opinion declared
elsewhere, that there is no such thing as Ecclesiastical Power, or any society
of the Church by Gods Law) to infer, that the Church has nothing to do with
Matrimonial causes, which it has nothing to do with, if any thing but the
law of the Church can secure the conscience in point of divorce) p. 543. 544.
that, so long as the Christians were mingled with the Jews, they observed the
judicial laws of the Synagogue, and therefore corrected all divorces good
be^or God, which were according to Moses Law. And therefore, that, vvhatso
ever was in force among Christians before Constantine, was in force merely by
the voluntary consent of Christians, which was to give way, when the
secular Power should otherwise provide, as in matter of divorce, so in other
Matrimonial causes. This is th^^ ^^ich seems to be intended p. 559. But this
pretense is rooted up, by proving the Church to be a society and Body founded
by God, to communicate in the service of God, for the attaining of everlasting
life. For, thereupon it rem^^ns evident, that the Laws thereof came not
originally from the voluntary consent of Christians, (unless you understand
that consent whereby they submit to the Christian faith, that they may be
saved, and thereupon find themselves tie^ to submit to them from whom they
receive that faith, whereby they hope to be saved) but, from those who first
delivered Christianity to the Church, that is, from our Lord and his Apostles.
And, had Christians been left to their own choice, it is not possible they
should have imposed upon themselves, (that is, that the whole Church should
have received) that charge, of not divorcing, which the Rules and Customs of
the Church evidence to have been in force through the whole Church, as by and
by it will appear. As for the time when the Christians observed Moses Law, that
excellent saying of Justine the Marty^, takes place; (...). They obey the
Laws, and, by their own lives, go beyond the Laws For* the Jews Law was then
their Civil Law, because authorized by the Romans, in as much as they
restrained it not. So, by complying with the Jews, they gained the free
exercise of their Christianity, as well as invited them to admit and receive
it. But, did they therefore renounce the Law of Christ, where it restrained
them more then the Law of Moses? Did they allow themselves more wives then one,
when Moses allowed it the Jews, and they complied with Moses? Certainly, the
Law that allows a man more wives then one, never constrained any man to make
use of that allowance. So well might the Christians, acknowledging Moses Law,
acknowledge themselves bound not to use the power of putting away their wives,
when Moses Law allowed it.

But it is further argued there, lib. III. cap. XXVIII. XXIX. XXX. (at least,
it seems upon the same ground to be argued) that the Roman Laws, from
Constantine, to the fall of the Eastern Empire, in a manner, do allow divorce
upon such causes as the Sovereign thought fit. Which Laws, being made by
Christian Princes, intending to limit that infinite liberty, which the former
laws of the Empire allowed either party, to dissolve marriage at pleasure, with
all that he brought, must needs pretend to secure Christians in point of
conscience, divorcing upon no other causes then those laws allow. Constantine
therefore restrains the liberty of divorce to three causes on either side; On
the wives side, if the ^usband should Murder, Poison, or Rob graves: On the
husbands, if the wife should be an Adulteress, an Impoisoner, or a Bawd. And
this, at such time, as he advised with Bishops in all that he did, granting
then, an appeal to their Courts, by an act dated the same year, (as it is
probable) and lately published in Sirmondus his Appendix to Theodosius his
Code, without date for the year, but directed to the same Ablavius, P. P. to
whom the form is directed, Cod. Theod. lib. III. Tit. XVI. which Theodosius the
younger, a very Christian Prince, extends to many more: Justinian (the
legislative humor being then predominant) limits the matter otherwise, as he
thought fit; His successor Justine goes beyond him, in allowing divorce upon
consent of parties, though at neither parties choice. Which Law is not found to
have been repealed, till it was left out of that collection of Laws called the
Basilicae, into which, Leo the wife about the year DCCCC. compiled all the Laws
which he meant should stand unrepealed. The particulars you may see curiously
collected there. Which I should make no account of, did it not appear also, by
sundry testimonies of later times, there alleged, that the Greek Church did
proceed according to the said Laws, in blessing Marriages made upon such
divorces, and, consequently, allowing the communion of the Church to those that
made them. Balsamon upon Syn. VI. Can. LXXXVIII. defines an unreasonable cause
of divorce to be that, which the Judge (to wit, according to the Law) allows
not. No^ makes he any exception to them, from any Canon of the Church, writing
upon Photius his N^mocanon, Tit. XIII. 4. 30. And upon Can. Carthag. CV.
alleging Justinian Novel. CXVII. he says; That the Canon* is not in force:
(to wit, the Law having provided otherwise) referring himself to that which he
had written upon the VI Synod, quoted before. Harmenopulus also in Prochicro,
says plainly, that divorces were judged, amongst them, by the Imperial Laws.
And Matthaus Monachus, Quaest. Matrim* Juris Gr^co-Rom. Tomo. I. p. 507. So
also the Canons of Alexuis Patr. CP. about MXXX. alleged by our Author out of
a written Copy, p. 613. And Michael Chrysocephalus, upon Can. Apost. XLVIII. p.
600. Besides Matth^us Blastares in Nomocan. alleged by Arcudius p. 517. where
he, being a Greek, confesses, that the Greek Church had sometimes practiced
according to the Civil Laws. Which, had they not secured the conscience, it
could not, it ought not to have done. And, what case can there be in point of
marriage, wherein the Law of the Land secures not the conscience, if, in point
of divorce it do? Or, where is the indissolubility of marriage, and the Interest
of the Church in marriage grounded upon it?

But because it would be two gross for a Christian to say, that man's Law,
allowing divorce, can secure a Christian in conscience against Gods Law,
forbidding it; (our Lord having said, Whosoever puts away his wife but for
adultery, (...), and mary's another; and he that mari^s her that is put away,
commits adultery, Mat. V. 32. XIX. 9. Mark. X. 11. 12. Luke XVI. 18.) it is
pretended there, p. 454. that (...) in the Gospels, signifies any thing that is
dishonest; and that, what the State judges dishonest, is just ground of
divorce. You must know, that, in our Lords time, there was a difference (which
is supposed to be the occasion of the question made to our Lord) between the
Schools of Hillel and Shammai, (two great Heads of the Pharisees) about the
meaning and extent of the Law concerning divorces, Deuteronomy. XXIV. 1 -- which
allows him that likes not his wife, because he has found, or having found
mat^r of nakedness^ in her, to put her away. For, Shammai confined the intent
of it, to that which is dishonest, and deserves shame, as nakedness does. But
Hillel extended it to any thing that offends the Husband; as, say they, for
example, if she burn his Meat. As for R. Akiba, that allowed it, if a man can
get a fairer wife, his opinion is but the enlargement of Hillels, which
expounds Moses his words; If he have found in her matter of wickedness; to
signify, either nakedness, or other matter besides. This question then being
on foo^ at that time, it is argued, p. 478 -- that our Lord intends nothing
else but the resolution of it; the Pharisees demanding nothing else, and
therefore making no opposition to that which he resolves, Mat. XIX. 3-9. And,
thereupon, great pains is bestowed, cap. XXIII, and XXVII. to show, that our
Lords exception, (...), or (...), signifies no more then (...) in Moses
according to the opinion of Shammai. For, if we suppose our Lord to have spoke
in that Ebrue which the Jews then spoke, and now we read in the Talmud and
Chaldee Paraphrases, then must he use the word which the Law uses (...) (which
the Gospels must translate (...)) If in Syriack, the word (...), properly
signifying the uncleanness of the Stews, is necessarily understood, by the
circumstance of the place where it is used, to signify all uncleanness, but
may be extended to all sin, whereby we go a whoring from God, as the
Scripture uses to speak. So, according to this opinion, our Lord, excluding
only arbitrary divorce, allows it where Moses, according to Shammai, allows
it; for any cause of dishonesty, or, that deserves shame, as nakedness does.
And, if these premises be pertinent to that which follows, that is, to justify
those divorces that are made according to the Imperial Laws related afterward
(for the Author all the while protests to determine nothing, p. 496.) the
inference must be this; That, those causes of divorce, which Christian powers
by their Laws have allowed or shall allow, are the true interpretation of
that cause, which Moses under the time of (...) or nakedness, our Lord of
(...), which is usually translated For^ication, allows.

I forbear to relate any more of that which is alleged to show, that (...), in
the words of our Lord, may signify the same that (...) in Moses, according to
R. Ak^ba; For, the reason which I rely upon, admits no consideration of it. The
resolution of our Lord is manifestly inconsistent with the Law of Moses, and
therefore, with any interpretation that can be thought ag^^eable to it. For,
when he says; Moses for your hard-heartednesse -- But I say unto you -- What
can be more evident, then, that he repeals the provision of the Law, and
restrains what Moses had allowed? Is it not manifest, that, when he ^llegeth,
that God, having made first one man, and one woman, joined them in marriage to
be parted no more; he grants, that Moses Law had abated of this, and
declares the reviving of Gods first appointment, among his own Disciples? Can
the allowance of divorce, according to the Law, stand with the primitive
institution of Paradise, more then having more wives at once? Can we suppose
the Pharisees come to our Lord to decide between Hillel and Shammai, who
condemns all Pharisees? Or is it a marvail, that he, who pretended to be the
Messiah, should introduce a provision differing from Moses, and from all that
pretended only to interpret his Law? That there should be no further dispute
of the matter of his resolution, when there lay no dispute, but about his
authority, whither from God or not? Suppose our Lord, to them, no more but a
Prophet, to his Disciples the Messiah; why should they dispute that which they
knew his Disciples admitted, when they saw the primitive appointment of God,
related by Moses, clear on his side? That is to say, why should they not be put
to silence now as well as other times, when they could not answer his
allegations out of the Scriptures. It is therefore utterly unreasonable to
imagine, that our Lord, intending to restrain those divorces which Moses law
allows, should use a term, of the same extent with that which ^e intended to
restrain. The Jews indeed insist upon this; That a Prophet had always power to
suspend the obligation of any positive Precept, for the time, as Elias that of
sacrificing no where but at Jerusalem, Levit. XVII. 1-9. Deuteronomy, XII. 5-18. 26,
27. XIV. 21-26. when he sacrificed in mount Carmel, 1 Kings XVII. 22-39. But,
our Lord introducing a new Law instead of Moses his Law, their a^cestors
crucified him therefore, and they to this day maintain it. Indeed, there is
cause to believe, that the Prophet Malachy, reproving the oppressions which the
Jews then laid upon their wives, for the love of strangers, which they had
married over their heads, contrary to the Law, Mal. I. 14. 15, 16. propounds the
liberty of divorce which the Law allows, for an expedient acceptable to God, as
his own provision, when he says; For the Lord God of Israel says; If thou
hate, put away, as the Jews there expound it. For, they who construe it; The
Lord God of Israel says, that he hates putting away; cannot give account, why
the Prophet should mention the matter of divorce, where his purpose is to blame
the oppression of Israelitish wives, for the love of strangers married against
the Law. Whereas, when he adds; For one covers violence with his Garment,
says the Lord of Hosts,: He aggravateth the same fault by this consideration,
that the covenant of marriage (signified usually in the Scripture, by covering
the woman with the man's Garment, Ezekiel. XVI. 8. Ruth III. 10.) is employed for a
means of oppression and violence, upon her, that, out of love entered into it.
And the Prophet Mala^hi, holding his Commission by virtue of Moses Law, how
shall he say that God hates that, which, by his law he provided, though for a
remedy of further mischief?

There is indeed great dispute, whither the allowance of Moses law did secure
them that put away their wives under the law, in point of conscience to God;
And it is certain, if that be true which I have settled in the second Book,
concerning the inward and outward, the civil and spiritual obedience of God
under Moses law, and the difference between them; that it could not always do
it. For, could he, that kn^w he put away his wife for ^ust, or for wrath, or
for advantage, think that he loved his wife, whom, all men know they are to
love above others, being bound to love all Israelites as himself? But on the
contrary, he that had lighted upon a wife of crooked conditions, and, having
done his reasonable endeavor to reclaim her, had found her incorrigible, how
should he think he did her wrong, using the power that Gods law had given him
so moderately, in putting her away? Had God given them a Law, which could in no
case be used without sin? For, had the nakedness, which the law allowed for
a just cause of divorce, signified nothing else but that which our Lord by his
Gospel allows, what question remains, whither the conscience be secured by it
or not? But among Christians, covenanting with God upon express promises of the
world to come, under a (...) and more excellent rule of obedience, with promise
of helps proportionable to go through with it, it is marvail, if an obligation
be acknowledged, of bearing with patience the manners of the wife, which a man
himself chooses, never giving over the hope of reducing her to reason, until
she falsify the trust of wedlock? That, when the matter is come to that point,
it should no more be matter of precept, but matter of counsel, to endure such a
wife, when the infamy of a man's bed my be saved, and hope of reclaiming her may
remain? So that, the question, whether the meaning of Moses his words, be the
meaning of Christ's, is the same in this particular of marriage, which the
Christians have generally with the Jews, whether our Lord Jesus, persiting the
Law by bringing in the Gospel, be the Christ or not. The resolution whereof,
as it necessarily infers the difference between them, which I have settled in
the second Book, so that difference will as necessarily infer, this
provision of our Lord to be several from that of Moses. Out of Origin, in Mat.
VII. a pleasant conceit is alleged; Forsitan audax aliquis and Judaicus vir,
adversus doctrine Salvatoris nostri dicet, quoniam and Jesus dicens; Qui cunque
dimi serit uxorem suam excepta causa fornicationis facit ^^^ machari, permi^it
uxo em dimittere quem ad modum Moses, qu^m retulit, propter duritiem cordi^
Jud^orum hoc pr^cepisse. Et hanc ipsam inquiet esse causam fornicationis, per
quam just ux^r a viro dimittitur, secundum quam and Moses praecepit dimitter^
uxorem, si inventa fuerit res turpis in ^a. Perhaps some bold Jewish fellow may
say, (crossing our Saviors Doctrine) that even Jesus, saying; Whosoever shall
send away his wife but for fornication, makes her com^^it adultery; has given
leave to put a wife away, even as Moses, who, he relareth, did command this for
the Jews hard-heartednesse; And will say, that this is the very same cause of
fornication, for which a wife is justly put away by a Husband, according to
which Moses also commands to put away a wife, if a foul thirg be found in her.
Whence it is argued, that there were then, that expounded our Lords words to
the same intent with Moses. That there were, Origin says not, that there
might be, I grant. But they must be Jews, and adversaries to our Saviors
Doctrine that should do it. For, he that should say so, must blame our Savior,
for pretending to contradict Moses (which Origin supposes no Jevv could deny)
saying, indeed, the same thing Otherwise, he must contradict the Synagogue,
for allowing divorce where Moses allowed it not, if the soul thing which Moses
allows divorce for, be only that fornication for which our Lord allows it.
Then, he that would make use of Origin, to prove that the terms of our Lord,
and of Moses, may signify the same thing, must first answer the Argument
wherewith he convinces him that thus should blaspheme our Lord. Adultery, says
he, is no cause of divorce, but of death by Moses law, therefore that dishonest
thing for which the Law allows divorce, is not adultery. In fine, he that
examines all that is said, or can be said, of the diverse significations of
(...) in the Scriptures, will find but two; the one proper, in the case of man
and wife; the other, by translation to the alliance between God and his people,
perpetually compared to a marriage all over the Scripture. That this
signification cannot take place here, this may serve to evidence; That the
cause upon which our Lord allovvs divorce, must be something betvveen the Wife
and the Husband, as it was in the Law; For, would it not be impertinent, to
punish transgression of Gods Covenant, with dissolution of wedlock? The
proper signification of (...) indeed, is larger in the Scriptures, then
according to the Atrick Greek; to signify all uncleanness, at the matter
requires. For, when S. Paul says, 1 Cor. V. 1. (...) -- for a man to have his
Fathers wife, would not have been (...) in ordinary Greek. But it is no
marvail, if the Jews that spoke Greek, call all that (...), which their usual
language called (...) the Syriack (...) So that (...) in our Lords words, is
exactly expounded by Hesychius, and the Etymologick turning, (...). Who being
Christians, do usually expound that pro^erty of the Greek, which is usual
among Christians, out of the Bible.

And this is demonstrated to be the signification here meant, because it is not
possible to show, that ever there was any opinion, rule, or practice received
in the Church, that it is lawful to divorce but in case of Adultery. I do
truly conceive, that there was anciently a difference of opinion and practice
in the Church, whither it be lawful to mary again upon putting away a wife for
adultery; or, whether the bond of marriage remain undissoluble, when the parties
are separated from bed and board for adultery. But this difference argues
consent in the rest; that is, that, excepting the case of Adultery, there is no
divorce to be among Christians. Neither do I now speak of the base times of the
Eastern Empire, of which, I will give you such an account, as I find most
reasonable, when I come to the difficulty that is proposed. I say it may
appear, that the Church originally granted no divorce but for adultery, whether
the innocent party, or whether both were allowed to mary again, living* the
other or not. It is acknowledged by our Author, that Tertullian, cont. Marc.
IV. 34. de Pudiciti^ cap. XVI. both expounds our Lords words in this sense, and
determines against divorces out of them; that Origin, in Mat. H^^. VII. accepts
them in the same sense, and disputes for it. That Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom.
II. sub finem, condemns the divorces which the Roman Laws then licensed, and
marriage upon them. That S. Chrysostom in Mat. Hom. XVII. and LXIII. Libro de
Virginitate. Sermon. I. de debitore X. millium. S. Ambrose, in Luc. lib. XVII. S.
Jerome Epist. XXX. in Mat. XIX. S. Basil. ad Amphil. Can. IX. in Hexaem, Hom.
VII. Asterius Hom. ult. S. Austine de adulterinis conjugiis ad Pollentium,
^ollovv the the same sense, and deliver the same Doctrine, which seems to be
also S. Gregory Nazianz^nes, when he calls a Wife,, (...) An evil which,
being g^^, is not to be let go. The record is yet to seek, that may shovv any
such opinion in the Church, and, having escaped so diligent hands, I may well
challenge all the world to produce it. For, whereas it is said, p. 155. that
Origin ubi supra, argues, that there are faults no less destructive to any
society or communion in wedlock, then adultery is; And therefore, that adultery
is named but as an instance, in a sentence to be extended, by reason of equity
necessarily inherent in the case, to all faults equally destructive to marriage;
I grant that Origin has so argued, and that Grotius (out of whose Annotations
upon Mat. V. 31. 32. all this dust has been raised) has seconded him in it.
But it is one thing to say, that, by consequence of reason, where the fault is
no less destructive to marriage then adultery is, there ought to be the same
liberty of divorce; Another thing to say, that, by the Leter of our Lords
words, all causes of divorce, that Moses Law, or the Civil Laws of Christian
Sta^es allows, are allowable in point of Conscience. The one leaves the weight
of the fault, and the equality of it with adultery, to be judged by the Church:
The other takes away the Church, and the judgment of it, which Origin never
meant to do. Again, I say, that those things which are disputed by Origin, were
never held of such consideration to the Church, that either the opinion, or
much more the practice of the Church should be valued by them. It is plain he
was allowed so to argue, but it is as plain that his arguments took no effect,
either in the opinion, or in the practice of the Church. As for S. Augustine,
who was so much perplexed, whither our Savior might not mean spiritual
fornication in those words, Retract. I. 29. having delivered it for his opinion
before, in his exposition of the Se^mon in the Mount; Will any man believe,
that he, who so ^^ifly holds, that it is unlawful to mary after divorce, for
Adultery, as S. Austin, in his Books de adulterinis conjugiis ad Pollentium,
and elsewhere, does, can allow divorce for any thing but Adultery? The truth
is, he that considers the business thoroughly shall see, that it was that
supposition that obliged S. Austine to this doubt; as, on the contrary, the
improbability of the doubt, is that which chiefly renders the supposition
improbable. Which, being a thing not yet observed, so far as I know, and
there being no means to judge what is in the power of the Church, and what is
not, in matter of divorce, otherwise; I will go out of the way to debate,
rather to resolve it, before I go forwards.

CHAP. XIV. Scripture alleged to prove the bond of Marriage insoluble in case of
adultery, uneffectuall. S. Paul and our Lord speak both to one purpose,
according to S. Jerome, and S. Austine. The contrary opinion more reasonable,
and more general in the Church. Why the Church may restrain the innocent party
from marying again. The Imperial Laws could never be of force to void the
Power of the Church. Evidence for it.
SOme texts are alleged to prove the bond of Marriage undissoluble, which to me,
I confess, do not seem to create any manner of consequence. S. Paul says, Romans
VII. 2. The wife that is under a Husband, is tied to her Husband living, by the
Law: But if her Husband dye, she is clear of her Husband. So, living her
Husband, she shall be styled an adu^teress if she become another husbands: But
if her Husband dye, she is free from the Law, so as to be no adulteress if she
become another Husbands. Where, say they, it is plain, that she who mary's
before her former Husband is dead, is an adulteress. As also in 1 Cor. VII. 39.
The wife is tied by the Law as long as her Huband lives; but if her Husband
fall asleep, she is free to mary whom she please, only in the Lord. And yet it
is manifest, that S. Paul, in the first place, speaks according to the Law, in
the second, according to Christianity; and, that there is no question, that,
under the Law, marriage might be dissolved. Therefore, the words of S. Paul are
not superficially to be considered, when he says, Romans VII. 1, Know ye not
brethren, (For, I speak to those that know the Law) (...); For the meaning
cannot be, that the Law has power of a man, as long as the man lives that the
Law has power upon; but, as long as the man lives who has power over him by
the La^; As it is evident, by the inference; For the wife living, is tied by
the Law to her Husband; but if her Husband die, she is clear of her Husband.
And the compari^on from which S. Paul argues holds thus; As a wife is no longer
tied to her Husband, by the power which the Law gives him, when he is dead; so
are not Christi^ns ^^ed to God by the Power, w^^^h the Law gives him, when it
is voided by the death of Christ; but, by the new bond which the Covenant o^
Grace knitteth. Now, by the Law, the bond of Marriage is not to be dissolved,
but by the will of the Husb^nd; but, if the Husband will, it is dissolved by a
Bill of divorce. And therefore, that exception is necessarily to be understood
in S. Paul's words. Which being understood, it will be ridiculous to infer^e,
that therefore the marriage of Christians is indissoluble. Though diverse o^ t^^
Fathers, it is true, h^ve thought it a good inference. But among Christians,
when S. Paul says; the wife is tied by the Law, as long as her Husband lives;
his intent can require no more, then, that she is free, when he is dead, to
mary again; Not, that she can no way be free while he is alive. Again, Ephesians, V.
28-32. He that loves his wife loves himself. For never did any man hate his
own flesh, but feed and cherish it, as our Lord his Church. For we are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Therefore shall a man leave Father
and Mother, and cleave to his wife, and they two shall become one flesh. This
mystery is great, but I mean in Christ, and in the Church. The marriage of Adam
with Eve, was intended by God for a figure and prophecy of the incarnation of
Christ, and his spiritual marriage with the Church, by virtue of it; as the
Scripture, wheresoever it speaks of the first and second Adam, declares.
Therefore, as I said, their marriage was an indissoluble union of one with one,
as the marriage of Christians, which reviveth it. Be the marriage of Christians
then a Sacrament, as much as any man would have it to be; be it a commemoration
(if Adams was a prediction) of the incarnation of Christ, and of his marriage
with the Church; Let it contain a promise of Grace to them that exercise it as
Christians should do; it is therefore indissoluble in the point of right, I
confess; that is to say, it is the profession of an obligation upon the
parties, to hold it indissoluble. But, is it therefore indissoluble in point of
fact? May not the obligation so professed be transgressed? And, is not marriage
a civil contract, even among Pagans and Infidels, and that by Gods
appointment? And, may not the Law which God ^^ath restrained the marriage of
Christians to presuppose the conditions of a civil contract? And are not
civil contracts void? when one party transgresses the condition on which they
are made? Or, cannot marriage signify the marriage between Christ and his
Church; cannot the observation of it oblige God to give grace, unless we
understand all such conditions thereby to be extinguished? The union of the
word with our flesh, the union of Christ with his Church, depends only upon
that effectual Grace which himself purposed from everlasting, because, as I
said, upon supposition of our perseverance. The union of Wife and Husband
signifies it no less, though, the obligation being transgressed, it may become
void. But, how shall marying as a Christian should mary be the means to obtain
Grace unless, as well the union, as that promise may be forfeited, by
transgressing the condition upon which it is made?

The chief difficulty then lies in the words of our Lord, Mat. V. 30. 31. XIX.
3-9. in which, I must, in the first place, consider, that there are diverse
things observable in them, to show that our Lord, though he declared not
openly, that the Gentiles should embrace Christianity, and the Jews refuse it,
yet nevertheless propounds it so, that he must be understood to intend it for
the Gentiles so converted, as well as for the Jews. That of Origin in the first
place. For, the Law appointing death for the punishment of adultery, what need
the exception of adultery to the Jews, among whom divorce for adultery was
death? Secondly, his words in S. Mark. X. 11. 12. Who so ^utteth away his wife
and mariet^ another commits adultery against her, and, if a wife put away
her Husband and mary another, she commits adultery. For, by the Jews Law,
though the Husband might put away his wife, yet the wife could not put away her
Husband. And, though Josephus report, that Herod's sister Salome sent her
Husband a Bill of divorce, yet he reports it as that which never was done
before; and therefore, cannot be thought to have come to a custom in our Lords
^ime. Thirdly, how could our Lord say, according to the Jews Law, that he who
married a woman divorced commits adultery, when as, what hindered a man then
to mary a divorced wife, out of mere charity, to keep her from committing
adultery? Lastly, if we consider S. Paul's words, whereby he teaches, as I
have showed, that, the wife having the same interesse in the Husband, as the
Husband in the wife, by the Christian Law, the wife can no more leave her
Husband, then the Husband the wife, 1 Cor. VII. 1-5. I. 11. it will appear,
that his Doctrine, extending to the condition of man and wife by the then
Roman Law, is derived, as it must needs be derived, from this sense of his
Masters. Seeing then, that divorce, not only among the Jews, but among ^he
Romans, was always understood to dissolve the bond of Marriage; what
appearance can there be, that our Lord, when he says; He that puts away
his wife, unless for adultery, and marieth another, commits adultery, and,
he that marieth her who is put away commits adultery; intends not to
extend the exception to marying again, as well as to putting away? And
therefore, that he who puts away for adultery, and she who is not put away
for adultery may mary again? For, if those whom he spoke to could understand
nothing by divorce, but that which they saw, and the divorce which they saw, or
heard of, enabled all parties to mary again, then, that divorce which the
exception of fornication allows by our Lords law, understanding that exception,
inables to mary again. Two reasons are opposed from our Lords words. First, in
S. Mark X. 12. S. Luke XVI. 18. the exception is not expressed, and yet it is
said; He that puts away his wife and mary's another, commits adultery. To which
it is answered; That, the Gospels are, as S. Justine the Martyr calls them,
remembrances of the sayings and doings of our Lord, the effect whereof was
delivered to, and received by them who were baptized, as the Law of
Christianity. And that therefore, in recording them, it was thought enough, to
remember the heads of those things which were undertaken to be believed and
observed. That therefore, all that undertake to expound the four Gospels, do
use to add, whatsoever any of them has more then the one which he has in
hand, to make up his sense. In fine therefore, that in this point, the sense of
our Lord is not to be measured by that which S. Mark and S. Luke has less,
but that which S. Matthew has more. And therefore, that, when our Lord says,
He that puts away his wife, and mary's again, commits adultery: And he that
mary's her that is put away, commits adultery; He is to be understood with this
exception, unless for adultery. It is objected secondly; That by this account,
she that is put away for adultery may mary again, and neither her self, no^ he
that mary's her, be chargeable with adultery; which were a gross inconvenience,
that, by the Law of our Lord, a woman, by committing adultery, (or man in like
case) should advantage himself, to mary again with a good conscience. For if
it be true; He that puts away but for adultery, and mary's again; and, he that
mary's her who is put away but for adultery, commits adultery; then will it
follow, that, he who puts away his wife for adultery, and mary's another, and
he that mary's her that is so put away, commits no adultery. To which I answer,
that it follows not, that our Lord so saying, should mean this consequence; But
rather, that he who mary's her that is put away for adultery, commits adultery
much more: Though he who puts her away is no cause of it, neither chargeable
with adultery for marying again. For, if the Husband be chargeable with
adultery, when the wife mary's again, being not put away for adultery; why is
he chargeable with it that put her away for adultery? If, because he mary's
again, not putting his wife away for adultery; putting her away for adultery,
why is he chargeable with it? The difficulty will be; Then is the knot of
wedlock tied to the one party, and loose to the other? which seems a knot more
indissoluble then that of wedlock; but is indeed none at all, if we distinguish
between the metaphor of a knot tied, and the obligation signified by it. For,
though the act of consent to the contract of wedlock, is the act of two
parties, whereof a third, that is God, is depositary, to discharge the
innocent, and to charge the guilty; yet, the bond or obligation which is
contracted by it is answerable severally, by each party, in the judgment of
God. And, is there the same reason, that God should call him to account for
adultery, who thinks himself free of that contract which he stood to till his
party transgressed it, as her that gave him cause to think himself free by
transgressing it?

The difficulty then rests in the meaning of S. Paul, when he ch^rgeth the wife
not to depart from her Husband: If she do, to abid^ unmaried, or to be
reconciled to her Husband. And the Husband, not to put away his wife, 1 Cor.
VII. 12. And that having before charged married people not to part, even for
devotion, but for a time, for fear of temptation by concupiscense. For, can it
then be imagined, that he allows them to part upon any occasion, but that of
adultery? Therefore, those that are parted for adultery he forbids to marry
again. And these are the Texts that have moved S. Jerome Epist. XLVII. to be of
this mind. But S. Austine further, expounding the Sermon in the mount upon this
supposition, (as he himself professes in the beginning of his books de
adultrinis conjugiis, written express to maintain it) and desiring to show how
our Lords Law injoyns the same with his Apostles; imagines, that our Lord might
mean spiritual fornication or adultery, according to which the Psalm says,
Thou have destroyed all that commit fornication against thee; when he gave it.
Which sense compriseth all sin, that carries with it a construction of
departing from our Covenant with God, both in truth, and according to S.
Austine, de Sermon domini in monte, I. 16. Whereupon the Mileritane Canon,
XVII. speaks thus; Placuit ut, secundum Evangelicam and Apostolicam
disciplinam, ueque dimissus ab uxore, neque dimissa a marito alteri
conjungantur; sed ita maneant, au^ sibi reconcilientur: Quod si contempserint,
ad poenitentiam redigantur; In qua causa legem I^perialem petendam promulgari.
It seemed good, that, according to the discipline of the Gospel and the
Apostles, neither he that is dimissed by his wife, nor she that is dimissed by
her husband, be wedded to another; but remain so, or be reconciled to one
another; which if they neglect, that they be put to Penance; and that request
be made for an Imperial Law to be published in the case. Where, alleging the
Gospel, and S. Paul both, it is plain, the Canon proceeds upon the opinion of
S. Austine; For, he was at this Council, and, in all probability, had the
penning of the Canons.

That which moved them to be of this opinion, I confess moves me to be against
it. I cannot be persuaded that S. Paul in this place, and our Lord in the
Gospel, speak both to one and the same purpose. All subjects of the Roman
Empire, when S. Paul writ, had power to leave their wives or their husbands at
pleasure, without giving the Law account. But, supposing them Christians, were
they not to give God account? were they not to give the Church account?
Certainly if they married again, they must give the Church account, because our
Lord has said, He that leaves his wife but for adultery, and marieth again,
commits adultery; For of adultery, account is to be given the Church. And
truly, who parts with a wife, it is great odds, does it out of a desire to mary
another; which, all the Church agrees, he cannot do, unless she be an
adulteress, part of it says further, though she be he cannot do it. But, if
he mary not another, but part with his wife, he must give God account, whether
he be bound to give the Church account or not. And this account S. Paul
instructs how to give. He will not have Christians to part bed and board, much
less to repudiate, to part families, to send one another a way with that which
they brought; but, if they will needs try how good it is living unmarried, he
would have them know, that they could not mary elsewhere, because of our Lords
Law, which, in case of fornication, he silently excepteth. For, to me it
seems manifest, that our Lord, in case of fornication, provideth for the
reparation of the party wronged, whose bed and issue is concerned; restraining
the divorce which the law allowed, only to the transgression of marriage
in^cted by the institution of Paradise, when two continue not one flesh. But S.
Paul, for the conscience of particular Christians, upon what terms they may or
ought to forbear ^ohabitation; to wit, so as they mary not again: Which is
exhortation enough, to set aside animosities, and return to bed and board again.
S. Austine, and Venerable Bede upon the Gospel, following him, confess, that,
according to their interpretation, our Lord permits to part, not for the
fornication which the other party has done, but for that which himself may
do; To wit, which, by the company of an ill disposed yoke fellow, he may be
moved to do. So, divorce, according to this opinion, is grounded upon the
precept of the Gospel; If thine eye offend thee pluck it out; and, is that
which the Church of Rome at this day maintains, by the XXVI Session of the
Council of Trent, Can. VIII. (and that, as I think, according to S. Paul only,
that he leaves it to the Conscience of particular Christians, without
interessing the Church the interest whereof, I conceive, cannot be excluded,
though S. Paul, here, provide not for it) as Cardinal Bellarmine de Matrimoni^
I. 14. disputes. But, in case of adultery, it never was, nor ever could seem
questionable, (so as S. Paul to decide it) whither a man might so put away his
wife or no; all Civil Law that then was, counting him accessory to the stain
of his bed and issue that did not; And thereupon, the ancient Canons of the
Church imposing penalties upon any of the Clergy, who, being allowed to dwell
with their wives, should endure an adulteress. And therefore, I conclude, that
S. Paul, though he allow not, either husband or wife, to part with wife or
husband, as to cohabitation, without renouncing the bond of wedlock, no not for
the state of continence,; (as S. Austine very well argues; if not for
continence, then for no other cause) yet* forbids not what he allows not. But,
seeing such offenses fall out among Christians that be married, as are not
easily discernable, where the fault of them lies; no^ allowing them to part,
nor yet condemning both parties, he limits them, in case they do so, not to
marry again; imposing thereby, upon the innocent party, the necessity of
continence, which his innocence makes tolerable, and the A^ostles advise, if it
proceed not to the parting of families, easily recover^ble. As for the guilty,
if it prove a burden, or a snare, he may impute it to his fault. And, as it
was not necessary, that the Church should be interessed in it, so long as both
parties were enabled by the Law to depart, and neither proceeded to mary again;
So, the Law not allowing it, there is no marvail that the Church should
interpose.

Let us then see how the rest of the Church allows the exception of adultery,
to the pur^o^e of marying again. Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. II. in fine,
(...). The Scripture plainly inacteth; Thou shall not a smiss thy wife but upon
account of adultery: Counting it adultery to mary while the one of the parted
is alive. Athen^goras, de resurrect. mortuorum, (...) A Christian is to ab^de
as he was born, or a^ one marriage: For, says he, he that dismisseth his wife,
and marieth another, commits adultery. This necessarily concerns no more,
th^n marrying again upon that divorce, which the Roman Law in^led eith^r p^rty
to make, without rendering a reason; and may well b^a^ the ex^eption of marying
upon divorce for adultery, by the Christian Law. And the s^^^ ^xception may
well be understood, in the XLVIII. C^non of the Ap^^^^^s* (...)* If a Layman,
casting ou^ his wife, take another, or one that is put away ^y another, let him
stand excommunicate. Provi^ion is made against taking to wi^e one that had been
put away, for the reputation of the Clergy: For, it must needs be a s^ain to
bring such a one into a man's house. If it be true that Grotius alleges out of
several passages of Tertulliane; that the Church, in his time, admitted them
to mary again, who had parted with their wives for adultery, we need no more.
But, though those allegations, (as not quoted, so) are no where to be ^ound;
yet Tertullianes opinion is to be seen, by the plea that he makes, contra Marc.
IV. 32. that our Lord abrog^teth not that divorce which Moses had inacted,
though he rest^ineth it; Which could not be said, if the divorce which our Lord
allows, did not import right to mary again. Lactantius plainly signifies the
same, when he says; Adulterum esse, qui a marito dimissam du^erit: Et eum qui,
praeter crimen adulterii, uxorem dim* serit, ut alterum du^^t; That he is an
adulterer, who mary's a wife put away by her husband: And that so is he, that
shall put away his wife to mary another, excepting the crime of adultery. The
great Council of, almost all the West, at Arles, in the business of the
Donatists, provides, Can. X. That those who take their wives in adultery, being
young Christians, be exhorted not to mary others as long as they live; leaving
thereby, hope of reconcilement. Certainly, they counted it not adultery, which
they only exhort not to do. The Council of Elvira, Can IX. That the wife that
forsakes her husband for adultery, and mary's another, shall not communicate so
long as he remains alive; of the husband, nothing. By the VIII. and X. She who
leaves her husband without cause, and mary's another, is not to communicate, no
not at the point of death. (At the date of this Council, before the act of
Constantine, man or wife parted without showing cause. Without cause then, is,
when that cause which the Church allows, viz. adultery, is not) She that mary's
him, who, she knew had put away his wife without cause, not till the point of
death. This is the difference between committing adultery, and marying him that
commits adultery by putting away his wife without adultery. And, it is plain,
the wife is stricter used by these Canons then the husband. The Commentaries
upon S. Paul's Epistles under S. Ambrose his name, say plainly, 1 Cor. VII. That
the man may mary again, having put away his wife for adultery, not the wife
having put away her husband; because the man is the head of the woman. I do not
find this reason sufficient. For, S. Paul makes the interest of the wife in
the husband, and that of the husband in the wife both one and the same. Nor do
I find the reason sufficient which Cardinal Cajetane has given for him, upon
Mat. XIX. 9. to wit, because our Lord, saying; He that puts away his wife,
unless for adultery, and marieth again, commits adultery; says nothing of
what the woman may do in that case. For Mark X. 11. 12. he says as much for
the wife as for the husband, not expressing the exception; Why then should I
not be extended to her, when he adds it? But I conceive, that, though, by
Gods Law, the woman be restrained no more then the man, yet the Law of the
Church might restrain that which Gods law restrained not; And so, though the
man be only advised not to mary again, by the Canon of Arles; yet, the woman
might be put to Penance, so long as her first husband remained alive, by the
Canon of Elvira. For, I see, S. Basil ad Amphil. Can, IX. confesses, that,
though S. Paul makes the case of both equal, yet, custom put the woman to
Penance, marying upon the adultery of her husband. Some ground of difference
nature it self inforces, in that, the man taints not the wives issue, nor
brings that infamy upon her bed, as she upon his. In the mean time, whatsoever
we say of that, it is manifest, they held it not adultery, for the party that
parted for adultery, to mary again. And as for Fabiola, who, having put away a
notorious adulterous husband, and married another, after the death of this
second, did voluntary Penance for it; as you find in S. Jerome, Epist. XXX. It
may be the Church exacted it not, because, during her second Husbands time, it
is not said that she communicated not; And it may be she followed S. Jeromes
opinion, which he expresses Epist. XLVII. Some passages of S. Basil, S.
Chrysostom, and Gregory Nazianze, are alleged in vain, signifying only the
insolubility of marriage; which may allow the exception which the Gospel makes,
and must allow it, when we see the custom, testified by S. Basil, to the
contrary. And S. Chrysostom, when S. Paul says of the wife, If she part --
understands him; If she part upon ordinary displeasures, which he calls (...),
or pusillanimities, which, the courage of a true Christian would neglect and
over see. Innocent I. Pope, Epist. ad Exuperium, puts them only to Penance,
that mary again, having put away wives or husbands; Not supposing adultery: But
Epist. IX. ad Probum Statuimus fide Catholica suffragante, illud esse
conjugium, quod primitus erat divina gratia fundatum: Conventumque
secundaemulieris, priore superstite, nec divortio ejecta nullo pacto posse esse
legitimum. We decree, the Catholic faith voting for it, that to be marriage,
which first was founded upon Gods grace: (that was first made according to
Christianity) and that the wedding of a second wife, leaving the first, can by
no means be lawful. Which exception could possibly signify nothing, if in no
case, (not of adultery) a second could be married, while the first is alive. And
in the West, Chromatius of Aquileia, in Mat. V. as well as in the East,
Asterius Homil. an liceat dimittere uxorem; the first damns him that shall mary
again excepting adultery. The second would have his hearers persuaded, that
nothing but death or adultery dissolves marriage.

But do I therefore say, that the Church cannot forbid the innocent party to
mary again? or, is bound by Gods law to allow it? All Ecclesiastical Law being
nothing but the restraining of that which Gods Law has left indefinite? And
the inconveniences being both visible and horrible? I conceive, I am duly
informed, that George, late Archbishop of Canterbury, was satisfied in the
proceeding of the High Commission Court, to tie them that are divorced from
marying again, upon experience of adultery designed upon collusion, to free the
parties from wedlock; having been formerly tender in imposing that charge. The
Greek Church may beter avoid such inconveniences, not being tied to any Law of
the Land, but the tempering of the Canons remaining in the Governors of the
Church. But, they that would not have the Laws of the Church, and the justice
of the Land, became Stales and pandars to such vilanies, must either make
adultery death, and so take away the dispute, or revive public Penance, and so
take away the infamy of his bed, and the taint of his issue, that shall be
reconciled to an Adulteress; or, lastly, bear with that inconvenience which
the casualties of the world may oblige any man to, which is, to propose the
chastity of single life, in stead of the chastity of wedlock, when the security
of a man's conscience, and the offense of the Church allows it not. But though
this, in regard of the intricacies of the question, and the inconveniences
evident to practice, may remain in the power of the Church; yet can it never
come within the power of the Church to determine, that it is prejudicial to
the Christian faith to do so, as by Gods Law. And the Church, that erres not in
prohibiting marriage upon divorce for adultery, will err, in determining for
matter of faith; that Gods law prohibites it, so long as such reasons from the
Scriptures are not silenced by any Tradition of the whole Church. It is easy
to see by S. Augustine, de adulterini conjugiis, II. 5-12. that public Penance
was the means to restore an adulteress to the same reputation among
Christians, which an adulteress that turned Christian, must needs recover
among Christians. And that is the reason, why the Canon of Arles orders, that
young Christians be advised not to mary again, that their wives may be
recovered of their adultery by Penance, and so their marriage re-estated. I see
also that Justiniane Nov. CXVII. has taken order, that women excessive in
incontinence, be delivered to the Bishop of the City, to be put into a
Monastery, there to do Penance during life. And, supposing adultery to be
death, according to Moses Law, the inconvenience cease. If the Civil Law
enable not the Church to avoid the scandal of this collusion, it is no marvail
that the Church is constrained to impose upon the innocent, more then Gods law
requires, to avoid that scandal which Gods law makes the greater inconvenience.

And, thus having showed you, that S. Austines interpretation of fornication is
not true, I have, into the bargain, showed you, that it cannot serve to prove
divorce upon other causes besides adultery; and so, the insolubility of
marriage, excepting our Saviors exception, is as firmly proved, as the consent
of the Church can prove any thing in Christianity. I know Origin argues, that
poisoning, killing children, robbing the house, may be as destructive to the
Society of Wedlock, as Adultery; And he thereupon seems to infer, that our
Savior excepts adultery only for instance, intending all causes equally
destructive to wedlock; as Grotius, who follows his sense, seems to limit it.
But Origens opinion will not interrupt the Tradition of the Church, unless it
could appear to have come into practice, sometime, in some part of the Church.
Neither would it serve his turn, that would have those divorces which the
secular Power allows to extend to marying again. For Origin never intended,
that his own opinion should bind; but, that it is in the power of the Church to
void marriages upon other causes. For, he says, he knew some Governors of
Churches suffer a woman to mary, her former husband living, Praeter Scripturam,
besides the Scripture. And that, as Moses permitted divorce, to avoid a greater
mischief. But I may question, whether they thought that against the Scripture,
which Origin thought to be against the Scripture. And, in the mean time, as I
do not see, what breach his report can make upon the Tradition of the Church;
so it is plain, the Power of the Church, and not the secular, did that which he
reports. And truly, what the testimony of S. Austine, (extending that Adultery
upon which our Savior grants divorce to all mortal sin; but, confining him
that is so divorced not to mary another) can avail him, that would entitle the
secular Power to create causes of divorce, to the effect of marying again; let
all reason and conscience judge. I shall conclude my argument; Exceptio firmat
regulam in non exceptis. An exception settles the rule in all that is not
excepted. Either our Savior intended, that, who had put away a Yoke Fellow for
adultery, should mary again, or not; If so, he has forbidden marying again
upon other causes; If not, much more: For, though upon adultery, he has
forbidden to mary again. And thus is the Power of the Church in Matrimonial
causes, founded upon the Law which our Lord Christ has confined all Christians
to, of marying one to one, and indissolubly, whither without exception, or,
excepting adultery. For, seeing that, of necessity, many questions must arise
upon the execution of such a Law; and that Civil Power may as well be enemy to
Christianity, as not; and that, as well professing to maintain it, as
professing to persecute it; to say, that God has left the Consciences of
Christians to be secured by the Civil Power, submitting to what it determines,
is to say, that, under the Gospel, God has not made the observing of his
laws the condition of obtaining his promises. This is that power which
Tertulliane in several places expressly voucheth, de Pudicitia, cap. IV. Penes
nos (speaking of Christians, that is, of the whole Church) occultae quoque
conjunctiones, id est, non pri^s apud Ecclesiam professae, juxta maechiam and
fornicationem judicari perclitantur. Among us, even clandestine marriages, that
is, not professed before the Church, are in danger to be censured next to
adultery and fornication. And therefore, Ad uxorem II. ult. Unde sufficiamus ad
senarrandam faelicitatem ejus matrimonii quod Ecclesia conciliat? How may we be
able to declare the happiness of that marriage, which the Church interposeth to
join? de Monogamia, cap. XI. Quale est id matrimonium, quod, eis a quibus
postulas non licet hahere? What manner of marriage is that, says he (speaking of
marying a second wife) which, it is not lawful for them of whom thou desire
it, to have? Because it was not lawful for the Clergy, who allowed the people
to mary second wives, themselves to do the same. Ignatius, Epist. ad (...). It
becomes men and women that mary, to join by the consent of the Bishop, that
the marriage be according to the Lord, and not according to lust. It has been
doubted, indeed, whether we have the true Copy of Ignatius his Epistles or not;
whether this be one of them or not: But, that Copy being found, which Eusebius,
S. Jerome, and others of the Fathers took for Ignatius his own, and has all
that the Fathers quote, just as they quote it, nothing of that which stood
suspected before; to refuse them now, is to refuse evidence, because it stands
not with our prejudices. Not that this power of the Church stands upon the
authority of two or three witnesses. These were not to be neglected. But, the
Canons of the Church, and the custom and practice of the Church ancient^r then
any Canons in writing, but evidenced by written Law, which could never have
come in writing, had it not been in force before it was written, suffer it not
to remain without evidence. In particular, the allowance of the marriages of
those who were baptized, when they were admitted to Baptism, evidenced out of
S. Austine, the Constituions, and Eliberitane Canons, evidenceth the Power of
the Church in this point unquestionable.

And therefore against the Imperial Laws, I argue, as against the Leviathan;
that is, if any man suppose, that they pretend to secure the conscience of a
Christian, in marying according to them upon divorce. Either the Sovereign
Power effects that as Sovereign, or as Christian. If as Sovereign, why may not
the Christians of the Turkish Empire divorce themselves according to the
Al^oran, which is the Law of the Land, and be secure in point of conscience? If
as Christian, how can the conscience of a Christian in the Eastern Empire be
secured in that case, wherein, the conscience of a Christian in the West cannot
be secured, because there is no such Civil Law there, the Christianity of both
being the same? For, it cannot be said, that the Imperial Laws alleged, were
in force in the West, after the division of the Empire. I argue again; That
they cannot secure the conscience, but under the Law of our Lord, as containing
the true interpretation of fornication in his sense. And can any man be so
senseless as to imagine, so impudent as to affirm, that the whole Church,
agreeing in taking the fornication of married people to signify adultery, has
failed; but every Christian Prince, that allows and limiteth any other causes
of divorce, all limiting several causes, attaineth the true sense of it? Will
the common sense of men allow, that Homicide, Treason, Poisoning, Forgery,
Sacrilege, Robbery, Mans-stealing, Cattle-driving, or any of them, is
contained is the true meaning of Fornication in our Lords words? That consent
of parties, that a reasonable cause, when Pagans divorced per bonam gratiam,
without disparagement to either of the parties, can be understood by that name?
For, these you shall find to be legal cause of divorce, by those acts of the
Emperors. Lastly I argue; If these causes secure the conscience in the Empire
by virtue of those Laws, why shall not those causes, for which divorce was
allowed or practiced amongst the ancient French, the Irish, the Welsh, the
Russes, do the like? For, that which was done by virtue of their Laws,
reported there, cap. XXVI. XXX. is no less the effect of Christian power that
is Sovereign. He that could find in his heart to tell Baronius (reproving the
Law of Justine, that allowed divorce upon consent) that Christian Princes, who
knew their own power, were not so easily to be ruled by the Clergy, p. 611. can
he find fault with the Irish marrying for a year and a day, or the Welsh,
divorcing for a stinking breath? Had he not more reason to say, that, knowing
their power, they might choose whether they would be Christians or not? The
dispute being; What they should do, supposing that they are Christians. And
therefore, it is to be maintained, that those Emperors, in limiting the
infinite liberty of divorces by the Roman Law, to those causes upon which
dowries should be recoverable or not, (being made for Pagans as well as for
Christians) did, as it were, rough hew their Empire to admit the strict law of
Christianity in this point. And, that this was the intent and effect of their
acts, appears by the Canons which have been alleged, as well in the East, as in
the West, made during the time when those Laws were in force. For, shall we
think the Church quite out of their senses, to procure such Canons to be made,
knowing that they could not take place in the lives and conversations of
Christians, to the effect of hindering to mary again? If we could so think, it
would not serve the turn, unless we could say, how S. Basil should testify,
that indeed they did take place to that effect, and yet the Civil Law not
suffer them to take effect. From our Lord Christ to that time, it is clear,
that no Christian could mary again after divorce, unless for adultery; some
not excepting adultery. In the base^ times of that Empire, it appears by the
Canons of Alexius, Patriarch of C P. and by Matthaeus Blastares, alleged by
Arcudius, p. 517. that those causes, which the Imperial Laws allowed, but
Gods law did not, took place to the effect of marrying again. But, that so it
was always from Constantine, who first taxed legal cause of divorce, nothing
obliges a man to suppose. For, though the Emperors Law, being made for Pagans
as well as for Christians, might enable either party to hold the dowry; yet,
the Christian law might, and did oblige Christians not to mary again. The
Mileuitane Canon shows it, which provideth, that the Emperor be requested to
inact, that no Christian might mary after divorce. For this might be done,
saving the Imperial Laws. But, when we see the Civil Law, enforce the Ministers
of the Church to bless those Marriages which the Civil Law allows; but Gods Law
makes adulteries, the party that is put away, and not for adultery, remaining
alive; Then we see what a horrible breach the civil Power has made upon
Christianity, by hindering the Power of the Church to take place. For, on the
one side, the blessing of the Church, seems to concur to the securing of the
consciences of particular Christians, that they forfeit not their interest in
the promises of the Gospel, by doing that; to which, the Church, for avoiding
greater mischief, is constrained to concur: On the other side, that which is
done, is, not only, by the consent of the whole Church, in the sense of our
Lords Law, but by those Divines of the Eastern Church, which writ during time
that this corruption is pretended, as Euthymius and Theophylact upon Mat. V.
condemned for adultery. Now, supposing the Law to part Wedlock, the Canon not
suffering to mary again, S. Paul's alternative is whole; Either not to part, or
parting, to be reconciled, but not to mary again. And therefore the Church had
no more reason to interpose in that case, then to censure who does wrong in
going to suit. For wrong is always done, but, because it is between two, it is
not censurable; only S. Paul's aim of reconciling them is harder to be
attained, when the dowry is recovered, then when cohibitation only is parted.
And therefore, as that licentiousness in divorcing, which the ancient French,
the Irish, the Welsh, the Russes, and Alysimes, did, or do use, is an evidence
that Christianity was not so fully received, or did not totally prevail amongst
them; So, when the Greek Church yielded to allow those divorces which the Civil
Law allowed, which at the first it did not do, then was their Christianity
imbased and corrupted. Which, though it cannot have come to pass without the
fault of the Clergy, yet it is most to be charged upon the secular power, the
interesse whereof it inlargeth to the prejudice of Christianity. For, as in
times of Apostasy, and factions in the Church, it has been many times
constrained to receive or retain those; of whose salvation it cannot presume,
at the peril of their own souls; So, when it seems less evil to yield to that
violence which the secular Power offers, then to abandon the protection
thereof, those that impose violence are far more chargeable with the souls that
perish by the means thereof, then those that yield to i^ for the best. And,
that this may serve for a great part of excuse for the Greek Church, we have
great argument to believe; Because, since the taking of Constantinople, being
no more tied by the Civil Laws of the supreme Power, they allow no divorce but
for adultery: Neither is there any further difference between them and the
Latin Church, but, whither Gods law, upon divorce for adultery, allow marying
again or not. Which the Council of Trent has no further impeached, then, in
case it be maintained that the Church erreth in saying, that the bond of
marriage remains insoluble, notwithstanding adultery on either side, Conc. Tied.
Sess. XXIV. cap. VII. least the subjects of the State of Venice should be
condemned unheard, who had always married after divorce for adultery; as the
History relates.

CHAP. XIV. Another opinion, admitting the ground of lawful Impediments. What
Impediments arise upon the Constitution of the Church, generally as a Society,
or particularly, as of Christians. By what Law some degrees are prohibited
Christians. And, of the Polygamy of the Patriarchs. Marriage with the deceased
wives Sister, and with a Cousin Germane, by what Law prohibited. Of the
Profession of Conscience, and the validity of clandestine Marriages. The bounds
of Ecclesiastical Power in Marriage upon these grounds.
I Am now to propose another opinion, pretending to justify the Imperial Laws
examined concerning divorce, the moderation whereof I do much esteem above
these novelties, tending to cast one Article concerning the Holy Catholic
Apostolic Church, out of the common faith of all Christians. It says, that
the secular Power is able to limit the conditions upon which marriage is
contracted (as being indeed a civil contract) so that marriage, contracted
contrary to the conditions limited by the secular Power, shall be ipso facto
void, the persons being, by the Law, rendered incapable of contracting the same:
And that, by the same reason, the same Power is able to prescribe such
conditions, as, coming to pass after marriage, are of force to void it by
virtue of the provision going before, declaring it void, whenever such
conditions should come to pass. As, in case of murder, poisoning, treason,
forgery, robbery, sacrilege, in case of impotence, absence of long time and
the like; for, in case of mutual consent, or, upon reasonable cause, without
disparagement, themselves dare not take upon them to say, that the secular
power can make any lawful divorce. This opinion is indeed considerable, in
regard of those impediments, which, Canonists and Casuists declare to have the
force of avoiding marriage consummate by carnal knowledge. For if they, or some
of them, may appear to be well grounded, there can be nothing more effectual
to clear my first intent, to wit, what is the true interesse and right of the
Church, in determining Matrimonial causes.

I say then, that, upon the suppositions premised, that the Church is a Society
founded by God, and that there is a peculiar Law of our Lord concerning the
marriages of Christians, it necessarily follows; that, as there are diver^e
things, which make marriages void, or unlawful, so the Church is to be
satisfied, that there is none of them to be found in those marriages which it
allows. If we consider the Church generally as a Society of reasonable
people, certainly, those things which render the contracts of all reasonable
people, either void or unlawful, in what Society soever they live, must needs
be thought to render, either void or unlawful, those marriages, that are so
contracted in the Church. As for the purpose; Whatsoever is contracted either
by fraud or by force, is of it self originally void, supposing that fraud, or
that force to have been the cause why it was contracted. The reason being the
same, that ties a man to any thing which ever he contracted; which is, his own
free consent, in what he is not limited to by the law of God and Nature. For,
if this be the reason that obliges, where this reason fails, the obligation of
necessity cease. And shall it then be thought, that any solemnity, which the
Church may celebrate a marriage contracted by force with, can avail to make that
contract binding? Or that a cheat, which, had it not been believed, a man would
not have married, nor the marriage have been solemnized, when it is solemnized,
shall have force to oblige? This to those, who, believing that marriage is a
Sacrament, do think it consequent, that the solemnizing of marriage, renders
those marriages of force to bind the parties, which, otherwise, are not only
unlawful, but also void. For, though I cannot here balk my order, and resolve
how many Sacraments there are, and whether marriage be one of them or not; yet,
since I can say, that, supposing it were, this would not follow, for the reason
which I have said, nothing hinders ou^ discourse to proceed, as supposing it
were, not granting that it is. In particular, seeing that, by the Law of
Christianity, none can mary with one that is bound to another already; the
innocent party so married by cousenage, is so far from being obliged by it,
as to be obliged not to use it upon notice. Again, in particular, seeing that
Christianity declares marriage to intend procreation, and the remedy of
concupiscence, the ugliness whereof was never discovered by Idolators and
Pagans; wheresoever is discovered a natural impotence to per-form the act of
marriage, there appears an error, which had it not been, the marriage had not
been made; And therefore, adding the general to the particular, the contract
must appear void. The same is much more to be said, if, by any deceit, there
has been an error in the sex of one of the parties. Difference in Religion
between Christians and Pagans, between Christians and Jews, renders marriage
void by virtue of the premises, though it oblige not Christians to make use of
their right, by renouncing it, as Jews were obliged to desert Idolaters. But,
that there may some new Religion spring up in the world, upon the divisions of
the Church, (which, we see, are possible) which, question may be made, whether
it be lawful, or, whether expedient for Christians, either to mary, or to
continue married with; (suppose for the present that of the Gnostics, that of
the Priscillianists, that of our Ranters, or Quakers) who can deny? And,
supposing such a question made, and supposing the Church to be a Society
trusted with the guard of Gods Law concerning marriage, what determination can
secure the conscience of a Christian, but the determination of the Church, in a
cause grounded on matter of Christianity, for the guard whereof the Church
stands? Does not all the world acknowledge a public reputation of that
honesty which Christianity pretends, and challenges to be performed, in the
marriage of Christians as they are Christians? Do not all Christians
acknowledge, that there is a neernesse both of blood and of alliance, within
which Christians are forbidden to mary?

You will say to me, that these degrees are limited by the Law of God, in the
XVIII of Leviticus, and, that the Church has no more to do in prohibiting that
which is not there prohibited, then in licensing that which is. But that will
not serve my turn, having proved, that the Law of Moses, in the first instance,
was given for the civil Law of one people of the Jews, and, for their civil
happiness in the Land of promise, given them on condition of living according
to it, with a promise of freedom over themselves so doing. The Church, on the
contrary, a society of all Christendom, founded upon undertaking the Law of
Christ, with promise of everlasting happiness. For, what appearance is there,
that the same Law should contain the condition of temporal and eternal
happiness, in any part of humane life and conversation? Indeed, he that should
argue, that, seeing God prohibited to many degrees of affinity and
consanguinity in the marriages of his ancient people, whom he treated expressly
with upon only temporal promises; all the same degrees therefore are
prohibited Christians, whom God deals with upon the promise of the world to
come; I cannot see how his argument could find an answer. But, having showed,
that Christians are bound to straiter terms of Godliness by the law of Christ,
then the ancient people of God, whom God obliged himself to for the world to
come, but by intimations, which needed stronger inclinations to virtue to
embrace; will it not follow, that the provision of the Levitical Law, is no
exception to this general in matter of marriage? Indeed, it is not the power of
the Church, that brings in this ground of restraining more then is restrained
by the Levitical Law; but the nature of Christianity, which, I showed from the
beginning, to be, in order of nature, before the constitution of the Church,
and ancient to it. But, having showed, that there is no presumption in
Christianity to hinder that to belong to the Law of the Church, which is not
recorded in the Scripture; by consequence I have showed, that the practice of
the Church may be sufficient evidence for it, and, that the power of the Church
is not only sufficient, but necessary, to the determining of that which is not
determined by it. I confess, I have a difficult objection to answer* when I
read Levit. XVIII. 24. 25. Be not polluted with any of these. For with these
were the Nations polluted, which I drive out before your face. And the earth is
polluted, and I visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and, she spueth out her
inhabitants. For, by this it should seem, that all the prohibitions of that
chapter, contained in the genenerall term of these thing, stood by the
perpetual Law of God and Nature, so that they were never dispensed with before
the Law, and that, therefore, there can be no reason to understand any degree
to be prohibited Christians, which was not prohibited Jews. The objection were
difficult enough, had we not peremtory instances to choke them with, that argue
thus. For is it possible for any reasonable man to imagine, that God should
call those things which the Fathers practiced till now, those abominations for
which he drives out the seven Nations from before his people? Is it not
manifest, that Jacob was married to two Sisters at once, that Moses and Aaron
came of the marriage of the Mothers Sister, Exodus VI. 20? that Abraham was
married to his brothers daughter, at least? And is it strange, that should be
prohibited by Moses Law, which before was dispensed with? But, supposing that
difference between the Law and the Gospel that I have proved, were it not
strange, that that no more should be prohibited under the Gospel, then by the
Law?

Of the Polygamy of the Fathers before the Law, I said enough before, to show
that it was dispensed with; how it was dispensed with, I said not, which seems
to make men difficult of belief in the point. And, truly that which the
Fathers say sometimes, that they were taught by Gods spirit, that they might do
it, for the maintenance of the righteous seed; seems somewhat strange, if we
understood it, as if the world did acknowledge it to be prohibited, till the
chief friends of God had particular revelation from him, that it was allowed
them, being forbidden all the world besides. Now, we have good information from
the Jews (which all men of learning do now accept for Historical truth) that,
after the flood, there were certain precepts delivered to Noe, and his Sons,
(which therefore, they call the seven precepts of the Sons of Noe) with an
intent to oblige all Nations; among which there was one, that prohibited the
uncovering of nakedness, signifying thereby, the forbearance of all that was
then to be counted uncleanness. Which what it was, and what it was to contain
before the Law, though it be not recorded in Scripture; yet we are to stand
assured, that nothing that we find practiced by the Fathers, was any part of
it; Because, being so highly favored by God as we find they were; we are not
to think, that they lived in rebellion against any part of his Law. The Jews
indeed say, that the same Precepts were all delivered to Adam, and to his
posterity, saving one concerning the eating of blood, which was added, when the
rest were renewed to the Sons of Noa after the flood; which I think my self at
liberty not to believe. For then, whatsoever is not contained in these
precepts, must be understood to be allowed all the Sons of Adam, before the
flood. Whereas, the Polygamy of Lamech seems to be recorded by Moses, for the
first transgression of the original institution of Paradise. And, when we
read, after the world had stood XVC years, that men began to multiply upon
earth; there is appearance, that, thitherto, Polygamy was not in use among the
children of God, supposing them to be the posterity of Seth, which continued in
the service of God, as the most received interpretation has it. For, had
Polygamy been then in use, they would have multiplied faster, as after the
flood, and, as the Israelites in Egypt. Not that it was not then in use among
the children of men, after Lamech had begun it; but because, being not
entertained by the children of God, (one half of mankind at that time) it took
not the like force, even among the children of men, as after the slood. This is
the reason why, believing that the institution of Paradise was in force, at
least among the children of God; I admit the Tradition of the Jews, concerning
the precepts of Noah's children after the flood, according to S. Jerome again
Jovinian, where he says, that neither divorce, nor eating flesh, was licensed
until the flood. Polygamy and divorce being matters of so near kin, that the
one cannot be imagined to have been allowed, when the other was not. For if God
gave the Sons of Noah these precepts, he gave them assurance of his favor,
living within the compass of them, which is to dispense with the primitive
institution of Paradise.

But, I do not therefore think my self tied to those bounds, which the Jews
limit the meaning and intent of this prohibition of uncovering nakedness with;
(namely in the point of simple fornication, which, they no where allow to have
been prohibited by it) as the Laws of Moses (they say well) extend not to
them, being made for free Denizens of Gods people, unless it be otherwise
expressed; as in the prohibition of eating that which is torn, which they are
commanded to give to the stranger within their gates, Deuteronomy. XIV. 21. For,
seeing that they were utterly prohibited to suffer Idolaters to live within the
Land of promise; but, that it is supposed, strangers should live in it, which,
being not tied to their Laws, were not circumcised, and, that they might have
slaves of this rank; we have certain evidence, for the truth of the Tradition
concerning certain precepts given all mankind after the flood. But if, because
there is no punishment assigned for the fornication of strangers, it should
therefore be thought, it was then no sin, by Gods Law to all Nations; I
should deny the consequence. The fornication of Judah with Tamar, whom he took
for a pros^itute, we see he avowed not. And that of Samsom with Dalilah, I may
as easily say, was, under pretense of marriage, as the Jews, that she was a
Proselyte of the Children of Noah. For, it is agreed upon, that, by the Law, an
Israelite might neither commit fornication with an Israelitess, nor with a
Gentile; The one by the Law of Deuteronomy. XXIII. 18. and Lev. XIX. 19. The other by
that which you read in the Book de Jure Naturali and Gratium secundum Ebrues V.
12. Wherefore, seeing the Law supposes Harlots, when it forbids the Hrie of
them to be consecrated to God, Deuteronomy. XXIII. 18. it seems to follow, that the
Law allow, that trade only to strangers of the Sons of Noah, that is to say,
not Idolaters, in the Land of promise. For though the Jews will have this Law
to take hold of him that lies with a Gentile, or slave, or Jewesse, that is
forbidden him, whither by the law of uncleanness, Levit. XVIII. or any other;
yet we find it not punishable by the Law, unless it be with a Gentile-slave,
who, having partly obtained her freedom, is espoused to an Israelite, Lev. XIX.
20. as the Jews limit it; because, otherwise, they were forbidden to mary
slaves, according to Josephus, Antiq. IV. 8. For, they that counted the
dishonor of Dinah such a reproach to them, that, notwithstanding all possible
reparation tendered, they were to revenge it so deeply in blood; shall we
imagine, that they counted it indifferent in the rest of mankind, even those
who were retired from Idolatry, to profess the true God, as the Jews their
successors seem to do? Rather are we to attribute this opinion of the
indifference of it to the coming in of Idolatry, which was the Apostasy of the
Gentiles from the Law g^ven the Sons of Noah; S. Paul Romans I 24-27. according
to the Author of the Book of Wisdom, III. 12. 16, 19. VI. 3. 6. ascribing that
inundation of uncleannessd, which overflowed all the world but Gods people, to
the coming in of Idols. And therefore, fornication, though forbidden, by the
Decalogue, is not always punished in the Israelites themselves; because the
law, (which S. Paul says came in because of transgressions, Gal. III. 29. and,
was not given the righteous, but the unrighteous, 1 Timothy I. 9. 10, 11)
intending to prohibit the grosser sins, which civil Society is chiefly
offended with; expected spiritual obedience, upon the belief of God and his
providence, in taking account for our actions here, together with the promise
of deliverance by the Messiah to come; and not from the constraint of temporal
punishment, which the Law was armed with. For, if this were the means of grace
provided for the seed of Abraham, well might it serve those strangers, who,
renouncing the service of Idol^, should join themselves to Gods people, and so
become partaker^ of the same means with them, to induce a resolution of
spiritual obedience.

We have further to persuade us, to admit of this dispensation in the primitive
institution of Paradise; the Tradition of the Jews, affirming, the prohibition
of Levit. XVIII. to have belonged in part to the stranger within their Gates,
in part not. Which Tradition, being committed to writing* so late after the
dissolution of the Government, and, having still the force of Law, where
strangers should make themselves Jews (which certainly, at the writing of their
Traditions, fell out many times) we must needs allow, for the interpretation of
that law which was in force while their state stood; though we question,
whither it contain the due bounds of this prohibition, as it was first
delivered to mankind after the flood. And hereupon, well may we answer with
them, that when Moses says; that for these abominations the seven nations were
driven out before the children of Israel; he is to be understood, respectively
to those abominations which were committed against the true intent of the
prohibition of uncleanness, enjoined on all mankind; but not to those things
which we see were in use among the Fathers before the Law, nor to whatsoever
was committed against the first institution of Paradise. Which if it be
admitted, then, all that is established by the Law of Levit. XVIII. will oblige
the whole Church, without dispensation by any power of it; though, not because,
by the act of giving the Law to the Israelites, the Church is obliged; but,
because there is more reason why Christianity should restrain that which was
allowed by the Law, then that the Law should restrain that which was allowed by
the Patriarchs. And, upon this principle, we shall not need to run upon any
inconvenience, to obtain one degree of affinity, and one of consanguinity to be
unlawful for Christians, though not expressed in the leter of the Scripture; to
wit, the marriage of the sister to a man's deceased wife, and, that of cousin
Germans.

The former is thought to be secured by the Text of Levit. Thou shall not
uncover the nakedness of thy Brothers wife, it is thy Brothers nakedness.
For, the wives sister being as near as the Brothers wife, the one being
prohibited, and, neernesse the only reason of the prohibition; the other
cannot be licensed, saving the reason of the Law. Therefore the provision of
D^ut. XXV. 5-10. that the next of kin, though a Brother, should mary the wife
of the Brother deceased, so that the children should be, in account of Law, the
children of the deceased; All this, signifies* no more, but that, the Law being
positive, this exception is made to it by him that made it. So that, when it
follows, Levit. XVIII. 18. Thou shall not take a wife to her sister to vex her,
to uncover her nakedness, beside her in her life time; It is observed, that in
the Ebrue, to take a wife to her sister, is, to take a wife to another wife:
And therefore, that this Law is a prohibition of Polygamy, at least when the
taking of another wife may be an occasion to vex the former wife; Not, that a
Jew was licensed hereby to mary his wives sister after her death. This, indeed,
was the interpretation of the Sadduces, and of those Jews that admit no
interpretation of the Law of Tradition, but only by the leter of it; for which
they are reproved by the Talmud^sts, the offspring of the Pharisees; in the
Book called Pesikta. Though it is to me difficult to believe, that the Sadduces
of old, or their successors, the Scriptuary Jews, did thereupon, tie
themselves to one wife. It is, indeed, difficult enough to give an evident
reason of difference in nearness of blood; wherefore the brother, should be
prohibited his brothers wife, and the sister allowed her Brothers husband. But,
it is one thing to allege an inconvenience, an other thing to answer an
argument; nor are we to presume, that God does nothing by his Law, without
acquainting them whom he imposed it upon with the reason of it. Now, this
interpretation cannot subsist, without overthrowing all that has been said, to
show, that Polygamy after the flood was first prohibited by Christianity. For,
when thy Brothers wife is generally prohibited in Leviticus, and afterward
licensed, or commanded, in case he die childlesse, it is but a particular
exception to a general. But if, in Ex. XXI. 10. a man is supposed to have power
of having more wives then one, and by Lev. XXIII. 10. enjoined to have no more
then one, in Deuteronomy. XXI. 11-15-18. supposed to have more then one; can these be
thought reconcilable? Certainly, the tenor of these Laws imports no such thing
as dispensing, but a liberty already in use, which the Law restrains not; but
this Law would restrain, if, had it been thus meant. And why should the Law
say, in her life time, if the intent of it were, that a man should not have two
wives at once? Could there be any question, whether a man might mary a second
wife or not? Therefore, that clause must be thought to be added, to signify,
that, after death, this Law forbids not to take the wives sister to wife. And
so, that which Jacob had done before, is, by this Law, forbidden to be done
for the future. For Jacob, when first he found that he had beded his wives
sister, was innocent for all that was done, but had been utterly disabled to
have companied with any other for the future, without dispensation in this
Law; which, we must imagine, either to have come betvveen Labans proposition
of marrying both, and Jacobs assent; or else, to have gone before all the
actions of like nature, which the Scripture testifies; whereof, vvhither is
the more reasonable, let any man of reason choose. As for the limitation added
to the right of having more wives then one under the Law, Exodus XXI. 10.
whereby, he that has an inferior wife, bought with his silver of Gods
people, is bound to pay her the benevo^ence due to a wife, though it make the
marriage void by abuse of his right; (for it is said; He shall let her go free,
which implies the dissolution of the marriage) yet, it no way signifies, that
he was not able to mary her before. And, when the Prophet, Mal. 11. 14. 15.
16. blames the Jews for oppressing their wives, out of love to strange
wives, which, by the Law they might not have; be this adultery, if you
please, (because such a marriage, as, I have shovved, was ipso facto void) be
it treachery in transgressing his covenant with the first wife; yet did not
he that took a second wife so as to oppress the first, violate this Law of
Levit. XVIII. 18. For, how can a marriage that is good and valid, become void
by oppressing? but, as an Ebrue slave that one mary's is made free by the Law,
if she be not used as a wife (and so, no longer his wife) that relief being
only provided by the law in that case. Therefore when the Law says, -- to vex
her, it is not limitation, but a reason, which the Law follows in sisters,
because, in them, as it is more likely to come to pass, so it is more
unreasonable, as in Jacobs example; whereas, being a perpetual attendant of
Polygamy, as in the wives of Elkanah, it was not, nevertheless, admitted for a
reason totally to prohibit it. And therefore, I say, that I am no ways tied
to give a reason, why God, who prohibited two Brothers to have the same wife,
should allow two sisters to have the same husband, after death. For, the Law
being positive, (as it is confessed by the dispensation introduced by the Law,
on the one side) the will of the Lawgiver is the reason of those bounds which
he limits, and therefore he is not obliged to inact those bounds, whereof
there is no reason to be seen. His own knowledge, of what was fitting for his
design, of husbanding the restraints of the L^vv, ^o as to make way for the
necessity of the Gospel; being the only reason that remain^ undisputable. And
is not the instance manifest, in that, the Fathers sisters being prohibited by
the Law, the sisters Daughter is not, vvhereupon Herod married his ne^ce, and
espoused his daughter to his brother Ph^r^ras, Jos. Ant. XII. XVI? Which he
that considers, will not despise a probable reason evident to the Jews, though
he acknovvledge that it inforces nothing, s^tting the will of the Lavv-giver
aside; To wit, that the young are wont to frequent their Grandfathers and
Grand-Mothers houses, and there to have conv^rsation with their Fathers
sisters, having less interess in Brothers houses, and so frequenting them
less. Which holds also in the brothers house, more then the wives sisters. And
so the reasons of the prohibitions, of Leviticus, XVIII. being two, ne^rnesse
of blood, occasion of uncleanness, if the Law had not made the marriages of
such persons unclean; this reason may way where the other does not appear. As
for the inconvenience that is feared, that Christian people should license
themselves to do that under the Gospel, which, it is confessed, that Gods
people under the Law, were not prohibited to do; (for, it is manifest, that
some which count themselves great Saints have done it) either people do believe
the Holy Catholic Church, or not: If they believe it, they must believe the
power of the Church, in limiting that which our Lord Christ has not limited,
in ^estifying where our Lord Christ and his Apostles have li^ited, though not
recorded to us by the Scriptures; according as I have deduced it in the
premises. If not, it is no marvail to see, that, Apostasy from the belief and
unity of Gods Church, should now and then draw after it licentiousn^sse in such
a point as this is. If the Canons and Customs hitherto reverenced by all
Christians, as the remains and evidence of the conversation delivered over by
the successors of our Lord to his Church, cannot prevail with men, to forbear
that which no example but their own warrants; the Scripture cannot stand long,
standing only upon motives of conscience. It is as ordinary to hear it said,
that the Scripture which is contained in the Bible, is not the Scripture, but
that which is written in the heart; that the man that was crucified at
Jerusalem is not Christ, but he that dwells in the he^r^; as it is to see a man
mary the sister of his deceased wife. Temporal punishments may deter ^en
from publishing such blasphemies; But, if the unity of the Church come not in,
to evidence the motives of faith, and, by consequence, to procure the reverence
of those Laws, whereby only it may be maintained; it will be as easy and
obvious to despise Christianity and the Scriptures, as the Church, and those
Rulers, wher^by the service of God is maintained in the unity of it.

As concerning the Marriages of Cousin Germans, the premises being supposed, I
am not a whit troubled, that I cannot produce such Canons in writing, as may
evidence, that all Christians from the beginning forbore it. For, ^aving
showed, that all the Canons of the Church were in effect and force before they
were written and inacted by Councils; and, that the inacting of them was but
the limiting of some circumstances, abating the rigor of primitive customs,
because, the number of Christians multiplying, could not so easily be h^ld to
it; I cannot see how S. Augustine can be refused, when he tells us, de Civ.
dei. XV. 16. Raro per mores fiebat, quod fieri per leges licebat, quia id nec
divina prohibeat, and nondum prohib^erat lex ^uman^: Ver^ntamen factum ^etiam
licitum propter vicinitatem horrebatur illiciti. Seldom was that done, by
reason of custom, which by reason of l^w might have been done, because,
neither did Gods Law prohibit it, nor as yet ^ad man's Law prohibited it:
Notwithstanding, being lawful to be done, it was abhorred for the
neighborhood of that which was unlawful. Gods Law in Leviticus, had not
forbidden it. Nor the Laws of the Empire as yet. How then came Christians to
abhor that, which, the law of God and Man, says S. Augustine, (that is to
say, the law of Moses, and of the Empire) licensed? Is it possible that
Christendom, of it own free motion* should conspire to impose upon it self
such a restraint, having no share in Christianity? It is still as easy to
maintain, that the world was made by the casual meeting of Atoms, according
to Epicurus, denying providence. But, suppose the Apostles and their
successors, to have received for a necessary point of Christianity, that,
unless our righetousnesse exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, we shall by ^o means enter into the Kingdom of heaven; and, suppose
them to have the allowance of all marriages, that is, the discerning of what is
agreeable to Christianity, from what not; and you render a sufficient reason,
how such a custom should prevail in the Church, which, otherwise, is not to be
rendered. And, supposing such a custom, you grant that, that which Christians
abhorred only because it was near that which the law of Moses, or the law of
the Empire made unlawful; was become it self unlawful, by virtue of that
custom, which, no Christian, that would not offend the unity of the Church,
could lawfully transgress. The saying of Justine the Martyr, Ep. ad Zenam and
Ser^num, is truly Apostolical, and takes place here again; (...). They obey the
Laws that are, and in their lives, go beyond the Laws; speaking of the
Christians. But if it were the character of Christians to go beyond the Laws,
shall we count it a thing lawful for a Christian, to efface in himself the
common character of Christians? When the Great Theodosius made it a Law to the
Empire, not to mary Cousin Germans (which is the Law that S. Augustine
intimates, for which he is so much commended, not only by S. Ambrose, Ep.
LXVI. but by the Heathen Historian Sex. Aureli^s Victor in Theodosio) did he do
this for a frolic, (all reason of state dissuading the imposing of unnecessary
burdens, where the necessary were so great) or, did he do it because he would
promote Chistianity, by imposing upon the Empire, before it was all Christian,
the custom of Christianity? I know this act was repealed by Justinian, and
perhaps upon advice of some Bishops, who always frequented him, as we
understand by Procopius. But, neither is the authority of Justinian of weight
in the question of Christianity; neither did those Bishops, that might give
this advice, act in the quality of Bishops, but of his friends and Counsailers;
their opinion as Bishops, would not have served to change the customs of the
Church. Therefore this repeal never took place in the West. For first, the
Goths retained Theodosius his Law, as Cassidore VII. 46. testifies, (which
Cvias says, is the reason, why, in Gai^s, (out of whom Justinian took his
Institutes for the most part) it is at this day read; Duorum fratrum vel
sororum liberi, vel fratris and sororis jungi non possunt. The children of two
Brothers or Sisters, or, of a Brother and Sister, may not mary together;
contrary to that which Justinian is known to have inacted) Then, the later
Emperors revived the Law of Theodosius; upon which occasion it is still read
in many Copies of the Institutes, de Nupt. X. 4. non possunt, expressly against
many parts of Justinians Law. And, for the East, how shall we say that
Justinians Law was repealed, or, upon what ground, but that the custom of the
Church prevailed to move Christian Emperors to repeal it, seeing Christendom
scandalized at the license introduced by it? He therefore that alleges
I^stinian in these cases, or, even Moses, let him allege Herod's marying his
Brothers Daughter, and espousing his Daughter to his Brother Pheroras in
Josephus, A^t. XII. and XVI. and so allowing the same; which when Claudius for
his own lust licensed* there was scarce found a Gentleman in Rome that would do
the like, as Tacitus reports. Indeed, when S. Austine says, this was rarely
done before Theodosius, signifying, that, sometimes it was done; we must
accknowledge, not only that the marriage was not void, that was so made from
the beginning (for neither is the marriage of the deceased wives Sister, or, of
the niece, void by the Canons of the Apostles, and the Eliberine Canon injoyns,
upon marying the wives sister, five years Penance, signifying that it was not
void) but also we remain uncertain whether it were censured by the Church, or
how.

But, when S. Gregory allows Austine the Monk, to allow the first Christian
Saxons to mary in the fourth degree, we are not certified, whither according to
the account of the Roman Law, or, according to that account which the Popes
afterward brought in use. For, the Roman Law, counting the stock for one,
made no first degree in the cross line, but reckoned Brothers the second, and,
by consequence, Cousin Germans the fourth, determining both legal successions
and affinities within seven degrees, which are sometime called six, as you
include both terms, or exclude the one, L. X. ff. de gradibus and affinibus.
Paulus, Sent. IV. 11. ubi Anianus and Modest. L. XLV. ff. de gradibus and
affinibu^. Whereupon marriage was first forbidden in the West, as far as the
seventh degree inclusive, Cause. XXV. q. 2 and 3. and cap. 20. ib. Greg. P P. I.
Nic. P P. II. c. 17. ib. and sentent. IV. did. XL. Isid. Orig. IX. and c. 6.
Cause. XXXV. q. 5. Great. c. 21. whereby it should seem that this degree was
dispensed with by S. Gregory, being otherwise, then prohibited. But the Pope
afterward, introducing a contrary way, of counting brothers for one degree,
and Cousin Germans the second, (which before were the second and the fourth)
determined, kindred by seven of these degrees, which were before just half so
many Alex. PP. 2. c. 2. Cause. XXXV. q. 5. and all these prohibited, c. 14.
Cause. XXXV. q. 2 and 3. till reduced to the fourth by the Laterane Council
under Innocent III. for the difficulty and burden of it, (which fourth, is
just the eight by the former account) which is now the law of the West under
the Pope. A thing which I cannot admire at enough, either how proposed, or how
admitted. Whereas in the East, the seventh degree (according to the Roman
account) is neither permitted, nor the marriage dissolved if consummate. Ius.
Graecorum. L. III. p. 204. lib. IV. page 266. afterward, under Michael
Patriarch of C P. Ib. lib. 3. p. 206. the seventh was forbidden, the eighth
always licensed. See further, Harmenop. lib. IV. Tit. 5, Arcudius VII. 30.
which I allege, all to no purpose but this, that the consent of Christendom,
submitting to be restrained beyond all degrees, any way pretended to be
expressed by Gods Law, is an evidence of the two Principles alleged, that they
were from the beginning admitted by all Christendom. Indeed, when it is said,
that which the Church censured not, which S. Gregory dispensed with, which the
Roman Emperors and Gothish Kings reserved themselves a power of dispensing
in, as appears by a Law of Honorius and Theodosius, in C. Theod. Si nuptia ex
rescipt^ p^tantur and by Cassi^d. VII. 46. It is no marvail if it be permitted
by the Statute of H. VIII. XXXVI. 38. we may see the case has been not much
otherwise with us, since that statute, then with Christendom, before the act of
Theodosius. For, as then, the known custom of the Church; so since, with us,
the remains of the opinion of that public honesty, which Christianity first
introduced, has been the cause that few have used the known liberty of the
temporal law; and that, with such reluctation of judgment, as has been
thought the occasion of evil consequences. As for those degrees, which, being
prohibited by the Popes, are of course dispensed in for paying the fees,
without any notice of particular reason in the case; as it is not for me,
either to maintain the abuse of Ecclesiastical power, or, because of the
abuse, to yield, the Church to have no power in those causes, which it could
have no power in, if that power might not be abused; so, I am able to conclude,
that it were more Christian for any Christian state, to undergo a burden
altogether unreasonable, then to shake of a burden, for which there is so much
reason in Christianity, as I have showed, for prohibiting the marriage of Cousin
Germans.

Another impediment, of force to void marriage, whether only contracted, or
consummate also by carnal knowledge, pretended by the Church of Rome, and
practiced in the Eastern Church, is that of profession of single life, to
attend upon the service of God alone. For, whether Christians under wedlock,
upon consent, may part from bed and board for this purpose, there is no reason
for any Christian to make difficulty, the wish of S. Paul, that all were as he,
1 Cor. VII. 1. taking place in them as well as in all others; That to avoid
fornication, one man should mary one wife; not taking place, but in them, in
whom no such resolution is supposed. Upon which supposition, they are commanded
to return to the use of wedlock, after having retired for Prayer and Fasting,
least Satan tempt them through their incontinence. But this is disputable,
whether it be a dissolution of the bond, or only a suspension of the exercise
of marriage. It is further pretended, that the one party may, by publishing such
a profession, make void the marriage that is not yet consummate by carnal
knowledge, leaving the other free to mary elsewhere. This in the Church of
Rome. For, in the Eastern Church, I doubt not that those Imperial Laws took
place, which made this profession a lawful cause of dissolving marriage in
being, per bonam gratiam, as the Roman Law called it; whether the party so
deserted, were allowed to mary elsewhere or not. And indeed we find S. Basil,
qq* fusius explicat XII. and S. Chrysostom, in Mat. hom. LXIX. ad pop Ant. and
in 1 Timothy hom. XIV. together with Cassiane in the example of Theonas Collat.
XXI. 9. 10. in their zeal to monastical life, advising married persons not to
stay for the consent of their parties, in making such a profession as this; At
such time as the West, where monastical life was not yet so originally spread,
S. Hierome, Epist XIV. and S. Augustine, Epist. XLV. and CXCIX. and de adult*
conjugiis, maintain the contrary opinion: Which to me, I confess, seems fa^
more probable. For, granting single life, duly ordered, to be the ordinary way
and means of attaining perfection in Christianity, according to the promises;
this state of eminence necessarily supposes that which is necessary to the
being of Christianity. Therefore, the way to perfection must be grounded upon
justice. Now, in justice, the contract of marriage among Christians, gives each
party that interesse in the others body which marriage exercises. Which
interesse, noting but consent seems to dissolve. And therefore, seeing there is
no Tradition of the whole Church to enforce this right, not only particular
Churches, not allowing it, shall not seem to me to depart from the Unity of the
whole in so doing: But also Sovereign Powers, through their several dominions,
in regard of the interesse which all States have in the marriage, or single life
of their subjects, shall lawfully use their Power, to limit the force of it.
But, as for marriage consummate and used, I cannot see, how the party deserting
upon such pretense, is excused from the guilt of adultery which the deserted
may commit, either single or married again. As for the question that may be
made, whither the marriage of one that has professed single life be void or
valid; supposing the profession of single life to be agreeable to Christianity,
(as, I conceive, I have showed sufficient reason to believe) there is no
consideration sufficient to make marriage after it valid, but the abuse of the
profession it self, amounting to such* a height, as may serve to satisfy a
Christian, that, in consideration thereof, it is it self in the first place
become void.

Another impediment yet remains questionable, whether it be of force to
dissolve those marriages which are called clandestine, whither for want of
consent in the Parents, or the solemnities of the Church. Some think, that want
of consent of Parents, not only makes the act unlawful, which all agree in,
but the marriage void. As if the reverence due to Parents by Gods law, did make
a man's contract with a thirdperson void, who is no ways bound to inquire,
whither his free consent be lawfully exercised or not. In the Scriptures, we
see, Gods people proceed by consent of Parents, and, daughters especially, S.
Paul supposes to refer themselves to their Fathers, 1 Cor. VII. 36. But,
neither was Esaus marriage taken to be void, because it was made without such
consent, Ge^. XXVII. 45. Nor was there any particular consent of Jacobs Parents
to his marriages, Genesis XXIX. nor were the Fathers of Judah or of Tobias, made
acquainted with their marriages. And, as for the Roman Laws, which void
marriages for want of this consent in some cases, it is no more an argument of
the Law of nature, then the power of the Father by the same Laws, which,
nevertheless, allow the Mother none, when as Gods Law always, as well as the
Law of Moses, gives them equal interesse. It is therefore manifest, that there
is ground in Gods Law, to make this impediment of force to dissolve marriage
contracted without it. And that, either for the Church, as the reverence of
Parents, is a part of Gods law now in being, which the power of the Church
pretends to preserve; Or, for the secular Power, as the interesse of Parents
in the marriages of their children, is of consequence to the public peace and
wealth. The same may be said of those marriages that are made without witness,
or, without solemnities of the Church, saving that, those solemnities which
contain the approbation of the Church, arising upon the account of the Church,
it is evidently more proper for the Church, to make this impediment of force to
dissolve marriage; For the secular power, to in^ct the Law of the Church by
force of arms and temporal penalties. There remains one cause more to hinder
marriage, so as to dissolve it when consummate, being made notwithstanding it,
the condition of slavery in either of the parties, at such time, when as the
rights of bondage subsisted. This cause stands now by the Canon Law, and is
in^orced and limited by the Casuists: But it was not the Canon Law, that first
voided the marriage of a slave taken for free, but the Laws of the Empire, as
Ivo himself, a Collector of the Canons, witnesses, Epist. CCXLIII. where,
having produced the Law of Iustiniane, he thus proceeds; In tali ergo
contractu, quod lex damnat, non homo sed i^stitia separat; quia, quod contra
leges praesumitur, per leges solui meretur. In such a contract then, that which
the law oondemns, it is not man but justice th^^ separates. Because, what is
presumed against Law, by law deserves to be dissolved. Which reason takes place
also in legal kindred, according to the Imperial Laws, whereby, an adopted
Brother is disabled to mary his sister by adoption. In imitation whereof, an
opinion of the public honesty of Christianity, so prev^iled in that Church
afterward, that, being once Gossips, came to be an hindrance of marriage; which
opinion, howsoever grounded, notwithstanding, introduced the same kind of
burden, and no other, then that of legal kindred by adoptions. These reasons,
though not admitted by all professions in Religion that shall meet with this,
yet seeing they proceed upon one and the same common ground, the effect and
consequence whereof cannot be admitted in some, and refused by the rest: And
seeing that some of them are admitted on all sides, there being no other reason
sufficient, why they should be admitted; may serve to evidence the interesse of
the Church in Matrimonial causes. And that evidence may serve to infer,
that, though the secular Power has also an interess in the same; yet in regard
of the trouble which concurrence may cause in civil Government, Christian
Princes and States, have done wisely (as well as in regard to the interess of
the Church, they have done Christianly) in referring the conduct of Matrimonial
causes, almost wholly, to the Church. Especially, supposing that they take good
heed, that the laws thereof neither trench upon the Interess of their Crown,
not the wealth of their subjects. But, whither secular Power can make laws, by
virtue whereof, that which a man voluntarily acts afterward, shall be of force
to void marriage contracted before, (upon which ground, the opinion which I
propounded last, would justify the divorces which the Imperial Laws make, to
the effect of marrying again) will be a new question. Seeing that if any thing
b^ to be accepted, it will be in any man's power to dissolve any marriage; and
the law of Christ, allowing no divorce but in case of adultery, will be to no
effect. Neither will there be any cause, why the same Divines should not allow
the act of Justine, that dissolves marriage upon consent, which they are forced
to disclaim, allowing the rest of those causes which the Imperial Laws create.
Indeed, whither any accident, absolutely hindering the exercise of marriage, and,
falling out after marriage, may, by Law, become of force to dissolve it, I need
not here any further dispute. For, so the securing of any Christian man's
conscience, it is not the act of secular Power inacting it for Law, that can
avail, unless the act of the Church go before, to determine, that it is not
against Gods Law, and therefore subject to that civil Power which is Christian.
The reason indeed may fall out to be the same, that makes impotence of force to
do it, and it may fall out to be of such force, that Gregory III Pope, is found
to have answered a consultation of Boniface of Mence, in the affirmative,
XXXII. q. VII. c. Quod proposuisti. But this makes no difference in the right
and power of the Church, but rather evidences the necessity of it. For though,
as Cardinal Cajetane says, the Canon Law it self allows that Popes may err
in determining such matters, cap. IV. de divortiis. c. licet de sponsa duorum,
(which every man will allow in the decree of Deuededit Pope, Epist. unica) yet
the ground of both Power witnessing the Constitution of the Church, as a
necessary part of Christianity; as it determines the true bounds of both, so it
allows not the conscience of a Christian to be secured by other means. And were
it not a strange reason of refusing the Church this Power, because it may err,
when it must, in that case, fall to the secular Powers, who have no ground to
pretend any probable cause of not erring? For he that proceeds in the
simplicity of a Christian heart, to use the means, which God, by Christianity,
has provided for his resolution, may promise himself grace at Gods hands,
even when he is seduced by that power which is not infallible. But, he that
leans upon that warrant, which God, by his Christianity, has not referred him
to, must answer for his errors, as well as the consequences of the same.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Power of making Governors and Ministers of the Church. Upon
what ground the Hierarchy of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons stands, in
opposition to Presbyteries and Congregations. Of the Power of Confirming, and
the evidence of the Hierarchy which it yields. Of those Scriptures which seem
to speak of Presbyteries or Congregations.
NOw are we come to one of the greatest Powers of the Church. For all
Societies, according as they are constituted, either by the act of Superiors,
or by the will of members, are, by their constitution, either enabled to give
themselves Governors, or tied to receive them from those by whose will they
subsist. The Society of the Church, subsisting by the will of God, is partly
regulated by the will of men, voluntarily professing themselves Christians. If
God, having limimited the qualities, and the Powers by which his Church is to
be Governed, do refer the designing of persons to bear those qualities and
powers, to his Church, it must needs appear one of the greatest points that he
has left to their choice. Therefore, I have made it appear, from the
beginning, that the original of this Power, was planted by our Lord Christ in
his Apostles and Disciples, to whom, immediately, he committed the trust of
propagating it. And now, that I may further determine, within what bounds, and
under what terms, those his immediate Commissaries did appoint it to be
propagated to the end of the world; I say, that, by their appointment, the
bodies of Christians contained in each City, and the territory thereof, is to
constitute a several Church, to be governed by one chief Ruler, called a
Bishop, with Presbyters or Priests subordinate to him; for his advice and
assistance, and Deacons to minister and execute their appointment: The said
Bishops to be designed by their Clergy, that is, their respective Priests and
Deacons, with consent of neighbor Bishops ordaining them* and by the assent of
the people whom they are to govern. I say further; That the Churches of greater
Cities, upon which the Government of the less depends, are, by the same
Rule, greater Churches, and the greatest of all, the Churches of the chief
Cities: So that the chief Cities of the Christian world, at the planting of
Christianity, being Rome, Alexandria, and Antiochia; by consequence, those
were, by this Rule, the chief Churches, and in the first place that of Rome.
This position excludes in the first place that of Independent Congregations,
which makes a Church and a Congregation to be all alone, so that the people of
each Congregation to be able, first to give themselves both Laws and
Governors, then, to govern and manage the Power of the Keys according to Gods
word, that is, according to that which they shall imagine to be the intent of
it. For, whatsoever authority they allow their Ministers or Elders; seeing they
are created out of the people by the mere act of the people; and, that the
consent of the People is required to inact every thing that passes; it will be
too late for them to think of any authority not subordinate to the people, upon
whom they have bestowed the Sovereign. On the other extreme, this position
excludes that of the Romanists, who will have the fullness of Ecclesiastical
Power to have been first settled upon S. Peter, as sole Monarch of the Church,
and from him derived upon the rest of the Apostles, as his Deputies or
Commissaries; So that, the Power which other Bishops, Priests, and Deacons have
in their respective Churches, being granted by the successors of S. Peter,
Bishops of Rome, is therefore limitable at their pleasure, as no otherwise
estated by divine right, then, because God has settled it in S. Peter and his
successors, as the root and source of it. Between these extremes there remain
two mean opinions, whereof one is the platform of the Presbyteries, in which,
every Congregation is also a Church, with a Consistory to rule it, consisting
of a Minister with his Lay Elders, (whom now they call Triers, referring to
them the ^riall of those who come to communicate) and Deacons. Of these
Congregations, so many as they (without Rule or Reason so far as I know)
think fit to cast into one reso^t or division, they call a Session or Class,
and as many of those as they please, a Synod, and of Synods a Province. So
that, as the Churches of all one Sovereignty, constitute the National Church,
containing all the Provinces thereof; so would they have also Provincial,
Synodical and Classical Churches, consisting of the Congregations, Classes and
Synods, which each respective Classis, Synod, or Province contains. The other
mean opinion is the frame of the Catholic Church, I as have showed, and shall
show it to have been in force from the time of the Apostles; Having first
showed, that the visible unity of the Church is a thing commanded by God in the
first place, for the communion of all Christians in the true faith, and in the
service of God according to the same.

For, it is visible, that, the means by which this has been attained, is the
dividing of Christendom into Churches, which we now call Dioceses, providing
each of them a sufficient number of Priests and Deacons, under one Head, the
Bishop, as well to regulate the faith and manners of the people, as to Minister
unto them the offices of Gods service. Therefore, whatsoever means I employed
at the beginning, to show, that those persons who succeeded the Apostles in
time, obtained not their places by force or fraud, but by their will and
appointment, will here be effectual to prove, that the qualities which they
held in their several Churches, were not obtained by force or fraud, but by
the same appointment. Wherefore, having showed, that, from the beginning, the
unity of the Church, has been main^ained by the mutual intelligence and
correspondence of the chief Churches; (upon whom the less depended) And that
this intelligence and correspondence was always addressed and managed by the
heads of the said Churches; (nor could it indeed have been maintained, had
there not been such Heads always ready to address and manage the same) I have
in effect showed, that this was the course, whereby the Apostles executed their
design, of maintaining unity in the Church. Is it not plain by the instances
produced in the first Book, that the whole Church remained satisfied of the
says of each Christian, upon the testimony of his Bishops, because they rested
satisfied of his? That, hereupon, whosoever was recommended by his Bishop, was
admitted to communion as well abroad as at home? What other interess had the
Church of Rome in the faith of Paulus Samosatenus, or Dionysius Alexandrinus,
the Churches of Alexandria and Antiochia, in the proceedinge of Novatianus, all
Churches in the fortune of Athanasius? What other reason can any man give for
that uniform difformity of Ecclesiastical Traditions and customs, which
^ppeareth from point to point, in all matters, the whole Church agreeing in
things of highest concernment, but all Churches differing in matters of less
consequence? Is it not manifest, whenever, in^stead of this daily
correspondence, Synods were assembled upon more pressing occasions, that only
Bishops appeared in behalf of their respective Churches? For, if others
appea^ed in the name of Bishops, upon occasion of old age, or other
hindrances; I need not say that it was the Bishops right in which another
appeared. Into these qualities and preheminences over the rest; whether of the
Clergy or People, that Bishops should be able to in^^nuate themselves all over
Christendom, had it not been so appointed by the Apostles; it is no less
contradictory to common sense; then, that Christianity should ever have been
received, had not such men as our Lord Christ and his Apostles, preached and
done such things, as the Scriptures relate to make it receivable. Or, then,
that all Christians should, of their own inclinations, agree to those Laws
which have made the Church one Society from the beginning, had they not found
themselves tied to follow the appointment of the Apostles that founded it.

Wherefore I will not take upon me, to show you the names of Archbishops,
Primates, and Patriarchs, in the Scriptures: Much less any command there
recorded, that all Churches be governed by Bishops, all higher Churches by
higher Bishops. But I pretend to have showed (by the particulars produced in
the Right of the Church, Chap. III. in the Primitive Government of Churches
throughout, and in the Apostolical form of Divine Service, Chap. IV. and never
contradicted to my knowledge) that there are express marks left us in the
Scriptures, of several Churches planted in several Cities; so that there is
never mention of more Churches then one in one City, but perpetually, of more
then one in one Province; of Heads of those Churches, whether Apostles
themselves, or their fellows and successors, applied to the charge of several
Churches. Of chief Churches, and inferior Churches, according to the capacity
of the Cities in which they were first planted. I challenge further here, as
proved by that which has been said in the first Book; That this form of
Government has been in sorce ever since the time of the Apostles, whose
immediate successors are to be named in the greatest Seas, upon which, it is
evident, that inferior Churches depended, from the same time; As manifest by
that which has been said in the places aforementioned. That the advice and
assistance of Presbyters, together with the ministry, and attendance of
Deacons, to and upon the said Heads, is as anciently evident in the Records of
the Church, as any Record of any Church is ancient. And upon these premises I
conclude; That the same course and way of Government by Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, which afterward prevailed throughout the whole Church, was first
begun by the Apostles, as, without whose authority, it could not have taken
effect all over the Church.

And, of those that take upon them to depart from the Church, that they may not
be so governed, I take my self enabled to demand; where there is any precept
recorded in Scripture, that the Government of the whole Church be settled either
in Independent Congregations, or in Congregation^l, Classical, Synodical,
Provincial, and National Churches: The very names are as barbarous to the
language of the Scriptures, ^s the subject is to the Writers of it. And yet,
were all this showed me, I would say, that, as the Magicians of Pharaoh, in the
third Miracle, so must the Architects of this design fail in the* highest point
of aecumenical or Catholic; Which, having never been compassed but by the
means of single heads of the chief Churches, it is absolutely too late for any
other form to pretend (I say not to come from any command of the Apostles) but
to be receivable in the Church, being founded by God, for one and the same
body, to continue till the coming of Christ to judgment. For, if the Apostles
of our Lord, determining in part that Order which should preserve the unity of
the Church, (which, what it was, the original practice of the whole Church
evidenceth) leave the rest to be determined by the Church, for its own
necessity and use; That which is so determined by the Church, whenever it
becomes necessary to maintain unity in the Church, shall no less oblige, then
that which the Apostles determined in specie themselves. The reason is the
unity of the Church, not only of divine right, as provided for by the
Apostles, but holding the rank of an end, to which particular provisions of the
Apostles, in this matter, seem but as means. It is true, I am far from
believing, that, had the Reformation retained this Apostolical Government, the
Church of Rome would thereby have been moved to join in it: But, when I see the
Schism which it has occasioned to stand partly upon this difference; When I
see so many particulars, begun by the Apostles (as the Scriptures themselves
evidence) others determinable by the Church; When I see, those that correct
Magnificat, introduce, instead of them, those Laws which have neither any
witness from the Scriptures, nor any footing in the authority of the whole
Church; I must needs conclude, those that do these things, in as much as they
do them, to be causes of the Schism, that is, Schismatics. For, what authority
upon earth can introduce any form reconcilable with that which the Apostles
first introduced to procure the vanity of the Church, (being to continue one
and the same Body from the beginning to the end) but he must give cause of
dissolving the unity of the said Body, unless he can convince the rest of the
Church, that it is Gods act, to whom all the Church is to be subject, whereas
to him they are not? Wher^fore let not Presbyterians or Independents, think
that they have done their work, when they can answer texts of Scripture, so as
not to be convinced, that Bishops are of divine Right. Unless they can harden
themselves against the belief of one Catholic Church, they must further give
account, why they depart from that which is not against Gods Law, to introduce
that which it commands not. For that is to proclaim to the Church, that they
will not be of it, unless they may be governed as they list themselves;
Whereas, they cannot be of it, by being governed otherwise, then the whole
Church from the beginning has been. Let them not marvail, that those, who go
not along with them in it, forewarn others of making themselves Schismatics,
by communicating in their innovations.

But, against the Independants I must further take notice, that, by the
supposition of one Society of the whole Church, the *whole pretense of the
Congregations is quite excluded. For, if God appointed all Churches to make one
Church, by the communion of all in the service of God, supposing the same
faith; then did not God appoint all Congregations to be chief within
themselves, but to depend upon the whole, both for the Rule of Faith, and for
the order of Gods service. Again, it is evident to common sense, that the
people of one Church can pretend no interess to give Law to another Church:
Whereas, whomsoever we enable to preserve the unity of the whole, those persons
must eith^r have right to oblige those that are not of their own Congregations;
or else, God shall h^ve provided that the Church shall be one, but excluded the
only means by which it can be preserved one. And therefore, to all those texts
of Scriptures, which are alleged to prove the chief Power of the People in the
Church, which is the ground of the Congregations, I give here this general
answer, which elsewhere I have applied to the said several passages: First, by
way of exception, that they can infer no more now against the Clergy, then
they could th^n against the Apostles: So that, seeing the Apostles were then
chief, notwithstanding all that those Scriptures contain, the Clergy also
remain now chief in the Church. Secondly and directly, that they import no more
then the tes^imony, consent and concurrence of the people, by way of suffrage,
or agreement, and applause, to the Acts of the Clergy; the interess whereof is
grounded upon the sensible knowledge which the people have, of the persons
concerned in Ordinations, Censures, or other Acts of the Church, in regard
wh^reof, it is no more then reason requires, that they be duly satisfied of the
proceedings of the Church, without making them Judges of matters of Right in it.
So that, to make the people chief in Church matters, upon account of this Title,
is to make the people of England Sovereign, because English Juries have power
to return evidence in matter of fact, either effectual or void.

Another reason I here advance, upon supposition of the force and weight of the
Tradition of the Church, in evidencing the reason and intent of the sayings and
doings of the Apostles, recorded in the Scriptures. Philip, one of the seven,
having preached, and converted and baptized the Samaritanes, the Apostles at
Jerusalem send down to them Peter and John, at whose pr^yers, with ^^ying th^^r
(...) on them, they receive the Holy Ghost, Act. VIII. 14-17. And so S. Paul
^^yes h^nds upon the twelve men that were baptized before, at Ephesus, ^^^ ^hey
receive the Holy Ghost, Act. XIX. 1-8. For, what reason shall we imagine, why,
they that were in^bled to baptize, were not ^^abled to give the Holy Ghost
(baptism being the condition upon which the Holy Ghost was due, by the promise
of the Gospel) but to show, that they were baptized into the uni^y of the
Church, out of which they were not to expect the Holy Ghost; Therefore, that
their Baptism may have effect, that is, give the Holy Ghost, the allow^nce of
the Apostles, (upon whose government the unity of the Church depends) is
requite: Which allowance, their prayers for the Holy Ghost, and Impo^^^ion of
hands, impl^eth and presupposes. It cannot be doubted, that the visible Grace,
of ^peaking in str^nge languages the great works of God, was then given, for an
evidence of the presence of the Holy Ghost with Gods people; whereupon it is
called by S. Paul, 1 Cor. XII. 7. The manifestatio^ of the Spirit. But, ev^n of
this kind of Graces, S. Paul says again, 1 Cor. XIV, 32. 33. The Spirits of
the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. For God is not the author of
unsetlednesse but of order, as in all Churches of the Saints. If therefore,
there come no confusion upon Prophets Prophesying one by one, because God, who
is the Author of Order, grants such inspirations and revelations to inferiors,
that they cease not therefore to be subject to those which he grants to
Superiors; How much more re asonable is it, that the Gift of the Holy Ghost
promised to them that are baptized, should nevertheless de^end upon the
blessing of the Apostles. So that, when S. Peter says to them that were
conv^rted at Pentecost, Act. II. 38. Repent, and be Baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ, unto remission of sins, and y^ shall receive the
gift of the Holy ^host; It seems to me no more then reason requires, that he
^upposes the same blessing: As also S. Paul, in those of whom he says; That,
having believed in Christ, they were sealed by the Holy spirit of promise; And
again; Grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to the day of
ransom, Ephe I. 13. IV. 30. Unless a reason could be showed, why S. Peter and
S. John should travail from Jerusalem to Samaria, to do that, which they need
not do at Jerusalem, where they were: Or originally, why the Imposition of the
Apostles hands should be requisite, to procure some the Holy Ghost, and not
others.

This being that which the Scriptures record of the Apostles, all men know, how
ancient*, how general the custom has been in the Church, for Bishops to
confirm the baptized, by praying for the effect of it, which is the Holy Ghost,
with Imposition of hands. Professing thereby, that they own their Faith and
Baptism, and acknowledge them for part of their flock, as acknowledged by them
for their Pastors; Which is that eminence of honor due to the Bishop, in
which, the welfare of the Church consists, says S. Hierome, adv^rsus
Luciferian^s. For Tertullian also, de Bapt. cap. XVII. reserveth unto the
Bishop the right of granting Baptism, though he allow not only Priests and
Deacons, but partly also Laymen to Baptize. Now if, from the beginning, this
privilege was reserved the Apostles, in sign of the truth of that Baptism
which so they allowed; If those who received Baptism at years of discretion,
h^^ing the^^elves made profession of their faith, were nevertheless to
acknowledge their Pa^^ors, and the Unity of the Church wrapped up in them, as
that, upon which the effect of Baptism depends; How much more those that are
b^ptized Infan^s? Who cannot otherwise, according to the original constitution
of the Church, be secured, that they profess the faith of the whole Church, but
by their Bishops allowance; through whom they have communion with the w^ole
Church. For, as I have showed, that there was originally no other mean to
maintain the unity of the Church; but, the faith of the Bishop to secure the
whole Church of the faith of his flock: So was the ^same the only mean to
secure the flock, that they held the faith of the whole Church, which owned
their Bishop and his faith. And, howsoever the profession of faith may be
limited, and the Bishop in exacting the same; yet is it necessarily an act of
chief Power in the Church, to allow the communion of the Eucharist. So that,
when once Presbyterians share this part of the Bishops Power among their
Triers, (allowing them to admit to the Communion those that can say the
Catechism which they made themselves) First, they put upon us a new faith,
which we must own for the faith of the Church: Then, to debauch Partisans to
themselves, they authorize the malice of gross carnal Christians to domineer
over their neighbors; whom they may easily pick a quarrel with, for not
answering their Catechism, but are not able, either to warrant, or to teach
them the truth of the least tittle of it, which, so nearly concerning their
salvation, how necessary is it that it be reserved to the Head of each Church?
Besides, that by acknowledging him, they visibly submit to the Laws of the
Church by which he governs, and to his authority, in such matters as the Laws do
not determine, which is the very means of maintainidg Unity in the Church.

And truly, the consideration of this point, discovers unto us the only sure
ground, upon which any man may resolve, what offices of christianity may be
ministered by the several Orders of the Church. For, when the power of
Confirming, proper to the Bishop, evidenceth, that he alone grants Baptism,
(either by particular appointment, or by general Law, in which his authority is
involved) but a Layman sometimes may minister it; we see what S. Paul means,
when he says, 1 Cor. I. 17. God sent me not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel; Our Lord having said, Mat. XXVIII. 19. Go Preach, and make Disciles of
all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; To
wit, that the Power of appointing it, not the ministry of doing it, is proper
to the Apostles and their successors. Which reason will hold in sundry
particulars, concerning Ordination, concerning Absolution and Penance,
concerning confirmation and others: In all which, this being once secured, that
no man act beyond the Power which he receives, it will be no prejudice to the
unity of the Church, that some Orders do that, by particular commission from
their Superiors, which their Order inables not all that are of it to do;
Because, in such cases, it is not Authority, but Ministry which they
contribute. As for the order of Priesthood, that the power of consecrating the
Eucharist is equal to the Power of the Keys, in which that Order has an
Interest, in the inward Court of Conscience (the outward Court of the Church
being reserved to the Bishop, with advice and assistance of his Presbyters)
whereas the power of Preaching and Baptizing, is, of ordinary Right,
communicable to Deacons; For the proof of all this, I refer my self to that
which I have said in the Right of the Church, Chap. III. and to that which must
be said here in due place. Let not then those of the Presbyteries or
Congregations, think their business done, till they can give us some
reasonable account, how all the Christian world should agree to set up Bishops
into a rank above their Clergy and People both, if this had been forbidden,
nay, if it had not been so ordered by the Apostles. Not that I gr^nt them to
have any more appearance of evidence from the Scriptures, to destroy the
superiority of the Bishops, and the concurrence of the Clergy to the
maintenance of unity in the Church, then the Socinians have to destroy the
faith of the Holy Trinity, and the satisfaction of Christ; But because I do
grant these, as I granted the other, that there is that appearance of evidence,
which, every one that is concerned to be subject to Bishops, cannot evidenly
resolve; as every one that is bound to believe the Holy Trinity, and the
satisfaction, is not bound to be able, evidently to resolve all objections
which the Socinians can make against it out of the Scriptures. For it is
granted, that S. Hierome has alleged many texts of Scriptures, to show, that
Bishops and Priests were both the same thing under the Apostles; and, that
therefore the difference between them, is but of positive humane right by
custom of the Church, and has many followers in this opinion among Church
Writers* Though with this difference, that it can never be pretended, that S.
Jerome, or any Ecclesiastical Writer after or before S. Jerome, ever alleged
the words of S. Paul, 1. Tim. V. 17. The Elders that rule well are worthy of
double honor, specially those that labor in the word and doctrine; or any
other syll^ble of the whole Scripture, to show, that any of those that S. Paul
pronounces worthy of double honor, were Laymen, that is, of the rank of the
people: Which is now an essential ingredient of the design, both of our
Presbyteries, and also, so far as I know, of the Congregations. I do indeed
acknowledge, that there is difficulty in expounding those texts of the Apostles
which speak to this purpose, so as to agree them with the Original and
universal practice of the Church. And therefore, it is no marvail, if learned
men that have handled this point among us, (where, without affectation, I may
say, that it has been most curiously and ingenuously disputed) have gone
several ways, upon several grounds, in assigning the reason, why the degree
of Deacons is mentioned next to the degree of Bishops, in so many texts of the
Apostles, having the order of Priests between both, as the original and
perpetual custom of the Church required.

For, it is well enough known, that there is an opinion published and
maintained by many learned observations in the primitive antiquity of the
Church, that, during the time when those texts of the Apostles were written,
there were but two Orders, of Bishops and Deacons, established in the Church;
though Bishops also are called Presbyters, the name not being yet appropriated
to the middle order, while it was not introduced, as afterward it came to be.
And this opinion allegeth Epiphanius very fitly, confuting Aerius the Heretic
or Schismatic, objecting the same, that, at the beginning, the multitude of
believers in less places being so small; that one Governor, together with some
Ministers to attend upon him in executing his Orders, might well serve them; it
is no marvail if there be no mention of any more Orders in so many texts of the
Apostles. And it may be said, that, as there were Churches founded and governed
by a certain order, from the beginning that we read of them in the Apostles;
so, no Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, was appropriated to any particular Church,
till, after that time, by degrees, they came to be selled to certain Churches
by Ecclesiastical Law and Custom. So that, during the time of the Apostles,
themselves, and their companions, whom they associated to themselves for their
assistance, were, in common, the Governors of Churches then founded, according
as they fell out to be present in these Churches, to whom they had the most
relation by planting and watering the faith planted in them; either by virtue
of the agreement taken by the Apostles within themselves, or by the appointment
of some of them, if we speak of their companions and assistances. But
afterward when the faith came to be settled, then, as those which had been
Governors of Churches in common before, became chief Governors of particular
Churches, to whom, by lawful consent, they became appropriated; so were they
provided of Priests and Deacons, to assist and attend them, in the execution of
their office toward the body of Christians, then mulplyed in several
Churches. I do confess to have declared an opinion something differing from
both of these sayings, about the reason here demanded; As not being persuaded,
either, that the Order of Presbyters was not yet introduced into the Church,
during the Apostles time, or that chief Governors were not appropriated and
settled in some Churches during the same; though I have no need to undertake
that in all they were; believing, and maintaining, that the Apostles
themselves, in the Churches of their own planting and watering, were
acknowledged chief Governors in ordering, notwithstanding their extraordinary,
both Power, not confined to any one Church, and graces and abilities
porportionable. In which regard, and under which limitation, visible to the
common sense of all men of their own and the next ages, I do maintain Bishops
to be their successors. Whereupon it follows, that I allow the name of Bishops,
in the Apostles writings, to comprehend Priests also, because of the matter of
their function common to both; though, with a chief Power in the Bishop; in
Priests, so limited, as to do nothing (that is to say, nothing of consequence
to his Power over the whole Church) without his consent and allowance. But this
variety of opinion, in expounding these Scriptures, draws after it no further
consequence, to prejudice the primitive Law of Government in the Church, then
this; That there are more ways then one to answer the seeming probabilities,
pretending to make the evidence of Catholic Tradition unreconcileable with the
truth of the Scriptures, in the agreement whereof, the demonstration of this
truth consists. I conceive, therefore, I might very well refer my self to
the Readers free judgment, to compare the reasons which I have produced, with
those that since have been used. Notwithstanding, I shall not think much,
briefly, according to the model of this design, to express the sense I have, of
the most native meaning of the most texts alleged in this business; that I may
have opportunity to point out again, the peremptory exceptions which ^re
visible in them, either to the imagination of mungrill Pr^sbyteries, compounded
of Clergy and People, during the time of the Apostles, or, of the chief Power
of any such Presbyteries in their resepective Churches.

CHAP. XVII. The Power given the XII. under the Title of Apostles, and the LXX.
Disciples. That the VII were Deacons. Of the first Presbyters at Jerusalem, and
the Interest of the People. Presbyters appropriated to Churches, under the
Apostles. S. Paul's Deacons no Presbyters. No ground for Lay Flders.
FIrst then, as the name of Apostle, in the Original meaning, is very general,
to signify any commissary, Proxy, delegate, or Ambassador; so the use of it,
in the Apostles writings, is larger then to be confined to the twelve. For,
when S. Paul says, That our Lord appeared to the twelve, afterward to all the
Apostles, 1 Cor. XV. 5. 7. He must needs understand other Apostles besides the
twelve; perhaps the same that he meant, where he reckoned Andronicus and Junias
remarkable among the Apostles, Romans XVI. 7. And that, in another ^ense then
Paul and Barnabas are called Apostles, Act. XIV. 4. 14. For, the name of
Apostle intimating whose Apostle he is that is called an Apostle; we have no
reason to count Paul and Barnabas any man's Apostles, but our Lord Christ's,
though they were first sent, with the blessing of such Doctors and Prophets, as
the Church of Antiochia then had, Acts XIII. 1. 2, 3. whose authority cannot,
in any reason, be thought to extend so far, as to constitute an Apostle
par^llel to the Twelve, which S. Paul so often so expressly challenges. For, since
we see their commission is immediately from the Holy Ghost, that is from God,
we are not to value their right, by the solemnity, which it is visibly
conferred upon them with: Unless you will say, that, by virtue of that
Imposition of Hands, they were messengers and Commissaries of that Church, and,
that they then appeared to be no more then so, though afterward, God set on
them marks of the same authority with the Twelve. Truly, those whom S. Paul
calls false Apostles, transferring themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 1
Cor. XI. 13. must ne^ds be understood to have pretended commission from our
Lord Christ himself. For hereupon, they stood upon it, that they had seen him
in the flesh, disparaging S. Paul that had not, who, therefore, vindicateth
himself to be nevertheless, 1 Cor. IX. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 10. And indeed, there is
great cause to think, that they were of Cerinthus his party, who, as Epiphanius
relates, having taught at Antiochia, that Christians are tied to Moses Law,
and being disowned by the Apostles, to have received no such commission from
them, Act. XV. 1. 24. out of discontent, set up a sect by themselves, borrowing
to their former Doctrine something of Simon Magus, (being of that time) as you
may see by Epiphanius and Irenaeus; whereof, this may justly seem to have sowed
the seeds at Corinth, about that time. As for those who pretended to be
Apostles and were not, but were discovered to be otherwise, by the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, Apoc. II. 2. whose commission they pretended, our Lords, or
the Apostles, or what besides, let every man judge. For, those whom S. Paul
calls Apostles of the Churches, 2 Cor. VIII. 23. and Epaphroditus, when he is
called the Apostle of the Philippians, and minister of S. Paul's necessities,
Phil. II. 25. I am confident, their titles import not Apostles to, but from the
said Churches: that is, not sent by God, or any body else, to them (not that
they might not have commission from the Apostles, but that it is not here
signified by this Title) but, sent by those Churches, with commission to bestow
their oblations at Jerusalem; and by the Philippians, to present the offerings
which they contributed to the support of S. Paul, Phil. IV. 10-18.

Now, our Lord having ordained, not only twelve Apostles, for the Heads of the
twelve Tribes of that spiritual Israel of his Church which he now began to
create, but also LXX inferior Disciples, though not called Apostles, yet sent
to preach by our Lord during his life time, Luke X. 1. answerable to the LXX.
Elders of Israel under Moses, and in after ages; Though it cannot be doubted,
that, those whom our Lord had set his best marks upon during his life time,
were, and were to be of greatest authority in his Church, after the raising of
it; yet we have no mark left to show, that these LXX. were, by the said
Commission of our Lord during his life time* entitled to any rank, or
particular charge in the Church after his death, but by the appointment of the
Twelve, and acceptance of the Church. And therefore, I find no difficulty in
believing those Ancients, which conceive, that, some of the seven, (which are
the first that we read of applied by the Appstles to any particular office or
function in the Church) may have been of the number of the said LXX. Disciples.
No not though we allow, according to the sense of all antiquity, that they were
properly Deacons to the Twelve, as Governors of the whole Church at that time,
comprised in the City of Jerusalem, and the adjacent parts. For, was not their
function sacred and Ecclesiastical, which, before the ordaining of them, was
performed by the Apostles themselves? Were not the Moneys which they dispensed
the oblations of Christians, consecrated to God, in the maintenance of the
Church? Were not the Tables which they furnished out of those goods, the feasts
of love, where Christians, at the beginning, (to have more opportunity of
instruction from the Apostles, and to strengthen one another) did eat together,
the poor at the charge of the rich, celebrating withal the Eucharist? He that
doubts of the premises, let him satisfy himself by the reasons premised: He
that finds the evidence of them, why should he make difficulty in admitting
those seven to be Deacons then, more then in admitting those who afterward,
either waited at the Altar, or dispensed the oblations of believers to the
maintenance of the poor? The State of Christianity was altered, and so, the
manner of exercising their function was not the same; But, if the reason of the
difference be no more then follows upon alteration in the state of
Christianity, the Society and Corporation of the Church remaining all one, then
is the office the same. Let no man then, that believes a Church by divine
right, and consecration of the same, imagine the Deacons office to be
conversant in temporal things (because in dispensing of moneys) those moneys
being consecrated to God, (for the maintenance of the Faith. Nor let any man,
that sees these seven, as soon as they are ordained to wait upon these Tables,
fall to preaching the Gospel; ( Stephen at Jerusalem, Philip in Samaria, and
why not all the rest as occasion may serve?) think this any stranger, then,
that the Apostles themselves should wait upon the same Tables at such tims, as,
no man doubts that they preached the Gospel. The empty noise of Minister of the
word and Sacraments, ^sounding in the mouth of those, who scorn to acknowledge
any error in themselves, or their ^faction, binds up poor people, like children
in a biggin of vain belief, that, by Gods Law, no man is to Preach or Baptize,
that may not consecrate the Eucharist: who, were they to prove what they take
for granted, would be as silent as their hearers.

But, if these seven attend upon these Tables, and that ^under the Apostles,
how comes it, that the Oblations of the Antiochians are consigned to the hands
of the Presbyters, by Paul and Barnabas, Act. XI. 30? Forsooth, what were these
Presbyters, but so many Lay Elders, to give check to the Apostles, by their
interess in disposing of the Church Goods? Sure, they that have heard of XII.
Princes of Tribes, and LXX. Elders, that governed all Israel with, and under
Moses, and, in correspondence with them, XII Apostles, and LXX Disciples, the
first fruits of the spiritual Israel under our Lord Christ, will not commit so
gross an inconsequence, as not to subordinate them to the Twelve. He that
admits that which I said even now, that it does not appear, that the LXX.
Disciples (whatsoever dignity and respect they might have among the Disciples,
by being so sent) did hold any office in the Church by virtue of it, but that
which they were designed to by the act of the Church; must also allow, that,
upon such designation, both the LXX. and others, might properly be called
Presbyters or Elders. Only, supposing the name of Presbyters to be relative to
the Body of those whereof they are Presbyters, there will be as much difference
between them and the Apostles, as between the Twelve Princes and the Elders of
Israel, (to whom all matters of the Law resorted, which could not be ended at
home) and every little Piepouder Judge, that could decide alone, or with two
more, upon compromise. Wherefore I will not contend with them, who think it so
convenient to say, that those Elders of Acts XI. 30. were Presbyters of the
local Church of Jerusalem. For when, upon the matter, the Church of Jerusalem,
and the whole Church, were both a thing (the Church of Antiochia being but yet
in the Cradle, and therefore those of Judea and Samaria, mentioned, Acts IX.
31. where the Harvest was less, though somewhat elder, yet not more
considerable) whither as Elders of the whole Church, that is Bishops; or as
Elders of the Church of Jerusalem, that is Priests, (supposing the same Order
promiscuously called Bishops and Presbyters, which I never doubted, and since
has been largely and learnedly proved) will scarce be decided by these Texts;
and the interesse of the Church will be secure, though it be not decided. For,
when the deputation of the Church of Antiochia is addressed to the Apostles and
these Elders, when they assemble to consider of it, when the answer containing
the decree goes forth in their name, Act. XV. 2, 4. 16, 23. It is still the
decree of the Princes and Elders of the Israel of God, whether you take them
for Elders of the Church of Jerusalem, or Bishops of the whole Church. Nor is
the case much otherwise, when Paul and his companions consult with James and
the Elders, almost about the same business, Act. XXI. 18. though, of the
twelve, it seems, there was none then left at Jerusalem but James, (whom, for
the many marks which the Scriptures give us, that his care was appropriated,
though his power no way confined to that Church, the Church calls Bishop of
Jerusalem) and of those Presbyters, many were either settled in, or dispersed to
other functions (as, those whom first we read of in the Church of Antiochia,
must have have been of that quality, Act. XIII. 1. no less then Bar^abas and
Silas, Act. IX. 27. XI. 22-26. XV. 22.)

But, is there any man that can pick out of all this, any manner of pretense,
for the equality of, whether Governors or Ministers of the Church, for the
concurrence of Lay Elders, to the Acts of their Government? For the concurrence
of the people there may be some pretense, because they are present at passing
the decree, and the leter that bears it goes in their name, Act. XV. 4. 23. And
because the choice of Matthias and of the seven, proceeds upon upon their
allowance, and nomination of the persons, Act. I. 20-23. XVI. 3-6. But, that
therefore, the chief interess should be in the people, is an imagination too
brutish. Cannot the Apostles, finding themselves obliged to ordain persons so
and so qualified, for such and such offices in the Church, appeal to the
people, whom they acknowledge so and so qualified: Cannot S. Paul afterward
provide, That no man should blame them in dispensing the Power which they are
trusted with, 2 Cor. VIII. 20. but a consequence must thereupon be inferred
against themselves, that they are commanded by God, to refer things
concerning the salvation of Gods people in general, as the power of an
Apostle* the order of Deacon, the decree of the Synod at Jerusalem, to the
temerity and giddiness of the people? When it is evident in the Text, that,
the people are neither left to themselves, whither to proceed or not, nor to
proceed, but within bounds limited; so, that proceeding within those bounds,
^hey could not prejudice the Apostles interess, without they, were to be
restrained. As for the matter of Faith determined at Jerusalem, is any man so
little a Christian as to doubt, whether it obliged them whom it concerned, or
whether by virtue of that act? Those that so readily admitted it, Act. XVI. 4.
did not. The whole interess of the people, consequent to this proceeding of the
Apostles, consists, in being reasonably satisfied of matter of fact, concerning
persons, and causes, to be justiced by the Apostles, and their successors in
the Church. And can no more argue the People to be chief in the Church, then
the trial by Juries can argue England to be no Monarchy. Which interesse, when
it is shamefully abused to the dishonor of Christianity, I say not I would
have it taken away, as in some ^laces perhaps it is; but, I say, he that would
not have the satisfaction which they may demand limited by certain bounds, with
force of Law, that it may not be so abused any more, can neither pretend to be
reasonable, nor Christian. But, that the people of one Church should do an act
which must oblige other Churches, is a thing so gross, that they, who allow
their Christians the freedom to be tied to nothing but what themselves please,
do, by consequence, allowing others the same, destroy all principles and
grounds of one Catholic Church; which having proved as largely as my design
admits, I remit those who may pretend themselves unsatisfie^ in this point, to
void me these grounds, before they claim of me that which cannot stand with the
truth of them. But, the due interess of the people being thus satisfied, and
their pretended interess by the same means excluded; what becomes of the Lay
Elders interess upon their account? For, Lay Elders can be no more then the
Foremen of the People, to act that interess which they challenge, to their due
advantage. And, in this quality, I have granted elsewere, (and cannot repent me
of that opinion) that, in some parts of the Western Church, some of the chief
of the People, (that is, that were not of the Clergy) did concur to the acts of
the Church, in behalf of the People, and of their Interess. And in this
quality, Blondel, the most learned of Presbyterians, claims the Lay Elders of
G^n^va to be receivable. Which, as he knew very well, and all his party will
own, to be utterly inconsistent with the meaning and intent of them who first
brought them in at Geneva; So will it, both cut of all pretense for them, that
is derived from any other ground, and leave the claim also to be limited, by
that, which the preservation of the whole Church, and the unity thereof will
require.

In the mean time, the Order of Bishops, and the superiority thereof above the
order of Priests, stands exemplified, in the person of S. James the brother of
our Lord, by so ancient testimonies, concurring with such circumstances of
Scripture, marked out Bishop of Jerusalem, whither one of the twelve or no^. In
that indeed, the reports of the ancients are not reconcilable. But, if not,
why should S. Paul be so careful to protest, that he received not his authority
from him, no more then from S. Peter and S. John, Gal. I. 18. 19. II. 9. 12.
Could there be any question of receiving his authority from any but those of
the Twelve? Therefore, and for other reasons elsewhere alleged, I count it, as
shouldred by most prob^bilities, so a subject to least difficulty, to believe
him to be James the Son of Alphoeus, as having nothing of consequence to
answer, but, why Heg^sippus, writing so soon after the Apostles, has not
remembered it. But of that, let each man think as he finds most reasonable.
Those testimonies of antiquity, which expound those circumstances of Scripture,
which mark him out for the head of that Church, do not discharge him from the
care of other Churches, especially of the circumcision, which, perhaps by his
care, together with S. Peter and John, were won to Christianity; according to
the division which S. Paul has recorded unto us, Gal. II. 9. 10. whereupon, we
see him exercise the the office of an Apostle to the Churches of the Jews
dispersions* by his Epistle James I. 1.

But let us proceed. S. Paul and Barnabas ordained their Presbyters Church by
Church, (...), Act. XIV. 23. And appointed Titus to constitute Presbyters, in
Creete, City by City, Tit. I. 5. Be it granted, because Epiphanius has said
it, and it is a thing in it self reasonable, that, in some places, the number
of believers was so small, that there needed but a Bishop to govern, and a
Deacon or Deacons to attend upon the execution of his orders; That there should
be Churches constituted by the name of such Churches, in such Provinces, and no
more people any where signified, would make them Churches that might be, not
that were. Tertullians saying, Ubi tres Ecclesia, licet laici, Where there be
three, though of the Laity, there is a Church, is not meant of such Churches:
But, that three Christians, (or two in our Saviors terms, Mat. XVIII. 19.)
that meet to serve God, are a Church, because so assembled, being of the
Church. At least in mother Churches of mother Cities, (where the Apostles made
their chief residence, because the harvest was there greatest, and likewise
their Ministers) that there should be no more Christians then one Bishop could
govern and teach, during the Apostles time, seems to me to carry no appearance
of truth. And to imagine, that, those who were designed for Pastors of Churches
in being, were always resident in the mother Church, (though occasions,
whereof there is no rule, might and must cause their presence there many times)
the reason of their office admits not. But if we admit (...), to signify more
then one in a City, and a Church, it seems not to be refutable, that they were
appropriate to those Churches; The name of Presbyters of such and such Churches
b^ing relative to the people of their respective Churches, Further, S. Paul,
s^nding to Ephesus, called to him the Elders of the Church, whom, by and by, he
says, The Holy Ghost had placed Bishops over his flock* to feed the Church of
God, Act. XX. 17. 28. Here (...), by virtue of the article, may refer us,
either to the whole Church, or, to that part of the Church which the speech
most concerned, or, in fine, to the very Church of Ephesus. There is a
conjecture, that S. Paul makes them Bishops, by saying, that God had made them
Bishops of his Church, who were Presbyters when he sent for them. But, I allow
not those of the Church of Rome, that our Lord made the Bread and Wi^e of his
last Supper, his Body and Blood, by saying; This is my Body, this is my Blood;
But by that which he did before he said it. For the same reason therefore, I
cannot allow, that S. Paul here makes them Bishops of Presbyters, by saying;
God has made you Bishops in his Church, not declaring, by any thing that he
says or does, any intent so to do, thereby to be understood. But, I cannot but
consider, that Ir^naeus III. 14. tells* us, that S. Paul, at this time, called
together the Bishops and Presbyters, Qui erant ab Epheso and reliquis proximis
civitatibus; Which were of Ephesus, and other the next Cit^^s; and S. Jerome,
ad Evagr. that he called together, omnes illos apud qu^s praedicaverat; All
those wi^h whom he had preached. Which if we grant, the article of (...), will
referrs us to that part of the Church that was concerned, whereas the words as
they lie, (as he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church) refer
us to the Church there mentioned, of Ephesus. When S. Paul addresses his
Epis^le to the Philippians, together with the Bishops and Deacons, Phil. I. 2.
when, in his instructions to Timothy, he passes immediately from Bishops to
Deacons; 1 Timothy III. 1-8. It is said, that the Bishops of the next Cities
together with their Deacons, were present, or ordinarily resident on the
Capital City, according to that which I said even now of Ephesus. And it may be
said, that they were Bishops and Deacons at large, in respect to the Church at
large, not applied to the functions either of Bishop or Priests, in this or
that Church. And truly, I do remember the words of Clemens, ad Corinth.
speaking of the Apostles, (...). Preaching therefore the Word by Cities, and by
Countries, and Baptizing, they made the first fruits of them, (whom they had
baptized) Bishops and Deacons of those that should believe And, that S. Paul
addresses his Epistles to the Church that is at Corinth, and to all that called
on the name of the Lord in all Achaia, 2 Cor. I. 1. So that, they provided for
the ordering of them that should become, or were become Christians, before they
were yet cast into Churches. And, it is reasonable to think, that those were
ordained in the mother Cities, and there, stood upon their guard, expecting
opportunity of framing their flocks. And, that this was a cause, why the titles
of Bishops and Presbyters are promiscuously used and attributed. But I cannot
therefore yield, that one Bishop, with one or more Deacons, could serve the
Churches of Philippi, Corinth, or Ephesus: Or, that as yet no Governors were
affected and applied to several Churches. For, when S. Paul directs Timothy to
dispose of the stock of the Church, for the Honor, that is, the maintenance of
widows, and Presbyters, to receive accusations against Presbyters under two or
three witnesses, and to rebuke them that should offend before all, 1 Timothy V. 2.
16-28. it seems not reasonable, to imagine Timothy the Judge of the Biships of
inferior Churches, as regularly every Bishop is of his own Presbyters; that he
should rebuke the Bishop of For^i^e, though inferior Churches, before the
people of his Church of Ephesus; that he should dispose of the stock of his
Church at Ephesus, upon Widows or Presbyters of other Churches then that at
Ephesus: But rather, that the proceeding of Timothy is prescribed as a ^orm for
the proceeding of others, in their respective Churches.

Another opinion says; That the Deacons whom S. Paul puts next to Bishops are
Presbyters, called also Ministers of God and Christ, as Timothy, 1 These. III.
2. and S. Paul himself, 2 Cor. II. 23. Ministers of the New Testament, as S.
Paul, 2 Cor. III. 6. Ministers of the Gospel; as S. Paul, Ephe. III. 7.
Ministers of Righteousness, into whom the Ministers of Satan are transformed, 2
Cor. XI. 15. Ministers of the Church, as S. Paul, Col. I. 25. Observing, that
the vulgar Latin of S. Jerome translates (...)* Phil. I. 1. 1 Timothy III. 8.
Diaconos, elsewhere, in thirty places Ministros; and concluding, that these
Deacons are the same with Presbyters under the Apostles, and the Bishops their
next successors, till the order of Deacons was brought in by the Church. Which
to me seems strange, that the titles of the Apostles and their companions
should constitute or signify an inferior order of Presbyters. And therefore,
think it more pertinent to the meaning of those texts, to observe the terms
which are added in them, to limit that Ministry for which they are called
Ministers, either by the persons, or subject matter to which it relates. For,
the Apostles commission being immediate from our Lord, (as the commission of
their companions, when they became their Apostles, from themselves) and the
matter in which the Apostles ministered to God or Christ, (their companions also
to them) being the Word, or the Gospel, (that is the work of publishing it)
distinguishes them from the Deacons that are under Bishops in S. Paul, as those
that ministered to their respective Bishops, and, by their appointment, to the
people, as the VII at Jerusalem, by the appointment of the Apostles. For, if S.
Paul be called Minister of the Church, Col. I. 15. he is so called as Minister
of the whole Church, or Minister of God in the work of it, not of this or that
Church; which, Deacons are called Deacons, because they minister to, but, at
the Order of their Bishops and Presbyters. As for the companions of the
Apostles, when they are sent, upon their commissions, to preach the Gospel,
they are fitly called Ministers of the word, the Gospel, the New Testament, or
Evangelists; when they give personal attendance upon them, the Apostles, they
may fitly be understood to be called their Ministers, in the same sense as
Deacons are called Deacons, for attending upon their Bishops; allowing always,
as much difference between them and ordinary Deacons, as between S. Paul, for
example, and the Bishop or Priest on whom the Deacon attends. And, for these
two several notions, you have just ground in the texts of the Apostles, Acts I.
17. 25. VI. 1. 4. XIX. 22. 2 Timothy IV. 5. 6, 7, 11. Besides, when Phaebe is
alled a Deaconnesse of the Church at C^nchr^ae, Romans XVI. 1. when S. Paul
says, that they who Minister well, procure themselves a good step, and much
freedom in the faith which is in Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy III. 13. I understand not
what this opinion would make of Deaconnesses, or what is that fair step which
Deacons attain by ministering well; which, in my opinion, is clearly the rank of
Presbyters, as Clemens, Alexand. and others of the Fathers have expounded it.
Neither do I think it possible to give a more reasonable reason, why the
vulgar, translating (...) Ministros, so often elsewhere, should translate it
Diacones, Phil. I. 1. 1 Timothy III. 8. then to put a difference between that
sense, in which it stands for the Deacons of Churches, (which the Greek word
Diaconus, had been used to signify all over the Latin Church) and that
signification, in which the Apostles and their companions are called the
Ministers of Christ, or of the Gospel; In which, because the Greek Diaconi was
not famous in the Latin, therefore he imployeth tke Latin Ministri, that
answers it. Plainly, seeing the word (...) bears a notion of waiting upon
another pleasure, in executing his orders, and the word (...), of ruling and
governing; and seeing I have showed, that the Presbyters, according to the
ancient custom of the Church (derived originally from the Synagogue) did sit
with their Bishop, though in a rank under him, while the Deacons hood, as
waiting upon them, (as you may see in the Apostolical form of divine service,
Chap. III. and IV. and in the Right of the Church, Chap. III.) I cannot see how
both these names can be accepted to signify the same persons: Or, how the
degree which S Paul says, is attained by well performing the Deacons office,
can be any thing but the rank of Presbyters.

There remains the words of the Apostles, 1 These. V. 12. 13. Now we request you
brethren, to know those that labor amongst you, and are over you in the Lord,
and admonish you: And to esteem them more then abundantly in love, for their
works sake. And again. Heb. XIII. 7. 17. Remember your Leaders, which have
spoken to you the word, the issue of whose conversation seeing, imitate ye
their faith. And; Be ruled by your Leaders, and yield to them, for they watch
for your souls, as those that must give account. That they may do it joyfully,
and not groaning; For that is not for your turn. Where, it is manifest, he
distinguishes those that first planted the Churches to whom he writes, from
those that governed them at present: But, whether it be more reasonable to
understand by these words, one governor to one Church, or a Bench of
Presbyters to each; whether assigned to one particular Church, or belonging to
any Church as much as to these; I shall willingly refer it to the Reader to
Judge. The words of S. Jame, I conceive admit no denial, Jam. V. 14. Is any man
among you sick? let him call for the Presbyters of the Church, and let them
pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; here are Elders
more then one, and those proper and relative to one and the same Church, and,
the office which they do, not competible to any Lay Elders, according to any
pretense, supposing especially, that which I said before, to clear the intent of
it. In fine, the seven stars, which are the Angels of the seven Churches, and
the seven Candlesticks which are the seven Churches, Revel. I. 20. seem to
yield us a pregnant evidence of so many Governors, proper to so many Churches:
To wit, so many Bishops, as is argued elsewhere; As for the words of S. Paul. 1
Cor. XII. 28. And some has God set in the Church, first Apostles, secondly
Prophets, thirdly Doctors, then miracles, then Graces of healing, helps,
Governments, kinds of Languages; And, Ephe. IV. 11. And he gave some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors; It is true, the
offices of Apostles and Evangelists, cannot be confined to one particular
Church; but the offices of Pastors and Doctors, may and ought, of Helps and
Governments must; At least if we understand them, as I have showed that they
are to be understood: to wit, Governors of the sick, impotent, and needy, and
their assistants in that work. For, I may freely say, there has nothing been
said to the purpose, of those Offices, but this. And therefore, seeing the
Apostle in both places speaks of the whole Church, which consists of all
Churches. the form whereof is still the same, how much soever they differ in
bigness; it seems to me very reasonable to understand by S. Paul, that God
has placed in the Church, as well those offices which relate to all, or to
many Churches, as those which relate unto one; that, by the means of all of
them, the University of Christians may be edified in and to the unity of one
Body, which is the whole Church.

These being the particulars that concern this point, in the writings of the
Apostles, I am not solicitous for an answer to the Puritanes objections,
finding in them no ingredient of any of their designs, but only a number of
Presbyters of the same rank, in one and the same Church, no ways inconsistent
with the superiority of Bishops, no ways enduring the Power of the Keys in the
hands of Lay Elders. But, if the writings of the Apostles express not that form
of Government by Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, which, it is manifest, that the
whole Church ever since their time has used; First, neither can it be said to
agree any thing so near with any of their designs: And, all the difference is
reasonably imputable to the difference between the State of the Church, in
making and made; the qualities of Apostles and Evangelists, not being to be
propagated to posterity any more then their persons, but, the uniformity of
succeeding times, not being imputable to any thing but their appointment. As
for the reason why the titles of (...) and (...), are so promiscuously used, as
well in the records of the primitive Church, as in the writings of the
Apostles; I admit that of Epiphanius, that, at the beginning, a Bishop with his
Deacons might serve some Churches; I admit the ordaining of Bishops for
inferior Churches to be framed, and in the Churches of mother Cities,
according to Clemens; I admit the ordaining of Clergy to no particular
Churches; But, I cannot reject that which I learned from an author no ways
inconsiderable, the supposed S. Ambrose upon S. Paul's Epistles. He, not only
in the words quoted in the first Book, upon 1 Cor. XI. but upon Romans XVI. and 1
Cor. I. alleges, that, when S. Paul writ, Governors were not settled in all
Churches, acknowledging, that Presbyters were. Can he then be thought to make
Presbyters, and the Governors of Churches all one? But, Amalarius de officiis
Eccles. II. 13. (quoting things out of these his Commentaries, which now appear
not) and out of him Rabanus, upon 1 Timothy IV. 14. and Titus I. says; that they,
who, under the Apostles, had power to ordain, and are now called Bishops, were
then set over whole Provinces, by the name of Apostles, (agreeing herein with
Theodoret upon 1 Timothy III. IV. and S. Hierome upon Gal. I. and many others of
the Fathers, that extend the name of Apostles far beyond the XII.) as Timothy
in Asia, Titus in Creete; The Churches of particular Cities having their own
Presbyters to govern them, but, expecting ordinations, and the settling of the
more weighty causes, from these their superiors. These were the Presbyters
that ordained Timothy, 1 Timothy IV. 14. says Rabanus; who certainly, being
ordained to so high a charge, could not be ordained by the Presbyters of any
particular Church. Now, the successors of these Apostles or Presbyters finding
themselves inferior to their Predecessors, says he, and the same title a
burden to them, appropriated themselves the name of Bishops, which imports
care, leaving to Priests, that which imports dignity, to wit, that of
Presbyters. This, Amalarius allegeth out of the said Commentaries. Adding,
that, in process of time, through the bounty of those who had the power of
ordaining; these Bishops were settled two or three in a Province, until at
length, not only over all Cities, but, in places that needed not Bishops.
This, being partly the importance of this Authors words, partly that which
Amalarius and Rabanus gather from his meaning, gives a clear answer to all that
S. Jerome has objected out of the writings of the Apostles, to prove, that
Bishops and Presbyters are, by their institution, both one, because they are
called both by the same title. And therefore cannot, with any judgment, be
alleged to his purpose. In fine, the same Author upon Ephesians. IV. affirms,
that, for the propagation of Christianity, all were permitted at the first to
preach the Gospel, to Baptize, and to expound the Scriptures in the Church.
But, when Churches were settled, and Governors appointed, then order was taken,
that no man should presume to execute that office, to which he was not
ordained. By whom I beseech you, but by the same, who had formerly allowed and
trusted all Christians, with all offices, which the propagation of the common
Christianity required? Even the Apostles and Disciples, and their companions
and assistants, in whom, that part of power rested, which the Apostles had
endowed them with; until, Bishops being settled over all Churches, they might
truly be said to succeed the Apostles in the Government of their respective
Churches, though, no body can pretend to succeed them in that power over all
Churches that belonged to their care, which, the agreements passed between the
Apostles, must needs allow each one. Nor need I deny that, which sometimes the
Fathers affirm, that even Presbyters succeed the Apostles. For, in the Churches
of Barnabas, and Saul's founding, Act. XIV. 28. while they had no Governors but
Apos^les and Presbyters; it is manifest, that the Presbyters did whatsoever
they were able to do as Lieutenants of the Apostles, and in their stead. But,
shall any man in^^rre thereupon, that they who say this, allow Presbyters to do
whatsoever the Apostles could do, seeing them limited, as I have said, by the
Authors which I allege? For, what if my Author say, upon Ephesians. IV. that at the
first, the Elders of the Presbyters succeeded upon the Bishops decease? Shall
the rule of succession make any difference in the power to which he succeeds?
Or, both acknowledge the Laws, which, they that order both shall have
appointed, even the Apostles? Let S. Hierome then, (and whosoever prefers S.
Hieroms arguments before that evidence which the practice of the Church
creates) have leave to dispute, out of the Scriptures, the beginning of Bishops
from the authority of the Church, which, neither S. Hierome, nor any man else
could ever have brought the whole Church to agree in, had not the Apostles
order gone before, for the ground of it; provided that the love of his opinion
carry him not from the unity of the Church, as it did Aerius: (For, he that
says, that this ought to be a Law to the Church, need not say, that every
Christian is bound, upon his salvation, to believe, that it ought to be a Law
to the Church) so long as the succession of the Apostles is upon record in the
Church, in the persons of single Bishops, by whom the Tradition of faith was
preserved, according to Irenaeus and Tertullian, the unity of the Church,
according to Opta^us and S. Austine; What wilfulness can serve to make all
Presbyters equal in that power, which, all the acts whereby the unity of the
Church has been really maintained, evidently challenge to the pre-eminence of
their Bishops above them, in their respective Churches? The constitution of the
whole Church out of all Churches, as members of the whole, will necessarily
argue a pre-eminence of Power in the Bishop above his Presbyters, not to be
derived from any agreement of the Church; but, from the appointment of the
Apostles. In the mean time, suppo^^ng the whole Church to agree in that, which
God had enabled them to agree in, having not tied them to the contrary, but
having tied them to live in vi^^ble unity and communion, all Churches with all
Churches; they that depart from this Unity upon this account, shall be no less
Schisma^^cks, then, had the Superiority of Bishops been settled by the Apostles.
This is that which I come to in the next place.

CHAP. XVIII. The Apostles all of oequall power; S. Peter only chief in
managing it. The ground for the pre-^minence of Churches, before and over
Churches. Of Alexandria, Antiochia, Jerusalem and Rome. Ground for the
pre-eminence of the Church of Rome, before all Churches. The consequence of
that Ground. A summary of the evidence for it.
SOme consideration I must now bestow upon that Position, which derives a
Monarchy over the Church from S. Peter's privileges. For, I make no scruple to
grant, that he was indeed the first and chief of the Apostles, as he is
reckoned in the Gospels, Mat. X. 2. Mar. III. 16. Luke VI. 14. and that, in
likelihood, because he was the first in leaving all to adhere unto our Lord* as
the man to whom our Lords call is directed, Luke V. 4-11. though he was first
brought to our Lord by bis brother Andrew, as Philip once brought Nathanael
that was not of the twelve, John I. 41-46. so that this first call gave them
acquaintance, but made them not Apostles. And, from this beginning, we may well
draw the reason, why S. Peter is always the forwardest to answer our Lords
demands, and to speak in the name of his fellows, Mat. XIV. 28. XV. 25. XVI.
16. XVII. 24. XVIII. 21. XIX. 27. XXVI. 33. Mar. VIII. 29. X. 28. XI. 21. XIV.
29. Luke VIII. 45. IX. 20. XII. 41. XVIII. 28. XXII. 34. Joh. VI. 68. XIII. 6.
Act. I. 13. 15. II. 14. 37. IV. 8. which, it would not become the reverence we
owe the Apostles, so impute to S. Peter's sorwardnesse, without acknowledging
the ground of it, being visible. But, these privileges will not serve to make
S. Peter Sovereign over the Apostles; The stress lies upon Mat. XVI. 16-19. And
Simon Peter answered and said; Thou ar^ the Christ, the Son of the living God.
And Jesus answered and said to him Blessed art thou Simon Son of Jonas, for
flesh and blood has not revealed this to thee, but my Father in the heavens.
And I say to thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give
thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest on earth,
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou loosest on earth shall be loose
in the heaven. And upon John XXI. 15. 16, 17. where S. Peter, thrice professing
to love Christ, receives of him thrice the command of, Feeding his sheep. But
will this serve the turn ever a whit more? It must be either by virtue of the
matter which our Lord says, of or to S. Peter; or, by virtue of his saying it
to S. Peter, and to none else. Against this later consideration, I conceive, I
have provided by the premises. For, seeing there is a sufficient reason to be
given otherwise, why S. Peter answers before the rest, when our Lord demand;
whom they acknowledge him to be; the reply of our Lord, addressed to him alone,
will give him no more then the precedence, not the Sovereignty over the
Apostles. Which is still more evident in S. John, because, S. Peter having
undertaken before the rest to stand to our Lord in the utmost of all his
trialls, had deserted him most shamefully of them all, denying, udder an oath,
to have any knowledge of him. For, it is not observed for nothing, that he
professes the love of Christ thrice. Let S. Peter then be the Prince Apostle,
or the chief Apostle, let him be, if you please, the Prince of the Apostles,
there will be found a wide distance between Princeps Apostolorum in Latin, as
some of the Fathers have called him, and Sovereign over the Apostles. When
Augustus seized into ^is hand the sovereign Power of the Roman Empire, nomine
Principis, as we read the beginning of Tacitus, under the title of Prince; He
was well aware, that, the Title which he assumed, did not necessarily proclaim
him Sovereign, which he de^^red not to do.

As for the ^a^er of our Lords words, those that fear where there is no fear,
will have our Lord say; that he builds his Church upon the Faith of S. Peter,
prof^ssing our Lord to be Christ; Or, to point at himself, when he says; Upon
this Rock will I build my Church. But what needs it? Says he any more to S.
Peter, then S. Paul says to the Ephesians, II. 20. Built upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner
stone? Or S. John of the new Jerusalem, Revel. XXI. 14. And the wall of the
City had twelve foundations, upon which were the names of the XII Apostles of
the Lamb? How then shall S. Peter be Sovereign by virtue of an attribute
common to him, with the rest of the Apostles? Some conceive, that, when our
Lord proceeds to tell him, that, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
the Church; He mean^ no more, but that he will rescue his from death, by
raising them again. But, raising from death, implies raising from sin in the
Old Testament, expresses it in the New; And, the City of God, which is the
Church, in the New Testament, referrs to the City of Satan that oppugneth it;
And therefore, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; Cannot signify
less then a promise, that the Church shall continue till our Lords second
coming to judgment, notwithstanding the malice of Satan and his accomplices.
But, S. Peter is not the only foundation of it, though no body else be named
here. Again, our Lord gives S. Peter the Keys of his Church here, as in S.
John, he commands him to feed his flock; But is the office of feeding Christ's
flock S. Peter's peculiar? Have not the Apostles the charge of it, even from our
Lord? do they do it by virtue of S. Peter's commission, or by his appointment?
How are they Christ's Apostles otherwise? As for the Keys of the Church, they
are given to S. Peter here, they are given to the Twelve, by the power of
remitting and retaining sins, as I have showed John XX. 21. 22, 23. by the
power of binding and loosing, they are given to the Church, Mat. XVIII. 18.
And, can any man make S. Peter Sovereign over the Apostles and over the Church,
by virtue of that which is no privilege of his, the rest of the Apostles and
the Church being all endowed with it? Hear we not what S. Luke says, Act.
VIII. 14. The Apostles at Jerusalem, hearing that Samaria had received the word
of God, sent to them Peter and John? Can S. Peter go upon commission from the
Apostles, who gives the Apostles the commission they have? Those that preached
circumcision at Antiochia, had no commission for it from the Church at
Jerusalem, Act. XV. 24. It must have been from S. Peter, if that Church had
acted then by virtue of his Commission: But he was present, and is signified,
as one of them that writ these words. Let any man stand upon it that will, that
the false Apostles, whom S Paul writes against, 2 Cor. XI. 13. pretended
commission from S. Peter, because of the opposition which they made between him
on the one side, and S Paul and Apollos on the other side; 2 Cor. I. 12.
(Though I showed you beter reason before, that they pretended that commission
from the Apostles, which they disowned Acts XV. 24.) It is easy for me to say,
that they pretended not S. Peter's name as Sovereign over the Apostles, but as
founder of the Church of Corinth, as well as S. Paul, which Dionysius of
Corinth in Eusebius witnesses. Whereas, when S. Paul pleads his Commission of
Apostle from God, and not from man, Gal. I. 1. II. 6, 9. and that, in express
opposition to S. James and S. John, as well as to S. Peter, it is manifest,
that they, as well as S. Peter, might have pretended to give it, had he not
been an Apostle, but, being an Apostle, none but our Lord Christ. And
therefore, when he resists S. Peter, and reproves him to the face, Gal. II.
11-14. understand this resistance and reproof as you please, whither true or
colorable; had S. Peter been Monarch, it had not been for an Apostle, to
color his proceeding with a pretense, inferring rebellion against his
Sovereign. Wherefore, there may be lesand greater Apostles, for person^ble
quali^ies; And S. Paul, that is the least of them for his calling, may be
inferior to none, for his labors, 1 Cor. XV. 9. 10. 2 Cor. XI. 5. XII. 11.
12. Nay, S. Peter may have a standing pre-eminence, of Head of the Bench, to
avoid confusion, and to create order in their proceedings, and yet their
commission be immediate from our Lord, and the matter of it, and the power it
creates, the same for substance.

Having thus destroyed this ground, upon which, some people claim a Monarchy
over the Church for the Pope, by the scriptures, (without seeking for other
exceptions, to the pretense that may be made to the same purpose, from the
Tradition of the Catholic Church.) I proceed to setle the ground of that
eminence and superiority, which, I conceive, some Churches have over others,
for the unity of the whole Church: Because, of necessity, the reason and ground
upon which it stands, must be the measure of it, how far it extends: And, the
positive truth thereof, will be negatively, an exception to that Sovereignty,
which the Bishop of Rome, by the succession of S. Peter, pretends: I say
then, that the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord Christ, intending to convert
the World to the Faith, and to establish one Church of all that should be
converted to it, did agree and appoint, that the Churches of the chief Cities
should be the chief Churches; and that the Churches of inferior Cities should
depend upon them, and have recourse to them in all things that might concern
the common Christianity; (whither in the Rule of Faith, or in the Unity of the
Church in the offices of Gods service) reserving unto themselves the ordering
of those things, which, being of less moment, might concern their own peace
and good order, rather then the interesse of other Churches. I do not pretend
to produce any act under the Apostles hands, in which this conclusion is
signed; but, to proceed upon the principles premised, to argue, and to infer,
that those things which I shall evidently show, have passed in the Church,
could not otherwise have come to pass; unless we could suppose, that a
constant order, which has wholly taken place in the Church ever since the
Apostles, could have prevailed over those infinite ways which confusion might
have imagined, had there been no ground from whence this certain order should
rise. And here, I do profess, that, if any man will needs be contentious, and
say, that this order came not in by the appointment of the Apostles themselves;
(because, during their time, the probability of converting the Roman Empire,
and other Nations to Christianity, could not appear, and, that it does not
appear by any circumstance of Scripture, that the Spirit of Prophesy was given
them to such purposes) I will rather grant all this, then contend about those
terms which I need not insist upon; though I do firmly believe, that, before
all the Apostles left the World, the conversion of the Gentiles was their
design, and the design of their successors: But, I will provide on the other
side, that, whither the Apostles themselves, or their companions and
successors, in whom the power of governing the whole Church was as fully to all
purposes, as in the Apostles themselves; (for, though they might be assisted by
the Gift of Prophesy in those occasions, as it is probable they were at the
Council of Jerusalem, Acts XV. yet must their authority proceed, whether so
assisted or not) the obligation upon the Church must needs remain the same, to
cherish and maintain that Order which once might have been established by them;
the Unity of the Church, which is the end of it, not being otherwise attainable.

And, upon this ground, I maintain, that the Churches of Rome, Alexandria and
Antiochia, had from the beginning a privilege of eminence above other
Churches; For, Rome being the seat of the Empire, Alexandria and Antiochia,
which had formerly been the Seats of the Successors of Ptolomee in Egypt and
Seleucus in Asia, having, from their first coming under the Roman Empire, had
their pe^uliar Governors; it is no marvail, if the Churches founded in them,
held their peculiar privileges and eminences, over the Churches of their
resorts, from the very founding of Christianity in these mother Cities, and the
propagating of it from thence into inferior Cities, and thence over the
confines. And this is the only reason that can be rendered, why the Church of
Jerusalem, which, in respect of the first abode of the Apostles, and the
propagation of Christianity, is justly counted the mother of all Churches; and,
which gave law to that of Antiochia, and the rest that were concerned in the
same dispute with it; and, during the Apostles time, received oblations of
maintenance from the Churches of the Gentiles; became afterward inferior to
these, and in particular to that of Antiochia. But, he that shall compare these
Cities, and the greatness of them, and eminence over their respective
Territories, with that of Rome, not only over the rest of the Empire, but over
those Cities, with find it consequent to the ground of this design, not that
the Church of Rome should be Sovereign over the Churches of these Cities; (For,
that were inconsequent to the power of the Apostles, whence it proceeds,
(who, as I have proved, were equal among themselves) and the authority of
their companions and successors, into whom it stood immediately divided) But,
that it should have that eminence ov^r them, (and by consequence, much more
over the Churches of inferior Cities) as is requisite to the directing of such
matters, as might come to be of common interesse to the whole Church, to such an
agreement as might preserve the unity thereof, with advantage to the common
Christianity. Now, when I name these Churches, of Antiochia and Alexandria, for
examples sake; supposing, that the Churches of the chief Cities of other
Provinces of the Empire, had also their eminence over the Churches of inferior
Cities within the said Provinces; I suppose also, that they, accordingly,
approached to the dignity and privileges of that at Rome; the power of
obliging the whole (which, for the State, under God, rested then in the
Emperor alone within the Empire) rosting, for the Church, in the successors of
the Apostles, according to this weight and greatness of their Churches. For,
though Tertulliane, de praescrip. Haerct. cap. XXXVI. challenges, that the
very Chairs which the Apostles sat in, the very authentic leters which they
sent to the Churches of Corinth, Thessalonica, Philippi, and Ephesus, were
extant in his time in the said Churches; yet does it not therefore follow, that
the privileges of those Churches should be all the same, with all Churches
wherein the Apostles sat; which would necessarily follow, if nothing were to
come into consideration, but, that they were founded by the Apostles
themselves. For, supposing that the Apostles themselves (or their companions
and successors, endowed with the same Power; as, not confined by any act of the
Apostles, under whom they claimed, to the contrary) appointed, that regard
should be had to the privilege of the Cities wherein they were planted; it
follows of reason, that S. Peter for the Jews, and S. Paul, for the Gentiles,
(at least principally) should make it their business to plant Chistianity, and
to found the Church of Rome: And, that the eminence of these Apostles, (one
chief by our Lords choice, the other eminent for his labors) may very well be
alleged for the privileges of that Church, and yet the consequence not hold in
other Churches, for which it may be alleged, that they were the seats of
Apostles; because, the reason for which these Apostles bestowed their pains
there has a reason for it; to wit, the eminence of that City.

Here, you easily see, that, deriving the pre-eminence of the Church of Rome,
not from S. Peter's personal pre-eminence only, (which, it would be impossible
to show how it comes intailed upon that Church, the pre-eminence of the
Apostles not resting in all their Churches) but from an Order given out by the
Apostles, advancing the privileges of Churches, according the secular eminence
of Cities; I say, you easily see, that, the concurrence of S. Paul, with S.
Peter, to the founding of it, is a confirmation of that ground, whereupon the
preeminence thereof stands; whereas, that opinion which derives it only from
the personal eminence of S. Peter, admits not the concurrence of S. Paul, to
the constitution of this pre-eminence. Wheresoever therefore you find S. Peter
and S. Paul acknowledged joint founders thereof, in the writings of the
Fathers, all that must be understood, to setle the opinion which I here
advance, and to destroy that plea, which derives it from the Sovereign power of
S. Peter, over the rest of the Apostles. And Epiphanius is not the only author
where you find it, the disputes of these times will afford you more then this
abridgement can receive. But, I conceive, I have made a fair way to the ground
for it, by observing some probabilities, that S. Paul should be head of those
that turned Christians of Jews, as S. Peter, of Gentiles, at Rome: Which I will
here confirm, by expounding the inscription of Ignatius his Epistle to the
Romans, according to it, oth^rwise not to be understood. It addresseth to the
Church, (...), Which governs in the place of the fields at Rome. The word
(...) is here used, as many times besides, speaking of those places which a man
would neither call Cities nor Towns, as Act. XXVII. 2. (...), being to sail by
the places of Asia. (...), it is plain, signifies the Country, (...) then must
necessarily signify here the Vaticane, lying in the fields, as a suburb to
Rome, and being the place where S. Peter was buried, and where the Jews of Rome
then dwelt, as we learn by Philo, Legatione ad Caium, speaking of Augustus;
(...). He knew that great quarter of Rome, which is beyond the River Tiber, to
be held and inhabitated by Jews, most of whom were Romans, and Libertines.
For, being brought captives into Italy, they were set free by their Masters,
without constraining them to adulterate any of their Country Laws. Hereupon,
the Synagogue of the Libertines, Act. VI. 9. is, the Synagogue of the Roman
Jews. Now S. Peter's Church we know, is to this day in the Vaticane, as S. Paul's
in the way to Ostia, as from the beginning, we understand by Caius in Eusebius,
Hist. Eccles. II. 25. the places of their burials were. Which circumstance
points them out Heads, the one of the Jewish Christians at Rome; the other, of
those that were converted being Gentiles. For, that the Vaticane was then the
Jewry at Rome, we learn also by Tully, in his Oration pro Flacco; where he
complains that his cause was heard in the fields of M ars, prope gradus
Aurelios, that the Jews, who were offended at Flaccus, for prohibiting them to
send their oblations to Jerusalem, when he was Governor of Asia, might come in
and discountenance the cause. For plainly, this was hard by the Bridge that
passed out of those fields into the Vaticane, where the Gate called Porta
Aurelia stood, (hard by S. Peter's Church) to which Gate, it seems, there were
steps to go up, which he calls there gradus Aurelios.

It is also easy to see, that this supposition draws the ground and reason
of the Superiority of Churches originally, from the act of Temporal Power,
which constituteth the eminence of Cities over other Cities; But nevertheless,
immediately, from the act of the Church (or of those that have authority to
oblige the Church) taking the Superiority of Cities, as it is, for the most
reasonable ground of planting in them the most eminent Churches; but, by their
own authority providing, that so it be observed. Therefore, it is to be
considered, that the Church is, (by Gods command, howsoever by his promise) to
continue one and the same till the coming of our Lord unto judgment; But, the
dominion of this World, upon which the greatness of Cities is founded,
changes, as Gods providence appoints: Besides that change which Temporal Power,
remaining in the same hands, is able to produce within its own dominions. The
consequence of which consideration will be this, that, where Temporal Power
makes such a change in the state of those Cities which are the seats of
Churches, that, the Government and advancement of Christianity either may
proceed, changing the privileges of the Churches, or cannot proceed otherwise;
there the Church either may, or ought to transfer the pre-eminences of
Churches from City to City: And therefore, that, where the case is otherwise,
the Church is not bound, upon every act of Temporal Power, to proceed to any
change. If this seem obscure, being thus generally said, let not the Reader
despair, before we have done, to find instances in things that have come to
pass, not only to clear my meaning, but also to evidence the reason upon which
I proceed. It is likewise easy for him that considers this supposition, and
the effect and consequence of it, to see, that it gives no Jurisdiction to the
Church of Rome, (much less to the Head thereof, in behalf of it) over other
Churches, then those which resort immediately to it, (as every Diocese is
concluded by the mother Church, and every Province by the Synod of it) much
less the Power of giving Law to the whole, but by the act of those Synods,
whereof the whole consists; or, of judging any appeal that may be brought to
it; But it makes the Church of Rome, as other Head Churches, the center, to
which, the causes that concern, first the Western Churches in particular, then
the whole, are to resort, that they may find issue, and be decided, by the
consent, and, to the unity of all whom they concern. It is also easily to be
observed, that this eminence of the greatest Churches over their inferiors,
(which, originally, is no further defined and limited, then, the consequence of
this ground, in respect of the rest of Christendom required) might lawfully be
defined and limited further, either by s^lent custom, or by express law of the
Church consenting, at lea^^^^ ^ffect and practice; (which is the only real
positive Law that rules all Societies) Whereby new rights and privileges might
come to the Church of Rome, as well as to other Churches, which might also be
for the good of the whole, in ^^intaining the unity of the Church, together
with the common interest of Christianity. But I deny not on the other side,
that this Power, the beginning whereof is so necessary and just, the intent so
excellent, by the change of the world, and the state of things in it, may be so
inhansed, that, though it do provide for the unity of the Church, yet it shall
not provide for the interess of Chistianity. But of this, and the consequence
of it, in due time.

For the present, the reason upon which my position, the effect and consequence
whereof I have hitherto set forth, is grounded, is the effect of it, in all
proceedings of the Church, recorded, first in the Scriptures, and afterward in
Church Writers, as they succeed; those that I must here principally consider,
being the very same that I considered in the first Book, to make evidence of
the being of the Church, in point of fact, as a body, out of which now, the
right which held it together, as the soul, must appear: Adding the
consideration of such eminent passages in succeeding times, as may serve to the
same purpose. I will not here repeat the marks of it, which I have produced out
of the Scriptures, in the right of the Church, Chap. II. For, the dependence of
Churches is part of this position, as an ingredient, without which, the unity
of the whole is not attainable. I will only add here the consideration of
that which I alleged in the first Book, out of S. John's last Epistle, 5-10.
Some have thought it so strange, that Diotrephes and his faction should not
acknowledge those that were recommended by S. John an Apostle, that they have
rather entitled the Epistle to a successor of his, in the Church of Ephesus,
whose Tomb S. Jerome saw there, besides S. John the Apostle, whom Papias
called John the elder, as he is called in the beginning of these two Epistles,
Hieron. Catal. in Johanne and Papia, Ens. Ecclesiast. Hist. II. 25. But, he
that considers what S. Paul writes to the Corinthians, of his adversaries
there, will not marvail, that S. John should find opposition at the hands of
Diotrephes, aspiring to the Bishopric, by banding a faction against the Jewish
Christians, whom, it appears sufficiently, that S. John cherished. And
therefore, the mark here set upon Diotrephes, is not for introducing
Episcopacy, as the Presbyterians would have it, but for disobeying the
superior Church, whereof S. John was head, to the indangering of Unity in the
Whole. For, could Diotrephes hope to make himself Bishop in his own Church,
when no body was Bishop in any Church besides? Or might not Diotrephes hope to
do it, by heading a party, that disallowed compliance with Judaism at that
time? If then, the Apostles provided not that the Church should continue
always one, if this Unity was not always maintained, by the dependence of
Churches; let this reproof have no effect in any succeeding time of the Church.
But, if the eminence of S. John's Church, above the neighbor Churches in
ensuing ages, was a necessary ingredient to the unity of the whole; then be it
acknowledged, that S. John's successors might lay the blame of Diotrephes his
ambition upon any successor of his that should follow it.

Before I go any further, I will here allege those Fathers which do teach, that
our Lord gave S. Peter the Keys of his Church, in the person of the Church,
and, as the figure of it: Namely, S. Cyprian, Pacianus, S. Hierom, S.
Augustine, and Optatus, whose words I will not here write out, to inflame the
bulk of this Book, because you have them in the Archbishop of Spalato, de Rep.
Eccl. 1. VII. 17-29. VIII. 8. 9. Adding only to them, S. Ambrose de dignitate
Sacerdotali, cap. 1. affirming, that, in S. Peter. the Keys of the Kingdom of
heaven are given to all Priests: And cap. II. speaking of the words of our Lord
to S. Peter; Feed my sheep; Quas oves, and quem gregem, non solum tunc beatus
suscepit Petrus, sed and nobiscum eas suscepit, and cum illo eas nos suscepimus
omnes. Which sheep, and which flock, not only S. Peter then undertook, but
also he with us, and with him we all undertook them. And venerable Bede upon
the words of our Lord, Tell the Church; Haec potestas sanctae Ecclesiae
Episcopis specialiter commissa est, generaliter vero omni Ecclesiae data
creditur. Nam quod dominus alibi hanc ligandi solvendique potestatem Petro
tribuit, utique in Petro, qui typum gerebat Ecclesiae, omnibus Apostolis hoc
concessisse non dubitatur. The power of the Keys is committed especially to the
Bishops of the Holy Church, but is believed to be given generally to every
Church. For, whereas, our Lord elsewhere gives unto S. Peter this power of
binding and loosing, there is no doubt that, in Peter, bearing the form of the
Church, he gave it to all the Apostles. Proceeding to allege S. Jerome, and S.
Augustine to the same purpose. And upon the words of our Lord, Feed my sheep;
Quod Petro dictum est, omnibus Christi discipulis dictum est. Hoc namque
fuerunt caeteri Apostoli quod Petrus fuit, pastores sunt omnes, grex unus
ostenditur, qui and ab Apostolis tunc unanimi consensu pascebatur, and deincep^
a successoribus eorum communi cura pascitur. That which is said to Peter, is
said to all Christ's Disciples. For what Peter was, that were the rest of the
Apostles. They are all shepherds, but the flock appears to be but one, which,
as then, it was fed by the Apostles with unanimous consent, so is it since fed
by their successors with common care. These Fathers then, when they give this
for the reason, why our Lord gives Peter only the Keys of the Church, with the
charge of feeding his flock; that he bore the person and form of the Church;
suppose the Church to be a body compacted of all Churches, (ruled by the same
form of Government, for the preserving of unity in the whole) as the college
of the Apostles consists of so many persons endowed all with one and the same
power, for whom one answers, to signify the unity of the whole. Whereby it
appears, first, negatively; That the Church did uot understand any Sovereign
Power to be committed to S. Peter by these words: Then positively, that our
Lord, speaking to him alone, signifies there by the course which he has
established for preserving unity in the Church; To wit, that, all Churches
being governed in the same form, the greater go before the less in ordering
matters of common concernment. S. Cypriane, from whom all the rest have this
doctrine, has cleared the intent of it, when he thus writes, Epist. ad Jubai,
LXXII. Manifestum est autem ubi and per quos remissa peccatorum datur, quae in
baptismo, scilicet, da^ur. Nam Petro primum dominus, super quem aedificavit
Ecclesiam, and unde unitatis originem instituit and ostendit, potestatem istam
dedit, ut id solveretur in caelis quod ipse solvisset in terris. Et post
resurrectionem quoque ad Apostolos loquitur dicens; Sicut misit me Pater, and
ego mitto vos: Hoc cum dixisset, inspiravit, and a^t illis; Accipite spiritum
sanctum: Si cujus remiseritis peccata remittentur illi, si cujus tenueritis,
tenebuntur. Unde intelligimus, non nisi in Ecclesi^ praepositis, and in
Evangelica lege dominica ordinatione fundatis licere baptizare, and remissam
peccatorum dare. Now it is manifest, where, and by whom remission of sins is
given, when it is given in Baptism. For, our Lord first gave to Peter ( upon
whom he built his Church, and in whom, and from whom he instituted and declared
the original of unity in it) this power, that it should be loosed in heaven,
whatsoever he had loosed on earth. And after his resurrection also, speaking to
the Apostles, he says; As my Father sent me, so send I you. And having said
this he breathed on them, saying; If ye remit any man's sins, they shallbe
remitted him; if ye retain any man's, they shall be retained. Whence we
understand, that it is not lawful for any but those that are set over the
Church, and grounded in the Evangelical Law, and the Ordinance of our Lord, to
baptize, and give remission of sins. Because Peter received the Keys,
therefore all and every Church, that is, those that are over it, and none else,
can give remission of sins by admitting to Baptism. Shall we think the
consequence extravagant, having so clear a ground for it; to wit, the unity of
the whole Church, settled upon two ingredients, the same form in all Churches,
but with dependence of the less upon the greater Churches? If any man say, all
this is disputed by Cypriane, to prove that Baptism given by Heretics is void;
wherein he has been disowned by the Church; And that therefore the reasons are
not well grounded from whence it is inferred: The answer is easy, because he
inferrs upon them that, which, though true, they do not enforce. That a man
cannot lawfully baptize, is not so much, as that, if he do baptize, his Baptism
is void. S. Cypriane took both for one, and therefore his reason is good,
though it conclude not his purpose. Why not void, being unlawful. I refer my
self to what S. Augustine since has disputed, and the Church decreed and
practiced. And here you have one ground for that distinction between the Power
of Order, and the Power of Jurisdiction, comparing one with another, the
Bishops and Priests of several Churches, according to the original constitution
of the Church. I allow S. Hierome to say, that wheresoever there is a Bishop,
whither at Rome, or at Eugubium (an obscure City near Rome) he is of the same
worth, as of the same Priesthood, Epist. LXXXV. For, as to the inward Court of
the conscience, the office that is Ministered by the Bishop or Priest of a less
Church, is no less effectual, then by one of a greater Church. But, as to the
outward Court of the Church, supposing all Churches governed in the same form,
but the Churches of less Cities subordinate to the Churches of greater Cities,
by the appointment of the Apostles; the act of the less Church, of the Bishop
or a Priest of it, cannot be of that consequence to the whole, as the act of
the greater Church: And so, though the Bishop or the Priest of a little Church
be of the same Order with the Bishop or Priest of a great Church; yet, the
authority of the one extends without comparison further then the authority of
the other can do. And, you may perhaps dispute, whether this authority produce
any such as Jurisdiction or not; but, whether there be ground hereupon, to
distinguish between the Order, which is the same in both, and the authority
which it creates, in which there is so great difference, you cannot dispute.
Certainly, the office of a Deacon in a greater Church, may be of more
consequence to the whole, then many Bishops can bring to pass. As the
assistance of Athanasius in the office of a Deacon, to Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, at the Council of Nicaea, was of more consequence to the obtaining
of the decree of the Council, then the votes of many Bishops there.

CHAP. XIX. Of the proceedings about Marcion and Montanus at Rome. The
business of Pope Victor about keeping Easter; a peremptory instance. The
business of the Novatians evidenceth the same. Of the businesses concerning
the rebaptizing of Heretics, Dionysius of Alexandria, Paulus Samosatenus, S.
Cypriane, and, of the Donatists under Constantine.
AMongst the proceedings of the Church, I will first allege that of the Church
of Rome, in refusing Marcion her communion, because excommunicated by his own
Father the Bishop of Sinope in Pontus, in bar to the pretense of Sovereignty in
the Church of Rome. For, if Marcions Father, Bishop of Synope in Pontus, if
Synesius Bishop of Ptolomais in Cyrenaica, could oblige the Church of Rome and
all Churches, not to admit unto the communion of the Church, those whom they
had excluded, because the unity of the whole could not be preserved otherwise;
then is not the infinite Power of one Church, but the regular Power of all, the
mean which the Apostles provided, for the attaining of Unity in the whole. Not
as if the Church of Rome might not have admitted Marcion to communion with it
self, had it appeared, that he had been excluded without such a cause, as
obliged any Church to excommunicate. For, in doubtful causes, the concernment
being general, it was very regular to have recourse to the chief Churches, by
the authority whereof, the consent of the rest might be obtained. But, could it
have appeared, that such a thing had been done without any cause, then would it
have been regular for any Church, to have no regard to such a sentence. In the
next place, the consideration of Montanus his business at Rome, there
alleged, shall evidence some part of my intent. Being condemned and refused by
the Bishops and Churches of Asia, he sends to Rome, to solicit a higher
Church, and of more consequence to the whole, to own the spirit by which he
pretended to speak, and to admit those stricter orders which he pretended to
introduce. A pretense for those that would have the Pope Sovereign; but not so
good as they imagine, unless they could make it appear, that he made the like
address to no other Church but that of Rome. For my part, finding, in other
occasions, frequent and plentiful remembrance of recourse had to other
Churches, as well as to Rome, in matters of common concernment; I find it
necessary, to impute the silence of his other addresses, to the scarcity of
records left the Church: Not doubting that he, and the Churches of Phrygia
engaged with him, would do their utmost to promote the credit of his
Prophesies, by persuading all Churches, to admit the Orders which he pretended
to introduce. And, how much greater the authority of the Church of Rome was,
then that of an ordinary Church, so much more had he prevailed by gaining it.
That no man may imagine, that all lay in it; nor yet, that the consent of it
signified no more then the consent of every Church. For, consider the Church of
Carthage, and the choler of Tertullian, expressed in the beginning of his Book
de Exhortatione Castitulis, against Pope A^phyrine, for admitting adulterers to
Penance. And, in consequence thereunto, consider what we have upon record of
Historical truth from S. Jerome, Catal. in Tertull. and the authorities quoted
before; that Tertullian, falling to the Doctrine of Montanus, upon affronts
received from the Clergy of Rome, set up a communion of his own at Carthage,
which continued till S. Augustines time, by whom, his followers were reduced to
the Catholic Church. For, what occasion had Tertullian to break from the
Church of Carthage, because of the affront received from the Church of Rome, in
rejecting Montanus, had not the Church of Carthage followed the Church of Rome
in it?

The same is the consequence of that which passed in that famous debate of
Victor Pope, about breaking with the Churches of Asia, because they kept not
Easter on the Lords day, as most Churches did; but, with the Jews, observing
the Passion upon the full Moon, celebrated the Resurrection of third day after
that. For, might, not, or, ought not the Church of Rome, refuse to communicate
with these Churches, had the cause been valuable? In case of Heresy, in case of
any demand destructive to the unity of the Church; you will say, that, not
only the Church of Rome, but any Church whatsoever, both might and ought to
disclaim the Churches of Asia. But I have to say again, that, in any such case,
there is a difference between that which is questioned for such, and that which
is such, and ought to be taken for such: And, that nothing can lightly be
presumed to be such, that any Church seems to profess; But that, in reducing
such unavoidable debates, from questionable, to be determined, the authority
the chief Churches is, by the constitution of the Church, requisite to go
before, and make way toward obtaining the consent of the whole. And, that it
cannot be thought, that Victor would have undertook such a thing, had it not
belonged to him, in behalf of his Church, to declare himself in the business,
in case there had been cause. All this while, I would not have any man imagine,
that, Victor having withdrawn his communion from the Churches of Asia, the rest
of Christendom were necessarily to think themselves obliged to do the same. It
is true, there were two motives that might carry Victor to do it. For, seeing
the Council of Nicaea did afterward decree the same, that he labored to
induce the Churches of Asia to, it is too late to dispute, whither side was in
the right; For, that which was for the advancement of Christianity, at the time
of that Council, was certainly for the advancement thereof, at the time of this
dispute: And, though in S. John's time it might be, and was without doubt for
the best, to comply with the Jews in matters of that indifference, for the
gaining of opportunities to induce them to become Christians; yet, when the
breach between the Synagogue and the Church was once complete, that reason
being taken away, the reason of uniformity in the Church, upon which the unity
thereof so much nependeth, was to take place. And therefore a man may say, with
respect to those Churches, that the zeal of their Predecessors credit, seduced
them into that contentiousnesse which humane frailty ingendreth: And those
that, after the decree of the Council, persevered in the same practice, are not
without cause listed among Heretics, taking that name largely to comprehend
also Schismatics. So I allow, that Victor had just cause to insist upon his
point. But it is also ^vident, that it would have been an increase of authority
and credit to Victor, and to his Church, to seem to give law to those
Churches, by reducing them to his Rule. For, reputation and credit with the
world, necessarily follows those that prevail. And, Victor, being a man, as I
have granted his adversaries were, might be moved with this advantage, as much
as with the right of his cause. But, though I allow, that Victor had reason to
insist upon his opinon, yet I do no way allow that he had reason to interrupt
the communion of the Church, because those of Asia did not yield to it; The
matter it self not being of consequence to produce such an effect, no^,
uniformity in all things necessary, though conducing to the unity of the
Church. And therefore, I do no way allow, that other Churches could be obliged
to follow the Church of Rome in this sentence; the unity of the Church, which
is the end, being of nearer interest and concernment to them all, then the
authority of Victor, or of his Church, or then uniformity in this point, which
is but the mean to obtain it. Which as it is true, so was it indeed the reason
that Irenaeus alleged to Victor, ^o divert him from that resolution, in
Eusebius, Eccl. Hist.* V. 25. 26. where you may see, that his credit, and the
credit of the rest of those that held communion with both, prevailed to void
those leters which Victor had issued, to break of communion with the Churches
of Asia. And therefore, I cannot wish to show you better marks, both of the
dependence of Churches, and the superiority of the Church of Rome; and also,
that this superiority was regular (and not sovereign as that of a Monarch) when
the greatest of inferior Churches have recourse and respect to it as the
center of their communion; and yet do not absolutely give up themselves to
yield to the authority of it, as they do to the sentence of the Council of
Ni^aea, because it could not be reasonable for the Churches of Asia to stand
out with it: Whereby you see the difference, between the authority of the Pope,
and the authority of a general Council.

The business of Novatianus will not require many words, to evidence the same
consequence by it. The Church of Rome it self was the seat of the business,
and the calamity thereof, suffering a Schism within her own bowels, the
occasion of it. And, I appeal to the experience of the world, whither intestine
dissension do not discover the respect all men owe to their Neigbours, by the
need they have of them, for the composing of it. But, not to speak of occasion
of advantage, but of terms of right; that Church having gotten two Heads,
Cornelius and Novatianus, who was then judge, which side ought to be accounted
the Church of Rome, ^o that, the other party should be obliged to submit and
join with it? For, had it been a Law that obliged the whole Church, that those
who had fallen away in time of persecution, be not admitted to Penance, and, by
consequence to the communion, any more; (which was the motive and ground, why
Novatianus was made Bishop against Cornelius) certainly, the rest of the Church
must have acknowledged Novatianus, who maintained it, not Cornelius who waved
it; Notwithstanding that Cornelius was made by sixteen Bishops of the then
resort of that Church, Novatianus but by three. For, though the Canon of the
Apostles, requiring only three Bishops, or two at least, to the ordaining of a
Bishop* may very well seem to be the ancienter custom in the Church, then the
IV Canon of Nicaea, which provideth, that it be done by the consent of all the
resort, either present, or, under their hands, referring themselves to three
that are present; yet is it plain, that the act of three, o^ two at least, was
accepted upon presumption of the consent of the rest, an^ ^^^ dispatch of
business, because Ordinations would otherwise have been ^nr^^^on^bly
troublesome. But, this Canonical advantage of Cornelius* his c^use could no^
have wayed against the Novatians plea, had it been inde^d a (...) ^^ds Law to
the whole Church, that Apostates be not read^itted ^o (...)* For this, not
only the Novatians stood upon, but afterward, (...) ^^^ pers^^ution of
Diocletian, the Meletians fell away from the (...) ^o other quarrel, as you may
see by Epiphanius, Haer. LXVIII. In th^^ (...), the Authority of the rest of
the Church must have oversway* (...) of the re^ort of the Church of Rome, the
greatest part wh^^^ (...) for Cornelius. And, because it was a point hitherto
not decide^* (...) question^ble in the Church, therefore it comes to the
sentence (...)* Now it is a question, not to be answered by those who make
(...) of the Church of Rome, Monarch over the whole, how then the (...) giving
Law to that Church, should depend on other Churches, as here (...) i^ does.
For, the common intere^t of Christianity, whether in matter o^ (...) is the
ground of the dispute, or in the unity of the Church, (...) calls in
question, is that which makes the Novatians, whither (...) S^hismaticks, not
acknowledging Cornelius, after that he was a^knowle^^ (...) ^y the rest of the
Church. And, for this cause it is, that the Church o^ ^^^^ochia (that is, the
Synod whereof that Church was the He^^) (...) a return from the Church of
Rome, for the favor they did it in (...)* Corn^l^us, which they made great
difficulty to do a great while, as you (...) by that which I related in the
first Book. For, supposing that (...) of Antiochia did no more in the business
then right required; yet, (...) goes, he that has right done him, may well
acknowl^ge himself (...) that does him right. In the mean time, S. Cypriane,
and the Chur^^ (...)* with the dependences of it, declare for Cornelius from
the (...) (...), with his Church of Alexandria, and the dependences there^^
(...) ^n^ormation, are won to their side: Neither could Fabius, an^ (...)
Ch^r^^es that resorted to Antiochia have stood out, without great mischie^ ^^
^^^ whole: And therefore, what thanks soever they may deserve of the Church ^^
Rome, for doing their duty in such a distress of it; Who can say, that the
Sov^^aign Power of the Church of Rome, obliged them to make it Sovereign, de
facto, (which, being divided, de jure, it was not) when it is so evident, that
the unity o^ the Church obliged them, each in their several ranks, to concur to
that means which God had provided for the maintenance of it, by establishing
the Church of Rome in the first place?

In the business that ^ell out about rebaptizing Heretics that returned to
the Church, when we see the Church of Rome alone engaged against the Churches
of Africa* and o^ the East both, (for, you must remember what I observed before,
that, those who made the most difficulty in disowning Novatianus, were the same
that stood for rebaptizing Heretics, with the African Churches on their side)
we are ^ound to presume, that many and great Churches depended upon it, to
w^igh against so great a consent as opposed it? For, in point of fact, it is
evident, that it was the consent of the geatest part, that obliged the rest to
join with it: And, in point of right, the presumption i^ peremptory, that the
greatest part ^ould not agree to determine against Gods Law, but walked within
those bounds which God had confined his Church with. We are not then to marvail
so much at the heats which passed between Stephen, Bishop of Rome, on one side,
and S. C^prian ^or Cart^age, and Firmilianus, chief Bishop of Pontus, on the
other side. ^or it is evident, that they referred not themselves to Stephens
opinion concerning Gods Law, whose successors are now pretended infallible; And
yet, did refer themselves to the judgment of the whole Church, departing from
their rigor in consideration of it. In the mean time, it must not be
neglected, that Rome, having Dionysius of Alexandria to side with it, was able
to weigh against so great a consent; Which gives no leave to abate any thing
of the regular pre-eminence of it above other Churches. But, when we see, that
neither Rome prevailed, that no Heretics should be rebaptized, nor the adverse
party, that all; but, an abatement is made by the Council of Nicaea, in
rebaptizing Samosatenians; of Laodicea, in rebaptizing Mo^tanists; by the
Churches of Africa, (the practice whereof Optatus relates) in rebaptizing
Sabellians (to say nothing of other Rules mentioned in the first Book) did they
take, shall we say, the breast of the Pope for the cen^er of infallibility in
the Church; and the voice of the whole Church for evidence of Tradition from
the Apostles, or the sentence thereof to be without appeal in matters not
determined by it? Neither will I pass by that little that we have upon record
in the case of Dionysius of Alexandria, complained of to Dionysius of Rome, as
inclining to that which was afterward the Heresy of Arius, in things that he
had written against Sabellius; Without observing, (not, as most do, that, in so
great* a case, recourse is had to the Church of Rome, and to no Church besides
it) but that there is no remembrance left, of any recourse had to other
Churches, when as there is remembrance of the recourse that was had to the
Church of Rome, in it. For, i^ appears by the course that was held in other
cases, that the ordinary way was, to communicate matters concerning the common
interest, with as many Churches as there was convenience to do; As, expecting
re^ress by their con^urrence and assistance. And therefore, I count it
ridiculous to suppose, that a ^ater of so great concernment, was not referred
to any but the Bishop of Rome, because it is not recorded of any besides it.
For what reason or sense is there to expect, that, when we are so sc^n^ed of
records in the first ages of the Church, we should ^ind, in every particular
business, remembrance of that which was always done? But when in this, as in
all other cases which I have touched, you find recourse always had to the
Church of Rome, but very little or no mention of other Churches, (in the West
especially, though concerned in the matter as much as it) shall we not take it
for an argument, that they usually referred themselves to the Church of Rome,
expecting satisfaction in their common interests, from the trust which they
reposed in it?

In the matter of Samosatenus, there are two passages, expressly signifying the
two chief points of my position. Read the leter of the Synod, giving account of
their proceedings to all Churches, and tell me who can have the confidence to
maintain, that the force of their sentence depended only upon the Popes
allowance? It is true, the leter is written, on purpose to obtain the consent
of other Churches, by giving them account of their proceedings. For, they did
no^ presume of the justice of them, upon any visible circumstance of the
persons, place, manner or form in which they were assembled, This they expected
from the matter and ground of their sentence, and the way of proceeding to it.
But, when the same account that is given to Rome, is given to other Churches,
ev^ry one as they were of consequence to the Whole; neither can the approb^tion
of one be supposed to oblige the Whole, nor does any thing hinder it to be held
for the Head or prime part of the Whole, and of most consequence to sway the
resolution of the whole; in which, the presumption that the sentence is
according to right becomes complete, But when the secul^r Power is called upon
to give execution to it by the force of this World; Aureliane the Emperor
suspendeth his proceeding upon the resolution of Rome and Italy: Whereby he
shows, that these were held to be of most regard and consequence in matters
that concerned the whole. For, seeing Aureliane, at that time having a good
opinion of Christians (whom a while after he persecuted) determined to do them
a favor in qui^ting their differences by way of right; it cannot be imagined,
that he would take a course which they should refuse, but such as the order of
the Church, established before, did require. And therefore, the allowance of
the Bishops of Rome and Italy, is expressed for a just presumption, that an act
done by such a Synod, and afterward acknowledged by them, could not be
disowned by the rest of the Church. In the mean time, when he names the Bishops
of Rome and Italy, I must not omit an opinion that has been published many
years since, because it seems considerable. The ground whereof is this; That
Sex: Aurelius Victor, Epit. in Adrian^, reports, that, the Government of the
Roman Empire, which was afterward established by Constantine, was first
molded and framed, in the most material points of it, by Adriane. Whereupon
it becomes probable, that, when Aureliane refers himself to the judgment of
the Bishop of Rome and Italy, the meaning is, to the Bishops of Rome and
Milane, and the rest of those Churches that resorted unto Rome and Milane, as
the chief Churches upon which they depended. For, that, after Constantine,
Milane was the Head of all the rest of those Provinces of Italy that re^orted
not to the Church of Rome, it is so manifest, that I will not trouble the
Reader with proving it here again:

There are, besides, some cases mentioned in S. Cyprians Epistles, of great
force, to clear the terms, upon which the unity of the Church subsisted, as
well as the being and constitution of it, which, some of them have been already
alleged to evidence* Basilides, Bishop of Asturica in Spain, convicted of
Apostasy in persecution, to the worship of Idols, was deposed by the Bishops of
those quarters, and another settled in his stead. He repairs to Stephen Bishop
of Rome, to obtain, by false information and favor, his sentence, to restore
or to confirm him. S. Cyprian excuses Stephen as circumvented, blaming him the
*did it, but not for going to Rome, or seeking to be restored by that means.
For, to say truth, he must have blamed the contrary party, that had recourse to
Carthage, seeking to maintain what they had done, by the sentence of the Church
of Carthag^, which that LXVIII. Epistle caries, as well for Martialis, Bishop,
it seems, of Emerita in Spain, as Basilides, whom for the like crime, he judges
unworthy to hold his Bishopric. Again, Martianus, Bishop of Arles, adhered to
Novatia^us, as S. Cyprian was informed by the Bishop of Lions. Hereupon he
writes to Stephen at Rome, to write into Gaul, for the deposing of Marcianus,
and the settling of another in his stead, Epist. LXVII. Again, Felicissimus and
Fortuna^^s, Presbyters of the Church of Car^hage, under S. Cyprian, with
others, to the number of five, having made a party to restore those that were
fallen away in persecution, contrary to the resolution of the Church, which had
referred it to a Council, as we learn by S. Cyprian, Epist. XXXVIII. and XL.
with Fortunatus, a Bishop of this party, betaking themselves to Rome, are first
refused by Cornelius; but, upon appearance of a party in his Church for them,
put him to a stand. In this case S. Cyprian, writing his LV. Epistle,
acknowledges the Church of Rome the seat of S. Peter, and the principal Church,
whence, the unity of the Priesthood was sprung; but maintains, that every
Bishop has a portion of Christ's flock assigned him to govern, upon his account
to Christ: And therefore, that causes are to be ended where they ri^e, and the
good intelligence between Bishops, ought not to be interrupted by carrying
causes abroad to be judged again. Is not all this true, supposing the case?
For, who c^n choose but blame a schismatic attempt? But, could any man hinder
Basilides and Martialis from seeking the Church of Rome, had their cause been
good, seeing their adverse pa^ty did, and might seek to fo^^ain Churches? Was
it not necessary to seek both to Carthage and to Rome, for the freeing of the
Church of Arles under Marci^nus, from communion with the Novatians? Here, I
con^eive, lies the truth. Some causes of necessity have recourse to the Church
of Rome; to wit, such as necessarily concern the whole Church, either in the
faith, or, in the unity of it. Such was the cause of Marcianus, which could not
be ended but by the same consent which cast the Novatians out of the Church.
Was the cause of Basilides and Martialis of the same weight; was it not merely
personal, and conc^rning matter of fact, whither they had indeed sacrificed to
Idols, or not; no question remaining in point of right, that such could not be
Bishops? yet, could not the Bishops of Spain overruled the Bishop of Rome, not
to receive information from the aggriev^d. Their way was, to have recourse to
other Churches, the consent whereof might out-way the Church of Rome, together
with the goodness of the cause. And the Church of Carthage must have done the
same, had Felicissimus and Fortunatus found reception at Rome, and credit to
bal^nce their cause against S. Cyprian, and the African Church. So that, causes
of Faith necessarily concerning the whole Church, whenever they rend^r the
peace thereof questionable; those that, for their weight, do not concern ^he
whole, will concern it, when they render the peace thereof questionable. And,
so long as Law provideth not bounds to determine, what causes shall be ended at
home in the parts where they rise; what cause is there that may not be
pretended to concern the whole; and, by consequence, the Church of Rome; which
being the principal Church, what cause, concerning the whole, can end without
it? He that admits not this supposition, con^^sting in the regular
pre-eminence, denying the unlimited Power of the Church of Rome over other
Churches, will never give a reason, why recourse is always had to the Church
of Rome; and yet, if the cause require, to other Churches, to balance it. The
unity of the Church, and communion with it, is the thing that is ^ought: The
consent of the greatest Churches, (that of Rome in the (...) place) is the
means to obtain it.

This business therefore is much of kin to that of the Donatists trial under
Constantine, when they petitioned the secular Power, that they might be heard
by the Bishops of Gaul, intimating, the reason why they declined the Bishops
of Italy to be; because they might be tainted with falling away; or shuffling,
in the per^ecution of Diocletian, which they charged their adverse party in
Africa with, because they express this for the ground of their Petition, in
Optatus I. that, under Constantius, there had been no persecution in Ga^l. Here
I must pass by the consideration of any thing that may concern the dispute
between secular and Ecclesiastical Power, as not concerning this place. But,
when Constantine, by his answer, assigns them for Judges, the Bishops of Rome
and Milane, with such and such of their suffraganes, joining with them the
Bishops of Collen, Autun, and Arles in Gaul, to satisfy them, it is plain,
that he refuses them to transgress; that respect, which the constitution of
the Church challenged for the Churches of Rome and Milane; that such causes as
concerned the unity of the Church in the Western parts of the Empire, should be
determined, (not by the Pope alone, no^ the Church of Rome alone, but) by the
Churches of Rome and Milane, as the chief Churches of that part of the Empire;
the Church of Rome always in the first place. On the other side, when the
Donatists, not satisfied with their sentence, petition the Emperor again, that
it may be reviewed, and the Emperor adjourns them for a second trial to a
Council at Arles; it is plain, that he allows them not an appeal from the
former sentence, because, many of those that were Judges in the former Synod,
did vote in the later Synod: But it is as plain, that the parties then held not
the Popes judgment (either alone, or in Council) unquestionable, unless all
were madd, in pretending to give either check or strength to that sentence
which was originally unquestionable. If therefore, a sentence given by the Pope
in a Council of Italy, which some Gaulish Bishops joined thereunto, might be
revised in a fuller Council of Gaulish Bishops, with the concurrence of many
others, as well Italian and Spanish, (to say nothing of three from Britain,
the first unquestionable record of the British Churches) is it not manifest,
that Euclids axiom, that the whole is greater then any part of it; takes place
in the Church, as well as the words of S. Jerome, Orbis major est Vrbe, that
the world is greater then the City of Rome? Surely if S. Austine, Ep. CLXII.
say well, that the Donatists might have appealed to a General Council, had they
been justly grieved by the sentence at Rome; his saying will hold, if they had
been grieved by the Council of Arles, though concluding the Western Church: But
it will hold also of the Council of Arles, that it had been madness to call
it, had not the generality thereof extended, to conclude the Western Church,
further then the former at Rome, though the cause came not to it by appeal.

CHAP. XX. Of the constitution and authority of Councils. The ground of the
pre-eminences of Churches in the Roman Empire. The VI. Canon of the Council of
Nicaea. The pre-eminence of the Church of Rome, and that of Constantinople.
Some instances against the superiority of Bishops, out of the records of the
Church; what offices every Order by Gods Law, or by Canon Law, ministers.
HEre, the next consideration for time being that of the Council of Nicaea; the
VI Canon whereof first limited by written Law, the pre-eminences of Churches in
the Empire, having taken place by custom before; I will not repeat that ground
for Councils, and for their authority, which I have laid in the first Book; nor
bound the right of Civil and Ecclesiastical Power in giving force to the acts
of them, which I reserve for the end of this third Bood. But, to evidence the
constitution of them, from whence, their authority in the Church must proceed;
I maintain here from the premises, that the original constitution of the
Church, determines the person of the Bishop, to represent his respective
Church in Council: And, that the constitution of Councils, consisting of
Bishops, representing their respective Churches, evidenceth the authority of
Bishops in the same; Which produces the effect of obliging, either the whole
Church, or that part which the Council represents, by the consent of Votes.
The act of the Council of Jerusalem under the Apostles, Act. XV. was respective
to the Churches of Jerusalem and Antiochia, with those which were planted from
thence, by Paul and Barn(...), made by an authority sufficient to oblige the
whole Church. The El(...) concurred to the vote with the Apostles, those that
will be so ridicul(...) for Lay Elders of Presbyters; But will never tell us,
how the V(...) Elders should oblige the Church of Antiochia, and the
plantations (...)y were the Elders, who, joined with the Apostles, (from whom
they could not be dis-joyned) were able to oblige the whole Church. And indeed,
there is no mention of them in the acts of choosing Matthias, and the seven
Deacons, Acts I. VI. which acts concerned the whole Church. And therefore,
there is appearance, that, the authority which they always had, in respect of
the Church to be constituted, was by that time known to be limited, by the
allowance and consent of the Apostles. But, when I granted, that S. Paul seems
to allow both the Romans and the Corinthians, to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, as Gods creatures; I did not grant, that his authority could derogate
from the act of the Apostles: But, that the act of the Apostles was not
intended for the Churches represented at the doing of it. As that which was
done, Act. XXI. how great soever the authority might be that did it, seems to
extend no further then the occasion in hand. That which remains, then, in the
Scriptures, agrees perfitly well with the original practice of the whole
Church. It cannot be denied, that there are here and there, in the records of
the Church, instances evidencing the sitting of Presbyters in Council, which, I
deny not, must needs import the privilege of voting. But, the reason of their
appearing there, appears so often to be particular, by commission from their
Bishops, and, to supply their absence, that, there is no means in the world to
darken this evidence for the superiority of Bishops. For, can it possibly be
imagined, that the Bishop should always represent his Church in all Councils,
without choice, or other act to depute him, were he no more then the first of
the Presbyters? Is it not evident, that the whole Church always took him for
the person, without whom, nothing could be done in the Church; which, whither
in Council, or out of Council, never dealt with his Church but by him, always
with his Church by his means? Now, for the authority of Councils thus
constituted; though, for peace sake, and because an end must be had, the
resolution of all Councils must come from number of Votes, which swayes the
determinations of all Assemblies; yet there is, thereupon, a respect to be had
to the Provinces or parts of the Church, which those that vote do represent,
unless we will impute it to blame, to those that suffer wrong, if they submit
not themselves to the determinations of those, whom themselves have more right
to oblige. This consideration resolves into the grounds of the dependence of
less Churches upon greater Churches, all standing in the likelihood of
propagating Christianity out of greater Cities into the less, and of governing
the Church in unity, by submitting less residences to greater, rather then on
the contrary. Which is such a principle, that all men of capacity will
acknowledge, but all would not stand convict of, had not the Church admitted it
in effect from their founders, before they were convict of the effect of it by
humane foresight. Upon this supposition, the Church cannot properly be obliged
by the plurality of Bishops, who all have right to vote in Council; but, by the
greatness and weight of the Churches for whom they serve, concurring to a
vote. And hereof there be many traces in the Histories of the Church, when they
mention the deputation of some few Bishops, representing numerous Provinces,
which, for distance of place, or other peremptory hindrances, could not be
present, to frequent as others. For, can this be a reasonable cause, why they
should be obliged by the votes of those who were present in greater number? The
true reason, why the decrees of Councils have not always had, nor ought
always to have the force and effect of definitive sentences, but of ^^rong
prejudices, to sway the consent of the whole: Because there was never any
Council so truly General, that all parts concerned were represented, by number
of Vo^es, proportionable to the interesse of the Churches for whom they serve;
For, certainly, greater is the interest of greater Churches. Which case,
when^oever it comes to pass, those that are not content, have reason to
allege, that they are not to be tied by the vote of others, but by their own
consent. And therefore, the nnity of the Church requires, that there be just
presumption, upon the matter of decrees, that they will be admitted by those who
concur not to them, as no less for their good, then for the good of the rest
of the Church. In the mean time, the pretense of the Popes infinite Power
remains inconsistent with the very preten^e of calling a Council. For, why so
much trouble, to obtain a vote, that shall signify nothing without his
consent, his single sentence obliging no less? These are the grounds of that
Aristocraty, in which the Church was originally governed, by the constitution
of the Apostles; (unless we will think, that a constant order, vi^^ble in all
the proceedings thereof, could have come from the voluntary cons^nt of
Christendom, not prevented by any obligation, and drawing every part of it,
toward their several interests) which makes the obligation of Councils, and
their decrees, harder to be obtained; but, when once obtained, more firm and
sure; as, not tending to destroy the original way of maintaining Unity, by the
free correspondence and consent of those who are concerned; but, to shorten the
trouble of obtaining it. And, if this were understood by the name of the
Hierarchy, why should not the simplicity of Apostolical Christianity own it?

Now, because the greatness of Churches depended, by the ground laid, upon the
greatness of the Cities, which was in some sor^ ambulatory, till it was settled
by the rule of the Empire, begun by Adriane, and completed by Constantine; my
meaning will neither be clear nor evident, unless ^ limite the greatness of
Churches, by such degrees as took place afterward, when Constantine, having
put the civil Government of the Empie under some Praefectis Pr^torio, (whom we
may call in English, Masters of his Palace) appointed every one of them several
Lieutenants in their several quarters: As him of Gaul, (to speak of the West,
which concern^ us most) one in Britain, one in Gaul, and one in Spain: Him of
Italy, one at Rome, one at Milane, and one at Carthage, in Africa, which was
laid to that Government: Him of the East, one at Alexandria, for Egypt, one at
Antiochia, for that quarter which was properly called the East of the Empire,
one at Casarsa for Pontus, one at Ephes^s for Asia, and one at Constantinople
for Thrace: And him of Illyricum, one for the East of it at Thessalonica, one
for the West of it at Sirmium. For, every one of these Lieutenants, having
under his disposition, a certain mass or number of Provinces; and every one of
these Provinces a certain chief City, (the seat of the civil Government, as
well as the chief Church of the Province) and the residences of the Lieutenants
themselves, being the resorts of the appeals out of the Provinces, the Rule of
the Church remains settled by the subject of it; the Churches of the Head Cities
of every Diocese, (so theycalled that Mass of Provinces which was allotted to
each Lieutenant) challenging a regular pre-eminence over the Churches of the
chief Cities of other Provinces, as they over the Churches of ordinary Cities,
within the same Province. But, as it would be ridiculous to attribute these
pre-eminences to the secular Power, because it creates the civil
pre-eminences of the Cities, and not to the Church, which, presupposing the act
of civil Power, cast it self into the like fo^m; (for the same rule was in
force, when the Empire, enemy to the Church, did nothing in it) So, I shall
challenge all men that have their senses exercised to discern of such matters,
to judge, whither all Christians could have agreed of their own heads, to yield
these pre-eminences, had they not found the rule delivered them by the Apostles
to require it. For, it is manifest, that, from the beginning, before
Constantine, there was respect had to the pre-eminence of Churches,
proportionably to the greatness of their Cities, in the Government of the
Empire; The instances of Rome, Alexandria, An^iochia, Ephesus, Corinth,
Thessalonica, C^sarea, Carthage Milane, Lions, and others, as others come to be
mentioned in the records of the Church, not admitting any visible exception to
a rule so originally, so generally, so evidently received.

Therefore, as for that plea, which the Church of Rome advances so far
beyond reason and measure, of S. Peter's Headship by divine right, of his
sitting last at Rome, before at Antiochia, and by his Deputy S. Mark at
Alexandria, as if all the Churches of Asia, Africa, and Europe, were, by this
means, of his lot; if we take it as it sounds, it will appear a contradiction
to the light of common reason, that the Church of Rome should have that
pre-eminence by being the seat of the first Apostle, to which other Churches
have nothing proportionable, by having been the seats of other Apostles. For,
had there not been more in the case, that which Epiphanius, Haer. LXX. says;
That, had the controversy about keeping Easter, risen before the removing of
the Church of Jerusalem to Pella, at the beginning, under the Apostles, it must
have resorted thither; must have taken place always: That is, the Church of
Jerusalem, which was, at the first, the seat of all the Apostles, must have
been for ever the chief Church. But, if we suppose, that the Apostles order
was, the greatest Churches to be those of the greatest Cities; we give a reason
of the greatness of the Church of Rome, from the privilege, not of S. Peter
alone, but of S. Peter as the chief Apostle, and as S. Paul, as him that
labored most, when they, upon that agreement, made choice of Rome for their
seat, and the exercise of their Apostleship. But, that the Church of
Alexandria, (the privileges whereof never extended beyond the Diocese of the
Governor of Egypt, Lieutenant in that quarter) should have right over all the
Churches of Africa; that the Church of Antiochia (the privileges whereof were
never visible beyond the Diocese of the East) should have right over all the
Churches of Asia, by S. Peter's Headship, (and yet Alexandria, where he never
sat but in and by S. Mark, before Antiochia, where he sat in person seven
years) is such a devise, as nothing but prejudice and faction can make
probable. For the right, then, of summoning and ordering Councils, if we speak
of Provincial Councils, it is manifestly in the Bishop of the Mother City,
which, succession has called the Archbishop* If of a greater resort, in the
first Bishop of a Diocese, called since the Primate; If it were gathered out of
several Dioceses, (whereof we have an instance in that of Antiochia against
Samosatenus, out of Pontus and Asia, as well as the East) it is to be ascribed
to the authority of the greatest and next Bishop, concurring to quench the fire
in their neighbor Church, as Firmilianus of Caesarea, and Macarius of
Jerusalem, were presidents in that of Antiochia. For, though the privileges of
the Church were settled upon the form of the Empire; yet, it seems, th^re was
always an exception for that of Jerusalem, (as having been the Mother Church
before the Rule was to take place) not only by the Canon of Nicaa, which now I
come to, but by the act of Chalcedon, which made it absolute within certain
quarters, utterly exempted from Antiochia, by a concordate confirmed in Council.

The Canon of Nicaea, which I spoke of, is thought to have been made upon
occasion of the Schism of Meletius in Egypt, which had withdrawn the Churches
there from their obedience to Alexandria; For it orders, that the ancient
rights thereof be maintained, as also those of Antiochia, (with an exception
for Jerusal^m, saving the respect due to the Mother Sea of Caesarea) because
the Church of Rome also has the like privilege over these Churches, which
Ruffin^s, in his Histories of the Church, translates Suburbicarias. This
Transl^tion has occasioned many Books, to show, what were these Ecelesiae
sub^^bicariae, whereof, it seems, there are but three meanings possible. There
was then a ^overnour of the City of Rome, to whom resorted all appeals from the
Magistrates of the City, and within a hundred miles; all which Country being
comprised in one title of Regiones suburbicariae; there is an opinion, that the
Churches of that Precinct, by the name of Ecclesiae suburbicariae, were then of
the Popes Jurisdiction, and they alone. Another conceit may be, that urbs in
the (...)ivative suburbicariae, is opposed to Orbis, and all Churches in the
World, ^^bj^cted by the Canon to the Church of Rome, as all Cities were to
Rome. W^i^h ^^ for nothing. For, what Jurisdiction had any civil Magistrate
that gov^rn^d Rome over other Cities, without the Precinct o^ it? And yet,
shall we be so ^i^^^ulous; the Canon describing the privileges of the Church,
of Rome, by those of Alexandria, which extended as far as the Government of
Aegyp^, ^o confine those of the prime Church of the Empire, within the (...)? I
suppose, therefore, they have far the best cause, who suppose (...) to be
called Regiones suburbicariae, which were under the Lieutenant of Rome, in
oppo^tion to the Lieutenant of Italy, resident a Milane, having under him seven
of those Provinces, into which that Government was then divided: In which
regard, the other ten Provinces, which were under the Lieutenant of the City
resident at Rome, are properly called Suburbicariae, though p^rt of them were
the Isles of Sicilia, Sardinia, and Corsica etc. And here lies the greatest
question, nothing else bearing water in my judgment. For, by this Canon, ^ll
the right and title of the Church of Rome is to be measured by the right o^ any
one of those Churches, which were the Heads of Dioceses; (taking Dioceses for
the residences of Lieutenants) all which are to be suppo^ed equal in power,
granting only Rome the precedence, which all Order requi^es. For, what right
can the Church of Rome challenge, which this Canon acknowleges not? Is it right
or wrong, which the decree of the whole Church allows not? Strongly argued, I
confess; which, notwithstanding, I am not satisfied with. For, the intent of
the Ganon, being to setle the lights of Alexandria, is satisfied, by rehearsing
the like rights in the Churches of Rome and Antiochi^, which, by supposing, as
in force of old, it setleth for the future. But, is this to declare and limite
the Title thereof, in regard of the rest, especially for the Western Church,
which the Council had no occasion to meddle with? Judge first, by that which
appears. In the greatest concernments of the Church, concerning Montanus,
concerning the keeping of Easter, concerning the cause of the Novatians, of
rebaptizing Heretics, of Paulus Samosatenus, of the Donatists, of Dionysius
Alexandrinus; In fine, concerning those which I mentioned out of S. Cyprians
Epistles. What one Church can there be named, to the concurrence whereof, the
like respect has been had, in things concerning the Faith and Unity of the
Whole, as that of Rome? For that which follows, I think there remains no
dispute, the privileges thereof still increasing, as well by the acts of
Councils, as by custom and use. And, of that I must demand a reason, how they
should come to be cast upon one, had there not been, from the beginning, a
stock of Title, exclusive to any other of the greatest Churches (acknowledging
the order of the Apostles to have provided no further, then, that the Churches
of the chief Cities should be the chief Churches, leaving the rest to the
Church, upon consideration of the State of the World, to determine.)

One particular I must insist upon, for the eminence of it. I have already
mentioned the general Councils, whereof, how many can be counted General, by
number of present votes? The authority of them then, must arise from the
admitting of them by the Western Churches; And this admission, what can it can
it be ascribed to, but the authority of the Church of Rome, eminently involved
above all the Churches of the West, in the summoning and holding of them, and
by consequence, in their decrees? And indeed, in the troubles that passed
between the East and the West, from the Council of Nic^a, though the Western
Churches have acted by their Representatives, upon eminent occasions, in great
Conncils; (as the Churches of Britain had their Bishops, at the I. Council of
Arles, at the Councils of Sar^ica, and of Ariminum) in other occasions, they
may justly seem to refer themselves to that Church, as resolving to regulate
themselves by the acts of it; So that S. Jerome might very well name Rome and
the West, as the same pa^ty, in his LXXVII. Epistle; Haereticum me cum
Occidente, haereticum cum Aegypto, hoc est, cum Damaso Petroque condemnent. Let
them condemn me for an Heretic, with the West, and with Egypt; that is, with
Damasus, Bishop of Rome, and Peter, Bishop of Alexandria. And, against
Vigi^^n^^us, he calls the Western Churches the Churches of the Apostolic See.
So S. Basil calls the Bishop of Rome, (...), The Crown of the West, Epist. X.
and S. Austine cont. Jul. Pelag. I. 2. Puto tibi eam partem Orbis sufficere
debere, in qua primum Apostolorum suorum voluit dominus glorioso Martyrio
coronare. Cui Ecclesiae praesidentem Beatum I^nocentiu^ si audire voluisses --
I conceive, that part of the world should serve your turn, in which, it pleased
God to Crown with a glorious Martyrdom, the first of his Apostles. The
President of which Church, blessed Innocent, if you would have heard -- He
supposes Innocent, being over the Church of Rome, to be over the Western
Church. In the Council of Ephesus, S. Cyril threatens John of Jerusalem, that,
those who will have communion with the West, must submit to the sentence of the
Synod at Rome, against Nestorius, Part. I. cap. XXI. the leter of Pope Agatho
to the Emperor in the VI. General Council, Act. IV. supposes the Synods of the
Lombards, Slaves, Frankes, Goths, and Britains, to belong to the Synod of
Rome, and that the Council was to expect account of them from it. No otherwise,
then, to the leter of the Synod of Rome, to the second General Council, ninety
Bishops of Italy and Gaul concurred, according to Theodoret. And Cornelius in
S. Hieromes Catalogue, writ to Flavianus Bishop of Antiochia, from the Synods
of Rome, Gaul, and Africa. Whereby it may appear, how the Western Churches
always went along with that of Rome. Which, though it give not the Church of
Rome that privilege over the Churches of eight Dioceses, which, the canons of
Nicaea do confirm to the Bishops of Alexandria, over the Diocese of Egypt, and
the Church of Antiochia, over the Eastern Dioc^ses; yet, necessarily argues a
singular pre-eminence in it over them all, in regard whereof, he is styled
Patriarch of the West, during the regular Government of the Church; and, being
so acknowledged by King James of excellent memory, in his leter to the
Cardinal of Perr^n, may justly charge them to be the cause of dividing the
Church, that had rather stand divided then own him in that quality. But,
granting the Church of Rome to be regularly the seat of the chief Patriarch,
(for so he is styled in the Council of Chalcedon, Act. III. so the Emperor
Justine calls Hormisdas, so Justinian calls the Bishop of Rome, Nov. CIX. And
the VI Council, Act. XVIII. counts five seats of Patriarchs: And if Gregory,
Epist. XI. 54. acknowledge Spain to have no Patriarch, and Innocent III. C.
grave de Praeb. and dignit. C. antiqua, de Privil. count but four, it is
because they would make the Pope more then a Patriarch) it will nevertheless
be questionable, how fa^re it injoyes the same rights throughout the West; or
rather unquestionable, that he did no^ consecrate all the ^i^^ops of the West,
as he of Alexandria did all the Bishops of Egypt* and he of Antiochia, all
those of the Eastern Diocese. On the other side, it will be unquestionable,
that all causes that conce^n the whole Church, are to resort to it. And, if
Innocent I. mean none but those, when he says, that they are excepted from the
Canon of Nicaea, that forbids appeals, Epist. ad Victricium Roth^m. He says
nothing but that which the constitution of the Church justifies. B^t the cases
produced before out of S. Cypriane, show, that there was much l^ft for custo^^
to determine. Nay, rules of discipline, which, in my opinon, the good of the
whole Church then requir^d, that they should be common to all the West, ^re of
this rank; no^ could any of then ever oblige the West, without the Bishop of
Rome. But, that he alone should give rules to ty all the West, may have had a
regular beginning, from voluntary references, of Himerius Bishop of Farracona
in Spain, to Syricius, of Exuperius Bishop of Tolouse, and Victricius of Roven
to Innocentius, but argues not that it is the original right of that Church;
But, that it has increased by custom, to that height, as to help to make up a
claim for that infinite power which I deny, in stead of that regular Power
which I acknowledge. Judge now by reason, supposing the obligation upon all, of
holding unity in the Church; and, the dependence of Churches the mean to
compass it. For, this will oblige us to part here with the Parallel of the
Empire, which, having a Sovereign upon earth, will require the Ministers of
thereof, immediate or subordinate, to be of equal power in equal rights,
Praefects, Lieurenants, and Governors. But, the Head of the Church being in
heaven; and, his Body on earth, being to be maintained in Unity, by an
Aristocraty, of Superiors and Inferiors; whither was it according to the
intent of those who ordered the pre-eminence of greater Churches, that, that
the Church of the greatest City should be equal in power to the head Churches
of o her Dioceses; Or, that the general reason should take place between them
all, an eminence of power following their precedence in rank? So that,
whenever it become requisite to limite this generality by positive
constitutions, the pre-eminence, of right, to fall upon one, exclusively to
others? Surely, though we suppose, that all Christendom, of their free consent,
agreed in this Order, yet must we needs argue, from the uniformity of it, that
it must needs come from the ground settled by the Apostles. For it is manifest,
that the rights of the head Churches of Provinces, had a beginning, beyond the
memory of all records of the Church, which testify the being of them, at the
time of all business which they relate; That the head Churches of Diocesses
were not advanced in a moment, by the act of the Empi^e; but molded asore, as
^t were, and prepared to receive^ that impression of regular eminence, over
inferiou^ Churches, which the act of the State should stamp the Cities with,
over in^^riour Cities; yet cannot be maintained, that the greatest respect was
and is by the Apostles act to be given to the greatest Churches (that is, the
Churches of grea^est Cities) and yet, that the ^ri^^ledges necessarily accruing
by positive constitution, might as justly have been placed upon the head Church
of any Diocese, as upon that of Rome. I know I have no thanks for this of the
Romanists; (for, as S. Paul s^yes, How shall I serve God, and please men both,
in such a difference as this?) but, seeing the canon of Nicaea does necessarily
confine the Church of Rome to a regular Power; is it not a great sign of truth
that those things which appear in the proceedings of the Church, do concur to
evidence a ground for the Rule of it; inferring that pre-eminence which the
Churches of Alexandria and Antiochia cannot have, but, the beginning of the
canon, establishing ancient custom, settleth? Let us see some of those
proceedings.

After the Council of Nicaea, the Arians, (having Eus^bius of Nicomedia for
their Head) desire to be heard at Rome by Pope Julius in Council, concerning
their proceedings against Athanasius. Here, shall I believe, as some learned
men conjecture, that Pope Julius ^s merely an Arbitrato^ named by one part, y
whom the other could not refuse; and that any Bishop, or at least any Primate
might have been named, and must have been admitted, as well as he? Truly, I
cannot; considering, that, their hope being to win themselves credit by his
sentence; I must needs think, that they address themselves to him, by whose
sentence they might hope to draw the greatest prejudice on their own side. It
cannot be denied indeed, that whereas, in a case of that moment, the last
resort is necessarily to the whole Church, whither in council, or by reference;
by referring themselves, they brought upon their cause that prejudice, which
necessarily lights upon all those that renounce the award of the Arbitrators
whom they have referred themselves to, in case they stand not to the
sencentence. But, though they had not been chargeable with this, had they not
referred themselves; yet must they needs have been judged by the Bishop of
Rome, among the rest of the Church, and in the first place; and, his sentence
must needs weigh more toward the sentence of the whole Church, then the
sentence of any other Arbitrator could have done. For, let me ask in the mean
time, is this an appeal to Pope Julius, or to him and his Council? let the
seque^e judge. For, he that condemns the Arians for not appearing at the
Council which they had occasioned; he that condemns the Council of Antiochia,
(at the dedication of the golden Church, presently after, where they were
present) for revereing the Creed of Nicaea, and condemning S. Athanasius,
notwithstanding the sentence of Julius and his Council; necessarily shows us,
that they were not quite out of their wits, to bestow so much pains for
procuring a decree at the Conncil of Antiochia, that must have been void ipso
facto, because the matter had been sentenced at Rome, that is, in the last
resort, before. Therefore, I coneive, Julius had right to complain, that they
took upon them to regulate the Churches without him, nor can I much blame
Socrates or S^zomenus, in justifying his complaint; Because Athanasius his
cause, as well as the Creed of Nicaea, concerned the whole Church: And, for
them to condemn him whom Julius and his Council held at the instance of the
Arians had justified, was to make a breach in the Church; though, at present,
we say nothing of the Faith. Neither had they reason to allege the good they
had done the Church of Rome, by their compliance in the cause of Novatianus, or
to expect the like from Julius in a cause of the like moment, because of the
sentence of the Nicen^ Council already past, in the main ground of the cause,
and, because of the sentence of the Synod of Rome past in the cause. Now, when
this difference comes afterward to be tried by a General Council at Sardica,
shall this trial infer the infinite Power of the Pope, or the regular Power
of a General Council? For surely, the Council of Sardica was intended for a
General Council, (as the Emperor Justinian reckons it) being summoned by both
Emperors, Constantius and Constans, out of the whole Empire. When the breach
fell out, and the Eastern Bishops withdrew themselves to Philippopolis, the
whole Power, in point of right, ought, I conceive, to remain on that side which
was not the cause of the breach. But, the success sufficiently shows, that it
did not so prevail. For, many a Council might then have been spared. The
sovereign regard of peace in the Church, suffered not those that were in the
right to insist upon the acts of it, as I suppose. In the mean time, the Canons
thereof, whereby, appeals to the Pope in the causes of Bishops are settled,
(whither for the West, which it represented, or for the whole, which it had
right to conclude, not having caused the breach) shall I conceive to be forged,
because they are so aspersed, having been acknowledged by Justinian, translated
by Dionysius Exig^us, added by the Eastern Church to their Canon Law? Or shall
I not ask, what pretense there could be, to settle appeals from other parts to
Rome, rather then from Rome to other parts, had not a pre-eminence of Power,
and not only a precedence of rank, been acknowledged originally in the Church
of Rome?

But, though I think my self bound to acknowledge, that such Canons were made
by the Council at Sardica; yet, not, that they took effect by the act of it.
The Canons of Councils had not effect, as I said before, till received. The
troubles that succeeded, might well hinder the admitting of them into practice.
And, that this exception is not for nothing, I appeal to all that shall but
consider, that the Canons of the Council of Antiochia, which the Eastern
Bishops at Sardica stood for, made part of the Code of the whole Church, which
the Council of Chalcedon owned; The Canon of Sardica being no part of it till
after times. And this is the point, upon which, the dispute between the Pope
and the Churches of Africa* about appeals, most depends. The case that brought
it to issue, was the case of Apiarius, a Priest only, that appealed to Rome.
The Popes Legates pretended, that appeals to Rome were settled by the Council
of Nicaea. The Churches of Africa* finding no such Canon of Nicaea in their
records, desire, that recourse might be had to Alexandria, and Constantinople,
for the true Copies. The true Copies import no such thing; but it is alleged,
and it is reason it should be alleged, that the appeals of Bishops are settled
by the Canons of the Council of Sardica, the very terms whereof are couched in
the instructions to the Council of Africa. The Council of Sardica was not the
Council of Nicaea, but the acts of it were done by those who pretended to
ma^ntain it. Whither it were justly done, or imported an intent of imposture,
to challenge the authority of the Canons of Nicaea, for the Canons of it, I
dispute not. But, had the case in question been the case of a Bishop, as it was
only the case of a Priest, what could the Churches of Africa have alleged,
why they should not be tied by the Canons of Sardica, who acknowledged
themselves tied by the Canons of Nicaea? For, there was only the Bishop of
Carthage present at the Council of Nicaea, but there was six and thirty
Africane Bishops at the Council of Sardica; enough to represent all the Diocese
of Africa, and to tie those whom they represented. What could they allege, but
the inexecution of the Council of Sardica? Or what greater evidence could they
allege for the inexecution of it, then that there was no Copy of any such
Canon in the records of all their Churches? Or, how could the Pope desire a
fairer pretense for the execution of it for the future, then the concurrence of
the African^ Churches, by so many Bishops? For, though the Council of Sardica
is quoted in that which is called the VI Council of Carthage; yet, the whole
issue of the business was only, whither they were Nic^ne Canons that were
alleged or not; and, when it appeared that they were not, the dispute was at an
end, and the Africane Synod, by the leter extant in the Africane Code, desires
the Pope to stand to terms of the Nicene Canons. Therefore, it is clearly a
fault in the Copy, that the Council of Sardica is named; which could not be
pleaded, because all knew that it was not in force, as the Council of Nicaea
was, in the Churches of Africa* So that, the act of the Council of Sardica
necessarily presupposes, that the Church of Rome was effectually acknowledged
the prime Church of the West, (and by consequence of all Churches) because it
setleth the right of appeals upon it before other Churches, in certain causes,
though it appear not what effect it took, unless you allow the conjecture
which I have to propose. Within a few years after this contest, there appears a
standing Commission of the Popes, to the Bishops of Thessalonica, to be their
standing Lieutenants in Illyricum, mentioned in the leter of Pope Leo to
Anastasins of Thessalonica, as derived from their predecessors. Had the Bishop
of Rome been no more then the Bishop of Thessalonica, how came this to be his
Lieutenant, rather then on the contrary? And truly, where those privileges of
the Church of Rome over the Churches of Illyricum began, whereby the Popes had
made the Bishops of Thessalonica their standing Legates, appears not by the
records of the Church: So that, it is as free for me to conjecture, that they
come from the Council of Sardica, as for others to conjecture otherwise; For,
it is not unreasonable to think, that it might take effect upon the place where
it was made, with fuller consent of the Bishops of that Diocese, present in
greater numbers then strangers, though scarce known in Africa after some LXX.
years. But, at such time as Rome disputed with Africa about appeals, and
enjoyed regular privileges in Illyricum; can the Church of Milane, or any
Church of Spain, or Gaul, or Britain, be thought parallel to it? From this
time, the rescripts of the Popes are extant, unforged, and directed to diverse
prime Churches of Gaul and Spain. And, the Heads of them were added by
Dionysius Exigu^s, about DXXX, unto that collection of Canons, which, what
force it had in the Western Church, appears in that Cresconius, abridging the
Canons which the African Church used, referrs them to the Heads which he
follows, both beginning at Syricius, Cresconius ending at Gelasius. And, the
Copies of Dionysius his Collection, that now are extant in the Libraries of
France, have, at the beginning, a leter, whereby Pope Adriane I, directs it to
Charles the Great. As you may see in Sirmondus his Councils, Tomo II. ad annum
DCCLXXXVII. This subordination, being nothing but the limiting of the
pre-eminence of the Church of Rome, in the common concernments of the Western
Church, suffers not any terms of equality betwixt them, unless we could think,
that they who received such instructions from Rome did send the like to Rome in
the like case. Nor yet to attribute the inequality to the rescript of
Valentinian the III. in favor of Pope Leo, against the Bishop of Arles, though
that might be, (and was without doubt) a goodly pretense for the Popes to
inhanse their privileges while the Empire stood, and when it was fallen, to
maintain them upon the title of ancient custom. Besides the greatness of the
City Rome, in comparison of any City of Gaul or Spain, or Britain; besides the
pre-eminence of S. Peter; it is to be considered, that Innocent I. Pope,
affirms all the Churches of Italy, Gaul, Spain, Africa, Sicily, and the Isles
that lie between, to have been founded by those who were ordained by S. Peter
and his successors: And therefore, that they ought to follow the order of the
Church of Rome, Epist. ad Decentium. For, with him agrees herein; as for
Africa, Tertulliane, de Praescript. cap. XXXVI. and S. Gregory, lib. VII.
Indict. I. Epist. XXXII. Nor do I think that Cyprian meant any thing else, when
he describes the Church of Rome to be the Church, und^ unita Sacerdotalis
exorta est, ^ From whence the unity of the Priesthood had the rise, to wit, in
Africa; Of Gaul and Spain, I perceive, no question is made. And, he that will
free the beginning of Christianity in Britain from fables, must acknowledge;
that, as it is agreed among men of learning, that it was first planted from
Gaul, so, from thence also it must have received Christianity. Of Illyricum,
the same cannot be said. Nor do I find any title for the Jurisdiction of Rome
over it, more ancient then the division of the Empire among the Sons of
Constantine. For, the Council of Sardica, being assembled upon this account, by
both Emperors, and parted in two, the Eastern Bishops of it plead, that it was
a Novelty which the ancient custom of the Church abhorrs, that the East should
be judged by the West. And Constantius writes to the Western Bishops in the
Council of Ariminum, that no reason would endure them to decree any thing of
the Eastern Bishops: both in the fragments of S. Hilary. Which, as it is
constitutes the regular, but destroys the infinite power of the Pope, (because
it concludes no man without the Synod to which he belongs) so, it shows no
ancient custom, by which, Illyricum should belong to the West. And Palladius
an Arian Bishop in the Council of Aquileia, under S. Ambrose, excepting; that
he was not to be sentenced without the Eastern Bishops, who had been writ to,
to come; S. Ambrose answers, that, knowing the custom, that the Synod of the
East should be held in the East, of the West, in the West, they were not come;
intimating, that Palladius, in the mean time, must look to be judged by the
Synod of the West, leaving those of the East to take their course, in a cause
of common concernment. Here is then, a reason, why Illyricum should belong to
the Western Church. Whither or no, the holding of the Council of Sardica in
Illyricum, might occasion the Canons thereof to take place in Illyricum, which
came not to effect in Africa, let those who have the skill judge. I see, the
act of Pope Hormisda, making the Bishops of Tarracona and Sevile his
Lieutenants, Epist. XXIV. and XXVI. is attributed to the Canon of Sardica;
which, I have showed, was not known in Africa about a hundred years fore.
Therefore, let those that have skill judge. I am willing to allow a better
reason for the pre-eminence of the Church of Rome over Illyricum, when I shall
see it rendered. In the mean time, the rescript; of the Popes are extant,
evidencing the resort from Illyricum to Rome, no otherwise then from Gaul, or
from Spain, or from Africa.

What shall we say of Britain? For, all this while I show, that the Church of
Rome cannot be reduced to the rank of the Head Churches of Dioceses, though the
Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antiochia were only Heads of one Diocese. They
knew Pope Caelestine, when he joined with the Synod of Gaul, to send Germanus
and Lupus to deliver them from Pelagianism; as well as Ireland, a British Isle,
knew him, when he sent first Palladius, and then S. Patrick* with effect to
convert it; S. Hilary of Tours having sent S. Keby before, to no great pur^ose.
They knew the Pope, when they a^mitted that order for keeping of Easter, which
afterward they would not part with, when S. Austine demanded it, for a mark of
subjection, at their hands. For, it appears by my L. Pri^^^^s Antiquities,
that the rule which they held was the same, which the Church of Rome had first
embraced; Only, whereas, in process of time, a fault of two days was
discovered in it, which Severus Sulpitius, in Gaul, is said to have mended;
They, having received it with this amendment, would not part with it, when
Austine demanded it of them, for a mark of subjection to his Bishopric. This
you may see in those Collections, page 925 -- They knew him, when S. David sent
the Synodes, which he had held against the Pelagians, to Rome, for the
approbation of the Pope; When S. Kentigerne went to Rome, to purge the
irregularity which he was under, by being ordained Bishop of Gl^s^ow by one
Bishop. In fine, they knew him, in all the corresponce which they had with
their fellow British Churches in France, who exercised daily communion with
Rome. And therefore, when they say, they knew him not, we are to understand, by
a figure of speech, that they knew him not to the purpose that was demanded, ^o
as to be subject to the new Bishop of Britain; Which, the Canon of the
Apostles, providing, that every Nation should have their own Bishop, enabled
them to refuse. And, the just jealousy they had, that the admitting of him
might be a snare to their civil freedom, obliged them to refuse. For, when they
say, they are ready to acknowledge the Pope as brotherly love requires, they
may well be thought to acknowledge him with that Canonical respect which
ancient custom required; without which, brotherly love subsisteth not among
Christians.

But, I must come to the privileges of Constantinople, begun by the Canon of
the second General Council, established by the fourth, in the last Canon, which
the Popes, to this day, acknowledge not, though the effect of it has suffered
no interruption by their disowning of it. I know not how I should give a
clearer evidence of the ground I propose, for the pre-eminence of Churches,
then the alteration which succeeded upon the erecting of Constantinople into
the second Head of the Empire. For, within fifty years, the Council of the East
being held there, makes it the second Church, and head Church of Thrace
Diocese, which the Chalcedon Council extends to the Dioceses of Asia and
Pontus, exalting it so ^arre above Alexandria and Antiochia, as might seem,
afarr of, to call for a kind of subjection at their hands. If this be
rightfully done, what shall hinder the whole Church, to dispose of the
superiority of Churches, when the greatness of their Cities makes it appear,
that the dependence of the Churches of less Cities upon them, is for the Unity
of the whole, in the exercise of true Christianity? And, what can be said, why
it should not be right for the East to advance Constantinople to the next to
Rome; the same reason being visible, in it, for which Rome had the first place
from the beginning? It is true, whereas Rome was content to take no no^ice of
the Canon of Constantinople, the Legates of Pope* Leo present at Chalcedon, and
enforced, either to admit or disclaim it, protested against i^. But, upon what
ground, can he, who, by being part of the Council, conclu^es himself by the
vote of it, refuse his concurrence to that which he alone likes not? Or, to
what effect is that disowned, which takes place without him who protests
against it? unless it be to set up a monument of half the Church, disowning the
infinite power of the Pope; the other half not pleading it, but only
Canonical pre-eminences by the Council of Nicaea. I suppose indeed, the Pope
had something else to fear: For, Illyricum being so much near^r Constantinople
then Rome, there was always pretense of reason to subject it, as Asia and
Pon^us, ^o Constantinople, to the prejudice of those pre-eminences which Rome
enjoyed there. Especially since Illyricum was surrendered by Valentinian III,
upon the marriage of his Sister, to Theodosius the younger, (as that learned
Gentleman John Marsham (has observed) and thenceforth become part of the
Eastern Empire; For, hereupon followed the Law omni Innovatione cessante, still
extant in the Code, requiring the Bishops of Illyricum to give account to
Constantinople, of all* matters that should pass. Besides, had the Empire
continued in force in Italy, why might not Constantinople, in time, have
pretended to the first place, Rome being no more the prime City, and yet still
of the Empire? And therefore Pope Leo, (as wi^e for the privileges of his
Church, as stout for the Faith) did his own business, when he pleaded the
Canon of Nicaea, and the second place for Alexandria. And, whatsoever contests
passed afterward, between the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople, the
privileges of Rome in Ill^ricum continued, till the time that Gregory the
Second withdrew his City from the obedience of the Empire, pretending his
Sovereign to be an Heretic, for destroying of Images. I said before, in the
first Book, that others relate this otherwise. And Anas^a^i^s, in the lives of
Gregory II and III. owns no more, but, that they ex^ommunicated the Emperors,
which, notwithstanding, occasioned the Italians to ^all from the Empire. But,
hereupon, the Empe^o^ commands not only Illyricum, but Sicily, and that part
of Italy which con^^nued subject to the Empire, to resort to the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of Constantinople; and, as in case of such jealousy, was
necessarily to be obeyed. Hereupon, Pope Adrian, in his Apology for Images to
Charles the Great, complains, that they deprived the Church o^ Rome of the
Diocese, together with the patri^ony which it held in it, when they put down
Images; and had given no answer from that time. And Nicolas I. Epist. ^.
revives the claim. Which, with the rescripts of the Popes between, concerning
Illyricum, as well as the rest of the West, (see also the life of Hadriane II
in Anastasius) and much more that might be added, shows, that this was the
state of the Church till that time. During the time that Rome, on one side,
stood upon these terms which Constantinople, on the other ^^de, was continually
harassed by the Lombards, (who had no reason to confide in it, we* see, because
they were not long after destroyed by it) there is no marvail if Milane, head
of the Lombards, and Ravenna, head of the Exarchate, (that is, of the Dominion
that was governed by the Emperors Lieutenant there resident) did, by the
Secular Power of their Cities, set up themselves to contest with the Pope,
about several privileges of their Churches. For, alas, what can this signify,
of competition for the Primacy, with Rome, if we compare the respect of Milane
or Ravenna with that which Rome has ^ound among other Churches, in the
concernments of the whole?

Therefore, I will mention here only one action more, carried through in so
high a tune, by G^lasius and other active Popes, that it is much insisted upon
by those, who would plead for the Popes infinite Power if they durst, because
they would not have it regular, which is the same; (for, what bounds can that
Power have, that acknowleges no Rule to limit it?) It is that troublesome
business that ^ell out in Egypt, about the Council of Chalcedon, when, John of
Alexandria having fallen under the jealousy of the Emperor, and Acacius of
Constantinople, goes to Rome with Leters from Antiochia, to complain of the
intruding of Petrus Mongus into his Sea; Who, being an enemy to the Council of
Chalcedon, but pretending fair, to promote those means, by which, the Emperor
Ze^o and Acacius pretended to reunite Egypt to the Church, having never
received that Council; was, thereupon received into communion by Acacius; The
Rule of the Church being undispensable, whosoever communicated with Heretics,
to stand for an Heretic to the Church, whatsoever he believe otherwise. This
cause having bred a world of trouble for many years, the Popes never
condescended to be reunited in Communion to the East, till it was granted,
that all the Bishops of Constantinople since Acacius, though they had professed
the true Faith, and some of them suffered for it, should be condemned as
Heretics, by raising names out of that list, in which, the godly Bishops were
remembered at celebrating the Eucharist. Though, the reason why they had
continued communion with Heretics was only for fear of making the breaches of
the Church wider, and more incurable. Here, it may seem to have been the Power
of the Pope, that brought, even the second person of the Church, to the justice
of the Canon, so much more evident, by how much there was less reason to
insist upon the rigor of the Canon, in comparison to the end to which it was
subordinate, the unity of the whole; Yet, to him that reasons aright, it will
easily appear, that it was no duty, that, either the Emperors or the Bishops of
Constantinople owed the Popes, that made them submit to the Canon, but the
obligation they had to the Unity of the Church, for the maintenance whereof the
Canon was provided. And that Zeno, taking the course that Constantius had done
in the matter of Arius, to reconcile Egypt to the Church, by waiving the Council
of Chalcedon, for an expedient of his of his own; (for, Constantius sought no
more, than to reconcile all by waiving of the Council of Nicaea) and Acacius,
by communicating with Heretics; did necessarily, as all offenders do, make
them their Superiors, who maintain the Laws for the good of the whole. In fine,
that, whatsoever the Popes did, by virtue of the Canon, can be no ground for
any irregular Power in themselves, the Canon as justly maintaining the poor
Britains against the Pope, as the Pope against Zeno and Acacius. But the first
General Council makes full recompense, for all, the Church of Rome may pretend
to have gained, by the business of Acacius. Pope Vigilius being in
Constantinople, and refusing, at the summons of the Emperor and Council; to
sit, it proceeds, and condemns three Articles which he had declared for, and
so prevails, that he himself thought best at length, to concur to the Act;
And, all this being done, is disowned by the Bishops of Africa, (Facundus by
name, whom he had set on work to write for the three Articles) and Istria,
till all was reconciled. I question not the point of Heresy, either in this
case, or that of Honorius, whose constitution, whereby he thought to silence
the dispute concerning the two wills in our Lord Christ, made him to be
condemned for an Heretic in the sixth General Council. Only I count it a
pitiful excuse, to imagine, that the Synod is falsified in this point; the
VIIth Synod, in the last session, bidding anathema to Honorius, and so many
records testifying the same. And, where it is said, that the Synod might err in
point of fact, that Honorius held Heresy, though not in point of right, in
condemning that for Heresy which is not; (as the Jansenists at this day,
admitting the condemnation of five propositions by the late Pope, admit not,
that they are contained in Jansenius his book) not to dispute of that, it will
appear, that the Pope may be judged by the Church in other cases besides that
of Heresy, if Honorius, being no Heretic, is by the Council, condemned for an
Heretic. Indeed, there is no cause that concerns the whole Church, but the
whole Church may judge it. Nor can any cause lightly concern a Pope, that
concerns not the whole Church. The reason why Popes have been so seldom judged,
is not for want of right, but for fear of division in the Church, which makes
it not expedient to use that right. There are many particulars of less
consequence pleaded for the Popes Power, which I will not examine, admitting a
regular pre-eminence for him above all other Bishops, (which is seen in the
recourse had to him before others, in matters concerning the whole Church) but
denying that infinite Power, which, nothing can be alleged to prove.

I acknowledge indeed, that this regular pre-eminence not only might, but,
supposing the Church to continue in Unity, must needs be further and further
determined, by Canon or by custom, whether enlarging or restraining it, as by
the Canons of Sardica, allowing appeals to him in the causes of Bishops. For,
the causes of Bishops do not all necessarily concern the whole Church, unless
the subject of them be matter of Faith, or otherwise, that which calls in
question the Unity of the Church; and then, Laymens causes are no less. So, an
appeal to Rome, so constituted, is properly an appeal there to be sentenced in
the last resort. But, when recourse is had to the Pope in the first place, that
is no appeal, but a course to bring the cause to the sentence of the whole
Church, whereof his sentence is the first part, and a great prejudice to that
which follows, because of the respect which all that depend upon that Church
owe his sentence. And, this increase of the Popes power, I do think to be
always a just cause, of excluding from the Unity of the Church, for refusing
obedience to it. For, the Unity of the Church being of Gods Law, and so,
in^bling to limit the terms upon which the Power of the Church is held and
exercised, by Canonical right; it cannot be in the power of any part to cast
off those Laws by which it is bounded, within the compass of Gods Law, at
pleasure: because they are the conditions upon which the Unity of the whole
stands, which, no part can say they will renounce, unless they may hold it upon
such terms as they please. But, whether these limitations may not be so
excessively abusive to the liberty of the whole, so prejudicial to the service
of God in the truth of Christianity, for which they, and the whole Church
stands, that parts of the Church may and ought to provide for themselves, and
their Christianity, against the oppression of them; that I referr to the last
consideration, when I shall have showed, how matters in difference are to be
valued by the principles that are settled. In the mean time, I must observe,
that, from the time that the Pope was re-imbursed of his loss of Jurisdiction,
and possessions in those Provinces, which, upon his rebellion, the Emperor
withdrew from his obedience, by the liberality of Pepin and Charlemaine,
bestovving upon him the Exarchate, which, with the Kingdom of the Lombards,
they had taken from the Greekish Empire; Though I cannot say, that, from that
time, regular proceedings were laid aside, in the Western Churches; Yet I must
say, that from thence the Popes had a ground, to reduce the regular proceedings
of Councils to their own will and interest, and to introduce their own
rescripts in stead of all Canons, for Law to the Western Church. And this,
though I must not prove here, yet here I may allege, why I go no further here
in this dispute.

It remains, that I gather up some fragments of instances that have been
produced, to show, that Episcopacy is not of divine right, because, from the
beginning, either all, or some Churches have had none. Of the authors whereof,
I must first demand, whether the Unity of the Church be of divine right or not.
For, unless they will put the whole cause upon a new issue, that there is no
Law of God, that the Church should be one; I demand of them, how this Unity
could have been preserved by the equality of all Presbyters, which, by the
Hierarchy, I have showed, was maintained. Till they show me this, I think my
self secure of all their little objections. For, if the Hierarchy cannot be
imputed to chance, or, to the voluntary agreement of all Christians, as
uncertain as chance; certainly Episcopacy, the first ingredient of it, can be
imputed to nothing but the provision of the Apostles. And therefore, I must
here renew my answer to the question that is made; Supposing the superiority of
Bishops to consist in the Power of doing some act which a Priest cannot do;
what act is it, that a Bishop, by his Order can do, a Priest cannot. For, all
Priests have, by their Order, the Power of the Keys, and by virtue of the same,
of baptizing, and giving the Eucharist to those, whom the Laws of the Church,
not their private judgment, admits; unless it be in cases which their private
judgment stands charged with. And, that which they shall do upon such terms, is
to as good effect toward God, in the inward Court of Conscience, as if a
Bishop had done it. But, because there be cases that concern the unity and good
estate of that particular Church whereof each man is a member, others, that may
concern the whole, others, some part of the whole Church; the constitution of
the Church necessarily requires, in ^^^ry Church, a Power, without which,
nothing of moment to the State thereof shall be of force in the outward Court,
as to the Body of the Church. This, the Chief Power of the Apostles, this, S.
Paul's instructions to Timothy and Titus, this, the Epistle to the seven
Churches, this, the practice of all Churches before the Reformation settles
upon the Bishop. And therefore, I should think, that I showed you a peculiar
act which Bishops can do, and Priests cannot, if I could only show you, that,
according to this Rule, nothing is to be done without the Bishops consent. For,
whatsoever either Law, or unreprovable custom, may enable a Priest to do, that
he does by the consent of his Bishop, involved in passing that Law, or
admitting that custom. And hereof, the Bishops peculiar right of sitting in
Council is full evidence, which; if the practice of the Church could justify
nothing else, would be an act, peculiar to the Order of Bishops, according to
the premises. It was an ancient Rule in the Church, that a Priest should not
baptize in the presence of a Bishop, nor give a Bishop the Eucharist: To show,
that it is by his leave that he acts, as Tertullian says of the right of
Baptizing, de Bapt. cap. XVII. So, the Canons which allow not a Priest to
restore him to the communion, that had done public Penance, in the face of the
Church, require the consent of the Bishop to acts that concern the Body of it.
That ancient author that writ de VII Ordinibus Ecclesiae, among S. Jeromes
works, reckons diverse particulars, some whereof, he complains, that the
Bishops where he lived did not suffer the Priests to do. Does he therefore
make Bishops and Priests all one? Certainly he speaks my sense and my terms,
when he says, the Bishop is the Priests Law; That Bishops in Council, give
Law to the Clergy as well as the people, out of Council, that which is not
otherwise determined, nothing but his Order can determine. And this is the
ground of the difference between the Power of Order and the Power of
Jurisdiction, comparing the Bishop and Presbyters of one and the same Church
one with another. For, the Order of Priesthood importing the Power of the Keys
in baptizing, in binding and loosing in the inward court, in giving the
Eucharist; it is plain, there is a Power of Order common to both. But the use
of it, without limiting any due bounds, at the discretion of every Priest,
would be destructive to the Unity of the Church, which I suppose. That Power
therefore, which provideth those limitations, according to which the common
power of the Keys is lawfully ex^r^ised, whether it be properly called
Jurisdiction or not, is necessary to the being of every Church, even by the
common Power of the Keys, upon which the foundation of the Church stands.

I can therefore allow the said author to complain, that Priests in his part^
were not suffered to do those acts, which, in the Fast, in Illyricum, in Africa,
they did do; For, all those parts were governed by Synods of Bishops. But I
allow not his argument; Because a Priest can celebrate the Eucharist, which is
more. It is more to the salvation of those that receive, toward which, the
Eucharist immediately works, no less if a Priest, than if a Bishop give it.
But it is not so much to the Body of the Church, as to excommunicate, or to
restore him that is excommunicate. That therefore, some offices may be done by
both, and that, according to the order of the ancient Church, is no argument
that both are one; but, that it is no prejudice to the Chief Power of the
Bishop, that they are done by a Priest. Let Confirmation be the instance, for
our author instances in it. Certainly, there never was so great necessity for
it, as since all are baptized infants. For, it expressly renueth the Covenant of
Baptism, not only in the conscience, between God and the soul, but as to the
Body of the Church, implying an acknowledgment of the obligation then
contracted; And of the Church, to which this acknowledgment is rendered. For,
he that desires baptism of the Church, at years of discretion, desires it
upon those terms which the Church tendreth. And therefore, he who is baptized
an infant, and afterward confirmed, submits to the same terms in his own
person; which he could not do when he was baptized. It is not therefore said;
That none can be saved that is not confirmed. For, let him observe the rule of
Christianity, and that, within the Unity of the Church, and he wants nothing
necessary to the common salvation of Christians. But, how effectual a means the
solemnity of this profession might be, to oblige a man to his Christianity, and
to the Unity of the Church, let reason judge. Now, S. Hierome says most truly,
that this office is reserved to the Bishop, for the preserving of Unity in the
Church, by maintaining him in his prerogative. But, is that an argument, that
his prerogative is not original, but usurped? To me it is not, who acknowledge
the Eucharist of a Priest as effectual to the inward man, as that of a Bishop;
the difference between them standing in reference to the visible Body of the
Church. Our author acknowledges the same that S. Hierome advers. Luciferianos
teaches: Demanding only, that it may be lawful for Priests to consecrate the
Chrism which they confirmed with, in case of necessity, which, he says, was
done in many Churches; and protesting, not to impose Law on the Bishop, who,
says he, is Law to the Priest. The supposed S. Ambrose says, that in Egypt,
Priests did confirm in the Bishops absence. It is no news, that Gregory the
Great allows Priests to confirm in Sardinia, Epist. III. 26. for, Durandus
has made him an Heretic for it, in IV. Did. VII. Quaest. IV. and Adriane,
himself afterward Pope, Quaest. de Confirm. in IV. art. ult. yields thereupon,
that a Pope may ^rr in determing matter of Faith. And, the Instruction of the
Armenians by Eugenius IV. in the Council of Florence, acknowledges it had been
done by Priests, the Chrism being consecrated by the Bishop before. The
limitations of necessity, of the Bishops absence, of Chrism consecrated by the
Bishop, import his allowance, and that, his prerogative; Though, as the case is
now, that all are baptized infants, the recognisance of our Christianity then
received cannot be made to so good purpose, as, limiting the solemnity thereof
to the Bishops own hands.

I could say the same of Ordination, and would say the same, if I did find any
irreprovable custom for Priests to ordain. The Canon of Ancyra I have expounded
otherwise, and Eutychius his relation has been rejected for a fable elsewhere.
I find by unanswerable arguments, that the consent of the Church made
Ordinations good, which, for the act of those by whom they were solemnized,
were utterly void. The case of Ischyras and the Meletians is famous. Pretending
to have been made Priest by Coluthus, a Schismatic Bishop under Meletus; by
the Council which Hosius was at, he is made a Layman with the rest of the
Meletians. And upon this account, Athanasius, Apolog. II. insists, that there
could be no sacrilege committed in breaking his Chalice, because there is
neither Consecration nor Church among Schismatics. Yet were these Ordinations
admitted for good by the Council of Nicaea, provided, they stood to the Order
of it. Therefore Athanasius excepts further, that Meletius did not give up
Ischyras his name in the list of his Clergy. The same had been the case of the
Donatists, had they been admitted by the Church, every one in his order; as, I
said, Melchiades Pope was content they should be. The same is the case, which
Leo I resolves Rusticns Bishop of Narbonne in, Epist. XCII. cap. II. allowing
those Ordinations to stand good upon certain terms, which, of themselves, were
void. If it could appear, that the Church did at the first, accept for Bishops
of Alexandria, whomsoever XII Presbyters of his Church should install; I would
conclude him no less Bishop, by the consent of his suffragans, whom the
Priests, advancing to the higher Throne, had set over themselves, then* had
three of them consecrated him by imposition of hands. But, finding that a
fable, and no other instances alleged upon any good ground, I conclude S.
Jerome and S. Chrysostomes credit unquestionable, witnessing no more than they
might see, and affirming the Power of Ordaining to be the Bishops peculiar, as
indeed most concerning the state of his Church. It is said, that Novatus,
Presbyter of the Church of Carthage, made Felicissimus Deacon of that Church.
S. Cypriane Epist. XLIX. But it is said also, that he made Novatianus Bishop
of Rome: Both by the hands of his Faction, whose names you have there Epist.
LV. It is said that, Eustathius being removed from the Sea of Antiochia, in the
year CCCXXVIII, Paulinus who was not made Bishop there till CCCLXII, governed
the Church there with his fellow Presbyters: As also, when Meletius was set
asidea while after, did Flavianus and Diodorus, Theodoret Eccl. Hist. I. 21.
II. 28. IV. 12, 14. Surely, having Catholic Bishops on all sides, they might
govern the widowhood of the Church, without meddling with the Bishops peculiar.
It is said, that Apollinaris was made Bishop of Laodi^^a by a part of the
Clergy and people, and by him, Vitalis, Bishop of the party which he had gained
at Antiochia. Theodoret V. 3. that the Novatians had their Churches in
Constantinople, and the adjacent Provinces, yet never were headed by any Bishop
that fell from the Church; and therefore, made themselves all Ministers. As if
Apollinaris could not as well find Bishops to ordain him, bearing up the party
that chose him, as Audius in Epiphanius Haer. LXX. found a Bishop, as ready as
himself, to fall from the Church, and to make him a Bishop. As if the
Novatians, being, in likelihood, planted from Rome, could not have their
Bishops ordained by their party there. C^rtainly it is a desperate attempt, to
persuade us, that, in the time of Gregory of Tours, any Priest should ordain,
as Bishop of Clermont in Auvergne, because he reports Hist. V. 5. that, one
of them, being chosen by a party of the Clergy and people, kept possession for
above XX years. For, pretending that the neighbor Bishops did him wron^, in not
consecrating him, he might, by favor at Court, hold the possession which he
had got, not meddling with imposition of hands.

But, the Christianity of Scotland makes a great noise, even during those
times, when, it cannot be made to appear, that any Scots dwelt in Scotland.
Which makes me mervail, that this objection should be sound in the Preface to
the X English Histories. For, that the relations of Hector Boise or John Maire,
or Buchanan, (as ignorant as his predecessors, though in better Latin) should
be swallowed by those that could not judge, though it had been against their
interest, it had not been strange. But that a man of such skill in all
antiqui^ies should repeat an ungrounded relation of certain Priests called
C^ld^i, that ^a^e their own Bishops, without any mark of historical truth upon
it, is an argument of more will than skill to do ^ischief in the Church. But,
after Christianity was planted, as well among the Picts, as the Scots in
Scotland by S. Columb, it is argued, that the Bishops of Duresme and others in
England, that sprung from that plantation, were made by Priests only of S.
Columbs Monastery in his Island* Which men of learning would not do, if common
sense could persuade them, not to employ their learning, to make men believe
that it is not light at noon. S. Columb himself is condemned, by the Bishops of
Ireland of S. Patricks plantation, to Penance, for having a hand in blood, as
you may see by the Collections already quoted. A Bishops Sea is planted in the
Island where he builds his Monastery. Shall we imagine S. Columb made him a
Bishop, who lived and died a Priest and an Abbot; or the Bishops that sent S.
Columb upon this worthy employment, for an abatement or commutation of his
Penance? It was the time when S. Kentigerne, his good friend, went to Rome, to
clear himself, that he was made but by one Bishop, as his life relates. Is
there any age in which it can be said, that there was Christianity among the
Scots, and not Bishops, unless it be the time of Buchanans fables? And
therefore, though, as Bede says, that Monastery ruled even the Bishops, for
the reverence of their learning and holiness; Yet, for the authority of
Ecclesiastical proceedings, there is no doubt to be made, that such things must
come from the Bishops, though there is no mention of them, because neither
Bid, nor any soul could think, there would ever be any man so extravagant as
to question it.

Yet that learned Preface argues, that certainly the Culdei in Scotland had
the Power of making their Bishop or Bishops from this beginning, and that they
held it till Turgot was made Bishop of S. Andrews MCVIII. That Ninianus Bishop
of Galloway was no otherwise made, because Plecthelm was ordained upon a new
account afterward, which certainly, can be imputed to no other reason than
this. That Wine Bishop of Winchester, in Bid III. 28. was the only regularly
ordained Bishop of his time; which cannot be true otherwise. A thing to be
wondered at, that so knowing a man should look so far for a reason evidently
false, having a true one in the text of Bid before his eyes. For, what is more
evident, than, that the English Bishops of Austines plantation had their
Ordination from him, not from any Priests? But if from him, then from one
Bishop, which was not regular; The Nicene Canon requiring the Representatives
of the Province, the Apostles Canon, two at least, if not three. Whether S.
Gregory and his Successors intended, that their Power, giving Austine his
Commission, should supply the formality of the Canon; or supposed that the
Welsh Bishops should join with him, (which, afterward, upon the difference
that fell out between them, either they would not grant, or he would not
desire) the consecration of the Bishops of that plantation must needs be
irregular, because it came from Austine alone. Nor need we any other reason
why Wilfride went for his consecration into France, as the same Bid relates.
For, that there was the same irregularity also among the Welsh Bishops, appears
by S. Kentigern, who went to Rome to purge it, as his life relates. And
therefore, though Wine, having been regularly ordained in France, as Malmsbury
says, de Gestis Poutif. II. joined with him two Welsh Bishops, to consecrate
regularly; yet, their regularity which might be in the consecrating of the said
Bishops, might al^o move Wilfride, rather to go into France, than to rest
content with the same. But, that Niniane, being a Welsh Bishop, at such time
as the Welsh had other Bishops, should be ordained by Priests; because a
written Copy Hist. Du^^lm. in Biblioth. Coton. says, after his time, that
Galloway had yet no Bishop; is a conjecture too slight for a man of that
knowledge. For, there is appearance enough, that, under the Welsh, the Sea was
tr^nslated to Glascow, for Kentigern, after Niniane. And that Plecthelm was
first Bishop of Galloway under the Saxons, after that the Kingdom of Cumberland
was become English. Of the ^uldei in Scotland, whatsoever is said before the
Plantation of S. Columb, I challenge ^or a mere fable. After it, though Bid
says, that his Monastery, after an unu^^^l way, ruled even the Bishops; yet,
where there were Bishops, no reason can presume, that their authority did not
ordain, though they thought fit, that the knowledge of the Monastery, whence
they came, should direct, whom. And therefore, whatsoever the rights of these
Culdei in Scotland might afterward be, it cannot way a s^ravv^ ^^rds the
cause of Episcopacy, because never extant in the Church of Scotland, but under
it. They that shall peruse what the late Lord P^imate has written, in his
antiquities of the British Churches, and from his info^mation, Sir H. Spelman
in his Gloss^ry, will not allow them to be any other than C^nons, that vv^re
to att^nd upon the service of God in the Church. Which, whether or no, before
the division of Dioceses in Scotland, they might have that right, in advan^ing
of Bishops to all Seas, which the Clergy of every Church had in resp^ct to
their own Church; I leave to their antiquaries to determine. The extr^cts of
Philostorgius I give more credit to, than to any thing that has been said of
the Scottish Culdei. And they, I admit, relate II. 5. that the ^o^^es who dwelt
on the North of the Black Sea, had Christianity some LXX years before Ulphilas
was made their Bishop. For, having carried ^ome of the Clergy captives in an
inrode, they were by them taught Christianity, says Philostorgius. But, they
might have Priests ordained by the next Bishops, all having that power in that
case: Or, they might have other Bishops before Theophilus, whom the
Ecclesiastical Histories reckon at the Council of Nicaea, before Ulphilas; The
want of records will not evidence, that those Clergy did all acts of
Ecclesiassical power before, or, made themselves Bishops to do what themselves
could not do; that is, give them the power which they had not themselves. I am
secure of all that can be said, from the state of rural Bishops, called
Chorepiscopi, in the ancient Church; Not doubting, that any Bishop may
communicate any part of his power, within his own Church, the rule and custom
of the whole Church inabling him to do it. Socrates and Sozomenus testify,
that, whereas, generally, there were no Bishops but in Cities, in Cyprus they
were settled in Boroughs. I have el^where observed the same in Africa and
Ireland. Either Cities were something else there, than in other Countries, or
else the number of Cities could not be so great as the number of Churches, in
the numerous Afric^ne Synods, and, when S. Patrick sounded as many Churches in
Ireland as there are days in the year* Was this any breach upon S. Paul's rule
or practice, settling Churches in Cities? divide a Province or Sovereignty into
more or fewer Churches, it ways the same to the whole Church, not according to
the number of those that vote in their own Synods. Unless the Council of Trent
could oblige Christendom by a plurality of them that voted there. One Diocese
of Lincoln will better allow, half a douzain rural Bishops to be cut out of it,
than many Cities, in some parts, can have Bishops. In a word, the Rule of the
Church supposes the act of some State, which it cannot regulate. And is it
then strange, supposing the superiority of Bishops, so much differing in
Jurisdiction, though for Order the same, as I have said; that some of them
should have a Bishop under him, (that is, answerable to him immediately, and,
to the Synod of the Province by him, though according to the Canons of the
same) with power to Ordain Priests, according as the said Synods should allow
or withdraw it? I will say further, that, supposing all that I have said (of
the Hierarchy to be an Ordinance of the Apostles, because received by all) to
be a mere imagination of mine own, but granting the unity of the Church to be
of Gods Law, and the means of maintaining it self to be the consent of the
Church, and this consent executed by the establishment of Episopacy through the
whole Church; I can by no means excuse those that go about to put it down from
being Schismatics. Whither, upon an erroneous conscience, they imagine that to
be a transgression of Gods Law, which, the whole Church, for so many ages,
embracing, makes evident to be according to Gods Law; Or whether, God having
commanded the unity of his Church, and his Church having introduced it for a
mean to preserve that unity, they think it lawful for themselves to refuse it;
not believing it to be against Gods Law, and therefore within the power of the
Church to appoint it. For, whatsoever can be said of the several customs,
which several Churches allowed, cannot take place in that which is supposed to
be settled and received in all Churches. Not is it possible, that the Church
should continue one, as a visible Society and Body, in the visible communion of
the same offices of Christianity, if it be free for the parts of i^, to
withdraw themselves from the Laws, which have been received by the whole, to
limit the circumstances of their communion, though not the conditions of it.

I have but one point more to mention, before I leave this subject, concerning
what offices, every degree is, by Gods Law, or by Canon Law, able to minister
in the Church; necessary here to be mentioned, where I have showed, what
persons are enabled to give Law to the Church, and to do, by consequence, those
acts wherein the execution of Law consists. For, by the premises, the truth
of that which I have proposed in the Right of the Church, more clearly appears,
then it could appear there; that the offices of Christianity, which several
degrees are enabled to minister, do argue the interest of those respective
degrees, in the Government of the Church. Ordinations therefore wholly reserved
to the Bishop, as not to be made without his consent; Saving such Ordinations
of inferior Ministers, as, not much concerning the state of his Church, he
may, by way of delegation, refer to his Presbyters, or rural Bishops.
Excommunications likewise, as, concerning the being of every Christian, as a
member of the Church. As for the assistance, concurrence, and consent of the
Presbyters of each Cathedral Church, in and to the Ordination of Presbyters
and Deacons, I refer my self to that which I have said elsewhere; Seeing it
were a thing ridiculous to require, that all the Presbyters of each Diocese
should concur to all such Ordinances. As for the ordaining of Bishops, the
rule is plain, that, being a part of the Provincial Synod, no mere Bishop is
to be ordained without the consent of the Synod, the Bishop of the Mother City
always concurring; Though, all reason requiring, that he who is to govern, be
taken out of the bosom of those whom he is to govern; there is a right and
privilege of nomination due to the Clergy, and of approbation or suffrage, to
the people of the Church. For, it is a thing most certain, that the interest of
the People in the Elections of Bishops, in the ancient Church, (which is still
more clear in the Election of Presbyters) was grounded only upon the
knowledge, which they must needs have, of persons proposed, either to approve
them, (which was called their suffrage) or otherwise: Not that they had any
right to go before their leaders, the Clergy, in nomination, or to oblige the
consent of the Synod of the Province: Though it is true, that, many times,
they did prevent both, and prevail, and might without inconvenience so do, when
the eminence of some person was so discernable, that their grosser judgments
could no^ mistake in the choice; though transgressing their rank, in demanding
even the worthiest, before their turn came. The same rule holds in the
ordaining of superior Bishops, seeing they have all their Church, their
People, their Clergy, and their Synod. The difference that S. Austine,
Breviculo Collationis, III. diei, observes in the consecrating of the Pope,
that it is done by ^he Bishop of Ostia, not by any Metropolitan, is an
exception to a rule. So was Dionys^us ordained in the year, CCLIX. if we
beli^ve the acts of S. Laurence. And therefore, that Pelagius I. was ordained
by two Bishops, and a Priest of Ostia, as his life in Anastasius relates; by
the strictness of the Nic^ne Canon, voids it: For, how can he have carried the
greater part of the Bishops? The condescension of the Apostles Canon, and
consent ex postfacto might make it good and valid, by the same reason as before.
The state of particular Christians is not of such consequence to the Church,
that it should be regularly the business of a Synod; though, for the
assistance, concur^ence, and consent of the Clergy of each Church, I refer my
self to that which I have said elsewhere, and which would be too particular to
be debated in this abridgement. As for the matter of Penance, in things that
come not to the knowledge of the Church, I have no cause to repent me of that
which I have said in the Right of the Church; where I have showed, that P^nance
and Absolution in the inward Court of the Conscience, extends as far as the
Communion of the ^ucharist, from which Penance excludes, and to which
Absolution restores. That all Priests, and none but P^iests receive, by their
Ordination, power of celebrating the Eucharist; that is to say, of consecrating
and communicating the same, and, that it cannot be done by any other, without
very great Sacrilege* And that, for an argument of the Power of the Keys in the
hand of every Priest, though limitable by the rule and custom of the Church,
to the inward Court of the conscience. That the offices of Preaching and
Baptizing, ^re regularly communicable to Deacons, but, in case of necessity,
even to those of the people, always by delegation from their Superiors the
Bishops: In sign whereof, neither was it the cus^ome that any man should
consecrate the Eucharist, Preach or Baptize, in the Bishops pr^s^nce, but
himself, or by his appointment. As for the reading of the Scriptures, and the
s^nging of Psalms in the Church, it is so well known to have been the Deacons
office in the ancient Church, that there were several ranks of Deacons
appointed for those s^v^ral works, Lectores and Ps^l^ae (which now like those
in the Church of Rome, help to make the inferior Orders) the rule of the
Church, being grounded upon undeniable wisdom, and the authority of S. Paul,
forbidding nov^ces to be promoted; that exercise in the inferior offices of
the Clergy, might be a condition requisi^ to advance unto superior degrees in
the Clergy. Now, for the celebrating and blessing of Marriage by Priests only, I
must go no further at present; because, having showed, that it is to be allowed
by the Church, I have not yet showed, that it is to be solemnized by the
blessing of the Church.

CHAP. XXI. Of the times of God service; By what Title of his Law the first day
of the week is kept Holy. How the Sabbath is to be sanctified by Moses Law. The
fourth Commandment, the ground upon which the Apostles inacted it. Upon what
ground the Church limiteth the times of Gods service. Of Easter, and the Lent
Fast before it. Of the difference of meats, and measure of Fasting. Of the
keeping o four Lords Birthday, and other Festivals, and the regular hours of
the day for Gods service.
HAving thus showed, first, what are the Powers of the Church; and then, in
whose hands they rest; and, having said before, that, the determining and
limiting of all circumstances for the exercise of those offices of Gods
service, for the Communion whereof the Church stands; and also, of those
qualities which render men capable to communicate in that same, is totally
reserved to the Church, so far as Gods Law has not prevented the
determination of it; We are now to consider the time, the place, the manner and
form, the ceremonies and solemnities whereby the celebration of Church offices
is either already determined by Gods Law, or remains determinable by the Law of
the Church. And this I cannot do better, then, beginning with the times of
divine service, and considering what Laws of God, what Laws of the Church, all
Christians ought to be tied to in that point; whence it may appear, what may be
the subject of Reformation in it. Where, I find it requisite in the first place
to debate, by what right the first day of the week, called Sunday, is set apart
for the service of God, under Christianity.

There is an opinion too well known amongst us, that the first day of the week
is kept by Christians in virtue of the fourth Commandment, which obliged the
Jews to keep the seventh day of the week. Which opinion if it be true, they
have some ground for confining the service of God to it. But it cannot be
maintained without two assumptions. The first; That the seventh day, in the
fourth Commandment signifies, not the seventh day of the week, on which God
rested from creating any more, but one of the seven days: The second, That the
resurrection of Christ upon the first day of the week, is a reason that
necessarily determines all Christians, to do that which they are bound to do on
one day of the seven, upon the first and none else. Neither of which is true,
though the later have far the more appearance of truth in it. For it is
manifest, that the will of God may be, having obliged the Jews to keep one day
in seven, to oblige Christians to keep one day in six, or less, unesse it be
otherwise determined by some commandment of Gods. Now it appears, that the
first day of the week was kept in the times of the Apostles, our Savior having
peared unto them after his Resurrection upon that day, Joh. XIX. 26. Act. XX.
^. 1 Cor. XVI. 2. Apoc. I. 10. But, of any precept to make this a Law to all
Christians, nothing appears in the Scriptures of the New Testament. Again, it
may be said; That the Gospel requires more plentiful fruits of obedience then
the Law: And therefore, if the Law required one day of seven for the service of
God, that the Gospel requires more. Nor will it concern me here to prove that
this opinion is true: It is more then enough that I can say, that, before this
novelty came into England, it cannot appear that ever any Christian thought
otherwise. For, I argue no more in this place, but that, the rising of our Lord
upon the first day of the week, does not necessarily determine the Church to
keep one day of the seven, as the command of God does. For, had God commanded
one day of seven to be kept under the Gospel, as under the Law, there had been
no room for further consideration. But, so long as there is only a reason on
the one side; That the Resurrection to Christians is as the Creation to Jews:
And a reason on the other side; That it becomes Christians, in this as in all,
to do more then Jews; I cannot deny that there is a sufficient reason, for him
that has power of determining that which God has not determined, to appoint
the first day of the week; but I utterly deny, that there is any Law of God,
before the act of this power, to determine it. And the reason is plain: For, in
matters of this nature, there may be sufficient reason for several
determinations, because it is not the substance, but the circumstance of that
which is by nature necessarily good, and Gods service. Again, supposing that
Christians are bound to keep one day of seven for Gods service; may I not ask
why the passion of Christ should not determine them to keep the sixth, as well
as the Resurrection the first day of the week? Especially in the sense of them,
who think they have reason to feast on good Friday, and to celebrate their
Fasts on the Lords day? For, if the resurrection of Christ be no reason to make
the day thereof Festival, nor his Passion, why we should rather fast on the
day of it; certainly, where both cannot be kept, the one concerns us as much as
the other do, and therefore there is as much reason to keep this as that. This
to the later of the two assumptions.

But in the former, there is no color of truth; Nor do I see how any thing can
be more strange then this; That so many men professing learning, and zeal to
the Scriptures alone, should read in the Commandment, that God res^ed the
seventh day from making the world, and therefore commanded the seventh day to
be kept holy; And understand by all this, only that God would have one day of
seven, not that day of the seven on which himself rested. Unless it be still
more strange, that men of common sense should believe, that the Jews were not
tied by Gods Law to keep the day on which God rested, but only one of seven;
so that, the keeping of the seventh was not by Gods Law, but by man's. For if it
be once granted, that God commanded them to keep, not only one day of seven,
but in particular, the seventh; how can any common sense understand, that
Christians, by the same command, should be tied to keep the first day of the
week? If prejudice and faction went not under the color of zeal to the
Scriptures, it would appear to be zeal toward our selves and ours, that offers
such violence to our own sense, in seeking to impose this sense upon the
Scriptures. In plain terms, there can be nothing more manifest to Christians in
the Law of Moses; then it is manifest that the precept of the Sabbath is a
ceremonial Precept, figuring the rest of Christians from the bondage of sin, by
doing, for the future, God works here in the Church militant; and from the
bondage of pain, when that rest is become perfect in the triumphant Church of
the World to come: And all this by the work of this precept; that is, by
resting from bodily labor in the Land of promise, in remembrance of the
bondage of Egypt, which the Israelites had escaped. For in Deutronomy V. 15.
this is the reason alleged why they where to rest, Ezekiel. XX. 12. Ex. XXXI. 31.
I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between me and them, that they might know,
that it is I the Lord their God that sanctifies them. And therefore the
Apostle, Heb. IV. 4. 5, 9, 10. shows, the seventh day to signify the rest of
the Land of p^o^i^e. For, says he, in one place it is said; God rested on the
seventh day from all his work. And here (Psalm. XCV. 11.) if they shall enter
into my rest. For, he that is entered into his rest, has ceased from his own
works, as God from his. Therefore there remains another rest to the people of
God (as the Apostle argues) by the same reason, as the carnal rest of the
Jews is a figure of the spiritual rest of Christians, in grace here, in glory
in the world to come. And therefore, when he is afraid least he should have
labored in vain upon the Galatians, IV. 10. because they observed days, and
months, years; when he teaches the Colossians, II. 16. not to be overruled
in the matter of new Moons or Sabbath; When he shows the Romans XIV. 5. that
they who esteemed on one day before another were weak Christians; He did not
mean to remove the obligation of the seventh day upon the first; but to show,
that Christians may as well think themselves bound in conscience to be
circumcised, as to be under the precept of the Sabbath.

And, let me understand, how we can be bound by the precept of the Sabbath, and
not be bound to that measure of rest which the precept of the Sabbath limiteth.
For, the constitution which the Jews go by this day, is so grounded in the
Text, that it is not possible to imagine, that ever it was practiced otherwise;
the leter of the Law manifestly distinguishing between work and servile work^,
and permitting the dressing of meat upon the first and last days of the
Passov^r, Pentecost, and the feast of Tabernacles, but forbidding servile work,
that is to say, such work as sl^ves were employed about for their Masters
advantage; but, upon the Sabbath and day of atonement, forbidding all work;
that is, not only servile work, but the dressing of meat, upon those days,
whereupon comes the express prohibition of kindling fire on the Sabbath, not
for the time that they lived in the wilderness, but, as the Law expresses, in
all their habitations, Ex. XII. 16. XXXV. 30. XVI. 23. Levit. XXIII. 3. 7, 8,
21, 25, 28. Numb. XXIX. 1, 7. And therefore, Deuteronomy. XVI. 8. where, for brevities
sake, he says of the Passover, No work shall be done in it; The Greek adds
out of Exodus and Leviticus; (...) Besides what shall be dressed for meat. And
therefore, when our Lord goes to d^ne with a Pharisee, Luc. XIV. 1. it is no
marvail that he is invited upon a Festival, on which they hold themselves
still bound to eat the best meat, and drink the best wine, and put on the
clothes they have: But he knew his entertainment must be upon meats dre^t the
day before. And therefore, he not only reproves the hypocrisy of the
Pharisees, who, for their own profit, to draw their Ox or their Ass out of the
pit, could b^l^ it; and in a charitable cause, of healing a man, stood upon it:
But further, he shows it to be a mere positive precept of the Law, when, by
the right of a Prophet, he commands the lame man whom he had cured, to carry
away his bed upon the Sabbath, Joh. V. 10. the Prophet of the old Law having
forbidding to carry any burden upon the Sabbath, Jer. XVII. 21. 22. And the
reason, my Father still works, and so do I work; in^erreth, that, as the
rest of God was not from bodily labor, so neither is it the rest from bodily
labor which he or his Gospel intends. I conclude therefore, that which will
seem strange to unskilful people; That the only thing commanded by the leter
of the fourth Commandment, is to rest from bodily labor upon the seventh day
of the week, on which God rested, from whence it is called the Sabbath; But, by
the mystical sense of it under the New Testament, to rest from our own works
of sin here, that we may attain to the rest of God in the world to come. And
I cannot see how a more evident argument can be expected for this, then the
extending of the precept, to cattle and strangers, not only to children, who
otherwise are not under the precept. For, strangers, in the Law, (that is,
those that worshipped the true God alone, but were not circumcised, who are
therefore always translated Conuerts in the Syriack, to wit, from Idols) were
only tied to seven precepts, which all the Sons of Noe had received from him;
Whereof that of the Sabbath was none. And therefore, it is not they that are
commanded to rest, but Gods people are commanded that they shall not work, as
they are commanded that their Cattle shall not work.

I know there is a strong Argument against this, in vulgar esteem, which to me
makes no difficulty at all; that they are commanded to sanctify or keep holy
the Sabbath. But, he that admits the true difference between the Law and the
Gospel, must admit a legal as well as a spiritual holiness. And I would
know, what holiness there is in offering a brute beast to God in sacrifice,
that is not, in sitting still on the seventh day: Both being stamped with Gods
command; and the rest of the Body signifying the rest of the soul from sin,
which is very holy, as the sacrifice is holy, because it signifies the
holiness of our Lord Christ, or of them whom he sanctifies. The Apostle
teaches us thus to distinguish, when he says, Heb. IX. 11. If the blood of
Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of a red cow, sprinkling the purified,
sanctifies to the purity of the flesh; For, the holiness it procures, is but
the capacity of free conversation amongst the people of the true God, as to the
leter of the Law: And, bodily rest upon the Sabbath, is a full profession of
the true God which made heaven and earth, and brought his people out of Egypt.
I do not deny, that the service of God was commanded by the Law upon the
Sabbath: But not by this precept. You have an order for public Assemblies on
the Sabbath, as well as on other Festivals, Levit. XXIII. you have an order for
what sacrifices should be offered on each of them, Number. XXVIII. But, had the
Law gone no further then the fourth Commandment, the Jews had not been tied to
those precepts. I acknowledge further, that they were bound to serve God with
other offices (such as are common to them and us both) upon the Sabbath, as
upon other Festivals, when they had Synagogues, or means to assemble themselves
otherwise, as Abenezra observes out of 2 King. IV. 23. For had it not been the
custom to resor^ to the Prophets at the Festivals, he would not have said; Why
will thou go to the Prophet? It is neither new Moon nor Sabbath. And the order
for this, which we see by the acts of the Apostles, and the Gospels, as well as
by the Jews Constitutions, no man will deny to have obliged them by virtue of
the Law; But, not by the leter of it: which had it been precisely followed, the
objection of Origin, and other of the Fathers must have taken place; and no man
must have stirred out of the place where he should be found, at the coming in
of the Sabbath. But, in regard there was always in that people, a sense of
that spiritual service of God, which these carnal precepts tended to; therefore
was there provided a power to limite the extent of the leter, so as not to
destroy duties of greater consequence. And it seems, they pitched upon a
reasonable ground for a reasonable measure, when they made a Sabbath days
journey so much as the distance of the utmost camp from the Tabernacle in the
wilderness: But, he that was not within that distance of a Synagogue, by going
to a Synagogue must violate the Law, that says; Thou shall not stir out of
thy place on the Sabbath. It was therefore holiness to sit still; otherwise,
the service of God must not have been omitted for it. Therefore, the service of
God by those offices which Christians serve him with, is no otherwise,
intimated rather then provided for, by the Law, then, as the Gospel is
witnessed rather then inacted by it. And it is truly said, that God blessed the
seventh day and hallowed it; in that he appointed his rest in the world to
come, for those who had rested from their own works here; But consequently, in
that he appointed the rest of the seventh day in the Land of promise to be a
figure of it. For, I take not upon me to say; That God hallowed not the seventh
day till he gave the Law, (understanding that which is said at the creation;
that he blessed and sanctified it, by a Prolepsis, because he did it when he
gave the Law) because I need not: The designing of the thing signified by it,
(which is more properly the rest of God, then not working) reflecting the
attribute of holiness upon the day which he designed for the sign of it. For,
in that God rested the seventh day from making all his works; he signified,
that he appointed rest for them that do his work here, in the world to come. In
that, delivering his people out of Egypt, he appointed them to rest from bodily
labor upon the seventh day; he signified, that he appointed them whom he had
given the rest of the promised Land, a shadow of resting from their own works
to do his, the substance whereof is the conversation of Christians in the
Church, which the Land of promise ^igureth, as well here, as in the world to
come. The former appointment is that which the blessing and hallowing of the
seventh day, at the creation; the second, that which the hallowing of the same,
at giving the Law, signifies. Nor do I make it my business, that the Fathers
before the Law, did ever keep or not keep the seventh day for Gods service;
because I neither see evidence for this, nor for that. For, though the
remembrance of the seven days of the week is so ancient, and so general among
all Nations, (as you may see by that very learned Work, de Jure naturae and
Gentium secundum Ebraeos) that you may well conclude it to be a mark and
impress of the creation in seven days; yet will this argue no observation of it
under the Patriarchs: Because, the appropriating of them to the seven Planets
(though con^rived by the Devil, to divert that truth to superstition, which is
the ground of Religion according to the Scripture) disables us to argue the
creation it self from it, to those that know it not otherwise, much more any
rule of Gods service grounded upon it. But he that should say, that the Sabbath
was kept under the law of Nature, as it was to be kept under the law of Moses,
must first answer Tertullian, cont. Jud. cap. IV. (and Justine from whom he
has it, and all Fathers that have used it* after them, and understood the
interess of Christianity better then we do) Quis legit Abrahamum Sabbatizantem?
For why should he think to persuade us to such a ridiculous imagination, if he
have no Scripture for it? And therefore, though I agree not with Philo, that
the Jews had forgot which was the seventh day, till God recalled the
remembrance of it, by sending down Manna, and therefore said; Remember to keep
holy the Sabbath; yet I do not allow this to be said, because they had forgot
it by their Apostasy in Egypt; where, it is plain, they forgot their God, as I
showed you before: But, because they forgot Gods first command, at the giving of
Manna, therefore it is reason they should be charged to remember it for the
future.

As little do I esteem of that mere voluntary presumption, that, being part of
the Decalogue, the precept of the Sabbath, must needs be part of Gods perpetual
Law, whither natural and moral, or positive. For, is it not the Decalogue
that says; That thy days may belong in the land which the Lord thy God gives
thee? Or, does the Land of promise in, the leter, belong to any but Israelites?
Again, the tenth Commandment forbids to covet another man's wise, adultery
being forbidden before: And therefore, to covet another man's wife in the tenth
Commandment, is; to compass another man's wife; which might be done where the
Law allows divorces, as Moses his Law does. If therefore the first and last
Commandment of the second Table are, by the terms of them, appropriated to Gods
ancient people; is it strange, that the precept of the Sabbath should not be
thought perpetual, to oblige all mankind, but Ceremonial, to oblige only the
same? That there should be a Ceremonial precept in the first Table of the
Decalogue? Nay, seeing, to all mankind, it can import no more then a
circumstance of time for the public service of God; what reason can be
imagined, why a precept of that consequence should make one in the first Table
of the Decalogue? whereas, importing to* that people, the creation of all
things by the true God, and their deliverance out of Egypt, and by consequence
the obligation of his whole Law; it is worthily reckoned, by the Jews Doctors,
among the very principal precepts of it. As for Christians, the literal sense
of it is no less unlawful for them to observe, then it is for them to be
circumcised, or to undertake the Law of Moses; to the which the Sabbath, next
to circumcision, obliges. And by consequence, the spiritual sense of it
imports no less then the whole duty of a Christian, (which all ceremonies do
figure) that is to say; resting from our works of sin, and consequently,
busying our selves about the works of Gods service. And therefore I do marvel,
that those who so obstinately promote this Doctrine, are not sensible of the
scandal they give to them, who have visibly been seduced to keep the Saturday,
by grounding themselves upon it; And may, by the same reason, be seduced, to be
circumcised and turn Jews; If yet it be a thing to do, and that diverse
English, in these unstable times, not distinguishing between that which did,
and that which does oblige, when they find both in the Scriptures, have not
hereby been moved to make that change. For, when they are told, that, by the
leter of the fourth Commandment, they are obliged to keep the first day of the
week; And, by common sense, discovering a great part of the premises, discern,
that if the fourth Commandment be in force, they cannot be obliged to keep the
Lords day; Is it not an even wager, that, (not doubting the fourth Commandment
to be in force, as they are told*) they shall keep the Saturday, which, if it
be in force, they ought to keep, rather then the Lords day, which (finding no
reason for it, because they are told none) they will presently imagine to be a
Popish custom. I know there is one argument, which is very plausible to induce
well meaning Christians, into that zeal which we see they have, for the strict
keeping of the Lords day, which they call the Sabbath; Because this opinion
will oblige the world to exercise more works of godliness, and to abstain from
more of those debauches which Festivals occasion, in vulgar people, then
otherwse. To which, for the present, I will say only this; That, having showed
the truth to be as it is, I can oblige all Christians to believe, that Gods
glory, and the advancement of his service, cannot be grounded well, but upon
the truth. And therefore, I may well demand their patience, till I come by and
by, to show the ground of the mistake which they are carried away with, to
think, that Gods glory and service is not more plentifully provided for, by the
Laws and customs of the Catholic Church, then by strict keeping the Sabbath
upon a false ground; which, hindering the effect of those Laws, by consequence,
hinders Gods service.

But now, all this being settled, what is there remaining to allege, why
Christians should be bound to keep the Lords day, but the act of the Apostles,
by virtue whereof it came into force among all Christians, in all Churches?
For, it would be too ridiculous to allege, that it is grounded upon those
Scriptures, whereby it appears that it was kept under the Apostles, either as
a reason sufficient, or as distinct from the authority of the Apostles. For,
these Scriptures being the Scriptures of the Apostles, we can derive no
authority from them, but that which we first suppose in the Apostles? I
suppose, here that no man will, say that our Lords appearing to his Disciples
after his resurrection upon that day, was enough to make it a Law, or evidence
that it was so made; unless his Apostles could testify that he appeared to
that purpose. As for the rest, if it may by circumstance appear, that, under
the Apostles, they did assemble to the service of God upon the Lords day; will
it therefore follow, that all Chistians are bound to do the same? Or, can any
more then this appear, by that which I alleged out of the Apostles writings?
If there could, the writings of the Apostles being their act, as much as any
act whereby they could declare an intent to oblige the Church; there will be
nothing to bind it to keep the Lords day, but the authority of the Apostles.
But, he that will give his own common reason leave to speak, shall hear it say;
that it is not their words that oblige us to it, but the original and
universal custom of the Church, evidencing, that they used to celebrate that
day, with an intent to introduce the obligation of it into the Church. For, of
this original and universal custom, having as yet found no question made on
any side; I hold it superfluous to take pains, to make evidence of that which
no man questions. When Justine the Martyr, presenting to the Empire an Apology
for all Christans, declares, that their custom was to assemble on the Lords
day, to serve God with the offices of Christianity, which there he describes;
had it not been to abuse himself and the Empire, to declare that for the
custom of all Christians, which was indeed the custom of some, but of others
not? Whither Easter was to be kept upon the fifteenth day of the first Moon,
upon which our Lord suffered, or upon the next Lords day, upon which he rose
again, was a dispute in the Church, as ancient as the Apostles; The former
custom having been delivered to the Churches of Asia by S. John, the later to
the West, by S. Peter and S. Paul. But, what ground could there be for this
dispute, had not the first day of the week been honored and observed above the
rest, in regard of our Lords rising again? Certainly the E^ionites were one of
the ancientest sects thar rose up against the Church; and they, as Eusebius,
Eccles. Hist. III. 27. keeping the Sabbath as the Jews, and because the Jews
kept it, observing also the Lords day, because the Christians kept it. It is
true, that, among the Eastern Christians, the Saturday was observed for the
service of God, many ages after condescension to the Jews (in regard whereof
the observation of Moses law was in use after Christ, in some parts of the
Church more, in some less) was quite out of date. But that is no argument,
that the Lords day was not kept, when the Sabbath was kept, to them who see S.
Paul keep the Lords day, Act. XX. 7. within the time of compliance with the
Jews. For, the offices which God is served with by the Church, are pleasing to
him at all times, as well as in* all places; whereas the keeping of the
Sabbath, upon any day but a Saturday, would have been a breach of his Law. For,
when the other Festivals of the Jews are called Sabbaths in the Law; that is
not to say, that the Sabbath was kept upon them (for I have showed you two
several measures of rest due upon them by the Law) but, that they participated
much of the nature of the Sabbath, and therefore may be called with an addition
such or such Sabbaths, but not absolutely the Sabbath. Therefore, when
Christians afterward continued the custom of serving God upon the Sabbath,
that is the Saturday; it is to be understood, that they served God with the
offices of Christianity, not with the rest of the Jews* Sabbath. If it be
further demanded, whither the obligation of the Lords day do not depend upon
the precep^ of the Sabbath, so that it may be called, with an addition, the
Sabbath of Christians, though not absolutely the Sabbath; (because that n^me is
possessed already by the Saturday, in the language of all Christians as well as
Jews, till men affected an abuse in the name, to bring their mistake into men's
minds) To this I answer; that, if the Lords day had no dependence upon the
precept of the Sabbath, we could not give a reason why one day of seven is
observed: For, the choice of the number could not come by chance. And I
cautioned before, that the Resurrection of Christ was as sufficient a reason why
the Church should serve God on the Sunday, as the creation of the world was,
why the Synagogue should serve God on the Saturday. But this dependence was not
immediate, because I showed also, that this was not enough to introduce the
obligation upon us. The act of the Apostles intervening, was the means to make
the obligation necessary and legal; whereof, before, the ground only was
reasonable. But, I do not mean this dependence to be the effect of the fourth
Commandment only, which prescribes only bodily rest, as I have showed; but
of these appendences of it, whereby, the Assemblies of the Jews, and their
sacrifices for that day are inacted. For, because they were to serve God upon
the Sabbath, it was certainly reasonable, in regard of our Lords resurrection,
that Christians should serve God upon the first day of the Week. If any man in
this regard will call the Lords day the Christians Sabbath, or the like, I find
no fault with it (nay, I find it so called by the Christians of Aethiopia, in
Scaliger, VII. de Emend. Temporum.) Provided he conne my opinion that thanks
which it deserves, for leaving no further room to unstable spirits, to imagine
(as some great Masters have done) that it is in the power of Churches (or of
Christian Powers ^rotecting them) to choose another day of seven, or of less
then seven, for Gods public service. For, not being out of the reach of such
power immediately, by virtue of the fourth Commandment, as I and they both have
showed, it is beyond the rea^h of it by virtue of the Apostles authority, and
the act of it.

And now it is time to declare, the sense of the Catholic Church derived from
the doctrine and writings of the Apostles to be this, concerning the times of
Gods service; That, the offices thereof being always acceptable to God, and
seasonable, so that they be orderly done, it is the duty of the Church to
provide that they be as frequently celebrated, as the occasions of the world
will allow; not by particular Christians alone, but, at the common assemblies
of the Church. Whereby it may appear, how injurious, and prejudicial to the
service of God the zele of those is, who, challenging the whole Sunday for the
service of God, by virtue of the fourth Commandment, seem, thereupon, to take
it for granted, that there ought to be no order for the public service of God,
upon other Festivals, and times of Fasting appointed by the Church; nor, which
is more, for the daily celebration of divine service in the Church. There has
been a pretense indeed, that, when the fourth Commandment says; Six days
thou shall labor, and do all that thou have to do; It forbids the Church to
give any Rule of forbearing bodily labor, for the exercise of Gods service. But
so ridiculous, that, even these who have the conscience to hold the conclusion,
have not the face to maintain the premises. That form of speech manifestly
importing no more than this; That the present Law requires no more than keeping
the first day of the week; seeing it is manifest, that, by other Laws, God
intended to proceed further, and to except other days from the bodily labor of
his then people, for his service. Thereupon it is manifest, that the Synagogue
proceeded likewise to except other days, for which there rose occasions, for
the like purpose. And truly, those who think it a burden to the duty of
working for men's living, that there should be an Order for the daily serving of
God in the Church, having all them to attend it, that are not prevented of it
by necessary occasions; may look upon the Jews, and blush to consider, that
they, as S. Jerome, Epiphanius, and Justine the Martyr assure us, should
assemble themselves thrice a day in their Synagogues to curse our Lord Christ;
(which, their own Constitutions, not mentioning, do provide for the service of
God nevertheless) but, that it should be counted superstitious for Christians
to meet for Gods service in public, unless it be on the Lords day. Certainly,
the practice of the primitive Christians at Jerusalem signifies no such thing;
all the contribution there raised tending to no other purpose, but, that the
Church might hold together in the doctrine of the Apostles, and the service of
God* and celebration of the Eucharist; Though they went also into the Temple,
and served God with the Jews, whom they then hoped, and intended to reduce unto
Christianity. But I will referr my self in this point, as in that which
follows, to that which I have said, in my Book of the service of God at the
Assemblies of the Church, Chap. VIII. having received, from no hand, any manner
of satisfaction, in the least of it. Whereby it will appear, that the Church
has power to limit the times of Gods service upon this ground; Because the
occasions of the world suffer not Christians always to attend it, which, so
often as the Church shall find it possible, they are bound to do: And, that the
use of this power, as it is justified by the practice of the whole Church, so
it is necessary to the advancement of godliness according to Christianity: Nor
can the effect thereof be superseded, without hindering the service of God,
whatsoever the strict keeping of the Lords day may contribute to the same.
Those times of persecution succeeded, to the primitive Church, wherein, it is
altogether admirable to consider, how it was possible to reduce the whole body
of Christians to an orderly course, of so frequent service of God, as
appears; The difficulties of assembling themselves being so great, as under
persecution must needs be. Therefore, when the exercise of Christianity was
free and peaceable, when all Nations and Languages, upon their conversion to
Christianity, had made it their business, and set aside means, by which the
service of God might be daily celebrated, and all men have opportunity to
frequent the same, so far, either as their occasions would give leave, or
their hearts to God mind them to frame their occasions; to take away this
order, and to destroy the means of executing it, as either superstitious or
superfluous, what is it else but that curse, which the Jews, in their
Synagogues, would have wished Christianity, when they met to curse Christ?

And, if all difference of days for the service of God being taken away by
Christianity, so that no office of it is at any time unacceptable; (as the
offices of Judaism were abominable, not upon their legal days) And the Apostles
have notwithstanding, for orders sake, that there might be a certain time,
inviolably dedicated to that purpose, set aside the first day of the week for
it shall; we question whether it was they that instituted the solemnity of
Easter Holy Days, and consequently of Whitsuntide, in remembrance of the
resurrection of our Lord, and the coming of the Holy Ghost, or not? For, all
the Lords days in the year have the mark that stands on them, from that one,
on which our Lord rose again. And, since we know, that the difference about
keeping Easter is as ancient as the Apostles, and, that there could have been
no ground for it, had not the Lords day born that mark at that time; (the
question being only when the Fast should end, and the celebration of Easter
come on) can any doubt remain, that the solemnity of Easter was then in use?
And, if it can be said, that the keeping of Easter for seven days, from
whence, in stead of the Heathen names, the Christians called the days of the
week, feriam primam, secundam -- and septimam; and the use, to pray standing
from Easter to Whitsuntide, were not original nor universal customs of the
Church, but accessory and local; yet can it never be said, that there was any
time, or any part of the Church that did not fast before Easter, that Fast
which they called (...) in Greek, and quadragefimam in Latin; Though I cannot
say for forty days, as the name seems to import, (...) signifying a sum of
fifty days in the language of all Jews or Christians that write in Greek. For,
I have not on any hand any satisfaction in the words of Irenaeus, the true
reading whereof, there maintained, seems to import; that, in some places,
they fasted but forty hours, before the Feast of the Resurrection. Tertullian
de Jejuniis cap. XIII. objecteth to the Catholics, that they Fasted the Easter
Fast, citra dies quibus ablatus est sponsus. On this side the days on which
the Bridegroom was taken away. More days than our Lord was in the grave. But
that is far from forty. That which is alleged for the forty days Fast out of
Ignatius is not found in the true Copy. Thus far the solemnity of Easter, and
the Fast before it appear original: But not forty days. This will scarce allow
that to be true, which the learned Seldom in his book de Anno Jud. c. XXI.
produces, of his Eutychius, which says; that the Christians, after the
Ascension of our Lord, though they kept Easter when our Lord suffered and rose
again, yet, kept the Fast of forty days immediately after the Epiphany, as our
Lord after his Baptism; (which, they supposed, fell on the day of his birth)
and that, when Demetrius was Bishop of Alexandria, by many leters and messages
that passed between him, and Victor of Rome, and the then Patriarchs of
Jerusalem and Antiochia, it was agreed, that, the order which has since
prevailed should take place. Much less will the said passages of Irenaeus and
Tertullian allow, that which the book of the Popes lives, compiled by
Anastasius, but, out of the records of that Church, reports of Telesphorus,
that he ordered the Lent Fast for VII weeks before Easter; rather signifying,
that he ordered something about it, which later authors report, according to
that which was later in debate: For, that there was dispute, in the time of
Pius, about keeping Easter, (that is, ending the Fast) on the Lords day, or
according to the Jews, may appear by the revelation which Hermes his Pastor
pretends to that purpose; Which Anastasius allegeth to that purpose.
Therefore, though I can allow Eutychius no credit of historical truth, when he
agrees not with authors which have that credit, yet, in a case where
intelligence is wanting, I must needs think his relation considerable. It is
well enough known, what Socrates has discoursed for his opinion, that the Lent
Fast came in by mere custom, not by any Order of the Apostles; what he has
alleged of the visible practice of the Church in his time, to that purpose
Eccles. ^ist. V. 21. Sozomenus VII. 19. more particularly, that the Montanists
fasted two weeks, some three continual weeks, others, as much or more weeks as
came to three weeks; (which perhaps may save Socrates his credit, reporting,
that at Rome, three weeks; if it be true which Peitus has observed, that Leo
and S. Austine say, that they fasted not the the Tuesdayes and Thursdayes of
Lent in their time) others, in five, six, or seven. More, he might have said,
For, the Christians of Syria and Aethiopia, and the Coptites begin their Ninive
a week before Septuagesima: That is their forty days fast, because Jonas
prophesied; Yet forty days and Ninive shall be destroyed; The variety seems
to argue that it came by degrees to this certain number of days, by the
example of the Clergy, the freedom of the people, and the authority of the
Church. Which, though I shall be glad to be informed further in, whether so or
otherwise; yet, having settled from the beginning, that the chief difference
between the Apostles Orders, and those of the Whole Church, is the matter of
them, determinable by common sense and the state of times, to conduce or not to
conduce to the end of Gods service, for which it stands; To me, it makes not
much difference, whether instituted by the Apostles, or received by the whole
Church, the power of the Church; manifestly extending to it: And the
solemnizing thereof being of such inestimable use, though not for the
instructing of them that stood to be Christians, as in the primitive times, yet
always for the profession and practice of Penance, and, for the reconciling of
sinners to the Communion of the Eucharist at Easter. And therefore, if I do not
apply unto the Forty days Fast, as, to the Fast before Easter, I do apply the
rule of S. Austine, that those things which the whole Church observes, having
no remembrance of the beginning of them, must be ascribed to the Tradition of
the Apostles; yet I do apply unto them that other saying of S. Austine, which
imports; That to dispute against those things, which the whole Church
observes, is the height of madness. Nor is there any thing in that Law
unsurable to Christianity, but that which the coming of the world into the
Church necessarily inforceth; That all are constrained to keep it; and so, good
Christians, notwithstanding the exception of the sick and impotent, may suffer
for the refractory and profane, among whom they live; Who, when it came first
in use, no doubt, were left to themselves; and to that, which, the good example
of the Clergy moved them in conscience to undergo.

The Church of England, I see, for the prejudices which that time was possessed
with, could not undertake to restore the ancient custom of public Penance, at
the beginning of Lent. But when the Church professes withal, how much it were
for the souls health of all, that Penance were restored; when it prescribes a
Commination against sinners, to charge upon particular Consciences, to exercise
that themselves, which, for preserving of Unity, it undertaketh not to impose
upon all; when it orders those Prayers for the service of that season, which
cannot be said with a good conscience, but by those, who, in some measure apply
themselves to these exercises; well may we grant, that the tares of false
doctrine springing up with the Reformation, have made these wholesome orders of
little effect; but it must never be granted, that the Church of England makes
either the Lent Fast, or other times of fasting superstitiosu. As for the
difference of meats, true it is, that S. Paul has marked those that sorbid
marriage, that enjoin abistnence from meats, which God has made to be received
with thanksgiving by those that believe and know the truth, as men of lying
spirits, and teaching the doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, with
seared consciences, 1 Timothy IV. 1-4. But, always understanding those followers
of Simon Magus, and Cerinthus, from whom, the Heretics that succeeded,
learned, that this world was not made by God; and, that the bond of marriage
came in by the spirits that made the world, whom we must escape, by abstaining
from some kinds of creatures. What Christian can dare to say, with a good
conscience, that the rule or custom of the Church, to forbear those meats and
drinks that inflame the blood most, for the mortification of the flesh, has
any dependence upon those wicked blasphemies? Nay, who can read, that Daniel,
in his fastings, eat no pleasant meat; but he must infer, that there is no
fasting observed, where men observe no difference of meats? Look into the Jews
Constitutions, and see how they observed their Fasts, and their Festivalls; you
shall find it more ancient then Christianity, to solemnize Sabbaths, (and
proportionably other Festivalls) with the best meats, the best drinks, the best
apparel, all things of the best: And on the other side, as much care, that
there be nothing to signify, or ground any such construction upon their Fasts
and Humiliations. So that, we may well ask those that appoint their solemn
Humiliations upon the Sabbath, (for so they will needs call the Sunday, right
or wrong) what Religion they intend to be of; neither Judaism nor Christianity
having produced any such sect, till our time. And therefore we must say, that,
those who make a disference of meats for conscience sake, as if all meats were
not Gods creatures alike; or, as if we held choice of meats to be still the
service of God, because once it entitled the Jews to the Land of promise; are
justly reproved by S. Paul, adding, in the place aforementioned, as a reason of
the premises; For, every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with thanksgiving, being sanctified by the word of God,
(assuring us hereof) and by prayer. But, if the meaning be further to say, that
it is superstitious to observe fasting with meats of less nourishment, that
signify mourning, that effect the mortification of the flesh, and the
concupisences thereof, and that for conscience sake, not only in that regard,
but in regard the Church has appointed it for that purpose; then must I say
plainly, that this Doctrine, in stead of reforming or maintaining the service
of God, is the author of that licentiousness which we see come to pass. I will
not here dispute, that there may not be as much riot, as much contradiction to
the end and purpose of fasting, in eating of fish, as in flesh; especially
allowing Wine and Sweetmeats, as the Church of Rome does, to those that are
content to submit to other Laws of it. For, he who maintains, that there is no
fasting properly so called, where there is no difference made between meats;
and, those that provoke the appetite, and inflame the blood, are not laid
aside; those that signify mourning best, are not used; maintain sthat is it
not properly fasting, where only fish is served, if the quality or the
quantity of that which is served may serve for feasting. And, such customs as
those are me^re irregularities, which the rule and practice of the primitive
Church no way allows, all the diet which it granted, being only exceptions
from total abs^inen^, to sustain nature, and to maintain health, which no
Religion destroys, and therefore excepteth weak ages and constitutions from
this strictness. The granting of fish, above bread and water, and salt and
herbs, is an abatement of the primitive strictness, which Clemens Alexandrinus
reports, S. Matthew, Poedagg. II. 1. Hegesippus in Eusebius, of S. James of
Jerusalem, Hist. Eccles. II. 23. and S. Austine, adversus Faustum libro XX.
c^napura in Ireneus, that is to say, a supper without any thing of a living
creature at it, being the same that parasceve, or Friday. And, if we may
reasonably imagine, that the cold climate wherein we live, and the spending of
our bodies by the air, requires more effectual restauratives, then the
Eastern Countries, from whence these practices first came; yet to make fasting,
and forbid difference of meats, will always be things contradictory: To abate
of that difference by little and little, acknowledging the general ground of it,
will be but the same, that may be observed in all exercises of Christianity;
that the strictness thereof decayed by degrees, in succeeding times, from that
which was practiced from the beginning, under the Apostles. For, the measure of
Fasting in the ancient Church, was also till three in the afternoon, which the
more devout extended, with the Jews, until the appearing of the Stars; and
that the Montanists would have imposed upon the Church, for a Law declared by
their Prophets. Now, in all these Western parts, (at least, according to
practice, whatsoever be the Rule) it is granted, that fasting is but eating one
meal a day, though it be at noone, not denying the collation at night, nor
every where, no not at Rome it self, a draught of drink in the morning, and a
bit of bread, least that draught do harm. And this is called the Fast of the
Church, in opposition to the fast of nature, prescribed to those that celebrate
and receive the Eucharist, even from Physic, and any thing that may be
received before. But these are abatements, which no rule or custom of the
ancient Church justifies; only, when more cannot be obtained, it is
requisite, rather to cherish such a measure, as can be maintained, then to let
all order go, under pretense of Christian liberty, which is indeed, abandoning
our selves to sensuality, by casting off the rules which oblige us to mortify
natural concupisence.

In the next place, it is a marvail to see, how ready men are to embrace a
slight plea, why the solemnity of our Lords birth should not be observed;
though in the end, they forfeit the credit of their skill, in reforming, by
discovering their ignorance. Joseph Scaliger, a very learned man, and much
studied in Chronology, thinking that he had found the true year of Christ's
birth, which had not been preserved past question in any record of the Church;
(for the world, when it was not Christian, counted not by the time of Christ's
coming, as now it does) bethought himself, that, by counting the courses of the
Priests in the Temple, from the cleansing thereof by Judas Maccab^us, (the
year, and the month, and day whereof is certain) he might attain to the day
that the course of Abia, whereof Zachary was, being the first course, Luke I.
5. came on to Minister in the Temple, (the XXIV divisions spending XXIV times
seven days, in one course, certain) and by consequence the day of the
Annunciation V^ months after, and the day of our Lords birth, nine months
after that, at least for the month and season of the year, though not to a
day. And accordingly found, that our Lord was born about the feast of
Tabernacles with the Jews, in September, being a figure of the Tabernacle of
his flesh. Though this was ingeniously argued, yet, had it proved true, it had
been an unsufferable levit in any man, to infer the dissolution of order in
the service of God, and the peace of his Church, upon the supposition of it.
For, who ever heard the Church declare, that the celebration of our Lords birth
on the XXV of December, proceeds upon supposition, that he was indeed born that
day; So that, supposing it uncertain on what day he was born, it was to be
celebrated on no day? What reason, what sense can justisie such a consequence,
when the circumstance of time is not considerable toward the end of Festivals,
which is, the service of God; but only as an occasion for the Church to take,
of assembling Christians? Not as among the Jews, whose solemnities, having
dependence upon the Land of promise, and the temporal promises thereof, if they
kept not the due season of the year, were indeed abominable. Those therefore,
that would persuade us, that there is any fault in solemnizing the remembrance
of Christ's birth, ought first to show us, if they mean any good to our common
Christianity, that the birth of Christ is not a ^it occasion of assembling
Christian people, to serve God with the offices of Christianity: Which if they
should go about, they might well blush to remember; that, having been so
zealous to cry up Market days for fit occasions of Gods service, wherein there
is so much appearance of worldly profit, by increase of Trade, and commerce of
people; they should have so little regard to that consideration, upon which all
matter of all Christian assemblies depends, as not to think it a just occasion
of assembling Gods people. It is true indeed, there has been some difference
in the observation of the Church about the day; the VI of January having
heretofore been observed in some parts of the Church, for the day of Christ's
birth, as well as of his baptism; Which probably came from the Gospel, saying,
that our Lord was baptized at thirty years of age, Luke III. 23. and giving
thereby occasion to place both upon one and the same day. This you shall find
in Cassiane Collat. X. 1. And where Ammianus XXI relates of Juliane, that, not
willing as yet to declare himself Apostate, he came forth to Church, die
Epiphaniorum, upon the Epiphany; Zonaras reporting the same, says, upon the
Nativity. Not because it was so held and observed in the West; but because
Zonaras, a Greek, relates it as the East accounted it. And this was the ground
for the XII days, when the XXV of December prevailed over the East; which was
lately come to pass in S. Chrysostomes time, as, it is well known that Scaliger
has observed. But what will half-sighted ignorance plead, for the great
boldness which it takes, of innovating in the orders of the Church, upon a
supposition always conjectural, and we acknowledged false by all Chronologers?
For, could ever any man assure, but upon probable conjecture, that Judas
Maccabaeus did begin the service of the Temple rather with the first order,
then with that at which it left off three years before, which every man
remembered? But, time having since discovered, that it was not the true year of
Christ's birth, upon which Scaliger thought he was born; so far is this
ignorance from any plea for it self, that it may well be a warning to the like
boldness, to be beter informed, before they undertake to reform. For, now they
are to advise how to answer Bucherius the Jesuit, who, by counting the courses
of the Priests, from the dedication under fudas, to the true year of Christ's
birth, has found the time of it to fall near the XXV of December, from the
annunciation of Zachary, being of the course of Abia. And the L. Primates late
Annals, maintain the XXV of December for the true day of our Lords birth,
delivered by S. Peter to the Church of Rome, upon the credit of the records of
the Taxes then extant at Rome, and alleged by Tertullian. Though the same
Tradition was not preserved in the Eastern Churches;) in so much, that, till S.
Chrysostomes time, all the Churches agreed not in the day upon which they
solemnized it.

Now, if there be so great reason, why the Lent Fast should go before the Feast
of Easter, to prepare all the world to renew the purpose and profession of
their Christianity, by the exercise of devotion and Penance, as well as to
prepare those that stood for their Christianity, to their Baptism at Easter,
which was, ror many ages, the custom of the Church; how can it be denied, that
the solemnity of Advent, before the celebration of* Christ's birth, is an order
fit to provide the like means and opportunities, and advantages, for the
advancement and improvement of Christianity, by the like exercises? Nor shall I
need further to dispute for the observing of Wednesdays and Fridayes, or
Saturdays, with those that have admitted the premises; that the Church may and
ought to set as^de certain days for the service of God, in fasting and Penance
for our own unworthiness, as well as in feas^ing and rejoicing for Gods
goodness. For, ^^nce our transgressions have their recourse, as sure as the
remembrance of our Lords rising again; is it, for the advantage, or for the
disadvantage of Christianity, that the Friday should be observed for the
service of God, by humbling out selves in the sight of our ^^nnes, as the Lords
day, for his service, by setting forth his praises, in the sight of his
mercies? And, seeing the Jews, from before our Lords time, observed Mundays and
Thursdays for their private and public hu^^liations, and the mo^^ solemn days
of assembling in their Synagogues, as I have showed there; And, that the
Christians have always observed Wednesdays and Frydays to the like purposes; It
seems to remain certain thereby, that the translation of the days is the act of
the Apostles, seeking those days which were alike distant from the Lords day,
as those which the Jews observed were from the Sabbath: Because no reason will
allow, that after the time of the Apostles, the breach between the Church and
the Synagogue being completed, Christians should imitate the orders of the
Jews, and all agree in it. It must therefore be concluded, that the observation
of Wednesdays and Thursdays is from the Apostles; Though the fasting upon
Saturday, which the West observes, come from the custom of the Church of
Rome, which the rest of the West has conformed it self to, in succeeding ages.
Of the observation of the Saints memories, and the days on which the Martyrs
suffered, which the ancient Church called their birth-days, to wit, into a
beter world; I shall not say much, for the reason alleged before. Only this,
that those who think not so eminent accidents sufficient occasions for the
Church to meet upon, for the service of God, in the offices of that
Christianity, which they either died in, or for; whatsoever they may pretend of
their zeal for Christianity, cannot pretend toward that Christianity, in and
for which they either lived or died. For, to what purpose rendeth that
Christianity, the seeds whereof were sown in their lives, and examples, or in
their deaths and sufferings; but, that God may be glorified in the service of
his name, by those that do study to imitate those paterns thereof, which they
have set us? I deny not, that there may come a burden upon the Church, by
multiplying the number of Festival days, and that there might be and was
reason, why it should be abated; But never, that there is superstition, either
in the service of God, or in the circumstance of it, and occasion of
celebrating it, upon the remembrance of Gods Saints. Neither will I say any
more for the Fasts of Ember weeks, and of the Rogations, since I understand
not, what quarrel there can be to the occasions of them in particular, if it
were agreed, that there is due ground for the setting apart of certain times
for the service of God, whither as Fasts or Festivalls.

Nor of the Hours of the day, or the deputing of them to the service of God,
whither in public or in privivate. For, what will those that pretend so much to
the Scriptures, answer to those testimonies of the Old and New Testament,
whereby I have proved, that the people of God did set aside the third, sixth,
and ninth hour of the day for that purpose? That the Apostles of our Lord
followed the same custom? That the Church has always done the same? All this
while, supposing morning and evening Prayer over and above, as brought in by
Adam, or by Abraham, as the Jews will have it; whereupon the Christians in S.
Cyprianes time, as appears by his Book de Oratione, had recourse to God five
times a day; Till afterward, as it is fit that Christianity go beyond Judaism
in the service of God, the custom being taken up by the more devout, (whereof
S. Cypriane makes mention in the same place) of rising by night to praise God,
(according to the Prophet David, Psalm, CXIX. 64. At midnight I will rise to
praise thee, because of thy righteous Judgments;) And the evening service
requiring some exercise as well at going to bed, as in closing the evening,
(which was called the Compline, as the complement of the days service) the
service of God, whither public or private, became divided into seven Hours;
which, upon these grounds, were very reasonably counted Canonical, according to
the same P^ophet David, Psalm. CXIX. 164. Seven times a day will I praise thee,
because of thy righteous Judgments. In fine, there can no question be made,
that the Law o^ regular Hours of the day for Prayer, is evidently grounded upon
the Scriptures, evidently authorized by the practice, not only of the Church,
but of Gods ancient people. And therefore, to make the Reformation to consist
in abolishing that Law, is, to make the Reformation to consist in abolishing
Gods service. And this I think enough to be said in this abridgment, seeing I
am no further to ent^^ into debate of the particulars, then the justifying of
the general ground requires; only remembering that which I have said already,
that the obligation is the same, whither the particulars may appear to have
been established by the Apostles, or received into the general practice of the
Church; The power of the Apostles, supposing the being of Christianity, which
their work was to preach, and extending no further, then the settling of it in
the community of the Church, by the order of Gods service; which, the
alteration of the s^ate and condition of the Church must need^ make changeable,
as well as that which the whole Church should introduce: So that, whither the
Apostles, or the Church authorized by the Apostles, have introduced an order,
within the compass of Gods Law, (that is, the substance of Christianity) in the
observation whereof, the unity of the Church in the service of God, which is
the end of all order in the Church, consists; it shall equally oblige every
Christian to maintain and cherish it, upon the cri^e of Schis^ to be incurred,
in case any breach fall out by violating the same.

CHAP. XXII. The people of God ^ied to build Synagogues, though not by the
leter of the Law. The Church to provide Churches, though the Scripture command
it not. Prescribing the form of Gods public service, is not quenching the
Spirit. The Psalter is prescribed the Church for Gods Praises. The Scriptures
prescribed to be read in the Church; The Order of reading them to be prescribed
by the Church.
NOw, as for the determination of certain places for the service of God, I
cannot see how there is or can be generally and absolutely any dispute, whether
or no there ought to be places set apart for that purpose? so that all
Christians may know where to resort to serve God; The matter being so evident to
the common reason of all men, that, to make any scruple about it, in regard
that there is no precept of God; Law for it written, either to the Jews in the
Old Testament, or the Christians in the New; were to make a doubt whether God
gave his Law to reasonable creatures or not* Indeed, in the Old Testament,
there is a Precept for all Gods people, to resort to the place where he should
choose to place his name, for the offering of their burnt sacrifices and
oblations, which he, thereby, makes abominable, any where else to be offered.
But this might have been a color to have pretended, that God had forbidden,
(so fart from requiring) all other religious Assemblies of his people, or any
places to be set apart for that purpose; had not his Prophets, and the
Governors of his people understood from the the beginning, the difference
between his spiritual and carnal Law, answerable to the difference between the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the Land of promise. And that, though the ceremonial
service of God in the Temple, could not be so parted from his spiritual
service, that the place to which the one was confined, should exclude the
other; yet, the spiritual service of God was to extend to those places, from
whence his figurative and ceremonial service stood excluded by the Law. It is
no marvail then, if, for a time, (the acts where of we read in the Books of
Josua, Judges, Ruth, and Samuel) Sacrifices were offered in the High Places;
that is, in other places deputed to the service of God, besides that where the
Ark of the Covenant stood; Whither we suppose, that the choice, which, God by
the Law had intimated, that he would make, of a place where he intended to
settle his service, were not executed all the while before the bringing of the
Ark to Jerusalem, and the building of the Temple there; Or, whither there was a
conditional purpose of God, of settling his service in the Tribe of Ephraim, at
Shiloh, declared unto his people, which obliged them to resort thither, as we
see they did, by the beginning of Samuel; but, that, this purpose being
declared void by the captivity of the Ark, the high places came to be permitted
again, as before the Ark had begun to settle in Shiloh. In the mean time, I
hold the opinion neither blameable nor improbable, which the best learned do
advance, for the beginning of Synagogues in the Land of promise; (that is to
say, of places where the people might and were to assemble, for the service of
God, which was not confined to the Ark) To wit, that these high places were
afterward deputed to the residence of Prophets, and their Disciples, and to
that service of God, which all Israel could not be present at in the Temple.
Though, those that submitted not to the Law, as the determina^ion of Gods
choice to Jerusalem, did not cease to offer sacrifices and burn incense in the
High places, especially in such times, when Idolatry was grown so strong, that
it could not be punished by exterminating those Cities that were found to have
a hand in it, according to the Law, Deuteronomy. XV. For it is evident, that, offering
sacrifice in the High places, was a great mean to palliate Idolatry; and, for
that reason, had been forbidden by the Law. But, what reason has any man to
reject this opinion, having no beter evidence for any other place, or
opportunity for any religious assembly of Gods people, but only that before
the Ark, for so long time? Indeed, in those Psalms that are entitled to Asaph,
from LXXIII. to LXXXIII. there is mention more then once of other Houses of
God, besides the Temple. But, of those Psalms, and the author and time of them,
there is difficulty made, whither written by Asaph, or afterward given to his
posterity to sing in the Temple. For, seeing they not only seem to point out
Nebuchadnezzar, by the wild bore out of the wood, LXXX. 13. but also the time
when they had no Prophets, LXXXIV. 9. either we must grant, that these things
are said by the spirit of Prophesy, or, that they were written in after times.
I do indeed continue rather of the former judgment. But I spare not to allege
the uncertainty, for an evidence, how far they were from having any written
Law for the building of Synagogues; which nevertheless, was a thing so
necessary for maintenance of their Religion, and the service of God according
to it, that no man in his right senses can question, whither they were tied to
it or not. Be it therefore uncertain, how far Synagogues were propagated in
the Land of promise, before the Babylonian Captivity; For, after the return,
which is the ^oot of account, for the time, from whence all Idolatry was
detested by them; from this time, when their dispersions among the Nations
began, together with their detestation of their Idolatries, be it resolved,
both that they did take upon them the building of Synagoues, for that service
not confined to the Temple, which they found themselves tied to frequent; And,
that they ought so to do.

Now, when Christianity first came in, not severed from Judaism, but
distinguished by some offices (namely of Baptism and the Eucharist) tha is to
say, by such Prayers, as were made at both; it is no marvail that the
Christians frequenting the service of God, together with the Jews either the in
Temple or in the Synagogue, did content themselves, to celebrate the offices
proper to Christianity in private Houses. For, I confess, when S. Luke says,
that they broke bread, that is, celebrated the Eucharist, as the Syriack
translates it, (...), that is, at home, or, from house to house, Act. II. 46. I
rather think this was done in private houses, though Beza might be my author,
that they had houses set apart for that purpose, if I meant to strain mine
opinion beyond the evidence of it. But, of the Church of Corinth, I say not the
same, where, I find no appearance by S. Paul's Epistles, that there was any
correspondence between the Jews and the Christians, or any expectation, that
the service of God according to Christianity, ^^^^eeding Judai^^^, might
convert Synagogues into Churches. And when S. Paul says, 1 Cor. XI. 22. Have
ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or, despise ye the Church of God, and
shame those that have not? not only the antithe^^s between houses to eat and
drink in, and the Church of God, but also the difference between shaming the
poor, and despising the Church of God, seems to require, that a Church there
signify a Church; that is, the place, not the people; Though not doubting,
that the assemblies of the Christians were there held many times in ordinary
houses, and upper rooms, Acts I. 13. XX. 8. but finding the Church at Corinth
so well settled, that if those of Jerusalem contributed their estates to the
maintenance of the people of the Church, no man can marvail that they should
disbur^^ for a Church. How ^arr, then, the Church began to be po^^^ssed of
places set apart for the offices of Christianity, seems to depend upon two
points, severally in several places: The probability of persecution, and the
compliance with Judaism. Unless those two be reducible to one, in regard of the
great appearance; that, at the beginning, all probability of persecution
depended upon the interruption of compli^nce and correspondence with the Jews.
This all reason justifies, that the Christians, so far as there was appearan^e
of probability, that they might enjoy the liberty of meeting at certain known
places, did, from the beginning, set apart certain places for that purpose,
either upon contribution of the Churches, or, upon the liberal devotion of
particular persons. And, for the proof of this, I think I need no more then the
visible example of the Jews, and the advantage which their Religion, and the
truth of God had found, by by having set places, to which, not only their own
might resort to serve God out of a profession of his truth; but, even the
Gentiles be won from the worship of Idols, by becoming acquain^ed with the
profession which they celebrated at such certain places. The effect of this
advantage is evident to us by the Acts of the Apostles, and the mention which
there we find of their preaching in the Jews Synagogues; For, commonly, there
is also mention of devout men, and devout women, and such as worshipped God of
the Gentiles: Being indeed those, that were converted from the worship of
Idols, to the true God, whom the Jews worshipped. And therefore, S. Paul, when
he shows that Christianity had the like advantage, by the resort of Gentiles
unto their assemblies, 1 Cor. XVI. 23. makes me think it still more probable,
that they had then at Corinth, certain known places, set apart for their
Assemblies. Only I will add the evidence of common sense, how much more
opportunity there must needs be, for companies that are grown numerous, to
assemble in certain known places set apart for that use, then in ordinary
houses, serving for other purposes.

And therefore, though I believe, that there is still mention, in such records
as the Church has left, of Assemblies held in ordinary houses, (that is to
say, that there is many times mention of the Assemblies of Christians, (in the
lives of the Saints, and the Acts of Martyrs) in private Houses, and not in
Churches) yet, of the Titles, and Coemiteries of the Church of Rome, I do not
believe the like. For, this word Title, necessarily imports a Mark set upon
a place, set aside for Church goods, to Church uses; it being then a visible
custom in the world, ^or those things that became the Exchequers, by some
title of Right, to have marks set upon them, challenging them upon that Title;
and this being the reason of the name. Neither is it necessary, that this Mark
should be a Cross without, as the Cardinal Baroni^s imagines, which might
discover them to Persecutors; seeing the Mark might be visible, though only
to Christians, witnessing the consecrating of the place, to that distinct use.
There is no cause, then, to discredit that which we have immediately from
Anastasius, because he had the best and the ancientest Records of the Church
for his materials; That, Pope Evaristus, so near our Lord, divided the Titles,
that is, the Churches then extant, among his Presbyters. For, whereas
Corneli^s, in his leter to Fabi^s, Bishop of Antiochia in Eusebius, which I
speak of elsewhere, tells him, that the Church of Rome had then six and forty
Priests; Optatus, in his second Book, affirms, that the Christians had in Rome,
when the Donatists first came thither, Quadraginta Basilicas and quod excurrit.
Forty fair Churches and upwards. For, those houses, which, Christians having
consecrated to the use of the Church, a room was reserved in for divine
service, were afterward turned into better buildings, merely for the service
of God, and not, for the retyring of Christians in time of persecutions.
Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. VIII. 2. shows us, that, before the persecution of
Diocletiane, the Christians, in all Cities, had raised new buildings from the
very foundations, because the old received not their assemblies. So near then,
comes the number of Churches, at the Dona^^sts coming to Rome, to the number of
Priests in Cornelius his time. So near comes this agreement to justify the
distribution of Titles under Evaristus. As for the burying places of
Christians, (which their says must need require them so keep distinct from the
sepulchers of them who had it not; whether within or without their Cities) who
can deny, that it was a great opportunity for the celebrating of their
Assemblies? Especially the remains of them near Rome, that are yet extant,
witnessing, what means theere was both, for their refuge there in the time of
persecution, and also for the solemnizing of the offices of Christanity, as you
may see by those things which Cardinal Baronius relates. I alleged before, the
sentence of the Emperor Alexander Severus, about a place questionable between
the Christians and the Taverners, being very confident, that no reason will
allow, that this place could be otherwise adjudged to the Christians, then, as,
belonging to the Church of the place. I know we have many places alleged out of
Origin, Arnobius, Lactantius, and others that defend Christianity against the
Gentiles, to show, that Christians then had no Temples. But the effect of them
lies in the word Templum, (...) signifying stately Fabrics, built for the
magnifying of the professed Religion, by those that built them; which the
Christians could not then do, when their religion was not allowed. In the mean
time, places for the opportunity of assembling themselves which Arnobius and
Ammianus, call conventicula, they can no more then be supposed to have wanted,
then to have been no Christians. And that, before Constantine, they had those
Fabrics which might bear the same of Templa or Basilicae, because, for the
bulk and beauty of them, answerable to the Temples of the Heathen Gods, or, the
great men's Palaces among the Romans. some whereof perhaps were, by that time
dedicated to be Churches; The same Lactantius may be my witness, where he
mentions such a one at Nicomedia; Ego, cum in Bithynia or atorias liter as*
accitus docerem, contigissetque, ut, eodem tempore, dei Templum everteretur. I,
says he, being sent for ^into Bithynia, and teaching eloquence, when it fell
out that the Temple of God was pulled down. This was one of those fair
buildings which Eusebius spoke of, set up before the persecution of
Diocle^iane, and pulled down by it. And besides the place quoted before,
Optatius, lib. I. where, speaking of the Bishops that made the best of the
Donatists, after the persecution of Diocletiane, he says; that they met in
Council at Carthage, in domo Urbanii Carosii, giving for a reason, nondum enim
erant Basilicae restitutae; because the Palaces were not restored to the
Church, therefore they met in a private house. And truly, it were a thing so
barbarous, Cyclo^ical, (so becoming those Monsters, of whom the Poet says,
(...), that none of them hearkens to another in any thing) to imagine, that it
is not necessary to have certain known places for Christians to meet at for the
service of God, that I will not suppose, that the question is about that point
amongst us, whatsoever noise may have been made in this confusion amongst us.
But rather, that the difference is about having stately Fabrics, for
magnifying of the Religion which we profess; about the manner of building them,
according to the importance of those offices for which they are built; about
the consecrating of them, and the holiness to be ascribed to them, about using
the same buildings, which have once, either truly, or imaginarily, been
polluted with Idolatry. All which being considerations not proper to this
place, I shall content my self to have said this to the point proper to this
place.

I go forwards, to consider the Order, or the matter and form of the public
service of God, which I cannot do without setting aside one scruple, which was
never heard of in Gods Church till our time, and in our time, has been carried
on so hot, that it has been one of the chief pretenses of dissolving the unity
of be Church in England, which has opened the Gap to all the Divisions which
we are over-runne with. It is pretended, that God is not to be served with
so^^es of Prayer prescribed by the Church; but, with that which his Spirit
incite^ to those who have the Grace of the Spirit, whither appointed by the
Church, to the Ministry of Gods service in public, (which are those, and only
those, as I have showed, that are designed to bear a share in the Government of
the Church) or not. What the Presbyterians have abated hereof, by their
Directory, I will not be troubled to inquire. Every man may remember, that, so
long as the business was to dissolve the unity of the Church, and to make vo^^
the Laws which settled it; they cried up this position as much as the rest.
But, when it came to order that confusion which they had made themselves, they
then found it necessary to limit both the matter and form, though not the words,
which, the offices of divine service should be celebrated with. Which, what was
it but Plowdens case; that, for the form of Gods service to be prescribed by
themselves, it is not only lawful, but requisite; by the Church, altogether
ab^^inable? And indeed, those who must needs take upon them to appoint the
persons who are to minister to the People, must needs take upon them to appoint
the form in which it was to be done; They who make the one to depend upon the
mo^ion of Gods Spirit, must make the other do the like; though never able to
make evidence of any such motion, in any person that ever pretended it. And yet
is that all that ever has been alleged, so far as I know, for all opinions
so new to Gods Church; That S. Paul forbids to quench the spirit, 1 These. V.
19. I do not deny, that other texts of S. Paul have been alleged, who in 1 Cor.
XXI. XIV. discourses so largely, of the use of spiritual graces; ordering
also, how they should be exercised and employed in the said Church: Nor, that
writting to the Romans, VIII. 23. 26. 27. he says; That the Spirit, which
groaneth for the resurrection, in those that have the first fruits of it,
helps the infirmities of the Saints (not knowing what to pray for as they
ought) interceding for them with groans unutterable; which, the searcher of
hearts, knowing the mind of the Spirit, finds to be made after the will of
God. But in these sayings, there is nothing like a precept, much less such a
one as may seem to oblige the whole Church. On the contrary, the evidences are
so frequent, and so palpable, in the discourse of S. Paul to the Corinthians,
that the Graces whereof he speaks are miraculous Graces, (such as God then
furnished the Church with, to evidence the presence of his Spirit in it, as
well as (...) their edification in Christianity, and assistance in Gods
service) that it were madness to require the Church to sollow the rules which
suppose them, which now appear no more in the Church. And truly, with what
conscience can he allege against the Church of Rome, that miracles are ceased;
(the grace whereof is ranked by S. Pa^l, with those which tend to the
edification of the Church, 1 Cor. XII. 8. 9, 10, 28, 29, 30.) who challenges
for himself, or his fellows, the privilege of those Graces in Gods Church?
With what conscience can they hear S. Paul say, 1 Cor. X. 17. That the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit with; And challenge
themselves the privilege of profiting the Church, by Teaching or by Praying,
without any manifestation of the Spirit? For, are they not challenged every
day, to make manifest, that ever any of them did speak by Gods Spirit, and not
by the Spirit of this World, inspiring the fruits of the flesh, by carnal, or
rather diabolical pride, innovating in matters of Faith, and destroying the
uniformity of Gods service?

And therefore when S. Paul, having said, Quench not the Spirit, adds,
Deipise not Prophesies; what has been alleged, what can be alleged, why it
should not be thought, that he repeateth in brief that order, which he had
declared so largely to the Corinthians, that the grace of speaking in unknown
languages, should not be discountenanced in the Church, and so the Spirit
extinguished; But that Prophesies, the grace whereof he there prefers so
far before it, should no way be neglected for it? Truly, he that says, The
manifestation of the spirit is given to all to profit with; does say in effect,
that, the Spirit which gro^neth for the resurrection in them, which have the
first fruits; (that is, the prime graces) of it, makes intercession for the
Saints according to God, by helping that infirmity of theirs, whereby, they
know not what to pray for of themselves. For, those who had not always had the
Apostles Doctrine sounding in their ears, but only, were instructed by them,
and their fellows, so far as to be fit for Baptism, remaining nevertheless
novices in Christianity; why should we think them fit to know what to pray for
in all occasions? Why should we think it strange, that God should give the
first fruits of his Spirit, to profit them with, in this case? But, the faith
of Christ, with the reasons and consequences thereof being settled, and the
order of the Church being established, as the gift of miracles ceased, as well
to the bodily health and support of Christians, and the Church, as to the
demonstration of Gods presence, and witness to the truth of Christianity; As
the delivering of incorrigible sinners to Satan, to the destruction of the
flesh, by bodily diseases, and death ceased, when obedience to Gods Church was
established; so is it no marvail, if the Graces of Gods Spirit, which profited
the Church in teaching them what to pray for, should no more be granted, when
the Church had not only knowledge, but good order established, by which, those
offices might be preformed to the profit and edification of Christians. Let
them then, who find, that they can cure the sick by their prayers, anoint them
with oil upon that ground, and to that purpose: Let them who can sing Psalms
extempore, so as to become the praises of God; (because S. Paul says; When ye
come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a doctrine, has a tongue,
has a revelation, has an interpretation: And that may be, as well suggested
upon the place as before hand) S. Paul says, that if a stranger, coming into
the Church, should hear diverse speak in strange languages, that which they made
not their hearers understand, he would say were madd; 1 Cor. XIV. 23.
dotwithstanding that it might appear, that they would not speak those
languages, but by Gods Spirit: I will only demand of them, not to abuse and
dishonor Gods Spirit, by imputing unto it those operations, which, it is not
for the honor of God to acknowledge; And then tell them, that they must be
tried by our common Christianity, whether, that they pretend to say, or to do,
by the same, agree with it.

But further order of Gods service in the Church, let us proceed according to
the principles premised, comparing that which we find extant in the Scriptures,
with the original and general practice of Gods Church, to say; That, the
service of God consisting of his praises, the doctrine of the Scriptures read
and expounded, and the prayers of the Church; (especially those which the
communion of the Eucharist is celebrated with) In the first place, the Psalms
of David, (that is the Book of Psalms) is necessarily, by the practice of the
whole Church, a form of Gods praises, determined to the Church. Which
conclusion, as it is easily seen, extends further then those Psalms, which,
by the Titles of them, or, by other circumstance of Scriptures, may appear to
have been composed to be sung in the Temple; though this contain a peremptory
instance against this strange demand, that it should be unlawful to serve God
with set forms. For, what difference can be imagined between Psalms and
Prayers, as to that purpose? But, the conclusion is directed against that new
light which pretends to cast the Psalms out of the Church, because it
appears, that they were composed upon the particular occasions of the Prophet
David, or other servants of God, by whom they were penned, and therefore not
concerning the state of Christ's Church, so as to be frequented by Christians,
upon public as well as private occasions, for the praises of God. This conceit
is sufficient to show, how little these new lights do understand of our common
Christianity, over-looking that, which the Church has always supposed against
the Jews, as the only ground, whereupon she wresteth the Scriptures of the Old
Testament out of their hands, and turns them to the interest of the Church
against themselves; To wit, that the Prophets, being inspired by the same
spirit which our Lord sent his Apostles, did preach the same Christianity with
them; though, according to the dispensation of that time, figuring the
spiritual estate of Christians, by the temporal estate of Gods then people,
and, injoyning the duties of Gods spiritual obedience, in a measure
correspondent to the light of the time. For upon this ground has it been
received, by the whole Church, that, the case of David, and, of other the
servants of God, who penned the Psalms, is the case, first of our Lord Christ,
then of Christ's Church, whithe^ in the whole thereof, or in the state of
particular Christians; David and the rest bearing first the person of Christ,
then, of his Church, according to the principles premised in the first Book. I
might here allege that ingenious saying of S. Hilary, that Christ has the Key
of David, because, the spiritual sense of the P^^lter is opened by the
discovery of Christ and his Church. I might allege S. Austine, accepting of
Tychonius the Donatist his rules, for the exposition of the Psalms; that those
things which are literally understood of the temporal state of David, and Gods
then people, are to be spiritually understood of the state of our Lord Christ,
here on earth first; then, of the spiritual estate of his whole Church, and of
each Christian. But, I had rather allege the practice of of Gods whole Church,
of which, there is no age, no part to be named and produced, in which it may
appear, that God was not served by singing the Psalms of David, to his praise.
Not that I would confine this office to that form which the Psalter yields; or
think, that the Apostles exhortations, Col. III. 16. James V. 13. Ephesians. 19.
can be confined unto them: Being well assured, by comparing that which I read
in the Apostles, whith that which I read in Tertullians Apologetick, (where he
says, that the Christians, at their feasts of love, were wont to provoke one
another to sing something of Gods praises) that they did in a simple style,
but, from a deep and losty sense, compose the praises of God in Psalms of their
own, fitted to that light, which the coming of Christ has brought into the
Church; But, that I would have this lothing of the Book of Psalms, recommended,
not by the Church of England, but by the whole Church, to be taken for an
evident mark, that we are weary of the common Christianity of Gods people, and
do lust for new meat of our own asking, if not, for the fleshpots and Onyons,
and Garlic of Egypt.

As for the reading of the Scriptures in the Church, which the whole Church
has used as generally as it has had the Scriptures; (for we understand by
Irenaeus, and may see by our ancestors the Saxons, that Christianity has
subsisted among people that had not not the use of leters; Though, our
anceflors the Saxons had the Scriptures before they had the use of leters, by
the means of them who brought them Christianity: But Irenaeus speaks of
barbarous Nations that were Christians, before they knew of any Scriptures) I
see it rather neglected then disputed against by the sects of this time. Why
neglected, diverse reasons may be conceived, though they, (perhaps, as a
disparagement to the Spirit, whence they may pretend to have their Orders the
carnal man only choosing in Religion, that which, by the use of reason, he is
convinced to come from God, contrary to the principles settled at the beginning)
think fit to allege none. Their illuminati, perhaps, are already so perfect in
the Text, that it were loss of time for them to assemble to hear the Scriptures
read. To whom I must say; That those who are enlightened by God are always
humble, and ready to continue in the unity of the Church, as I have showed by
the premises, that all Christians ought to do. That, if they do so, the greater
part of the Church by much, will have need to learn the Scriptures, (that ^is,
instruction out of them) by hearing them read in the Church. That, all that are
enlightened by God, are taught to condescend to the necessities of the weak and
simple. And that, those who break from the Church rather then do so, may think
themselves strong, but their strength is the strenth of Madmen, that see not
what they do. In fine, that, they who have received light by the knowledge of
the Scriptures, must needs add to their light by hearing them read, and that
there is no beter way for them to add to it; being the way which the primitive
Fathers took for that purpose. It may perhaps be imagined, that, the reading of
the Scriptures takes up the time of assemblies, and excludes the preaching of
the Word. To which I must say for the present; that it is a strange piece of
providence, to exclude the reading of the Scripture, which we know to be the
word of God, and, to have in it no cause of offense, but that which the want of
understanding in the hearers thereof ministers, out of a desire to make way
for that, which, pretends indeed always to be the word of God; but, no
understanding so simple, no conscience so seared, that must not needs know,
that it is not, that it cannot always be the word of God, because of the
contradictions that pass under that Title; And that, in matters of so high
nature, at this time, that, if the one be the word of God, the other must not
be counted the word of humane weakness, but of diabolical malice. There are
indeed certain bounds, within which, that which is preached out of the Pulpit,
may be presumed and taken for the word of God; as it might be, if it were said
in another place. But, if ignorant people, that cannot take upon them to judge,
shall presume it, of that which they hear from those that do not profess to
Preach within those bounds; who can deny, that they are guilty to their own
death? What those bounds are, I shall say by and by; In the mean time, let them
take heed, whose neglect of the written word, or whose zeal to preaching, shuts
the Scriptures out the Church, that they contribute not to the bringing in of
the secret and invisible Word of the Enthusiasts. It is now no dainty to hear,
that the word which we have written in our Bibles, is not the Word that saves,
but that which is secretly and invisibly spoken to us within by Gods Spirit.
And, whosoever attributes the reverence due to Gods word, to any such dictate,
without dependence upon the Scriptures, (that is, deriving the same from the
Scripture, by those means which God has allowed us for the understanding of
them, according to the premises) what shall hinder him to prefer the dictate
of his own Spirit, under pretense of Gods, before that which he admits to
come from Gods Spirit? For, he who admits the greater contradiction, of two
parallel Sovereigns; why should he not admit a less, (that the written word is
not Gods word, in competition with the dictate of his own Spirit) when there is
so easy a cloak, of expounding the written word, though against all reason and
rule of expounding it, yet so, as to submit, even the substance of Christianty,
to the dictate of a private spirit? We have an example for it in the impostures
of Mahomet. For, does not the Alcoran acknowledge both our Lord Christ, and
Moses, true Prophets of God, besides all other attributes? yet, in as much as
it pretends the Spirit given to Mahomet in such a degree, as to control them
both, it smoothes the way to the renouncing of Christianity, when the power of
the sword fell out on the side of it. Simon Magus, and his followers the
Gnostics, might have done the like, had the like power been on their side, (as
the Manichees did in part, if those things be true that we read in Cedronus, of
a party of them, possessed of the Power of the Sword, about the parts of
Armenia) all, upon pretense of higher revelations then were granted to the
Apostles. The same is alleged against the Paraclete of Montanus, (and perhaps
his followers, being disowned by the Church, might fall to such extremities)
but at the beginning, it does not appear that he pretended any more, then to
introduce certain strict orders into the Church, as enjoined by his Spirit, and
those of his fellow Prophets; which, it was not expedient for the Church to
undertake; (and being so, it was requisite for him to conform unto the Church,
any pretense of the Spirit notwithstanding) but otherwise, were no way
destructive to Christianity.

Suppose then, the reading of the Scriptures to be one of those offices, for
the which the Church is to assemble; the order of reading them (which is that
which remains) is a thing to subject so common reason, that there need not much
dispute about it. If we look upon Tertullianes, or before him, Justin Martyrs
Apologies for the Christians, there will appear no more then this; that every
Church, (that is, every Body of Christians under one Bishop) did prescribe
themselves that order for reading the Scriptures in the Church, which they
found requisite. And if that primitive simplicity, which the Christianity under
persecution was managed with, had continued, what fault could have been found
with it? But, when the World was come into the Church (which, he that injoyes
his right senses will not believe, did come into it all with the like
affections, to the professions which they undertook) it was in vain to hope,
that differences would not rise, or might not rise, about this as well as other
points, in which the exercise of Christianity consisted. Differences arising,
the greater authority is that, to which, the ending of them obliges all men to
have recourse. The greater authority, you have seen, is that of the greatest
Churches, whither in Synods, or, not requiring Synods to oblige the less, by
reason of the exigence, or reasonableness of the case. The order of reading the
Scriptures, and of singing or saying the Psalms and Hymns of Gods praises,
being grounded upon no other reason, nor tending to any other end, then that of
exercising and improving the Christianity of Gods people. I need no^ dispute,
that the Order, which the power of the Church of Rome h^d introduced here, as
well in the rest of the West, was such as made the Assemblies of the Church
fruitless to that purpose; For, what could those shreds* of Psalms and
Lesson^, which that order prescribes, contribute, that might be considerable
to that purpose? Nor need I argue how considerable the order of the Church of
England is to the same. For, to finish the Psalter once a year, the New
Testament thrice a year, the Old once; besides (for reverence to the ancient
Ordinance of the Church) another Order for beginning the Prophet Esaias at
Advent, and Genesis at Septuagesima, to be prosecuted on Festival days, is an
Order from which the Church has reason to expect a good effect in the
instruction of Gods people. And, the interweaving of the Lessons with Hymns, as
it is agreeable to the rules and the practice of the ancient Church; so it is,
in reason, a fit mean to preserve attention, and quicken devotion, in them who
use it. In the mean time, supposing there were considerable objections to be
made, against this or that order; yet, Order in general being a thing so
requisite to the preservation of Unity in the Body of the Church, there is no
reason to be given, why any body should be admitted to dispute any Order
received, that cannot advance another Order, which he can pretend to be more
effectual to the purpose, in which the parties must needs agree.

I am here to answer that part of the question, concerning the Canon of
Scripture, which, I said in the first book, concerns the Law, not the faith
of the Church; whither the reading of those Scriptures which S. Jerome calls
Apocryphal, Ruffinus upon the Creed Ecclesiastical, for part of the Church
office, be for the edi^ication of the Church, or not; And a few words shall
serve me to answer it with. The very name of Ecclesiastical serves him that
admits the Church to be one Body, the unity whereof requires some uniformity in
the order of those offices, the communion whereof, is one part of the end for
which it subsisteth. For, it is manifest, that the whole Church has frequented
the reading of them; and that they are called Ecclesiastical for no other
reason, but, because the reading of them has been frequented by the Church, in
the Church. And whosoever makes this any title of separation from the Church of
Rome, will make his Title Schismatical, separating for that which is common to
the present Church of Rome, with the whole Church. But because the repute of
the Church is so slight in the judgment of many, that think themselves the
most refined Christians, that they allow it not that common sense in managing
the business of Christianity, which they must needs allow Jews, Pagans,
Mahometans, in faithfully serving their own faithless suppositions; and which,
all experience shows us, that it serves all mankind, to what purpose soever it
is employed; (and that, notwithstanding so great a trial of it, as the
governing of so great a Body as the Church is, in unity, so far, and so long
as this Unity has prevailed) it is therefore necessary to give a reason, why
the Church so used them; Which, supposing the premises, it will be as easy, as
it is necessary for me to give, and that more sufficient, if I mistake not,
then can possibly be given, not supposing the same, For, if the secret of the
resurrection, the general judgment, and the World to come, if, the mystery of
the Holy Trini^y, consisting in the Word or Wisdom and Spirit of God, if the
inward and spiritual service of God, in truth of heart, be more clearly opened
in them, by the work of Providence, dispensing the effect of Canonical
Scripture by the occurrences of time, then in the Law and the Prophets
themselves; (which, I have showed, both that so it is, and why so it is, from
the ground of the difference between the Old and the New Testament) then, I
suppose, there is sufficient reason, why, those who admit the Old Testament, to
be made for common edification in the Church, should not put any question
concerning those Scriptures. Those new lights among us, who do not allow the
Psalter to be pertinently and reasonably employed for the public service of
God, upon all occasions, as the Church has always employed it, may assure us,
that they understand not why the Scriptures of the Old Testament are read in
the Church, because they understand not the correspondence between the Old and
the New Testament; in the understanding whereof, the edification of the Church,
by the Scriptures of the Old Testament, consists. There may be offense taken
at diverse things in these Scriptures, I deny not. But there may be offense
taken, in like manner, at diverse things in the Canonical Scriptures of the Old
Testament. The humility of Christians requires them, edifying themselves in
that which they understand in the Scriptures, according to our common
Christianity, in the rest, which they understand not, to refer themselves to
their Superiors. The Church understood well enough, this difference, and this
correspondence to be discovered by these writings, as the time required, when
it appointed Learners to read them. And, though I stand not upon terms, yet, I
conceive, they are more properly called Ecclesiastical, because the Church has
employed them to be read in the Church, then Apocryphal, according to the use
of that word in the Church, to signify such writings as the Church suspecteth,
and therefore allows not to be read, whither in public or in private.
Whereupon, I conceive also, that the term of Canonical Scripture has, and
ought to have two senses; one, when we speak of the Jews Canon, in the Old
Testament; another, when we speak of the Canon of the Church. For, seeing the
Tradition of the Synagogue is perfect evidence what Scriptures of the old
Testament are to be received, as inspired by God; the word Canon, in that case,
may well signify the Rule of our Faith or manners. But, because the Church
cannot pretend to create that evidence originally, but only to transmit what
she receives from the Synagogue; Pretending nevertheless, to give a Rule,
what shall be read for the edification of the Church; the word Canon therefore,
in that case, will signify, only the list or Catalogue of Scriptures, which
the Church appoints to be read in the Church; which seems to reconcile the
diverse accounts extant in several Records of the Church.

CHAP. XXIII. The consideration of the Eucharist prescribed by Tradition, for
the matter of it. Lords Prayer prescribed in all services. The matter of Prayers
for all estates prescribed. The form of Baptism necessary to be prescribed. The
same reason holds in the forms of other Offices.
IN the next place, I do maintain, that the Order of celebrating the Eucharist,
and the Prayer which it was, was from the beginning, solemnized with, were,
from the beginning prescribed the Church by unwritten custom, that is, by
Tradition from the Apo^^les, containing, though not so many words, that it was
not lawful to use more or less* (for, these were always occasions for
celebrating the Eucharist emergent, which must be intimated, in fewer or more
words, in the celebrating of it) yet, the matter and substance of the
Consecration of it, together with the matter and substance of the necessities of
the Church, for which it was offered (that is to say, for which the Church was
and is to pray at the celebration of it, as hoping to obtain them by the
sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross which it represents) as received from the
beginning, was every were known to be the same. This I infer from that which I
have said in the Book before quoted, of those Texts of S. Paul, where, those
Prayers of the Church which the Eucharist is consecrated with, are called
Eucharistia, or Thanksgiving, (if not rather the thanksgiving, because, it was
a certain form of Thanksgiving, well known to all Christians by that name; from
whence, the Sacrament ^o consecrated, was also so called from the time that our
Lord, h^ing blessed, or given thanks to the Father, over the Elements, had
said; This is my body, this is my blood) and, order is given, that, at the
celebration thereof, Prayers be made for the necessities of the Church, and of
all people, 1 Cor. XIV. 25. 26. 1 Ti^^. II. 1-8. Together with those passages
of primitive antiquity, from whence it appears there, that the form of
consecrating the Eucharist, used and known generally in the Church, is called
Eucharistia; and, that the custom of interceding for all the necessities of
the Church, and for the reducing of unbelievers to the same, is and has been
taken up; and ever frequented by the Church, in obedience to, and prosecution
of the said precept of the Apostles. This observation might perhaps be thought
too obscure evidence, ^o bring to light a point of this consequence, were it
not justified by all that I produced before to show, that the Eucharist is
consecrated by the Prayers of the Church, which celebrateth it, upon the faith
of our Lords institution and promise. For, the matter of these Prayers tending
to a certain purpose, that the Elements may become the Body and Blood of
Christ, and convay his Spirit to those who receive them with living faith; the
Consecration, which is the effect of them, requires, that the form of them be
prescript and certain, though not in number of words, yet, in sense, in tent,
and substance. And this, by the evidence there produced, may appear to have
been maintained from the beginning, by Tradition in the Church, according to
the affirmation of S. Basil, that this Prayer is a Tradition of the whole
Church.

Many are the L^^urgies, (that is, the forms of celebrating the Eucharist) in
the Eastern Churches under Constantinople, Alexandria and Antiochia, yet
extant, which show the substance of it, (after the Deacon had said; Lift up
your hearts, the People answering; We life them up to the Lord; which
evidently points ou^ that which S. Paul calls the Thanksgiving or Blessing,
wherein the Consecration of the Sacrament consists, beginning there, and
ending with the Lords Prayer, in all of them) to be this; Repeating the
creation of all things, and the fall of man; to praise God, that he left him
not helpless, but called first the Fathers, then gave the Law, and, when it
appeared that all this would not serve to reclaim him to God, sent his only
Son to redeem him by his Cross, who instituted this remembrance of it; Praising
God therefore, for all this, but especially for the death and resurrection of
Christ; and praying, that the Spirit promised may come upon the elements
presently set forth, and make them the Body and Blood of Christ; that they who
receive them with living Faith may be filled with the Grace of it. I
acknowledge, that the repetition of the creation and fall of man, the calling of
the Patriarchs and giving the Law, is all silenced or left out in the Latin
Canon, (that is, that Canonical Prayer, which this Sacrament is consecrated and
communicated with) neither can I say that it is extant in the Ambrosian or any
form besides, that may appear to have been anciently in use, in any part of the
Western Church; Though, I have reason enough to conceive, that it was used from
the beginning, and afterward cut off, for the shortning of the service,
because of the great consent that is found among forms used in the Eastern
parts, and because we see, how the Psalms and Lessons retained in them, are
abridged of that length, which, by the Constitutions of the Apostles and other
ancienter records of the Church, may appear to have been used in former ages.
But, there can be no reason to say, that the leaving out of all this, being so
remote a ground of the present action, makes any difference in the substance
and effect of that prayer which it is done and performed with. And the rest,
being the same in all forms that remain extant, inables me to conclude, that
the Prayers of the Church, which the Eucharist is to be consecrated with, were
from the beginning prescribed, not for so many words, but for the substance of
them; not in writing, but by silent custom, and Tradition received by the
Church from the Apostles; and ought to continue the same to the end of the
world in all Churches. There is a little objection to be made against this,
from that which Walafridus Strabo, and other Latin Writers concerning the
Offices of the Church have reported from some passages of S. Jerome and S.
Gregory the Great; That S. Peter, at the first, did consecrate the Eucharist
with the Lords Prayer only; Which if it all this falls to the ground, and the
form of consecrating the Eucharist has proved so uniform merely by the consent
of after ages, and will remain subject to be changed again, seeing that the
Lords Prayer may, for the substance of it, be rendered into other terms and
conceptions as many ways as a man pleases. But there is, I have showed you, a
mistake in the meaning of these passages, intended only in opposition to that
variety of Psalms and Lessons and Hymns, and Prayers, which afterward were
brought in, to make the celebration of the Sacrament more solemn; in regard
whereof they say, that S. Peter consecrated, only with the Lords Prayer, not
with any of those additions for solemnities sake, when he consecrated by that
Thanksgiving or Blessing, which our Lord consecrated the Sacrament at his last
Supper with, adding only, in stead of all other solemnities, the Lords Prayer,
which the Consecration is still concluded with in all ancient forms. For, when
the Order and occasions of Assemblies were not settled, but the Offices of
Christianity were to be ministered, upon such opportunities as they could find
out for themselves, it is no mervail, if S. Peter himself might be obliged to
abare all, but merely what was requisite.

And truly, I may here seasonably say, that I conceive the Lords Prayer is
justly called by Tertullian Oration legitima, or, the Prayer which the Law,
(that is, the precept of our Lord in the Gospel; When ye pray say thus)
prescribes, not as if he would have them serve him with no other prayer but
this; But, that they should always use this as a set prayer, whatever other
occasions they might have, of addressing themselves to God with other prayers.
For, accordingly, I do observe, that in all prescribed forms, upon what
occasion soever, not only of celebrating the Eucharist, (which assemblies have
therefore been called (...) Missae in Latin, from the dismission of them, as
in Greek (...) from the gathering of them, whereas the Latin word Collectae,
which answers it, is extended to other assemblies) but other more daily and
hourly occasions, (according to the premises, concerning Five hours of Prayer
in the day, in S. Cyprians time, which since have come to seven, that there is
always a room for the Lords Prayer, as if the service of God were not lawful
according to the precept; When ye pray, say thus; unless it be used. Which is
that which I shall advise them of, who either exclude it as unlawful, or
forbear it as offensive, that they may consider, how they count themselves
members of Christ's Church, waiving that which the whole Church has practiced
in obedience to his precept, for conformity with the enemies of his Church.

There is yet another sort of Prayers, which are offered to God at the
celebration of the Eucharist, according to S. Paul's command, for all estates
and orders of men, whether in the world or in the Church, and for all their
necessities; in regard whereof, I showed you before, that the Eucharist is
counted a Sacrifice for the Church, or rather for all mankind; (As the High
Priest, when he went into the Holy of Holies, according to Philo, prayed for
the whole world) representing the intercession of Christ for the same, now at
the right hand of God, which the Church, in his name, by celebrating this
Sacrament, executes and commemorateth upon earth. And the form hereof, I can
easily say by the same reason, is, for matter and substance, though not for so
many words, and for the conceptions it is expressed with, prescribed according
to S. Paul's command, by the custom of the Church, received by Tradition from
the Apostles. For, when I have once named the necessities of all Orders and
Estates, without or within the Church in general, supposing what Christianity
requires Christians to pray for, as well in behalf of the enemies of Gods
Church, as of the members of it; I conceive I have named the substance of these
prayers, the particulars whereof, you may see in our English Litanies to be the
same, that the most ancient Writers of the Church witness to have been used,
after the exposition of the Scriptures; whether they describe the celebration
of the Eucharist, as does Justine Martyr, or not, as Tertullian. And from hence
I hope to resolve that question which I have proposed in another place, and no
man yet has taken in hand to answer; Why, as well in the Ancient Latin as
well as Eastern Liturgies, (as also by the testimonies of S. Austine and others
it appears, that) these Prayers are twice repeated at the Eucharist. The
reason being this, that first, those who offered the creatures of which the
Eucharist is consecrated, and, by which offering, the assembly of the Church
was maintained, might testify, that they do it out of devotion to God, hoping,
by so doing, to obtain at his mercy, not only their own, but the necessities
of all other orders and estates, by virtue of the Sacrifice of the Cross,
which, at present, they intend to commemorate and repete. Which
notwithstanding, the elements being consecrated, and, the Body and Blood of
Christ, once sacrificed on the Cross, here and now represented; they offer to
him the same Prayers again, presenting him, as it were, the same sacrifice here
and now represented, for the motive inducing him to grant the said necessities.
And therefore, have reason to account this service the most eminent service
that Christians can offer to God, and those prayers the most effectual that
they can address unto him; as being proper to that Christianity, in virtue
whereof they hope to obtain their prayers, and of nothing besides. That which
remains of this point, is only the consideration of those prayers which are
made at those assemblies of the Church, which pretend not to celebrate the
Eucharist, how they may appear to be prescribed by Christianity. Where, I shall
need to say nothing of such Prayers as are to be made by Christian assemblies,
for the necessities of all Orders and Estates, whether within or without the
Church; because I have already spoken of them, when they are made upon occasion
of celebrating the Eucharist. The difference between that occasion and other
occasions which the Church may have to frequent the same Prayers, when the
Eucharist is not celebrated, inferring no difference in that which is
prescribed to the Church, or by the Church, either in the matter or form of the
same.

As for the Prayers which every assembly makes for it self, concerning the
common necessities of all Christians as such, (which, I conceive, were first
called Collecta, because the assembly ended in them, and was dismissed with
them, from gathering the same; as the Mass has the name in Latin Missa, from
dismissing it, as I observed before) I shall need to say as little, having
showed, by what authority all Christians are to be limited, in such things as
have been left unlimited by our Lord and his Apostles. For the necessities of
Christians as Christians become determinable, (if any thing concerning them
become questionable) by the same authority that governs every Church, upon
such terms, as it ought to govern the same. But, if any cause appear, (as many
ages since there has appeared necessity enough) why particular Churches should
be ruled, in those forms, by Synods, that is, by the common authority of more
and greater Churches, for maintaining unity in the whole, (which the form of
Church Service may be a great means to violate, as we know by lamentable
experience) it remains, that the same means be employed for maintaining unity
in this point, which God has provided for maintaining the same in all cases.
So that, supposing, that in process of time, whether by direct or by indirect
means, the Church of Rome has gained so much ground of the whole Western
Church, as to conform their Prayers, and, in a manner, the whole Order of divine
Service, to the pattern prescribed by it; (which I take to have been the case at
the Reformation, with all the Western Church) it cannot be alleged for a
sufficient cause of changing, that the Church of Rome has no right to require
this conformity by Gods Law* But the question must be, whether the uniformity
introduced by the same, be so well, or so ill, for the prejudice or advancement
of Christianity, that it shall be requisite, for the interest thereof, to
proceed to a change without the consent of the Church. Which if it be true,
then, whatsoever has been objected to the Church of England upon this Title,
as agreeable to the form used by the Church of Rome, (not as disagreeable to
Christianity) is to be damned, as ignorantly and maliciously objected, for to
make division in the Church without cause.

These same reasons will serve to resolve, how necessary it is, that those
Prayers, wherewith the rest of Ecclesiastical Offices, Baptism, Confirmation,
Penance, the Visitation of the Sick, and Marriages are celebrated, be of a
certain form, and prescribed by the authority of the Church. It were a thing
strangely unreasonable, for him that has considered that which I have said in
the second book, how our Christianity and salvation is concerned in the
Sacrament of Baptism, and, how much the disputes of Religion that divide the
Western Church depend upon the knowledge of it; to imagine, that all those, who
must be admitted by the Church to the ministering of it, can be able to express
the true intent of it, in such form of words, as may be without offense, and
tend to the edification of Gods people, in a thing so nearly concerning their
Christianity. Rather it may justly be questioned, whether they that take upon
them to baptize and consecrate the Eucharist, not grounding themselves upon the
authority of the Church, supposing the Faith of the Church, expressed in such a
form as the Church prescribes, but their own sense, concerning the ground and
intent of those Sacraments; Do any thing or nothing; That is, whether they do
indeed minister the Sacrament of Baptism, necessary to the salvation of all
Christians, or only profane the Ordinance of God, by professing an intention
of doing that which is not indeed that Sacrament, under pretense of celebrating
it. Whether they do indeed consecrate the elements, to become, sacramentally,
the Body and Blood of Christ, and so communicate the same to those which
receive; or only profane those holy mysteries of Christianity, and involve his
people in the same guilt, by pretending to celebrate so holy an Office, and in
effect doing nothing, as not knowing what ought to be done, nor submitting to
those that do. A consideration very necessary, in regard of those who forsake
the Baptism which they received in their infancy in the Church of England, to
be baptized again by new Dippers. For it is true, the Church has admitted the
Baptism of Heretics for good, but not of all Heretics; Of those, whose
Baptism S. Cyprian excepts against Epist. ad Jubaianum, it is manifest, that,
the Church, voiding the baptism of the Samosatenians by the Canon of Nicaea,
the baptism of other Heretics, by the Canons of Arles and Laodicea, must needs
make void the baptisms of the greatest; part being evidently further removed
from the truth which Christianity professes, than those whose baptism the said
Canons disallow. And, though it is admitted, according to the dictates of the
School, that these words; I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; contain a sufficient form of this Sacrament; Yet that holds, upon
supposition, that they who use it do admit the true sense of this word I
baptize; intending thereby to make him a Christian, that is, to oblige him to
the profession of Christianity, whom they baptize. Which, what reason can any
man have to presume of, in behalf of those, who renounce their baptism once
received in the Church of England, to be baptized again? For, all reason of
charitable presumptions cease, in respect of those, who root up the ground
thereof by Schism, and by departing from the Unity of the Church. And, besides
that we do not see them declare any profession at all, according to which they
oblige themselves either to believe or live; (which is reason enough to oblige
others not to take them for Christians, not demanding to be taken for
Christians, by professing themselves Christians) we see the world overspread
with the vermin of the Enthusiasts, who, accepting of the Scriptures for Gods
word, upon a persuasion of the dictate of Gods Spirit, not supposing the reason
for which they are Christians, do consequently, believe as much in the dictates
of the same that are not grounded upon the Word of God, as upon those that are;
So that, the embracing of the Scriptures makes them no more Christians, than
Mahomets acknowledging Moses and Christ in the Alcoran makes him a Christian.
For, whosoever is persuaded, that he has the Spirit of God, not supposing,
that it is given him in consideration that he professes Christianity,
(supposing therefore the truth thereof, in order of reason before he receive
the Spirit) may, as well as Mahomet in the Alcoran, frame both the Old and New
Testament to whatsoever sense his imagination, which he takes for Gods Spirit,
shall dictate.

This reason, why it is necessary to follow the forms which the Church
prescribes, is more constraining, in celebrating the Sacraments of Baptism and
the Eucharist, as more nearly concerning the Christianity and salvation of
Christians; But yet it takes place also, in the rest of those Offices, whereby,
the Church pretends to conduct particular Christians in the way to life
everlasting. He that supposes that which I have proved, how necessary it is,
that every sheep of the flock should acknowledge the common Pastor of his
Church, that the Pastor should acknowledge his flock, upon notice of that
Christianity which every one of them in particular professes; though he may
acknowledge, that originally, there is no cause why every Bishop should not
prescribe himself the form of it in his own Church; yet, supposing that
experience has made it appear requisite, for the preservation of Unity, by
Uniformity, that the same form should be used, must needs find it requisite,
that it be prescribed by a Synod greater or less. At such time as public
Penance was practiced in the Church, when the Penitents were dismissed before
the Eucharist, with the Blessing and Prayers of the Church, can it seem
reasonable to any man, that any Prayers should be used in celebrating an action
of that consequence, but those, which the like authority prescribes? So much
the more, if it be found requisite, that the practice of private Penance, and
of the inner Court of the Conscience, be maintained in the Church. For, how
should it be fit, that every Priest, that is trusted with the Power of the
Keys in this Court, should exercice it in that form which his private fansy
shall dictate? Of Ordinations I say the same as of Confirmations. Of the
Visitation of the Sick, and of Marriage, as of Penance. Only considering, that
it is not likely, that the reason, whereupon the celebration of Marriage is an
Office of the Church, (deriving from those limitations which the precept of our
Lord has fastened upon the Marriage of Christians) should be so well understood
by all that are to solemnize Matrimony, as to do their Office, both so, as the
validity of the contract, and so, as the performance of that Office which the
parties undertake does require. In fine, having showed, that, the Service of
God upon the Regular Hours of the day, is a Custom, both grounded upon the
Scripture, and, tending to the maintenance and advancement of Christian Piety;
It remains that I say; that, the form and measure of that devotion, which all
estates are to offer to God, at those hours, cannot otherwise be limited to the
edification of all, than by the determination of the Church. They that please
themselves with that monstrous imagination, that no Christian is to be taught
what or how to pray, till he find himself enabled by the Spirit of God,
moving him to pray; will easily find, that they can never induce the greater
part of Christians, to think themselves capable, of discharging themselves to
God, in so high an Office, as the sense of their Christianity requires. They
that observe the performance of those who take it upon them, shall find them
sacrifice to God that which his Law forbids; the matter of their Prayers not
consisting with our common Christianity. For, of a truth, it is utterly
unreasonable to imagine, that God should grant inspirations of the Holy Ghost,
for such purposes, as our common Christianity furnishes. And therefore, the
consequences of so false a presumption, must be, either ridiculous or
pernicious. Now, if any man say, that he admits not the premises upon which I
infer these consequences, it remains, that the dispute rest upon those
premises, and come not to these consequences; Only let him take notice, that I
have showed him the true consequences of my own premises, which he must
reprove, as inconsistent with Christianity, if he take upon him to blame the
premises, for any fault that he finds with their true consequences. And to
say truth, as the substance and matter of Christianity is concerned in all these
Offices, (though in some more in some less) and by consequence, in the form of
celebrating them; So the Unity of the Church is generally concerned in the form
of celebrating them all, in as much as any difference, insisted upon as
necessary, and not so admitted by others, is, in point of fact, a just occasion
of division in the Church. And therefore, all little disputes of these
particulars necessarily resort to the general; Whether God has commanded the
Unity of the Church, in the external communion of the members thereof, or not.
Which having concluded by the premises, I conceive, I have founded a prejudice,
peremptorily overruling all the pety exceptions that our time has produced,
to dissolve this Unity, which ought to have been preferred before them, had
they been just and true, as none of them proves.

CHAP. XXIV. The Service of God to be prescribed in a known Language. No
pretense that the Latin is now understood. The means to preserve Unity in the
Church, notwithstanding. The true reason of a Sacrifice inforceth Communion in
the Eucharist. What occasions may dispense in it. Communion in both kinds
commanded the People. Objections answered. Who is chargeable with the abuse.
I Would now make one Controversy more, (how much soever I pretend to abate
Controversies) than hitherto has been disputed, between the Reformation and
the Church of Rome; because, though we hear not of it in our books of
Controversies, yet in deed, and in practice, it is the most visible difference
between the exercice of Religion in the two professions, that you can name.
For, what is it that men go to Church for, but to hear a Sermon on one side,
and, to hear a Mass on the other side? And yet, among so many books of
Controversies, who has disputed, whether a man is rather to go to Church to
hear a Sermon, or, (not to hear a Mass, but) to receive the Eucharist? This is
the reason indeed, why I dispute not this Controversy, (because the Mass
should be the Eucharist, but, by abuses crept in by length of time, is become
something else) until I can state the question upon such terms, as may make
the reason of Reformation visible. Whether the celebration of the Eucharist is
to be done in a Language which the people for the most part understand, not in
Latin, as the Mass, supposing the most part understand it not; is first to be
settled before we inquire, what it is that Christians chiefly assemble
themselves for; Though the question concerns not the Eucharist any more than
the other offices of Gods public Service, only as the Eucharist, if it prove
the principal of them, is principally concerned in it. I am then to confess,
in the beginning, that, those of the Church of Rome have a strong and weighty
objection against me, why they ought not to give way, that the Service of the
Church, though in a form preseribed by the Church, as I require, should be
celebrated in the Vulgar Languages, which every people understand. The
objection is drawn from that which we have seen come to pass; For, the Service
of the Church, the form and terms of it, being submitted to the construction of
every one, because in English, has given occasion to people utterly unable to
judge, either how agreeable matters excepted against are to Christianity, or, how
necessary the form, to the preservation of unity in the Church, first to desire
a change, then to seek it in a way of fact, though by dissolving the Unity of
this Church. For, he that maintains as I do, that, whatsoever defects the form
established may have, are not of weight to persuade a change, in case of danger
to Unity; And secondly, that those who have attempted the change, have not had,
either the lot or the skill, to light upon the true defects of it, but to
change for the worse in all things considerable; must needs affirm, that
otherwise, they could never have had the means to possess men's fancies with
those appearances of reason for it, which have made them think themselves wise
enough to undertake so great a change. And truly, there is nothing so dangerous
to Christianity as a superficial skill in the Scriptures, and matters of the
Church; Which may move them, that are puffed up with it, to attempt that for
the best, which, it cannot enable them for to see, that so it is indeed.
Whereas, they who hold no opinion in matters above their capacity, (because
concerning the state of the whole) are at better leisure to seek their
salvation, by making their benefit of the order provided. Seeing then, it
cannot be denied, that, the benefit of having the Service of God prescribed by
the Church in our Vulgar English, has occasioned so great a mischief as the
destruction of it, it seems, the Church of Rome has reason to refuse children
edge tools to cut themselves with, in not giving way to the public Service of
God in the Vulgar Languages; Unless it could be maintained, that no form ought
to be prescribed, which is all one as to say, that there ought to be no Church,
in as much as there can be no Unity in the Faith of Christ, and the Service of
God according to the same, otherwise.

Now, that you may judge what effect this objection ought to have, we must
remember S. Paul's dispute, upon another occasion indeed, but, from the same
grounds and reasons, which are to be alleged for the edification of the Church,
in our case. God had stirred up many Prophets in the Church of Corinth,
together with those who celebrated the mysteries of Christianity in unknown
Languages, and others that could interpret the same in the Vulgar; partly out
of an intent to manifest to the Gentiles and Jews his own presence in his
Church, (including and presupposing the truth of Christianity) but partly also,
for the instruction of the people, (novices in Christianity for a great part)
in the truth of it, and, for the celebration of those Offices wherewith he is
to be served by his Church. It came to pass, that diverse, puffed up with the
conceit of Gods using them to demonstrate his presence among his people, took
upon them to bring forth those things, which the Spirit of God moved them to
speak, in unknown Languages, at the public assemblies of the Church; Who might
indeed admire the work of God, but could neither improve their knowledge in his
truth, nor exercice their devotion in his praises, or those prayers to him,
which were uttered in an unknown Language. This is that which the Apostle
disputes against, throughout the fourteenth Chapter of his first Epistle to
the Corinthians, making express mention of Prayers, Blessings, (which I have
showed to be the consecration of the Eucharist) and Psalms, ver. 14-17-26. and
concluding, v. 27, 28. that no man speak any thing in the Church, though it be
that doctrine, those prayers or praises of God, which his own Spirit
suggesteth, unless there be some body present that can interpret. Which, what
case can there fall out for the Church, which it reaches not? For you see, S.
Paul excludes out of the Church, even the dictates of Gods Spirit, evidencing
his presence in the Church by miraculous operations, unless they may be
interpreted, for the edification and direction of the Church. What can he then
admit for the Service of God, in the name of his Church, or, for the
instruction thereof, which, it can neither be instructed by, nor offer unto him
for his service? Nay, what cause can there be, why the Church should meet,
according to S. Paul, if there be nothing done that is understood? What cause
can be alleged, why there should be a Church, that is, a Body, and an authority
to Order that Body, if there be no Office for which it should assemble,
because, that which it understands not, is no such Office? For I have laid
this for a ground, that the Society of the Church subsisteth for the Service of
God at the common Assemblies of the Church, in the Unity of the same
Christianity; So that, though it may be alleged, that the Unity of Christianity
may be preserved by the Society of the Church, though the Service of God be not
understood, yet the end for which it is preserved is not compassed, when the
Service of God is not performed, by those who understand it not, is
Christianity requires. Certainly, it is a question to be demanded of those of
the Church of Rome, why they do not preach to the people in Latin, as well as
they celebrate the rest of Gods Service in that Language, if they be content to
submit themselves to S. Paul's doctrine? For, whatsoever reason they can allege,
why that in the Vulgar, and the rest in Latin, will rather serve to
demonstrate, that it would be more visibly ridiculous, than, that it is any
more against S. Paul's doctrine. But, is it any more to the benefit of Gods
people, toward the obtaining of their necessities of God, that they should
assemble to offer him the devotions which they understand not, than, not to
assemble, or offer none? For, whatsoever may be said, that the devotions of
those who do understand what they do, are available to the benefit of those who
do not, will hold nevertheless, though they were not present, nor pretended to
do that which the Congregation does, provided that they have as good a heart to
do that which the Congregation does, as they have being present at it; Unless
we suppose, that God values their hearts because they are there, more than he
would value them being elsewhere.

Nor can I possibly imagine what can be said to all this, but only in
abatement of that ignorance, in the Latin of the Church service, which the
Nations of the Western Church may be supposed to attain to; whether by custom
of being used always to the same form, or, because the Vulgar languages of
Italy, Spain, and France, being derived from the Latin, may enable even
unletered people to understand that, or the most part of that, which is said in
Latin at the Church service; which is the reason, why the Jews, after their
return from Captivity, having changed their Mother Hebrew, into the vulgar
tongue of the Babylonians and Ch^ldeans (being indeed derived from it, with
less change, then the Italian from the Latin) maintained notwithstanding the
service of God in their original Hebrew, so far as we are able to understand,
by the circumstances produced elsewhere. And though, at this present, some
parts of it are rather Chalde^ then Hebrew; yet, they are now in such a
condition, that a great many of them are not able to attain, either that
language, or the Hebrew but speak and understand only that language where they
are bred, the service which they use in their Synagogues remaining in the
Hebrew. And the Greeks at this day, having got a vulgar language, as much
differing from the ancient learned Greek, as the Italian from the Latin,
notwithstanding, cease not to exercise the service^ of God in the learned
Greek, which they understand not. Which the Western Nations and Nothern may
continue to do, with as little burden, as they voluntarily undergo; least they
should give the minds of rude people cause to make more doubt then they see,
upon a change which they see. And truly, I do think this consideration of
preserving unity in the Church, of such weight, that I do not think it was
requisite, when the Latin tongue began to be worn out of use, by little and
little, through the breaches made by the Germane Nations upon the Western
Empire; that the service of the Church should straightway be put into the
Languages of those Nations, who were every day changing their languages, and
learning the Latin; or rather framing new languages, by mixing their own with
the Latin. Neither will I undertake to determine the time, and the state, in
which the Church first becomes, or became obliged to provide this change, for
the same reason. For it is evident, that it had not been possible, to preserve
correspondence and intercourse between all these Nations, with the maintenance
of unity in that Christianity, which, while this change was making, they had
received, had not the knowledge of the Latin among them, made it reasonable to
continue the use of it in the Church service. But, as the case is now, that a
total change of the Latin into new languages, has been accomplished; and,
that the greatest part of Christian people by many parts, are by no means able
to learn what is done at the service of the Church, confiningit to the Latin,
I must needs count it strange, that the example of the modern Jews, in their
Synagogues, or those miserably oppressed Christans in Turkey, should be alleged,
as to prove, that there is nothing to oblige the whole Church to provide bet^r
for all Christians, then those Churches do for their people, or the Jews for
their Synagogues, when we dispute what ought to be done. We should rather look
to the original practice of Christendom, (which there may be reason to entitle
unto the Apostles, and consequently, the changes that may have succeeded, to a
defect of succeeding ages, failing, and coming short of their institutions)
then allege the practice of the Jews, (which the Christians have so little cause
to envy, that they may well conclude them to be a people forsaken of God, by
the little appearance of Religion in the offices which they serve God with) or,
the necessities of ignorant and persecuted Christians, for a rule to Churches
flourishing with knowledge, and means of advancing Gods service.

If, from he beginning, when, by the means of those who spoke Greek and Latin,
or other languages used within the Empire, from whence the tidings of the
Gospel came, other Nations had received the service of God in those languages
wherein the Churches of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, or Antiochia, or
possibly other Churches from which their Christianity was planted, did
celebrate it; they might with some color of reason, have argued, that so it
ought to continue in the Western Church. But since it appears, that the
service of God has been prescribed in the Arabic, the Syriack, the Ethiopick,
the Coptick, the Sclavonian, the Russe, and other ^or^ain languages; what can a
man infer, from the practice of the Church of Rome, not allowing the Saxons in
Britain, the Germans in Almane, and the North and Eastland Countries, the
Slavonians in Pole and Boheme, and other parts, the service of God in their
Mother tongues, toward the disputes of this time, that they ought not to be
allowed it; but the inhansing of the Popes Power, requiring of those who
acknowledge the same, absolute conformity, in things altogether needless to
the unity of the Church, the true end of all due Power in the Church. For, were
conformity in this point necessary to the unity of the Church, had the Power of
the Church of Rome, and of the Pope in behalf of it, been such, by virtue of
the first instituting of it, as might have required it; why then was it not
required from the beginning, that the service of God through the whole Empire,
should be celebrated in Latin, being the language which the mother Church of
the mother City did use, and far more frequented then in Greece, than now in
the West, which is forced to use it? Seeing then it appears, that there is
nothing at all to be alleged for so great an inconvenience, but that which I
have alleged for it, and which I acknowledge to be truly alleged, and justly,
but not justly admitted; it remains, that the Church is provided by God of
other Laws, the observation whereof is, and would be a cure to the danger
alleged, from the change of the public service of God, into the vulgar
languages. For, this danger proceeds from nothing but from the false pretense
of absolute and infallible authority in the Church, which is indeed, limited by
the truth of that Christianity whereupon the Church is grounded; and for the
maintenance whereof it subsisteth. For, though this pretense may be a mean to
contain simple people in obedience to any thing which shall be imposed, so long
as they know not any thing better that they ought to have; yet, if conscience
be once awaked with reasons convincing, that the authority instituted by God in
his Church is abused, to the prejudice and hinderance of the salvation of Gods
people, it is no marvail, either that they should neglect all their interest of
this world, to seek themselves redress; or, that they should mistake themselves
in seeking it, and think the redress to be the destroying of all authority in
the Church. So that, the preventing of danger, by the necessary reformation of
abuses in Church matters, must not be thought to consist in pretenses, as
inconsistent with the common good of the Churches, as with the truth of
Christianity; But in submitting to those bounds which the grounds of
Christianity evidently establishes; And which, unless Christianity make
people more untractable, then all the rudeness which they are born and bred
with, makes barbarous Nations and wild Beasts; the sense of those mischiefs,
which difference of Religion has brought in and maintained in Christendom,
must needs have disposed them to embrace and to cherish, for the future
avoiding of the same.

In the next place, supposing the Eucharist, as the rest of the service, to be
celebrated in a language vulgarly understood, we are to debate, whither the
Eucharist require Communion; or, whether the private Masses now allowed and
countenanced in the Church of Rome, be of the institution of our Lord and his
Apostles. Nor shall I need to use many words, to free the term of private
Masses from the exception which is sometimes made; That, all Masses are public
actions of the Church, repeating the Sacrifice of Christ crucified to the
benefit of his Church. For, seeing the term of a private Mass signifies a
thing visible; The celebration of that Eucharist, whereof no body but the
Priest that consecrates it does communicate; I ask no man leave to use the
term, signifying no more by it, but, putting the rest to debate, whither, as de
facto in the Church of Rome, so, de jure, according to the institution of our
Lord and his Apostles; the sacrifice of Christ crucified, is and ought to be
either repeated, or represented and commended by celebrating the Eucharist, so
as, no body but the Priest that consecrates to communicate; or whether the
institution of our Lord require that Christians communicate in the Eucharist
which they celebrate. A dispute, wherein, nothing that is said in the
Scripture, concerning the order and practice of our Lord and his Apostles, can
leave any doubt. For, though there may be mention of celebrating the Eucharist,
where there is no mention of communicating in it (which is an argument merely
negative, not from the Scripture, but from this or that Scripture, and of no
consequence to say; S. Paul, 1 Cor. XIV. 14-17. 1 Timothy II. 1-6. mentions the
celebration of the Eucharist, not mentioning any Communion, therefore no body
did communicate) yet are we far from the least inckling of any circumstance,
to show, that there was this Sacrament celebrated, when there was none but he
that consecrated it to communicate. Nay, if we regard the institution, Do this
in remembrance of me, referring as much to take, eat, and drink, as to the
blessing or thanksgiving, whereby, I have showed, that our Lord did consecrate;
If we regard S. Paul, affirming, that the bread which we bless, and the cup
which we drink, is the communion of the body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor. X.
16. and, reproving the Corinthians, because the rich prevented the poor, and
suffered them not to communicate in their Oblations, out of which the Eucharist
was consecrated, as I showed before: We shall be bold to conclude, that, so far
as appears by the Scripture, all that did celebrate did communicate; as, all
that assisted did celebrate, if that be true which I proved before, that the
Prayers of the Congregation is that which consecrates the Eucharist, to wit,
supposing Gods Ordinance. The same appears by Justine Martyr, and other the
ancientest Records of the Church, that describe this office. But I cannot better
express the sense of the Church in this point, then by alleging the decretall
Epistles of the Popes, before Innocent the I. or his Predecessor Syricius;
which, being forged by Isidore Mecater, some DCC years after Christ, as has
been discovered by men of much learning, do notwithstanding contain this Rule,
that he who communicates not, be not admitted to the service of the Church.
Which, he that forged them would never have fathered upon the ancient Popes,
had it not been evident to all that were seen in the Canons of the Church, that
it was of old a matter of censure, to be present at celebrating the Eucharist,
and not to communicate in it. A thing evident enough by many Canons of Councils
yet extant, and foisted into those decretals to no other purpose, but to make
men believe in after ages, that those Canons were made, to prosecute and to
bring to effect those things which the Popes had decreed before; as if their
authority had been always the same, as it was at the time of this forgery.

Now it is well enough known, what pretenses have been made, and what
consequences drawn, from the speculation of the sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross, repeted or represented by this Sacrament; to persuade Christendom, that
the benefit thereof, in remission of sins, and infusion of grace, and all the
effects of Christ's Passion is derived upon Gods people, by virtue of the mere
act of assisting at the Sacrifice, which has been called opus operaetum, or
the very external work done, without consideration, without knowledge, without
any intention of doing that which he is to do in it; that is, of concurring
every one for his share, to the doing of the same: Supposing always, that this
Sacrifice consists in substituting the Body and Blood of Christ, to be bodily
present under the accidents of the elements, the substance of them being
abolished, and ceasing to be there any more; And not, in offering and
presenting the sacrifice of Christ crucified, here now represented by this
Sacrament, unto God, for obtaining the benefits of his passion in behalf of
his Church. And this opinion, I may safely say, I know to be still maintained,
because I have heard it maintained, though, as I suppose, by the more
licentious and ignorant sort of Priests; that it concerns not the people to
consider, to know, to intend to join their devotions, to the effecting of that
which this Sacrament pretends; But only to mind their own Prayers, assisting
and accompanying that which the Priest does, with those affections which they
came to Church with. But, can I therefore say, that this is the doctrine of
that Church, because it allows such things to be taught and said, without
punishment or disgrace? Surely, he that peruses, not only the Testimonies
which Doctor Field has produced, in the Appendix alleged before, to show, that
the true understanding of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, was maintained in the
Church, even till the Reformation; together with the opinions of many Divines
of credit in that Church, and instructions of Catechisms, and devotions, that
have been published since the Council of Trent; shall easily conclude, that it
is allowed, though not enjoined by the Church, to oppose this palliating of
abuses in the Church, by opinions so prejudicial to Christianity. And without
doubt, those who pretend no more then to excuse the Church, in not reforming
the abuse of private Masses, by saying, that the Church commands them not, nor
forbids any man to communicate at any time, but rather exhorts them to it; are
far from saying, that the people are no further concerned in the Mass, then to
assist it with their bodily presence, and the general good intentions and
affections which they come to Church with, employing themselves, in the mean
time, at their own devotions. Though it is much to be feared, that this opinion
is far the more popular; The opposition which the Reformation has occasioned,
and the countenance given by the Sea of Rome, to those who are the most zealous
and extreme in opposing the Heretics, bearing down the endeavors of more
conscientious Priests, to maintain more Christian opinions in the minds of
their people. In the mean time it is visible, that the resolution of this point
depends upon the true reason of offering the sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross, in celebrating the Sacrament of the Eucharist; Which I have showed to
consist, in presenting unto God the Sacrifice of Christ crucified, represented
here now by the elements sacramentally changed, by the act of consecrating,
into the body and blood of Christ, by those Prayers, whereby, the Congregation
which celebrateth this Sacrament intercedeth with God, for their own
necessities, and the necessities of his Church. For, if the virtue and efficacy
of these Prayers be grounded upon nothing else, then the fidelity of the
Congregation, in standing to the Covenant of Baptism; (as, if Christianity be
true, it consists in nothing else) and, if the celebration of the Eucharist be
the profession of fidelity and perseverance in it; what remains, but, that
the efficacy of the Sacrifice depend upon the receiving of the Eucharist;
unless the efficacy and virtue of Christian men's Prayers can depend upon their
perseverance in that Covenant, which they refuse to renew, and to profess
perseverance in it, that profession being no less necessary, then the inward
intention of persevering in the same. For, the receiving of the Eucharist is no
less expressly, a renewing of the Covenant of Baptism, then, being baptized is
entering into it. So that, whosoever refuses the Communion of the Eucharist, in
as much as he refuses it, refuses to stand to the Covenant of his Baptism,
whereby he expects the world to come.

I say not therefore, that, whosoever communicates not in the Eucharist, so often
as he has means and opportunity to do it, renounces his Christianity, either
expressly, or, by construction and consequence. For, how many of us may be
prevented with the guilt of sin, so deeply staining the conscience, that they
cannot satisfy themselves in the competence of that conversion to God, which
they have time, and reason, and opportunity to exercise, before the opportunity
of communicating? how many have need of the authority of the Church, and the
power of the Keys, not only for their satisfaction, but for their direction,
in washing their wedding Garments white again? How many are so distracted, and
oppressed with business of this world, that they cannot, upon all
opportunities, retire their thoughts to that attention, and devotion which the
office requires? How many, though free of business which Christianity
injoyneth, are entangled with the cares and pleasures of the world, though not
so far as to depart from the state of Grace, yet further then the renewing of
the Covenant of Grace imports? Be it therefore granted, that there is a great
allowance to be made, in exacting the Apostolical Rule, for all that are
present to communicate. But, be it likewise considered, what a pitiful excuse
it is in behalf of the Church, that it forbids no man to communicate, that
is prepared as the rules thereof require; subsisting for no other purpose, but
to procure the people thereof to be prepared for the service of God, whereof,
the principal part is this office. But, when it is further allowed to be taught
and said, that it concerns not Gods people to assist the office of the Church,
with their actual intentions and devotions, but with their bodily presence,
and the general affection which they bring with them to Church; what reason
can be alleged why they should go to Church, to carry those affections to the
Congregations, which are exercised at home, with their particular devotions, to
the same purpose? Nay, to what purpose subsisteth the Communion of the Church,
if it subsist not in order to the service of God in the public Assembly of his
people, the chief office whereof is taught to be of that nature, that the
presence of a Christian is of no effect to the purpose of it? Or, what reason
can be alleged, why the parts of Christendom should not provide for themselves,
by restoring the primitive practice of Christianity, without the consent of the
whole; forbidding them to provide for themselves, but not providing for them in
matters so grossly and palpably concerning our common Christianity?

But having cautioned, that the service of God, and the Eucharist, be in a
language vulgarly understood, and that for the communion, as well as for the
sacrifice; it must further be provided, that this Communion be complete, in
both kinds in which the Sacrament is celebrated, not barring the people of the
Cup, as it is the custom in the Church of Rome to do. And truly, there is not
so much marvel at any thing in difference, as there is, why it has been
thought fit, to make this the cause of so great a breach. For, the precept
running in those terms, which take hold of them who are obliged by it, that is,
of the whole Church, consisting of Clergy and people both alike; (because I
have showed, that, do this in remembrance of me, concerns the whole Church, by
the prayers whereof it is consecrated.) How will it be possible to make any
humane understanding capable to comprehend, that, when our Lord says, take,
eat, drink, do this; the people shall stand charged only with part of it.
Indeed, had there been any limitation of the Lawgivers intent expressed,
either by way of precept, as this lies; or, by the practice of the Church,
originally under the Apostles, and generally throughout Christendom; there
might have been pretense for dispute. And, it must not be denied, that there
have been those that have attempted to show, that the Apostles so used it, even
in the Scriptures; But by such means, as if they meant not, indeed* to prove it
for a truth, but to show, how willingly they would gratify those who would be
glad to see it proved, whether true or false. And do therefore sort to no other
effect, then to make it appear, that their desire to prove it out of the
Scripture was far greater, then the Scripture gave them cause to cherish. For,
were breaking of bread put a thousand times in the Scripture, for celebrating
the Eucharist, (as sometimes it is put, Act. II. 42. 45. XX. 7. at least for
those Suppers, at which the Eucharist was celebrated) what would this avail,
unless we could be persuaded, that, as often as breaking of bread is put for
eating, there we are to understand, that there was no drink? Or unless we
could understand, by one and the same term of breaking bread, that all Priests
had drink as well as bread, but the Lay people none? Therefore, whatsoever
advantage it may be, (in regard it is certain, that the greatest part of the
world will never be wise) to make a noise with any plea, though never so
unprobable, rather then be thought to have nothing to say; men of judgment and
conscience must needs take it for a confession, that there is no ground for it
in the Scriptures, to see things alleged so far from all appearance of truth.
As for the practice of the Catholic Church, I may very well remit all that
desire to inform, and not to scandalize themselves, to those things which
Cassander has, which much learning, collected, as sufficient to make it
appear, (if any thing that men are unwilling to see, can be made to appear)
that, as to this day, there is no such custom in the Eastern Church, so, in the
Western Church, it is not many ages since it can be called a custom: And that
by so visible degrees introduced, as may be an undeniable instance, to make
evidence, that corruption may creep into the Laws and customs of the Church,
though by those degrees, which are not always visible. Indeed it is alleged,
that there are some natures found in the world, that can by no means endure the
taste of wine, (which therefore some men call abstemious) without casting it
back again, and enduring as great pangs, as men are seen to endure, that are
forced or cou^ened to eat things which they hate. So that, to force such
natures to receive the Sacrament in both kinds, were to destroy the reverence
due to it, both in them who receive it, and in them that shall see it used with
no more reverence.

It is alleged again, That Christianity goes further than wine; That is; That
some Christian Nations dwell in Countries so untemperately cold, that wine will
not keep in their Countries, but changes as soon as it comes. Now, as no reason
appears, why the Sacrament should not be celebrated for the use of those
people, who cannot receive it in both kinds; Neither can any reason appear why
other people, receiving it in one kind, should not receive the same benefit by
it which they do. Last of all it is alleged, that, in the primitive Church, it
was many times received by the people in one kind upon several occasions. For,
in regard that Christians could not always be pr^sent at the celebrating
ther^o^, when there was not such means as have since been provided, especially
those who were married to unbelievers; it was a custom to send them the
Communion, who were known to join with the devotion of the Church, though
hindered to join therewith in bodily presence; as we learn by Justi^e Martyrs
second Apology. And because, in the quality of wine, a little quantity is not to
be preserved, (as preserve it they did, besides other reasons, to take it
Fasting) therefore it was sent only in the other kind, as we find by
Tertullian writing to his wife. Again, if a man that was under Penance fell in
danger of departing this life, before he was reconciled to the Church, by
receiving the Communion again; (which, by this one instance we may see, how
much the primitive Christians abominated to do) As the Law of the Church was,
that they should not be refused the Communion in that case; So the custom was,
for the same reason, to send it them only in one kind, as appears by an
eminent example, related from Dionysius of Alexandria by Eusebius Hist. Eccles.
VI. 44. But these instances, if they be looked into, will appear to be of the
same consequence, as if it should be alleged to a Jew; that, if two Jews should
turn back to back, and go one of them East, the other West, till they came to
meet again, (howsoever this may be possible to be done) seeing when they meet
again, if the one count Saturday, the other must needs count Sunday; (as
appears evidently by the reason of the Sphere, and the daily motion of the Sun
round the earth) therefore they cannot both keep the Sabbath upon the day which
the Law appoints; therefore, it is in the power of the Synagogue to appoint
that no Sabbath be kept. Or, because, during the forty years travail of the
Israelites through the Wilderness to the Land of Promise, their children were
not circumcised, by reason that they knew not when they should be summoned to
remove, by the moving of the cloud that was over the Tabernacle, which they
were always to be ready to do; Therefore, it was in the power of the
Synagogue, to dispense with the circumcision of male children, under the Law of
Moses. Positive precepts they are all, that of circumcision, and that of the
Sabbath, as well as this of the Eucharist. Neither can it be said, that those
ever concerned the salvation of a Jew more nearly, than this earnest of our
common salvation concerns that of a Christian: And, why the Synagogue should
not have more power in those precepts, than the Church in this, nothing can be
said.

But to the particulars* Suppose some fancies may be possessed with such an
aversness to wine, that no use of reason, at years of discretion, when they
come to the Eucharist, will prevail to admit that kind, without such
alteration in them, as the reverence due unto it can stand with; (for I have
seen the case of one, that never had tasted wine in all his life; and yet, by
honest endeavors, when he first came to the Eucharist, receives it in both
kinds, without any manner of offense) does it therefore fall under the power of
the Church, to prohibit it all people, because there may fall a case, wherein
it shall be necess^ry to dispense with some, though, not comprehended in the
case? For, there is nothing, but the mere necessity of giving order in cases
not expressed by the Law, that gives the Church power to take order in such
cases: Therefore, without those ca^^^, it has none. And so in the case of
those Nations, where wine will not keep, yet the people are Christians. For,
neither was the reason otherwise, supposing that the ancients did reserve the
Eucharist in one kind only, for the absent, or for the case of sudden death,
to those that were under Penance. For, this reservation was but from Communion
to Communion, which, in those days, was so frequent, that he who carried away
the Body of our Lord, to eat it at home, drinking the Blood at present, might
reasonably be said to communicate in both kinds. Neither can that sacramental
change, which the consecration works in the elements, be limited to the instant
of the assembly; though it take effect only, in order to that Communion, unto
which the Church designeth that which it consecrateth. And, so far as I can
understand the condition of the Church, at that time, in these cases, there may
have been as just cause to give it then in one kind, in these cases, as now to
the abstemious, or to those Nations where wine will not keep. But, shall this
necessity be a color for a Power in the Church, to take away the birthright
of Christian people, to that which their own prayers consecrate? If the Power
of the Church be infinite, this color need not. If it he only regular, as I
have showed all along that it is, there can be no stronger rule than that of
common reason, which forbids servants to make bold with their Masters
ordinances, where no other act of his obliges. For, all necessity is the work
of providence, and excuses, or if you will, justifies where it constrains; not
where it constrains not. The Greek Church has an ancient custom, not to
consecrate the Eucharist in Le^t but upon Sabbaths and Lords days, on the other
five days of the week, to communicate of that which was consecrated upon those
days, by the Council of Laodicea Can. XLIX. And this Communion is prescribed
by the Council in Trullo Can. LII. But, that they held the Communion to be
completed by dipping the elements consecrated before in wine, with the Lords
Prayer, it will to him that shall peruse that which is found in Cassanders
works page 1020, 1027. Whereby you shall perceive also, that the same was
formerly done in the Church of Rome on good Friday, on which days the same
course was and is observed, and that, with an intent to consecrate it as the
Eucharist is consecrated; though, at this day, it is not so believed in the
Church of Rome. For, the custom of the Church determining the intent of those
Prayers whereby the Eucharist is consecrated, to the elements in which it is
communicated; (Because, wine presently consecrated, being in so small a
quantity, was not fit to be kept) there is no reason why the Communion should
not be complete; Though, how fit this custom is, I dispute not.

But there is a new device of Concomitance, just as old as the withholding of
the Cup from the people; (that you may be sure, it would never have been
pleaded, but to maintain it, for, in the Greek Church, that allows both kinds,
who ever heard of it?) It is said, that the blood in the body accompanies the
flesh, neither can the Body of Christ, as it is, or as it was upon the Cross,
be eaten without the Blood. Seeing then, that he who receives the body must
needs receive the blood also, what wrong is it for the people, to be denied
that which they have, which they have received already? And now you see, to
what purpose Tr^n^^^s^^ntiation serves; To make it appear, that our Lord
instituted this Sacrament in both elements to no purpose, seeing, as much must
needs be received in on^ ^in^^^ as in both. And yet, by your favor, even
Transubstantiation distinguis^^th between the being of the flesh of Christ
naturally in the body of Christ upon the Cross, (for so, it was necessarily
accompanied with the blood of Christ, not yet issued from it) and between the
flesh of Christ being sacramentally in the element consecrated into it. And
thus, it cannot be otherwise accompanied with the blood, than, because he that
consecrates is commanded to consecrate another kind into the blood; And so,
he that receives the body being commanded as much to receive the blood, the
body may be said to be accompanied with the blood. But otherwise, if he
receive not the blood, then is it not accompanied with the blood as it ought to
be. For, seeing the command is to receive, as well as to consecrate several
elements into the body and blood of Christ, it is manifest, that the body and
blood of Christ are received, as they are consecrated, apart; Under one element
the body, under another the blood. Indeed, upon another ground, which the
Church of Rome will have no cause to own, I do conceive, it may well be said,
that the body is accompanied with the blood, to them that receive the Sacrament
in one kind; in case it may or must be thought, that they, who, in the Church
of Rome, thirst after the Eucharist in both kinds, do receive the whole Grace
of the Sacrament by the one kind; through the mercy of God, giving more than
he promises, in consideration that they come not short of the condition
required, by their own will or default. Which is necessarily to be believed, by
all that believe the Church of Rome to remain a Church, though corrupt, and,
that salvation is to be had in it and by it; Though, whether this be so or not,
I say nothing here, because it is the last point, to be resolved* out of the
resolution of all that goes before. For, since it is no Church, unless the Grace
of this Sacrament be convayed by the Sacrament ministered as the Church
ministers the same; And, seeing the precept of receiving the Eucharist is
positive, and imports not the promise of Grace, by the nature of the action
commanded, but by the free will and appointment of God; it were injurious to
the goodness of God, to think that he denies the promise to those, who would
perform the condition if they could, receiving the Eucharist in one kind,
because they cannot receive it in both. For, to say nothing at present, what
reason may hinder him, that otherwise would betake himself where he might
receive it in both kinds; how many thousand souls live and dye in that
Communion, without knowing, that there is any where means to receive it in both
kinds?

Which if it be so, then, this resolution leaves the charge where it ought to
lie; not upon the people, who suffers in it, but upon the Priesthood, who enjoy
by it a fruit less privilege above them, at the charge of Gods Ordinance which
suffers the sacrilege; But especially the Prelates, whose consent and
connivence maintains the abuse. For, all that has been alleged to excuse it,
may appear to a reasonable man, not to have been the reason for which it was
introduced, (nor yet, to avoid the irreverence of the wine that may remain in
the country men's beards; for, what is that to women that have none?) but to
add to the Clergy a pre-eminence above the people, by excluding them from that,
to which it admits the Priest that consecrateth. A thing that had not
needed, had the Clergy known, that all the reverence which is justly due to
them, is grounded upon the difference between them and the people, in sobriety
of carriage, and integrity of conscience, visible in the same: And that serves
not the turn, but rather turns to a contrary effect, when the people may
perceive, that they betray their trust, both to them and to God, by so
unnecessarily abusing their Office. So that, the mean to recover and restore
that trust and reverence due to the Clergy from the People, which, the
maintenance of Christianity absolutely requires, will consist in the
recovering and restoring of that integrity and holiness of life in the Clergy,
grounded upon their renouncing the interests and engagements of this world,
which their profession imports; Not in maintaining that difference, which,
the people may discern not to agree with our common Christianity.

CHAP. XXIV. Prayer the more principal Office of Gods service then Preaching.
Preachings, neither Gods word, nor the means of salvation, unless limited to
the Faith of Gods Church. What, the edification of the Church by preaching
further requires. The Order for Divine service according to the course of the
Church of England; According to the custom of the universal Church.
ANd now there is nothing in the way, why we should not judge between the
Reformation and the Church of To. whether the Sermon or the Mass be the
principal office for which Christians are to assemble* as the Romans once did
between their neighbors of Ardea and Aricia; adjudging to themselves the land,
which, they were chosen to judge, whether of those Cities it belonged to. There
had been indeed just complaint, that the people were not taught the duties of
their Christianity, at their assemblies in the Church: There had been just
complaint, that the service of the Church was not understood, being performed
in an unknown tongue; That the Eucharist was celebrated without any Communion
of the people; That the Communion, when it was given, as rarely it was, was
only in one kind. But never any complaint, that there were so many assemblies
of the Church without preaching, whereas, when there is none, the Church ought
not to assemble, though for the communion of the Eucharist, and the service of
God, which, by the Apostles ordinance, it is to be celebrated with. No man
living durst ever make any such complaint, nor can any man living justify it.
And yet, when the change comes to be made, as if such a demand had been both
made and justified, the sermon is set up instead of the Mass in most places;
And the Reformation is taken to be characterized as much, by putting down the
Eucharist, or reserving it to four times, a year, as, or so, by restoring the
Comunion of it in both kinds, with the service which it is celebrated with, in
the language that is vulgarly known. Not so the Church of England. The
Reformation whereof consists in an order, as well for the celebration of, and
Communion in the Eucharist all Lords days and festival days, as in putting
the service into our mother English; desiring that there might be also a
Sermon, when it may be had in so good order, as to create no offense to Gods
people, or irreverence in his Service; But, prescribing the order aforesaid,
though that cannot be attained to. Whereby it may appear, that is was nothing
but the ^ares of false doctrine, sowed among the good wheat of the Reformation
in England, that has hindered this good order to take effect in practice. For,
it were a great impertinence to me to dispute here, that the Eucharist thus
celebrated, is to be preferred before a Sermon without it. no man having
attempted to maintain the contrary, and the reason being so clear, upon the
premises; That, as the undertaking of Christianity by Baptism puts a man in
possession of his title to the Kingdom of heaven which the hearing of it
preached only makes him capable to choose: So, the ren^wing of his
undertaking, by the communion of the Eucharist, and the exerci^e thereof* by
the service of God which it is celebrated with, is the means of attaining
that, which, the further knowledge of Christianity attained by a Sermon,
renders a man only capable to attain: Namely the gift of the Holy Ghost,
inabling to make good that Christianity which our Baptism undertakes, and so
to attain life everlasting.

I proceed, here, upon supposition of that which I have said in my Book of the
right of the Church Page 98-106 to ground the difference between preaching the
Gospel to those that are not Christians, and teaching those that are, upon the
Scriptures of the old and New Testament. Our Lord and his Apostles, pretending
(as indeed they were) to be prophets, might easily be admitted to teach the
people in the Synagogue, wheresoever they came, because the whole Nation was to
obey them, by the Law, Deutr. XVIII. 13. supposing them to be Prophets indeed.
Thus had they means to preach Christ and Christianity to the Jews, so long as
the Jews, in regard of the credit, which, their doctrine, life, and miracles
had among the Jews, could not condemn them for false Prophets. As for the
Gentiles, who had not any custom to assemble themselves for the service of
God, worshipping false Gods, They could do no more then give them the news of
the Gospel, till, having persuaded them to be Christians, they might assemble
them as they found means both to praise God, and pray to God, according to
that which they, either had attained to, or desired to attain; And, to teach
them what they had further to learn, to make their Praises of God, and prayers
to God the more Christian. He that understands this case, by the Scriptures
of the new Testament, must conclude, that all preaching is to make men
Christians; that the praises of God, and prayers to God (comprehending the
Eucharist) are the exercise of Christianity. The one, the next means to
attain salvation, the other, only the means to attain that means. So that,
this dispute also resolves into that of my second Book, whether we are
justified by believing, that we are justified and predestinate; Or, by
professing and living as Christians. For, supposing the state of salvation to
be obtained by so believing and that so, as, not to be forfeited any more; It
is very reasonable to run infinitely after Sermons, till a man find himself
settled in so believing. But so, that then, he shall believe that, which, he can
have no reason, supposing the Scriptures, to believe. Nor shall the frequenting
of Sermons serve to show any reasonable motive to believe; But, the very act of
hearing a man speak out of the Pulpit, by the glass, must be taken for the
means appointed by God, by which, when he sees his time, he will determine the
Elect to believe, leaving the Reprobate in their unbelief, though, perhaps,
after they have slept out more Sermons then the other have done. So, the opus
operatum of hearing Sermons, according to this opinion, succeeds instead of the
opus operatum of hearing Masses, according to the corrupt practice of the
Church of Rome. And in this chang, the work of Reformation, according to this
opinion, must consist. But then, it will be necessarily consequent, that they
who have attained this faith, give over hearing sermons for the future, and not
only Sermons, but prayers, and all other offices of Gods service, and
assemblies for the same, according to the opinion of that Sect, that now thinks
themselves above ordinances. Which Sect, before ever it appeared, I had
understood, by a person of integrity and knowledge, that there was a difference
of opinion among those who frequented and maintained Sermons, besides the order
of the Ecclesiastical Laws in England; Some thinking it a means of faith, to
confer of the sermon after it is don, others laughing at so silly a mistake,
as, thinking to attain the state of salvation, by reason and freewill, not by
Gods mere Grace. Whereby it appears, that, whosoever, as I do, makes the
preaching of the Gospel (that is, not speaking out of a Pulpit, but, showing
the reasons which Gods word proposes to move men to be true Christians) the
means which Gods spirit uses to bring a man to the state of Grace; is obliged
to grant, that it is no otherwise the means to maintain a man in that state,
then, as it is the means to maintain him a good Christian. And, that his
Christianity, in the first place, consisting in the public service of God, to
which he becomes engaged by being baptized into the Church; The offices thereof
are the immediate means of salvation, to which, as well as to the offices
concerning other men and our selves, all teaching of Christians immediately
tends, as, all preaching to unbelievers, at a distance.

Now, let no man think, that I take any pleasure in censuring the proceedings
of foreign Churches, which I could willingly have passed over in silence, had
not a pernicious affectation of being like them, carried those that liked not
this order, to destroy the very being of the English Church; out of a desire to
change the virtue of it for their oversight. For now I must say, whatsoever
offense it may cause; that, when it had been well pleaded, that the communion
of the Eucharist ought to be restored in both kinds, with the service of God in
a known language; And, that order ought to be taken, that preaching might be
frequented, for the instruction of the people; to infer thereupon for a Law,
that there be no orders for holding any assembly of the Church, without
Preaching, was to cure the abuse of Private Masses, by degrading the Eucharist
from the preeminence that it holds, above all other offices that God can be
served with by a Christian; And that without color from the scripture, without
precedent, from any practice of the Church. There have been indeed pretenses
among us, that the word which gives efficacy to the Sacraments, is the word
preached; Meaning thereby, a sermon spoken out of the Pulpit. And from hence
has proceeded the affectation of Christning Sermons, as if that were the word
whereof S. Austine says; Accedat verbum ad elementum, and fit Sacramentum.
Nay, this preaching before meat, in a long discourse, instead of thanksgiving,
what is it but a mark of that sense which they give S. Paul, when he says;
that the creature is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, for the food of
Christians, 1 Timothy IV. 5? And when Sermons are so affectedly called the Means;
To wit, of saving us; Is it not manifest that they attribute unto Sermons that
which S. Paul Romans X. 8-15. and the apostles elsewhere attribute to the
preaching of the Gospel, whereby a man becomes convict, that he ought to
become a Christian, without which no Christian will grant any man can be saved?
Whereby we may see, what consequence, slight mistakes, in the very
signification of the words, may and do produce. For, having showed an evident
difference, between preaching the Gospel to those who as yet believe not, and
teaching those that are become Christians the further knowledge of their
Christianity; I may take for granted, that it is a mistake, when the difference
is not made, between preaching to an assembly of Christians, and declaring the
Gospel to unbelievers, whom the Apostles could not deal with upon any
supposition of Christianity but only upon the force of those motives which
they showed them to embrace it; to whom therefore the only means of their
salvation was the knowledge of those motives. And though all Christians when
they come among unbelievers, are bound to preach Christ to them, that is, to
declare unto them the reasons why they ought to be Christians, so far as they
are able to do it without prejudice of Christianity; Yet, to preach it as the
Apostles preached it, planting with all the Church, in which God should be
served according to Christianity, is that which no private man can do, without
authority received by the Church from the Apostles. From which authority, all
that is afterward don in serving God, by the Churches so planted, must receive
that warrant upon which Christians may ground themselves, that it is agreeable
to the will of God. And upon these terms, it is to be granted, that sermons
preached in the assemblies of Christians are the means of their salvation;
because that, the allowance of the Church groundeth a presumption, that they
are according to Christianity. But if this be wanting, though it is not
necessary that they should be contray to Gods word, yet, because there is no
presumption, that they are so as God has provided they should be, they are not
to be accepted for Gods word, though they who preach them would make men
believe it.

And this is, now, the condition of the people of England. It is well enough
known indeed, that the Presbyterians have propounded a new form of doctrine,
according to which, had it been received, there would have been reasonable
persumption for plain Christians, that their sermons must needs proceed. But
it is as well known, that it is excepted against in every part of it by, those
who joined with them against the Church of England; as, he that will take the
pains to compare that which I write here, with it, may know, what it is that I
except against in every point of it. How they satisfy their people, to pay
them for preaching, upon a supposition, which they know is contested on both
these hands, as well as by the Church of Rome, let them see to it, whom I have
thus warned. As for those that are not Presbyterians, it is plain, that the
people have no other ground to presume, that they preach the word of God, but
only, that they maintain the Bible to contain Gods word, and that they are
taken, by those that send them, for godly persons. The one whereof is common to
all Heretics: The other requires a ground, whereupon, those that send them may
be taken for godly persons themselves; and then, how they come to be satisfied
of those whom they send: Both liable to more peremtory difficulties, then their
life time will serve to void. Whereupon I infer, that there is no ground to
presume, that it is Gods word that is preached, where the authority of the
Church interposeth not.

And therefore it is lamentable to see how this miserable people are
intoxicated with the conceit, that they want not the word of God, nor the
means of salvation, so long as they can go and hear a man preach in a
Pulpit, without consideration, what he professes to teach for Christianity.
One thing I desire here may be considered. It has been not only commonly
said, ^ut maintained by the writings of sober and knowing persons, that very
many Jesuits have been, and are still employed, in preaching the extravagant
positions of this time, on purpose to gain opportunity, and means, to infuse
into men's minds, what they find effectual to make them their Proselytes. I
confess it is none of my sense. For, I conceive, I show the principle, upon
which, all these extravagances have a natural and reasonable dependence. But,
I demand; where is the provision for simple souls, when wise men are not
satisfied, that Jesuits are not admitted to preach? It is to be considered,
that preaching, is necessarily, an office that requires a facility in speaking,
which, all the world knows, goes not always along with a right understanding.
Where there is both good understanding, and a faculty of speaking, it is
manifest, if there be not a good intention, they are both as a sword in a
madmans hand, instruments to do mischeife with, I will silence the mention of
all that we have seen. The wars of the league in France, the troubles of the
united Provinces in the business of Arminius, who can deny that the Pulpit
inflamed both? Whatsoever the Apostle S. James, in the third Chapter of his
Epistle, has ascribed to the tongue, for good or for bad, belongs to it in the
Pulpit, as elsewhere. And therefore, it is in it self, an institution of
doubtful effect, to set men up to show their eloquence in the Pulpit, though,
under pretense of making our common Christianity recommendable, by the means
of it: And that, supposing them to admit the sense of the Church, for the
bounds of that which they are to deliver, for the sense of the Scripture, But,
supposing no bounds, utterly pernicious. For, seeing, no caution can exclude
controversies from rising; neither is there any such mischief as division, to
the Church, nor any such means, as Preachers tongues, to inflame it. And will
any common sense allow, that all audiences of Christians can be provided of men
of understanding, and eloquence, rightly informed of the whole interest of
Christianity? If any such thing could be supposed, it would not be for the
best. The satisfaction indeed, of the more civil audiences, requires no less.
For, to appoint men to go to Church to hear a sermon, by heareing whereof, a
man neither learnes that which he knew no^ before, or can be moved, (by
otherwise expressing that which he knew before) to delight in it more then he
did before, what is it but that which the Sons of Eli did, to make the offering
of God stink in the nostrills of the people? For, the time of seduction and
error, they may have such a stroke with their people, as to persuade them,
that, the lothing of bad sermons is a fruit of the corruption of our nature,
which opposes Gods truth. But, whom God gives Grace to consider what I pretend
to be Gods truth, they, finding that to be true which I shall say by and by,
must find the name of God to be only the pretense of faction and interest. In
the mean time, the satisfaction of the more civil andiences will not stand
with the edification of the maine body of Christians. The condition of the
world changes not, by men's being Christians. There are idiots, and there are
civil men, and men of learning, among Christians as well as Divines, and a
ways will be. That which satisfies the lesser part will not edify the greater
part. And, that is it the Church ought to aim at. Better the more refined
should want their curiosities, then the whole body their necessaries. The
plain sort of Christians, (who for number, how much they exceed the rest, I
refer my self to common sense; for weight, their souls being as precious to God
as the souls of Princes) cannot edify by that which satisfies the more
learned. They understand no deduction of reason, no figures of language. Tell
them the grounds of Christianity, they are convicted. Tell them what these
grounds oblige them to do, for the end which they evidence, they are
convicted. Tell them, that, for the interest of our common Christianity, they
are to come to Church to hear the same said again in more eloquent terms, or
more curious conceits, they have no reason to be convicted of it; they have
reason to suspect that there is some interest, besides the common interest of
Christianity, in it. Tell them, that which remains, that they are to come to
Church for the grounding, for the enlarging of their Christianity, by the
understanding of the scriptures; Supposing that, that they know what is
necessary to save all Christians, by the Church, and by being made Christians
by the Church, well and good: If they think not, that they are to give ear to
whatsoever instruction may advance them in the knowledge of our common
Christianity, I think them not good Christians. This for the whole Bible. And,
supposing that difference between the Law and the Gospel, which I have settled
in the first book, they may advance in the knowledge of Christianity, by the
preaching of those who understand it. But, not distinguishing that which is
necessary from that which is not necessary, by supposing that which is
necessary; they may hear Sermons all their life long, and not know wherein
their salvavation consists; (a thing found by experience, when there was a Rule
of doctrine agreeable to the Scriptures) and, not knowing the ground there laid
forth, upon which the Old Testament bears witness to the New; they may gain
nothing by hearing sermons all their life long, but mere dissatisfaction in
the grounds of our common Christianity. Whereas, going into the scriptures with
those two principles, and the humility of Christians, they may teach
themselves, that edification which they ought not to expect from those that
acknowledge them not.

As for the present order, which suppresseth all Assemblies for the service of
God when there is no Preaching; It is manifest, that, I will not say, no
understanding, no eloquence, but no lungs or voice (For, of a truth, this order
makes the service of God a work rather of the lungs, and of the voice, then of
any thing else) can furnish entertainment for the assemblies of the church,
with that which is worth the hearing, so often as it is fit for the people of God
to assemble for his service. This makes the business, for which the greatest
part now goes to Church, to be no more the service of God; but to get matter of
discourse or debate for the Sabbath, as they call it, how well the man
preached, or how well he prayed. For, whereas they were wont to object against
the Church, that it was not praying but reading prayers, which was ministered to
the Church, (as if attention of mind, and devotion of spirit could not as well go
a long with him that reads, as with him that is to study what to say when he
prays) now, the censures that pass upon men's prayers do show, that the
hearers minds cannot be employed in praying, when they are taken up with
judging how well the prayer they hear is made. Much more justly may the same
be said, if it be considered, how a man is obliged to discern what the matter
of the prayer is, whether it be from blasphemy, Heresy, Slander Rebellion or
not, least, before he be aware, he join in such horible crimes by saying Amen
to their prayer, which he is no otherway secured to be free from the same. Now
it may be considered, that the prayers which usher sermons in and out, by the
order of the church of England, but by the faction that destroys it; though
they exclude the service of God out of the Church, upon pretense of praying as
the spirit indites, yet are indeed no less provided aforehand, then the
prayers of the Church, (...) a little from time to time, as occasion may
require, to make the people believe that they are ex tempore dictates of the
spirit. So that, the change which many men call reformation consists in this;
that the peoples devotions are now confined, to that which every one that dare
mount the Pulpit dare say, instead of that which the Church, upon mature
deliberation, had appointed to be said. But, if it be thus in prayers which are
always for substance the same, what shall we say of Sermons, the substance
whereof changes according to the compass of the Scripture, and all the points
of it, which, the texts, upon which men take their rise, occasion them to
entreat? experience, in the decay of that reverence and devotion, which the
public service of God is to be performed with, may easily point a man of
common understanding to the sourse of it, in those false and weak suppositions,
upon which the order, or rather the disorder of the present chang, stands.
Instead whereof, therefore, acknowledging that there was just cause, at the
time of the Reformation, to complain upon the want of Preaching and instruction
of the people; I do and am to maintain, that there was never any pretense,
that the communion of the Eucharist, and the service of God that it is to be
celebrated with, ought to give way, and to be excluded the assemblies of
christians, to bring in that rule which is now, in effect, a chief point of
the chang that is made with us; that, without preaching no assembly for Gods
service. And thereupon, though I desire, that the more solemn service of God,
when the Eucharist is celebrated, may have a sermon for part of it; (as I have
showed, both by the Scriptures and by the primative practice of the Church,
that the use was under the Apostles, and in the next ages) yet, that the order
prescribed by the Church of England for the celebrating of the same, when and
where there is not means for a Sermon, such as ought to be had, is not to be
deserted, upon any pretense of frequenting Sermons.

As for more oridinary occasions of assembling for the service of God, having
proved before, that they ought to be frequented, for the celebrating of other
Offices of Gods service besides preaching, I take it for proved, that the order
prescribed by the Church of England, for the celebrating of Gods service, upon
such occasions, is no way to be deserted, but means to be sought, for the
frequenting of it. Acknowledging with all, the zeal and the joy which S. Paul
expresses, for the further edification of those Churches, to whom he directs
his Epistles, in that Christianity which they had received. 1, Cor. I. 5, 6, 7.
Ephesians. I. 17. 18. Phil. I. 9, Col I. 9. Romans I. 11. 12. as a strong motive to the
Church, to procure preaching as frequent, as it can be procured and maintained,
without these offenses. That the same S. Paul incourageth and directs
frequent and ample use of these miraculous graces which God granted the
Churches of that time, unto that purpose 1. Cor. XIV. 1-31. Ephesians. IV. 7-16. But,
supposing always the Spirits of the Prophets to be subject to the Prophets,
because God is not the God of unquietness but of peace, as in all Churches of
the Saints: 1 Cor. IV. 32, 33. And, that there is one body and one spirit, even
as we are called in one hope of our calling, the unity of which spirit is to be
preserved in the bond of Peace Ephesians. IV. 3, 4. By virtue of that Order which God
had settled in his Church, for preserving unity in it; declaring his meaning, by
bestowing the most Eminent Graces upon the most eminent persons of his
Apostles, by means whereof, the spirits even of Prophets became subject to
greater Prophets, for avoiding of unquietness, and preserving of peace, as S.
Paul further declares, when he adds by and by. 1. Cor. XIV. 36. 37. What?
came the word of God out from you, or came it to you only? if any man think
himself a Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge the things I write to you
to be the commandments of the Lord. Which is to say, that all, even Prophets,
are to be subject to the Apostles, and by consequence, to none but them, who
have received commission from the Apostles. For, howshal any order he settled to
maintain unity in the communion of Gods service, upon any other principle, but
that, upon which the Coirnthians are obliged to rest in this which therefore,
being settled by order from the apostles, is from thencforth trusted with the
teaching of Gods people, and no man further then he is trusted by the same;
Neither is it any marvel, that, in the Church of England, after orders
confirmed, after possession of a Church, license of preaching is granted by the
Bishop: Because, there are diverse offices, as well concerning the cure of
souls, as the service of God in the Church, to which men may be appointed, by
the Laws of the Church, who are not to be trusted with Preaching, even to
their own people, but upon express submission to the Bishops correction, in
behalf of his Church. For, if sufficient power be reserved the Bishop to
provide for his flock, it will be in him to provide instruction for them, by
such persons as he shall think fit to trust; and, if it be not in him so to
do, the fault is in the Laws, abridging his power, of making a cheerful
account to God for his people. Howsoever from hence it may appear, how
ridiculous a thing it is, to judge of the instruction a Bishop affords his
flock, by the sermons himself preaches; unless it could be thought that his
lungs and sides could reach all his people. For, his fidelity, in trusting such
persons as are to be trusted with teaching his people, and his care, in
watching over the performance of their trust, extends alike to all, and
makes his Clergy his instruments in feeding his flock. And, whatsoever may
have decayed in this Order through the Church of England, the restoring thereof
by wholesome Laws, as well Ecclesiastcall as Civil, had been and is the
Reformation of Christianity; not the rooting up of the very foundations of the
Church, out of zeal to exirtpate the order of Bishops. And, since the
licentiousness of preaching what any man can make of the Bible, has made so
fair a way, for so few years, to the rooting up of Christianity, with the
Church; what will there be to secure the consciences of Gods people, that they
may safely go to Church, and trust their souls with the means of salvation
that are there to be found, but the restoring of Gods Church; That is to say,
of that authority, which he, by his Apostles, has provided, for the
determining of all things concerning his public service; supposing the
profession of that faith which the whole Church has maintained from the
beginning, as received from our Lord by his Apostles? Which if it be true, the
same reason will oblige all men to provide the means of salvation for
themselves; that is, to follow them of their own choice, without direction or
constraint of the Laws in the mean time.

I do not conceive it becomes me to say what ought to be, as I conceive it
behooves me to say what ought not to be. This I will say, having proved, that
the praises of God, and Prayers, (much more the Eucharist) are principal, in
comparison of preaching, which is subordinate; That the assemblies of Gods
people ought to be more frequent for them, then they can be for heareing of
Sermons, as I have showed by the premises. S. Paul commands to pray
continually, and David says, the praises of God shall be always in his mouth;
not expressing the assemblies of Gods people, but inferring that which I have
said, of the daily service of God in public, in my book of the assemblies of
the Church Chap. VIII. I maintain, there is no ground, no precept, no example,
no practice of daily preaching, like this for daily prayers; which if it be
true the confining of assemblies to sermons is to Gods disservice. It will be
said, that S. Paul 1 Timothy IV. 2. Thus exhorts; Preach the word, be instant in
season out of season, examine, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and
meekness. And it is as easily answered, that here is nothing to the purpose.
Instance in the preaching of the word, refers to unbelievers. To induce them to
be Christians, though out of season, is always seasonable. Long-suffering and
meekness in examining, rebuking, exhorting of Christians, privately, may be,
publicly, if not according to order, must needs be unseasonable. Men seem to
imagine, that there were Pulpits, and Churches, and audiences ready to hear the
Apostles preach, before men were Christians. When they were, they shall find,
that means of meeting was provided by Christian people, according to their
duty; the order appointed by them and their successors. That they sat upon
their chaires in teaching, challenging the authority by which they taught; the
people, sometimes standing, sometimes allowed to sit down. None but Deacons
preached standing, when the order and discipline of the primitive Church was in
force. To deal with those that were not Christians, S. Paul must go out into
the Piazza, or to the Exchange, to Gentiles, to do that which they did in the
Synagogue, or in the temple, to the Jews, Acts XVII. 7, 11. 46. In preaching
to Jews, it was their advantage to observe the orders of the Synogogue. And
yet, he that shall peruse that which I have said in the book aforenamed, shall
never say, that those assemblies were principally for preaching, which the
Apostles made use of, to preach to the Synagogue When they had ordered the
assemblies of Churches, what have you in their writings to recommed frequent
preaching, but S. Paul's order, in the use of these miraculous graces given the
Corinthians. 1 Cor. XIV unless it be drawn into consequence* that S. Paul
prevailed till midnight. Acts. XX. 7. as if the act of an Apostle, being to
depart, were a precedent to the order of the Church. Bu^ I have showed you in
the foresaid book Chap X. that the Eucharists have a share in the use of the
said graces, and the work of the said assemblies, as also Hymns of Gods
praises. And in ^ Cor. XI. you read very much of the Eucharist, as also of
praying and Prophesying, that is, praising God by Psalms, as I have said there
Chap. V.) without any mention of Preaching. If the Doctrine of the Apostles, be
joined with breaking of bread and Prayer Acts XI. 42. If the Elders that
labor in the word and doctrine be preferred by S. Paul 1 Timothy V. 17. You have
a solemn instruction concerning prayers, and the Eucharist 1. Tim. II. 1, 2. as
also exhortations to frequent it, Ebr. XIII 15. without any mention of
preaching. In fine, there is nothing in the Scripture to question the ground
which I settled before, As for the practice of the Church, I will go no further
then Gennadius de dogmatibus Eccles. Cap. LIII. neither commending nor blaming
those that communicate every day; Though it were easy to show, how the rest of
the Fathers agree, or disagree therewith. For, that supposes the daily
celebration of the Eucharist; whereas, who ever heard of daily preaching all
over the ancient Church? For, that the order thereof was to assemble for the
praises of God, and Prayer, and for instruction by reading the scripture, more
frequently, then the boldest pulpit man could preach; Neither is it
questionable for matter of fact, nor for the consequence, in obliging them that
would reform and not destroy, to follow the example, supposing the premises.

One thing more I desire may be considered. All the affectation of preciseness
in keeping the Lords day willnever induce any people endued with their senses,
to do that which the Jews, by the Law of the Sabbath, whilst it was in force,
stood obliged to do; Namely, to dress their meat the day before, that so,
neither themselves nor their servants might he obliged to violate the rest of
the Sabbath. If this precept oblige Christians to hear preaching, for the
means of salvation how are servants dispensed with, to be absent from
preaching, who cannot be dispensed with, for resting on the sabbath? For,
though Christian servants may dress meat on the Lords day; Yet, as they are
not dispensed with, for serving God on the Lords day, so, if the service of God
on the Lords day necessarily requires preaching, they must be also preached to
on the Lords day. But, if being catechized in their Christianity, they may
serve God by praying and Praising God, and by heareing the instruction of the
scripture read, advance in the duties of Christianity; then may they do the
duty of Christans to God at Church, as well as, to their masters at home, the
duty of Christian servants, without heareing sermons on the Lords day? In a
point so unlimited, wherein a private man's opinion is not to be Law, I find no
better ground for reasonable terms, then that which the practice of the
Chatholike Church, reported by Gennadius, intimates. For, it is not to be
gathered from Gennad^u^, that there was means to receive the Eucharist every
day every where; because, neither can it be imagined, that there was ever any
time, since the Empire turned Christian, when there was means for all
Christians to be present at it, much less to communicate. On the other side,
the relation of Gennadius supposing that the celebration of the Eucharist was
maintained, when preaching neither was nor could be maintained; it follows,
that, by the Custom of the Catholic Church, Lords days and festivals, (the
celebration whereof, all Christians were always concerned in) are to be kept
by celebrating the Eucharist, when they cannot be kept by preaching and hearing
sermons. And, that there can be no better order that God may be served by all
sorts of Christians, then (where there is provision, and where the custom is,)
that all Christians may communicate on Lords days and Festivales; and when,
for reasons left to themselves, they do not communicate, they may with their
spirits as well as their bodies asist the celebration of it; Remitting the
custom which Gennadius his resolution supposes (the celebrating the Eucharist
every day) to the greater Churches of the more populous Cities and Places. But,
whereas the Apostolical form of divine service makes the sermon a part of it;
And, at Corinth, S. Paul orders many of those spiritual Graces to concur to
that work; (which, at assemblies on extraordinary occasions, was sometimes
practiced by the primitive Churches, as I have showed there) it were too great
wrong to common sense, to extend this to all assemblies of Christians in
villages; and, not consistent, either with the necessities of the world, or the
interest of Christianity, in frequenting those offices most, which are
principal in Gods service. Laying down then, that tyranny, which constraines
all that have cure of souls, to speak by the Glass every Lords day twice,
which shuts all the service of God out of doors, saving a prayer to usher it in
and out; The interest of Christianity will require, that, at and with the
celebration of the Eucharist, all Christians be taught the common dutys of
Christians, by them who are to answer for their Souls. Not to please the ear,
with sharpness in reasoning, or eloquence in language; but to convince all
sorts, what conversation, the attaining of Gods kingdom requires, of them who
believe that he made the world, that he sent our Lord Christ to redeem it,
that, by his spirit, he brings all to confess and show themselves Christians;
and in fine, that by our Lord Christ, he shall adjudge those that do so to
everlasting life, and those that do otherwise, to everlasting death, For the
rest, it is not my purpose to undervalue the labors of S. Chrysostom, S.
Austin^, Origin, S. Gregory, or whosoever they are, ancient or modern, that
have labored the instruction of their people, even by expounding them the
Scriptures out of the Pulpit; supposing they expound them within the rule of
our common faith. But, upon the account in hand only, I say, that if they
withdraw Christian people, from serving God by those offices, which the order
of the Church makes requisite, according to the premises; (which, I am sure
enough, none of the ancients ever did) their labors are not for the common
edification of the Church, but, for maintayning of parties in the Church. The
celebration of Lords days and Festivales, and times of fasting, necessarily
furnishes opportunity, both for all Curates, to furnish their people with that
instruction which they owe them, as answerable for their souls, and for those
whom God has furnished with more then ordinary graces, of knowledge or
utterance, to advance our common Christianity, by advancing the knowledge of
Christians in the scriptures. But, the office of a Pastor necessarily requires
an exact understanding of the nature of humane actions, in matters of
Christianity, whether, concerning believing or working, not to be attained,
without the study, as well as the experience of a man's whole life. And
therefore, to oblige them; who are to provide necessary food for the souls of
their flock, to be always gathering the flowers of the scripturers, to make
them nosegayes of, will be to starve them, for the want of that knowledge,
which the common salvation of all necessarily requires, that the more curious
may have entertainment of quelques chooses. And therefore, for the rest,
Christian people are to think themselves obliged to come to Church, to serve
God by prayer, and the praises of God, to learn instruction out of the
scriptures, by hearing and meditating upon the lessons of them, on far many
more hours, and days, and occasions, then there can be for preaching of
Sermons.

CHAP. XXV. Idolatry presupposes an immagination that there is more Gods then
one. Objections out of the scripture that it is the worship of a true God under
an Image. the Original of worshipping the elements of the world: The Devil:
And Images. Of the Idolatry of the Magicians, and of the Gnostics. What
Idolatry the cases of Aron and of Jer^boam involve. Of the Idolatries practiced
under the Kings and Judges, in answer to objections.
THere remains some difference, as well concerning the ceremonies and
Solemnities, as the order and circumstances of Gods public service, which, I
foresee, cannot be voided, without presuming upon some conclusions for grounds,
which hitherto are not resolved. For, the chief of those difference concerns
the charge of Idolatry upon the Church of Rome, in those prayers to the Saints
departed in that worship of Images and Relics of Saints, in that adoration of
the Eucharist, which they maintain and practice. Also, those Prayers which are
made for the deliverance of souls from Purgatory pains, is no small part of
the controversies which concern the public service of the Church. Whereas,
among our selves, it seems yet to be in dispute, whether any ceremonies at all
are to be used in the public service of God. The pretenses of this time having
extended the imagination of Idolatry so far, as to make the ceremonies and
utensils of Gods sevice Idols, and the ceremonies which they are used with,
Idolatries. For the voiding of which difficulties, I cannot find so near a
course, as, in the first place, to dispute, wherein the nature of Idolatry
consists, and what the very being of an Idol includes, requires, and
presupposes. In the next place, I shall dispute of the state of souls
departed hence before the general judgment, rather then of the place or
places in which they are bestowed, as being too obscure, and more for this
purpose, which speaks to common understandings; though, the new state of
things in dispute constrain it to use those terms, the novelty whereof will
make it obscure to most of them whom it concerns. After that, of ceremonies
generally, in the public service of God, what is the end of them, and what use
may and ought to make them receiveable (or rather recommend them) to Gods
people, for that purpose. If God make me able to dispatch these propositions,
with any satisfaction to my own judgment, I shall not doubt to conclude
without any great difficulty, that which may remain in dispute concerning the
differences proposed.

To begin then, first to inquire, wherein the nature of Idolatry consists,
and what the crime thereof requires, or supposes; I do not find what
exception can be made to that signification of the word, which defines it to
be the giving of divine, or religious honor, or worship, to a creature; Taking
Divine and Religious both for one and the same; that is, understanding that
Religious honor or worship, which is also divine, in case it may appear, that
there is, or may be, some Religious honor or worship, which is not divine.
But, this being only the signification of the word; (That is to say, the
description of that which the word Idolatry expresses, to him that begins to
consider it) I cannot tell, whether those that use the terms of divine and
religious honor, do consider the importance of those terms which themselves
use. For, Divine honor or worship is that honor or that worship, which is due
to God alone, in regard of his incomparable excellence above all his creatu^es,
to which, therefore, it remains utterly incommunicable. And, I have cautioned
that Religious signifies the same; Religion being that part of justice which
gives God his due; which no man can do, that honuors him, and worships him not
with that honor and worship which is utterly incommunicable to any of his
creatures. Now all honor, and all worship, is either the opinion and conceit
that a man has of the excellence and worth of that which he honors and
worshippeth, or the effect of it; Whether inward, in that reverence wherewith
he submits himself, his soul, his heart and mind, to it; or outward, in
those bodily motions and gestures, or other actions, wherewith man is wont to
express and signify the apprehension which he has, of the excellence of that
which he honors, and worshipeth. So that, supposing in a man an uncorrupted
opinion, of the incomparable distance, that indeed, is found between God and
the most excellent of his creatures, it is no more possible for him to
attribu^e the honor due to God alone, to that which he conceives, to be a
mere creature, then it is possible for a man, in any other case, to act against
that judgment which presently dictates what he ought to do. For, the present
apprehension of the excellence of God, above all creatures, necessarily
includes and infers a decree, resolving his Judgment to honor him as
such; Honor being the opinion of excellence, as I said; and the reverence
which it produces being inseparable from that opinion, by any means, but the
understanding of him that considers it. It is therefore utterly impossible,
that a man should atribute that honor which is due to God alone, unto any
creature, standing the opinion, that no creature is comparable with his
excellence. For, that were at once to have an apprehension, opinion, or
conceit, that Gods excellence is incomparably above that of any creature, and
yet the same with it; in as much as we suppose all honor and worship to consist
in this opinion of excellence. Indeed, if we speak of the outward acts of
honor and worship* true it is, and easy to be seen, that a man may and must
honor God with those expression^, which may, and perhaps ought to serve him, to
signify the honor which he worshippeth some creature with. But, those acts are
not properly honor or worship, but the signs of it, and are called honor and
worship, by the same denomination, ab extrinseco, (or, if you please, the same
figure of speech) by which signs are called those things which they signify.
Wherefore it is not only no inconvenience, but absolutely necessary to come to
pass, that these signs should be many times equivocall. That is, themselves
the same, when the honor and respect signified by them to be attributed to
God, holds that distance from that which by them is atributed to the creature,
which is supposed between God and the creature. For, all Philosophers and
Divine^ know, how much difference there is between the conceptions which men
apprehend by the same terms of Wisdom, justice and goodness, when they are
atributed to God, and, when they are atributed to his creatures, Though I
dispute not, hereupon, whether equivocall or not; Because, nothing to the
purpose whether so or no^, so long as it is no inconvenience, that, in regard
of the distance between the conceits so signified, they be called equivocall in
that sense which the subject matter will bear. Now, that equivocation which
words are subject to, when atributed to God and to his creatures, because of
the distance of the conceit which they signify, the same are all motions, and
gestures, all actions, or other marks of honor and worship necessarily subject
to, when they are exhibited to God and to the creature both. Suppose, for the
purpose, a man pray to God on his knee, or prostrate on his face, as the
ancient people of God used to do; and the custom of the country obliged him
to kneel to the Prince, or, to fall flat before him upon his face, as the
custom of the Persians required? shall any man be so mad as to say, that it is
Idolatry to give a petition to a Prince upon his knee? Surely, if there were no
other means for other men to discern, whether his intent be to honor him as a
Prince, or as God, I should not only grant, but challenge, that other men are
to rest in doubt of it, nay, perhaps to take it indeed for Idolatry, in case he
expresses not his intent to have been otherwise. But, where the custom of the
place makes that distinction that is requisite, between God and the Prince, and
the man's profession conformeth to the opinion and practice of the place; to
suspect a man of Idolatry in such a case, were that degree of madness, to
which the jealous seldom attain. For, suppose it were possible, that he
should indeed, and in heart, attribute to the Prince the honor due to God alone
nay, suppose that indeed he intended inwardly in heart to do it, as all those
did, who, under the Assyrians, Persians, Macedonians, and Romans, did commit
true and proper Idolatry to their Princes; I demand, what obligation any man
can have to quest on that, whereof God only can be judge, remaining secret in
the heart but no man can take any harm by, so long as it is not professed but
kept secret.

Seeing then, that there is no outward Idolatry, without professing to give the
honor due to God alone to his Creature, as no inward Idolatry without secretly
giving it, and no giving it secretly, without an apprehension adjudging the
excellence proper to God to his Creature; I am of necessity to infer, that,
there is no Idolatry to be committed, without an opinion, that the Creature is
God, communicating the Name and Title, the Attributes and Perfections, and so,
by consequence, the Honor and Reverence due to the Incomparable Excellency of
God, to his Creature. And this is the opinion of all Pagans, Hethens, or
Gentiles, whose Idolatry, the Scripture, as well of the Old as of the New
Testament taxes; and the Law makes a capital Crime for all Israelites, but
the Gospel, has converted all Nations, besides Gods people, from practicing.
For, had not the inward sense of all Nations, besides Gods ancient people, been
corrupted by the deceitfulness of sin, to the imagining of other Gods besides
the true one, from that light which convicteth all men of the true God; it had
not been possible, they should have fallen away from the Worship of God to
Idols. This is that which S. Paul calls the holding of the truth prisoner in
unrighteousnes, Romans I. 18. when those who stood, or might stand convict, by
the light of reason remaining in them, that there is but one God, Fountain, and
Ruler of all Creatures, to whom all men must give account of their doings; were
led along by custom, to worship the Creature instead of God, attributing unto
it the excellence of God. And, how in unrighteousness, is plain enough to any
man that shall consider, that the true God, searching the inward thoughts of
all hearts, demands account of the most secret intentions of the heart, for
his own Service; whereas, those imaginations which men set up to themselves to
be honored for God, they are well assured, can demand no such account at their
hand: Or rather, whereas the Devil, striving to derive upon himself the honor
of God, by suggesting unto man the Worship of the Creatures, which they are
known to be incapable of, and therefore redoundeth upon him that seduceth them
to it; is willing to allow those whom he seduceth the liberty, to wallow
themselves in uncleanness and unrighteousness, yea, and to accept it at their
hands for the Service of their false Gods, because, being enmity unto God it is
indeed his service. For, it is to be acknowledged, that the Gentiles, though
corrupted with the worship of Idols, had in them light enough to discern the
true God, and his Providence over all things, and the account which he will
take in another World, of all things, as S. Paul, Romans I. 18. 13. at large
charge; And Tertullian, in his Book de Testimonio animae, evidently
maintains, by the Sayings which he produces, frequented in the mouths of
the Gentiles. But it is withal to be maintained, that, being thus bribed by
the Devil with license to sin, and, willing to persuade themselves that they
were in the right, they whelmed it under the bushel of their Concupiscences,
persuading themselves that they were righteous enough, whilst they served their
imaginary Deities. Be it therefore resolved, that all Idolatry, when it is
formed, (for, I speak not of the degrees by which mankind might be seduced to
it) necessarily includes and presupposes a conceit of more Gods then one,
which being once admitted, there can no reason be given, why not numberless,
as well as more then one.

To all this I see but one Objection made, though from many Texts of Scripture,
for all comes to this inference; That it is Idolatry to worship the only true
God, in or under an Image representing him to man's remembrance; and therefore,
that the nature of Idolatry requires not the imagination of more Gods then
one. This is first argued, from the first Idolatry of the Israelites after the
Law, in making the golden Calf, and worshipping it. For, the people having said,
when they saw it; These are thy Gods, or, this is thy God, O Israel, that
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt; Aaron adds, To morrow is a Feast to
the Lord, Exodus XXXII. 4. 5. using that name of God which the Scripture never
attributes to any but the true God, Whereby it seems, that Aaron and the
people intended to represent the true God that had brought them out of the Land
of Egypt, by this Image, and to worship him under the same. And Jeroboam, when
he set up his calves, proclaimed in the same terms; Behold thy Gods, (or
behold thy God understanding the words to be said severally at Bethel and at
Dan) O Israel which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. And indeed, there
are so many circumstances seeming to argue that Jeroboam intended not to call a
way the people from the worship of the true God, that Abenezra the Jewe, upon
Exodus XXXII. and Moncaus a Wallon Gentleman, of late years, in a book on
purpose called Aaron purgatus, seconded very lately by Gaffarell in his
Curiosities, translated since into English, alleging a Persian author, whom
Grotins also seems to follow, in his Anno-Annotations upon Exodus XXXII.) have
made it their business to prove, that neither he, nor Aaron before him,
intended any other, then to worship God before the representation of one of the
Cherubims, which he had commanded to be made, to overshadow the ark of the
Covenant. For indeed, there is a great deal of reason to maintain, that those
living creatures, consisting of four faces, whereof one was the face of an ox,
heifer, or calf, which Ezekiel in the I. II. III. and X. Chapters of his
Prophesies describes, drawing the Throne of Gods Majesty, were no other then
the Cherubim which Moses, according to the pattern showed him in the mountain,
had caused to be made over the Arc; Which is also to be said of the Seraphim
with six wings, which the Prophet Esaias saw about Gods Throne Esa. VI. and is
expressly said of the four living creatures which Saint John sees Apoc. IV. 6,
7, 8. in compassing Gods Throne. They conceive then, that Aaron and Jeroboam,
intended no more, but to give the people a visible sign of Gods presence, out
of his own prescription to Moses; Aaron, only to satisfy the people, and to
retain them to the worship of the true God, whom he proposed to them to
worship by this slight; But Jeroboam, being under the Law which God had made,
that his presence should no where besought, but at the place which he should
choose, and that choice being executed, by his appointment of Solomon to build
him the Temple at Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. XII. 5-14. compared with Levit. XVII. 3-6. 2 Samuel VII. 2, 3-13. 1 King. V. 5. VI. 11, 12, 13. VIII. 29. 1 Chronicles. XXII. 10. 2 Chronicles. VII. 12. It is manifest therefore, that he transgressed this Law, and
made a Schism in Israel by transgressing of it, who were to remain one people
in Religion by the means of it, whatsoever might succeed in the civil
government; But it seems nevertheless, that he intended no way to recall them
from the worship of the true God. And therefore, Joahaz the son of Jehu, not
departing from the sin of Jeroboam, prays to God, and obtaines deliverance
from the Syrians. And his Son Joas obtaines an answer from God, by the Prophet
Elizeus, 2 King. 4, 5, 6, 14-19. as did his son Jeroboam by Jonas XV. 25, 26,
27.

And indeed, when Jeroboam is said to set upon house of high places, 2 King.
12. 31. why should we make this worse then other high places, which, for a
time, were tolerated in Israel, because it was not yet fully declared, what
place God would choose; but, after the Temple was built, were indeed unlawful,
but so, that no man can conceive, that it was Idolatry to sacrifice in them.
For, when the good Kings are commended for destroying Idolatry, and seeking
only the true God, it follows often times, that, nevertheless, the people
still resorted to the high places, 1 Kings XII. 2, 3. XIV. 3, 4. XV. 3, 4, 34,
35. which would be inconsequent, if it had been Idolatry to resort to the high
places, though it was an evil custom that prevailed against the Law. Therefore
the Prophet Osee declares it for a curse against Israel, that they should
remain a long time without sacrifice, statue, Ephod or Teraphim. Os. III. 4.
And Micah of Mount Ephraim, his mother having consecrated her money to the
Lord, (that is, to the true God, for it is the incommunicable name God which
the Scripture there uses) and made thereof a molten and a carved image, had an
house of God, with an Ephod and Teraphim, having set them up in his house Jud.
XVII. 1-5. to wit, because he served God in the same order as he was served at
the Tabernacle, only before an image representing his presence, as it was
represented by the Cherubim in the Tabernacle. This therefore is the Idolatry
which the second Commandment forbids, namely, to make an image representing
the prefence of God, and consequently, to fall down and worship the true God
before it; Which when God declares to be matter of jealousy to him, he
shows it to be the breach of the Covenant of wedlock, which he had entered
into with the Synagogue, which she, on her part, was found to renounce by so
doing. Though it is true, those that excuse Aaron and Jeroboam, as if they
intended only to use the same symbol of Gods presence, which Moses and
Solomon, by Gods order, had set up, at the place appointed by God, thereby to
persuade the people, that it was all one, whether they found God at Jerusalem,
or, where they set them up; must say by consequence, that, in so doing, the
Covenant of God was violated, by departing from that precept of his law, but,
with no intent to fall away to other Gods, for to commit Idolatry in it. For,
had Jeroboams intent been to bring in false gods, what had been the difference
between his sin and the sin of Omri and Ahub, of Ahaz and Manasses
afterward, 1 Kings XVI. 25, 30-33. XXI. 25, 26. 2 Kings XVI. 3. XXI. 3-9? For,
if all Idolatry implies a defection and apostasy from the true God to
imaginary deities, was it not the same thing for Jeroboam to set up his calves,
supposing that he set them up to represent such deities, as for Ahab to serve
Baal, or Manasses and the ten tribes 2 Kings XVII. 7, 8, 9. to commit the same
Idolatries, for which the Amorites were cast out from before the Israelites?
Besides, that, in reason, it seems utterly uncredible, that, the Israelites
having worshipped the true God till Solomon's death; nay, that Jeroboam himself,
having received assurance of the kingdom by Gods Prophet Ahiah, 1 Kings XI.
26-40. as Jehu by Eliseus, with instructions concerning the house of Ahab, the
execution whereof God allows, 2 Kings IX. 7-10. X. 30. I say, it seems a
thing very incredible, that those people, in a moment of time, as it were, upon
the publishing of Aarons and Jeroboams innovations, should change the inward
sense and reverence, which, in their heart they had acknowledged the true God
to yield the same to any imaginary godhead, which they, by their Calves, might
pretend to represent. Neither was it a thing any way consequent to Jeroboams
interest; which, it is plain, was the only reason that moved him to innovate,
to debauch the people to this point. For, if he might obtain of them not to go
up to Jerusalem, to worship the true God there, how did it concern him, to
insist further with them, to worship any false God of his devising, within his
dominions? A thing far more difficult to draw all them to, who fea^ed God
from the heart, in the ten tribes, then to induce them for fear of him, to
worship him at a wrong place, continuing faithful to his Kingdom.

This is the difficulty, or, if you please, these are the difficulties which
are or may be alleged against that definition, which, to the nature of
Idolatry, requires the belief of more gods then one; But no way tend to
satisfy us, of any other general reason, for which both, this and other
actions, should hear upon them the common mark and stamp of Idolatry, by the
penalties of it, in the Scriptures. For, what reason can endure to believe,
that the mark and penalties of Idolatry should rest upon actions of so vast a
distance in nature, as the worship of the true God, and the worship of the
Devil for God, because that is done before an image? Let us survay the matters
of fact which we have in the Scriptures. Moses thus warns the Israelites,
Deuteronomy. IV. 15-19. Take heed unto your selves, least you corrupt your selves, and
make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or
female, the likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any
winged foul that flies in the air, the likeness of any thing that creeps
on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the waters beneath the
earth. And, least thou lift up thine eyes to heaven, and when thou see the
Sun, and the Moon* and the Stars, even all the host of heaven, should
be pushed aside to worship them, and to serve them, which the Lord thy God has
imparted unto all nations under the whole heavens. It is like enough, that the
first Idolatry that ever was practiced, was the worship of the Sun, the
Moon, and the Stars; But, that it was a part of the Gentiles Idolatries, by
the Scripture alone it is evident and certain. The Jews, as Moses Maimo^i
relates, in the Title of Idolatry, at the beginning, tell us, that, out of
admiration of the beauty and constant motions of those glorious bodies, men
began of themselves to conceive, that it would be a thing pleasing to God, to
address themselves to him, by the mediation of those creatures, which, they
could not choose but think so much nearer to him then themselves: That this
conceit, being seconded with pretended revelations, to the same purpose,
brought forth in time the offering of sacrifices to them, and making of images
of them, by means whereof, the blessings of God might be procured through
their influence. And Origin often gathers out of those words, that God
allowed the Gentiles, before the Law, to worship the Sun and the Moon, and
the Stars, that they might proceed no further to worse Idolatries; Though, so
far as I have observed, he is not seconded herein by any of the Fathers. Nor,
can he in my opinion, be any further excused, then the Book of Wisdom does
excuse him, making the worship of the Elements of the World the lightest sort
of Idolatries. Wisd. XIII. 10.

It is a thing agreeable to all experience, that by degrees, and not in an
instant, mankind should be seduced to forget God, (having had the knowledge of
God at the first derived unto them from their first parents) and to take his
creatures for God. But, will any man therefore undertake, that, when they were
come so far, as to worship the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, by
sacrifices, and incense, and all those actions, whereby the honor of God was
first expressed; all this was done in honor to God, because they were
conceived to be nearer him then other of his creatures? How will he then answer
S. Paul, when he says, Romans I. 25. That the Gentiles, changed the true God
into a ly, and worshipped and served the creature, (...), besides, or parallel
to the Creator, who is God blessed for evermore? For, where was the ly* but, in
taking the creature for God? And, how could they worship and serve the creature
hand in hand with God, but, by degrading God into the rank of his creature, and
advancing the creature into the rank to which God was degraded, by their false
and lying conceit? How could they express this honor by actions formerly
appropriated to the service of God, had they not first been seduced, in the
conceit of that honor which they robbed God of, to give it his creatures? But
it is a thing certain, and palpable in the Idolatries of the Gentiles, that
they deified dead men, by attributing unto them the names of the Heavens, the
Sun, the Moon, the rest of the Planets, and other Constellations, of the
Air, the Earth, the Waters, in fine, of the World, and the Elements of it; So
that Idolatry was committed, both to the men, and to those worldly bodies at
once. In this case, will any man be so wilful as to hold still, that these
worldly Bodies were no otherwise honored, then in relation to God as his
creatures, when as it appears, that the honor due to God alone was
studiously procured for dead men, by insinuating ridiculous persuasions, into
the minds of people seduced, to think that they were deified in those Bodies?
Wherefore, it is not to be denied, that those creatures were advanced to the
honor of God, by degrading God into the rank of his creatures, as if there
might as well be more Gods then one, as more creatures of a kind then one.
Again, when Moses warns them of making the image of any creature, can any
man doubt, that his reason is, least it should be worshipped with the same
honor, which immediately, he forbids the Sun and Moon and Stars to be
honored with? And, could the mere privilege of being Gods creature move any
man to take any before another, and to make an image of it, that under it he
might honor God that made it? Or, was it requisite, that first men should
conceive an excellence in the creature which if expressed with the same
actions, whereby they honored God, of necessity it must be taken for the same
which they attributed to God? And what is that but the opinion of more Gods?
Can any man find fault with that which the Fathers have so frequently objected
to the Gentiles, that the gods whom they worshipped were dead men; seeing
before his eyes, in the records of the Romans, Macedonians, and Persians,
during the time of Historical truth, that their Princes were, of course as it
were, deified, and worshipped as gods after their death? And was all this done
in relation to one true God, whose graces, they had been the means to convey
to so great a part of mankind? Or, in despite of that light of one true God,
though inshrined in their breasts, they suffered to be overwhelmed with that
ignorance which custom had brought to pass. Is it possible to imagine, that
the Egyptians should tremble at those living creatures, or those fruits of
their gardens, which they honored for their gods, if they had taken them for
creatures of one true God, whom they intended to honor, by and under those his
creatures? Or was it necessary, that they should further conceive, the Godhead
in one City to be enclosed in this creature, in another in that, and thereupon
find themselves obliged to honor the same for God?

In fine, does not the Scripture in many places, plainly declare, that which I
pointed at in proposing my argument, that the Idolatry of the Gentiles was the
worshipping of Devils in stead of God? Why the Israelites are commanded to
sacrifice no where but before the Tabernacle, the reason is given Levit XVII.
7. And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after whom they
have gone a whoring. Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 17. They sacrificed unto Idol^, which were
not God: To gods* whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your
Fathers seared not. Sacrificing to new gods, they sacrificed to devils. Psalm.
CVI. 35, 37, 38. And they served their Idols which were a snare to them, yea,
they sacrificed their sons and daughters unto devils; and shed innocent
blood, even the blood of their sons and daughters, whom they offered to the
Idols of Canaan, and the land was defiled with blood. Offering their sons and
daughters to the Idols of Canaan, they offered them to devils. And S. Paul. 1
Cor. X. 19, 20, 21. What say I then that an Idol is any thing? Or, that which
is offered in sacrifice to Idols is any thing? (As before, VIII. 4. we know that
an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there is but one God) but I say, that
the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to
God: And I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils. Ye cannot
drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils: Ye cannot be partakers of the
Lords table, and the table of devils. Having said, that an Idol is nothing, and
that things sacrificed to Idols are nothing, because they are sacrificed to
that which is nothing, and that, because there is but one God; how does he
infer, that things sacrificed to Idols are sacrificed to devils? Surely,
idols are nothing, because there is but one God, in regard they pretend to be
gods, that is to say, images of gods, whereas indeed, there can be no more Gods
but one. And if this were all, since nothing can have no effect, sacrificing to
idols, being nothing, could not pollute the sacrifices; as some Christians
alleged to prove that they might eat of things sacrificed to Idols. But
because, in sacrificing to nothing, the devil steps into Gods place, having
caused that nothing to be taken for a God, and maintaining that conceit, by the
same ways which he raised it with; therefore, all that communicated in serving
those idols, (which all did that communicated in the feasts which they made of
those sacrifices) communicated in the worship of devils. Whereby it is evident,
that idolatry presupposes an erroneous opinion of a false Godhead, under
which, the devil suborneth himself to be worshipped; whom, did men take for
that which Christians take him for, they would be far enough from worshipping
him for God.

And herewith agrees the reason of idolatry, in the worshipping of images.
For* by the premises it is evident, that idolatry is more ancient then the
worship of images; and perhaps the truth is, it came not in, till the custom
came up to worship dead men for gods, which, as I said before, I believe was
later then the worshipping of the elements of the world, though I go not out of
my way to prove it, nothing obliging me so to do. Now, it appears by Varr^ in
S. Augustine, De Civitate Dei, IV. 31. that the Romans had subsisted above
CLXX. years before they had images. But, let no man therefore imagine, that
they were not idolaters during that time. For, it is evident, that there is no
record of learning so ancient among the Gentiles, as their Idolatries; only
the Scripture records time before the same. The words of Varro there recorded
by the said Saint Augustine, tell us truth in that business, that those who
brought in images, errorem addidisse, metum dempsisse; Increased error, abated
Religion. For, it is not strange, that a knowing man, as Varro was, should bear
witness to that truth which the Centiles imprisoned in unrighteousness, by
acknowledging an error in the multitude of their Gods; which was, by that time,
grown so ridiculous, that a child, should it have spoken what reason indicted,
might have reproved it. This Error then, Varro says not that it sprung from
Images, but, that they were the means to increase it, though to the a batement
of Religion, which could be but counterfeit. when men took upon them to make
their own Gods. But, was it thus with the Romans only? was not the case the
same with the Grecians also, before Sculpture and Picture, and other ways of
Imagery were devised, chiefly for the advancement of this error, as the wise
Jew Wisdom XIV. 18-21. and diveres of the ancient Fathers of the Church as S.
Austine de civitate Dei XVIII. 24. in Psalm. CIII. do often allege. Why do we
read then in Pausanias his most excellent survay of Greece, that, of old time,
they worshipped stones, only sharpened at the top for their Gods? Could they
have found in their heart so to do, had they not formerly imagined a Deity,
which they meant to remind themselves of, by so gross a mark rather then
image? But, is not this madness an evidence, that they came by degrees, to the
representation of those Dieties, which they had imagined before, and sought
only means to have them always present? Joseph Scaliger in that learned
appendix to his book de Emendatione Temporum, shows us, that the Phenicians
had the like custom of having of rude stones for the symboles of their Gods.
And no marvile. For, by the act of Jacobs pouring oil upon the stone at Bethel
it appears, that the Fathers themselves used such records of the true God,
and of his worship, which Idolaters afterward imagined their false Gods to be
present at, and thereupon, no marvrile that the Law prohibited afterward,
Levit. XXVI. 2. seeing it is evident by the writings of the Grecians and the
Romans, that, Idolatry increasing, it became an ordinary custom, to make every
stock and every stone a monument of that Worship, which, every superstitious
sool thought, he had cause, there to tender to his God, by pouring oil upon it,
as Jacob did Genesis XXVIII. 18. by dedicating garlands, or the like, as Tilullus*
has expressed in these verses; Et veneror seu stipes habet desertus in agris,
Sive qui^ exiguus florea serta lapis; with infinite more authors to that
purpose. And can any man doubt that the Idolatry of the Persians were not as
bad as these, though they had neither statues nor pictures? Surely those Hethen
Philosophers found it otherwise, who, being weary of the Empire under
Justinian, because of the ill countenance they found there, in favor to
Christianity; and betaking themselves into Persia, as Agathias in his second
book relates, found themselves quickly weary of it, in regard of those
barbarous customs, as they understood them, which the Idolatries of the
Persians had introduced. Thus much for certain, that worship which the fire
was served with, by the Persians, was not that, which could be tendered in
honor of God that made it as conceiving it a prime creature.

So that, considering these things without prejudice, we must needs stand
convict, that Idolatry, in general, is more ancient, then the worship of
images, though particular Idolatries must needs be advanced by it. And, in that
instance that the wise Jew propounds, for the beginning of idolatry, Wisdom
XIV. 14-17. When a Prince, hving lost a dear Son, causes the image of him to
be made, for his comfort and remembrance of him, which is propagated by the
honor done to his image. Not that he means, that all idolatry came from this
beginning; (for certainly, it would have been utterly senseless to have
expected this, from men possessed of the belief of one true God till that
time) But, because this might become the beginnig of that Idolatry that was
performed to the deceased, among those, who, having once admitted the belief
of more Gods then one, and in particular, worshipping dead men, could give no
reason why they should do less for them then for others. And, if it were
posible for the Devil to induce men to worship the creature for God; it is not
strange, that, by pretended apparitions, revelations and miracles don about
these statues or Images, he should maintain in them a belief of the presence of
that imaginary deity, which they intended thereby to represent and record, in
the statue or image; which must needs be a powerful means, to multiply those
ceremonies and solemnities, wherewith they pretended to honor the Deity there
enclosed. Certainly, for this reason it was, that, among the Greeks and
Romans, the consecrating of a Temple was the setting up and dedicating in it,
the statue of that Deity in honor whereof it was built. So you see it every
foot in Pausanias; and in the life of Alexander Severus, it is related for a
singularity of Adrians curiosity in following all Religions, that he built, in
every City, a Temple without any statue in it; which he had intended for our
Lord Christ, had he not been advised that all the world would turn Christians,
if he should take that course. And, though it is rather thought that Adrian
indeed did intend them for Temples to himself, yet still that holds which the
history adds; Quae hodie, idcirco quia non habent numina, dicuntur Hadriani.
That they are called Adrians, because they have no Godhead; Which, the Heathen
believed them to have, so soon as the statue of that God was set up whose the
Temple was to be. And this is not questioned, that Alexander Severus intended
that our Lord Christ should be worshipped, as one of their Gods, which would
have made him as much an Idol as their Gods, as the same Emperor did indeed
(worshipping as well Christ and Abraham, as the deified Emperors, Orpheus or
Achilles, among his closet Gods) as his life relates. Thus much is to be
noted, that Maimoni, where he relates the beginning of Idolatry, as I alleged
before* acknowledges, that it was mightily promoted by revelations,
apparitions, and miracles, pretended to be done by the stars or elements of the
world, at such monuments of their presence as had been provided; Which, since
Gods truth imputes to the Devil, the worship of these creatures was no less
the worship of the Devil, then sacrifices offered to the dead.

And all this is further confirmed by the Idolatry of Magicians, which, for
Balaams sake, I hold unquestionable. For, having showed before, that Balaam,
though he knew there was a God, which was able to defeat all his witchcraft;
did nevertheless address himself to his familiars, by offering sacrifices to
obtain of them the cursing of Israel, which, he knew could not be obtained
without the leave of their God, whom he acknowledges under the same name,
which his people never conmunicated to any besides; shall it seem strange,
that people weary of their Christianity, because it eases them not of the
little discontentments of their estate in this world, which they meet with;
should either formally, or by due construction, renounce the benefit of it, by
contracting for some curiosities which they desire, but their Christianity has
appointed them no means to procure? Or that, renouncing God and Christ, in the
same manner and degree as they contract for those things, they should translate
the honor, which, the little Religion, that can allow such a contract, leaves
in him that cannot deny a God, and yet serves him thus; unto the Devile, from
whom they expect their desires? Especially, the experience of all nations,
Christians, Jews and Pagaus, acknowledging those acts, which themselves,
though worshippers of Deviles, counted unlawful, because upon contracts
tending to the mischief of mankind. And the evidence of the Sabbaths and
solemnities of witches, in these times of Christianity, being no way to be
baffled by such reasons, as ^end to take away all reason, for the punishing of
witches, which the Law of Moses establishes; Though nothing hinder the
alleging of such, as may make men wary, what evidence they accept in cases more
private and secret. In the life of Pythagoras, by Jamblichus, Cap XXIIX. there
are diverse and sundry feats of his doing reported, which to Christians, that
know the difference between clean and unclean spirits, cannot see in to have
been don otherwise, then by familiarity with unclean spirits; Which he might
easily learn, by his travels among the Egyptians and Caldeans, Nations among
whom, as well Magic as Idolatry had been both bred and advanced; if we believe
either the scriptures, or the writings of Pagans, as well as of Christians. And
truly it is manifest, that the being and office of Angels about God was known
to him and to his followers, but without any distinction between the good and
the bad, which the scripture only teaches. Which is also to be seen in the
writings of Plato, where (...) and (...) is never taken in any ill sense, as
necessarily it is by all them who acknowledge Apostate Angels. Neither is it
possible for any Christian to make any other interpretation of that familiar,
which Socrates in Plato affirms, that he was always attended with (called
Socrates his Demon or Genius,) then of a deceiving s^irit; unless it could
stand with Christianity to believe, that God granted the assistance of his
spirit or Angels, to Pagans, and that so constant, as is not to be found of any
of his prophets.

It is true indeed, that there are many things in Plato which learned men do
compare and reduce to the rule of the Christian Faith, concerning the Holy
Trinity blessed for ever more. But, he that compares, The mind of God, the Word
of God, the Idea of God, the Spirit of God, the Wisdom of God, (...), which
Plato delivers, with that Fullness of the Godhead, that (...), which
Saturninus and Basilides propounded to be worshipped by their followers, in
Ireneus and Epiphanius; considering withal, that the Angels, (which are not
distinguished from God by Plato, according to that infinite distance which is
to be acknowledged between God and his creatures,) were, by most sects of the
Gnostics, admitted into that Fullness of the Godhead, which the several sects
of them worshipped; will have reason to believe the Fathers of the Church, when
they make the Philosophers the Patriarchs of the Heretics; And* that the
divinity of Plato was a tradition derived by Pythagoras, from the familiarity
which he had with unclean spirits, seeking to refine the gross Idolatry of
the Gentiles, into a more subtle way of worshipping the Devile. Which, being
imitated by Simon Magus and his followers, (of whom, Menander professed Magic,
as Basilides and Marcus also did; and the monuments of the Basilidians Magic
are extant to this day in the hands of Antiquaries, as you may see in Baronius
his Annals, and the life of Peireski written by Gassendus; and still more
plentifully in a latter Book, on purpose to expound the monuments of the
Basillidians God, called Abraxas) in those several Fulnesses of the Godhead,
which the several sects of them tuaght, and worshipped brought forth that
worship of Angels which S. Paul condemned Col. II. 8-9. Whether as belonging to
the fullness of the Godhead, or, as revealers of it. Especially if it be
considered, that, the deriving of the Original and beginning of evil, from a
principle belonging to that Fullness of the Godhead, which each sect of the
Gnostics acknowledged, (a position common to them all) is also a part of Plato
and Pythagoras his Philosophy; which the Stoics also, (from whom the Heretic
Hermogenes in Tertullian deriveth it) were tainted with, as well as with the
opinion of Fate, utterly inconsistant with the worship of the true God; as
Aristotle and Epicurus his Philosophy (free enough from familiarity with
unclean spirits) is with denying of providence at least in human affairs,
which the eternity of the world necessarily produces. Neither is the Heresy of
Cerdon and Marcion which succeeded the Gnostics, any thing else, but
Pythagoras his position, of a principle of Good, and an other of Evil, applied
to the supposition of Christianity, though such as they thought good to admit.
As for that of the Manichees, we may an well allow Epiphanius, deriving it from
one Scythianus, a rich merchant from Arabia to Egypt, who having also learned
their Magic, writ four books, to maintain Pythagoras his two principles.
And, going unto Jerusalem to confer with the Christians there, who maintained
one true God, and getting the worse, betook himself to his Magic, and
exercising the same on the top of an house, was cast down from thence and
dyed. His disciple also and slave Terbinthus, whom he left his heir, going
into Persia, to confer with the priests of Mithras about the same purpose, and
being worsted, betook himself to his masters Magic, and got his death as his
master had done. Thus says Epiphanius, and that Manes, marying his widow, by
his books and by his wealth became author of this sect; only, that having got
the books of the Old and New Testament, he used what colors they would afford
him, to entitle his device to Christianity, for the seducing of Christians.
But, whosoever considers what master Poc^^k has produced out of the relations of
the Saracens, concerning the religion of the Persians p. 146. 150. whatsoever
contest his predecessors might have with the Persians, must acknowledge, the
Heresy of the Manichees to come from the Idolatry of the Persians; the divines
where of acknowedg a Principle of darkness, opposite to a Principle of light;
as we read also in Agathias expressly lib. II. that the religion of the
Persians is that of Manichees. And these considerations, here put together upon
this occasion, may well seem, as I conceive, to satisfy us, that it is no
marvel, the Pagane Greeks and Romans should be so brutish, as to worship
stocks and stones, having among them those wits, that have left such excellent
things of God, and of man's duty to God, upon record; Seeing it appears, that
the most divine of them were no otherwise taught, then, as it might best serve
the Deviles turn, to detain them in the more subtle Idolatry of Magicians;
The rest being tainted with such positions, as stand not with the worship of
one true God. So that it is no marvel, if they complied with the vulgar
Idolatries of their nations; to him that considers that which I have written in
the review of my book of the right of the Church in a Christian state p.
CLXVII. to show, that the followers of Plato and Pythagoras, in the first times
of Christianity, as they were themselves Magicians, so were great instruments
to promote the persecuting of Christianity. Which is also the true reason, why
the Gnostics, having devised, every sect a way of Idolatry proper to
themseves, did indifferently counterfeit themselves Jews, Christians, or
Pagans, for avoiding of persecution, or for gaining of Proselytes; eating
things sacrificed to Idols, in despite of S, Paul, and taking part in the
Idolatrous spectacles and sight, of the Gentiles, as Irenaeus, with the rest of
the Fathers, witnesses. These particulars I have thus far enlarged, to make a
full induction of all the ways of Idolatry mentioned in the scriptures,
(wherewith all the writings of the Jews, Pagans and Christians, exactly agree)
by which induction it may appear, that all the ways of Idolatry, which the
Scripture mentions, do presuppose the belief of some imaginary and false
Godhead, properly called an idol, as imaginary, and without subsistence;
(though that name is no less properly attributed to the image of it, then the
Image of any thing is called by the name of that which it represents,)
because of the intercourse, which, by the means of such Images, those that
worshipped them had, with the author of such Imaginations, even the Devile,
thinking they had it with their imaginary Deities. And, the worshipping of
those Dieties, whether before and under such an image or without it, is that
which is called Idolatry in the Scriptures. For, though the word (...) may
generally signify all images, and can have no bad sense in the usage of Hethen
writers, because they could never think amiss of the Images which, they
thought, represented their Deities; Yet, when Christianity had brought in a
belief, that it was the Devile whom the Gentiles worshipped under those
Images, the word Idol, being appropriated to them, must needs be are a sense
of that which the Christians detested. Just as I said even now of the word
(...), that it must needs bear another sense to the ears of Christans, then
it could among the heathen poets or Philosophers. This language S. Jerome
uses, when, in his translation of Eusebius his Chronicle number. MDCCCLIV. he
says of Judas Maccabaeus; Templum ab Idolrum imaginibus expurgavit; that he
purged the temple from images of Idols; supposing the difference which I make,
between imaginary deityes and their Images. And, S. Austine in lib. Jud.
Quaest. XLI. speaking of the case of Gedeon; Cum Idolum non fuerit, id est
cujusdam Dei falsi simulacrum: seeing it was no idol, that is to say, the
image of any false God.

Which if it be true, it will no way be possible, to exempt the case of Aaron
or Jereboam from that reason of Idolatry, which this induction inforceth; Or to
imagine, that it could be the same crime in them, to worship the true God under
an image, as in the Gentiles, to worship the elements of the world, dead men,
imaginations, in effect, the Devile, under the like image. They made a calfe in
Horeb, and worshipped the molten image. Thus they turned their glory into the
similitude of a Calfe that eats hay, says David Psalm CVI. 19. 20, of this
act of the Isralites. They changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an
image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four footed beasts, and
creeping things, says S. Paul Romans I. 23. of the Gentiles; who, as I have
showed, did truly intend to worship those creatures for Gods. And therefore
must conclude, that, whatsoever Aaron might pretend to represent to the
Israelits, by this Calfe, that they intended to worship for God. And when the
Israelites joined themselves to Baal Peor, and ate the offerings of the dead,
Psalm. CVI. 23 Number. XXV. 3-8. and Moses commands to hang up the Princes, and
the Judges to slay every one his man, that were joined to Baal. Peor; Phineas,
out of his zeal to God, executes his command, (not out of a private
inspiration, whereof nothing could appear, as has fondly and perniciously
been imagined) and kills a Prince among the Israelites. But, when Moses
coming down from the mount, saw the calfe made, he caused the Levites to
revenge the fault, by slaying three thousand of those that were guilty of it,
Ex. XXXII. 25-30. And is it possible for any man to believe, that the same
punishment is assigned by God to the offering of sacrifices to a dead man, as,
to the offering of it to the living God, under or before an image. Not that I
intend to say this of Aaron, or, what his intention might be, in complying with
them, and avoiding their mutiny, without ever embracing in his heart that
idolatry, to which he pretended to con^urre with them; (nor will I much contend
with him that shall say, he chose that figure which might represent something
concurring to that worship of God, which himself had commanded) but the act of
them that mutinousely constrained him to make them a God to go before them, I
can by no means distinguish from the idolatries of Egypt, which, it was but
late that they had forsaken. As for Jeroboam, it is most truly alleged, that
nothing obliged him to demand of the Isralites to worship any false God, or to
require of them more then Aaron had done, upon their motion, concurring
himself to their Idolatry. But, then I must say also, that by setting up his
calves, and constraining the people to resort to them, for that worship which
the Law obliged them to tender to God, he certainly knew, that he must needs
occasion the greatest part of the people to worship an other God besides the
true God, howsoever some of them might do, that which Aaron had done, in
concurring, with the rest of their people. And perhaps the truth is, that
Jeroboam, for this reason, made choice of the same image, wherein Aaron had
offended before. But otherwise, the appearance of the Idolatry of the gentiles
in the act of Jeroboam, that is, in the service tendered his calves, is evident
in the scripture. Otherwise, how should the prophet Ahiah charge him, that he
had set up other Gods and molten images, and groves; 2. Kings XIV. 9, 15, 16.
as by Jeroboams own fin? And Baasha, that walked in the way of Jeroboam, 2.
Kings XV. 24. as did also Omri after him 1 Kings XVI. 26. are said to have
provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger with their vanities 1. Kings. XVI.
13. 26. And Abia reproaches Jeroboam 1 Chronicles. XIII. 9. and his party, that they
had made them Pristes after the manner of the nations, and other lands, so
that, whosoever comes to fill his hand with a bullock and seven Rames, may be
a Priest of no Gods? For what are vanities, or, no gods, but imaginary deities,
as Saint Paul says, that he preached to the Gentiles, to turn from those
vanities unto the living God, Acts XIV. 15. And the Prophet Jonas, in his
prayer, II. 8. they that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy. And
(...) in David, Psalm. XXXII. 7. Lying vanities, is the same that S. Paul's ly,
when he says; the Gentiles changed the truth of God into a ly, in worshipping
the creature besides the creator, God blessed for evermore Romans I. 25. So also
Deuteronomy. XXXII. 22. 2 Kings XVII. 15. Jeremy II. 5. VIII. 19. X. 15. XIV. 22. And
why should the Prophet Osee object, VIII. 6. The workman made it, therefore it
is not God, but the calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces; Had not the
calfe been taken for God? And again* Os. XIII. 2. They say of them, let the
men that sacrifice kiss the calves; For that this kissing was a sign of
worshipping that which was taken to be God, you have from Job XXXI. 26, 27. If
I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in her height, and my
heart has been seduced, and my mouth has kissed my hand; The Sun and the
Moon being at a distance, because they whose hearts were seduced to think them
gods, could not kiss them, they kissed their hands to them, in sign that they
honored them for gods; Therefore, they that kissed the calves, whom they might
come nigh, did it in sign that they honored them for gods. As the answer of
God to Elias says; I have reserved my self seven thousand men, all the knees
that have not bowed unto Baal, all the mouths that have not kissed him. 1
Kings XIX. 18. And therefore it seems very probable, that these calves are
also called Baalim, by the said Prophet, when he says Osee XIII. 1, 2. When
Ephraim offended in Baal, he died. And now they sin more and more, and have
made them molten images of their silver and Idols, according to their own
understanding, all of it the work of craftsmen: They say of them, let the men
that sacrifice kiss the calves. The author of Tobit, is, for his antiquity,
more to be credited in the understanding of the Scriptures, then all the
conjectures we can make at this distance of time; And he says, that the ten
tribes went up to offer sacrifice (...), Tobit I. 5. to the heifer Baal.
Whereupon it is thought, that S. Paul also, when he quoteth the answer of God
to Elias, 1 Kings XIX. 18. I have reserved my self seven thousand men that have
not bowed the knee to Baal; in the feminine gender, (...), Romans XI. 4.
refers to the feminine substantive (...). And if these calves were of the
nature of Baalim, it cannot be denied, that they signified imaginary godheads,
such as the Baalim were.

Wherefore, when it is objected in the first place, that Aaron proclaimed a
feast to the Lord, by the name of the true God, and that, both he and Jeroboam
said; This is the God that brought thee out of the land of Egypt; I answer with
the Wisdom of Solomon XIV. 21. that idolaters did ascribe unto stones and
stocks the incommunicable Name of God. Which if it can be said of the Gentiles,
that knew not the incommunicable name of God, the Israelites which used it,
must needs attribute it to those imaginary deities, which they advanced to the
rank of the only true God. And truly S. Steven Acts VII. 39, 40, 41.
describing this act by no other terms then those whereby the Scripture
expresses the Idolatries of the Gentiles, prosecuteth with an allegation out
of Amos V. 25. thus; Then God turned and gave them up to worship the host of
heaven, as it is written in the book of the Prophets; O ye house of Israel, did
ye offer me slain beasts, and sacrifices, by the space of forty years in the
wilderness? Nay, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the Star of your
god Rempham, figures that ye had made to worship them. Which, it seems, is to
be understood all, during their travail in the wilderness; because S. Steven
charging them, that they sacrificed not to God in the wilderness, seems to
press it further, by naming to whom they did sacrifice. And what Tabernacle
does he charge them to have taken up, but that which the Priests took up to
carry in the wilderness? Which, being the tabernacle of the true God, they, by
intending to worship Moloch in it, made his Tabernacle. So that it cannot be
strange, if they attribute the name of the true God to those whom, turning
idolaters, they held as true Gods as he. I will not dispute why they chose the
figure of a calfe; let who please allow the reasons alleged. If I did not find
idolatry in the acts of Aaron and Jeroboam, I might easily be rid of all
these objections otherwise; For, if Aaron and Jeroboam did not commit Idolatry,
how is it Idolatry to worship God under an image? But, finding the marks of
idolatry in them, I must needs acknowledge in them the reason of all idolatry,
according to the Scriptures. Supposing Aaron intended only a symbol of Gods
presence, consecrated by him in his Tabernacle, Jeroboam to follow his example;
those that were set upon apostasy, by the instigation of the mixed multitude
that came with them out of Egypt, Exodus XII. 38. and set them on murmuring for
flesh. Number. XI. 4. turning back in their hearts to Egypt, Acts VII. 38. that
is, to the ^dolatries which they had practiced there. Ezekiel XX. 7. may well be
thought to have set up the calfe which the Egyptians worshipped. But I need not
build on conjectures, having showed, that idolaters might exercise their
idolatry, even toward a symbol of Gods own service. Neither is it any
marvel, that Jehu should honor Josaphats posterity because he served God. 2 Chronicles. XXII. 9. (though that may be imputed to the time, when he had not yet
declared to follow the sin of Jeroboam) and his posterity seek God and his
Prophets having never tied the people to worship any false God, but only done
that, which, by necessary consequence (at least, if we count what, in
discretion must needs come to pass, according to the common course of humane
affairs) must needs produce idolatry. And supposing they set up the idolatry of
the Egyptians, they might as well have recourse to God and his Prophets; in
their necessities, as Ahab humbled himself at the word of Elias 1 Kings XXI.
27. how far soever, we may suppose that he went in acknowledging the true
God; for, the same will as easily be said of Jehu and his postirity.

Now it seems to me a thing most certain, that high places were tolerated
between the dividing of the Land and the building of the Temple. Whether
because the precept of the Law was not yet in force, God having yet declared no
settled choice of any place for his service as he says to David. 2 Samuel VII. 6,
7. or, because, soon after the Tabernacle was settled in Shiloh, the Ark was
taken by the Philistines, and so the Tabernacle desolate, as the Jews
understand it. For, who can allow that Gideon, a Judge stirred up by Gods
Spirit, should set up an high place for Gods worship against his Law Judges VI.
34. VIII. 23. For, the mention of an Ephod there VIII. 27. is but to say; that
the Order of Gods service in those high places was according to the Order of
the Tabernacle. But, what occasion of idolatry these high places did give, we
may easily gather by the Law, Levit. XVII. 5, 7. which declares; that, when
they were not tied to the Tabernacle in the wilderness, but offered their
sacrifices in the open fields, they sacrificed to Devils. For, being beset
round with idolatrous nations, that confined the deities which they worshipped,
to their Temples and Images, it is no marvel if they were tainted by the
same, not to understand, the true God, whom they worshipped in the tabernacle,
to be every where as much present as in the Tabernacle. The true worshippers of
God in Spirit and Truth, under the Law, understood it well enough, with Gideon;
neither is it any marvel, being then licensed and in use, if he conceived it
might be for the service of God, to set up an high place in his City. But, by
the event we see, what advantage the worse part has, to turn that which is
well meant to ill uses, when the people fell so soon to idolatry upon that
occasion, that it became a snare to Gideon and his house. And surely, when
Moses was in the mount with God, and the presence of God was not seen about the
tabernacle, is not this that which the people allege to Aaron, to make them a
God? as professing not to believe that Moses his God was among them, but
finding it necessary, that God who brought them out of Egypt should go ebfore
them Exodus XXXII. 1, 2? And so, Jeroboam setting up a new place of Gods
presence, and the whole nation having admitted the presence of the God of
Israel to be confined to Solomon's Temple; it followed, that the grosser sort of
people, who could not distinguish the omnipresence of God from the conceits of
the idolatrous nations which they were encompassed with, appropriating several
gods to several countries, (as the Syrians thought the power of God to reach
to the mountains, and not to the valleys, 1 Kings XX. 23.) must needs take it
for another God, that Jeroboam set up, for the God that brought Israel out of
Egypt; and, conforming to his Law, worship him under that conceit. For, when S.
Steven, having related how Solomon built God an house, adds straight, to
correct the mistake of the Jews to whom he spoke; Howbeit the most High
dwells not in Tempels made with hands, as says the Prophet; Heaven is my
Throne, and earth is my footstool, what house will ye build me, says the
Lord? Or what is the place of my rest? Has not my hand made all these things?
Acts VII. 47-50 He shows plainly, that the vulgar conceit of the Jews came
far short of the doctrine of the Prophets in this point, and that this was
then a great hinderance to the Jews Christianity, which vulgarly publishes
that, which, only the worshippers of God in Spirit and truth understood under
the Law; As Barnabas also, in that Epistle, which the ancientest of the Fathers
have acknowledged, and is lately set forth, declares.

Now for the text of the Judges, concerning that which the Jews call (...),
or, the Idol of Micah; Is it to be considered, that there may be and are two
opinions, concerning the true sense and intent of the second commandment, where
it says; Thou shall not make to thy self any (...), or carved image, the
likeness of any thing -- For, the word (...), by the original of it,
signifying all carved work, it may be thought that God intends, by these words
to prohibit all use of carved work among his people. Not as if the making of a
carved image were idolatry, but to avoid the occasions of idolatry, which, as I
have said, that art, though it introduced not, yet it increased. And therefore
it follows; For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God; For jealousy forbids as
well the means of adultery, as adultery. But, if we suppose the signification
of the word (...) extended by use, beyond the original of it, it may import
only such statues* as are made to represent a godhead imagined before; And
then, the letter of the precept forbids no more, then to make any carved work
for the image of God. According to the first sense, the making of the Cherubims
over the Ark falls within the precept; And is to be taken for a dispensation of
the Lawgiver, in the matter of a positive precept, which his own act only
rendered unlawful. But according to the later, being not included in the
matter of the precept, there needs no exception to render it lawful. The same
is to be said of the brazen serpent. Whether of these opinions is true, I need
not here dispute. Only, as I began to say before, I say further, that, during
the time that high places were licensed, it can be no inconvenience to grant,
that there was the like furniture provided for the service of God there to that
which was prescribed in the Tabernacle. For, upon what ground that People
thought it commanded by God there, (in which there could be no just occasion of
idolatry) upon the like ground, and to the like purpose, it might be taken up
in the high places. Though, that reason which had moved God to prohibit high
places, after the place of his worship should be settled, Levit. XVII. 5. 7.
might always endanger them, to go astray, as the story of Gideon shows. For,
though, so long as they understood the ground upon which, and the intent to
which they were used, they remained secure; yet forgetting it, by the
deceitfullnesse of error, they were subject to be seduced. The fact of Micah,
then, has two of these handles which Epictetus his manual mentions: It may be
taken, as if he meant only to make an high place, for the service of the only
true God, according to the Law; the carved work which he furnished it with
being only in stead of the furniture of the Tabernacle. Which is the case of
Gideon, as I stated it before. For, when the Prophet Osee threatens the ten
tribes, that they shall dwell a long time without Ephod or Teraphim; He does
not mean it for a punishment, that they should be restrained of the idolatry
which they practiced to the Calves; But he signifies, that the Cherubim of the
Temple, (where they ought to have served God, and where it would be the
blessing of that promise which the Law tendereth to serve God) have the name of
Teraphim common to them with the Calves; Though, those the objects of idolatry,
these the instruments of Gods service. For, on the other side, the fact of
Micah may be so taken, as if he intended to set up a carved image of an
imaginary Godhead, to be worshipped for the only true God. And this intent
seems to me the more probable of the two. For, there stands upon it the mark of
a thing done against Gods Law Judge. XVII. 6. In that day there was no king in
Israel, every man did what seemed right in his own eyes; Which, of the case of
Gideon, originally, could not have been said. And besides; That Micah could not
have any of the Tribe of Levi to minister in this high place, but, was feign to
take his son in the mean time, till he lighted upon a wandering Levite, whose
necessity might debauch him to any employment; This also seems an argument,
that his house of gods, which he furnished with Ephod and Teraphim, Judge. XVII.
5. was erected to false gods. For, that his mother had consecrated her money to
the incommunicable name of God, v. 2. is easily answered, by the same that has
been said to the cases of Aaron and Jeroboam. But, my opinion remains never a
whit prejudiced, though these arguments seem insufficient, and though it be
said, that the worship of the true God was that which Micah hereby intended.
For, still the same alternative will have recourse, which takes place in
Jeroboams case; Either his intent was the service of the true God; and then,
though we suppose, that he sinned against the precept of the Law Levit. XVII.
5. yet he sinned not the sin of idolatry; Or, his intent was the service of
some imaginary Godhead, and then he committed idolatry according to my opinion,
notwitststanding that he used the name of the only true God in the business.

As for that which is objected, that, according to this opinion, there would be
no sufficient reason for that difference which the Scripture makes between the
sin of Jeroboam which made Israel to sin, and the idolatries of Ahab, and
of the house of Omri, and those wherein Manasses followed the Amorites; How
much he is deceived that thus reasons, may easily appear to him that compares
those murders, those uncleanness, those horrible vilanies, which the devil
had seduced the Gentiles to, under the pretense of Gods worship, and, for the
discharge of that obligation which the sense of Religion binds all men with;
That compares these, I say, with the service of a false God, but otherwise,
according to the same rites and ceremonies, which the Law commands the true God
to be served with. Nor shall I need to say any thing to that which remains,
either what interest Jeroboam could have, to carry the people to the worship of
any other then the true God, who was to count his turn served, if they went not
up to Jerusalem; Or how, either he, or they who conformed to his command,
could, by only so doing, blot out of their minds that opinion of the true God
which they had sucked in with their milk, and whereby, they thought they held
their estate, whether of this world, or the hope they might have of the world
to come. For my opinion obliges me not to say, that Idolatry was commanded by
this law of Jeroboam, or practiced by all that conformed to it. But that,
though not expressly commanded, yet it followed by necessary consequence, upon
the introducing of the Law; Not by consequence of natural necessity, from that
which the terms thereof imported, but by that necessity which the School calls
moral, when the common discretion of men, that are able to judge in such
matters, evidences, that, supposing such a Law, it must needs, and will come to
pass.

CHAP. XXVI. The Place, or rather the State of happy and miserable Souls
otherwise understood by Gods people before Christ's ascension, then after it.
What the Apocalypse, what the rest of the Apostles declare. Only Martyrs
before Gods Throne. Of the sight of God.
I Come now to the nicest point, if I mistake not, of all that occasions the
present Controversies and divisions of the Western Church, the state of souls
departed with the profession of Christianity, till the day of Judgment; The
resolution whereof, that which remains concerning the public service of God,
the order and circumstances of the same, must presuppose. This resolution must
proceed upon supposition of that which the first book has declared, concerning
the knowledge of the Resurrection and the world to come, under the Old
Testament; and the reservation, and good husbandry in declaring it, which is
used in the writings of it. The consideration whereof mightily commends the
wisdom and judgment of the ancient Church, in proposing the books which we
call Apocrypha, for the instruction of the Ca echumeni, or learners of
Christianity. For these are they, in which, the Resurrection and the world to
come, and the happy state of righteous souls after death, is plainly, and
without circumstance, first set forth. I need not here repeat the seven
Maccabees and their mother, professing to die for Gods Law, in confidence of
Resurrection to the world to come, 2 Mac. VII. 9, 11, 23, 36. nor the Apostle
Ebr. XI. 35-38. testifying the same of them, and the rest that lived or died in
their case. But I must not omit the Wisdom of Solomon, the subject whereof, as
I said before, is to commend the Law of God to the Gentiles; that, in stead of
persecuting Gods people, they might learn the worship of the only true God.
For, this he does by this argument; that those who persecute Gods people think
there remains no life after this, but shall find, that the righteous were at
rest as soon at they were dead, and in the day of judgment, shall triumph
over their enemies. Wisdom II. III. 1-8. V, From hence proceeding to show, how
the wisdom of Gods people derives it self from Gods wisdom, who so strangely
delivered them from the persecutions of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, for a
warning to those that might undertake the like; In particular the Kings of
Egypt, under whom this was writ, and the Jews most used the Greek. The Wisdom
of Jesus the son of Sirach, pretending to lay down those rules of righteous
conversation, which the study of the Law, the offspring of Gods Wisdom, had
furnished him with; is not so copious in this point, though the precepts of
inward and spiritual obedience, and service of God from the heart, which he
delivers throughout, can by no means be parted from the hope of the world to
come, being grounded upon nothing else. And* he proposes it plainly from the
beginning, when he says; He that fears God, it shall go well with him in the
end, and at the day of his death he shall be blessed. The very additions to
Daniel are a bulwark to the Faith of the Church, when it appears, that the
happiness of righteous souls after death is not taken up by any blind
tradition among Christians; but before Christianity, expressed for the sense of
Daniels fellows, in those words of their hymn; O ye spirits and souls of the
righteous, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever. And
whatsoever we may make of the second book of Maccabees, the antiquity of it
will always be evidence, that the principal author of it, Jason of Cyrene,
could never have been either so senseless or so impudent, as to impose upon
his nation, that prayers or sacrifices were used by them in regard of the
resurrection, if they believed not the being and sense of humane souls after
death. 2 Mac. XII. 43.

Proceed we to those passages concerning this point, which the Gospel afford
us, and consider how well they agree herewith. I will not here dispute, that
our Lord intended to relate a thing that really was come to pass; but to
propose a parable or resemblance of that which might and did come to pass,
when he said Luke XVI. 19 -- There was a certain rich man, that was clad with
fine linen and purple, and made good cheer every day --. But I will presume
upon this; That no man, that means not to make a mockery of the Scriptures,
will endure, that our Lord should represent unto us, in such terms as we are
able to bear, that which falls out to righteous and wicked souls after death,
if there were no such thing as sense and capacity of pleasure and pain in
souls departed, according to that which they do here. I will also propose to
consideration the description of the place, whereby he represents unto us, the
different estate of those whom it receives. And in Hell, lifting up his eyes,
being in torments, he sees Abraham from afar, and Lazarus in his bosom. And
afterward; And besides all this, between us and you, there is a great gappe
fixed, so that those who would pass from hence cannot, nor may they pass from
thence to us. For, I perceive, it is swallowed for Gospel amongst us, that
Dives, being in Hell, saw Lazarus in the third heavens. Whereas the Scripture
says only (...), in the invisible place of good and bad ^oules; For so the
process of the Parable obliges us to understand it: S^^ing it would be
somewhat strange, to understand that gappe, wherewith the place of happy souls
is here described to be parted from the place of torments, to be the earth and
all that is between the third heavens and it. The Jews at this time, as we see
by the Gospel, believing, according to the testimonies alleged, that righteous
souls were in rest, and pleasure, and happiness, wicked in misery and
torments; called the place or state of those torments Gehenna, from the valley
of the sons of Hinnom near Jerusalem, where, those that of old time
sacrificed their children to devils burnt them with fire. The horror of, which
place, it appears, was taken up for a resemblance fit to represent the torment
of the wicked souls after death. In like manner Gods people, being sensible of
Gods mercy, in using means to bring them back to the ancient inheritance which
our first parents lost, by rebelling against God* They could not use so fit a
term to express the rest and happiness of blessed spirits in the world to
come, as by calling the place of it Paradise. But, that the place of this rest,
was the third heavens, before the sitting down of our Lord Christ at the right
hand of his Father; I am yet to learn, that there is any syllable or tittle in
the holy Scripture to signify, that the people of God understood, at such time
as our Lord delivered this Parable. So that, there can possibly be no
reasonable presumption, that the word (...), here used, not in reference to the
body, which goes to corruption in the grave, but to the soul or spirit, should
signify the same with Gehenna, in opposition to Abraham's bosom; Neither the
original signification of the word, nor the circumstance of the parable, nor
any opinion received then among Gods people so limiting the signification of
it. But, that the bosom of Abraham, should signify the place of rest which God
had appointed for the righteous, the reason is plain; The hospitality of
Abraham being renowned in the Scripture, and the happiness of the world to
come being usually represented to the people of God, at that time, under the
resemblance of a Feast, whereof Abraham is made the Master, when his bosom is
made the place to receive and refresh Lazarus. There is therefore no reason,
why the bosom of Abraham, and Paradise should not signify the same state, or
the same place, to the apprehension of Gods people at that time. But there is
also no reason why (...), in the Parable, should not extend to comprehend both
Gehenna and Paradise, in the sense of those, to whom our Lord addresses this
Parable. For, neither is it any way necessary, when the good thief prays, Lord
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: And our Lord answers; To day
shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke XXIII. 42, 43. that Paradise should
here be understood to signify the third heavens, ( the way into which was not
yet laid open standing the first Tabernacle; says the Apostle, Ebr. IX. 8. And
again, Which new and living way our Lord Jesus has dedicated, or hanseled for
us, through the veil, that is his flesh) unless we abuse our selves with an
imagination, that words can signify things, which could not be aprehended ont
of them, by those to whom they were said. For, as for S. Paul, who was ravished
into the third heavens, that is into paradise 1 Cor. XIV. 3, 4. I conceive I
need not insist upon an exception which there is no issue to try; To wit, that
S. Paul speaks of several raptures, one into the third heavens, the other
into Paradise. For, to speak freely, it seems no more then reason to grant,
that S. Paul was ravished to the presence of our Lord Christ; But, I must needs
insist, that the word Paradise could not signify the same thing to S. Paul
after the Ascension of our Lord, as to the hearers of our Lord, before it. As
for the words of the same S. Paul, having a desire to depart and to be with
Christ Phi. I. 23. whether they do confine the spirit of S. Paul departed to
the place of our Lord Christ's bodily presence in the third heavens; I will not
conclude, till I have considered more of those scriptures which may concern
the same purpose.

And indeed the Apocalypse, as it is the last of the new Testament, so seems
to declare more, in this matter, then all the rest of it before had done. For
when, upon the opening of the fifth seal, Apoc. VI. 9, 10, 11. the souls of
Martyrs, having demanded vengeance upon their persecutors, were clothed with
long white robes, and bidden to expect the fulfilling of their numbers; And
after that, the CXLIVM of the XII. tribes, that were to be preserved from the
said vengeance, were sealed; It follows, Apoc. VII. 9. 14. After that I
looked, and behold a great multitude, whom no man could number, of every
nation, and tribe, and people, and language, standing before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, and clothed in long white robes, with P^lmes in their hands.
And to show who they were, These be they who come out of the great tribulation,
and have washed their robes, and have blanched their robes in the blood of the
lamb. Therefore they are before the throne of God, and serve him day and night
in his Temple, and he that sits upon the Throne overshadoweth them. They
shall not hunger nor thirst, nor shall the sun fall on them, nor any, heat.
For the Lamb that is in the midst of the Thorn feeds them and guid^th them
to living wells of water, and God wipes away all tears from their eyes. Here
you have the souls of the Martyrs before the throne of God, over shadowed by
him that sits on the Throne, who wipeth away all tears from their eyes And
again Apoc. XIV. 1-5. where the CXLIVM. that were sealed appear again upon
mount Sion, and the voice of harpers is heard, singing to their harps, a new
song, before the throne and before the four living creatures, and Elders,
which no man but the sealed could learn; It follows; These are they that
have not been defiled with women, for they are Virgins: These are they that
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: These are redeemed from among men, as
first fruits to God and to the Lamb: Nor was any deceit found in their
mouths; For they are unspotted before the Throne of God. Here, CXLIVM appear
upon mount Sion, hearing only the song which the harpers sing to their harps.
And therefore, those that were not defiled with women, that follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, that are unspotted before the th^one of God, are the
harpers, not those that were sealed. The same Martyrs souls, that appeared
before in long white robes, with Palms in their hands, now appear singing the
song of triumph to their harps. For, so it follows v. 13. after denouncing
the the fall of Babylon, and vengeance of God, upon those that worship the
Beast; I heard a voice from heaven say to me, Write; Blessed are the dead that
from henceforth dye in the Lord. Even so says the spirit, for they rest from
their labor, and their works go along with them. Well might Tertullian
restrain this to Martyrs, for the consequence of the text mighti^y inforceth
it. The Lamb indeed is seen on mount Sion, with those that are sealed: But it
is never said, that they are before the Throne, but only they who appear in
Heaven; that is the Martyrs, whose song of triumph they hear and learn; which
needed not have been said if they were represented as of one company. And,
perhaps it is said that they follow the Lamb whither soever he goes; Because
they followed him to his Cross, suffering that death for him, which he had
suffered for us. And that they are Virgins; Because not stained with the
pollution of false Gods. For truly, when it is said: that guile was not found
in their month, We cannot understand any thing more proper then the profession
of the Christian Faith, forwhich they dyed. For, of whom can it be more
properly said; that guile was not found in his mouth, then of him that dies,
rather then transgress that which he undertook at his Baptism; to profess
the name of Christ unto death? He that likes not this will be obliged to
grant, that virgins also have the state of Martyrs, by this Prophesy. For,
besides all that has been said to shovv, that, in all this prophesy, save the
XXIV, none but Martyrs appear in heaven before Gods Throne, (unless we say,
that here, Virgins also are seen among the Martyrs) whenas, in the beginning
of the VII. Chapter, order is taken for the sealing of those, that should
escape the vengeance of God in Judaea, being Christians and servants of God:
(who, in the beginning of the fourteenth, appear again with the lamb upon
mount Sion) But, the Martyrs souls appear in heaven before the Throne, both
in the fifth and in the seventh (besides what I argue here by consequence drawn
from the meaning of the foureteenth) it would be a thing incons quent to the
text and grain of the Prophesy, to say, that the servants of God, who are
preserved, by the name of God sealed on their foreheads Apoc. XIV. 1. VII. 3.
from that destruction which involves the persecutors of Christianity, should
appear in the same company and rank with the Martyrs; Among whom are those
that are slain in the City of Jerusalem Ap. XI. 7, 8, 9. of a several
condition from those that are preserved alive.

Compare we here with the doctrine of S. Paul 2. Cor. V. 1-4. For we know,
that, if this earthly house of our Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building
from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. And for this we
groan, desiring that our dwelling from heaven be vested upon us. If so be we
shall not be found naked, having put it upon us. For we that are in the
tabernacle groan, as grieved, not because we desire to be stripped, but to be
invested, that the mortal may be swallowed up of life. The whole text of this
discourse manifestly imports, that S. Paul expects the resurrection as the
accomplishment of his hope^ not groaning for the day of his death, to have his
soul stripped from his body, but to have it invested with a heavenly
tabernacle, made by God, his glorified body, which brings life, that
swalloweth up the mortality of this. As also he says Romans VIII. 23. That we
who have the first fruits of the spirit groan within our selves, expecting the
adoption, even the redemption of our body. Where, the resurrection is the
adoption of those who rise again to be Sons of God, according to the word of
our Lord, Luke XX. 36. For neither can they dye any more, for they are equal
to Angels: And, being children of the resurrection, are children of God It is
true, it appears by S. Paul, that he was no further certified as then, of the
counsel of God, then to make it a question, whether he and the Christians of
his time, should be found alive by the Lord Christ at his coming to judgment;
For, therefore he says with an if; If we shall not be found naked of our
bodies, when we put on glorious bodies: Though he had said before, that, if this
body be dissolved we shall have a heavenly body for it. And so, 1 Cor. XV. 57.
The dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed. And, 1 Timothy IV. 15.
17. We that are left alive unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent
those that are fallen asleep. Again; We that are left alive shall be ravished
with them, in the clouds, into the air to meet the Lord, And so shall be
always with the Lord. So that the thousand years, which, it is revealed to S.
John, that the Church shall endure after the fall of Babylon, and the judgment
exercised upon the whore, Apoc. XX. is a further revelation of Gods will and
pleasure, for the subsistence of Christianity with the world; how much soever
he has determined it shall endure, more then he has there declared. But
notwithstanding, seeing that S. Paul, though uncertain thereof, suspends the
accomplishment of his, and our happiness, upon the resurrection; Most manifest
it is, that the stripping of our bodies, by death, is not the term of Gods
promise, according to S. Paul. Wherefore, when it folowes; Having therefore
always confidence, and knowing, that, dwilling in the body we are ^ilgrims
from God, (for we walk by faith, not by sight) we desire with confiderce,
rather to travel out of the body and to dwell with God: Supposing that S. Paul
expected this change by Christ's second coming, before he died, he contradicts
not himself, when he refers it to the resurrection; which if we think that he
assigns it unto the mean time, we make him to do. Therefore S. John 1
Epistle III. 2. Beloved, we are now the Children of God. But it is not yet
manifest what we shall be: Yet we know, that when he (or it) is made
manifest* we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Sons of God
because Sons of the resurrection, we saw before in our Lords words; Sons of God
because adopted to his spirit, we have here in S. John. But as S. Paul made
our adoption to be, the redemption of the body, so Ephesians VI. 30. Grieve not the
holy spirit of God, says he, by whom ye are sealed to the day of redemption.
And, ^. 14, speaking of the same spirit; Who is the earnest of our inheritance,
until the redemption of the purchase. As our Lord says also Luke XX. 28. Lift
up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh; speaking of his second
coming. If therefore, neither our adoption, and redemption, nor Gods purchase
be complete before we rise again, whether we read in S. John, When he shall
be made manifest, or, when it shall be made manifest, what we shall be, the
resurrection is the time. For, if we be not like Angels till the resurrection,
as our Lord says, much less like God, or like our Lord Christ, as S. John
says.

As for the term of seeing God, upon which the School Doctors have stated the
controversy of the Saints happiness in the mean time; It is a thing evident
enough, that the speech is borrowed from the comparison between Moses and other
Prophets, Number. XII. 6, 7, 8. Where God says, he will deal with other
prophets, by a vision or a dream, but with Moses face to face. And yet S.
Paul 1. Cor. XIII. 12. comparing the knowledge of God by faith, with the
knowledge of God by sight; We see now by a glass in a riddle, but then face
to face. Now we know in part, then shall I know as I am known, Which S. ^ohn
calls as he is, for sure God knows us as we are. Nay he says there, that
Moses beheld, (...) which the Greek seems to translate (...), signifying that
glorious appearance, witnessing the presence of God, which Moses communed with
mouth to mouth, (...), by sight, (for we have no better English for S. Paul's
(...), 2 Cor. V. 7.) not by riddles. Whereby it appears the knowledge of God,
which blessed souls have is described by S. Paul in the very same terms, in
which the knowledge of God which Moses had is described by God: And yet, none of
those School Doctors believes, that Moses saw God, as the blessed shall do.
Therefore, both of them seem to be such an expression of intellectual and
spiritual things, borrowed from bodily things of this world, as this
weakness of our nature is able to bear. And therefore, seeing God is
represented to us throughout the whole scripture, in the Majesty of a King
sitting upon his Throne, as the most glorious thing, that all sorts of men, (to
whom the scripture is written) can imagine to themselves; it seems most
reasonable to conceive, that both exp^essions are borrowed from thence. For,
the custom of the world knows no more evident mark of preferment, then for a
man to see his King, and to be always admitted to his presence; of which
admission, Courts know that there are many degrees. As the VII. Princes in
Ester I. 16. which see the Kings face; Or, stand before the Kings face, as the
Queen of Sheba expresses it, in Solomon's servants, 2 Kings X. 8. As the souls
of the Martyrs are before Gods throne, and see him day and night Apoc. VII. 15.
And so, by consequence, those souls, that are admitted into Gods presence have
an other manner of knowledge and familiarity with God then ever Moses had;
because it is one thing to see God, and to speak with God mouth to mouth, in
his Tabernacle, (Where, by a glorious appearance speaking in his person, he
testified his presence) another thing in the third heavens, whereof the most
Holy Place of the Tabernacle was but a figure. Here, take notice, before we go
further, in what fashion the Majesty of God appears, or is described in the
scriptures. I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the host of heaven
standing by him, on his right hand and on his left; says the prophet, 1 Kings
XX. 19. that is, all the Angels attending on both sides of his Throne. God is
to be trembled at in the great council of his Saints, and terrible above all
that are about him; Says David Psa. LXXIX. 8. The Majesty of his Throne is
terrible even to the Angels that stand beneath and about it: For, the Saints of
heaven, in the old Testament, are only Angels. Thus far, none of them sits in
Gods presence. In that vision of his throne which appears Dan. VII. 9. 10.
(with God sitting on it like the Ancient of days, with a thousand thowsands
and a miryade of miryads, waiting upon him.) it is said indeed; Thrones were
set; But no mention of any but this one in all that follows. And, though the
people of God are called there v. 22, 25, 27. (...) the Saints of the Highest;
Yet the Angles are still the Saints of heaven; His people the Saints on earth,
whom God there gives sentence for against their enemies. But, to the prophet
Ezekiel I. 22, 26, 27. he appearteth in the likeness of a man sitting upon a
Throne, pitched on a floor, which is drawn by four living creatures,
signifying those Angels, which covered the Arc of the Covenant in the
Tabernacle, upon which God is described to sit, as upon his Throne, in so many
places of the old Testament; Whereas, in the vision of the Prophet Esaias, his
Throne is compassed by six, Esaias VI. 1, 2. in that of S. John, Apoc. IV. 2, 3,
5-8. with four. But, in the new testament, our Lord promises his twelve
Apostles, that, at the regeneration, that is, the Resurrection, they shall sit
on twelve Thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Mat. XIX. 28. Luke XXII.
30. where by the way, we are also to note, that, the Kingdom of God which
our Lord bequeaths to them, to eat and to drink in it, and to sit on these
thrones, is not till the resurrection; Therefore neither these joies which the
said eating and drinking signifies. Hereuppon it is that S. Paul says; Know
you not that the Saints shall judge the world? 1 Cor. VI. 2. When, therefore, God
appears to S. John, as a bout to take vengeance upon the persecutors of his
Church, his throne appears environed with XXIV. Thrones, for XX^V. Elders to
sit on, and give sentence with him, Apoc. VI. 4. the Angels attending upon
their Thrones, as upon his, Apoc. V. 11. VII. 11. and the souls of the
Martyrs, which, Apoc. VI. ^. appear (...), beneath the Altar of incense which
stands before the throne, Apoc. VIII. 3. appear before the Throne Apoc. VII,
9. Just as in the Church, the people was wont to stand at the service of God,
with their faces toward the Bishop sitting on his throne, in the midst of the
seats on which the Presbyters sat, on both sides of him* the Deacons standing
to g^ve them attendance; As I have showed large, in my book of the service of
the Church Chap. III. p. 53-62. Chap. IV. p. 71-76. besides the review p. 74,
75. And further in my book of the R^ght of the Church p. 93-98.

But all this while we must remember, that, though this vision appears to S.
John in the heavens Apoc. IV. 1. yet does it not appear, that the Throne of
God, before which the souls of the Martyrs stand, and round about which the
XXIV Elders sit, is seen by them, as it is seen by S. John, in the vision
here described. For, whereas it is plain, that all this is represented, as if
there were in Heaven, such a Temple as that at Jerusalem, in the inner court
whereof, the Elders sit, the people stand, praising God; (For Apoc. VII. 15.
the Marty^s serve God before the Throne day and night in the Temple) It is
manifest, that the Throne of God (which, in the Temple, was the Arc of the
Covenant shadowed with the Ch^rub^nes,) was not seen by those who worshipped
without in the Court. And, Apoc. IV, 5. it is said, that thunder and lightning
came out of the Throne; and, that there were seven lamps burning before the
Throne, being the seven spirits of God. So that, the seven candelsticks being
between the Holy of Holies and the Court in which these things, appear; we
are obliged to understand the Throne to be in the Holy of Holies, as in the
Temple, and the VII. lights in the outward Tabernacle, or holy place of the
Temple. Which is still more plain, when it is said Apoc. XI. 19. And the
Temple of God in heaven was opened, and the Arc of his Covenant was seen in
his Temple, and there were lightnings and thunders, and flashes and
earthquakes, and great hail. For, if opened then, then shut before; neither was
the Throne seen which the arc of the Covenant signifies. And, Apoc. XIV. 17,
18. One Angel comes out of the Temple in Heaven with a sharp sickle; another
out of the Court, where all this appears hitherto, called there, (...) or the
Sanctuary, as also Apoc. XI. 2. in opposition to (...) the Temple; out of which
came the seven Angels with the seven viols Apoc. XV. 5. so also XIV. 1, 17.
And, you shall see by all this, what reason we have to think, that those who
are described, before Gods Throne, by this vision, are not admitted to see his
face. And therefore, if to know God as we are known in S. Paul, to see him as
he is in S. John, be our happiness, there is nothing to show us that it is
accomplished before the general judgment. For, if S. John when he says, we
shall know him as he is, speaks of the resurrection; the same we must needs
think is meant by S. Paul, when he says, we shall see him, face to face and
know him as we are known, for S. Paul, not expressing whether he speak of the
resurrection, or, of the mean time between death and it, must needs be
limited by S. John, speaking of the time, when our Lord shall be manifested,
or, when it shall be manifested what we shall be. And therefore, though Moses
spoke with God mouth to mouth, though he see him by sight, not in a riddle:
yet, is this but the highest degree of prophetical vision; which
notwithstanding, no man shall see Gods face and live, and therefore Moses
himself sees but his back, Exodus XXXIII. 20-23. And, notwithstanding that the
Martyrs are before Gods Throne in the third Heaven, yet for all this, they are
but in the inward Court, and the Holy of Holies appeared not open to S, John,
but upon occasion of judgments, the execution whereof comes from thence, where
the sentence must be understood to pass. So that, to know God as he is
known, according to S. Paul, and to see him as he is, according to S. John, is
that which is reserved for them that shall feast, after the resurrection* in
his presence.

For, seeing S. John sees the Throne of God in vision of Prophesy, which the
same vision describes the Martyrs souls in heaven to see; It cannot be
concluded, that the Martyrs souls do see God, as he is, and know him, as
they are known, because they are before Gods Throne, or because they see him
sitting upon it. For, Moses also communed with God mouth to mouth, and that
upon his Throne, in the Holy of Holies, the Arc of the Covenant overshadowed
by the Cherubines; unto whom God said nevertheless, no man shall see my face
and live. The Apostle indeed to the Ebrewes XII. 23. when he says; We are come
to the assembly and Church of the first borne registered in the heavens, and to
God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect; seems to
speak of this mean time. For, though some would have those sprits of just men
made perfect, to be the souls of living Christians; (as when S. Peter says,
1. Peter IV. 19. 20. that our Lord Christ being put to death in the flesh, was
made alive by the spirit, in which departing, he preached to the spirits in
prison; Which is necessarily to be understood of the Gentiles, whom the spirit
of God in the Apostles won to repentance, though the same spirit in Noe could
not effect it, as it follows) yet it seems more consequent to the rest of the
text, to understand it here of the souls of Christians made perfect upon their
departure hence. But, if just men made perfect, may be understood to signify
no more then Christians, because our Lord, distinguishing that righteousness
which the Gospel requires from that which the Law was content with, concludes;
Be ye therefore perfect as your heavenly father is perfect; Mat. VI. 48.
Certainly, the perfection of Christian souls, in the mean time between death
and the resurrection, cannot be concluded to be such as nothing shall be added
to, because, it is said, that they are made perfect. The same we have from the
Apostle 1 John IV. 17. Herein is love perfected in us, that we have confidence
in the day of Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world. For, I
beseech you, how can there be any thing added to his confidence at the day of
judgment, who has received his full reward from the day of his death? But
Saint Paul 2 Thessalonians. I. 6-9. Seeing it is just with God to render
tribulation to them who afflict you, and to you that are afflicted rest with
us, at the revealing of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his Angels, in flaming
fire, rendering vengeance to them who know not God; Who shall endure the
punishment of everlasting destruction from the face of the Lord, and from the
glory of his strength, when he comes to be glorified among his Saints -- at
that day. Where, you see, he refers, as well the rest of them who are
afflicted, as the punishment of everlasting destruction from before the Lord,
to the last day of the general judgment, when he comes to be admired among
his Saints; Who shall then be, as well glorified Christians as the Angels, and
that in heaven, according to the spiritual sense of the Old Testament; as upon
earth according to the literal sense, the Prophet Esaias says, that, after the
destruction of Senacherib; The Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Sion, and
Jerusalem, and be glorified in the sight of his Elders; Esaias XXIV. 23. Here
then all those scriptures, which refer the torments provided for the devil
and his angels, unto the general judgment, come in to bear witness in the
same cause. For, therefore the words of the sentence bear; Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels, Mat. XXV. 41. to wit,
against that time. And S. Paul 1 Cor. VI. 2. know ye not that we shall judge
the angels? to wit the evil angels: And the possessed to our Lord, Mat. VIII.
29. Art thou come to torment us before the time? And the Apostle, 2 Pet. II. 4.
For if God spared not the angels having sinned, but delivered them to be kept
for judgment, in the dungeon, with chains of darkness. And S. Jude 6. And
the angels that kept not their original, but left their own habitation, he
keeps in everlasting chains under darkness, to the judgment of the great
day. For, though there can be no reason why the devils, having rebelled against
God, should not taste the fruits of their rebellion immediately, as there is a
reason to be given, why man is not to be judged till he be tried; Especially,
the Parable of Dives and Lazarus showing, that wicked souls are in torment upon
their departure; Yet, seeing God has allowed them to tempt mankind, and to
dwell in the air about them; Job I. 7. II. 2. Ephesians. II. 2. VI. 12. (whereupon
they desire our Lord not to send them into the deep, Luke VIII. 31.) it seems
necessary to grant, that he will take account of them for the malice, which, at
present he suffers them to exercise, though sentenced to that dungeon, and
those bonds, which they can no more escape, then be converted to goodness,
from the beginning.

CHAP. XXVII. The Souls of the Fathers were not in the Devils Power till
Christ; Though the Old Testament declare not their estate. Of Samuels soul. The
soul of our Lord Christ, parting from his body, went with the Thief to
Paradise. Of his triumph over the powers of darkness. Prayer for the dead
signifies no delivering of souls out of Purgatory. The Covenant of Grace
requires imperfect happiness before the general judgment. Of forgiveness in
the world to come, and, paying the utmost farthing.
IT is manifest then, by these premises, that there is appearance enough of
difference, in and between several Scriptures, that concern the state of souls
departed before the general judgment. Nevertheless, in this, it cannot be
said that there is any difference, but that all is agreed, that the wicked are
in pain, the righteous at rest, upon their departure; As the Parable of Dives
and Lazarus distinguishes. And this I should here proceed further to limit, but
that I hope to do it more clearly and resolutely, premising here the
determination of two points incident. For it is manifest, that all parties in
difference do allow the hope of salvation to those Christians, that depart
imperfectly turned from their evil ways, and amended in their inclinations and
actions. Be it but for the example of the thief upon the Cross, though we
suppose, that, as there is but one example written, so there are few, and very
few examples come to pass; yet, (seeing that which has come to pass may come
to pass again, and, that the case cannot be excepted from the hope of
salvation) the question will be what becomes of those souls, that depart hence
in the state of Gods grace, but burdened with sins, which they have not
repented of to amendment. And, because all that is to be said of happiness
after death must come out of the new Testament, according to the premises; It
will be requisite to inquire, in the second place, in what condition, the
souls of the holy Fathers before and under the Law, and those, who, by their
doctrine and example did belong to the new Testament, though they lived under
the old; (as I have said) in what condition of ease or sorrow they are, between
their departure and the general judgment. Which draws an other question
after it, concerning the place where, or the company which Christ's humane soul
was with, during the time it was departed from the body. For, it is manifest
that there is an opinion which has very great vogue, even among the Fathers;
that the soul of Christ was in Hell, with the souls of the Fathers, during
that time, and brought them along from thence when he rose again, carrying them
up into heaven with him at his ascension, where ever since, the souls of the
martyrs, and other eminent Christians, which now are properly called Saints
(for in the writing of the Apostles, Christians who are generally called
Saints, as in the old Testament Israelites, are received, when they depart
hence; Those that die not in Gods Grace, being condemned to hell torments: But
those, who have not had care to cleanse themselves of sin by repentance and
amendment, remaining in the Suburbs of Hell, (as I may well call that place,
which the Church of Rome calls Purgatory) till by the prayers of the living,
or, having paid the debt of temporal pain, remaining due when the guilt of
sin is done away with the debt of eternal pain, they are removed to heaven,
and to the sight of God, which is the same happiness they shall enjoy after
the resurrection, only that the body has no part in it, as then it shall have.

That which the opinion which I have mentioned says of the state of righteous
souls under the Old Testament, seems to stand upon those descriptions of the
dead which it gives. The Prophet Esaias, describing the ruin of the King of
Babylon, Esaias XIV. 9. Hell (or the grave) from beneath, is moved for thee at
thy coming: It stirs up the dead for thee, even all the leaders of the
earth. To what purpose is it here to dispute, whether Hell or the Grave, where
it is so evident, that the dead must rise to meet the King of Israel? To what
purpose to allege a figure of Prosopopaeia, unless it could be understood,
that dead corpses could meet him, and receive him without their souls? The dead
here, are, in the original, the Giants, of whom we read, Genesis VI. 4. that, for
the wickedness of their times, the World was condemned to the flood. For,
though Moses call them Nephilim, and Esaias Rephaim; Yet it is manifest, that the
same word is attributed to the dead, because of the violence and wickedness,
which, the Scripture shows, were multiplied upon the earth by the Giants
before the Flood, and afterward, by the Giants that inhabited the land of
promise; whereupon the Scripture, by calling the dead by the name of Giants,
signifies, that the Giants were under that death, which God threatened Adams
sin with. And does not the Scripture of the Old Testament describe unto us
the Fathers of the Old Testament, in the same estate? What shall we say of the
soul of Samuel, which the witch of Endor raises out of the earth, if the
Scripture say true 1 Samuel XXVIII. 12, 14. when the woman saw Samuel; And Saul
perceived that it was Samuel? And, that no man may say it is a witch, and that
he that went to a witch says it; What shall we say to the language of Jacob; I
will go down to my son into hell mourning? Genesis XXXVII. 35. For his grief for
Joseph would not have been enough to make him die with sorrow, had he died with
Saint Paul's expectation to be with Christ, so soon as he was dismissed. And
therefore, the language of David, Psalm. LXXXIX. 4.-7. entertaining the thought
of death with such astonishment; seems to give credit to that gross opinion,
that souls have no sense till the resurrection, but sleep out the time. As also
King Ezekias, weeping at the news of death, because the dead could not praise
God; Esaias XXXVIII. 3, 18. as also Psalm. VI. 6. and Baruch II. 17. And Job III.
13. makes his case, had he never been born, the same with the dead. Not because
he thought the soul mortal. Therefore because he thought it a light that death
puts out, and the resurrection kindles it again. But all this is to be imputed
to nothing in the world but that dispensation of the Old Testament, which I
have spoke of so many times, and now shall confirm it by so visible an
instance as this. Death was proposed to Adam, for the mark of Gods wrath, and
vengeance, which he was become liable to by sin. The turning of this curse
into a blessing, was to be the effect of Christ's Cross, which was not yet to
be revealed. The life of the Land of Promise was proposed for the reward of
keeping Gods law, in stead of the life of Paradise. Therefore, the cutting off
of that life was to be taken for a mark of that curse, which mankind became
subject to by the first Adam, till it should be declared the way to a better
life, by the Cross of Christ. Therefore, the Giants, that left it with the
marks of enmity with God upon them, are described as within the dominion of
Hell, but not asleep, unless we can think that it is a mark of misery, to go
to them that sleep, when all do sleep. Prove. II. 17. IX. 18. XXI. 17. Esaias.
XXVI. 14. For, that there should be no praising of God after death, holds
punctually, in virtue of the Old Covenant, which brought no man to life, and
was then on foot; though they who writ those things, might and did know, that
by the virtue of the New Covenant, (under which they knew themselves to be)
they should not be deprived of the privilege of praising God after death, and
before the resurrection; how sparing soever they were to be, in imparting this
knowledge openly to all the world. For, how otherwise should they whom the
Apostle, Ebr. XI. declares to have sought the kingdom of heaven, have showed
themselves otherwise affected with death, then the Martyrs that suffered for
Christ were afterward? How could it be thought the same Spirit, that moved
them to such a difference of effects* according to the difference of time?

And therefore the same Solomon, that says, there is nothing to be done in the
grave Eccles. IX. 10. says further Eccles. XII. 8. that, when the dust returns
to the earth, then the soul returns to God that gave it. And when Exoch and
Elias were taken away by God in their Bodies, neither sleep they, seeing Moses
and Elias attend our Lord Christ at his transfiguration Mat. XVII. 3, 4. Mark
IX. 4 5. Luke IX. 30. nor is it possible for any man, that would have souls to
sleep, to give a reason, why, the Covenant by which all are ordered being the
same, the souls of Christians should sleep, when their souls sleep not. And
therefore, when our Lord proves the resurrection by this; That God is called
the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; whereas, God is not the God of the dead
but of the living; Mat. XXII. 32. Mark XII. 26. Luke XX. 37. he not only
supposes that his argument is good, but, that his adversaries, the Sadduces,
granted it to be good. And so Saint Paul, when he argues, that if the dead rise
not again, then are we the most miserable of all people; As having no further
hope then this life; 1 Cor. XV. 19. For, what needed more, to them that owned
the Law of Moses, and the Gospel of Christ, and yet would deny the world to
come, questioning the resurrection that supposes it? For the rest, I will not
repeat that which I produced before, out of the Books we call Apocrypha, which
he that peruseth, will find a difference between the language of the Patriarchs
and Prophets, speaking of themselves, and the language of those Books,
speaking of them; But I will insist upon this, that our Lord, when he proposes
the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, manifestly accepts of that opinion, which,
notwithstanding such difficulties from the Scriptures of the Old Testament, had
prevailed over the better part of that people, by Tradition of the Fathers, and
Prophets; To wit, that the souls of good and bad are alive in joy and pain,
according to the qualities in which they depart hence; and shall resume their
bodies, to give account in them, for their works here. The same does the
appearance of Moses and Elias at his transfiguration, the rendering of his soul
into his Fathers hand, the promise of bringing the thief into Paradise the
same day, signify. Whereby it appears, that, whatsoever might seem to argue,
either that the souls of the Fathers were in the devils hands, till the death
and resurrection of Christ, or, that all souls go out like sparks when men die,
and are kindled anew when they rise again, prove nothing, because they prove
too much, For, if they prove any thing, they must prove, that there is no world
to come, as the disputes of Ecclesiastes and Job seem to say; because, by the
accidents of this world, there is no ground of a man's estate in it. Which,
seeing it is so far from leaving any dispute among Christians, that, among
Jews, the Sadduces, were reputed Sectaries; It is evident, that, whatsoever
may seem to look that way in the Old Testament, cannot prove, that the souls
of the Fathers were in the Verge of Hell, till Christ riseing again, the
graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept arose, and came out
of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy City and appeared
to many, as we read in the Gospel of Mat. XXVII. 52, 53. This indeed were
something if the Scripture had said, that those Saints who arose with their
bodies, when our Lord Christ was risen again, had ascended into heaven with
him in their bodies. Which, because it derogates from the generallity of the
last resurrection, having no ground in the Scripture, can bear no dispute.
Therefore, seeing these Saints, as Lazarus before, and the Widows son of Naim
whom our Lord raised, restored their bodies to the grave; there is no
presumption from hence, that their souls were brought from Hell by our Lord,
to be translated into the full happiness of the world to come, with his own.
I do therefore allow, that which is written in the Apocryphal 2 Esdras IV. 41,
42. In the grave, the chambers of souls are like the womb of a woman. For, like
as a woman that travaileth makes have to escape the pressure of her travail;
Even so do those places haste to deliver the things that are committed unto
them. And VII. 32. And the earth shall restore those that are asleep in her,
and so shall the dust those that dwell in silence, and the secret places shall
deliver those souls that were committed unto them. For, in most of those
writings which the ancient Church counts Apocryphal, because they are
suspected to intend some poisonous doctrine, excellent things are contained;
which, the agreement of them with Canonical Scripture, and their consequence
and dependence upon the truth which they settle, renders recommendable, even
from dangerous authors. And, for that which is here said, whether we suppose
this book to be written by a Christian, or not, before Christ or after; Seeing
there is no mention of any Saints, in those visions of the old Testament, where
God is represented sitting upon his Throne, but oneby the Holy Angels; (though,
in the Apocalypse, the Martyrs are before the Throne, and the Elders sit on
seats round about the Throne) seeing it cannot be said that they are
translated out of the Verge of Hell into the heavens, by the resurrection and
ascension of Christ, who were in happiness before, by the parable of Dives and
Lazarus; I take the chambers or the houses here mentioned to be the bosom of
Abraham in the parable, and Paradise in our Lords promise; secret indeed,
because the script* is sparing in imparting unto us the knowledge of the place;
But, such as oblige them, earnestly to desire and long for the consummation of
all things, which, not only the comparison of the womb in this Apocryphal
scripture, but the cry of the souls in Apocal. VI. 10. XX. 12, 17, 20.
witnesses. But I must go no further in this point, till I have resolved the
difficulty of Samuels souls which, he that will needs question, whether it were
in the deviles hand, for a witch to bring up out of the earth, or, in the
bosom of Abraham, where ou^ Savior placed Lazarus, may as well question,
whether the witch or the Law sent us to the true God. To a heathen man, that
acknowledges not the enmity, between God and the Devil, which the scripture
establishe^h, Necromancy, that brings the likeness of the dead out of the
earth: need not go for a diabolical art, nor those spirits which minister
such appositions be counted unclean spirits. But, the scripture, even of the
old testament, placing the Giants, Gods enemies, beneath, oblige us to take it
for an unclean spirit, that serves an act forbiden by Gods Law, by bringing
the likeness of Gods prophet out of the place where Gods enemies go after
death. For, though Gods friends go to the dust, as concerning their bodies;
and, as concening their souls, the old Testament declares not whither they
go; yet has it no where described them in that company to which Solomon
deputeth his fool. And our Saviors parable, represents Dives in* the flames
which burnt Sodom and G^morrha^ no otherwise, then Solomon quartereth his fool
with the Giants that tyranized over the old world, or the land of promise.
Wherefore, though I reject not Ecclesiasticus for commending Samuel, because he
prophesied after his death (because, at the worst, it is not fit to reject a
book of such excellent use, for one mistake) yet I had rather say, that Saul*
having by his Apostasy declined to the worship of the Devile by Necromancy* did
think it more satisfactory to be answered by Samuel, then by any other
likeness and that this is indeed for Samuels honor; but, that otherwise, it
is no more for Ecclesiasticus to say that Samuel prophesied, then for the
scripture, that Samuel spoke to Saul: Who, whether he took it for Samuel, or
for an unclean spirit, the scripture would call it no otherwise, then the
witch, whom he submitted to pretended. She, when she, says, I see Gods ascend
out of the earth, though I find it no incongruity, that she should pretend, the
Spirit whom she employed to be of that number, whom the scripture calls Gods,
or Gods sons; yet, because it is rather to be thought, that she pretended to
bring up Samuel indeed, it is more convenient to translate it; I see a Judge
come up out of the earth; understanding, that, by the habit of a Judge in which
he appeared, she shows him to Saul for Samuel. For the observation of the Jews
doctors is most true, that Elohim signifies the Judges of Gods people.

These things thus cleared, it is manifest, that the soul of Christ, parted
from his body which lay in the grave, did not go into hell, to free the
Fathers souls out of the Devils hands, and to translate them to the full
happiness, which w^nts only the company of the body as an accessory to
complete it. But, seeing he may be thought to have gone thither, to declare the
victory of his Cross, and to begin that triumph over the Devil and his
party, which the Gospel shall accomplish at the general judgment, by the
redemption of the Church; Let us see what the Scripture teaches. S. Peter
Acts. II. 25-35. first affirms that David spoke of Christ* when he said Psalm
XVI. 11, 12. Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell: Nor suffer thine holy one to
see corruption. Thou shall show me the path of life, thou shall fill me with
the gladness of thy presence; And proves it, because David was dead and
buried, and his Se^ulchre was seen to that day. Just as he proves afterward,
that when David said, Psalm CX. 2. The lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my
right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footestool; he meant it of Christ,
because David never went up into the heavens. And there is no doubt, the
opinion of the Jews at that day bore him out in that exposition, because, as
to this day, so then, they did expound those texts of the Messiah. So he had
nothing to do, but to show h^w true they were of our Lord Jesus. That this no
way requires, that they should not be un^erstood of David in the literal
sense; I refer my self to that which has been said already. But, what
fignifies it in the literal sense, that God sh^wes David the path of life, and
fills him with the gladness of his presence. Surely, that he p^^serves him
alive, in his state and title of King of Gods people, to serve God before the
Arc. So Hez^kias, when he was unwilling to die, ^ because the living only
praise God; ^^d said; What is the sign that I shall go into the Temple of the
Lord. Esa. XXXVIII. 19, 22. So David, how many times does he ^et forth, for the
comfort of his life, that he might come and see God in the Temple? Ps. XVII.
15. XXIV. 3. 5. XXVI 6-13. XLII. And in a word, every where. If this be the
literal sense of the Psalm what shall i^ signify in the mystical sense,
supposing our Lord Jesus the Messiah, and su^posing him killed by the Jews?
Let S. Peter be judge, when he says, tha^ ^avid, knowing as a Prophet, that
the Messiah, our Lord Jesus whom ye have sl^in* should come out of his loins,
foretold of his resurrection, that his oule was not left in Hell nor aid his
flesh see corruption. For, is it any way req^isite, to the (...) of this
argument, that our Lords humane soul should triumph over the Devile and his
party, in the entralls of the earth? Therefore, ^f you accept his sou^^ to
signify his person, (as David Psalm XXV. 12. His soul, (himself) shall l^ve
at ease, and his seed shall inherit the Land,) thou shall not leave my soul in
Hell, will be no more, then, thou shall not suffer thine holy one to lee
corruption; Thou shall not suffer me to be cut off from thy presence, to which
I am to present the sacrifice of my Cross. But, if you will needs have the
soul to signify that which stands in opposition to the flesh; seeing the
souls of the Father^ which by the dispensation of the Law, appeared not freed
from the Devin* were indeed free by the Gospel; under the Law it is no
marvel, that ^ur Lord Christ represents his soul, as in the power o^ those
who had the power o^ death, who ^aith; This is your time, and the time of the
powers of darkness. Does S. Paul make any more o^ th^s text? Hear his words
Act^ X^I^. 34-37. That he raised him from the dead, no more to return to
corruption; thus he says; I will give you the sure me^cies of David. Wherefore
he says also in an other Psalm; Thou shall no suffer thine holy one to see
corruption. For, David, having served the counsel of God in his generation
fell asleep and was added to his Fathers, and saw corruption. But, he whom God
raised ^^w no corruption. He argues the mystical sense in our Lord Christ
(...) the literal sense in David was come to nothing, by his death, but how
the mystical sense in our Lord Christ? By his triumphing in Hell, or by rising
again?

Therefore S. Paul again Romans X 6-9. thus wr^steth the words of Moses out of
the Jews hands, to the establishing of the Gospel, upon supposition that the
law is the figure of it* Say not in thy heart* who shall go up into heaven,
(as Moses Deuteronomy. XXX. 12. faith; The Law is not in heaven, that thou should
say, would to God some body would bring it us from heaven, that we might hear
and do it; So, says he, of the Gospel, thou need not say, would to God
some body would go up into heaven) To wit, to bring down Christ: Or, who shall
go down into the deep; (as Moses adds; The Law is not beyond sea, that that
thou need say, would to God some body would go beyond sea and bring it us,
that we might hear and do it: So thou needst not say; would to God some body
would go down into the deep) To wit, to bring Christ up from the dead? But
what says it? (The Law, correspondent to the Gospel) The word is near, in
thy mouth, and in thy heart: That is, the word of Faith which we preach. That,
if thou pr^fesse with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, believing with thy heart that
God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Here, it is plain, the
deep is not named for the place of the damned, but for that place, or for that
state, out of which it was hard to recover Christ, supposing him dead. As it
was hard to bring the law from beyond the seas* The deep, I deny not,
represents to us the place of the damned, Luke VIII. 31. as also, the parts
that are under the earth Phi. II. 10. Apoc. V. 13. may comprehend also the
dead. Therefore, the deep signifies the place of the damned, not necessarily,
as here, but because the speech is of the region of Devils, and of the sealing
up of the devil in the deep. Just as I said of the grave, the pit, and the
place under the earth, that, when the scripture speaks of the Giants, of the
enemie^ of Gods people, of David's enemies in Gods people, it signifies, either
the place, or at least the state of the damned, which the Old Testament must
needs acknowledge acknowledging the happiness of Gods people. Psalm IX. 18.
Proverbs V. 8 VII. 27. IX. 18. And so went Corah and his accomplices, quick into
Hell Number. XVI. 30, 33. So* Psalm LV. 24. LXIII 10. The proper place of the
d^mned spirits seems to be properly called by S. Peter Tartara, when he
says; that God delivered them to be kept for judgment, (...), in chains of
darkness, being cast down into Tartara or Hell: 1. Peter II. 4. Now, the
state of death brings not Christian souls into Hell, unl^sse we suppose that
the place of good souls, under the Law; which supposition I have destroyed.
Therefore, the bringing of Christ from the deep is done, by raising him again.
So, quoting David again; Ephesians. IV. 8, 9, 10. Therefore he says, Psa. LXVIII.
17. Going upon high he led captivity captive, and gave men gifts* Now, that he
ascended, what is it, but that he first descended into the lower pa^ts of the
Earth? He that descended is the same that ascended far above all things, to
fill (or fulfill) all things. The Psalm speaks of the Arc going up into the
Tabernacle, or Temple, figuring the going up of our Lord to the right hand of
God, as Psalm XXIV. 6-10. XLVII. 5. The going up of the Arc was Gods triumph
over the Idolatrous nations, whom he cast out of the Land of promise, giving
gifts to his people in it. The going up of our Lord Christ, S. Paul says,
implies, that he had come down before, into the lower p^rt of the Eearth;
Either in respect of mount Sinai, upon which the Psalm describes God, with
that attendance, which the a^ke; and the Cherubines thereof signify his host
of Angels in the words just before: Or, we may well understand the lower parts
of the earth to signify, by the figure of apposition, the earth that is below
as flumen Rheni, and Vrbs Patavii signify the river Rhine and the City Padna
For we have a peremptory instance in Psa. CXXXIX 15 where David says, that he
was fashioned in the lower parts of the earth* speaking of his mothers womb,
and therefore meaning the earth below. The ascension therefore of Christ,
pretending to fill rather then fulfill all with his graces, (of which he
proceeds to speak,) requires no descent into hell, which he pretends not to
fill with his Graces, If the resurrection and ascension of Christ satisfy
these texts, so that they require no further descent then into the state of
death; supposing what I said before, of the souls of the fathers under the Old
Testament, I must needs conclude, that, the body of Christ being buried, his
soul went with the good theifes soul into Paradise, or the bosom of Abraham,
where the souls of the Fathers were refreshed of their travells, till the
first, and then, the second coming of our Lord.

Paradise, we know, was the place of man's happniesse, wherein he was created,
whence, having sinned, he was shut out. In our Lords time, Gods people, it is
plain, understood well enough the state of the righteous souls in the other
world. You have seen it out of those bo^kes which we call Apocrypha. Supposing
the place unknown, as indeed it is, how could it be more properly signified,
then by the name of Paradise* opening unto us the whole allegory, by which the
happiness which we seek to recover by the cov^nant of grace, was expressed
to us by God; first in the Land of promise, secondly in the Church, after in
the heavens, after the redemption of our bodies. The true Land of promise, to
which the Gospel, and the Church, secretly taught and built under the Law,
introduces us, because the Law cannot; is that Paradise to which Christ
restores Adam, that was driven out of paradise. If you call the same
Jerusalem, it will appear, why the place of the damned is called Gehenna,
which was the place without Jerusalem, where, those that were sacrificed to the
Idols of Canaan* were consumed with horrible tortures of fire. The Scripture
of the old Testament yields not the name, but the true interpretation of it.
In the mean time, though our Lord, by carrying the thief into Paradise, show,
that it continues not shut, yet continues it no less secret, no better known,
then it is known where Adam first dwelt. It is strange that the bosom of
Abraham should signify the same? He is acknowledged the Father of the
faithful, by Jews as well as Christians. His hospitality is recounted in the
scripture. The kingdom of God, which his people then expected, is proposed by
our Lord, in d^vers passages of the Gospel, under the figure of an
entertainment, as an expression then familiar to his people. It is no
marvel, that it should be called Abraham's bosom, from whom, the faith that
purchases it has so eminent a beginning though the Fathers before Abraham be
there. One thing we must note. A vast gap we see, between it and the flames
where Dives was tormented. But where the partition is fixed; so little is
determined by the words of the scripture, that, whether both within the earth,
or, one within the earth the other in the heavens, or whether both without this
visible world (as of the place of the damned, some argue, with great
probability, from the darkness that is without, in the Gospel) no rule of
^aith determines. And therefore, whether the Greek word (...), which the
parable uses Luke XVI. 23. when the rich man lifts up his eyes in Hell and
sees Lazarus in Abraham's bosom; whether it comprehend the bosom of Abraham as
well as the place of torments, no Rule of faith determines. For, as it
manifestly signifies the place of the damned, in the scripture; (which, it is
manifest, Gods people must needs distinguish by the scripture, is the place,
where, they were sure by the scripture, that God would punish his and their
enemies) So, comprehending also the place of righteous souls, nor
distinguished from the other, to Gods people, by the ancient scriptures, how
should the signification of it be restrained here? For, as the Hethen, so
Josephus also, manifestly extends it to the place of righteous as well as
wicked souls, after death. For when he says that, de Bello Jud. II. 12. the
Saduces (...), take away the punishments and rewards of the World to come;
under the one name of (...); he comprises both estates, which, the rest of Gods
people attributed then to good and bad. The Pharisees, he says, Antiq. XVIII.
2. maintain (...), punishments and honors under the earth: And that, as it
follows, for ever; which is as much as if he had said, (...): Because, those
things which were thought to be (...), are called (...)* things under the
earth. Again, of the Jews; (...). And, agreeing with the Greeks, they affirm
that good souls are assigned a seat beyond the Ocean, in a place not grieved
with rain, or snow, or heat, but always refreshed with a mild West wind
blowing from the Ocean. But, the evil ones they assign a dark and stormy
nooke full of torments without ceasing. And yet, in an other place, he says,
they assign them (...), the most holy place of the Heavens. So little ground
is there for the distinct signification of (...) in the sense of those to whom
our Lord spoke.

It behooves us therefore, to acknowledge the victory of our Lord Christ, and
his triumph over the Devil, and all the damned, which S. Paul, as, in the text
quoted out of the Ep^stle to the Ephesians, he ascribes to the Ascension of
our Lord, according to the Psalm which he alleges; so, Col. II. 15. to the
Cross, when he says, Spoiling principalities and powers, he made open show of
them, triumphing over them, in it, ( by it, or upon it) to wit, his Cross; to
which, he had said just before, that he nailed the hand writing which was
against us. This victory and triumph belongs to the rule of faith, and the
belief of it to the substance of Christianity; because, by virtue of it, we
have reconciliation with God, and the rest of that which the Gospel promises.
But, that it should be performed, by the descent of Christ's soul into the
place of the damned, being begun upon the Cross, and finished at the
ascension; as the necessity of our redemption requires not, so, no Rule of
Faith will oblige to believe. There is great appearance, that the devil did not
understand the effect of it till our Lord rose again, as Ignatius says, that
he understood not the the birth of the blessed Virgin. Pilates Wives dream is
a sign, that, doubting of the consequence, he would have hindered that, which,
by Judas, he did procure. He thought himself Lord of mankind, because, for sin,
they were condemned to death. That by the death of Christ, this condemnation
was to be voided, possibly he might not understand; till Christ rose again.
Though the souls of the Fathers were delivered out of his Power before the
death of Christ, yet might he not understand, that, by virtue of it. Our Lord
says John XIV. 30. The Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me;
Because he found nothing of his own, that is of sin, in Christ. Though he
had nothing to do with Christ in justice; seeing, in deed, he had means to
swallow him, and might not know, that the swallowing of him would oblige him to
render his interest in all that should escape with him; is it a marvel that
he swallowed him, being a murderer from the beginning?

Thus far I have owned the reason of our redemption, against Socinus. Which
if it be true, the victory of Christ was declared, that is, the triumph
begun, at his rising again. And therefore, it is no way prejudicial to the
common Faith, which, I know, some have imagined, that our Lord Christ, having
been in Paradise with the good thief, or in the bosom of Abraham with
Lazarus, till Easter day morning, when he was to rise again, went from thence,
in his humane soul, to the place of the damned, to declare to the devil, that,
by laying violent hands on him, who had not sinned, he had lost, not only the
Fathers, but all that should believe at the preaching of the Gospel. For,
herein, the triumph of his victory upon the Cross consists. But the
substance of this ceremony being so fully provided for, by the death of his
Cross, and by his ri^ing again in virtue of it; that he who believes it not,
should be thought to come short of believing all that, which it is necessary to
salvation to believe, seems to me utterly unreasonable. For, the Parable
representing unto us Dives and Lazarus, conferring together at that distance;
what reason can there be, why this victory might not be declared at the same
distance? Or, why the soul of Christ should move to do that, which might be
done at that distance; Least of all, why it should be necessary to salvation,
to believe that, which, there is no reason why it should be necessary to be
done. It is true, our Lord entered into possession of his conquest, when he
raised the bodies of those Saints, which, upon his resurrection, appeared in
Jerusalem. For that was to say, that their bodies, as well as their souls,
were, from henceforth, free from the dominion which sin gave death over
mankind. But, seeing their souls, as we have seen, were not to change their
abode till the general r^surrection; and seeing, therefore, that the soul of
Christ was not to go to take them from the verge of Hell, for the mark and
exercise of his triumph; I do not see why it should go into the nethermost
Hell, the place of the damned, to declare his victory, and to exercise his
triumph, and nothing else.

Now, having proved, that the souls of the Fathers, were not removed from the
Verge of Hell to heaven, by the descent of Christ's soul, at such time as, the
passage from the Law to the Gospel might seem to make such a change
reasonable; I shall be very difficult to be persuaded, that any souls of
Christians, who depart in the state of grace, are sent to the Verge of Hell, by
the name of Purgatory, there to remain, till, having paid the debt of
temporal punishment, reserved at the restoring of them to the state of Grace,
they are, by the prayers of their friends here, dismissed to heaven and
happiness. Every man knows, that this opinion is chiefly built upon the words
of Saint Paul 1 Cor. III. 12-15. If any man build upon this foundation gold,
silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; Every man's work shall be made
manifest: For, the day shall show it, for, it is revealed with fire, and the
fire shall try what every man's work is. If any man's work remain, which he has
built upon (this foundation of Christ) he shall receive the reward. If a man's
work be burnt up, he shall suffer loss, yet himself shall be saved, but so as
through fire. But, who shall consider these words, without prejudice, seeing he
finds them very difficult, shall find it impossible to build an article of
faith upon them. And, finding the issue of them to be at the general day of
judgment, shall find, that removing of souls out of Purgatory (upon which all
the consequence thereof depends) utterly inconsistent with the same. For, the
day whereof S. Paul here speaks, can be no other then the day of judgment;
because, had it been any day of inferior note, it must have been described by
some further mark, which that day needs not. I know two opinions, that will
not have that day to signify the day of judgment. Saint Augustine thinks that
it may signify any day of trial; For, the fire, is the means of that trial:
And, tribulation being that trial, the day will be the day of tribulation.
Grotius thinks the day to be the judgment of the Church here, whereby, that
which men build upon the foundation of Christ shall be tried, whether it be
gold, silver, precious stones, according to the foundation; or wood, hay,
stubble, no way suitable to it. For that which agrees not with the foundation,
there is no reason why it may not be lost, and yet he that laid it upon the
foundation be saved, though not by that fire, yet, through that fire that
tries. What pretense is here left for the purging of souls by that fire,
whereby they are tried? If the trial be at the general judgment; to bring
souls out of Purgatory then, what thanks can it deserve? And, of the general
judgment S. Paul must needs speak, because there is no other trial that is
certain. Affliction may try, and the Church may try, but it may also not try.
S. Paul speaks of a trial that must be not that may be. I confess this is
avoided by saying, that Saint Paul here prophesies of a judgment of God to
come upon those who adulterated the Gospel at Corinth, of whom he speaks;
For, that judgment which S. Paul foretells must certainly come to pass.
But, S. Paul when he says the day shall show it; speaks not of a day, which,
hereby he declares that it shall come: But of a day, which otherwise they
acknowledge was to come. Namely, by our common Christianity, whereof, the day
of judgment is a part. And, whatsoever judgment Saint Paul foretells to
come upon them, seeing the judgments of this world do not use to make every
man's work manifest; neither can it be said, that he whose work remains, shall
receive his reward, he whose work is burnt up, though he suffer loss, shall
escape, as through fire; Speaking of such a trial, as, by the ordinary course
of providence, manifests not all men's works, but some. Besides, when S. Paul
says, the day is revealed, he speaks of a day, which, in the mean time, is
concealed, when it shall be, though already revealed that it shall be. And
what day is that but the day of judgment? Or what fire did they expect that
day to be revealed with, but that fire which our Lord shall come to judgment
with? Now the fire of Gods vengeance, which the last day shall come with, why
should it not try as well as punish? This is indeed, in my understanding, all
that possibly can remain questionable, in the sense of those words, the rest
seems clear beyond dispute. The fire of the last day is a bodily fire, which
shall burn up the world, or purify it, to that constitution which shall remain
for the future. But what is that to the trying of their works? Saint Paul's
words require it not. The day tries, the fire consumes the works, and so
leaves the men purged by suffering that loss* So, men's works being tried by
that great day, if it, the fire of it, cleanse their bodies by sensible
torments, (for, that which we speak of* comes to pass after the restoring of
bodies,) then it is plain how the man escapes through fire, whose works are
consumed by the fire, which punishes the man by whom they are done. If this
fire cannot be properly understood to try what every man's work is, it will be
nothing unproper to understand the judgment of God to be the fire which
examines men's works; by which examination, they which have built hay and
stubble, upon the foundation of Christ, shall loose what they have built, and
yet themselves escape through that fire of conflagration, which shall involve
those that hold not the foundation, with their works.

The other text of S. Paul is more obscure then this, and yet, being brought to
prove this purpose, cannot here be balked. 1 Cor. XV. 29. What shall become of
those that are baptized for the dead? why are they then baptized for the dead?
The Commentaries upon Saint Paul's Epistles, that go under Saint Ambrose his
name, tell us plainly, that there were some then, who, if a man were prevented
of Baptism by death, baptized another for him, for fear he should either not
rise at all, or not well. And this he says, Saint Paul hereby allows not,
only argues, that this supposes the resurrection. And truly I showed you
before, that, according to Epiphanius, the Cerinthians did indeed, at that
time, baptize another for any that was dead in that case, having embraced
Christianity, but dying before he was come to be baptized. Of the Marcionites
S. Chrysostom upon the place, and Tertulliane, de resurrectione mortuorum
XLVIII. and contra Marc. V. 10. do witness the same. Whereupon it need not be
said, that the Marcionites were not in Saint Paul's time^ because they derived
their customs from the Gnostics that were. Nor can I allow Saint Chrysostom,
that (...), can signify here, (...); upon condition of rising agine from the
dead; as being baptized upon condition of that which the Gospel promises. I
grant, (...) may signify, (...). But that (...) should signify (...), no
example justifyeth. Nor does Saint Chrysostom cure it by expounding (...), to
signify, (...). For if Christians may be said to be baptized (...), as, for the
recovering of their bodies from death; they cannot therefore be said to be
baptized (...), because their bodies are alive. And diverse Copies, in the
second place, in stead of (...) read (...), or, (...). As you may see in the
readings of the Great Bible. And (...) will not serve to signify, (...): But
requires the sense which the Syriack renders, (...) in stead of the dead.

Now the objection is easily satisfied. For it may be demanded, why Saint Paul,
writing to Gods people, informs them not that this was not well done. For, he
writes to Gods people indeed, but, upon that which was done by those who
seduced Gods people: And therefore, need not stand to condemn that from whence
he argues, condemning all along, those who pretended to seduce Gods people.
This is the supposition upon which I must argue. False Christians baptized
others for those who, intending to be Christians, were prevented with death,
before they could be baptiz^d. That this was done in regard to the
resurrection, you need not believe the supposed S. Ambrose, it would not serve
Saint Paul, to prove the resurrection from that which they did, otherwise. That
the benefit which they might find at the resurrection by being baptized must be
expected to come by the prayers of the Church, which always prayed for
Christians, never for those that were not baptized; is that which is demanded
of them, who will never give any other pertinent reason, why others should be
baptized for those who were dead without Baptism. When it was found, that
Judas Maccabaeus his soldiers, that were slain in the battle* had committed
sacrilege, in turning to their own use things consecrated to the Idols; we
read that they betook themselves to prayer, and besought God, that the sin
committed might wholly be put out of remembrance. And that Judas made a
gathering throughout the Company, to the sum of M M. Drachmes of silver, and
sent it to Jerusalem, to offer a sin-offering, doing therein very well and
honestly, in that he was mindful of the resurrection. For, if he had not hoped
that they who were slain should rise again, it had been superfluous and vain
to pray for the dead. And also, in that he perceived, that there was great
favor laid up for those that died godly, it was an holy and good thought*
whereupupon he made reconciliation for the dead, that they might be delivered
from sin. This we read 2 Maccab. XII. 42, 43, 44, 45. The consequence whereof
may stand upon two presumptions. He that takes it not for Historical truth,
prefers his own emp^y fansy before all times and persons that have admitted
it. He that would have it pass for Gods word, must show the writer to have
been inspired by God, of which there remains no Tradition in the Church. What
should hinder the fact to be true? Does not the Law, which provideth no
sacrifice for sins unreconcilable by the Law, provide sacrifices for
sacrilege? Refer but the particular of the case to the determination of Gods
people, and the Elders which obliged it in every age, what is there in the
relation that agrees not with the Law? Did our Lord Christ or his Apostles, by
word or writing, ever blame any such practice? Thus far there is nothing to
render it either suspect for truth, or if true, contrary to the Law.

What have we in the New Testament, for it or against it? S. Paul 2 Timothy I. 16,
17, 18. God grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus; For he refreshed me many
times, and was not ashamed of my chain: But being in Rome, carefully sought
and found me. The Lord grant him to find mercy of the Lord in that day. For,
how many things he furnished me with at Ephesus, thou better know. Shall I
say that Onesiphorus was alive at Rome, when S Paul writ this, and that
therefore, he prays for his household apart, and himself apart? Let impartial
reason judge, whether Saint Paul would have prayed for him that was with him at
Rome alive, as one, who, coming to Rome, and not ashamed of his bonds, found
him out and refreshed him? Or whether he prays for him being dead, that he may
find mercy in that day; For his family only, that they may find mercy. But,
fall that how it may, he prays for that which could not befall him till the day
of judgment; and therefore, may be prayed for, on behalf of those who are not
come to the day of judgment, though dead. And therefore all those Scriptures,
which make the reward of the world to come to depend upon the trial of the day
of judgment, do prove that we are to pray for the issue of it, in behalf of
all, so long as it is coming. Besides Ephesians. IV. 30. John III. 2. Luke XXI. 18.
and 2 These. I. 6-9. quoted before. Saint Paul 1 Cor. I. 8. Who shall also
confirm you unto the end, that you may be blameless in the day of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Acts III. 19. Repent ye and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, when the time of refreshing shall come, from the presence of the
Lord. Phil. II. 16. That I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not
run in vain, nor labored in vain. 1 These. II. 19. For what is our hope, or
joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even ye, in the presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ, at his coming? 1 Pet. I. 5. Who are kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed at the last time. 1 Cor. V. 5. that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 2 Timothy IV. 8. Henceforth,
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous
Judge shall give me at that day. Luke XIV. 14. Thou shall be recompensed at the
resurrection of the just. For all which, there were no reason to be given, but
the mention of the day of judgment would be every where utterly impertinent,
if the reward were declared at the hour of death, and that judgment which
then passes. For how can that be expected, which is already enjoyed. You have
seen the souls of the Martyrs, that appear to Saint John before Gods Throne,
where none but Martyrs appear, as I have argued; bidden to expect the
con^ummation of their company, before the vengeance of God be exercised upon
their persecutors. Apoc. VI. 9, 10, 11. VII. 14 -- After this vengeance is
exercised, and they had reigned M. years with Christ, and the devil was loosed
again, and had brought Gog and Magog to fight against Gods Church, and they
had been destroyed, and the general judgment represented, Apoc. XX. the
Spirit returns to show Saint John the New Jerusalem, containing those that
see Gods face, and have his Name upon their foreheads, Apoc. XXI. XXII. 1-5.
Who have no need of the Sun, because God is their light, and shall reign for
everlasting. For, after all this again, The Spirit and the bride say come: And
let him that hears say come: And let him that thirsts come, and let who
will come, and take of the water of life for nothing. And, he that testifyeth
these things says; Indeed I come quickly, Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus. What
demands all this? That which seems not to be refused, admitting the
consequence of the Visions. That those souls, who appear before Gods Throne,
pray for the second coming of Christ, and the consummation of all things. The
renewing of their prayer Apoc. VI. after the representation of the general
judgment, Apoc. XX. inforceth it. The Saints, therefore in heaven still
desiring the second coming of Christ, is it marvel, if there remain
something to be prayed for on behalf of inferior ranks; having showed, that
those who were sealed and saved in Jewry are not described to appear in heaven
before Gods Throne? Whither we admit all that die in the state of Grace to be
with Christ, as well as S. Paul, and that in Paradise, taken for the third
heavens; Or, reserve, as well we may reserve so much privilege to an Apostle,
and a martyr, (according to that which I have showed you out of the Apocalypse)
as not to equal with him all that die in the state of Grace; Certain we are,
the estate of those that die in Gods grace admits a solicitous expectation of
the day of judgment, though assured of the issue of it. That is it which, so
many texts of Scripture alleged before, signify nothing if they signify it not.

What is it then, that reason, grounded upon the Scriptures requires?
Certainly, did our justification consist in the immediate imputation of Christ's
righteousness, revealed by that Faith, which, therefore justifies, no man
could die in the state of Grace, but be must be as pure as the Blessed Virgin;
and he that can digest such excessive assertions, may think strange, that any
difference should be made among them that dye in Grace. But I must and do
suppose that which I have proved, that the performance of that common
Christianity, the undertaking whereof justifies, makes as much difference
between the righteousness of several Christians, as must needs be found
between the Highest of Gods Saints, and the Lowest of those that escape the
second death. And therefore infer, that, the difference of their estates,
between death, and the general judgment, must needs be answereable; though,
from their death, they know, to whether lot they be deputed* as for their
particular judgment. And this will necessarily follow, supposing this world to
be the Race, and the next the Gole, according to the tenor of the Covenant of
Grace, which has been declared. For, supposing that he who keeps account of
his steps, and watches over his ways, may be ready for Gods call, and appear
before him without sin, having washed it away by the blood of Christ infused
in the tears of final repentance; Must we not of necessity suppose, that, they
who do not so (who are, evidently, the far greater part of Christians)
departing with the guilt and slain of such sin upon them, must needs appear
with it before God, notwithstanding the Covenant of Grace? Again, the ove of
this world, and of our selves, from whence such sin proceeds, and would
have proceeded, should men proceed to live; suppose it be such as drives not
Gods Spirit away, because incident to that humane ^railty which the Covenant of
Grace presupposes; how shall it be washed out of that soul after death, by
virtue of the Covenant of Grace, which has failed of the Covenant of Grace, in
not washing it away, being alive? It is therefore necessarily consequent upon
the premises, that Christian souls, which escape the second death, because
the love of God was alive in them to strive against sin, though not to clear
them of it, continue in that estate wherein they departed, till the general
judgment; As, for the love of God, or of the World, so for the joy, or remorse
which they have in them selves for it. That the purity of this joy, or the
mixture of it with remorse, be not merely the punishment of sin committed,
but the effect and consequence of the estate in which it departs, though the
sin which it committed in the Body be the means to constitute this estate.
That the departure thereof bring it to that anxiety, concerning the everlasting
judgment, which is proportionable to the love of the creature which it
departs with. That, being reposed in an estate and place of refreshment,
(which those secret receptacles and chambers of Esdras seem to signify) it
remain subject, as well to those clouds of sorrow and remorse, which the sense
of sin done, and the love of God, which has not conquered the love of the
Creature, produces, as to that light and refreshment, which the Spirit of God
may create. That the end of all this may be the trial of the day of judgment,
purging away all the dregs and dross of sin, and of the love of this world,
which may remain, in souls that depart, or are found then alive in the state
of Grace, by the fierceness and sharpness of that grief, which the trial of
the general judgment shall cause. It may be thought, that the fire wherewith
the day of the Lord is revealed, seizing their bodies which they shall have
resumed, by the pain which it breeds, purges away the love of the creature.
And it may be thought, that, the examination of the conscience, the conviction
of sin, the remorse and shame of so many disloyalties, the fear of the
Judge, and in fine, the strictness of the judgment is the fire which Saint
Paul says shall try every man's work; (as the fire which burns up the world
shall their bodies) and sever the dregs and dross of them, to the Devil and
his Angels, from whom they came, with the dregs and dross of the world, which,
divines say, shall be conveyed to Hell, as the ^inke of it. But, hereupon, the
Apostle, when he says; Ye are come to the spirits of just men made perfect.
Hebrews XII. 23. may be understood, that they are thus perfected; supposing him
to speak of the general judgment to come to pass then straight, as the
destruction of Jerusalem did, and, that therefore he says; Ye are come. But he
may be also understood to say, that they are perfected by Christianity, in
comparison of Judaisme, as our Lord says; Be ye perfect as your heavenly
Father is perfect: And as he says, that, the least in the kingdom of heaven
is greater then John the Baptist. Whereas, if we understand him to say; Ye are
come to the Spirits of just men perfected, between the departure and the day of
judgment, we make him to say that, which, is no where else either said or
intimated by the Scripture.

And that is it which distinguishes my opinion from the position of Purgatory,
or rather, the doctrine of the scriptures from the decree of the Councils of
Florence and Trent. For, will the present Church of Rome be content with such
an estate of souls, as no man can be helped out of? What were Purgatory worth,
if men were persuaded, that there is no means to translate their souls out of
the flames thereof into heaven, before the general judgment? Or, what were
Christianity the worse, if all were persuaded that those souls, which we
speak of all this while, need their friends prayers, to help them through this
middle estate, and especially, through the dreadful trial of the day of
judgment? Surely thus much the worse, that men must of necessity keep a better
account of their steps here, and take a better care to clear themselves of the
sins which they commit, that they may pass it with the more joy and
cherefullnesse. Well may they part with the dross and stubble of the immediate
imputation of Christ's merits and sufferings, (which they have built upon the
foundation of the remission of sins and everlasting life, in consideration of
the same, but upon condition of Christanity) upon these terms here, rather
then part with it at their charge, then, if perhaps they have not failed of the
foundation, by the means of it. And, upon these terms, I am not troubled at
the words of our Lord Mat. XII. 32. Who shall speak a word against the Son of
man, it shall be remitted him; But, who shall speak against the Holy Ghost, it
shall never be remitted him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.
For, as for mine own part, I find the force of the words well enough
satisfied, taking it only for, a fashion of speech, signifying only; that
that sin could by no means be pardoned, no not in the world to come; not
supposing that the world to come has means to pardon so great sins, as this
world has no means to do. I confess, according to my opinion, there is, in
some sort, pardon for sins in the other world, though, absolutely there is not;
because there is none, but in virtue of the covenant of Grace, the terms
whereof only take place in this world, though the effect thereof extend to the
world to come. For, after departure in the state of Grace, for a man to know,
that there is no more danger of failing of everlasting life, is absolutely
that, which the greatest Saints of this world could never attain to; Though
some effects of sin stick to those that are so assured between death and the
day of judgment; in respect to which, he who is absolutely said to be
pardoned, because in no danger of forfeiting it, may be said, so far not to be
pardoned, as the continuance of those effects imports. But, there is nothing in
my opinion to signify, that there is means of obtaining pardon for those sins
in the next world, which there is no means to obtain pardon for in this;
Which, this saying of our Lord, at the foot of the letter signifies. And
therefore I, for my part, can very well rest satisfied with this sense, taking
the enlarging of it, by mentioning the world to come, for an elegance which
common speech bears, and that of our Lord frequenteth. But, if any man think
I respect not the Fathers, that have expounded it to the sense which I refuse
not; the rule of faith being safe, let every man enjoy his opinion in it. Of
the figure (...), which Grotius observes in the words, in the world to come,
whereby, it shall not be for given him in the world to come, signifyes; He
shall be soundly punished for it in the world to come; let them who are capable
see him discourse learnedly in his Anotations upon this place.

As little am I troubled at that other text of the Gospel, Mat. V. 26. Luke
X^I. 58. Thou shall not come forth till thou have paid the utmost farthing.
For, I can easily grant, that the taking away of those effects of sin, which
remain in those that die in grace, according to my opinion, may be said to
come, by paying the utmost farthing. But, I need not grant, that he who says,
thou shall not come forth till thou have paid the utmost farthing, says; Thou
may come forth by paying the utmost farthing. For, the condition of paying
the utmost farthing will be unpossible, if we understand the prison to be the
Lake of the damned, which, the executioner mentioned before requires; In S. Luke
for a Preface to the Parable, Why do ye not judge what is right from your
souls; says our Lord; That is, why do ye not judge what ye are to do in the
matter of my Gospel, by that which you use to do in worldly matters? If you be
liable to an action, you find it best to compound it, before the judge give
sentence, and grant execution upon it. For, then you must stand to the
extremity of the Law. The preaching of the gospel shows, that the Law o^ God
has an Action against you, which you may take up, by becoming Christians, and
yet you will not do it. In S. Matthew, it follows upon the precept of being
reconciled to a man's brother; which shows, that God accepts not that sacrifice
which is not offered in charity. But, it cannot signify less then in S. Luke;
That our Lord, upon that occasion, puts all in mind to be reconciled to God
because there is no redemption if he grant execution against us. This execution
then is, either upon refusing the terms of reconcilement, or, upon failing of
that which we undertake by accepting them; That is, not upon those failleures
which may consist with reconcilement, as those who would have these words to
signify Purgatory imagine; but which destroy it: And therefore the limitation,
till thou have paid the utmost farthing; signifies as Mat. I. 15. He knew her
not till she had brought fourth her first borne son; though he never knew her*
That is to say, his utmost farthing shall never be paid. My opinion would allow
me to accept of Tertullians and S. Cyprians sense of this text; who do indeed
acknowledge, the voiding of those effects of sin, which may remain upon those
that depart in the state of Grace, between death and the day of judgment, to
be the paying of this utmost farthing. But, I have showed you why it agrees not
with the intent of the words. And if it did, it were nothing to Purgatory,
because Tertullian expresses it to be paid, m^ra resurrectioni^, by the delay
of the resurrection, that is, not before the general judgment; whereby
Purgatory is quite spoiled: For, pretending the expinting of venial sin,
(which consists with reconcilement) together with satisfying the debt of
temporal punishment, reserved by God upon that sin which he remitteth, it
cannot be intended by him that gives warning of seeking reconcilement, not, of
voiding the penalties which may remain when it is obtained. Where you may see,
by survaying the scriptures which have been debated, that there is not the
least pretense in them for paying this debt, by enduring the flames of
Purgatory, for that sin which is forgiven before. But, that all satisfaction
ends in voiding the guilt of sin, by appeasing the wr^th of God for it before
we go hence. There be other texts, both of the old and New Testament, that
are usually alleged in this dispute. But because, rather for show then
substance I will rather presume that all reasonable men may see where the
consequence fails, then use so many words as it requires to show it. He shall
sit as a refiner that purifieth silver, and ^^all purifi^ the Sons of Levi, and
purge them as Gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
rightousnesse, says the Prophet Malachi III. 3. But manifestly speaking of the
first coming of Christ and trial which the Gospel passes them through, that
turn Christians upon mature advice. Whatsoever trial the second coming of
Christ may bring with it, correspondent to the first, it will be nothing to
Purgatory, the day of judgment determining it. As for thee also, by the blood
of thy covenant, I have sent forth the prisoners out of the pit where in was no
water; Says the Prophet Zachary IX. 11. speaking of the return, from the
Captivity of Babylon, and of the prince of Israel that should figure o^t our
Lord Christ, and rule from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the
earth. Whereby it appears that, the spiritual sense of this Prophesy, ending
^n the redemption of mankind by the death of Christ, and his Kingdom, by the
preaching of his Gospel, can by no means be extended to any delivering out of
Purgatory; and if it could, must not be intended to take place before the
second coming. Which intent would also appear groundless in this; Because I
have showed, that he did not deliver the souls of the Fathers out of the
Devils hands at his first coming, which this text is alleged to prove no less
then Purgatory. For, this will confine it to the delivery of mankind from sin,
by the death of our Lord Christ and his sufferings.

CHAP. XXVIII. Ancient opinions in the Church, of the place of souls before
the day of judgment. No Tradition that the Fathers were in the Verge of Hell,
under the Earth. The reason of the difference in the expressions of the Fathers
of the Church. What Tradition of the Church for the place of Christ's soul,
during his death, The Saints souls in secret mansions, according to the
Tradition of the Church. Prayer for the dead supposes the same. No Purgatory
according to the Tradition of the Church.
LEt us now consider the Tradition of the Church, in these particulars. Justin
the Martyr in his dispute with Trypho the Jew, by the example of Samuel,
proves, that the souls of the Fathers and Prophets were in the hands of the
Powers of darkness; And that, by the prayer of our Lord Psalm. XXII. 21. we
are taught to pray, at our departure, that God would not give us up to them: as
he, at his death, commends his soul into his Fathers hands. It ^s well enough
known that Clemens Alexandrinus believes, that both our Lord and his Apostles
went into Hell to deliver from thence such souls, as should admit that which he
came to preach. He followed in it, the Apocryphal vision, of Hermes, then in
request, where this is still found libro. III. similitud. III. and, what
followers he has in this opinion, you may see by the late Lord Primate his
answer to the Jesuits Challenge p. 274. S. Austine de Haer. LXXIX. after
Philastrius de Haer. LXXIV. counts this opinion in the list of Heresies; Yet
doubted not, that he did deliver thence, whom he found fit, Epist. XCIX. de
Genesis ad Lit. XII. 33, 34. Nor S. Jerome, that he did them good who were there,
though, how it can not be said, in Ephesians. IV. libro II. To the same purpose, in
IV. Dan. I. in III. Lament. II. That this opinion had great vogue in the Church
and must be counted in the number of Ecclesiastical positions, cannot be
denied. That it is, or ever was held, as of the Rule of Faith, it must. Marcion
was the first that placed the Fathers souls in Hell, that he might assign
heaven for the part of his Christ, and his God, as we learn by Tertullian IV.
3, 4. to wit, to entertain his disciples, For, this ingageth Tertullian to
oppose the Gulf, and the rich man's lifting up his eyes in Hell, for arguments,
that Abraham's bosom is no part of it, but higher then Hell, though not in
heaven, to refresh all believers, Abr. children, til the resurrection, for he
allows paradise, only to Martyrs, which he makes also the place under the
Al^ar. where S. John saw only Martyrs souls, (though else where Apolog. cap
XLVII. and in his Poem de Judicio cap. VIII. he assigns it to incertaine the
Saints souls, without any difference) alleging a revelation to Perpetua, a
Montanist Virgin, to that purpose, de Resurr. XLIII. And therefore, de Anima
LV. makes that, which he made before higher then hell, but not in heaven, a
part of hell where our Lord visited the Fathers souls; to wit, the upper part
of it, being all contained within the entrails of the earth. To the same
purpose* Iraeneus, V. 31. says it is manifest, that the souls of Christians
go into an invisible place (the English of (...)) assigned them by God, to
attend the resurrection in it; Because our Lord, being to undergo the lot of
mortals stayed till the third day, in the lower parts of the earth, where the
souls of the dead were. And, though he allege for this an Apocryphal passage,
which he takes to be Esayes III. 23. but Jeremies IV. 39. yet says it no more
but, that the Lord God of Israel remembered his dead, a sleep in the delve of
the Earth and went down to them to bring them the news of his saving health; Of
which preaching otherwise Irenaeus and Tertullian say nothing.

Here then, to show that there is no Tradition in the Church for Limbus Patrum,
you have in the opinion of Irenius and Tertullian, a state of coutent and joy
for all righteous souls, till the resurrection, though within the earth for
the place; Where our Savior was with them, during his death. But, it is still
more particularly described, in a fragment of a very ancient Christian, who is
called Josephus, but is thought to be Caius, that writ against the Montanists
in Tertullians time: The book is mentioned by Photius XLVIII. the fragment is
published by Heschelius, in his annotations there, And there is a copy of it in
the Library at Oxford, a transcript whereof I have to show, by the favor of
the late learned Doctor Langbane. The tenor of it is, that (...) is a place
under the Earth, where light comes not, and therefore dark, and assigned for
souls to be guarded by Angels, that distribute them their lots for a time. One
quarter of it is the lake of unquenchable fire, which the wicked shall be
thrown into at the last day, when the righteous shall receive the kingdom,
who, in the mean time, are in the same (...), but quartered a part. For, there
is one common descent, at the entrance whereof stands the Archangel, with his
host, distributing the souls that are conducted by their Angels, the
righteous, to the right hand, to be lighted and conducted with melody by the
good Angels to the company of the righteous, in a place of light and joy; The
wicked as prisoners, with violence and shame on the left, to, hard by the said
lake, hearing the boiling of it, and seeing the righteous in joy afar off, and
expecting, as the righteous better things, so they worse, at the day of
judgment, Set aside the limiting of the place to be under the earth, in what
description can the scriptures better agree, then in this? The verses of the
Sibyls libro. I. conducting the three sons of Noe to Acheron in the house of
(...), tell us, that there, they shall be honored, (...). Because they are the
off* spring of the blessed, happy men themselves, whom the Lord of Host, gave a
good mind, and conserred counsels with them, who shall be happy though they go
to (...), or Hell. And is not this a clear resolution of S. Austins doubt,
whether Abraham's bosom belong to Hell or to Paradise Epist. LVII. in Psalm.
XXXV. and whether inferi, or Hell, do ever signify a good place, in the
Scripture, as Abraham's bosom certainly does de Genesis ad lit. XII. 23, 34.
which he supposes to be resolved in the negative, Epist. XCIX. But finds no
absurdity in the affirmative de Civit. XX, 15. For, taking (...) only for a
place invsible, where the souls of good as well as bad are disposed of until
the day of judgment, in which the Scriptures and the Church both agree; If
inferi be the Latin of it every where, Inferi also must signify such a place.
But, taking it to signify a place under the Earth as it is true the word
Inferi signifies; who dare undertake, that either the scriptures have taught,
or, there is any tradition of the Church, that the souls of the righteous,
till the resurrection, are guarded under the Earth, though the authors hitherto
quoted have believed it; whose opinion, therefore, in that point, is no part of
the Tradition of the Church.

S. Austine, for certain, admits all but that, resolving, Euchirid. CIIX.
Tempus quod inter hominis mortem and ultimam resurrectionem interpositum est,
animas abditis receptaculis continet; sicut unaquaeque digna est, vel requie
vel aerumna* pro eo quod sortita est in carne dum viveret. The time that comes
between a man's death and the last resurrection guards souls in secret
receptacles, as every one is worthy of rest or sorrow, according to the Lot of
it whilst lived in the flesh, For, what are these secret receptacles, but the
invisible place which (...) signifies? Pope Pius I* in his letter to Justus
Bishop of Vicuna, (the ancientest that the latin Church has, that is
unquestionable) Presbyteri illi, qui, ab Apostolis educati, usque ad nos
pervenerunt, a domino vocati, in cubilibus aeternis clausi tenentur. The
ancients (says he) who, being bred by the Apostles* were come to our time,
being called by the Lord, are kept shut up in eternal bed-chambers; to wit,
until the last judgment. Novatianus, of S. Cyprians time in his book de
Trinitate I. Quae infra terram sunt, neque ipsa sunt digestis and ordinatis
potestatibus vacua: Locus enim est, quo, piorum impiorumque animae ducuntur,
futuri judicii praejudicia sentientes. Nor are the parts under the Earth void
of orderly disposed Powers. For, there is the place, to which the souls of the
Godly and the wicked are conducted, feeling the prejudice of the judgment
which is to come The same says Origin, all but the place, de Principiis IV. 2.
Qui de hocmundo secundum communem istam mortem recedunt, pro actibus suis and
meritis dispensantur, pr^ut digni fuerint judicati; Alii quidem in locum qui
dicitur Infernus, alii in sinum Abrahae, per diversas mansiones. Those that go
out of this world by this common death, are disposed of according to their
works, and deserts; some into the place called Hell* others into the bosom of
Abraham, according to several lodgings. So also in Number* XXI. hom. XXVI. S.
Hilary says the same in Psalm. II. and CXX. For thus he writes; Exeuntes de
corpore, ad introitum illum regni caelestis, per custodiam Domini fideles omnes
reservabuntur, in sinu scilicet Abrabae interim collocati, quo adire impios
interjectum chaos inhibet, quosque introcundi rursum in regnum coelorum tempus
adveniat. All the faithful* going out of the body, to the entrey of the
heavenly kingdom, shall be kept there under the Lords guard, as placed, for the
time, in Abraham's bosom, whether, the gulf interposed prohibits the wicked to
come, till the time of re entering the kingdom of heaven come again. And
therefore, the same he means, when he says in Psalmum CXXXVIII. that, the Law
of human necessity, which our Lord refused not, is this, that, the body being
buried, the soul go ad Inferos For in Psalmum II. he exemplifies in Dives and
Lazarus. And Lactantius VII. 21. Nec tamen quisquam putet, animas post mortem
protinus judicari. Omnes in una communique custodia detinentur, dones tempus
adveniat, quo maximus index meritorum faciat examen. Yet let no man think that
souls are judged straight after death. They are kept in one common guard, till
the time come for the Sovereign Judge to examine their deserts. He denies
them to be judged, whom Novatianus acknowledges to be prejudged, or
forejudged. He means our common guard, but intends not to deny the gulf which
it is parted with. S. Ambrose de Bono Mortis X. XI. says, that those lodgings,
which the Apocryphichall Esdras speaks of, are the many lodgings, which our
Lord says are in his fathers house John XIV. 2. and, speaking of the Gentiles;
Satis fuerat dixisse illis, quod liberatae animae a corporibus (...) peterent,
id est, locum qui non videtur, quem locum Latin infernum dicimus. It had been
enough for them to have said, that souls, freed from their bodies, go to
(...), that is, to a place not seen, which place we call hell in Latin.
Signifying that, according to Christianity, all souls, going to Esdras his
lodgings, may be said to go to (...), which the Latin makes to be under the
Earth; But whether Christianity so understand it or no, not expressing. Again,
Ergo, dum expectatur plenitudo temporis, expectant anims remunerationem debitam
Alias manet paena, alias gloria: Et tamen nec illae interim sine injuria, nec
istae sine fructu sunt. While therefore the fullness of time is expected,
souls also expect their own reward. Some punishment, some glory attendes; yet
neither they without hardship, nor these without benefit in the mean time.
Yet, as it follows, neither grieved with cares, neither vexed with the
remembrance of that which is past, as the wicked; but, foreseeing their rest
and glory to come, enjoy the quiet of their lodgings, under the guard of
Angels. If it be excepted, that there is; no mention of the Fathers souls. Let
it be considered, how many Church-writers have made the bosom of Abraham in
which Lazarus rested before our Lords death, a place of rest and refreshment
from death till the day of judgment. Their words you may find in the answer to
the Jesuits Challenge named before p. 260-267. Where, those expositions of the
Gospel which go under the name of Theophilus of Antiochia and Euthymius of
Lions write two opinions, the one placing it under the earth, the other above,
because the rich man lifted up his eyes; From whence, the second of those
dialogues against the Marcionists that go under Origens name, argues that it
is in heaven. So far is the ancient Church from being agreed, that those
storehouses, wherein, it is agreed, that all souls are kept till the general
judgment, are beneath the earth. And, though he was a Christian that writ the
Apocryphal book of Es^ras II. from whom S. Ambros and S. Austine receive their
storehouses of Souls; yet speaks it in the person of Esdras, concerning the
Fathers of the Old Testament. In the mean time, of the removing of them, by
the descent of Christ out of the Verge of Hell into heaven, not one word in all
this; which certainly may serve to evidence, that there never was nor is any
such Tradition in the Church

In fine, the descent of righteous souls in to hell, and the deliverance of
them from thence by the descent of our Lord Christ may be understood two
several ways; Either according to the literal sense, of the old Testament or
according ot the mystical sense of the New. For, it is manifest, that Adam was
condemned to labor the earth first, and then to return to the earth; And this,
being expulsed out of Paradise. The secret of Christianity consisting in this;
that our Lord Christ should restore the posterity of Adam, from those sorrows
which brought him to the earth, whence he was taken, to Paradise, whence he was
expulsed; was not to be revealed, though it was to take effect, in all, who, in
effect, though not in form, embraced and held the Covenant of Grace, during
the old Testament. The land of promise, and the blessings thereof, were then
the pledges of this hope. To leave them by death, was then, to acknowledge
themselves liable to the second death, which returning to the earth signified,
so long as their return to Paradise was not revealed; Though, to them which
understood what the Land of promise signified, it was to return into paradise.
The new testament succeeding to reveal the mystery of the old, must it not
needs seem strange, that the Fathers of the old Testament should behave
themselves toward death, as they who had not this hope? Supposing this reason
not then to be declared, it need not seem strange; not supposing the same, it
seems to call in question some thing of our common Christianity. The Gospel opens
the secret, representing Dives in Hell torments, Lazarus in Abraham's bosom? But,
our Lord Christ himself being brought down to the dust of the earth, to
deliver mankind from the second death, signified by the same; did our common
redemption require, that he should come any further under death, and them who
had the power of it, our common Faith might seem maimed in not believing it.
But, the work of redemption being accomplished upon the Cross, the effect of
it was to be tried, by the disposing of his soul. Which effect, whether those
that belonged to the new Testament under the Old understood by the scriptures
of the Law, they understood it as did the Devil, by their deliverance out of
his hands; For, the reason of their deliverance, he might not understand, till
the rising of Christ again taught it. When therefore, we see the souls of
Adam and his posterity assigned, by the Fathers of the Church, to the powers of
darkness; let us understand it to hold according to the Old Testament, and it
will comprehend also, the souls of the Fathers; Who belonged to the New
Testament. When we hear them describe them in the rest of Abraham's bosom,
according to that which our Lord reveals, let us understand the effect of the
New Testanent, in them that dyed under the Old. Without distinguishing thus, I
conceive, it will be impossible to reconcile the Fathers, to themselves and the
common faith. For, pressing that which they say on either side, you will not
fail to make them cross one an other, as well as the Scriptures. But, thus
distinguishing, the common faith will remain, that which Macrina, in Gregory
Nyssens dialogue de anima and resurrectione answers to the question, Where
(...) is; To wit, that the translation of the soul from this visible world, to
that which is not seen, is all that can be had, either from Hethen writers, or
from the Scriptures; There being nothing under the earth, but that which
answers this Hemispere? above the earth. Which clause is added, to meet with
one opinion of the Gentiles; that the lower hemispere is the place of souls,
and the torments of Hell (which they call Tartara) as much beneath it, as
heaven is above this. Only here it must be provided, that the gulf be not
forgotten, which our Lord fixes, between Abraham's bosom, and the place of
torments. Dionysius Eccles. Hierarch. Cap. II. seems to agree with Gregory
Nyssen^, and so do others, whom, unless you distinguish thus, you will not
find to speak things consequent to themselves.

And I am much confirmed in it, first, by the difference of opinions, among the
fathers, concerning Samuels soul; Which we as there be enough of them, that
cannot endure, to yield it to have been in the devils power, to raise; so are
they by that means obliged to maintain the rest of the Fathers souls, with
Samuels, to have gone into Abraham's bosom, with Lazarus. Secondly, by their
agreement in acknowledging, that Paradise, which was shut upon man for the
sin of Adam, is opened by the death of Christ, to receive the righteous. For
to conceive, that they understood this of that Paradise which Adam was
expulsed, would be to make them too childish. But, understanding it of that
estate which that Paradise signified, you have Saint Basil assigning Paradise
to Lazarus de Jejunio Hom. I. Besides another Homily entitled to Zeno Bishop of
Verona. Nay, you have expressly in Philo Carpathius upon Cant. VI. 2. My love is
gone into his garden: Or, his Paradise; Tunc enim Paradisum triumphator
ingressus est, cum ad inferos penetravit. Then did he enter Paradise in
triumph, when he pierced into hell: Making the beds of spices there to be the
souls of the Fathers, to whom our Lord conducted the good thief. And
Olympiodorus upon Cant. III. says, that some make Paradise under the earth,
and that there Dives saw Lazarus: Others in heaven; Whereas the letter of the
Scripture places it upon the earth. But howsoever, that the righteous are both
in joy and peace, and also in Paradise; Things not to be reconciled, not
distinguishing as I do. Lastly, the reason of Faith setleth me upon this
ground. The reason of Faith, I say, not the rule of Faith. For, I do not say
that any part of the dispute belongs to that, which the salvation of all
Christians necessarily requires them to believe. He who understands, that
himself is saved by embracing Christianity, and living according to it, I do
not understand why he should be damned, because he understood not by what
means the Fathers before Christ were saved; provided he deny not their
salvation, to the disparagement of Christianity, whereof they were the
forerunners. And this is the case of Hermes, and Justine, and Clemens, and if
there were any others, who thought, that the Fathers, or the Philosophers were
saved by believing in Christ, at his descent into hell; merely because they
understood not the ground of that difference, between the litterall and
mystical sense of the Old Testament, which I have said. Indeed, in regard it
is, by consequence, destructive to Christianity, that the Fathers should have
attained salvation any ways but as Christians; in that regard, I answer, the
position is, by consequence, prejudicial to Christianity. But because, by that
consequence, which the most censorious of the error do not own, and, not
owning, necessarily incur some other inconvenience to Christianity; I say not
that they destroy the common faith who hold it, but that they destroy the true
reason of it, which subsisteth not, unless we grant, that the Fathers obtained
salvation by Christ; Nor that, unless we grant, that they came not under the
Devils Power by death, who died qualified for salvation, as that time required.

There remains no question, what company the soul of Christ was with, for the
time that it remained parted from the body, nor how the descent thereof to Hell
is to be understood, supposing the premises. The Tradition of the descent of
Christ's soul into hell can by no means be parted from the Tradition of an
intent to visit the souls of the Fathers. That supposes, that the souls of
the Fathers were disposed of under the earth; (whether in the intrails of the
earth, or in the hemisphere below us, as the Heathen did imagine) And, infers,
that the intent of it was to redeem them out of the devils hands, to go with
our Lord Christ, into his kingdom. Could this be maintained to be the
Tradition of the Church, I might be straightened by the Tradition of the Church.
But, as I have showed it, to be, by consequence, prejudicial to the Faith; So,
I have showed, that there is no Tradition of the Church for the disposing of
all souls, before Christ, under the earth, whether in the devils hands, or
otherwise. Nor* for the translating of any soul from under the earth to
heaven, with Christ, and by Christ. But, for the continuance of all, in those
unknown lodgings, where they are disposed, at their death, till the day of
judgment, whether before or after Christ; Though the Latin has no name to
signify them, but inferi, or infernum, necessarily signifying, as to the
original of the word, the parts beneath the earth. There is therefore no
question to be made; as to the Tradition of the Church, that the soul of
Christ, parting with the body, went to the souls of the Fathers, which the
Gospel represents us in Abraham's bosom, (whether the death of Christ removing
the debt of sin, which shut Paradise upon Adam, make that place known to us, by
the name of Paradise, to which our Lord inducted the good thief; Or whether
the Jews had used that name, for the place, to which they believed the souls
of the righteous do go) But, there is therefore no Tradition remaining of the
descent of Christ's soul into hell, to rescue the souls of the Fathers out of
the Verge of Hell, (commonly called Limbus Patrum) to go with him into his
kingdom. True it is which Irenaeus says, and the Tradition of the Church will
justify it, that our Lord Christ was to undergo the condition of the dead, for
the redemption of mankind. And therefore, the separation of his humane soul
from the body was really the condition, in consideration whereof, we are freed
from the dominion of death. True it is, that this dominion of death is
signified in the Old Test. by the returning of Adam to the earth of which he
was made: And, that the grave is an earnest of the second death, in all those
that belong not to the N. Test. while the Old was in force. Therefore, that our
L. Christ was to undergo the condition common to mankind, to which the first
Adam was accursed, is a part of our common faith; Because the curse was to be
voided by his undergoing of it. Accordingly therefore, you shall find by the
answer to the Jesuits Challenge, Page 308-326. that the spoiling of Hell is
attributed, by the Fathers, to the rising of our Lord Christ from the grave,
whereby, the law of death was voided. Which if it be true, what Tradition can
there remain in the Church, that our Lord Christ's soul should harrow hell,
and ransacke it of the souls of the Fathers, there detained, or in the Verge
of it? Saint Basil de Sp. S. cap. 15. (...). How then do we go down to Hell
aright? Imitating the burial of Christ by Baptism. For the bodies of these
who are Baptized, are as it were buried in the water. Saint Chrysostom in 1 ad
Cor. Hom XL. (...). For, to be baptized, and first to sink, then come up
again, is an Emblem of going down into Hell and coming up again. And truly,
if the force of Christ's death in voiding the dominion of death stood by the
merit of his sufferings; Then was the descent of his flesh into the grave of
force to that effect, without any descent further of his soul into the lower
parts thereof. And, if the death of Christ, and his continuing in death for the
time that God had appointed, was declared by God, to be accepted by him to that
effect; then was his rising from death, his triumph over hell and death;
whereby, the title of his rising again being declared, it must needs appear,
that neither death nor hell, nor the devil, has any more interest in
Christians.

Nor is it so strange, that the descent of Christ into hell should be mentioned
by the Apostles Creed, after his burial, if it signify not the descent of his
soul; as it would be, that it should be left out of other Creeds, if it did
signify, that it is necessary to the salvation of all so to believe. For,
neither is it expressed in the Creed of Nicaea or Constantinople, nor was it
found in that which the Church of Rome, or that which the Churches of the East
used, says Ruffinus upon the Creed; who, notwithstanding, expounds it,
because the Church of Aquileia, which he belonged to, used it. Which, had the
signification of it been a distinct truth, necessary to the salvation of all to
be believed, the Churches could by no means have connived at one another, in
not delivering it. And truly, seeing the dominion of death (intimating the
second death, to which those who belong not to the New Testament are accursed)
is signified in the Old Testament, by going under the earth; The signification
of going down into Hell in the Creed, can by no means be thought superfluous,
though our Lord neither went thither to rescue the Fathers souls, nor to
triumph over the Powers of darkness. For as thereby the common curse, from
whence we are redeemed, so is also the reason and means of our deliverance
from it intimated. And seeing there is appearance, from that which has been
said, that the devil himself did not understand the secret of Gods intent, to
dissolve his interest in mankind by the death of Christ, until it appeared, by
what right our Lord resumed his body, which he had Laid down; this being
declared in the other world, by his rising again, and, in sign thereof, the
souls of the saints that slept rising again with him, and resuming their
bodies; there is no reason, why the mention of his resurrection, following
immediately upon the descent into Hell, in the Creed, should not sufficiently
express that triumph, which this declaration imports. Which triumph being
effected by the Godhead, though in his flesh, it will be no marvel to meet
with some sayings of the Fathers, that ascribe it to his Godhead. Now, the
common doctrine of the School makes it no matter of Faith, to believe the
descent of Christ's soul into that Hell, where the damned were; but only to
the Verge of it, where the souls of the Fathers were. It is enough, with them,
that the effect of this Power reached to the place of the damned. Cardinal
Bellarmine, when he published his controversies, held it probable, that the
soul of Christ descended to the place of the damned; But, upon better
consideration, in the review of them, thinks, that the other opinion of Thomas,
and the rest of the School, is to be followed. And yet it is not possible to
distinguish between this Verge, and the lowest hell, by any Tradition of the
Church. Nay, Durandus goes so far out of their rode, as to maintain, that
the soul of Christ went not to hell, (that is to Lymbus) but only by the
effect of it, in making the souls of the Fathers happy; Which is, in my
opinion, declaring to them the reason of their happiness. And the opinion of
Suarez the Jesuit is, remarkable; That, taking an Article of Faith for a truth
necessary for the salvation of all Christians to be known, the descent of
Christ into hell is no Article of Faith. For, that is not very necessary for
single Christians to know. And, for that cause perhaps, it is not in the Nicene
Creed, which whosoever believes, believes enough to save him. And that perhaps for
this cause, some Fathers, expounding the Creed to the People, make no mention
of it; In III. Disput. XLIII. Sect. II. and IV. I may add, for the advantage
of my opinion; That, if it be not necessary for single Christians to believe,
much less is it necessary for the Church, as a body, to believe it. For, those
things which the Church believes as a body, it imposes, to be believed, upon
them who are of the body. But it cannot be reasonable, for the Church as a
body, to impose upon the members thereof, the belief of that, which, it is not
necessary to their salvation, as single Christians, to believe. And therefore,
allowing the conscientiousnesse of S. Augustine, who, having presumed, that he
who believes not the descent is no Christian, doubts not that, by the descent,
as many were delivered, as Gods secter justice thought fit. Epist. XCIX. And of
Saint Jerome in Ephesians. II. allowing some work of God to be managed by it, which
we understand no more then, what good our Lords death did the good Angels; I
allow also the reservedness of those of the Confession of Auspurg, or of
Suisse, who, acknowledging the literal sense of this Article, find not
themselves bound to maintain, for what reason it was: I am not offended with
those in the Church of England, that assign the triumph of our Lord for the
reason of it. But believing with Saint Gregory Nyssene, in Pascha and
Resurrect. Christi and Epist. ad Eustath. that our Lord, by the descent of his
body into the grave, abolished him that had the power of death, by his soul
made way for the thief into Paradise, where it self was; count this enough for
the salvation of all Christians to be believed: And therefore, that the Church
cannot impose upon them, as the necessary means of their salvation, to believe
any more.

I do not intend to say much more then I said before, to show you, that the
ancient Church, from the beginning, held the happiness of the Saints souls to
continue imperfect, till the resurrection of their bodies. Gennadius de dogmat.
Eccles. LXXVIII. LXXIX. will have us to take it for the doctrine of the Church,
that, the souls of the Fathers before Christ were in hell ti^l they were
delivered thence by Christ. That since Christ, they go straight to Christ,
expecting the resurrection of their bodies, that with them they may attain
entire happiness. And, that this doctrine had, for some time, great vogue in
the Church, I deny not; Nor intend to deny, that the Saints are with Christ,
some whereof the Apocalypse represents before the Throne; But, that there is no
Tradition for the translating of the Fathers souls, and, that the saints are in
Abraham's bosom (or Paradise with them) till the resurrection, I conceive I have
showed, by clearing the sayings of the most ancient Christians from the
misprisions which they are entangled with. He that shall consider the premises
may find Tertul. Lactant. and Victorinus, (whom Cardinal Bellar. acknowledges
to detain all souls in their storehouses, till the resurrection, De S. Beat.
I. 5.) good company among the rest of the Fathers. And therefore I will refer
it to the reader, to judge between that exposition that he fits the passages of
the Fathers with, which he produces, and that which my opinion requires.
Especially, having Doctor Stapleton, Defens. Ecclesiast. Authorit. ^. 2. to
confess, with others of that side, that all the ancients, in a manner, do hold
the contrary, of that which is since defined by the Councile of Florence. Saint
Bernard, I must not omit, because it is he, who, considering the text of the
Apocalypse, which, you may, see by the premises, says more then all the
Scripture besides; has so pertinently observed out of it, that they are but in
the Court as yet, but, at the consummation of their bliss, shall enter into
Gods house. Therefore he makes three states of the soul; The first, in tents,
the second in the Courts, the third, in Gods house; into which, neither the
Saints shall enter without the common people of the Church, nor their souls
without their bodies. De omnibus Sanctis, Sermon III. And Sermon. IV. the Saints,
which, now see only the manhood of Christ under the altar, he says, shall be
lifted upon the altar to see the essence of God. The School, since his time,
upon occasion of the contest with the Greek Church, believing with Saint
Bernard; has stated the dispute upon this term of seeing God; And John XXII.
Pope is questioned, whether, intending to determine with Saint Bernard, he held
heresy heretically, or not. For, his successor Bennet XII. first, and after him
the Councile of Florence has decreed that for matter of Faith, which, before
the decree was not matter of Faith; And therefore, if that be true which I said
in the first book, can never become matter of Faith. For my part, I see Saint
Augustine de cura pro mortuis cap. IX. resolve the question, how the dead can
know what is done here, three ways: By the report of those who go hence, and,
by the will of God, remember what is done here; by the ministry of Angels,
and, by the revelation of Gods Spirit. And if Saint John, being in the Spirit,
saw by vision of Prophesy, God sitting upon his throne in heaven, as well as
the Elders and Martyrs souls did; I can easily grant, that those souls, which
should have such revelations of Gods Spirit, (whether by the ministry of
Angels, or without it) might see God upon his Throne, as Saint John and the
Prophets did, and and as the Elders and Martyrs are there described to do. But,
this would be no more that sight of God, in which Saint Paul and Saint John
seem to place the happiness of Gods kingdom; then that sight of God, which
Moses had, when he communed face to face with God before the Ark, was that
sight whereof God said to him, Thou shall not see my face. For no man shall see
my face and live. This for certain; S. Augustine, deriving the knowledge of our
matters which blessed souls may have, from the ministry of Angels, and
revelations of Gods Spirit, and perhaps from report from hence, was far
enough from owning Saint Gregory's consequence; Quae intus omnipotentis Dei
claritatem vident, nullo modo credendum est, quod foris sit aliquid quod
ignorent. Those who see, within, the brightness of Almighty God, it is not to
be thought that there is any thing, which they are ignorant of, without. Moral.
XII. 14. For, supposing the Saints see the essence of God, it follows not,
that, thereby, they see what is done here, because it is not the essence of
God, but his will, by which it may appear. So far it is from any appearance
of truth, that he who has recourse to souls that go hence, to the ministry
of Angels, to revelations of Gods Spirit, to inform the saints departed of that
which is done here, should believe them to have that sight of God, wherein the
happiness of his kingdom consists. In fine, by the Archbishop of Spalato,
de Rep. Ecclesi. VIII. 110-120. you shall find the opinion of Calvine, to be
the same I here maintain, though his followers, it seems, are afraid of the
evidence for it, or the consequence of it. Let us see whether justly or not*

It has been a custom so general in the church to pray for the dead, that no
beginning of it can be assigned, no time, no part of the Chapter where it was not
used. And, though the rejecting of it makes not Aerius an Heretic, as
disbelieving any part of the faith, yet, had he broke from the Chapter upon no
other cause but that, which the whole Church besides him owned, he must, as a
Schismatic, have come into Epiphanius his lift of Heresies intending to
comprise all parties severed from the Church. All that I have known pretended,
is that which the learned Blondel, in a French work, of the Sibyls verses, has
conjectured; that it had the beg^nning from that book. Which book, as diverse
before him have showed reason, why it should be thought the work of a
Christian, intending to advance Cristianity by such means; So I confess, I
can not see whence it should come, more probably, then from Montanus, or some
of his fellow Prophets, as he conjectureth For, though he has failed of his
usual diligence, in clearing the difficulties, which the account of time
raises, how Justine Martyrs Apology and Hermes his Pastor, should borrow from
Montanus; yet do I not see why Montanus might not begin to declare himself by
it, before the date of them. But neither does my business require, or my
model allow me to debate it. For, supposing Justine Martyr, or Clemens, or
Tertullian, or Lactantius, or many more particular writers were induced to
allege it, as for the advant^ge of the common Christianity; He that sees not,
how much more it were, to induce particular Churches, and by consent of them,
the whole seems to me to renounce the advice of common reason, for love of his
own voluntary prejudice. Can it be imagined, that the Sibyls verses, coming
from an author of doubtful credit, could persuade the whole Church, to take up
a custom of praying for the dead, because they have persuaded diverse writers,
to alledg them in favor of Christianity? Why could not then Montanus persuade
it to embrace the pretense of his Prophesies? Why? But, because it was more to
give Law to such a B^dy, then to surprise a few Scholars. And yet, could all
this be overseen, would not that serve the turn. The opinion of Justine, that
our Lord by his prayers Psalm XXII. 21. and by commending his soul to God, on
the Cross, teaches us to pray, that our souls may not fall into the hands of
those spirit, which had the fathers souls in their power; is the mold in
which, some prayers in the Church of Rome, for the dead, are framed. Suppose
this, not granting it. This is not the doctrine of the Sibyls verses. For, they
place the sons of Noae, in bliss, not in the devils hands, though under the
earth; as I showed you. Neither could the reign of Christ upon earth, for a
thousand years, come from the Sibyls verses, how many soever were transported
with the conceit of it. For, though Montanus be found as ancient as Justine, he
will never be found so ancient as Papias, who preached it. As for the
quartering of righteous souls under the earth, and in Paradise; I have showed
you how both are true, according to the dispensation of the old and of the new
Testament. If the simplicity of the primitive Ch^istians, speak some times
according to the one, sometimes according to the other, as following the
language and style of the Scriptures; It is not because they followed any
Montanist, as a disciple of Montanus, whom the Church disowned. It must be,
because they knew him not to be Montanus, or any disciple of Montanus; And,
they knew him not by these parculars, because others before and after him, had
committed the same mistakes (for, supposing they understood not the secret
which I spoke of, in the Scriptures, they were indeed mistakes) and were not by
the Church disowned for it

But, what is it that I apeale to, in the prayers of the Church for the dead?
That they are made for the Patriarchs and prophets, for the Apostles and
Martyrs, even for the Blessed Virgin, as well as for all the departed in the
communion of the Church. The words of the ancient Liturgies, I remit you the
answer quoted before, to see p. 185. Be this, in regard to the resurrection, and
the day of judgment, so it be in regard to their resurection and judgment, so
that the benefit which they receive by it, not which their bodies receive by
it, (which were not prayed for) be acknowledged. If that be acknowledged
considerable for the whole Church to pray for, in behalf of those; how much
more in behalf of all others* that were admitted to communion with the Church?
I acknowledge a scruple made in S. Austines time, to the assumption which I
su^pose; de verbis Apostoli Hom. XVII. Ide^que habet Ecclesiastica disciplina
quod fideles noverunt, cum Martyrs eo loco recitantur ad altar ^ei, ubi non
p^o ipsis ^retur, pro caeteris autem commemoratis desunctis oratu^; I^ju^ia est
enim pro Martyr orare, cujus nos debemus orationibus commendari. And therefore
the Church has that discipline which the faithful know; When the Martyrs a^e
reckoned at Gods altar, in that place, as not to pray for them, but for others
departed, who are reckoned. For, it is an injury to pray for a Martyr, by who^e
prayers we a^e to be commended. Thus, S. Austine whereas S. Cyp^ian, in his
time, made no question of offering for Martyrs, Epistle XXXIV. The same S.
Austine, Enchir. cap. CX. Cum sacrificia* sive altaris sive quarumcunque
eleemosynarum, pro baptizatis defunctis omnibus offeruntur Pro valde bonis
gratiarum actiones sunt, pro non valde malis propitiationes sunt pro valde
malis et si nulla sunt adjumenta mortuorum, qualescunque vivorum consolationes
sunt. When sacrifices, either of the altar, or of whatsoever alms are offered
for all the dead after Baptism; for the very good, they are thank^givings for
the not very bad, propitiations, for the very bad, though no helps to the dead,
yet some kind of consolations to the living. Thus S. Aust. avoideth an
objection; How the same prayer should be a petition for some, for others a
thanksgiving. For, the custom being that, the St. departed, were rehearsed in
one place of the Service, others in an other place; he takes it to be the
intent of the Church, to give thanks for Saints and Martyrs, to pray for
others. The form then used in Africa we have not; neither can say, why this
construction may not stand with it. For, the very Latin Mass at this day is
capable of it, where you have first; Mement^ Domine famulorum famularumque
tuarum N. et omnium circumstantium, pro quibus tibi off^rimus, vel qui tibi
offerunt hoc sacrificium lauds communicantes and memoriam venerantes inprimis
gloriosae semper Virginis Mariae. Remember Lord thy servants, such and such,
and all here present, for whom we offer unto thee, or, who offer th^e this
sacrfice of praise, communicating* in, and reverencing first the memory of the
glorious ever Virgin Mary. So proceeding to the rest. Whereby, the w^y, it is
manifest, he that made this, read in S. Paul Romans XII. 13. (...) communicating
in the memories of the Saints; as S. Ambrose and other Fathers did: Not, as now
we read, (...), the necessities. But, after the consideration, Memmento domine
famulorum samularumque tuarum, qui no^ p^aecesserunt cum signo fidei, and
dormiunt in somno pacis, N^^psis dom^ne, and omnibus in Christo quiescentibus
locum, refrigerii lucis and paci^, ut indulgeas deprecamur. Remember Lord thy
servants such and such, that are gone before, with the badge of faith, and
sleep in the rest of peace. We pray thee lord grant them, and all that rest in
christ, a place of refreshment rest and peace. This then shows, that there was
some ground, in the manner and form of praying for the dead in the Affrican
Church, for S. Austines construction; That the intent of the Church was not to
pray for Saints and Martyrs at all. Which notwithstanding, it is evident, by
the forms, which I alleged before, that the intent of the Church, was to pray
for them. What account Gennadius his position would give for this difference,
and for the prayers then used for the dead; I understand not; Supposing it to
extend the name of St. to all that die in the state of Grace, and to intend that
all such, si^ce Christ, go to Christ, and are with Christ; before Christ, under
the earth* But, according to S. Austin, and those that dispose of them till the
day of judgment in secret sto^e-houses, signified by the name of (...), or,
the invisible place of the dead; (against which opinion, I maintain, there is
no Tradition in the Church) the reason is plain, from the d^fference of those
lodgings, according to the difference of the qualities in which men depart,
though all in the state of Grace. Take but the Court of the Temple in heaven,
which S. Io^n saw in the vision of Prophesy, for one of those secret store
houses, in which the Saints souls are bestowed, til the day of judgment, and
the scripture remains reconciled to it self, and to the primitive and
general practice of the Church. Tertullian mistook a little, when he affi^med,
that only Martyrs souls appear there. For, the XXIV. Elders sit as judges
with God, according as our Lord promises that his disciples shall do, when he
comes to judgment. But, if they and S. John saw both the same Thorn, S. Paul
may be with Christ, as one of them, and S. ^ohn may say, that, when Christ
appears, or, when it appears what we shall be, we shall see God as he is;
that ^is, not a^o^e. And so the reason is plain why the Church prayed for all,
because it has some thing to pray for on the behalf of all; To wit, that
which the Martyrs in the Revelation pray for; the vengeance of God, upon the
enemies of the Church, and the second coming of Christ, upon which their own
consummation depends. What account Innocent III. Pope gives for the change of a
prayer that had been used for the soul of Pope Leo, and how the Divines of the
Church of Rome are in^angled about it, you may see in the place alleged, page
197. But, neither had the change, nor the account for it, needed, had it been
considered and admitted, that the resurrection shall be a benefit even to the
souls of saints and Martyrs, supposing, that in that estate there remains
nothing else to desire for them. And this Epiphanins also alleges against
Aerius; that to make a difference between our Lord Christ, and the Saints, we
pray for them. Not that Chr^st^ans need to be taught, a difference between
Christ and his Saints; But because the difference between the state of our Lord
Christ having resumed his body, carried it into heaven, in perfect happiness,
and the Saints departed, who^e happiness is not complete till they r^sume
their bodies in the whole ground of those prayers, in reference to Saints and
Martyrs. And the same is signified by Epiphanius, when he says we pray for
the dead, (...) as yet in travail: And perhaps also when he says; (...); to
signify that which is more complete.

But, shall there be therefore no difference, between the storehouses in which
the Apostles and Martyrs, and those in which all that depart in the state of
grace are l^dged? Is their intertainment the same, because there all rest till
the day of judgment. The Martyrs souls in the Apocalypse, praying for Gods
vengeance upon the persecutors of his Church, thereby pray for their own
accomplishment. And therefore the spirit of the Bride says, come; Even the
spouse of the Lamb, the new Jerusalem, which S. John saw come down from heaven
dressed like a bride for her husband Apoc. XX^. 2. To wit, with fine linen that
shines, which is the righteous deeds of the saints Apoc. XIX. 8. This bride
still prays for the coming of her spouse. But, I have showed you the Lamb
upon mount Sion with the hundredth forty four thousand that h^d the Fathers
name marked upon their foreheades, which sing not the song of triumph which the
Martyrs sing to their harps, but understand it, and they only Apoc. XIV. 1, 2,
3, And therefore I have showed you an other storehouse for souls of a lower
rank, yet with the Lamb. And S. Austins doubt, supposes no doubt of praying
for those, whom the Church accounted not of, as it did of Martyrs. And
therefore, If there be written Copies of the latin Mass in which the prayer
for refreshment rest and peace, to them that are fallen a sleep in Christ,
appears not, as it is alleged in that answer p. 196. it appears sufficiently
otherwise, that the church did pray to that effect, for those that were not
taken for Saints and Martyrs. Epiphaneus alleges, against Aerius, that,
because we sin all with our will or against our will, therefore the Church
prays for remission of their sins. And perhaps when he said (...) to signify
that which is more complete; he meant to distinguish the prayers which were
made for Saints, from those which were made for others. So the forms which you
have in the Apostles constitutions VIII, 4. and other Lythirgyes, so S. Cyril
Catech. V. Mystag, says that though the Church knit no Crowns, for sinners,
yet it offers for them Christ slain for our sins, to render God propitious.
And the supposed Dionysius though he mention no prayer for Saints who^e names
are then rehearsed before the consecration, Eccles. Hierarch. cap. III. yet,
speaking of burying the dead Cap. VII. he mentions prayer for the remission
of their sins. For, supposing no punishment inflicted upon any that departs
in the state of Grace; notwithstanding it is reason to suppose, that the soul
remains affected with comfort for the present, and a cheerful expectation
of her future account, or the contrary, according to the love of goodness
which she contracted here. Wherefore, if the Saints of God are visited, either
by the immediate operation of his spirit, or the ministry of Angels, whereby,
S. Austine conceives, they may learn what passes here; Is it strange that
ordinary Christians, departed in the state of Grace, but, imperfectly turned
from less sins, should need the influence of Gods spirit, or the visitation of
the Angels, to hold them up, in the desire of their accomplishments and in the
expectation of their trriall to come? Is there any thing prejudicial to the
faith in that of 2. Es. IV. 35. Did not the souls of the righteous ask
questions of these things in their chambers, saying; How long shall I hope on
this fashion? When comes the fruit of the floor of our reward. Is it not
agreeable to reason, and to faith, that they should be dissatisfied of their
present comfort, and of the terrible trial to come, after the rate of that
affection they had for the world, when they parted with it? And yet at rest
from the temptations of it* and secure of being defeated of ending in Gods
Grace; And yet not under any punishment inflicted by God, but only under the
consequence of that disposition which they leave the world with. I do alledg
here, as for the interest of this mine opinion, the example of S. Ambrose
praying for the Emperors Gratiane Valentinian, and Theodosius, and for his
brother Satyrus, as likewise Gregory Nazianzene for his brother Caesarius,
whom nevertheless they suppose to be in happiness. Their words you may see
there p. 188. To which, he that will take the pains may add all that Bl^ndel
has collected in his second book of the Sibyls Cap. XLI. of Epitaphes which
pray for them whom they describe in happiness. For, in short, where there is
hope, that the deceased is among Gods Saints, there is there doubt, on the
other side, that he may have need of light and peace and refreshment. And
therefore the supposed Dionysius, Eccl. Hierarch. Cap. VII. where he relates
the custom of praying for the remission of sins, in behalf of the dead,
relates the singing of psalms of thanksgiving at funerals. And, S. Austine
tells how Euodius begun the CI. Psalm. when his mother was dead; yet, in
consideration of the danger which every soul that dies is subject to, prays
for her, as he had commanded. Confess. IX. 12.

In fine, though custom made not the d^fference every where visible, between
Prayers for Saints and prayers for ordinary Christians; yet was the common
Faith of the Church a sufficient ground for both, whatsoever descant, private
construction might make upon the plainsong of it, Tertullian, expecting the
reign of Christians upon earth for a thousand years, and thinking those that
should rise first most advantaged, took the delay of rising again for paying
the utmost farthing, and to have part with them that rise first, fit to be
prayed for, for our friends that are dead; de Amina Cap. LVIII. de Monog. Cap.
X. But this the Church is not chargeable with. That there was a conceit among
some licentious Christians, that the pains of the damned might either cease or
be abated by the prayers of the living, you shall find by the answer so often
quoted p. 226* 232. and that All Souls day had the beginning from such a
conceit. But, though men openly wicked may dye in communion with the Church,
yet, the Church supposes no man damned that dies in communion with the Church;
and therefore, the Church is not chargeable with prayers for the damned. It is
a known rule of the Church, that the offerings of those that dyed not in
communion with the Church should not be received; that the offerings of those
that dye in communion with the Church could not be refused. That this Rule is
more ancient then the Heresy of Marcion, and others before Marcion, that
baptized others for those that were dead, as you have seen, (that is, as
ancient as the Apostles) appears; Because, the reason why they baptized others
in their stead must be, because all those that were baptized were prayed for at
the Eucharist, and only those; as you see by S. Austine, and the Canon of the
Mass quoted just before. If then, men openly wicked dyed in communion with the
Church, it was because the Laws of the Church were not executed; which, had
they been executed, they should not have dyed in communion with the Church,
And, because this inexecution may be for the common good of the Church; it was
not offensive, that such were prayed for among other members of the Church.
For, there is possibility for the salvation of those, for whose salvation,
there is no presumption that is reasonable And there had been just offense for
the kindred and friends of such dead, had they been refused the common right of
all members of the Church. Therefore S. Austine says, though they that dye in
this case receive no help, yet, they that remain alive receive some comfort
and satisfaction, in the memory of their relations, being owned by the prayers
of the Church, for Christians. I will not here allege, that the Church of
England teaches to pray for the dead; where the Litanie prays for deliverance
in the hour of death and in the day of judgment: Or, when we pray after the
communion; that, by the merits and death of Christ, and through faith in his
blood, we and all the whole Church may obtain remission of our sins, and all
other benefits of his passion. But, it is manifest, that in the service
appointed in the time of Edward the VI. prayer is made for the dead, both
before the Communion, and at the Burial, to the same purpose as I maintain.
It is manifest also, that it was changed in Queen Elizabeth's time, to content
the Puritans, who, now it appears, could not be content with less then
breaking of the Church in pieces. And therefore, since unity has not been
obtained by parting with the Law of the Catholic Church, in mine opinion, for
the love of it, I continue the resolution to bound Reformation by the rule of
the Catholic Church. Allowing, that it may be matter of Reformation, to
restore the prayers which are made for the dead, to the original sense of the
whole Church; but maintayning that, to take away all prayer for the dead, is
not paring off abuses but cutting to the quick.

For, I must now add, that all this shows, the prayers of the Church of Rome
for the delivering of souls out of Purgatory pains, to have no ground in the
Tradition of the Church; there being no such place as Purgatory among those
storehouses, which are designed for those that depart in the state of Grace,
till the day of judgment; no pain appointed to make satisfaction for the debt
of temporal punishment, remaining when the sin is remitted; no translating of
souls so purged, from purgatory to heaven and the happiness of it. The delay
of the resurrection, may be a penalty, if you take into it, the consideration
of that estate in which the soul may be detayned, being such, as that
affection to the dross of the world, which it departs with, inforceth. But
what use is there of torment, when the race is done? When neither amendment of
the party on whom it is inflicted, nor of others that see the example, can be
expected; to make God torment them whom he is reconciled to, for the
satisfaction of his vindicative justice, is to make his vindicative justice
delight in the evil of his creature, when no reformation is to be expected by
it; Which, in the government of the world, is cruelty, not justice. If the law
allow an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; it could never stand with
Christianity, under the law, to take it, where it repaires not a man's loss;
though the magistrate was to give it, being required. Civil Law may allow
revenge, to satisfy passion; but the magistrate grants reparation, to satisfy
commutative justice, which, the party may demand for mere revenge. That there
is no ground for such punishment, in the tradition of the Church, I refer you
to the title of Purgatory in the answer to the Jesuits challenge, for evidence.
And it is indeed a thing, which the disputing of our controversies has made to
appear; That there was from the beginning, no question of any punishment, for
them that dye in Gods Grace; That S. Austine began to make some question of it,
upon some disputes which he met with. That S. Gregory first professed an
opinion of it, granted upon no scripture, no nor Tradition of faith, but upon
aparitions and revelations. That there is great appearance, that Venerable Bede, having received it from S. Gregorys Scholars, who planted Christianity
here, added much to it by his credulity in such matters. And yet, that they had
yet assigned no quarter in the Verge of Hell for this purpose, but only
believed it of certain souls, in some places of this earth; until the
School hammered out a debt of punishment, to which souls, acquitted both of the
guilt and stain of sin, may remain liable. The extending of indulgence to the
voyding of this, (how properly soever it may be counted purging of souls) made
the position a matter of great jelousy, for the interest of profit, which our
common Christianity abhors. And, indulgence indeed of Canonical penance, I
have showed, has the first ground in S. Paul's example, and necessary use in
the Church. But, when redeeming of penance was come into practice in the
Church, it was granted upon considerations with Christianity, and the safety of
poor souls allowed not; Of paying a rate, of taking the Cross against
Infidels, of modern Jubiles. But, that there should be a stock of merit in the
Church, upon account of works of supererogation done by the Saints, which
their own reward answers not; and that the Church, in granting indulgence
of penance, may allow it to his account that receives indulgence; is a
conceit, as injurious to the merits of Christ, (the consideration of all
pardon) and to the Covenant of Grace (the condition whereof it abateth) so,
that has no evidence from any rule or practice of the ancient Church. But,
that they should be thought to be of force to redeem souls out of Purgatory*
and that, taxing the time which they grant, and the like, for which neither
there is nor can be any ground; The best that is said, or can be said, in
defense of them who publish them to poor people, by whom they are frequented,
is; that they get themselves money, the account whereof, being alms, they
charge themselves with: And, that people are, by this means, employed in the
works of devotion, which, if not available to the effect which they imagine,
are how soever good for their souls health.

As for the translating of souls to heaven before the day of judgment, it is
so diametrally contrary to all antiquity, that the very naming of it takes away
all pretense for Traditon, on behalf of Purgatory. It is acknowledged indeed,
that a number of the ancient Fathers, during the flourishing times of the
Church, do believe, that the fire which the world is to be burnt up with, as
it shall involve the wicked, and carry them to be everlastingly tormented in the
sink of the world; so it shall touch and scorch even the Saints themselves, to
try if their works be such as Gods vengeance can take hold of, and to purge
away that dross which the love of the world they dyed with, imports. This is
by diverse called Origens Purgatory, because they conceive, his credit might
move S. Hilary, S. Basil S. Ambrose, Gregory Nyssene and Nazanizain S. Jerome
S. Austine and S. Chry. with diverse others to follow it. But Blondel, having
observed, that it is found in the Sibyles verses, will needs have them all to
have taken it up from thence. Which, as I have no reason to yield to, having
showed already, that the credit of that book was not the foundation of other
particular opinions, which had vogue in the Church; So do I not find those
famous Doctors so affected to Origin, (whose writings, concerning the
exposition of the scriptures, they were necessarily obliged to frequent) as to
admit an opinion so near concerning the faith upon this recommendation on whom
they declare so much jelousy, in matter of Faith. For my part, as I find it very
agreeable to the words of S. Paul, when he says, that they whose works are
burnt up shall escape themselves, but as through fire; So how men's works should
be tried, or burnt up by that fire; I find it not easy to be understood. And
therefore without taking upon me to censure so great persons, for innovating in
the Church, or to maintain that, in which there is no concurrence of any
Scripture with any consent of the whole Church, I leave the truth of this to
judgment, as secure, that it will not concern the common Faith. But this I say
peremptorily, that, admitting it, there remains no pretense for Purgatory in
the Tradition of the Church, unless it be by equivocation of words. For, this,
coming to pass at the day of judgment, admits no release before; And
without release before Purgatory fire goes quite out; No Indulgences, no
Jubilies, no stock of merit, to be dispensed by the Church, to such works of
devotion as it limiteth, can be any of any request, if they take not effect
before the day of judgment.

Take away the opinion of translating souls from the Verge of hell, which
Purgatory, to the sight of God, and the Clergy of the Church of Rome shall no
more eat the sins of the people, as the Prophet complains of the Priests under
the Law. For, while the people are persuaded, that their sins are cured by the
sentence of absolution once pronounced, Penance serving only to extinguish the
debt of temporal punishment remaining, and that to be ransomed by the services
which they pay for in the name of their friends which are dead, the Clergy live
by those sins of which the people die, because they are not duly cured. For, the
lusts for which men sin not being cured, by that hardship of Penance which the
case requires, to change attrition into contrition; the guilt of sin remains
upon the head of him in whose heart the love of sin remains alive,
notwithstanding the keys of the Church, mistaking in that case. Besides: take
away the opinion of translating souls from hell to heaven, since the coming of
Christ, and there will remain no ground for the translating of the Fathers
souls from the verge of hell, which is Limbus Patrum, to the sight of God, by
the descent of our Lord into hell, and his rising from the dead again. There
will be no cause, why that reason which I tender, for that vanity of
immaginations (rather then opinions or belief) in the Fathers, which that which
all agree in is entangled with, should not be admitted. For, the translating of
Christian souls from Purgatory to heaven not being believed, why should the
translating the Fathers souls remain? Why should not the simple Faith, in
which all Christians agree, revive, and take the place of Tradition in the
Church, which indeed it has; that between death and the day of judgment, the
good are in joy the bad in pain, both incomplete, till both be fulfilled,
after both shall have received their final doom?

CHAP. XXIX. The ground upon which Ceremonies are to be used in the service of
the Church; Instances out of the Scriptures and Tradition of the Apostles. Of
the equivocation of the word Sacrament, in the Fathers. The reason of a
Sacrament in Baptism and the Eucharist. In extreme Unction. In Marriage. In
Confirmation, Ordination, and Penance.
NOW, to come to the reason, for which Ceremonies are to be used in the public
service of God; I must here rest in that which I have rendered in my Book of the
service of God at the assemblies of the Church, being satisfied, that it
points at the very ground for the use of them, from the beginning, among Gods
people. Man is compounded of soul and body, and the worship of God, and prayer
to God, is an act of the soul, which the body, by the senses thereof, may
diverte the mind from, but cannot help forwards it, till by the motion and
gesture of the body, the soul be engaged to attend on that which the mind
proposes. Therefore the people of God, in the Scripture, pray always, either
standing or kneeling, unless some special cause move them to prostrate
themselves. That their ordinary posture was standing, appears by Mat. VI. 5.
Mark XI. 25. Luke XVIII. 11. Neh. IX. 5. Jerem. XV. 1. XVIII. 19. Job XXX. 20.
And they have reason, who derive the Stations of the primitive Christians, and
the use of not kneeling on Lords days, and, between Easter and Whitsontide,
from their custom. But therefore they kneeled in Lent, and 'Daniel kneeled
when he fasted, IX. 20. and Moses fell prostrate before God, Deuteronomy. IX. 18, 25.
but Esdras upon his knees Esd. IX. 5. X. 1. as Daniel also VII. 11. to what
purpose, but to cast down the mind by the posture of the body, that, being
sensible of his wants, a man may attend upon God with deep devotion and
reverence? The Publicane durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, Luke XVIII. 13.
which shows, that otherwise they did lift up their eyes, and spread their
hands to heaven, as Lam. III. 41. 1 Kings VIII. 54. 1 Timothy II. 8. But, the
Publicane smote upon his breast, because he exacted Penance of himself. He was
a fool for his pains, if that be Reformation which is pretended, to claim
familiarity with Almighty God, by talking with him negligently, to signify that
we are sure of him, having Faith that we are predestinate to life, as of the
number of those for whom Christ died, exclusively to the rest of mankind. Or,
if it be Reformation to sit and censure with how fit and pertinent conceptions,
in how proper and choice terms a man expresses his necessities, and the
necessities of his people, to God. But, praying to God is something else than
all this; and, not only the ancient people of God, but those who have no sense
of religion but that which nature forces them to, show us by their practice,
that lowliness of the body stirs as well as test^fieth reverence in the
mind to God in his service. All this holds, taking a man by himself as a
single Christian. But supposing the society of a Church, and an assembly of
Gods people for his service, there is more to be said. The people of God spoke
much by visible signs, not all by words. Jeremy might have said to them of
Jerusalem, take example by the Rechabites, who drink no wine upon the order of
their Patriarch; But that was not enough: He must bring them to the Temple,
and set wine before them, that, having formally refused it, he might thereupon
protest to his people. The same Jeremy might have told the Jews, as Saint Paul
does the Romans, that men are as clay in the Potters hands, without going down
to the Potters, and seeing him spoil a vessel that he was making, that he
might thereupon take his rise and say, that God was framing evil against them
whom he had made. Jer. XVIII. 1-5. without buying an earthen vessel, and
breaking it before the ancients of the People and of the Priests, to tell them,
that God would break them likewise; Jer. XIX. 1, 11, 12. when he makes all that
business on purpose, he shows, what force visible signs have to make
impression upon the mind, of that which words signify, nevertheless. The Law
would never have appointed to sit still on the Sabbath in remembrance of the
creation of the world, or the deliverance from Egypt; to carry a bundle of
branches in the hand, and to dwell in booths, in remembrance of the voyage
through the wilderness, otherwise. And, is not this reason fit to be applied
to the assemblies of Christians? Witness the Prophet Joel. Why must they weep
and mourn with their fasting? why must the children and sucklings assemble?
why must the joy of the bride chamber be superseded, but to make impression of
sorrow upon particulars, from that which the public expresses? Joel II.
13-16. The people of Niniveh, and the King thereof, put on sackcloth, and sat
in ashes, nor man, nor beast must taste food, or drink water, at the preaching
of Jonas III. 5. 6. 7. On the contrary, at the bringing of the Arc into the
City of David, Chron. XIII. 8. XV. 28. They have seen thy goings O God, even
the goings of my God, my King, into the sanctuary. The singers went before,
those that played on instruments followed, amongst them were the damsels
playing on timbrells. And the solemnity which the wall of Jerusalem was
dedicated with, you may read in Nehem. XII. 27-43.

The Festival of our Lords Resurrection presupposes the Fast of the Passion;
makes all the Lords days of the year festival, by renewing weekly that joy
which it solemnizeth. The Fast which goes before it. by the institution of the
Apostles, (agreeing in it, because not agreeing when it should end) in
Tertullians time was enlarged to those days, on which the Bridegroom was not
missing, but, by just use of the Churches Power, is enlarged to forty days.
Shall it be superstitious for the Church to profess solemn Penance and
mourning* for that time which gained the Ninivites that grace which the Gospel
tendereth the Gentiles, that repent according to their example? If it be
Reformation to abolish all ceremonies, let it be Reformation for Gods people to
understand any difference between an humiliation and a thanksgiving. Saint Paul
disputes hard, that the women of Corinth ought to be veiled, the men unvailed;
Not for any consideration of reverence to God, which the uncovering of the head
did not signify, in those times: But to signify the humility and modesty of the
sex; which, had he spoken of serving God in private, he need not have stood
upon, and therefore, in regard to the Church. Which if it be true, if
consideration ought to be had of the Church in celebrating the service of God
at the assemblies thereof, then it is requisite, that when the World is come
into the Church, and all assemble, those ceremonies should be used, which were
not requisite when the numbers were small; and the assemblies thereof thin.
That the Ministers of the Church should perform the service thereof in their
ordinary aparrel, when they ministered it in grottes and caves, to a few, I
marvel not, but count it reasonable; That when all assemble, wheat and
chafe, good fish and bad, all should be summoned to that apprehension of the
work in hand which our common Christianity inforceth, by the habit in which it
is ministered, it seems to me very unreasonable that any man should marvel.
Imposition of hands is necessarily, an act of authority. Booz may say to the
reapers, The Lord be with you; And they answer him; The Lord bless thee. Ruth
IV. 4. they may bless him as well as he them, And as the Priest says to the
people, the Lord be with you; so may they to him, and with thy Spirit; where
there is nothing but matter of common charity in band. But if Abraham pay
Melchisedeck Tithes, acknowledging his superiority. and Melchisedeck thereupon
bless Abraham, then the saying of the Apostle Heb. VII. 7. without question,
the less is blessed by the better; takes place. Of this kind is Jacobs
blessing his Nephews, by laying his hands on their heads, Moses his blessing of
Joshua, the Priests blessing of the people. The Israelites, laying hands on the
Levites, Numb. VIII. 10. seems rather to signify the charging of the sins of
the Congregation upon them, that by* them they might be expiated, according to
the Law. But our Lord lays hands on the little children whom he blesses, and
his Apostles lay hands on them whom they cure, Mark XVI. 18. as Naaman thought
that Elizeus would have laid hands on him, praying for him. So our Lord lifts
up his hands over his disciples to bless them, because he could not lay hands
on them all. The Apostles laying hands on the seven, Acts VI. 6. and the
imposing of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy IV. 14. signifies the
authority that inchargeth them with their office. And it is strange, that any
man pretending learning, can attribute the ordinations made by Paul and
Barnabas Acts XIV. 23. to the votes of the people, signified by holding up
their hands; The act of constituting them being expressly ascribed to Paul and
Barnabas; And therefore, by imposition of their hands, not by holding up the
peoples hands. Imposition of hands therefore, as it is used by the Church,
succeeding the Apostles in that use, signifies that authority which the Church
blesses, or prays for blessing, in behalf of those whom she presumes to be
qualified for the blessing, by so blessing, which she prays for at Gods hands.
I am not to forget the sign of the Cross, though a ceremony, which, I cannot
say the Church has either precept or precedent for in the Scripture; having,
prescribed that there is no presumption that it comes not from the Apostles,
because no mention of it in Scripture. Justine the Martyr mentioning the use of
it, Tertulliane and Saint Basil testifying that it was common to all
Christians, all times, all parts of the Church whereof there is remembrance,
using it; Choose whether you will have Saint Paul (when he says; In whom ye
were sealed by the holy spirit of promise; Ephesians. I. 13. and again, by whom ye
are sealed to the day of redemption, Ephesians. IV. 30.) to intimate that the holy
Ghost was given by Baptism, which was solemnized by signing with the sign of
the Cross; Or, that the Church took occasion, upon those words, to appoint
that Ceremony to be used in baptizing; it will nevertheless remain grounded,
that the use of it on all occasions, in all times, over all parts of the
Church, is to be ascribed to the Apostles. And certainly, there are many
occasions for a Christian to have recourse to God for his grace, upon
protestation of his Christianity, which is the condition upon which all grace
of God becomes due, when there is neither time nor opportunity to recollect his
mind unto a formal address by praying to God; All which this ceremony fitly
signifies. What then, if it be used by those, who bethink not themselves at
all of that Christianity, by which alone we may expect any benefit of Christ's
Cross? Who, may seem to hold their Christianity needless, promising,
themselves the benefit of it, by the opus operatum, of making a sign of the
Cross? Does this hinder any man to use it as it ought to be used? does it
prejudice him that so uses it? I will not say that there cannot, nor did not
consist any Reformation in laying this ceremony aside. But I will say, as of
Prayers for the dead; We know well enough whom there was a desire to content,
when this ceremony in the Eucharist, was laid aside under Queen Elizabeth,
having been prescribed under Edward VI. Which, seeing it has not served the
turn, but that the unity of the Church is dissolved, and so much more demanded
of them that would be thought Reformed, (if yet, any man man can say, what is
demanded) I think my self obliged to maintain in this point as in all the
rest; That the Reformation of the Church consists not in abolishing, but in
renewing and restoring the orders of the Catholic Church, and the right intent
of the same. He that will take the pains to add hereto that which I have said
in the place quoted before, shall comprehend the reasons upon which I remain
satisfied in this whole point; seeing there is no cause why I, should, either
recede from any part, of it, or, repeat it here again.

That which remains for this place is, the consideration of the nature and
number of the Sacraments; which being essentially ceremonies of Gods service,
the right resolution of the controversy concerning it must needs consist in
distinguishing the grounds, upon which, and the intents, to which they are
instituted; the difference whereof must make some properly Sacraments, the
rest, either no Sacraments at all, or in a several sense, and so, to a
several purpose. And truly, of all the Controversies which the Reformation
has occasioned, I see not less reason for either side to stand upon their
terms, then in this; which stands upon the term of a Sacrament, being not
found, in the Scriptures, attributed either to seven or to two. For, being
taken up by the Church; that is to say, by those Writers whom the Church
allows and honors; what reason can deny the Church liberty to attribute it
to any thing, which the power given the Church inableth it to appoint and to
use, for the obtaining of Gods blessing upon Christians? Why should not any
action, appointed by the Church, to obtain Gods sanctifying grace, by virtue
of any promise which the Gospel contains, be counted a Sacrament? At least,
supposing it to consist in a ceremony fit to signify the blessing which it
pretends to procure. For, it is manifest, that Baptism also, and the
Eucharist, are ceremonies signifying visibly that invisible grace, wherewith
God sanctifies Christians. But there will be therefore no consequence, that
Baptism and the Eucharist should be counted Sacraments for the same reason,
and in the same nature and kind, for which any thing else is or can be counted
a Sacrament; No, not though they may all, in their proper sense, be truly
called Sacraments of the Church, because the dispensing of them all is trusted
with the Church. For Baptism, by the premises, enters a man into the Covenant
of Grace, as the visible solemnity whereby it is contracted with the Church, in
behalf of God; which, unless in case of peremptory necessity, cannot be
invisibly contracted. So, it intitleth to all the promises which the Gospel
pretends. And so also does the Eucharist, being the visible ceremony which
God has appointed, for the renewing of it, and of our profession to stand in
it, and to expect the promises which the Gospel pretends, upon supposition of
the condition which it requires, not otherwise. And truly, the flesh and blood
of Christ, mystically received by our bodies, necessarily imports his spirit
received by our souls, supposing them qualified as the Gospel requires; and
in, and by the Spirit, whatsoever is requisite to enable a Christian to
perform his race here, or to assure him of his reward in the world to come.
And yet the necessity thereof not so undispensable, but that supposing a man
cannot obtain the communion thereof from the Church, but by violating that
Christianity which it seals, neither can a man obtain it by the Sacrament,
nor, without the Sacrament need he fail of it; that is standing to his
Christianity as well in all other things, as, in not transgressing his
Christianity, for communion in the Eucharist, with the Church. And this is the
case of those which are unjustly excommunicate; Seeing, in matters indifferent,
he that yields not to the Church, that is, to them who have the just power to
conclude the Church, (when they judge it for the common good, for him to do
that, which otherwise he is not obliged to do) must needs seem justly
excommunicable. So, these two Sacraments, have the promise of grace absolutely
so called, that is, of all the grace which the Gospel promises; which, it is
to be acknowledged and maintained, that no other of those actions, that are or
may be called Sacraments of the Church, does or can do, upon the like terms as
they do.

For of a truth, it is granted, that both these Sacraments are actions, and
consist in the action, whereby they are either prepared or used, though with so
much difference between the two. For Baptism is, of necessity, an action that
passes with the doing of it; Whereas, in the Eucharist, there is one thing done
in the preparing, another in the using of it; insomuch that the effect of
consecrating it, (which, I suppose here to be signified, in the Scriptures, as
well as the most ancient of the Fathers, by the name of Eucharistia, or
Thanksgiving) remains upon the thing consecrated; so that the bread and the
wine over which God was praised and thanked, are metonymically called the
Eucharist. And yet, in regard the consecration in reason, tends to the use of
receiving it, and that the Church is not trusted, or enabled to do it with
effect, but to that intent; the total of both is necessarily understood by the
name of that Sacrament. For, supposing the ancient Church might have cause to
allow, the use of receiving this Sacrament, to them who were not present in
body, though in spirit at the celebrating of it; (which I, for my part, in
point of charity find my self bound to suppose, even when I am not able to
allege any reason why my self would have done the same in the same case) So
long as, by reasonable construction, which the practice of the Church allows,
or groundeth, the consecration tends to the use of receiving, it is
reasonably called the Sacrament, or the Eucharist, in order to that use. If it
be consecrated to any other intent, either expressed, or enforced by
construction of reason, upon the practice of the Church; such practice
bordering upon sacrilege, in the abuse of the Sacrament, the Church has
nothing to do to answer for it. Nor is it my meaning that the Sacrament of
Baptism or the Eucharist does or can consist in the outward action of washing
of the body, or of praying over the elements, and reciting the Institution of
our Lord. It is true, the very bodily action were able in a great part, to
interpret the intent of doing it, to those who are already Christians, and know
what Christianity requires. But, seeing that can never be enough, much less
always; It is necessary, that the intent be declared, by certain words
signifiying it. But these words, with the bodily action which they interpret,
will, by this discourse, concur to make but one part of the Sacrament; which,
containing the solemnizing of the Covenant of Grace, will necessarily contain
that which all this signifies, of invisible and spiritual grace, conveyed
to those who are qualified for it, by that which is said and done, in virtue of
Gods promise. He that will speak properly of these two Sacraments, must make
the matter of them to consist in one of these two parts; The form of them being
(not the signification, which is the same in all ceremonies, but) the promise,
which tieth to them the whole effect of the Covenant of Grace; to which
purpose, it were well if the world would understand them to be seals of it.
This creates a vast difference between these two, and any of the rest, which
are called Sacraments; Which, whether the Councile of Trent sufficiently
express, by providing an Anathema for those who shall say, that the seven
Sacraments are so equal one to the other, that none is more worthy then
another; Sess. VII. Can. III. or not; let them look to it, I dispute not. Thus
much we see, a difference is hereby acknowledged. But the difference is vast in
this regard, that, whereas both these Sacraments take effect in consideration
of every particular man's Christianity, and the promises annexed to that end,
the rest, all of them, take effect in consideration of the Communion of the
Church, and that which it is able to contribute toward the effect of Grace;
Which necessarily consists in that which the Church is able to contribute,
toward the effecting of that disposition which, qualifieth for it. So, whereas
these two immediately bring forth Gods grace, as instruments of his promise, by
his appointment; the rest must obtain it by the means of Gods Church, and the
blessing annexed to communion with it. He that believes not Gods Church, in
the nature of a Society, grounded upon profession of the true faith, and
consisting in that communion, which separateth it not from the whole; may
promise himself the benefit of his Baptism, and of the Eucharist, (whomsoever
he communicates with) professing himself a Christian. He who believes every
Church to be a part of the whole Church, as he must acknowledge it requisite to
the effect of Baptism and the Eucharist, that they be ministered neither by
Heretics nor Schismatics; So must he attribute the effect of the rest to the
foundation of the Church, the Prayers whereof, God, by founding it, has
promised to hear, being made according to that Christianity which the
foundation thereof supposes.

Let us consider, whether extreme Unction may be, or must be counted a
Sacrament upon these terms, or not; for, if that, what question will remain
of the rest? I conceive, I have observed that which is very pertinent to the
consideration of all the rest, in showing that they are the solemnities,
wherewith some acts of that public authority is exercised, which the Church
has, in respect of the members of it. Only, in the Unction of the sick, I
have not found any act of authority, distinct from that power of the Keys,
whereby, in extremity, all are admitted to the communion of the Eucharist, in
hope of Gods mercy; acknowledging the debt of that Penance remaining, if they
survive, which must qualify them for it in the the judgment of the Church.
And, the promise of forgiveness of sins annexed to it, I have found to suppose
that contrition which undertaketh the same, in case a man survive. Which
notwithstanding, whosoever acknowledges the Church, cannot think the prayers of
the Church needless in such an exigent. But as for the ceremony of anointing
with oil, I have found it in the premises, to concern the recovery of bodily
health, by the practice of all ages, that are found to have used it; Though not
pretending miraculous graces, of curing diseases, extant in the primitive
times; but only that confidence, which Gods general promise to the Church
groundeth, of hearing the prayers thereof even for temporal blessings, so
far as the exception to it which Christianity makes, shall allow. It was
thought fit to lay aside this ceremony, at the Reformation, least the Church
should seem to pretend a promise, the effect whereof, being temporal and
visible, could not be made to appear; Which might seem a disparagement to our
common Christianity. But there have not wanted Doctors of the Reformation,
Bucer by name, that have acknowledged; nor will any man of a peaceable
judgment make question; that the ceremony might have been retained, at the
visitation of the sick; Which, he that would have the Church lay aside, because
the Church of Rome uses this ceremony at it, he would have the Church be no
Church, because the Church of Rome is one. For, as the office of the Church can
never be more necessary, then in that extremity, to procure that disposition
qualifying for pardon, which then, it is not too late to procure; So can no
ceremony be filter then anointing with oil, to signify that health of body,
which the Church cheerfully prays for, on behalf of them whom she promises
remission of sin; That health of mind, which the present agony so
peremptorily requires. Supposing then the constitution of the Church such,
that the ministry thereof must needs be thought sufficient means to procure
salvation for the members of it; And then, supposing the Church, so
constituted, injoyne prayer to be made for the sick, to whose reconcilement
the keys thereof are applied, anointing them with oil, to signify that health
of body and mind which is prayed for; So far am I from dividing the Church in
that regard, that I acknowledge, it may be very well counted one of the
Sacraments of the Church, in that case; To wit. as a ceremony appointed by the
Church, signifying that health, which the Church, rightly using the Power which
it is trusted with, appoints to be prayed for in that case.

To prove Marriage to be a Sacrament, it is well known how the text of S. Paul
is alleged Ephesians. V. 32. Sacramentum hoc magnum est; This is a great mystery,
but I mean, concerning Christ and the Church. But, Saint Paul says not, that
the marriage of Christians is a sacrament, but, that the marriage of Adam and Eve
was a great mystery; As indeed it was, if the Apostle say true, that it figured
the marriage of our Lord Christ with his Church, and that therefore the woman
was taken out of the man, as Christians are the bimbs of Christ, and therefore
wives are to be subject to their husbands, as the Church to Christ. True it is,
that, seeing marriage in Paradise was made an inseparable conjunction of one with
one, with an intent, that it should figure the inseparable conjunction between
our L. Christ and the congregation of them, whom, he foreseeth, that they shall
persevere; in that regard, the marriage of Christians also, being, by our Lord,
reformed to the first institution of Paradise, cannot choose but signify the
same, though now in being; Whereas, the marriage of Adam was a mystery for
signifying the same to be. But supposing all this, and not supposing an Order
in the Church, for the blessing of marriage, as a solemnity prescribed by the
Church; I know not whether there could be cause to reckon marriage among the
Sacraments of the Church, all the rest which pretend to tha quality, being
offices of the Church, to be performed with some solemnity. Whereas, supposing
something peculiar to the marriage of Christians, in regard whereof, it is to
be celebrated with the solemn Blessing of the Church; there is no cause, why,
under the equivocation premised, it may not be counted among the Sacraments of
the Church. For, is there any question to be made, that Christians, submitting
themselves to marry according to the Law of Christ, with an intent, not only
to keep faith to one another, according to that which is between Christ and his
Church, but to breed children for the Church; And so, submitting unto the
Church, and, those limits, wherewith the Church boundeth the exercise of Gods
Law, for maintaining of unity in the Church; may promise themselves the effect
of that Blessing which the Church joins them with? Supposing them qualified
for the common blessings of Christians, and the Church formed by God, with a
promise of his blessings; What doubt can be made, that the Blessing shall have
effect, which the Church joins them with? But, what assurance can be had of
the effect of that Blessing, without it, supposing the Church, and, supposing
the blessing of marriage appointed by the Church? I have showed the ground,
whereupon, the allowance of mrriage among Christians is necessarily part of the
interest of the Church? I have showed, that, in Ordination, in Confirmation, in
Penance, (as well as in Baptism, and in the Eucharist) the Church exercises
some power and authority, which she is trusted with by God. The blessing of
marriage, what is it, but the mark of that authority, in allowing the marriages
of Christians, which the Church thereby exercises? If Ignatius and Tertullian
require the consent of the Church, to the marriages of Christians; it must
needs be inferred from thence, that this consent was declared, by the blessing
of the Church; as the Power of ordaining, and the Power of absolving is
exercised with blessing, that is, praying for those that are ordained or
absolved. Tertullian says further, that marriage was confirmed by an Eucharist,
and sealed which blessing. And Clemens Alexandr. Paedag. III. 1. complaining of
her that wore not her own hair, that the Priest, laying hands on her, blessed
not her, but some bodies hair besides; What blessing should he speak of but
the blessing of marriage? The Epistle of Syricius to Himerius Bishop of
Tarracona mentions it, and so does the IV. Synod of Carthage Can. XIII.
likewise Innocent I. Pope Epist. IIX. ad Prelum and S. Basil in Hexaem. Hom.
VII. nor can any exception be made to the generality of it. But, if there
could, there would, nevertheless, ly no manner of exception against the Power
of the Church, in appointing of it, or the reason why the Church should appoint
it, supposing the premises. And, the experience of so much abuse as has been
committed of late years; (the same man or woman marying two brothers or
sisters successively, the one party marying, the other being alive, men marying
other men's wives, through the neglect of lawful impediments, for example) the
experience, I say, of abuses that have succeeded, by leaving people free to
marry without the blessing of the Church, is enough to demonstrate the
necessity thereof, as, supposing the allowance of the marriage. And therefore,
the solemnity of blessing marriage, intimating a supposition, that it is
intended for an inseparable conjunction of one with one, as is that of our Lord
Christ with his Church; And that, with due submission to the Rules of the
Church, from the prayers whereof, the blessing is expected; may well be called
the Sacrament of marriage, as containing a ceremony signifying that spiritual
Grace, of living like Christians in the state of wedlock, for which it
signifies the parties to be qualified; and, tending to obtain the same, by
virtue of that promise, which the foundation of the Church warranteth the
effect of her prayers with.

Consider now, that the Sacrament of Baptism, though it qualifieth for the
promises of the Gospel, yet, supposing the unity of the Church, out of which
the Spirit of God breaths not; That every Church is the congregation of
Christians, that is contained in that place which is the chief seat of that
Church, and the territories of it, subject to the Bishop and Clergy of the
same; That, whosoever is necessarily to minister Baptism, is not always able
to make him whom he baptizeth a member of the Church; as, in case of Heresy
and Schism, the Baptism whereof, the Church allows to stand good, but
without effect of Christ's promise. For, he that considers these things will
find reason to grant, that, the consent of the Bishop being requisite to make
any man a member of his Church, according to such terms, as, the Rules of the
whole Church shall limit; the allowance of every man's Baptism, to that effect,
should be solemnized by his Blessing, so as, the effect thereof to become
void, in case of the utter neglect of it. This is the reason that S. Jerome,
advers. Luciferianos, renders, for the solemnity of Confirmations; from the
unity of the Church and the person of the Bishop, in which, and by which every
Christian is a member of the whole Church, because a member of his Church,
whom the whole Church acknowledges Pastor of the same. And this the reason,
why it was never counted peremtorily necessary for all, as S. Hierome
acknowledges, that in villages, where the Bishops occasions called him not to
come, Christians lived and died without it; Because the testimony of all those,
who seek the Bishops Blessing, in acknowledgement of their Christianity, (the
profession whereof they declare themselves to stand to, by seeking the same,
and he, by giving it, to allow) and of their communion with the Church;
(which, by the same means, they claim, and he owneth) is a presumption on
behalf of the rest, who have not the like opportunity to seek it, that neither
they pretend toward the Church, nor he, on behalf of the Church, intends
toward them otherwise. The ground of this construction, is manifest by the
practice of the Church, in reconciling those Heretics and Schismatics, whose
Baptism the Church allowed to stand good, to the Church, by Confirmation, with
imposition of hands. For this supposes, that Baptism, which the Church did
not repeat, as allowing it ministered in due form, to have been without effect
so long as they continued without the Church; And to revive, and take effect,
again, by removing that bar of separation from the Church, which their
reconcilement voideth. If the Church of some times and some places have added
to Imposition of hands, a further ceremony of Chisme consisting of oil and
Balsame, to signify by the anointing thereof, that sweet smell, which the
Spirit of the Messiah in Esaias resenteth, why should it be thought, that this
addition in the solemnity must needs take away from the efficacy of it? Is it
not enough, that it may take away from it, in them, who, being zealous for the
ceremony, are careless of the substance? That this is acknowledged, by
returning to the Apostolical simplicity of Imposition of hands. Seeing then,
that the grace of standing to the common Christianity, is to be expected from
the blessing of the Church, upon them who have recourse to this solemnity, with
a disposition qualifying for the promises of the Gospel, in the unity of the
Church; it will be no disperagement to the Sacrament of Baptism, that
Confirmation should be reckoned among the Sacraments of the Church, being a
ceremony no way empty of that promise of sanctifying Grace, which, by the
foundation of the Church, belongs to the prayers thereof; and yet, the said
promise no way subsisting, but upon supposition of that Covenant of Grace,
which the Sacrament of Baptism inacteth.

As for the matter of Ordination, the words of Saint Paul stick close; 1 Timothy
IV. 14. Neglect not the grace that is in thee, being given thee through
prophecy, by the imposition of the hands of the presbytery; At least taking in
Saint Paul again, 1 Cor. IV. 7. For who distinguishes thee? Or, What have
thou that thou receivest not? But, if thou have received, why do thou boast
as not having received? Which, I have showed, being spoken of the Grace of an
Apostle, is drawn into consequence on all hands, concerning the grace of a
Christian. And therefore it will not serve the turn to say, that Saint Paul
speaks of some of those graces that are called gratis datae, that some for
the use of the Church, not for the salvation of him that has them. For Saint
Paul when he calls those graces the manifestation of the Spirit, signifies,
that they were given by God to manifest his presence in the Church, by the
visible operations of them. And therefore ordinarily, they presupposed, in him
that had them, the presence of the holy Ghost, to the effect of saving grace*
The cases of Balaam and Caiaphas, or Saul, or those that prophesied in Christ's
name, I have showed already, how far they contain an exception to this. In
the case of Timothy, ordained to that work which Saint Paul, by his Epistles,
instructs him, how to discharge; what shall we conceive to be the effect of
imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, supposing him thereupon, endowed
with a grace of doing miracles, or speaking strange languages, but without any
gift of saving grace, to direct the use of the same to the salvation of his
people? What else, but that which a sword is in a mad man's hand, or knowledge
eloquence, or understanding in him that should set himself to raise himself a
sect of followers, into heresy, or schism? Which, should God allow Timothy,
upon Imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, allowing it, that Christian
people might have confidence in so great a Pastor, in whom they saw such
manifestation of Gods Spirit, might he not reasonably be said, to allow him
means to seduce Christian people? I will not therefore contend, but the Grace
that was given Timothy by Prophesy, signifies some visible manifestation of
Gods Spirit in him, concerning whom, there had Prophesies gone before in the
Church of how great eminence he should be in it; But so, as to suppose that
saving grace, wherein, it manifested God to be in Timothy; which saving grace,
though not wanting in him, when he came to receive imposition of hands,
(because he who receive^ it, being no true Christan, shall never receive that
effect by it) yet might, by the effect thereof, be extended, applied, or
determined to the right use of whatsoever miraculous grace he might thereby
receive, in the service of Gods Church. For, to him that has by nature, or by
Gods blessing upon his honest endeavors, an ability to preach, to dispute, to
resolve in Christianity, and has not, by Gods saving grace, the intent to use
it well, what does such a gift bring, but ability to do mischief? Therefore the
gift given Timothy by imposition of hands, being that which was prayed for in
behalf of him, by those who laid hands on him, is the grace to behave himself
well in the function which thereby he receives. Which being obtained by the
prayers of the Church, what reason leaves it, why the prayers of the Church
should not still obtain the like, setting aside the difference between them
that pray, or, him for whom they pray? And certainly, the effect of all prayers
depends upon the same conditions, be it never so much the ordinance of God
which they desire him to bless. Here is then, I mean in Ordination, an
ordinance of God, solemnized with the visible c^remony of imposition of hands,
signifying the overshadowing of Gods protection, or of his Spirit, which it
pretends to procure, upon the promise of Gods presence with his Church, when
it prays to him. Which, if it be therefore reckoned among the Sacraments of the
Church; as the property of the term will certainly bear it, so can it be no
disparagement to the Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist, as if it came in
rank with them. For, the grace which it procures, as it is limited to a
particular effect, of ministering to the Church the ordinances of God, according
to that trust which he reposeth in the office; So is the grace which God
appoints to be convayed to his people, by the ministry of every office, no
less to be obtained by that outward profession, under which the order of the
Church obliges them to minister the same; (whatsoever a man's inward intention,
that is not visible, may be) then if he really did intend to do his best for
the service of God, and the salvation of his people. I speak now, so far as
the order of the Church goes. For otherwise, it cannot be doubted, that a man's
personal abilities may give a great deal of life to the public order of the
Church, and add much, in prosecution of the true intent, and in order to the
due effect of it. All which, the Grace to endeavor the faithful discharge of
each office, and the blessing of God upon such endeavors, which the blessing
of the Church, with imposition of hands, prays for, contains, and effects.

But of all powers of the Church, and the offices which they produce, there is
none that comes so nigh the promises of the Gospel, as that which consists in
binding the sins of those, that visibly transgress their Christianity, upon
them, and in loosing them upon visible Penance. For, this restores to a
capacity for the gifts of the Holy Ghost, forfeited by transgressing the
Covenant of our Baptism, and by admitting to communion in the Eucharist,
immediately renews the same. And truly, the whole work of it is nothing else
but the satisfying of the Church, that the man has appeased the wrath, and
regained the favor of God; that is, satisfied God, in the language of the
ancient Church, in consideration of the satisfaction of our Lord Christ,
accepting his Penance for satisfaction, which, of it self, it is not. And, in
regard of this great, virtue and effect of penance, I marvail not, that in the
reformation, Melancthon is found to have reckoned it a third Sacrament after
Baptism and the Eucharist. For, the name of Sacrament seems most duly to
belong to the acts of those Offices, which conduce most to the attaining, or,
to the maintaining of the state of Gods Grace. And truly it cannot be denied,
that the solemnity of Penance, in the ancient Church, was such as might well
serve to signify, the recovering of that Grace, the ground which Christians
have, for the help whereof, it so effectually intimates. So, though a man's
own repentance in private has the same promise of Grace, yet the solemnity of
Performing penance in the Church seems requisite to the nature and quality of
the Sacrament, in whatsoever sense it shall be attributed to it. And this
solemnity, all reason will allow, must needs have been of great effect to
procure, and settle, in the penitent, that disposition for pardon, which it
seems to profess. This solemnity being so much abated in private penance,
that nothing of it remains, saving the (...); notwithstanding, so long as it
remains an office of the Church, which limiteth the form and the rules
according to which it is done, with due hope of effect, there is no reason why
the nature of a Sacrament should be therefore questionable. When it is given
out, and simple Christians are so governed, as if they were obliged to believe,
that attrintion is changed into contrition, by virtue of the Keys of the
Church passing upon it; that is, that he, who is not qualified for pardon, when
he confesses, is, by receiving the sentence of absolution, qualified for
pardon, so that neither stain nor guilt of sin remains, but the debt of
temporal punishment* (whereas, the time of Canonical penance grounded a
presumption, that the change was wrought) then may there seem to be cause of
questioning, whether penance be a Sacrament, that is, an holy office of the
Church, in which it is ministered, under such an unhallowed opinion as that. In
the mean time, neither is the promise of Grace annexed to the solemnity
thereof, (in which there has succeeded so vast a change, as I have signified)
by Gods choice of any visible creature, in which it is exercised as in Baptism
and the Eucharist; but, by that common reason, for which, it is a solemnity fit
for the Church to execute it with; nor is the promise of grace annexed to the
office of the Churth any otherwise, then as it becomes the means to retrive
the condition of baptism, qualifying for the promise by the Covenant of Grace.
In fine, the name and notion of a Sacrament, as it has been duly used by the
Church, and writers allowed by the Church, extends to all holy actions, done
by virtue of the Office which God has trusted his Church with, in hope of
obtaining the grace which he promises. Baptism and the Eucharist are actions
appointed by God, in certain creatures, utterly impertinent to the effect of
Grace, setting aside his appointment; But, apt to signify all the Grace which
the Gospel promises, by virtue of that correspondence which holds between
things visible and s^nsible, and things intelligible and invisible; Both
antecedent, for their institution, to the foundation of the Church; the Society
whereof subscribeth, upon condition of the first, and for communion in the
second. The rest are actions appointed to be solemnized in the Church, by the
Apostles, not always, and every where precisely with the same ceremonies, but
such, as always may reasonably serve to signify the graces, which it prays
for, on the behalf of them who receive them; The hope of that Grace being
grounded upon Gods general promise, of hearing the prayers of his Church,
which the constitution thereof involveth. Nor am I solicitous to make that
construction; which may satisfy the decrees of the Councils of Florence and
Trent; who have first taken upon them to decree under Anathama, the conceit of
the School, in reducing them to the number of seven; But, seeing the
particulars so qualified by ancient writers in the Church, and the number
agreed upon by the Greek Church, as well as the Latins; I have acknowledged
that sense of their sayings, which the prim^ive order of the Chatholike Church
inforceth. For, though I count it a great a buse to maintain simple Christians
in an opinion, that the outward works of them, not supposing the ground upon
which, the intent to which, the disposition with which they are done, secures
the salvation of them to whom they are ministered; Which opinion the formal
ministering of them seems to maintain; Yet is it a far greater abuse, to
place the reformation of the Church in abolishing the solemnities, rather then
in reducing the right understanding, of the ground and intent of those offices,
which they serve to solemnize.

CHAP. XXX. To worship Christ in the Eucharist, though believing
transubstantiation, is not Idolatry. Ground for the honor of Saints and
Martyrs. The Saints and the Angels pray for us. Three sorts of prayers to
Saints: The first, agreeable with Christianity: The last may be Idolatry: The
second a step to it. Of the Relics of the Saints Bodies. What the second
Commandment prohibiteth or allows. The second Councile of Nicea does not
decree Idolatry; And yet there is no decree in the Church for the worshipping of
Images.
ANd now I come to that resolution which I have made way for, by premising
these conclusions, for assumptions to infer it; only, by the way, I have
resolved against those prayers which the Church of Rome prescribes, to deliver
the souls of the dead from Purgatory pains. I say then, first, that the
adoration of the Eucharist, which the Church of Rome prescribes, is not
necessarily Idolatry. I say not what it may be accidentally, by that intention
which some men may conceal, and may make it Idolatry as to God; I speak upon
supposition of that intention, which the profession of the Church forms, and
which alone is to my present purpose. I suppose them to believe, that those
creatures of God, which are the elements of that sacrament, are no more there
after the consecration; having ceased to be, that there might be room for the
body and blood of our Lord to come into their stead. I suppose, that the body
and blood of Christ may be adored, wheresoever they are; and must be adored by
a good Christian, where the custom of the Church, which a Christian is obliged
to communicate with, requires it. For, that which we see is enough for to
certify us, that, peremptorily to refuse any custom of the Church, is a step
to division, and the dissolution of it; which is the greatest evil that can
befall Christianity, next to the peremptory profession of some thing contrary
to that truth wherein christianity consists, and which the being of the Church
presupposes But, I suppose further, that the body and blood of Christ is not
adored, nor to be adored by Christians, neither for it self, nor for any
indowment residing in it, which it may have received, by being personally
united with the God head of Christ: But only in consideration of the said
Godhead, to which it remains inseparably united, wheresoever it becomes. For,
by that means, whosoever proposes not to himself the consideration of the
body and blood of Christ, as it is of it self, and in it self, a mere creature
(which, he that does not on purpose, cannot do) cannot but consider it, as he
believes it to be, being a Christian; And, considering it as it is, honor it as
it is inseperably united to the Godhead, in which and by which it subsisteth
in which therefore, that honor rests, and to which it* tends. So, the
Godhead of Christ is the thing that is honored, and the reason why it is
honored, both: The body and blood of Christ, though it be necessarily honored,
because necessarily united to that which is honored; yet is it only the thing
that is honored, and not the reason why it is honored, speaking of the honor
proper to God alone. I suppose further, that it is the duty of eevery christian
to honor our Lord Christ, as God subsisting in humane flesh; whether by
professing him such, or by praying to him as such, or by using any bodily
gesture, which, by the custom of them that frequent it, may serve to signify
that indeed he takes him for such; which gesture, is outwardly, that worship of
the heart* which inwardly commandes it. This honor then being the duty of an
affirmative precept, which, according to the received rule, ties always,
though it cannot tie a man to do the duty always, because then he should do
nothing else; What remains, but a just occasion, to make it requisite, and
presently to take hold and oblige. And, is not the presence thereof in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist a just occasion, presently to express by the bodily
act of adoration, that inward honor which we always carry toward our Lord
Christ as God? Grant that there may be question, whether it be a just occasion
or not; certainly, supposing it come to a custom in the church presently to do
that which is always due to be done, you suppose the question determined. This
is that which I stand upon; the matter being such as it is, supposing the
custom of the church to have determined it, it shall be so far from an act of
Idolatry, that it shall be the duty of a good Christian. Therefore, not
supposing the Church to have determined it, though, for some occasions,
(whereof more are possible, then it is possible for me to imagine) it may
become offensive, and not presently due; yet can it never become an act of
Idolatry so long as Christianity is that which it is, and he that does it
professes himself a Christian.

Here then you see, I am utterly disobliged to dispute, whether or no, in the
ancient Church, Christians were exhorted, and encouraged to, and really did
worship our Lord Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. For, having
concluded my intent, that it had not been Idolatry had it been done; I might
leave the consequence of it to debate. But not to balk the freedom which has
carried me to publish all this, I do believe, that it was so practiced and done
in the ancient church; which I maintain from the beginning to have been the
true church of Christ, obliging all to conform to it, in all things within the
power of it. I know the consequence to be this, that there is no just cause why
it should not be don at present, but that cause, which justifies the reforming
of some part of the Church without the whole; Which if it were taken away, that
it might be done again, and ought not to be, of it self alone, any cause of
distance. For, I do acknowledge, the testimonies that are produced out of S.
Ambrose de Spiritu Sancto III. 12. S. Austine in Psalm XCVIII. and Epist. CXX.
cap. XXVII. S. Chrysostom Homil. XXIIII. in 1. ad Corinth. Theodoret Dial. II.
S. Gregory Nazianzen Orat. in S. Gorgoniam, S. Jerome Epist. ad Theophilum
Epist. Alexandriae, Origin in diversa loca Evang. Hom. V. Where he teaches to
say; at the receiving the sacrament; Lord, I am not worthy that thou should
come under my roof; Which to say, is to do that, which I conclude. Nor do I
need more to conclude it. And what reason can I have not to conclude it? Have I
supposed; the elements, which are Gods creatures, in which the Sacrament is
celebrated, to be abolished; or any thing else concerning the flesh and blood
of Christ, or the presence thereof in the Eucharist; in giving a reason why the
Church may do it, which the Church did not believe? If I have, I disclame it
as soon as it may appear to me for such. Nay, I do expressly warn all
opinions, that they imagine not to themselves, the Eucharist so mere and
simple a sign of the thing fignified, that the celebration thereof should not
be a competent occasion, for the executing of that worship, which is always
due to our Lord Christ in carnate.

I confess, it is not necessarily the same thing to worship Christ in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, as to worship the sacrament of the Eucharist; Yet
in that sense, which reason of it self justifies, it is. For, the Sacrament
of the Eucharist, by reason of the nature thereof, is neither the visible kind,
nor the invisible Grace of Christ's body and blood, but the union of both, by
virtue of the promise; In regard whereof, the one going along with the other,
whatsoever be the distance of their nature, both concur to that which we call
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by the work of God, to which he is morally
engaged, by the promise which the institution thereof contains. If this be
rightly understood, to worship the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is to worship
Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. But I will not therefore warrant,
that they, who maintain the worshipping of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, do
not understand the visible kind, or, as themselves think, the visible
propertyes thereof, by that name, Which if they shall declare themselves to
understand, then is the question far otherwise, and to be resolved upon the
same terms, as the question concerning the worshipping of images shall, by and
by, be resolved; That though the Sacrament of the Eucharist may be the occasion
to determine the circumstance of the worshipping of Christ, yet is it self no
way capable of any worship that may be counted religious, because religion
injoyneth it. Cardinal Bellarmine, de Euch. IV. 29. would have it said, that
the sign is worshipped materially, but the body and blood of Christ formally,
in the Eucharist; Which are terms, that signify nothing. For, it is
impossible to distinguish in God, the thing that is worshipped* from the reason
for which it is worshipped; so that the thing may be understood, without
understanding it to be the reason why it is worshipped. Therefore, the sign in
the Eucharist, seems only to determine why, that worship which is always
every where due, is here now ten dred. Indeed, when the Councile of Trent
pronounces him anathema, that believes not, the elements to be abolished, and
cease to be in it being consecrated; I cannot deny, that, their obliging all to
believe that, which no man can have that cause to believe, for which he belives
the Christian faith, has been a very valuable reason, though not the only
reason to move the Church of England to supersede that ceremony; (hardly in the
minds of Christians so bred to it, to be parted from it) contenting it self to
injoine the receiving of it kneeling, which he that refuses to do, seems not
to acknowledge the being of a sacrament, requiring the tender of the thing
signified by it and with it. And, I conceive further, that, the carrying of the
Sacrament in procession, and, upon such occasions, as signifies no order
toward the receiving of it, nor any such intent, upon supposition whereof the
Sacrament is a Sacrament; has added much weight to that reason. For, if the
use of the sacrament were the reason to make the occasion fit, the abuse
thereof must needs render it unfit. But, for that which remains, whether those
who think the body and blood of Christ present, instead of the elements, which
are there no more, be Idolators for worshipping the elements which remain
present, where they think they are not, is a question no way to be resolved,
till it be granted, that, supposing them present, it is no Idolatry. For, if
the false opinion of their absence make men idolaters, then are they not
idolaters which have it not. Consider then, that, were the body and blood of
Christ so present, as to be in stead of the substance of bread and wine, the
consideration in which any Christian (holding what the church of Rome teaches,)
should worship it, would be no other then that for which it should be
worshipped by him who believes it not so present; as, in my opinion, the
ancient Church did believe. Both must worship the body and blood of Christ
because incarnate, and therefore, as the body and blood of Christ is
inseparable from the consideration of his Godhead, which every Christian
intends to worship. And, how can then a man's mistake, in thinking the elements
to be away, which indeed are there, make him guilty of honoring those creaturs
as God; which we know, if he thought that they were there, he must needs take
for creatures, and therefore could not honor for God? I do believe it has
been said, by great Doctors of the Church of Rome, that they must needs think
themselves flat Idolaters, if they could think* that the elements are not
abolished. That shows what confidence, they would have the world apprehend,
that they hold their opinion with; But, not that the consequence is true,
unless that which I have said be reprovable. For, what reason can be given,
why that bodily gesture, which professedly signifies the honor of God tendered
to Christ spiritually present in the Eucharist, should be Idolatry, because the
bread and wine are believed to remain there; Which, according to their
opinion, supposing them to be abolished, their accidents only remaining, is no
idolatry, but the worship of our Lord Christ for God?

In the next place, as concerning prayer to Saints, I must suppose, that the
terms of prayer, invocation, calling upon, and whatsoever else we can use, are
or may be in despite of our hearts equivocal; that is, we may be constrained,
unless we use that diligence, which common discretion counts superfluous, to
use the same words, in signifyng requests made to God and to man. Which are not
equivocall according to that equivocation which comes by mere chance; but, by
that for which there is a reasonable ground, in that eminence, which out
conceptions, (and therefore our words, which signify them) express unto us.
For, all the apprehensions that we have of God, and all things intelligible,
coming from things sensi^le, we can have no proper conceit of Gods excellence,
and the eminence thereof above his creatures; which necessarily appears to us
under attributes common to his creatures, removing that imperfection, which, in
them, they are joined with. This is the reason, why, all signs of honor, in
word or deed, may be equivocall when they need not be counted so, being joined
with signs, either of other words, or deeds, which may serve to determine the
capacity of them. Adoration, worship, respect, reverence, or howsoever you
translate the Latin cultus, are of this kind, as I said before. Ingressus
scenam populum saltator adorat; coming upon the stage to dance, he adores or
worships the people; or as an othersaies, jactat basia, he throws them kisses;
He does reverence to the spectators by kissing his hand, and saluting them with
it. So prayer, invocation, calling upon God, is not so proper to God, but that,
whether you will or not, every petition to a Prince, or a Court of justice is
necessarily a prayer, and he that makes it invocates, or calls upon that Prince
or that Court, for favor or for justice. Now, the militant Church necessarily
has communion with the triumphant; believing, that all those who are departed
in Gods Grace are at rest, and secure of being parted from him for the future;
though those who have neglected the content of this world the most for his
service, and are in the best of those mansions which are provided for them till
the day of judgment (whom here we call properly Saints) enjoy the nearest
access to his presence. To dispute, whether we are bonnd to honor them or
not, were to dispute whether we are to be Christians, and to believe this, or
not. Whether this honor be Religious or civil, nothing but equivocation of
words makes disputable, and the cause of that equivocation, the want of words;
vulgar use not having provided words, properly to signify conceptions which
came not from common sense. If we call it Religion, it is manifest, that all
religion is that reverence which the conscience of our obligation to God
renders. If civil, the inconvenience is more gross, though less dangerous.
For, how can we owe civil respect where there is no relation of members of the
same city, or Common wealth? Plainly, their excellence, and the relation we
have to them being intelligible only by Christianity, must borrowe a name from
that which vulgar language attributes to God, or to men our superiors. I need
say nothing in particular of Angels, whom if we believe to be Gods ministers
employed instructing his children upon earth, we must needs own their honor,
though the intercourse between us be invisible. It were easy to pick up sayings
of the Fathers, by which religious honor is proper to Christ, and others, in
which, that honor, that reverence, which religion injoines is tendered Saints
and Angels. And all to be imputed to nothing but want of proper terms for that
honor which religion injoyneth, in respect of God, and that relation which God
has settled between the Church militant and triumphant; being reasonably
called Religious, provided that the distance be not confounded between the
religious honor of God, and, that honor of the creature, which the religious
honor of God injoines, being neither civil nor humane, but such as a creature
is capable of, for religions sake, and that relation which it setleth. I must
come to particulars, that I may be understood. He that could wish, that the
memories of the Martyrs, and other Saints who lived so, as to assure the Church
they would have been Martyrs, had they been called to it, had not been
honored, as it is plain they were honured by Christians, must find in his
heart, by consequence, to wish, that Christianity had not prevailed. For, this
honor, depending on nothing but the assurance of their happiness, in them
that remained alive, was that which moved unbelievers, to bethink themselves
of the reason they had to be Christians. What were then those honors?
Reverence in preserving the remains of their bodies, and burying them,
celebrating the remembrance of their agonies every year, assembling themselves
at their monuments, making the days of their death Festivals, the places of
their burial, Churches, building and consecrating Churches to the service of
God in remembrance of them; I will add further, (for the custom seems to
come from undefiled Christianity,) burying the remains of their bodies under
the stones upon which the Eucharist was celebrated. What was there in all this
but Christianity? That the circumstances of Gods service, which no law of God
had limited, the time, the place, the occasion of assembling for the service of
God; (always acceptable to God) should be determined by such glorious
accidents for Christianity, as the departure of those who had thus concluded
their race. What can be so properly counted the reign of the Saints and
Martyrs with Christ, which S. John foretells, Apoc. XX. as this honor, when
it came to trample Paganism under feet, after the conversion of Constantine?
Certainly, nothing can be named, so correspondent to that honor which is
prophesied for them that suffered for Gods law, under Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan.
XII. Is not all this honor properly derivative from the honor of God and our
Lord Christ, and relative to his service? For, that is the work for which
Christians assemble, and for those assemblies the Church stands, as I have
often said; The honor of the Saints, but the occasion, circumstance, or
furniture for it.

Neither is it to be doubted, that the Saints in happiness pray for the Church
militant, and that they have knowledge thereof, if they go not out like
sparkles, and are kindled again when they resume their bodies, which I have
showen, our common Christianity allows not. For, is it possible, to imagine
that, knowing any thing, (that is, knowing God and themselves) they should not
know that God has a Church in the world, upon the consumation whereof their
consummation depends? Or is it possible, that, knowing this, and being
disposed toward this Church, as they ought to be disposed toward it, in
respect to God, they should not intercede with God for the consummation of it,
and the means thereof which is all we can desire? I will not use the text of
Jeremy XI. 1. and Ezekiel. XIV. 13-19. because it is manifest, that Moses and
Samuel, that Noe, Daniel and Job are named in them, but to put the case, that
if those men were alive, and made intercession for their people, they should
not prevail. Which is not to say that, which I have showed, that the Old
Testament speaks not out plain, that, being alive, they do intercede.
Therefore they make no consequence. I will not use the text of the Gospel Luke
XVI. 9. Make ye friends of the unrighteous Mamon, that, when ye fail, they
may receive you into everlasting Tabernacles, Though S. Austine de Civit. I.
27. makes a doubt whether it be by the intercession of his friends, that such a
man is received; Because he makes no doubt, that it is in consideration of the
charity by which he made them his friends, that he is received, And therefore,
in that consideration it must be, that they are said to receive him, not in
consideration of their prayers; Of which therefore this text says nothing. But
I must needs use the text of the Apoc. V. 8. VIII. 3. whereby it appears as
much, that the Church triumphant prays for the Church militant, as that the
saints of the Church triumphant are alive. And I will use these texts of the Old
Testament, where Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and David are in consideration,
and alleged to God in behalf of his people Genesis XXVI 5, 24. Ex. XXXII. 13.
Deuteronomy. IX. 27. 1. Kings XI. 12, 32, 33, 34. XV. 4. 2. Kings VIII. 19. XIX. 34.
XX. 6. Es. XXXVII. 35. 1. Kings XVIII. 36 1 Chronicles. XXIX, 28. For, as our
Savior argues well, that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are alive and shall rise
again, because, God is not the God of the dead; So is the consequence as good,
that, what God does for their sakes, he does it for their mediation or
intercession; unless he mean to set that on their score, which they desire
not at his hands. The Angels of little children always see the Fathers face in
heaven Math. XVIII. 10. And there is joy in the presence of Gods Angels, over
one sinner that repents Luke XV. 10. And David says, that, the Angel of the
Lord pitcheth his tent round about them that fear him and delivers them,
Psalm XXV. 8. And they are all ministering spirits, sent forth to attend upon
them that shall be heirs of salvation? Heb. I. 14. and have they not that
affection for those whom God so affects, as to provide them such attendance,
not to mediate with their desires to God, the effect of that goodness which he
is so affectionate to bestow upon us? An imagination so barbarous cannot
possess any man, till he think himself beloved of God, for hating those that
honor Saints and Angels above measure. Let them look to the measure, and let
them look how they hate them that observe it not. Let them not ground their
measure upon a supposition of as little affection in the Saints and Angels for
us, as in themselves for the Saints and Angels; unless it be, because such a
supposition may deserve to deprive them of the benefit of such relations. For,
as for the Church, S. Cyprian doubts not, when he desires, that those who shall
happen to depart first be mindful of them that remain, in their prayers to
God Epist. I. And the Saints in heaven, that are secure of their own
salvation, he says are solicitous for us, in his book de mortalitate. S.
Jerome says the same of Heliodorus, Epist. I. nor is any thing to be faulted,
of that which he writes against Vigilantius to that purpose. S. Austine
supposes that Nebridius prayed for him being dead, Confess. IX. 3. and expects
benefit, from S. Cypryans prayers, de Bapt. V. 7, 17. He said before, that, we
are to be commended by the prayers of the Martyrs, and de sanctis Sermon. XLVI.
Debent Martyrs aliquid in nobis recognoscere de suis virtutibus, ut pro nobis
dignentur domino supplicare. The Martyrs must take notice of something of their
own virtues in us, that they may vouchsafe to become petitioners to God for
us. And again, contra Faustum XX. 21. the reason why they celebrated the
memories of the Saints, he assigns, that they might be partners in their
merits, and be helped by their prayers. Both which Leo in S. Lam. considers, as
well the help as the example of the Saints, and S. Gregory, Epist. VII. 57.
Indict. II. Rogo omnipotentem Deum ut sua te gratia protegat, and beati Petri
Apostolorum principis intercessione a malis omnibus illi sum servet. I beseech
Almighty God to protect thee with his grace, and through the intercession of S.
Peter Chiese of the Apostles, keep thee unharmed by any evil. It were to no
purpose to show what I allow by bringing more, for this cannot be disallowed,
allowing the premises. But, this being supposed, whatsoever may be disputed,
whether Saints or Angels in this regard may be counted, Mediators, intercessors
or Advocates between God and us will be mere contentions about words holding
to the terms hitherto supposed. For, the intercession of our Lord Christ being
grounded upon the work of redemption, the effects of it must be according; To
make all mankind acceptable to God, under the condition which the Gospel
declares; To obtain for every man those helps of Grace, by which he may, or by
which he is effectually resolved to undergo the condition requisite. He that
knows the God-heade of Christ to be the ground, in consideration whereof, the
obedience of Christ is acceptable by God to this effect; and yet will needs
say, that Saints or Angels are our Mediators, Intercessors, or Advocates to the
same effect; there is no cause why he should be excused of Idolatry for his
pains. But withal, he cannot be excused of contradicting himself as
grossly; as he that maintains those Saints or Angels to be that one true God,
whom he acknowledges not to be that God, but his creatures. If there be reason
to presume, that they who acknowledge Saints or Angels their Mediators,
Intercessors or advocates to God intend to commit Idolatry, by contradicting
themselves thus grossly, there may be reason to think, that they count them
their Mediators, Intercessors or Advocates to God, to that effect, to which
Christ alone is our Mediator, Intercessor or Advocate. But if, whosoever is
accepted to pray for an other, is necessarily, by so doing, his Mediator,
Intecessor or Advocate, to him with whom he is admitted to deal on his behalf
by his prayers; then will it be necessary to limite the work of mediation to
that effect, which may be allowed to the intercession of the Saints or Angels
for us, if we will have them to be to purpose. Certainly, neither could Job
intercede for his friends, nor Samuel for the Israelites, nor Abraham for
Abimelech, or Pharao, nor any of Gods Prophets for any that had, or were to
have recourse to them for that purpose, but they must be by so doing,
Mediators, intercessors, and Advocates, for them with God. For neither can the
mediation of Saints or Angels, nor of any prophet or other, that can be
persumed to have favor with God be to any effect, but that which the terms of
that reconciliation which our Lord Christ has purchased for us do settle or
allow.

But he that says the Saints and Angels pray for us, says not that we are to
pray to Saints or Angels; nor can be say it without Idolatry, intending, that
we are to do that to them, which they do to God for us; On the other side,
though that which we do to them, and that which they do to God be both called
praying, yet it will be very difficult for him that really and actually
apprehends all Saints and Angels to be Gods creatures, to render both the
same honor, though, supposing, not granting, the same Christianity to enjoin
both. But, to come to particulars, I will distinguish three sorts of prayers to
Saints, whether taught or allowed to be taught, in the Church of Rome. The
first is of those that are made to God, but to desire his blessings by and
through the merits and intercession of his Saints. I cannot give so fit an
example, as out of the Canon of the Mass, which all the Western Churches of
that communion do now use. There it is said; communicantes and memoriam
venerantes omnium Sanctorum tuorum quorum meritis precibusque concedas, ut in
omnibus protectionis tuae muniamur auxilio. Communicating in and reverencing
the memory of such and such, and of all thy Saints, by whose merit and prayer,
grant that in all things, we may be guarded by thy protection and help. There
is also a short prayer for the Priest to say, when he comes to the Altar, as he
finds opportunity; Oramus te Domine, per merita sanctorum tuorum, quorum
reliquia hic sunt, and omnium sanctorum, ut indulgere digneris omnia peccata
mea. We pray thee Lord, by the merits of the Saints whose relics are here,
and all Saints, that thou would vouchsafe to release me all my sins. And on
the first Sunday in Advent, mentioning the Blessed Virgin, they pray; Vt qui
vere eam matrem Dei credimus, ejus apud te intercessionibus adjuvemur: That we
who believe her truly the mother of God may be helped by her intercessions
with thee. The second is that, which their Litanies contain, which, though I
do not undertake to know how they are used, or how they ought to be used by
particular Christians, (that is, how far voluntary, how far obligatory) yet the
form of them is manifest, that whereas you have in them sometimes, Lord have
mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy
upon us; You have much oftener the Blessed Virgin repeated again, and again
under a number of her attributes; you have also all the Saints and Angels, or
such as the present occasion pretends for the object of the devotion which a
man tenders, named and spoken to, with, Ora pronobis, that is Pray for us; The
blessed virgin some say with te rogamus audi nos; We beseech thee to hear
us. One thing I must not forget to observe, that the prayers which follow those
Litanies, are almost always of the first kind; That is to say, addressed
directly to God, but mentioning the intercession of Saints or Angels, for the
means to obtain our prayers at his hands. The third is, when they desire
immediately, of them, the same blessings, spiritual and temporal, which all
Christians desire of God. There is a Psalter to be seen, with the Name of God
changed every where into the Name of the blessed Virgin. There is a book of
devotion in French with this title; Moyen de bien seruir, prier, and adorer la
Vierge Marie; The way well to serve, pray to, and adore the blessed Virgin.
There are diverse forms of prayer, as well as excessive speeches concerning her
especially, and other Saints, quoted in the Answer to the Jesuits Challenge,
page 330-345. Of those then, the first kind seems to me utterly agreeable with
Christianity; importing only the exercise of that Communion* which all members
of Gods Church hold with all members of it, ordained by God, for the means to
obtain for one another the Grace which the obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ
has purchased for us, without difference, whether dead or alive; Because we
stand assured, that they have the same affection for us, dead or alive, so
far as they know us and our estate, and are obliged to desire and esteem
their prayers for us, as for all the members of Christ's mystical body. Neither
is it in reason conceivable, that all Christians from the beginning, should
make them the occasion of their devotions as I said, out of any consideration
but this. For, as concerning the term of merit perpetually frequented in these
prayers; it has been alwawes maintained by those of the Reformation, that it
is not used by the Latin Fathers in any other sense then that which they
allow. Therefore the Canon of the Mass, and probably other prayers which are
still in use, being more ancient then the greatest part of the Latin Fathers;
there is no reason to make any diffficulty of admitting it in that sense, the
ground whereof I have maintained in the second Book.

The third, taking them at the foot of the leter, and valuing the intent of
those that use them, by nothing but the words of them, are mere Idolatries; as
desiring of the creature that which God only gives, which is the worship of
the creature for the Creator, God blessed for evermore. And, were we bound to
make the acts of them that teach these prayers the acts of the Church, because
it tolerates them and maintains them in it in stead of casting them out, it
would be hard to free that Church from Idolatry; which whosoever admits, can by
no means grant it to be a Church, the being whereof supposes the worship of
one God, exclusive to any thing else. But the words of them are capable of the
same limitation that I gave to the words of our Lord when I said, that they
whom Christians do good to here, may be said to receive them into everlasting
habitations, because God does it in consideration of them, and of the good done
them. And so, when Irenaeus calls the Virgin Mary the advocate of Eve V. 19.
he that considers his words there, and III. 33. shall find that he says it not
because she prayed for her, but because she believed the Angels message, and
submitted to Gods will, and so became the means of saving all, though by our
Lord Christ, who pleads even for her as well as for Eve. Ground enough there
is for such a construction; even the belief of one God alone, that stands in
the head of our Creed, which we have no reason to think, the Church allows
them secretly to renounce, whom she allows to make these prayers. And
therefore no ground to construe them so, as if the Church, by allowing them,
did renounce the ground of all her Christianity. But not ground enough to
satisfy a reasonable man, that all that make them do hold that infinite
distance between God and his saints and Angels, of whom they demand the same
effects, which if they hold not, they are Idolaters as the Heathen were; who
being convinced of one Godhead, as the Fathers challenge to their faces,
divided it into one principal, and diverse, that by his gift are such. How
shall I presume, that simple Christians, in the devotions of their hearts,
understand that distance of God from his creatures, which their words signify
not? which the wisest of their teachres will be much troubled to say, by what
figure of speech they can allow it? Especially if it be considered, how little
reason or interest in religion there can be, to advance the reverence of
Christian people toward the Saints or Angels, so far above the reason and
ground, which ought to be the springhead of it. For, so far are we from any
Tradition of the Catholic Church for this, that the admonition of Epiphanius
to the Collyridians takes-hold of it, Haer. LXXIX, For, they also would have
been Christians, being a sort of women in Arabia, who, in imitation of the
Eucharist, offered to the Virgin Mary, and communicated. Therefore Epiphanius
reproves them by the Custom of the Church, that no such thing was ever done in
the Church, as well as by the ground of Christianity, that Christians worship
only one God. This admonition then takes hold, though not of the Church, yet
of the prayers which it allows, signifying the same with their oblations. So
does the admonition of Saint Ambrose in Romans I. to them who reserve nothing to
God, that they give not to his servants. So does that of Saint Augustine, de
vera Rel. Cap. LV. that our religion is not to consist in worshipping the dead;
And, that an Angel forbad S. John to worship him, but only God, whose
fellow servants they were. So does the argument of S. Gregory Nyssene contra
Eunom. IV. and Athanasius contra Arian* III. concluding our Lord to be God,
because he is worshipped, which Cornelius was forbid by Saint Peter, Saint John
by the Angel, to do to them, says Athanasius. In fine, so dangerous is the
case, that whosoever communicates in it, is no way reasonably assured, that he
communicates not in the worship of Idols. Only, the Church of England having
acknowledged the Church of Rome a true Church, though corrupt, ever since the
Reformation; I am obliged so to interpret the prayers thereof, as to
acknowledge the corruption so great, that the prayers which it allows may be
Idolatries, if they be made in that sense which they may properly signify: But
not, that they are necessarily Idolatries. For, if they were necessarily
Idolatries, then were the Church of Rome, necessarily, no Church; The being of
Christianity presupposing the worship of one true God. And though, to confute
the Heretics, the style of modern devotions leaves nothing to God which is
not attributed to and desired of his Saints; Yet it cannot be denied, they may
be the words of them who believe, that God alone can give that which they
desire.

The second sort, it is confessed, had the beginning in the flourishing times
of the Church after Constantine; The lights of the Greek and Latin Church,
Basil, Nazianzene, Nyssene, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, Chrysostom, Cyrils
both, Theodoret, Fulgentius, Gregory the Great, Leo, more, or rather all after
that time, have all of them spoken to the Saints departed, and desired their
assistance. But neither is this enough to make a Tradition of the Church. For
the Church had been CCC. years before it began. Irenaeus is mistaken, when he
is alleged for it, as I said even now. Cardinal Bellarmine alleges out of
Eusebius, de Praeparat. XIII. 10. Vota ipsis facimus. We make our prayers to
them. But the Greek bears only, We make our prayers to God at their
monuments. Athanasius de sanctissima deipara, whom he quotes, is certainly of a
later date then Athanasius. Out of S. Hillary I see nothing brought, nor
remember any thing to be brought to that purpose. In fine, after Constantine,
when the Festivalls of the Saints, being publicly celebrated, occasioned the
confluence of Gentiles as well as Christians, and innumerable things were done,
which seemed miracles done by God, to attest the honor done them, and the
truth of Christianity which it supposed; I acknowledge, those great lights did
think fit to address themselves to them, as petitioners* but so at the first,
as those that were no ways assured by our common Christianity, that their
petitions arrived at their knowledge. You have seen Saint Augustine
acknowledge, that they must come by such means, as God is no way tied to
furnish. Gregory Nazianzene speaks to Gorgonia, in his Oration upon her, and
to Constantius, in his first oration against Juliane, but under a doubtful
condition, if they were sensible of what he spoke. Enough to distinguish
praying to God from any address to a creature, though religion be the ground
of it. And when the apparitions about their monuments were held unquestionable,
yet was it questioned, whether the same sou^ could be present at once in places
of so much distance, or Angels appear like them, as you may see in the answer
aforesaid, page 391. 394. Nay, Hugo de S. Victore in Cassander, Epist. XIX.
has enabled him to hold, that the Litanies do not suppose that the Saints hear
them, and therefore are expounded by some to signify conditional desires, if
God grant them to come to their knowledge. But of that I speak not yet, only
as it inables me to conclude, that this kind of prayer is not Idolatry. This
necessarily follows from the premises; Because a man cannot take that Saint or
Angel for God, whose prayers he desires; But manifestly shows, that his desire
is grounded upon the relation which he thinks he has to him, by our Lord
Christ, and by his Church. Nevertheless, though it be not Idolatry, the
consequence and production of it not being distinguishable from Idolatry, the
Church must needs stand obliged to give it those bounds, that may prevent such
mischief, as that which shall make it no Church. For, though the degrees are
not visible by which the abuse is come to this height, yet, I conceive, it
appears, by Walafridus Strabus de Rebus Ecclesiasticis cap. XXVIII. that
before S. Jerome, the Saints had no room in the Litanies, which answer; Pray
for us; after every Saints name. There he tells, that S. Jerome first
translated Eusebius his Martyrologe (containing what Saints died on what days
of the year) at the request of Chromatius and Heliodorus Bishops, upon occasion
of that commendation which the Emperor Theodosius had given Gregory Bishop of
Cordova, for commemorating every day at the Eucharist, the saints of the day.
And before this, he affirms, the Saints names had no room in the Letanies. And
Chemnitius has given us the transcript of an ancient Letanie out of a written
Copy belonging to the Abbey of Corbey upon the Wesor, which calls upon the
Saints; Sancte Petre, Sancte Paul, etc. but so, that the suffrage is; Exaudi
Christ; O Christ hear us, or them for us; which is the effect of the first
sort of Prayer, and an evident argument that the forms now in force took
possession by degrees. For the Letatanies are properly (...), Lord have mercy
upon us, as the Liturgies of Saint Basil and Saint Chrysostom call them. By
that form of service which the Constitutions of the Apostles relate, where the
Deacon indites to the people what they are to pray for, in behalf of all
estates in the Church, and their necessities; you shall see the people answer
only, (...), Lord have mercy. That is their part. Thence came the name of
Letanies, whether such devotions were used in Processions, or otherwise. That,
in the Letanies of Saint Gregory, whereof we read in his life, I. 41. 42. The
Saints were spoken to, the people answering, Ora pro nobis, pray for us; it is
easy to believe. For, of Charles the Great and Walafridus his time there is no
question to be made. That the same was done in Saint Basils Letanies, whereof
Epist. LXIII. or in those which Mamertus Bishop of Vienna instituted, (as we
find by Sidonius Epist. V. 14. VII. 1. which have since been called Rogations)
there is no manner of appearance; And the innova^ion of Petrus Fullo, the
Eutychian Bishop of Antiochia, after the Councile of Chalcedon, which
Nicephorus relates Eccles. Hist. XV. 28. in bringing the Blessed Virgin into
the prayers of the Church, is enough to assure us there is no Tradition of the
Apostles for it. A difference very considerable. For, grant the monuments of
Saints and Martyrs the places for Christians to meet at, for Gods service in
public, for their private devotions, by primitive Christianity; All this
while the service of God is the work, the honor of the Saints, determines
only the time and place of it. Processions celebrated with Letanies were
assemblies for Gods service, to turn away his plagues, and the like; And, when
the Saints come into them, their honor becomes part of the work for which
Christians assemble. Suppose a simple soul can distinguish between Ora pro
nobis, and Domine miserere; between Pray for us, and Lord have mercy upon us;
How shall I be assured, that it distinguishes between the honor that Pagans
gave the less gods, under Jupiter the Father of gods, and that which himself
gives the Saints, under the God of those Saints? And is it enough, that the
Church injoynes not, nor teaches Idolatry? Is it not further bound to secure us
against it? I know not whether it can be said, that Processions, and Letanies,
are voluntary devotions, which the people are not answerable for if they
neglect. They were first brought in, and since frequented, at the instance of
Prelates, and their Clergy; and, if they be amiss, the people are snared by
their means; that is by the Church, if the Church bear them out in it. And by
these three sorts of Prayers it appears, that without giving bounds to private
conceits, there is means to stop men's course from that extremity, which,
whether it be real Idolatry or not, nothing can assure us. Upon these terms I
stand. I have heard those relations, upon credit not to be questioned, which
make their devotions to Saints hardly distinguishable from the Idolatries of
Pagans. That they who preferred them, could not, or did not distinguish, I say
not. In fine, they demonstrate manifold more affection for the Blessed Virgin,
or some particular Saints, then for our Lord. That they call not upon Saints to
pray for them but to help them; That they neither express, nor can be presumed
to mean, by praying for them, but by granting their prayers; In fine, that
they demonstrate inward subjection of the heart, wherein Idolatry consists: I
cannot disbelieve those who relate what they see done. What may be the reason
why to them, rather then to God? It was a means to bring the world to be
Christians, that it was preswaded, that God protected Christians, by the
intercession of those Saints, whose Festivalls they solemnized. But it brought
them to be Christians, with that love of the world, and the present commodities
of it, which Christianity pretends to leave without the Church, among the
Pagans. Should they resign these affections to their Christianity, they would
have immediate recourse to God: whom having to friend, they know they need
neither be troubled for plague, nor toothach, nor any thing which the Cross of
Christ consists with. While they cannot assure themselves that they do, no
marvel if they would have such Christianity, as may give them hope of that,
by the Saints, which God assures them not by it. I grant it no Idolatry, that
is, not necessarily any Idolatry, to pray to Saints to pray for us. The very
matter implies an equivocation in the word praying, which nothing hinders the
heart to distinguish. But is it fit for the Church to maintain it, because it
is necessarily no Idolatry? I grant, Ora pro nobis, in the Letanies, might be
taken for the ejaculation of a desire which a man knows not whether it is
heard or not; (as some instance in a leter, which a man would write, though
uncertain whether it shall come to hand or not) and I could wish, that the
people were taught so much, by the form; as a powerful means to preserve the
distance between God and his creature alive in their esteem. I count it not fit
for a private person to say, what might be condescended to, for the reunion of
the Church stopping the way upon those mischiefs, which the flourishing times
of the Church have not prevented. While all bounds are refused, all
extreamities maintained, I allege it, for one of the most considerable titles
for reformation without the consent of the whole.

As for the remains of the Saints bodies, and the honor of them, having said
this of their Souls, whereof their bodies had been the instruments, I shall
need to say but a little. Gennadius I will not forget, De Eccles. dogmat Cap.
LXXIII. Sanctorum corpora, and praecipue beatorum Martyrum reliquias, acsi
Christi membra sincerissime honoranda: and Basilicas eorum nominibus
appellatas, velut loca sancta divino cultui mancipata, aff^ctu piissimo, and
devotione fidel^ssima adeundas credimus. Si quis contra hanc sententiam
venerit, non Christianus, sed Eunomianus and Vigilantianus est. We believe,
that we are most sincerely to honor the corpses of the Saints, specially the
relics of the Martyrs, as of the members of Christ; And to come to the
Churches called by their names, with most pious affection, and most faithful
devotion. If any man do against this sentence, he is no Christian, but a
follower of Eunomius and Vigilantius. At the first, the places of their
burial, and times of their triumphs, determined the circumstances of Gods
service. Afterward, when more Churches were requisite, then there were Saints,
to bury their remains where the Eucharist was celebrated. seems an honor
proper for the purpose. Nay, though S. Jerome confess that those pore women,
which lighted candles in houour of them, had the zeal of God not according to
knowledge; (supposing both Jews and Gentiles had a custom to light candles, on
all occasions which they would honorably celebrate) why should it seem a
ceremony unfit to express men's esteem of Gods Grace in them? If Vigilantius
could not down with this, I have nothing to do with Vigilantius. But there
were abuses even before that time. Lucilla, reproved by Cacilianus, Deacon of
Carthage, for kissing the relics of some questionable Martyr before the
Eucharist, by her money and faction raised the schism of the Donatist, upon his
being chosen Bishop. Optatus I. S. Austin knew many Christians that worshipped
tombs and pictures de moribus Eccles. Cath. cap. XXXIV. Vigilantius might
desire, only that bounds might be put to prevent abuses, and in that, might be
borne out by those Prelates whom S. Jerome taxes. In that, I do not find
Vigilantius condemned by the Church. And, those bounds were easily determined,
if prayer to Saints did not transgress the bounds of revealed truth. For, were
nothing done that should suppose that they hear the prayers that are made
them, there should be no considerable occasion, to transgress the bounds of
honor due unto their relics.

As for the worshipping of images, of necessity, the word (...) or carved Image
in the second commandment must either stand for any similitude, and so the
making or having of any manner of image will be forbidden by the precept; Or,
for the similitude of any imaginary Godhead; And so no image but those are
forbidden by it. According to that former sense, the making of the brazen
serpent and the Cherubins over the Arc is a dispensation of God in his own
positive law, which is easily understood. But, Solomon making the Bulls, the
Lions, Eagles and Cherubins in his temple will be no less, and will require a
revelation to warrant it. According to the later, making of images, will be no
more prohibited the Jews, then other nations, by the Law. But, God having
constituted a power in the Nation to limit the Law, and so to make a hedge for
it, as the Jews speak; that which they forbid, will be, by that means,
prohibited by the Law. And so, there might be such an image in David's house, as
we read of 1. Sam. XIX. 12. that is such an one as was not so prohibited. And,
by the some reason, the tribute money might have Caesar's picture on it, which
otherwise must be against the Law. And when Josephus says, that Solomon
incurred blame ^y making images of living creatures in the Temple, it will
appear, that their constitutions, in his time forbad the making of such.
Tertullian contra Marc II. 22. manifestly affirms the making of the Brazen
Serpent and Cherubines not to have been against the Law, because not made for
Idols, alleging the words of the precept; Thou shall not worship them nor
serve them; For a restriction limiting the generality of a carved image. And
this opinion I doubt not to be true; and that there is no third to be named.
For, if it be said that the meaning of the precept is; Thou shall make no Image
that may give occasion to worship it; No^ supposing a conceit of more Gods then
one, an image is not a thing that can make a man think so; supposing the
conceit of a God besides the true God, without an image, a man will worship
the same. Now, either God by saying; Thou shall make no image that may give
occasion to worship it; refers it to every man to judge, whether the image that
he may make gives occasion to worship it or not; And then, he leaves it to
every man to make any image, which he judges to give none: Or, he refe^^ it to
the power which he appoints to oblige the nation, in that behalf, to judge;
Which is that which I say. And therefore, seeing no man is left to himself, to
judge in that which God has appointed a power to determine, of necessity, this
sense is the same which I maintain. The consequence whereof is, that it is in
the power of the Church to judge whether images are to be had, and that in
Churches, or not. For, the power that concludes the Church being the same with
the power that concludes the Synagogue, as the Synagogue and the Church are
both one and the same people of God, under the Law and the Gospel* It is not
possible to limit this power under the Gospel, not to place images in
Churches, by virtue of this Law, which provides nothing concerning Churches.
The case would come to be the same, if we should suppose the precept to
prohibit the making of an Image. For then, the matter would necessarily
evidence that it was positive, and given only the people of the Jews, for
that estate which the Law introduced; Seeing, not only that which is
ceremonial, but also that which is positive, in Moses Law, necessarily cease
to oblige Christians. The reason why the Law provideth not to the contrary, is
that which I have alleged, why Christians are not tied to part with wives or
husb^nds that are Idolaters, as the Jews were, out of S. Austine; That, whilst
the blessings of the world were the promises, which God conditioned to give
them that should keep his Laws, the prosperity of this world might move
Israelites according to the ^lesh, to fall from their own to their husbands or
their wives Gods* the worshippers whereof they saw prosper in the world. Not so
those who had undertaken his Cross, and thereupon, if faithfully, had received
his spirit which the Gospel brings. For so, why should the Church think,
that having Images should seduce those that are such, to think^ them the seats
of some God head, which supposes a conceit of more Gods then one? And upon
this supposition proceeds all that is written ^n the prophesies of Esaias and
Jeremy, in the book of Baruch, under the person of Jeremy, and in the rest of
the prophets, in scorn of the Images of the Gentiles; To wit, that they
imagined some Deity contained and enclosed in them, which were indeed mere
wood and stone.

The question that remains is but only this; whether this power of the Church
has been duly executed, and within the bounds of our common Christianity, or
not. For, to pretend that the Apostles themselves have put it in use, by
prescribing, that images be had, and in Churches, would be to contradict all
that appears in the point by the records of the Church. For, though I be
obliged to say, that there was never any constitution of the Apostles,
injoyning the whole Church, not to bring any image into any Church; because all
the Church, that is considerable, has sometimes done it; yet will it easily
appear there is no act of the whole Church, binding all to have them in
Churches. The council of Elivira, Can. XXXVI. Placuit picturas in Ecclesiis
esse non debere, ne quod c^litur in parietibus pingatur. It seemed good that
there be no pictures in the Churches; least that which is worshipped be pictured
on the wales. The Epistle of Epiphanius to John Bishop of Jerusalem is extant
in S. Jerome, relating how, finding something of our Lord Christ painted upon a
veil in a Church of his Diocese, he gave order to tear it, which, being out
of his Diocese, he could not have don, had he not thought it against Gods Law;
and therefore no law of the Church. And Eusebius Eccles. Hist. VII. 18. relating
the statue of our Lord curing the woman that had the issue of blood, at
Caesa^ea Philipi, faith, it is no marvel, that Gentiles converted to the
^aith, should honor our Lord, and his Apostles (for he says, he had s^en
images of Peter and Paul as well as of our Lord, (...), preserved from their
time) as the Gentiles used to honor their Saviors or benefactors. But, had it
been against Gods Law, would not the Apostles have told them so; would they not
have believed the Apostles* whom they bel^eved before they were Christians? The
picture of the good shepherd upon the Chalices of the Church, which Tertullian
appeals to de Pudicit. cap. VII. easily shows, that they used not his Picture,
who used an Emblem of Christ for a Picture. And you heard S. Austine say, that
he knew many worshippers of Pictures and Tombs among Christians. The true
ground and effect of these passages, is hard for me to evidence here in a few
words. I believe S. Austine saw some dow* baked Christians do that at the
tombs of Christians, which, when they were idolaters they did at the tombs of
their friends, where part of their Idolatries, don were to their Ghosts. For,
by that which follows he complains, that he saw that excess of meat and
drink upon the graves of Christians, which, it is no marvel if the
Idolatries of the Gentiles allowed. So that it is no such marvel, that such
Christians should worship Pictures, as did the Gentiles. The Canon is one of
the hardest pieces of antiquity that I know. The most probable seems to be
this. That it follows the reason alleged in Deuteronomy, against any image for
God, because they saw no shape of God. So* the word cultus seems strictly to
signify that honor which Christianity tenders immediately to God, not that
which it may injoine to his creature. And their reason will be this, because
the God* head cannot be painted, therefore no Pictures in Churches. I do
believe there was something of the quarrel between John of Jerusalem and
Epiphanius about Origin (upon which, Theophilus of Alexandria heaved S.
Chrosystome out of the Sea of Constantinople) in that act of tearing the veil;
But, I believe Epiphanius acted according to his opinion in it, and an opinion
that he owned to all the world, what ever the rest of the Church did; (for we
see not that proceeding against John of Jerusalem, as against S. Chrosystome)
Eusebius might think those statues of our Lord and his cure, those pictures of
S. Peter and S. Paul more ancient then indeed they were. But, neither does he
charge any Idolatry upon them, nor is there any question in the case, but of
having pictures in private, not in the Church. That after this time, Churches
were everywhere trimmed with the stories of the Saints, and the Passions of the
Martyrs, I need not repeat much to prove; the controversy in the East, about
the worshipping of them, is evidence enough, that the use of them went forward,
but with such contradiction, that some held them Idols and broke them in
pieces, (who were there upon called Iconoclast^,) others worshipped them; who
after many attempts of the contrary party, prevailed at length in a Council at
Nicaea thence called the VII. General Council, with the concurrence of the Pope.

That the decree of the Council injoines no Idolatry, notwithstanding
whatsoever prejudice to the contrary, I must maintain as unquestionable,
supposing the premises. So far is it, from leaving any room for the
imagination of any false God* head, to be represented by the images, which it
allows, that it expressly distinguishes, that honor done the image of our
Lord Christ to be equ^v^cally called worship, that is, to be only so called,
but not to signify the esteem of God; (which, he that believes the Holy
Trinity, can no way att^ibute to the image of our Lord) supposing, not
granting, that it were lawful to honor the image of our Lord, not with any
gesture or word signifying any God head enclosed in it, (which the idolatries
of the heathen did signify*) but, that it is the picture of that man who also
is God; (which, he who believes the Trinity, and puts off his hat and bows the
knee to the image of our Lord must needs signify) I say this shall be no
^dolatry, because (whether the worship of the image or of him whose image it
is) necessarily it is no worship of God, but proceeds from an esteem, that the
image is a contemptible creature, but that the man whom it signifies is God. I
say upon these terms, it is not possible that it should be Idolatry, to
worship this image. Because, though the words or the gesture which are used may
signify the honor due to* God alone, yet the profession under which they are
used necessarily limits them to the honor of that which is not held to be God,
namely the image ^t is to be granted, that, whosoever it was that writ the book
against Image^ under the name of Charles the great did understand the council
to injoine* the worship of God to be give^ the image of our Lord; For, of any
other image of God there was no question in that Councile) But it is not to be
denied, that it was a mere mistake* and that the Councile acknowledging, that
submission of the heart, which the excellence of God only challenges, proper
to the Holy T^inity, maintains, a signification of that esteem, to be paid to
the Image of our Lord. For the words of the Councile, I refer you to Estius in
III. Sentent. distinct. IX. ss. II. and III. where you shall see, besides the
honor* due to God alone, and the honor due to his Saints, the Council
injoines a kind of honor for the images of either, respectively signifying the
esteem we have for God, and of his Saints. I know there is much noise of
Latria, to signify the honor due to God alone, and Dulia that which belongs
to his Saint^. And I am satisfied that there is no ground for the difference,
either in the original reason or use of the words, But, as nothing hinders
them to be taken as words of art use to be taken, to signify peculiar
conceptions in Christianity; so, if dulia be understood as S. Austine
understandes it c^ntra Faustum XX. 21. for that love and communion which we
embrace the saints that are al^ve with, there is no fear of Idolatry in
honoring the Saints departed with dulia. But, the honor we give the images,
is not the honor we give the principal, but only by the equivocating of
terms, according to the decree of the Council. Therefore that honor of images
which the decree maintains, is no Idolatry.

But, he that says it is no idolatry which they injoine, does not therefore
justify or commend them for injoyningit. It were a pitiful commendation for
the Church, that it is not Idolatry which the decree thereof injoynes. It is
therefore no evidence, that the decree obliges, because it injoines no
idolatry. You saw how near the honor of Saints, in the prayers which come
from this decree, came to Idolatry. And, though those that counted Images
idols in the East, stood for the honor of the Saints, yet it is certain, and
visible, that the authors of the decree did intend to advance the honor of the
Saints thereby, and effect it. What is that effect? That the Saints are prayed
to by Christians, in such form, and with such terms, as do not distinguish
whether they hold them Gods or creatures. Grant they agree with their
profession, and you must construe them to the due difference; suppose they
understand not the common profession, or the consequence of* it, who warants
them no Idolaters? It is alleged out of S. Basil de Spiritu Sancto cap. XVIII.
that the honor of the Image passes to the principal. He speaks of the
honor of the Son, that it is the honor of the Father, whose image the Son
is And so it is indeed. The honor of the Father and of the Son is both one and
the same. To say that the image of our Lord is to be honored as he is, is
perfect idolatry. But he who believes the Son to be of the fathers substance,
and his picture to be his picture, cannot say so, if he be in his wits. Either
he commits Idolatry, or he contradicts himself; That may and must be said. It
is easy to see how many Divines of the Church of Rome, make images honorable
with the honor of their principal; The images of our Lord, by consequence
with latria the honor proper to God. When this is said, it must be cured by
distinguishing though not properly, yet improperly; though not by it self, yet
accidentally, reducible to that honor which the principal is worshipped with;
that is, the image of Christ, as God. Yet you are not to use these terms to
the people, least they prove Idolaters, or have cause to think their teachers
such. So Cardinal Bellarmine de Imaginibus II. 23, 24, 25. There is a cure for
Idolatry in the distinction, supposing him to contradict himself. For what
greater contradiction then that the honor, that may be reduced to the honor
of God, should be the honor of God; seeing that it is not the honor of God,
which is not proper to God, as consisting in the esteem of him above all
things? So, for the adoration of the Cross, the sign of the Cross which I
spoke of before, is only a ceremony, which, being from the beginning,
frequented by Christians upon all occasions, the Church had reason to make use
of, in the solemnizing of the greatest actions of Gods public service;
particularly, those whereby the authority of the Church is convayed and
exercised. The Cross whereon our Lord Christ was crucified is a relic,
though not part of his body, yet for coming so nere to his body, deserving to
be honored. Other Crosses are the images of that. The School Doctors
question, what honor it is which the true Cross of Christ demands. And the
head of them, Thomas Aquina^, answers the honor proper to God, by the name of
latria: Either as representing the figure of Christ crucified, or as washed
with his blood. If the Cross of Christ must be worshipped with the honor
proper to God, because washed with our Saviors blood, then must it have
received divine virtue from his blood; Is not this construction reasonable? And
what made the Idols of the Hethen idols, but an opinion of divine virtue
residing in them* by being set up for the exercise of their religion that
supposed many Gods? I grant the construction is necessary, though not
reasonable. For, I find it construed otherwise. To make a difference between
the true Cross of Christ which is honored for a relic, and other Crosses,
which are honored as the pictures of it, and signs putting us in mind of
Christ on the Cross. So, the words of Thomas Aquinas may be reasonably taken
to teach Idolatry. If they be not necessarily so to be taken, yet, as he
teaches to honor it with Latria, either he teaches Idolatry or contradicts
himself, for the same reason as in Images. What the effect of these excessive
positions has been, is easy to see. They clothe their images, they paint
them, they guild them the finest they may. They think themselves holy for
touching, kissing, and caressing them, as children do their babies. They touch
their bodies with them, and think themselves hallowed by the means. They put a
cotton on the end of a stick, and touch first the images, then, the eyes, the
lips, and the noses of them that come, and that in their surplisses. Thus are
they induced to pray directly to the Saints for their carnal concupiscences,
as did the heathen idolaters; to vow to give themselves to them, to put
themselves under their protection and defense, to set them up in their
privacies, yea, in l^^civious postures, and the habits of their mistresses, as
promising themselves protection from them in their debauches. In fine, by this
means, they are come to make images of God; not pictures of his apparitions in
the Scripture, but of the Father, and of the holy Trinity. A thing so expressly
forbidden by the Law. For, the Arc of the Covenant had on it, indeed, the
figures that signified Angels, the Throne of God; it self signifying Christ, in
whom God is propitious to mankind. Therefore they were to worship toward the
Ark. But the majesty of God was, hereby, understood to be like nothing visible,
they were only taught where to find him propitious. Now, setting up their
images, and injoyning images to be worshipped, the construction is so
reasonable, that they honor the image with the honor due to God alone, that
it is not possible to make any other reasonable construction of that which they
do. Against the II. Councile of Nicaea all this, and without any order of the
present Church of Rome; but so, that, were not men sensible by whom they were
authorized, it were as easily disowned, on the one side, as it were hard on the
other side, to persuade men to do it.

Here it will be said, these are probable reasons, such as, in moral matters,
may always be made on both sides; (for what is there concerning humane
affairs, that is not disputable?) But, the decree of the Church being once
interposed, by the second Councile of Nicaea, it behooves all Sons of the
Church, to depart from their own reasons, because the unity of the Church, as a
Body, can by no means be maintained, unless inferiors yield to the judgment
of superiors. An objection which I must own, because I have acknowledged the
argument of it hitherto, and have no where been straightened by it. But I say
therefore that the Power of the Church has never been exercised by a voluntary
consent, in any decree injoyning the worship of Images. For the having of
Images in Churches, I acknowledge, there is a clear and unquestionable consent
of the Church visible; though, as I said before, there appeared dissatisfaction
in some parts, which appears to be voided, by the subsequent consent of the
whole. And I find sufficient and clear reason for it; the adorning of Churches
for the solemnity of Gods service; the instruction of the simple, that cannot
read in any book, by the pictures of things related in the Bible, and the
acts and sufferings of the Saints and Martyrs; the admonishing of all, whether
learned or unlearned, of that which they knew before; the stirring up of
devotion toward God, by being admonished, whether of things related in the
Scriptures, or in the relations concerning the Saints, and Martyrs, which the
Church justifies. In a matter subject to the power of the Church, as I have
showed this to be, the light of common reason attesting these considerations,
more ought not to be demanded. And therefore, though the Homilyagainst peril
of Idolatry, contain a wholesome doctrine, in this particular, I must have leave
to think it fails; as it evidently does in others. But all those reasons are
utterly impertinent to the worshipping of Images. For, suppose the Image of our
Lord, or his Cross, may reasonably determine the circumstance of place, where
a man may pray to God, as I said of the holy Eucharist; the worship so tendered
will be manifestly the worship of God, and have no further to do with the
image, then a furniture or instrument, not which a man serves, but whereby he
serves God. And therefore Saint Gregory, supposing, and, as it seems, taking no
notice of him that prays before the image of Christ upon the Cross, in his
Epistle to Secundinus; In another Epistle to Serenus Bishop of Marseilles
forbids all worshipping of Images, as making them subjects capable of any
worship that may be called religious, as proceeding from or enjoined by that
virtue. For, the honor of the image passes not upon the principal, any
otherwise, in this case, then, as the presence thereof may be a sign to show
why we worship the principal where it is. Which, the images of Saints are not
fit to signify, because their principals the Saints are not capable of it.

But, setting aside all dispute what ought to be done; because the question is,
what the Church has decreed, that it ought to be done, I say, the decree of
the second Councile of Nicaea, obliges not the Church at present, because it
never had the force of a sentence. I have said in due place, that all decrees
of Counciles are but prejudices, no sentences. The reason whereof is as
necessary as evident, supposing the premises. For, the consent of the whole is
that which gives any decree the force of a decree, as you saw, by the instance
of the Council of Sardica. The consent of the representatives in a Council is a
presumption of the consent of the whole, but it is not the formal consent of
it. No Council ever was composed of representatives, proportionable, in number
of votes, to the weight of each part to the whole. The ground of a presumption
making the calling of Councils worth the while, is, because, whatsoever may
come in consideration is supposed to have been wayed there, and the express
consent had of the present, against which the absent cannot weigh. In the II.
Councile of Nicaea, the Popes Legates consented; and I granted before, the West
was wont to receive the conclusions from Rome, but not tied so to do, in case
the matter required further examination, as in this case. For, within a while
after, a Council of Charles the Greats Dominions (then the far greatest part
of the Western Church) assembled at Francford, condemns the Council of Nicaea,
allows the having of images in Churches, as S. Gregory had done, and in like
manner, condemns all worshipping of them. Here was a fair stop to the recalling
of the Church of Romes concurrence to it. Which, though it was not effected,
yet under Ludovicus Pius son of Charles the Great, an Embassy ^ comes from the
Eastern Emperor, with a leter yet extant, signifying many orrible abuses,
which the decree had produced, and desiring his concurrence, and the
concurrence of the Church under him, to stop the current of them. A Treaty
being had hereupon, by the Prelates of his dominion, the resolution-is yet
extant in the negative, under the name of the Synod of Paris, grounded upon
consent with the Fathers. By this, and by diverse particulars laid forth by the
Archbishop of Spalate 7. de Republ. Eccles. XII. 59. 71. it appears, that the
worship of images, never came in force by virtue of this Conncile of Nicea. And
amongst them, it is not to be forgotten, that the acts thereof were not known
in the West; as appears by the extravagancies of Thomas Aquinas, and the
School Doctors that followed him, in determining, that images, and the true
Cross of Christ are to be worshipped with the same honor as their principals;
The image of Christ therefore, and his true Cross, with the honor due to God
alone, though in reference to God. Had the Acts of the Councile been known in
the West, (as they would have been, had it been admitted) these men would never
have gone about to bring in an opinion, so extravagant from the doctrine of the
Councile. Which shows plainly, that it is the Sea of Rome, that has employed
the whole interest thereof, right or wrong, to give that force to the decree,
which, of it self it had not. You have besides, a work of Jonas Bishop of
Orleans, against Claudius Bishop of Turin, you have the testimony of Walafridus
Strabo, allowing images, but disallowing all worship of them. Nay, in the time
of Fredrick Barbarussa, Nicetas, relating how he took Philippopolis, notes,
that the Armenians stirred not for the taking of the City, having confidence in
the Almans, as agreeing with them in religion, because neither of them
worshipped images. De Imperio Isaaci Angeli. II. Therefore, in removing the
force of this decree, it is not the authority of the whole Church, but the will
of the Sea of Rome, that is transgressed. And, that power of the Sea of Rome by
which this is done, is not that regular preeminence thereof over other
Churches, which cannot decree any thing in the matter of a general Councile,
but, by a general Councile, either expressly assembled, or included in the
consent of those Churches whereof it consists. But of that nothing is or can be
alleged. It remains therefore, that it is come to effect by that infinite
power thereof, which the whole Church acknowledges not, and therefore, in
effect, by the means which it imployeth, to justify such a pretense.

I say no more of the ceremonies of Gods service. I maintain no further effect
of them, then the ground for them warrants. The composition of our nature makes
them fit and necessary means to procure that attention of mind, that devotion
of Spirit, which God is to be served with, even in private, much more at the
public and solemn assemblies of the Church. Whatsoever is appointed by the
Church, for the circumstance, furniture, solemnity or ceremony of Gods service,
by virtue of the trust reposed in it, is thereby to be accounted holy, and so
used, and respected. The memories of Gods Saints and Martyrs are fit occasions
to determine the time and place and other circumstances of it: And the honor
done them in recording their acts and sufferings, (with the conversation of our
Lord upon earth) whether out of the Scriptures, or otherwise, a fit means to
render his solemn service recommendable, for the reverence which it is
performed with. If, in stead of circumstances, and instruments the Saints of
God, or Images, or any creature of God whatsoever become the object of that
worship, for which Churches were built, or for which Christians assemble; by
that means, there may be room to let in that Idolatry at the back door, which
Christianity shuts out at the great gate. Whether or no it be a fault in
Christians, that they cannot do violence to their senses, and count those
things holy, as instruments of Gods service, because so they should be, which
they are convinced, in common reason, that they are used to his disservice; I
dispute not now. But without dispute, woe to them by whom offenses come; And,
they who prosecute offenses given without measure, are they by whom offenses
come. The charge of superstition is a goodly pretense for abolishing
ceremonies. But when, not only the reverence of Gods service, but also the
offices of it are abolished withal, then is there cause to say, that the
service of God it self seeems superstitious. To fit and sleep out a sermon, or
censure a prayer, is more for a man's ease, then to fall down on his knees, to
humble his soul at Gods footstool, and to withdraw his mind from the curiosity
of knowledge or language, to the sense of Gods majesty and his own misery. It
is then for our ease, but not for Gods service, that the ceremonies thereof
should be counted superstitious.

CHAP. XXXI. The ground for a Monastical life in the Scriptures; And in the
practice of the primitive Church. The Church gets no peculiar interest in
them who profess it, by their professing of it. The nature and intent of it
renders it subordinate to the Clergy. How far the single life of the Clergy
has been a Law to the Church. Inexecution of the Canons for it. Nullity of the
proceeddings of the Church of Rome in it. The interest of the People in the
acts of the Church; And in the use of the Scriptures.
I Cannot make an end, by distinguishing the bounds of Ecclesiastical and
Secular power in Church matters, till I have resolved, whether or no the body
of it, the materials of which it consists, be sufficiently distinguished by the
estates of Clergy and People; Or whether there be a third estate of Monkery,
constituted by Gods Law, intitling the Church to a right in those who profess
it, upon the ground of Christianity, and in order to the effect of it. For, the
resolution hereof opens the ground, as well of that reverence which the people
owe the Clergy, as of that instruction and good example which the Clergy owe
the people, the neglect whereof is that which forfeiteth the very being of the
Church, that is the unity of it. I am not now to dispute whether it be lawful
for a Christian to vow to God the vow of continence or not, having proved in
the second book that it is; And showed, in what sense the perfection of a
Christian may be understood to consist in the professing and performing of it.
The case of Ananias and Sapphira has been drawn into consequence, not only by
Saint Basil, as I showed you in the first book, but also by Saint Gregory of
Rome, Epist. I. 33. quoted by Gratiane XVII. Quaest. I. Cap. III. though,
acknowledging, that community of goods was a part of the profession of the
Christians then at Jerusalem, it cannot be said, that they who professed this
community of goods did profess that which is strictly called Monkery. For,
they let not to continue married, all Monks professing continence. But I
have, besides, made it to appear, that all were not tied, then at Jerusalem, to
give up all their goods to the stock of the Church, but only what the common
Christianity should prompt every man to contribute to the subsistence of the
Church and Christianity; which, what it required, was visible. But I do not
therefore yield, that the argument is not of force, so far as the case (and
therefore the reason drawn from it) takes place. All Christians consecrate
themselves to the service of God, by being Baptized and made Christians. By
that they stand obliged, to consecrate their goods to the subsistence of his
Church, as the necessities thereof become visible. If it appear to be part of
this Christianity to consecrate a man's self to God further, by professing such
a course of life, as he thinks may give him best means and opportunity, of
discharging the common profession of Christians; (though all Christians are not
tied to profess the same) shall he not stand bound to make it good, upon the
same ground, for which Ananias and Sapphira are condemned, in withdrawing that
which they professed to consecrate to God? But Saint Paul's instruction, to
refuse the younger widows, has no answer; Because, when they grow wanton
against Christ, they will marry; Having damnation, as having set their first
faith at naught. 1 Timothy V. 11, 12. For what can that first faith be, but their
promise engaged to the Church, whereby they dedicate themselves to the service
thereof, in the state of widows?

Under the Old Testament, it is no mistake of the Jews to believe that all
Gods people were, ordinarily, under the precept of increase and multiply;
requiring of them, the state of marriage. Saint Angustine and other Fathers of
the Church, have found marks of it in the Old Testament. It is not therefore
to be imagined, that there is either precept or precedent for the state of
Monks, in the Old Testament. Nor yet to be denied, that Nazarites, especially
from the mothers womb, that those women who kept guard at the Tabernacle, Exodus
XXXVIII. 5. 1 Samuel II. 22. (as Anna the daughter of Phanuel, that departed not
from the Temple, serving God with fasting and prayer day and night, Luke II.
37.) that the Rechabites are instances and precedents of some principles and
ingredients of their profession, even under the Old Testament. For, if man and
wife should now dedicate themselves to attend upon the poor, sick, and
helpless in hospitals, or the like, they would be no less. The Prophets,
though under no perpetual tie, lived in a kind of Community with their
disciples; not for that knowledge of the Law which the Rulers of the people
professed, (whom they were ordinarily in difference with, and often times
persecuted to death by them) but for those rudiments of Christianity, which, by
their means, were kept alive under the Law. The Rechabites, being of the race
of the Kenites, which, it seems, upon Moses invitation to Jethro, took part
with the Israelites, in the Land of Promise, under the condition of worshipping
only the true God; knowing, what all strangers are subject to, living under
the dominion and protection of strangers, received a Law from their
predecessors, not to have further to do in the world, then their subsistence,
by the simplest sort of life, by being shepherds, required. And, being
commended for obeying their Rule, by the Prophet Jeremy, from Gods mouth, have
much justified them, who, under Christianity, do voluntarily put themselves
under the like Rule, out of a pretense, the better to discharge their
Christianity by that means. During the time of our Lord, there was a third
sect of people among the Jews, whom we find no mention of in the Scriptures of
the New Testament, because they lived retired out of the world, some married,
others in single life, both under a most strict observation of their Rule,
which you have in Josephus, under the name of Essanes. It is well enough known,
that Eusebius finding a relation written by Philo the Jew, of that manner of
life which they used in Egypt, hard by Alexandria, has reported them for
Christians; and how this report has been disowned of late years, as a mere
mistake of Eusebius, or an ungrounded conjecture. I, who have showed, that it
is possible Philo himself may have been a Christian, must not reject the
opinion of those, who think they might really be Christians, converted by the
first arrival of Christianity in Egypt. For, in the case which I spoke of,
there is no cause, why they might not be both Jews and Christians, the
separation of the Church from the Synagogue not being yet formed; and, when it
was formed, continue Christians, forsaking the Synagogue. And truly the mention
of Virgins, as of a peculiar order visible in the Church, is so ancient in the
writings of Tertulliane, Methodius, (whose Book of Virginity is published of
late) and Saint Cypriane, that it must needs be impossible to find any
beginning for it. For Tertulliane writing his Book, De velandis Virginibus, to
prove that Order not exempt from Saint Paul's injunction, that women vail their
faces at divine service; appeals to the custom of the Church at Corinth, to
which Saint Paul writ it, as having always observed it in Virgins. And
therefore the same Saint Paul, directing him who had resolved to keep his
daughter a Virgin. 1 Cor. VII 37. seems to suppose, this resolution to imply
that education, whereby she might be enabled so to continue. For, it is true,
the profession is difficult, but not impossible for him to go commendably
through with, that by Gods grace, undertakes it with that zeal which the end
requires. I do much admire the resolution of Gennadius, De 'Dogmat. Eccles.
cap. LXIV. that it is not the mere love of a continent estate which
Christianity esteems, unless it be chosen as the means and opportunity of
serving God with the more freedom; otherwise, signifying rather the declining
of marriage, then the love of Chastity. For. so it is indeed, he that chooses a
continent estate, to avoid the difficulties of marriage, seems rather to tempt
God, and to expose himself to many desertions, waving the remedy which he has
provided. But he who trusts to Gods assistance, for the accomplishment of that
intention which Christianity commends, though it command not, may assure
himself of it, not destituting his prayers, of the endeavors which he may and
is to contribute.

This being the case of particular persons, that withdraw themselves from the
world to make their salvation the more assured, the interesse which accrues to
the Church, in them that do so, seems to be no more, then may be grounded upon
the profession of such a purpose. For, so long as it is secret, between God and
the soul, the Church can have nothing to do in it. But being once professed,
and known to take hold; the transgression thereof, becoming notorious, is a
sin which owes an account to the Church. Not that the manner of this
profession, is any way provided for, but by the custom of the Church. For, he
that should actually and visibly declare, such an intention, by really entering
upon the course, and living according to it, would become necessarily liable to
that account, for the transgressing of it, which the solemnity renders due. And
therefore that solemnity reduces it self to the nature of those ceremonies,
whereby, actions of great consequence, wherein the authority of the Church is
exercised, ought in reason to get reverence. For by that means, the parties
concerned receive a due impression of the charge they undertake, when God and
his Church become rather parties, then witnesses to it. In the mean time, they
remain in the Church, what they were before, private Christians, only
professing such a course of life, only engaged to God in it; under the
knowledge of his Church. And, when those that have spent their time in this
kind of life, out of their experience and knowledge undertake to direct others,
the way of governing themselves in it, when others, joining themselves to them,
undertake to order their life according to such directions; neither has the
Church any thing to do in the matter of them, further, then to take account,
that they be according to Christianity; nor do the parties enter into any new
obligation, but that of performing that profession which is become notorious.
The consequence whereof is this; that the profession being ^ransgressed, by an
act that creates a new state, (as that of marriage, the bond whereof is
insoluble) the obligation which is violated being to God, and not to the
Church, the Church shall have no power to free him from the obligation
contracted, whatsoever censure the transgression of his profession may require.

John Cassians, who lived in the Monasteries of Egypt, wherein this exercise
seems to have received first that form, with other parts, according to their
capacities, imitated; mightily justifies the Apostolical original of the
profession, by the antiquity of their Monasteries, and the Traditions by which
they lived, received from age to age, without express beginning. But above
all, the three several forms of them, extant in Egypt, during his time,
seems to demonstrate, by what degrees it came to that height. The first of
them, called in his time Sarabaitae, professing no communion with others, but
at each man's discretion, seems to him a defection from the common profession;
But signifies, that, at the first, the profession did stand without living in
common, though it could not stand* so long, without* abuse. To avoid which abuse
first Convents began, then Anchorites left them to live alone in the
wilderness. You may see what he writes, De Instit M^n. II. 3, 5. Collat.
XVIII. 3-7. The orders of their Convents, which he describes, as also Saint
Basils instructions, make the work of their life to be the service of God* by
prayer and fasting, with the praises of God; But so, that laboring with their
hands in some bodily work, and living in so much abstinence, they were able to
contribute the greatest part of their gain, for alms to the poor; Though not
at their own discretion, but at the discretion of their superiors, to whose
guidance they had once given up themselves. How far this is distant from any
form of this profession extant in the West, is easy enough to imagine. For,
all this while, they remain mere Lays, without all pretense of that
superiority over the people in the Church, which the Clergy signifies; That
superiority, which they have one over another, standing only upon that
voluntary consent and profession, the solemnizing whereof signifies, that it
is approved by the Church. Nor is there any thing of indowment in all this,
their profession, to give alms of their labors, rendering them incapable of
any such. But it must not be denied, that the Monasteries of the West, have
been the means to preserve that learning which was preserved alive during the
time; at least the knowledge of the Scriptures, and other records of the
Church, upon which the knowledge of the Scriptures depends. And certainly, the
knowledge of the Scriptures is more dangerous then a sword in a mad man's hand,
unless it be joined with that humility which only Christianity teaches. A
thing more rare, in them that think themselves guilty of learning, then pearls
or diamonds. A thing so difficult for them to attain, that it ought to be
counted a sufficient price, for all the exercise a man can bestow in this
profession, all his life long. That sobriety of mind, that gravity of manners,
that watchfullnesse over a man's thoughts and passions, which is absolutely
requisite for the discharge, as of all Christians, so, especially, of them that
are liable to the temptation of spiritual pride; for knowledge in matters of
God, is a competent reward for all that retirement from the world, which this
profession can require. This being the design of Monasteries* it cannot be
denied, that the goods which they may be endowed with are consecrated to the
service of God, as estated upon his Church. But not therefore upon the Church
of Rome. The pretense of allowing the Rule of Monastical Orders, (which ought
indeed to be approved of by the Church) and of reducing them into several
bodies, under one Government, in several dominions, and the Churches of them;
(a thing no way concerning the foundation of the Church, or any right thereof
derived from the same) has been the means for the Church of Rome, to exempt
them from the government of their Ordinaries, and to reduce them to an
immediate dependence upon it, by whose Charter each Order subsisteth. But there
is no manner of ground in the profession for this; nor was it so originally,
but is come to be so, by the swelling of the Regular Power of that See, to that
height, which the pretense of Infallibility speaks. For why should not every
Church, or every Synod, to which any Church belongs, and the respective heads
of the same, be capable of visiting, regulating, or correcting whatsoever may
concern the common Christianity, in bodies of mere Lay people, (as I have
showed all Mona^^eri^s or Convents of Monks originally to be) subsisting
within the respective Diocese of every Church? Unless the case of a Monk
falls out to be a cause that concerns the whole Church, as that of Pelagius;
For then there will be no marvel, that it should resort to the same trial,
that determines the like causes of other Christians. And upon these terms,
though the Church of England has no Monasteries, as not essential to the
constitution of the Church, but advantageous for the maintenance of that
retirement from the world, in the reasons of our actions, wherein our common
Christianity consists, by that visible retirement, wherein this profession
consists; (For, the constitution thereof succeeding that horrible act of
abolishing the Monasteries, under Henry VIII. it is no marvel, if it were
difficult to agree in a form, which the Reformation might allow and cherish)
yet is no son of the Church of England bound to disown the whole Church, in
maintaining Monastical life, as agreeable with Christianity, and expedient to
the intent of it.

They that understand the intent of Monastical life to be contemplation, do
not seem to consult with the Primitive custom and practice of it in the
Church. For, when bodily labor was by the Rule, to succeed in the intervals of
Gods service, and, as soon as it was done; I cannot conceive how a man should
imagine a more active life. That the activity thereof is exercised, not in any
business tending to advantage a man in this world, but to keep him employed,
so as to live free to serve God; makes it not the less active, though not to
the ordinary purpose. The case is the same, supposing that in stead of bodily
labor, men give themselves up to studies of the mind, for exercise of their
time in the intervals of Gods service. The whole intent of it may be comprised
in two cases. Either a man has forfeited his Christianity, with the promises
due, to it, and desires to regaine the grace, and to appease the wrath of God;
in one word, to make satisfaction for his sin, in the language of the ancient
Church; Or, he desires to prevent and avoid such forfeitures; and knowing his
own, and seeing other men's infirmities, and the danger to which they render him
liable, resolves to attend upon nothing else; as, not confident of passing
through the rocks and billows of the world, without making that shipwreck. S.
Jerome is an eminent example of the former case. His writings are, most an end,
the fruits of his retirement to that purpose. Only that, being a Priest before,
and tied to the service of his Church* he must be dismissed by his Bishop.
Gennadius shows upon what ground, De dogm. Eccl. cap. LIII. Sed and secreta
satisfactione solvi mortalia crimina non negamus, sed ut mutato prius seculari
habitu, and confesso religionis studio, per vitae correctionem, and jugi, imo
perpetuo luctu, miserante Deo, veniam consequamur: Ita duntaxat, ut contraria
his quae poenitet agat, and Eucharistia^ omnibus Dominicis di^bus supplex and
submissus usque ad morte^ percipiat. But we deny not that mortal sins are
loosed by satisfaction in secret, though so, that a man obtain pardon by the
mercy of God, changing first the habit of the world, and professing the study
of religion, by amendment of life, and continual, or rather perpetual
mourning. Only on these terms, that he do the contrary to that which he
repents of, and humbly like a suppliant receive the Eucharist every Lords day
till his death. By this custom, so general, that Gennadius makes the ground
of it a position of the Church, we may see, by the way, that the ancient Church
never took the power of the keys to be necessary to the remission of all sins
after Baptism; Seeing, of those sins, upon which the Power of the Keys had
passed by Penance, there can no doubt remain, whether remitted or not; That a
man should change his state of life to assure it. In the mean, time the other
case is contained in this. For, he who retires from the world to bewail his
sins, does it with an intent to provide, that he may not commit the like for
the future; And that is also the intent of all those, that propose this life to
themselves, or have it proposed to them by their parents, for the future. How
this estate of life may be counted a state of perfection; Not as if the
perfection of a Christian did consist in any observation of an indifferent
nature, but in the complete observing of that which our Baptism professes; I
have showed in the Second Book. The objection which here is to be made to it,
is of weight. For, the perfection of Christianity consisting in charity, as S.
Paul teaches, and that charity, in this state of life, being confined to a
man's self, and those little offices which a man has occasion to exercise
toward a little Convent; (for, what consideration is to be had of the alms
which the work of their hands, where that was in use, might contribute to the
necessities of the poor?) it seems, that the ordinary state of those that have
engaged in the world is of more perfection then Monastical life, as furnishing
greater oportunities, for the exercising of that charity, wherein our
Christianity cheifely consists. To which I answer, that, though the occasions
of the world minister more opportunity of exercising charity, to them whom a
man converses with; Yet, the engagements which a man that lives in the world
has, by his estate and profession, even according to Christianity, make it
more difficult for him to follow the reason of charity, (supposing that it were
easy for him to discern it, in every thing) then for those who have retired
themselves from such engagements. And though, the profession of Monastical
life not being vulgar, and therefore being difficult, many were seen to fall
short of it, even when the intention of undertaking it was innocent, and the
condition simple; and falling short of it, become far worse then those who
fail of their Christianity, in the ordinary state of Christians; Yet, there is
in the state it self, not incombred with accessory corruptions, grounded for a
persumption in reason, that those who live in it come nearer that which our
Baptism professes, by the means thereof, then others can do. And this answer
serves, comparing private persons, with private persons, in the one and in the
other estate. But comparing private persons in this estate, with public
persons in the Church, which are the Clergy; whose profession does, and ought
to disingage them of those obligations to the world, which I alleg^ for the
presumption, why the Laity having opportunity do not attain the reason of
charity, in the intent of their actions; I acknowledge their estate is of it
self simple and absolutely the state of perfection in the Chu* though more
difficult to discharge, then that of Mona. life, whatsoever perfection it
pretends. For, the profession thereof, being the solemn dedicating and
consecrating of a man's self to God, for and in the ministry and service of his
Church, contains in it self, and ought to express unto the world, the
disclaiming of all manner of engagements, inconsistent with it, so far as the
foundation of the Church allows. That limitation I except, because I have
provided else where, that the foundation of the Church presupposes civil
government, for an ordinance of God; and therefore, no quality standing by the
foundation of the Church can exempt any man from the service of his Country.
So, the privileges of the clergy it is granted, stand by the civil Laws of
Christian powers; though obl^ged as not to persecute for Christianity, so, not
to hinder Christians from dedicating themselves to the service of the Church;
Who upon those terms, being so dedicated, can not be subject to those services
of their Country, which all are necessarily subject to, upon any pretense to
discontinue their attendance upon the service of the Church. But, this
exception being made, for the rest, that engagement to the Church, which the
undertaking of holy Orders constituteth, remains absolute; supposing a
disposition and resolution, in him that undertakes the estate, to behave
himself with that simplicity, innocence* humility, charitablenesse, and
sobriety of judgment, in the midst of the world, which he undertakes to
converse with, which Monastical life professes toward a man's self, and
those few from whom we cannot re^ire. This the constitution of the Church and
the reason of it, this the examples of the Apostles, and their companions, and
substitutes, in the Scriptures of the* New Test* (as partly, of the Prophets
and their disciples under the Old) evidenceth no less, then the Canons of the
Church, or the customs thereof more anciently in being, then expressly
inacted by any common decree of it. Whereupon it follows, by virtue of the
premises, that the state of Monastical life, is of its own nature subordinate
to the state of the Clargy, tending as a means, by private exercise, to fit
men to the discharge of themselves toward the world, which the Clergy obliges
every man to converse with, in that manner which Monastical life professes.
Of this there is sufficient evidence, by those many examples that are extant,
in the records of the ancient Church, of such as have been taken from
Monastical life, to be promoted to the service of the Church. Which course
expressing no dispensation in the profession of Monastical life, formerly made
necessary, intimates a reasonable ground for th^s const^uction; That the
Church allowing men to dispose of themselves to the exercise of monastical
life intended not to part with that interest which it has in every particular
Christian, to oblige those to the service thereof, by promoting them to Holy
Orders, whomsoever she finds fittest for it. And that, the allowance of
Monastical life, is in order to this intent and purpose. A thing still more
visible, by all those institutions and foundations whereby Monast^ties have
been made and accounted seminaries of the Church, and the Clergy of it.

This being said* you see how great aquestion remains, whether the Clergy be
bound to the continence of single life or not to wit, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons* For the Deacons office has indeed been divided into several orders
of inferior Clergy, sub* deacons readers, door* keepers, waiters, and that for
the necessity of the Church in that estate which was before Constantine; So
that the cons^u^ion of them cannot be imputed to any corruption that might
follow upon the temporal prosperity of the Church. But of these inferior
Orders there is no question. For, as concerning Deacons you have a Canon of the
Council at Aricyra, (the Canons whereof were afterward part of the Canons of
the whole Church) allowing them, not to marry being Deacons, but to be made
Deacons being married. And an other of the council* of Elvira in Spain,
(ancienter then the Council of Nicaea* injoyning upon Bishops, Presbyters,
Deacons and Sub-deacones to abstaire from their wives, under pain of their
Clergy. At the council of Nicaea, it was in debate to do the same, and the
Council was moved by Paphnutius a Bishop of great merit in Egypt, himself
always a single man, to rest in the rule presently in force; which was;
preferring those, who being single, should loose their ministries if they
married to all decrees of the Clergey especially Priests and Bishops, to make
use never the less of those, who were married or professed an intent of
marryage, when there was ground by the rest of their qualities, of confidence
in them, for the discharge of their office. For this; as it agrees with the
Canon of Ancyra, and the form of it, so it assures us that the Council of
Elvira could not have taken in hand to impose so great a burden, had not the
precedent practice of the Church, by unwritten custom, before the Canon,
disposed the Church to receive it. And therefore, I will in this point, which
has been the subject of many volumes, and, in which it would be endless to
examine the Canons the precedents, the authorities that concern it, discharge
my self chiefly upon Epiphanius, whose words in the LIX. Haeresy of the
Novatians, are these, (...). Moreover neither does the Church admit him that is
the husband of one wife, yet living and getting Children, Deacon or Priest or
Bishop or sub deacon: Unless he abstain from that one, or is become a Widower:
Especially where the Canons of the Church are exact. But you will by all means
say to me, that in some places, Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons do still get
children. That is, not by the Canon, but by the slack disposition of men's
minds, sometimes, and for plenties sake, when men fit to minister are not
found. In the conclusion of his work also, he reckons this for one of the
Laws of the whole Church, without mentioning this exception. Now if you go to
seek for any rule in writing, to bind the whole Church to this, before
Epiphanius his time, you will find none, But a custom you will find in force
which is more then all the Law of the world in writing, whereby it will appear
that the endeavor of the Church was, to be served with single men; but, when
the best qualified were not such to balke the rule, for the appearance of that
common good in balkeing it, for which the rule it self was made. And so the
resolution of this point attesteth, first, the Corporation of the Church;
when, for the good of the body, it presrcibes it self rules, what sort of
persons to make use of, for the exercise of those offices, in the communion
whereof the surety of it stands. Then, it eminently attests the superiority
of the Bip* and his Clergy in every of those Churches, whereof the whole
consists; Unless men be so wilfully senseless, as to attribute the wisdom
which such dispensations required, to the rashness of anymultitude. Last of
all, ^it attests the regular pre-eminence of the Church of Rome over the rest
of the Western Churches; by the interposition whereof, visible in those times,
when it had no help from the secular power to make it irregular and infinite,
so great a burden became so far owned.

First then, I must free the Church from the heavy charge, of bringing in the
doctrine of deviles, foretold by S. Paul, in prohibiting marriage, 1 Timothy IV. 1,
3. which I shall do the more slightly because I have had opportunity else where
to show, that he speaks of the Heresies on foot in the times of the Apostles,
which made marriage the ordinance of those powers which made the world, which
their doctrine distinguished from the true sovereign God. For, what has the
rule of the Church to do with any such supposition as this? (...) (...). So
Epipha. prosecutes his purpose. For the Church always aiming at the most
fitting, as well ordered by the H. Gh, decreed to endeavor that the service be
performed without distraction from God, and spiritual necessities effected
with all the most charitable conscience; I mean that it is fit, in regard of
sudden ministries and necessities, that the Priests, the Deacons and the
Bishops wait upon God. For, if the Holy Apostle command those of the Laity,
saying; that they may attend upon Prayer for a time; 1. Cor. VII. 5. How much
more commands he the Priest the same? Now I mean with out distraction, that
he may wait upon the Priesthood, which is performed in spiritual
necessities, according to God. Here you have no mention for incapacity of the
Priest hood, or any service which it injoyneth, by marriage, or any thing to
disparage the estate in the sense of Gods Church. But here you have S. Jeromes
argument, if S. Paul require the use of wedlock to be fo^borne for
extraordinary devotions, then has the Church reason, to endeavor, that they
whose ordinary devotions ought to be extraordinary in comparison of the people,
be such as forbear it always. Especially in regard of those offices of the
Church, the occasions whereof may fall out at any time, and sudaine, Truly,
were there nothing to do, but to preach twice a week, there could no such fall
out. Nor can I show you better evidence then this, that that order is not the
order of Gods Church, Again, Epiphanius in the premises, charge the
Novatians with ignorance, in not permitting the Laity to marry second wives;
(which their Fathers the Montanists are evidently chargeable with) Not
considering that the Clergy were intended for the cream of Christians, not in
knowledge, or language, but in Christianity. Therefore he that had been baptized
in danger of death, not before, and he that had done public penance, was not
admitted; No more was he that had married a second wife, which, when all is
said, is S. Paul's meaning, 1. Tim. III. 2. For, he that had more wives, then
one, was no Christian, and therefore in no capacity for the Clergy, who was not
to communicate with the Church. And, they who think S. Chrysostom in Epist. ad
Titum hom. II. expounds him, of those who being parted by divorce, should mary
a second wife; must say whether before baptism or after; For that alters the
case. For, though it was a doubt in S. Jeromes time, whether he that had
married one before baptism another after were under this incapacity or not; But
after baptism, it is not to be thought that the Church had so little respect
of our Lords Laws, as to admit adulterers though not as to the Roman Laws,
yet as to Gods. Athenagoras calls it (...) fashionable adultery, in regard to
the world. For, as to the Church, adultery it was always, but never
fashionable. Wherefore, S. Chrysostomes argument is to this purpose; (...); How
should he govern well, the Church, that kept no good will for her that was
gone? For, a man is not chargeble for not keeping affection for her whom he puts
away, when she is gone; but well and good, for her that is dead. And if he say
that S. Paul hereby pun shes (...), the incontinent; and that the case has
(...) many blames it is plain, that civil people have always had them in
esteem above others, that have staid at their first marryage. And therefore,
though no civil Law forbid it as S. Chrysostom observes, nor Christianity,
yet is it no marvel* if the laws of the Church, which the Apostles hereby
inacted, set a mark upon it, which civility disesteemeth. See Grotius his
annotations on the place and Luke II. 36. If we consider, that the widows
which the Church maintained were to be such, 1. Tim. V. 9. then, that it has
always been an incapacity by the Canons of the Church; we shall not need seek
any other beginning for it. S. Chrysostom in 1 ad Tim. Hom X* though the copy
be not clear, says plain enough, that the Apostles exacted no more then
this; signifying what the Canons at that time, did require. For, I do not
pretend that the Apostles themselves, either enjoined: themselves single life,
or gave over their wives, when they went about their office; Though nothing
can appears to the contrary, the many examples of Bishops and Priests, that
gave over the use of wedlock from the time of their ministry with the consent
of their wives, giving appearance, that they thought, the Apostles had done the
same. It is enough, that their instructions were a ground for the Church to
proceed in it, and a step toward it. That course which the Council of Nicaea
confirmed, by resting content with it, seems agreeable, both with justice,
and that holiness to which the Church pretends.

But, before I come to that, I must not forget the second reason moving the
Church to endeavor it, to wit, the dispensing of the Church goods according to
the intent for which they are dedicated to God, in being estated upon it. For,
by the ground hereof, settled in the first book, it evidently appears, that
the Clergy are not proprietaries in the fruits of them; But, have only full
right to maintain themselves upon them, with that moderation and abstinence,
in their private expense, which continual attendance upon Gods service*
involved in their profession, necessarily inferteth. Otherwise it is manifest,
that they are trusted by Christian people, with the dispensing of their
oblations and consecrations to the maintenance of the poor; part of the
original consideration upon which they were estated upon the Church. Nor can
any civil Law, providing contribution of the people for the necessary
subsistence of the poor of every parish, ever extinguish this obligation, so
long as the Church is a Church, and stands upon its own title. That
hospitality to which Church goods are, and always have been accounted liable,
consisting, not in secular intertainment, which brings on ambition of worldly
expense, and costly superfluities; But, in providing for the poor and
strangers, and distressed, whether at home or abroad; the intent whereof
redounds to the account of him that provideth the means, and therefore the
execution thereof, to his account that dispenses the same. For, if the intent
of the Church, and all the Laws of it demonstrate, that the Clergy are to be
the first fruits of Christianity; then does the renouncing of the world, which
all Christians by their Baptism profess, in the first place take hold of
them. But, that the enjoying of superfluities in the world is utterly
inconsistent with. Therefore, the profession of the Clergy necessarily limiteth
their right in Church goods, to a spare and moderate maintenance; the trust
which is upon them, by intent of pious consecrations, expressed in the
original custom and practice of the Church, taking place in point of
conscience, where their own necessities cease. Now, it is indeed become
evident, by corruption prevailing in the Church, that single men, becoming
trusted with Church goods, can abuse them so well to their own riot, or to the
enriching of their relations, that married men could have don no more. But that
never came to pass, til, chiefly by the coming of the world into the Church,
those manners and customs, in which the eminency of the clergy above the people
did and ought to consist, suffered shipwreck in the multitude of offenders;
after they had been maintained a great while, by the eminent abstinence of
Prelates and inferior Clergy, able, for authority and means, to have produced
bad examples. Whether common reason is tied to judge it more probable, that the
moderation and abstinence which the Clergy professes should prevail and take
effect, they living single or married; that I suppose only comes in
consideration, when the dispute is, what course the Law of the Church should
take. And therefore, the profession of that continence, which single life
requires grounding a reasonable presumption of eminence in Christianity, above
those that are married, there was all the reason in the world, why the Church
should endeavor to put the government thereof into such hands, by preferring
them before others. On the other side, as all truth in moral and humane
matters, is liable to many exceptions; it cannot be denied, that more
abstinence, from riot and from riches both, more attendance upon the service of
God is found some times, in those that live married, then in those that live
single. In which consideration, it may well seem hard, to conclude all them
that are married unserviceable for the Church. The moderation therefore of the
Eastern Church seems to proceed upon a very considerable Ground; not
excluding married persons from a capacity of Holy orders, but excluding persons
ordained from any capacity of marriage. For, those who were promoted to the
Clergy being single, and knowing that they were not allowed marriage, what can
they pretend, why they should hold their estate, not performing the condition
of it? As for the promoting of those who are already married, it is the trial
of their conversation in wedlock, that may ground a presumption, as well for
that conscience, which their fidelity in dispensing the goods of the Church, as
for that diligence, in setting aside the importunities of marriage, which their
attendance upon the service of the Church requires. It was therefore to be
wished, that the Western Church, had used the limitation, which the Nicene
council, by resting contented with, confirmed; to admit of persons married
before orders, preferring before them those that are single. But it must be
granted, that, as well in the West as in the East, though the aim was to
perfer single life, yet here and there, now and then, those that were married
were not excluded. It is not to be thought that one Spanish council, which had
no effect at all without the bounds of it, could as easily be reduced to effect
in practice, as couched in writing. Especially, the General council of Nicaea
having waived the motion of inacting the same. But, this demonstrates the
credit of the Church of Rome, in the Western Church, at that time that the
Rescripts of Syricius and Innocent, Popes, are found the first acts, to enforce
the same which that Spanish council had inacted. For, the African and other
Western Canons, that inj^ine the same, are, for time, after Syricius. Whereby
it appears, though they do not use that exception which the council of
Nicca had supposed, yet, that the rule of single life for the Clergy was so
trodden under foot, that it was found requisite to seek means, by the Synods
of several parts, and by the concu^rence of the Sea of Rome to bring it into
force. For, let no m^n think that those Canons took effect so soon as they were
made, which were made on purpose to restrain the marriages of the Clergy; Who,
for the most part, had, from the beginning lived single, but, neither before
nor after could be totally restrained from marriage.

It would be too large a work in this place, to repeat, either the particular
Canons which were made, and the discourses of the Fathers to enforce them, on
the one side; or on the other side, the saying of the Fathers and other
records, in point of fact, whereby the in execution of them does appear. Those
that would be satisfied in it may see what the Archbishop of Spalato has
collected, and find Epiph. his saying still take place, during the flourishing
time of the Church But all this while you hear nothing of any vow annexed to
the undertakeing of Holy Orders, by virtue whereof, marriage contracted under
them should become void. For, the vow of single life, being an act that
disposes of a man, and his estate in this world, to a total change of his
courses, if he mean to observe it, what reason can admit any ground for
presuming of it, when it is not expressed? And the custom of the Eastern
Church, reduces the penalty thereof unto the ceasing of^ that ministry, and by
consequence, of that maintenance, which the order intitleth to; which is not
the penalty of breaking a vow. But the effects of these rules and endeavors
of the Western Church was never such, as to exclude the Clergy from marryage;
how much soever they might exclude married persons from the H. orders. When
Greg. the seventh undertook to bring them under a total restraint from marriage,
it is manifest, that, other manner of means were employed, to make that
restraint forcible, then the constitution of the Church indowes it with. For,
that was the time when the Church undertook to dispose of Crowns and
scepters, and to extend the spiritual power thereof, to the utmost of
temporal effects. And therefore it is to be granted, that, by such means
indeed, it might and did come to effect; But in point of fact only, not in
point of right, as being a rigor, which, the practice of all parts was
sufficient protestation, that the Church, in that estate, was not able to
undergo. For, the horrible and abominable effects thereof have been so
visibl^, that it is not possible, the cause of them should seem the production
of that reason, which the being of any law requires, and supposes* Nor can
the Sea of Rome justly be admitted, to charge that no bounds have been observed
in releasing of it; which, it cannot be denied, that the ancient Church, in all
places did observe. For, I truly, for my part, have granted that even Laws
given by the Apostles, for the better government of the Church, though written
in the scriptures, may be dispensed in by the Church, when the present
constitution of things shall make it appear to the Governors thereof that the
observation of that rule which served for that state in which it was
prescribed, ^ends to the considerable and visible harm of the Church, in the
present state of it. And therefore, I will not take upon me to say, that the
state of bigamy which S. Paul, I have showed, makes an impediment to some
Orders, can by no means be dispensed with. But the Sea of Rome, which
dispenses with it as of course, paying the ordinary fees, I conceive, cannot
in justice charge the releasing of the rule of single life to all the Clergy,
though, in some measure, a Law of the whole Church. And how many Canons of the
whole Church, besides, are there, which must be trampled under foot, by
bringing that unlimited power into effect, which now it exercises? I could
therefore earnestly wish* for mine own part, that some reservation had been
used, in the releasing of it; that the respect due to single life, by our
common Christianity* might have remained visible to Christian people, by the
privilege of it in the Church. Nor do I think my self bound, by being of
the reformation, to maintain the acts by which it stands, upon other terms.
But this I say that when the extremity of one party occasions the other to fall
into the opposite extreme, neither party seems clearly excusable of the fault
which the other commits, in betaking it self to the opposite extreme. And then
I say further, that, when secular force was applied to impose a burden, which
the experience of more in corrupt times had showed, that they could not bear,
the issue must needs be, the treading down of Christianity, for maintaining of
the ^edge that should sense it; And therefore, the proceedings being void, in
all reason of Law, it is no marvel if that moderation, which the argeement of
both sides might have preserved, could not take place.

I am yet indebted to those of the congregations, in a short account of the
right of the people in Church matters. I have acknowledged, that, during the
time of the Apostles, they were present at ordinations, at inflicting of
penance, at Councils; that the resolution of matters in debate passed under
their knowledge; that their consent concurred to put them in force. But, I have
also maintained that the unity of the Church is the sovereign Law, to which,
all other Laws, though never so much inacted by the Apostles, never so
evidenty couched in the scriptures, are necessarily subordinate; as tending
only to maintain unity, by maintaining order, in the exercise of those
offices, for communion wherein the Church subsisteth. That, in order hereto,
every Church is a body (tending to constitute one body of all Churches)
consisting of all Christians contained in one city and the territory of it;
howsoever cities and their territories may be distinguished; as, some times,
merely upon this account, and to this intent and purpose, they have been
distinguished. And by this means I have prescribed, that the consent of the
people of each Church was never requisite in this consideration, because they
usually meet together for the service of God; ^ut, as part of the people of
that Church, who were to be acquainted with proceedings concerning their
Church, that they might have reason to rest satisfied in the same. I have
provided in due place, that Laws expressly provided by the Apostles, and
recorded in the scriptures, for that state of the Church, which they saw, may
and ought to be superseded by the Church in case they prove useless to that
purpose, for which they were provided, by that change which succeeds in the
state of the Church. For, how should the sovereign Law of unity take place, how
should the Church continue one and the same body, from the first to the second
coming of Christ, otherwise? Now, this interest of the people, in matters
concerning their Church, though related in the scriptures* and known, by them,
in point of fact, to have had the force of law during the time of the Apostles,
and acco^ingly in the primative Church of the ages next the Apostles; yet,
cannot be said to be any where commanded, in point of right, for a Law of God,
to take place in all ages. I must therefore prescribe upon this account, and
do prescribe; That when the world is come into the Church, and the whole
people of England, for example, have declared themselves Christians, it cannot
be any more for the unity of the Church, that the consent of the people be
required to the validity of those acts, which concern the community of their
respective Churches. For then would it be no less unpossible, to constitute
one Church of all Churches, then it is for all Independents, to constitute a
Body that may be called the Church, of all their congregations, each whereof
they call a Church. And therefore, there is no cause why they should demand,
the same regard to be had to each one of the people, when all the people of a
City, and the bounds thereof concur to constitute the Church of a City; and
when the chief part of Christians within the bounds of a City, assembling at
once for the service of God, might also be acquainted with the proceedings of
matters concerning their Church. But, all this while, I am not so simple as to
grant, that the consent of the people, then required to the validity of things
done in the Church, did consist in plurality of votes; having easily huffed out
that ridiculous imagination, that S. Paul and Barnabas created Elders by votes
of the people, testified by lifting up their hands; the action of (...) being
attributed to themselves* not to the people. But, the consent of the people, I
mean, in body, as the people, that is, a quality distinct from the Clergy in
the Church, as their superiors and guides, in matters concerning the community
of it. For, is there any example in the Scripture, that ever they went to the
poll, or counted noses, in passing of matters concerning the Church, which the
people were acquainted with? Is there any such example in all the practice of
the primitive Church, in which it is acknowledged, the same course continued as
under the Apostles? Ordinations were held in presence of the people, that, if
there were cause, they, who knew every man's person might object against those
who were in nomination; if not, they might consent, by one vote of all that was
called their suffrage. This being the manner, upon this occasion they might and
did sometimes step before their leaders, and demand such as liked them best;
But so, that, if they forgot themselves, the Clergy was bound not to admit
their demand. And, in case of a Bishop, the neighbor Bishops were bound by S.
Paul's instructions to Timothy, not to lay hands on any for whom they could not
answer. Tertullian testifies, that, matter of excommunication was handled at
the assemblies of the Church (that is, with the knowledge of the people) as the
case of the incestuous person at Corinth, in S. Paul, is. But, neither were all
matters handled before the people, if the matter of S. Paul's communicating with
the Jews were handled* with the Elders, before the people were acquainted with
it, Acts XXI. nor is it posible to imagine, supposing a Church not to be a
congregation, but, that which I have said, that the people can have
satisfaction in all matters of that nature, when all the world is come into the
Church. As for Councils, it is a thing ridiculous to demand, because the people
concurred to the resolution of that at Jerusalem Acts XV. therefore, that the
acts of Councils should pass the people. For, when the Church of Jerusalem and
the whole Church were both the same thing, it was no marvel that the people
was to be satisfied, in the conclusion of it. And, by the form of holding the
Spanish Counciles, which you have at the beginning of the Councils, ^^t
appears, that there was provision made for the people, to assist, and see what
was done at* their Councils. But, so unreasonable is it to demand, that the
people consent to the acts of Councils, that it is manifest, that there can be
no such thing as a Council, according to the supposition of the congregations
And therefore, in the acts of Counciles, which are the Laws whereby the Church
is to be ruled, the people can have no further satisfaction, then to see them
openly debated, under the knowledge of the people. Indeed, the interest of
Sovereign powers in Church matters, (which I allow, not only in order to the
public peace, but as they are members of the Catholic Church, and so,
trusted with the protection of all that is Catholic) in behalf of the people,
gives them that power over the acts of Counciles, which by and by I shall
declare. Which, though grounded upon another account, and belonging to them in
an other quality, then that which the constitution of the Church creates; is
notwithstanding, provided by God, to secure his people of their Christianity,
together with the unity of the Church. But, the suffrage of the people of every
Church, that is, their acknowledgment, that they know no exception against the
persons in nomination for Bishops, or other orders of the Church; as it agrees
with the proceedings of the Apostles and primative Church, so must it needs be
a most powerful means, to maintain, that strict bond of love and reverence,
between the Clergy and the people, in the recovery whereof the unity of the
Church consists. And supposing public penance retrived, without which, it is
in vain to pretend Reformation in the Church, there can be no stronger means
to maintain Christianity in effect, then the satisfaction of the people,
though not in the measure of penance to be enjoined, yet in the performing of
it. Always provided, that this interest of the people be grounded upon no
other presumption, that any man is the child of God, or in the state of Grace,
and endowed with Gods spirit; then that which the law of the Church, whereby he
injoyes communion which the Church, creates. For, this presumption must needs
be stronger concerning the Clergy, by their estate, then it can be concerning
the people; Because, by their estate, they are to be the choice of the people.
And though, as all moral qualities are subject to many exceptions, some of the
people may be better Christians then some of the Clergy; yet a legal
presumption, that any of them is so, must needs be destructive to the Unity of
the Church.

But, no disorder in religion can be so great, as to justify the obdurate
resolution of the Church of Rome, to withdraw the scriptures from the people.
There is nothing more manifest, then, that the lamentable distractions which we
are under have proceeded from the presumption of particular Christians, up on
their understanding in the scriptures, proceeding to think their quality
capable of reforming the Church. Only those, that can have joy of so much
mischief to our common Christianity, can think otherwise. But, I am not
therefore induced to think our Christianity any other then* the Christianity
of those, whom our Lord, whom S. Paul, and other Apostles and Prophets exhort,
and encourage to the study of the scriptures; Whom, S. Chrysostom, and others
of the Fathers so earnestly deal with, to make it their business. All the
offense consists in this, that private Christians* observe not the bounds of
that which is Catholic, when they come to read the scriptures. For, if they be
not content to confine the sense of all they read, within that rule of faith,
in which the whole Church agrees, because they understand not how they stand
together; If they think the Laws of the whole Church can command things
contrary to that, which God by scripture commands; It is no marvel they
should proceed, to make that which they think they see in the Scripures, though
indeed they see it not, a Law to the Church. For, they think it is Gods will
that ties them to it, But, if the Church be the Church, as I have showed it is,
then was the Scripture never given private Christians, to make them Judges,
what all Christians are bound to believe, what the Church is to injoine the
Church, for the condition of communion with the Church. If any man object the
inconvenience, that it appears not, who or where that Church is, and so, we
are confined to those bounds that cannot appear; This inconvenince is the
clearest evidence, that I can produce for the Catholic Church. For, unless we
grant this inconvenience to come by Gods institution and appointment, we must
confess the unity of the Church to be Gods appointment, because the
dissolution thereof produces this inconvenience. For, were the unity of the
Church in being, I could easily send any man to the Catholic Church, by
sending him, to his own Church; Which, by holding communion with the whole
Church, must needs stand distinguished from those which hold it not, though
under the name of Churches. And, he who resorts to the Church for resolution in
the Scriptures, supposes, that he is not to break from the Church for that,
wherein the whole Church is not agreed. Now that the unity of the Church is
broken in pieces, it remains no more visible to common sense, what it is
wherein the whole Church agrees, as the condition for comunion with it. But,
the means to make it appear again, having disappeared, through disunion in
the Church, is that discourse of reason which proceeds upon supposition of
visible unity, established by God in the Church. And the means to make it
appear again to common sense, is the restoring of that unity in the Church, by
the interruption whereof it disappeareth. Then shall the edification of
particular Christians, in our common Christianity, proceed without interruption
by means of the Scriptures; every one supposing, that his edification in the
common Christianity depends not upon the knowledge of those things, wherein
the Church agrees not, but of those things wherein it agrees. In the mean
time it remains, that offenses proceed to be infinite, and endless, because
men, giving no bounds to their studies in the Scriptures, imagine the
edification of the Church to consist in that, wherein themselves, not regarding
the consent of the Church, have placed their own edification in the Scriptures.

CHAP. XXXII. How great the Power of the Church, and the effect of it is. The
right of judging the causes of Christians c^aseth, when it is protected by the
State. An Objection; If Eccl^siasticall Power were from God, Secular Power
could not limit the use of it. Ground for the Interest of the State in Church
matters. The inconsequence of the argument. The concurrence of both Interests
to the Law of the Church. The Interest of the State in the indowment of the
Church. Concurrence of both in matrimonial causes, and Ordinations. Temporal
penalties upon Excommunication from the State. No Sovereign subject to the
greater Excommunication, but to the less. The Rights of the Jews State and of
Christian Powers, in Religion, partly the same, partly not. The infinite Power
of the Pope not founded upon acts of Episcopacy, but upon the Secular Powers of
Christendom.
AND now I may make good that which might seem an excessive word when I said
it, that the Power which I demand for the Church, is no more, then the
subsistence of every Corporation, constituted by Sovereign Power, requires;
Only that it stands by Gods Law, these by man's. For, what Corporation
subsisteth without public persons, to govern or to execute those things
wherein it communicates? without any power to limit that which the Laws of
the foundation determine not? to admit and to shut out whom the foundation
thereof qualifieth? without a stock to defray the charge of those offices, for
communion wherein it subsisteth? That which renders the power of the Church
considerable even in the Church, that is, by the original constitution of it,
is the extent thereof, comprising all Christians. For by that means, in what
quality a man is owned by his own Church in the same he is owned by all
Christians, supposing the unity of the Church, to take place and prevail. That
which renders it considerable in the world, is the professing of Christianity
by the Sovereign Powers of the World; that is, of those States which
Christendom contains. For, supposing that which has been made to appear,
that the Church, being a Society formed by the act whereby God constituteth it,
dissolveth not into the state, when, by professing Christianity, it becoms
obliged to protect the Church; The rights and Powers thereof, and the qualities
of persons ministering the same, necessarily remain distinct from those, which,
the State wherein it subsisteth, either involveth or produces: And the
Protection of the state signifies further, that allowance, or that maintenance
of the rights, that concur to the acts thereof, which a Christian State needs
must afford that Christianity which it professes. The Power of ministering the
immediate instruments of Grace, the Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist;
The power of the Keys, in exacting that profession which qualifieth for them,
the means subordinate to the ministering of them; The power of solemnizing
those Offices with the Prayers of the Church, which the Promise of Grace,
implied in the foundation of the Church, attends; all these make the act of
the Church merely ministerial, the blessing that attends, the mere effect of
Gods grace, only limited to the communion of his Church. When the Church
determines the times, the places, the persons, the occasions, the forms, the
circumstances, the manner of celebrating any of those offices, which qualify for
Communion in the service of God with the Church; of those which provide for the
celebration thereof; of those wherein it consists; the acts whereby it
determines that which God has not determined, done within the Sphere of Gods
Law, oblige all to conformity by Gods Law; as the acts of Corporations oblige
the members, by the act of the State upon which they stand. Not as if this
conformity were the worship of God, but that which prepares and makes way for
it. The Laws of the Apostles, though recorded in Scripture, are necessarily,
by the subject matter of them, of this nature. Therefore I maintain them
subject to change, upon the same account, as the Laws of all visible
Corporations are necessarily subject to change. He that should think the
observing of them pleasing to God for the thing which they injoyne and
determine, not for that act of Gods service, the circumstance whereof they
limit; might commit superstition in observing the Laws given by the Apostles,
as well as by the Church. There may be ground for a presumption, in reason,
that there is superstition in doing that, which for the nature and kind of it,
may lawfully be done; when there is so much business about the circumstance,
that there is no appearance to reason, how it can stand, and be done, in order
to the principal which it pretends. For example; Pilgrimage to the holy
Land, has in it a pretense of extraordinary devotion, to which a man
sequestreth his time, from his attendance upon this world, and the advantages
of it. But if in effect, the exercise of devotion appear not the principal, is
there not ground in reason, for a construction, that a man hopes to bribe God,
with his bodily exercise, to grant those effects of Grace, which he cannot be
obliged to, but by the condition which the Gospel imports? This is
superstition, and will worship in the badde sense, or, the vain worship of
God, by doctrines delivered by men, which our Lord and the Prophet Esaias charge
the Jews with; When a man stands upon the circumstances tending to limit the
order and uniformity of that worship of God in Spirit and Truth, wherein
Christianity consists, as if the observation of them were the substance of
it. And yet, that uniformity which the Laws of the Church procure, so
necessary to the maintenance of Gods service, for which it stands, that there
is no less superstition, in standing upon the not doing of them; Which cannot
be stood upon, so far beyond the sphere of their kind and nature, without
appearance of an imagination, that a man becomes acceptable to God by refusing
them. But, to proceed to violate the unity of the Church upon such a cause, is
nothing else, then, to place the worship of God as much in committing
sacrilege, as in abhorring of Idols. This being the utmost of what the Church
is able to do, by the original constitution thereof, it will not be
prejudicial to that service of God which Christianity injoyneth, that the acts
thereof should take hold upon the conscience; Because it is easily understood,
by that interruption of Gods service, which the disorders of this time have
made visible, how every Christian, is bound in conscience to concur to that
uniformity, which, as it procures the service of God, so is procured by the
Laws of the Church. But this effect is invisible, between God and the
conscieuce. The visible effect of the original power of the Church, is
considerable in regard of the greatness of that Body which is the whole
Church, and ownes the act of every Church, done within the within the true
sphere, by giving effect to it. But it becomes considerable to the world, by
that accessory force, which the protection of the Church by the power of the
World (necessarily ensuing upon the profession of Christianity, so long as the
acknowledgement of one Catholic Church is a part of it) adds to the acts of
the Church, by owning them for the acts of a Corporation which the State
protecteth.

Before I come to limit this effect, I must acknowledge one part of the
Churchright to have ceased, and become void, by the coming of the world into
the Church, and the conversion of the Roman Empire to the Faith; That is, the
power of ending all suits between Christians within the Church. Saint Paul is
express in it; And the generality of our Saviors command; to resort to the
Church, if thy brother offend thee, can never be satisfied with any other
sense. The Synagogue had the same order, upon the same ground; to wit, that the
offenses that fall out among Gods people might not scandalize the Gentiles.
Therefore Saint James, writing his Epistle to converted Jews, supposes that
they exercised the same power of judging between Christian and Christian, as
they did being Jews, between Jew and Jew: And exhort them, thereupon, to use
it like Christians, James II. 1-13. for, this I have showed to be his meaning
in another place. And Saint Cypriane teaches Quirinus in the testimonies which
he produces against the Jews out of the Scripture III. 44. Fideles inter se
disceptantes non debere Gentilem Judicem experiri. In Epistola Pauli ad
Corinth. I. Audet quisquam vestrum -- That Christians, being in debate among
themselves, are not to come to the trial of a heathen Judge. For, in the first
Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians you have; dare any of you --. In the
Constitutions of the Apostles II. 45, 46, 47. this authority is most truly
attributed to the Church, by describing the manner of proceeding in it. Nor
will any man of reason question, that the author of them, though not so ancient
as the title under which he goes, understood the state of the Church before
Constantine. There he shows, that the Church, in the use of this power, aimed
at the precept of our Lord, to be reconciled to our brethren before we offer
sacrifice to God Mat. V. 23, 24. For, though the offering of beasts in
sacrifice to God be ceased, yet the reason of the precept holds in the
Eucharist, and the offering of those oblations, out of which it was consecrated
for Christians. To this purpose he prescribes, that Consistories be held on
the Monday, to see what differences were on foot in the Church, that they might
have the week before them to set them to right, that so they might offer at the
Eucharist, on the Lords day, with a clear conscience. For, at the Eucharist
they were to salute one another with a kiss of peace, and the deacon cried
aloude; (...); Let no man have any thing against any man, let no man give the
kiss of peace dissembling. All evidences for the practice of the Church. That
which Gratiane has alleged out of the Epistle of Clemens to James of
Jerusalem Causa XI. Quaest. I. Cap. XXXII. is found also in the life of Saint
Peter out of the book of the Popes lives, which you have in the Counciles;
though, in that Copy of it which has since been published under the name of
Anastasius, it appears not. The words are these in the Epistle. Si qui ex
fratribus negotia habent, inter se, apud cognitores seculi non judicentur; Sed
apud Presbyter^s Ecclesiae, quicquid illud est definitur. If any of the
brethren have suits, among themselves, let them not be judged before judges of
the World; But whatsoever it is, let it be judged before the Priests of the
Church. The life of Saint Peter says thus; Hic Petrus B. Clementem Episcopum
consecravit, cui and Cathedram vel Ecclesiam, omnem disponendam commisit,
dicens; Sicut mihi gubernandi tradita est a Domino meo Jesu Christo potestas,
ligandi s^lvendique, ita and ego tibi committo, ut ordines dispositores
diversarum causarum, per quos actus non Ecclesiastici profligentur, and tu
minime curis seculi deditus reperi^^, sed solummodo orationi, and
praedicationi, ad populum vacare stude. This Peter consecrated B. Clement
Bishop, and committed to him the sea, or, the whole Church, to be ordered,
saying; As the power of governing, or, binding and loosing was delivered me by
my Lord Jesus Christ, so do I also depute thee, to ordain those that may
dispose of diverse causes, by whom, actions that are not of the Church may be
dispatched, so that thou be not found addicted to secular cares, but only
study to attend upon prayer, and preaching to the people. I know the first is
forged, and the second of little credit. And, he that writ the Epistle might
intend to create an authority, against trying the Clergy in secular Courts,
which could not be the subject of any thing that Clement might write. But both
authors write what they might know, in their time, to have fitted the Apostles
time. There is nothing more suitable to that estate which the Apostles signify,
then that Clemens should appoint, who should attend upon the dispatching of
suits between his people, that he might attend upon the principal of his
Office. For, that all resorted not then to the Church, it is ridiculous to
imagine. It is enough that there is no instance extant, of any suit between
Christians tried before Gentiles, before Constantin^. And this is the reason
why Constantine, undertaking the protection of Christianity, made the Law that
is yet extant in the Code of Theodosius de Episcopali Audientia I. that any man
might appeal to the Bishop, in any cause, before sentence. Is there any
appearance that so vast a privilege would ever have been either demanded or
granted, had not the matter of it been in use, by the Constitution of the
Church among Christians? Therefore it was no marvel that it was limited
afterward (for it made the Church judge in all causes, in which one party
would appeal to it) as it appears by Justinians Law and other constitutions
before Justiniane. For, when the Empire was become Christian, the reason of our
Lords and his Apostles Order was expired. In the mean time, the referring of
causes to the Bishop* upon appeal, was but to refer the causes of Christians
to the Bishop which belonged to his knowledge before. And, when all were
Christians, to demand that all should resort to the Bishop, had been to
dissolve the Civil Government, which the Church supposes. The causes that
were afterward heard by Bishops, of the trouble whereof Saint Augustine
complains, and which Saint Peter had cause to provide, that Clemens should not
be oppressed with, resorted to them either as arbitrators, by consent of
parties, or as Judges delegated by the secular power, in causes limited by
their acts.

And now is the time to answer the objection against the being of the Church,
and the Protection which is drawn from those bounds, which, the power of
excommunicating, challenged by the Church, has been and is confined to, by all
Christian states. Though, having made the question general, I find it
requisite to extend also the answer to those other points, wherein I have said,
the right of the Church is seen, and upon which the society thereof is founded,
no less then upon the power of excommunicating. And then the argument will be
to this effect; That, seeing no Christian can deny, that the Laws, the
Ordinations, the Censures of the Church are lawfully prohibited to take effect
by the secular Powers of Christian States, therefore the right of doing those
acts stands not by Gods Law, but by the sufferance and appointment of the same
secular Powers, choosing whom they please to execute their own rights by. And
besides this consequence, another will rise, that this is the sense of all
Christendom, (to wit, where Christians are governed by Christians) that there
is no such thing as any power of the Church by Gods Law; because all
Christendom agrees, Sovereigns in doing, subjects in admitting, that it is
limitable by the Secular, which cannot limit Gods Law but its own. This being
the force of that objection, which is so largly pursued, in the first book de
Synedriis cap. X. my answer is; That, having showed how the decrees of the
Apostles themselves, as for the matter of them, are limitable and determinable
by the Church, to such circumstances, as may make them useful to the Church,
for another state then that for which they were first made; I am to grant, that
the Laws also, and other acts of the Church, may be limited by the secular
power, as for the execution and exercise of them. For, as the Society of the
Church, and all the acts thereof, done in virtue of Gods Charter, by which it
stands, supposing Christianity; so Christianity supposes commonwealths; that
is to say, the government of this world, in and by those Soveraignties, which
subsisted when Christianity came into the world, or may lawfully come to
subsist afterward. For, not to dispute for the present, whether civil
Government subsist by the law of God, or by humane consent; seeing it cannot
be said to subsist by the same act, (that is, by the same declaration of Gods
will) by which the Church, that is Christianity, subsisteth; it is manifest,
that the title by which, the Church stands must not be inconsistent with that
title by which civil government deriveth it self from the will of God: And
therefore, that they may and must suppose one an other. Who ever challenges to
the Church a power in all civil causes, and over all persons, to ordain, and
by force of their arms to execute, what the Church (that is, those that have
right to conclude the Church) shall think the consideration of Christianity
shall require; he, I grant, erecteth a Power destructive to the civil
gov^nement; Which, to stand tied to execute a decree, that may be contrary to
the decree of those that govern, is necessarily inconsistent with But, that
which I say is this; That the Church has power to determine all matters, the
determination whereof is requisite to mainetain the communion of Christians in
the service of God, and to oblige Christians to stand to that determination,
under pain of forfeiting that communion: But no power to give execution to them
by force of arms, which the Soverain power of every state only moves.
(Supposing for the present that no arms can be moved, but originally from the
sovereign, nor any thing executed by any force, which is not ultimately
resolved into the power of the sword, which the Soveraige bears, as known to
common sense* And by consequence I say, that the Sovereign power having right
to make the acts of the Church Laws of the state, by declaring to, concur to
the execution of them by the force which it moves; must needs have right to
judge whether they be such as Christian powers ought, or may concur to execute,
and accordingly limit the exercise of them.

But, thereby I intend not to grant, that Christian powers may not exceed their
bounds of right, in opposing and suppressing the effects o^ those acts, which
may be duly don by the Church; nor to dispute this point upon supposition,
that the particulars, related in that X. Chapter I de Synedriis, ought to have
the esteem of precedents, as things well done, and within the limits of secular
power in Church matters. For, I have already granted, that the power of the
Church, (that is to say, of those that pretend it on behalf of the Church,)
has so far transgressed the bounds, as to suffer the temporal power of the
Church, in ordine* ad spiritualia, to be disputed and held* being really
destructive to all civil Government, and to act too many things, not to be
justified but upon suspicion of it. And therefore, I think I demand but reason,
when I take leave ^o suppose, that sover^^gne powers are subject to err, as
all men are, especially in so* nice a point as is their own interest in Church
matte^s; And that these Errors may have proceeded to the hinderance of
Christianity, even by such acts as were intended *to have the force of standing
Laws.

But, what has been well or ill done in this kind, is not my business here to
dispute. That which I have to do now is, in general, to determine, in what
consideration the civil power, (which the Church of England grants to be
sovereign in all causes and over all persons both Ecclesiastical and Civil in
the dominions thereof) gives the acts of the Church, the force of the Laws of
the state. Which I have already expressed to be twofold: As sovereign, to
suppress whatsoever may seem to importe an attempt upon the right of it;
which, subsisting without the Church, i^ to be maintained against all
incrochment of whomsoever may claim in behalf of the Church; And as
Christians, because civil power being presupposed to the being of the Church
(which stands upon supposition of the truth of Christianity) the sword of
Christians st^nd obliged to protect the Church against all pretenses. For,
seeing the society of the Church is a part of Christianity, as has been showed;
of necessity it follows, that Christian powe^s stand obliged by their
Christianity, both to protect those that are lawfully possessed of right in
the behalf of the Church of their dominions, in the exercise of it; and also
to restrain them, when their acts, (whether expressly attempted or maintained
by use of long time) prove prejudicial to that common Christianity, which the
being of the church presupposes But as this necessarily presupposes that
those that claim on behalf of the Church may proceed to actions so prejudicial
to the state, as may deserve to be punished or restrained by civil and
temporal penalties of all degrees; So will it necessarily infer, that civil
powers may proceed to excesses (not only in their particular actions, but also
in violating and oppressing the Church) that the Church may be obliged to
proceed against them, by cutting them off from the communion of the Church; so
that, therein subjects do stand, obliged, not to obey them, in violating and
oppressing the Church, and to abstain from communicating with them in the
mysteries of Christianity, continuing nevertheless obliged to them in all the
offices, which the maintenance of the state, which Christianity presupposes,
will require at the hands of good subjects.

This being said, I will summon the common sense of Christendom to give
sentence of the truth, or likeness to truth of this argument; All Christian
Princes and States do limit the use of Ecclesiastical power within their own
dominions; Therefore they do not believe any such thing as a Church, or any
power derived from any Law of God, by which it stands. For, it is manifest,
that the powers from whose acts this argument is drawn are such, as hold
communion with the Church of Rome, and acknowledge the Pope in behalf of it. As
manifest it is, that the Pope not only challenges to be head of the Church,
in Church matters but maintains Friars and Canonists to challenge for him
Sovereign power, in civil causes, over all persons, in order to Christianity.
To say then that by, the acts, which they limite the use of Ecclesiastical
power by they pretend, that there is no Power in the Church, but what they give
it; is to say, that by those acts they contradict themselves, and proclaim
their own professing themselves Sons of the Church, not only to be without
cause, but to signify nothing, as words without sense; Which, with what
modesty it can be affirmed in the face of Christendom, I leave to Christendom
to judge. Only I will here summon the liberties of the Gallicane Church, as
they are digested by that worthy Advocate of Paris P. Pithaeus to give sentence
in this cause, being a piece much appealed to by the Father of this argument,
as that which deserves to be accounted of prime consequence in the business. I
desire those that will take the pains to look into them, to tell me whether
they find not these two to be the first two points of them; That the King of
France is Sovereign in his own dominions; and, that he is Protector of the
Canons, Liberties and privileges of the Church. And then, I desire them to
employ the common understanding of men, to pronounce, whether these be not the
same points of secular interest in Church matters, which I have advanced;
Namely, as Sovereign, to have no competitor in the right of the Crown; and as
Christian, to be borne Protector of the Catholic and Apostolic Faith, and of
the Church and of the Laws of it, which have no being but upon supposition of
that faith, whereof one part is the belief of the Catholic Church. Only I
shall take notice, that they protest, that they are called Liberties and not
Privileges, on purpose to signify, that they are no exceptions to the common
right of all Soverainities in Church matters, but essential points of it; Which
they call the liberties of the French Church, in particular, because the Kings
of France, they think, have maintained them better, then other Princes of
Christendom have done. In consequence of this collection of Pithaeus besides
the proofs of them in two great volums, we have of late a commentary of Petrus
Puteanus upon these Liberties, as they are digested by Pithaeus; the business
whereof is, first to make good, that they are of more unquestionable right in
France, then they have been and are practiced also by other Princes and states
of Christendom; which is answer enough to this whole argument, as it stands
upon the authority of Christendom, expessed by the acts of it. Nevertheless,
I shall further allege in this cause, the collection which Friar Paul of the
order delli Servi, has made of the articles, accorded between the Pope and
the state of Venice, concerning the Inquisition, and the bounds of secular
Power in the cognizance of those causes, wherein that court may pretend
concurrence of Jurisdiction with it. I will not undertake to say, that the
state of Venice, maintaining the Inquisition, upon such terms as this
collection or Capitular declares, does maintain those persons in the use of
Ecclesiastical power, to whom, by the common right of the whole Church it
belongs. Neither will I maintain that whatsoever those articles distinguish,
and allow the Inquisition, is by virtue of the common right of the whole
Church. For, who can ty him to express every where, what is by Ecclesiastical
right, and what of secular privilege, by free act of the state bestowed upon
the Church; as all states that would be held Christians, have always done?
This I say, that he that shall take the pains to look into it, shall find the
bounds of secular and Ecclesiastical power so expressly distinguished, upon
the reasons which I have aleged, that it shall be too late to say, that they
who acknowledge a Church, and certain rights, by Gods Law belonging to the
foundation of it, do contradict themselves, when they do limit the exercise of
those rights; Being ready further to maintain, that they do nothing but
right, when they limit the exercise of them according to the reasons which I
have advanced.

As for the Leviathan, who has made himself so merry, with compasing a state
Christian, in which the Ecclesiastical power is distinct from the secular,
with the government of Oberon and Queen Mabbe and their Pugs in the land of
Fairies; If he speak of a state framed according to the opinion of those, that
make the Pope sovereign in all causes, and over all persons, in order to
Christianity, I grant he has reason: For there is not, nor can be any such
state; and it would be indeed a kingdom of confusion and darkness. Nay,
where the Church it self is Sovereign, as in the Popes dominions, show the
difference of the grounds, upon which several rights and powers are held and
exercised, will be, in some points, though not in all, no less visible then
else where. But, if he intend by consequence to say the same of all Christian
states, that acknowledge an Ecclesiastical power derived from the Law of God,
and not from the secular; then, I remit to those, that shall have perused the
practice of Christendom, but in those short pieces that I have named, whether
they believe those states, which so govern themselves, to be the land of
Fairies, or his wits, that writ such things, to have been troubled with
Fairies.

And now in particular, to say, what the maintenance of the Church in giving
Laws to the Church requires; (that is to say in determining those matters, the
determination whereof becomes necessary for the maintenance of unity in the
Communion of the Church) It is easy to deduce from the premises, that every
Christian is under two obligations. One, to the Church, which, as a Christian,
he is bound to communicate with; The other, as belonging to that state of
Government, which he believes to be lawfully settled in his country. By the act
of those, whom he believes to have right, to oblige respectively these two
societies (which, if we speak only of that part of the Church which is in one
soverainty consist of the same persons, if they be all of the same Church)
every Christian is respectively obliged. For, by the premises it remains
manifest, that it is the act of the Church, to determine the matter of
Ecclesiastical Law, and give it force to oblige the respective part thereof,
under pain of forseiting the communion of the Church; But, the act of the
state, either, not to hinder this effect, when and where Christianity is only
tolerated, as a corporation which it allows; Or to make them Laws of the
state, when and where the whole state is of the same Church, as a corporation
consisting of the same persons as the state. That this is from the beginning
the sense of Christendom, easily appears, supposing that which I have showed
by the premises; that the Canons of the Church were not first in force, and
limited to the terms which we have in writing as the acts of general or
particular Councils, from the date of those Councils; But, by unwritten
custom, derived from the Orders given out by the Apostles and their
successors, unto the Churches of their founding; and by the intercourse of all
Churches with the authority of the Clergy and consent of the people in each,
settled over the whole. This, for the time that the Church was a corporation,
sometimes persecuted, sometimes tolerated by the Empire; during which time, it
were ridiculous to question whether Councils were held or not; But
nevertheless, impossible to derive the customs of the Church from their acts.
After Constantine, the protection of Christianity was become so firm a law of
the Empire, that Julian, though absolute Sovereign* and miserably desirous to
root it out, could not have his will of it, during his short reign. And,
though general Councils were called only by the Emperors for the reasons
aforesaid, and particular councils might be called, as often as they pleased; yet
the Canon of Nicaea, which provides for the holding of them twice a year,
shows the acts of them to be all the acts of the Church, though with allowance
of that state. And, what prejudice to any state in all this? That God should
have provided a Corporation for the Church, to determine all matters
determinable concerning that wherein the communion thereof consists;
Providing the state o^ a right and Power, as Sovereign, to suppress
whatsoever prejudiceth the peace or weal of the state; (no way prejudicial to
Christianity, because there is nothing in Christianity prejudicial to any
state) And, as Christian, to see the persons trusted on behalf of the Church
observe the due bounds, as well of their authority, as, of the matter of their
acts, wherein it is limited, either by the word of God or by greater authority
within the Church. He that looks upon the French, the Spanish, the English,
the Germane Councils, will find sufficient marks, as well of the ratification
of secular power, as of the determination of the Church. Thus far the business
is clear. For, if the Rescripts of the Popes in the West which are extant
after Syricius, if the Canonical Epistiles of some great Bishops in the East,
and afterward, the rescripts of the Patriarchs of Constantinople make up the
Canon Law, by which they were respectively governed; the allowance of the state
is evident enough, where the authority of the Church only acts. But, there
are in the Roman Laws abundance of acts, especially of the Emperors after
Justinian, which give a form, and not only force to the ordering of Church
matters; which is indeed to give Law to the Church, obliging the Church to
execute the same. And there is a most eminent instance in France, when Charles
VII. took occasion upon dissension between the Pope and the Councile of Basil,
by a convocation of his Nobles and Clergy, to give a form to the exercise of
Ecclesiastical Law within his dominions, by an act called the Pragmatick
sanction, which took place in that kingom ^ill the Concordates between Francis
the I. and Leo X. Pope. And that with such approbation, as seems to carry the
face of a protestation of the whole Church and kingdom, against the said
concordates. Here is indeed, wherewith to justify an extraordinary course of
proceeding, when present disorder required an expedient. And the disorder in
Church matters, which some allege for the occasion* whereupon Charles the Great
caused the French Capitular to be made, tends to the same purpose. Nor do I
deny, the acts of the Eastern Emperors or other soverains, may be beneficial
to the Church, by the inexecution of the proper Laws of the Church, and the
difficulty of providing new that may be availeable. But, to provide with all,
that they may be more prejudicial, in the example of superseding the authority
of the Church, then beneficial, in the providing against present abuses. I
have given you an instance, in marriages upon divorce* and, for the consequence
of it, I claim, that no such acts be taken for precedents, but stand liable to
examination upon the principles premised; though possibly, useful for the
time, and obliging the Church to use them, for the common good. Neither is it
enough, to prove that God has not instituted both these interests, in Church
matters; that both may err, and abuse their power; and oppose one another, that
it may become questionable what the one or the other of these powers may or
ought to do and which of those that belong to both are to follow. For answer, I
hold it enough for me, resting in the general before established, to say; That
there is appearance of reason, that secular Powers, knowing how much it
concerns, both the interest of their estates, and the salvation of their own
souls, that the Church under them be maintained in unity; will not interrupt
the Church in the use of that right, which, duly limited, can add nothing to
their soveraignties, if they should seize it into their hands, nor take any
thing from them, being maintained in their hands, who, by Gods law are to hold
it. As for the Church, and those that claim under the Church, what appearance
is there that they should attempt upon their Sovereign, but disorder in State,
upon difference of claim and title, which what Law preventeth? For, as for
that one instance of the Bishops of Rome, and the occasion of their exempting
themselves from the allegiance of the Empire, I am to speak anon. So that the
quiet of Christendom, as for this point, will require no more, but that the
common understanding of men be conducted to discover these bounds in all
public actions; public persons believing, that it is for the public
interesse, as indeed it is, to observe them in their proceedings. If that
cannot be obtained, it is vain to demand, why God has given a Law, which, by
the partialities of the world, may become useless, and not serve to direct
particular men's proceedings with quiet; much more to argue, that there is no
such Law, because it does not. For we know, both, that God gives no Laws, but
to them to whom he gives free choice to observe them or not; And also, that he
has given the Gospel and Christianity upon condition of bearing Christ's
Cross, whereof, the vexations, which the partialities framed upon occasion of
this Law, do produce, is a part.

Now, the indowment of the Church, being part of the subject of of
Ecclesiastical Law, it will be requisite here to say, how it is, and how it is
not exempt from secular right. Seeing then that all Christian states and
kingdoms, acknowledging the Church a Corporation founded by God, and to be
maintained by the first fruits and oblations of Christians goods, have not
thought it fit to leave this maintenance to the daily will of Christians, but
to make good that which they have vested in the Church, for a standing
indowment, by protection of Law; it is manifest, that they have left themselves
no particular right in that, which either themselves have consecrated, or
allowed their subjects to consecrate to the use of the Church. But it does not
follow from hence, that they have abandoned and disclaimed that common right,
which every Common wealth has in all goods of particular persons, for the
maintenance and defense of the Public, in the necessities of it. Whereby it
seems, that, be the gift of Ecclesiastical goods never so large or so
absolute, for the form which private men's gifts go in, the Sovereign, by
making them good, does not abandon the right of public aid in them: And
therefore, that the Common wealth may, notwithstanding, serve themselves of
taxes imposed on Church goods. Likewise, seeing the use of Church goods is
declared, by all records of the Church, as well as by the Scriptures, to tend
to the maintenance of the poor, which is included in the intent of maintaining
Gods service in the Church; it follows, that, if Church goods be used
otherwise, by those that are not proprietors, but trustees for the poor, it is
in the secular power to reduce and restore the use of them, according to the
original intent of the Church. But, to seize them into the hands of the secular
power, (as if the Corporation of the Church could be dissolved by man's Law
which is founded by Gods) to be employed to the advantage of the seizers of
them, is an attempt of sacrilege, upon Gods goods first, and, by consequence
upon Gods Law, by which the Church stands. For, the indowment of the Church
may be invaded by Secular power, upon the Title of public aid, but extended
beyond any bound of it, that reason or common sense can allow: And this is
sacrilege, though consistent with an opinion that they are the Churches. For
it is no new thing, for men to transgress their profession by their actions.
But it may also be invaded, out of an opinion, that they are only public
goods, and not Gods; And that opinion supposes, that there is no such thing as
a Corporation of the Church founded by God, which hitherto Christians, by their
Creed, do profess to believe. And therefore this is a sacrilege of an higher
nature, tending to root out all difference of good and bad according to
Christianity, that is grounded upon the constitution of the Church. Seeing
then, that all Christian Kingdoms and states have thought themseves tied, to
enable the Church, by their Laws, to transmit those estates to posterity, which
either Sovereigns or private Christians have upon supposition of Gods Law,
endowed it with; (for how should all Christians agree to do that, which no Law
of Christianity obliged them to do?) it will be of no force to argue, from any
limitations which Christian States may have bounded the right of Tithes with,
that they did not believe the Church to be a Corporation, enabled by God to
hold an estate bestowed upon it, but only to be made such a one by their
privileges. For, as it appears by the premimises, that those limitations may
be according to Gods Law; So, whether they be so or not, it is to be judged by
the grounds upon which I proceed here. And this is the case of the right of
Patronage, reserved over Churches to those that first endowed them, by consent
of the Church, in remembrance of their merit. For, as it may be so limited, as
to be no prejudice to the Church, and to Christianity; So, that it is every
where so limited, I do not find my self tied to maintain.

Of the concurrent interests of Church and State in marriage, or matrimonial
causes, I cannot say much here. Supposing the premises upon which I maintain
it, I can undertake, thereupon, to evidence the weakness of this presumption;
That those Christian powers, which take upon them to limit the exercise of
Ecclesiastical power in matrimonial causes, do not believe any
Ecclesiastical power in them, as of divine right; that is to say, any
Corporation of the Church endowed by God, with power to allow or disallow the
marriages of Christians. Suppose then, that our Lord Christ has introduced a
new Law among Christians, of the marriage of one with one, and that
indissoluble, saving upon breach of wedlock. Suppose that which I proved before,
that the Laws of Moses are not Laws to the Church, but arguments evidencing
the Laws of the Church, by the correspondence between it and the Synagogue.
And therefore; Granting, that those degrees, in which marriage was prohibited
Jews by the Leviticall Law, are not licensed for marriage among Christians;
That it does not follow, that no further degrees are prohibited in the Church.
Suppose further, from common sense and experience of the world, that, upon any
new Law, there will arise a multitude of new cases, to be decided, either by
particular jurisdiction, or by a general Law; And the power of deciding the
same vested in that Corporation, which first received the Law. Suppose again
that marriage, though among Christians limited to a mutual interest in one
another bodies, for the preventing of concupiscence, is notwithstanding a
civil contract, supposing the same freedom from error or force in the persons
that contract, that is requisite to the validity of all civil contracts: And
further that it may concern the State to limit the qualities, of persons that
may contract it, so that, not being contracted within those bounds, which the
State shall limit, it shall be either unlawful or void; It will follow then
upon these suppositions, that Civil Powers may create lawful impediments of
marriage, as of civil contracts; But nevertheless, that the use of marriage
is not to be deemed Lawful, until the allowance of the Church give them
assurance, that the limitations given by our Lord, and his Apostles, to the
marriages of Christians, and the determinations, which thereupon have proceeded
from the Lawful power of the Church, are not violated by the same. Neither is
it available to say, as some have pretended to say, that this right of the
Church falls to the State, when it professes Christianity, and the
maintenance thereof, all parties being members or subjects of it; No more
then, that the society of the Church cease, and is swallowed up in the
Commonwealth, when the Sovereign becomes Christian. Indeed among Gentiles,
whose Religion, being contrived by the devil and his ministers, was admitted
by civil Powers, as an expedient to keep their people in obedience; Among
Jews, whose religion. given by God as a condition of maintaining them in the
Land of Promise, pretended expressly no more, then the civil good of one
people; it is no marvel, that the determination of all things questionable
concerning marriage, should lastly resort to the civil Powers, whose dicision
might secure the People of that good which the Law tendered, if they should
practice the Law of marriage according to their determinations. But Christianity
being tendered to all nations, for their everlasting happiness, and one Society
of the Church founded of all that should receive it of all nations; and the
limitations peculiar to Christianity occasioning many things to become
questionable, and many times necessary to be determined for Christians, the
right of determining them can no more be thought an escheat to the civil power,
then the Church to the Commonwealth. If then the Laws of all Christian
Kingdoms and States have allowed the Laws of the Church thus much force and
interest in matters of marriage; (how much more soever they may have allowed,
then here is demanded) It will be in vain to argue. from any Laws of
Christian States, limiting the freedom of marriage, or the exercise of
Ecclesiastical power in matrimonial causes, that they do not believe the
Church to be, by Gods Law, a society, the allowance whereof, upon the premised
considerations, becomes requisite to the lawful use of marriage among
Christians. For, seeing both the Church and the State are subject to mistake
the bounds of their concurrent interests, in matrimonial causes; And
therefore, that there may be cause for the State, by the force which it is
endowed with, to bar the abuse of Ecclesiastical Power in the same, or that
the State may do it without cause; It is ridiculous to infer, that they who
limit the exercise of Ecclesiastical Power do not believe the Church, or any
lawful Power of it in such causes, independent upon their own.

The same is to be said, touching the Ordaining of Persons to exercise the
Power and right of the Church, and to minister the offices of Christianity to
Christian People. No man will refuse civil powers the right of maintainig the
public peace, and their estates, by making all such acts ineffectuall, through
the force which they possess, as may be done to the disturbance of it. No man
will refuse them as Christian, the interest of protecting the Church, against
all such acts as may prove prejudicial to the common faith, or do riolate the
common right of the Church, according to which such Ordinations are to proceed.
But having proved, that those Ordinations are made, and to be made, by virtue
of that Power which the Apostles have left in the Church, and which our Lord
gave the Apostles, As it has been cleared, what interest in this power, their
acts will allow to those several qualities, which they have settled in the
Church; So it remains manifest, that those who have the interest cannot
otherwise be hindered by secular force in the exercise of it, then by the
violation of that Law of God, whereby the society of the Church, and those
rights whereupon it is founded, subsisteth. Not as if I did imagine, that this
right has been violated, so often as Christian Princes or States have
nominated persons to be ordained, which they, for the public peace and good of
the Church, and to hinder disorderly proceeding in the Church, have thought fit
to name. For we have eminent examples, even in the happy times of the Church,
of Ordinations thus made, to the incomparable benefit of the Church. And why
should not the reasons premised be thought sufficient to justify such
proceedings? But because it is alleged by some, even that mean no harm to the
Church, that the right of all parties devolveth to the State, by the profession
of Christianity. Which plea if it were good, there would be no reason why the
Church, and all the right of it should not he thought to accrue to the State,
by declaring it self Christian. Here I will remember one of the most eminent
actions that ever was done in Europe, against the right of the Church, which
is, the Concordates between Francis I. King of France, and Leo X. Pope. The
Pragmatick Sanction of Charles VII. had maintained the right of the Church in
that dominion, against diverse perogatives pretended by Popes; but it maintained
the Church also in the election of Prelates, which that Prince had a desire to
seize into his hands. Hereupon an agreement passes, the King to make good the
prerogatives pretended by the Pope, the Pope to accept and to maintain the
Nominations of Prelates, which the King should make. Which Concordates, with
what difficulty, and after how many protestations and Remonstrances of the
Clergy, of the university of Paris, and Sovereign courts of the Kingdom, they
were accepted; I leave to them that will take the pains, to peruse the
relation thereof, historically deduced by Petrus Puteanus, to judge. Not
forgetting what Thuanus, one of the Principal ministers of that kingdom, as
prime President of the Parliament at Paris, has said to posterity, in the
first book of his Histories. That so great a Prince, after having dissolved the
course of Ecclesiastical Elections introduced into the Church by the Apostles,
never prospered in any of his greatest undertakings. And if, in the contention
between the Emperors and the Popes, about Investitures, the case truly stated
will evidence, that the common right of the Church was trodden under foot, as
well as that of the Sovereign; I report my self to the conscience of any man
that can judge, whether it be reason to infer; that the proceeding of
Christendom acknowledges no such thing as a Church, rather then to conclude,
that the particulars, whether well or ill done, (which is not my business
here) are to be tried by the reasons premised.

Now for the Power of Excommunication, whereupon the force of all acts of the
Church depends, every man knows, that, since Constantine received
Christianity, he, and after him, all Christian Princes and States, do
necessarily pretend the advancement of it, by temporal penalties, and
privileges of their indulgence. Among which, one is that punishment, which in
other States, as well as in England, a man incurres by being Excommunicate. He
that would challenge the power of doing this for the Church, from the original
right of it, must transgress the principles premised; whereby it may appear,
that the Church is not able to do any thing, of it self, that requires
secular force, or tends to alter any man's secular estate in the Commonwealth.
Neither is there any more evident character of that usurpation, which the
Popes, in behalf of the Church, have been chargeable with, then the enforcing
of their acts with temporal penalties. But all such attempts naturally resolve
into the highest, whereby some Popes have pretended, that by the sentence of
Excommunication, subjects are absolved of the allegiance they owe their
Princes, and stand free, and may stand obliged, to take up arms against them
as they shall disect. Which is so far from standing with any pretense of
mine, that I profess further to believe, that no Sovereign is liable to the
utmost excommunication, called the greater excommunication among Divines and
Canonists, though limited and defined by them, upon sundry and diverse
suppositions of their own which I intend not hereby, either to admit or to
dispute, because it is enough for my turn, that we agree in this; that the
precept of avoiding the Excommunicate is limitable, upon such considerations,
as the constitution and being of the Church presupposes. As the Apostle, when
he orders the Corinthians not so much as to eat with one that professes
Christianity, and yet lives in the sins he names 1 Cor. V. 11. means the
same that he expresses and signifies, by avoiding an Heretic Titus III. 10.
and S. John, by not bidding him God speed, and our Lord, by holding him as a
Heathen man or a Publicane. But, he that shall consider the vast difference
between the State of Christianity, under the Apostles, and, when the Empire,
and now several Soveraignties profess it; (remembering, that Christianity
disolves not but maintains civil Government, and every man's estate in it) must
see this to be one of those Laws, which, without limitation, become useless
to the maintenance of the Church, and therefore must necessarily be limited,
that it may be serviceable. The ordinary limitation of it by that verse of the
Casuists, is well enough known; Vtile, lex, humile, res ignorata, necesse. But,
he that will observe shall find, that all these Exceptions to the general rule
of avoiding the Excommunicate are grounded upon that one title of the necessity
of this world, and the subsistence thereof, which the being of the Church
presupposes. A man converseth with the excommunicate for his profit, to
recover a debt; This is the necessity of his estate, of which he owes God an
account, in behalf of his obligations. A man or wife converses with wife or
husband excommunicate, for the bond of marriage. This is that necessity, which
that law, presupposed to the foundation of the Church, creates. Superiors and
inferiors converse with one an other excommunicate. This is the necessity of
their estate, which Christianity maintayneth. Other necessities are warrantable
under the general title of necessity. The necessity of violence or fear, why
should it not have a place here, as well as that of ignorance; only that both
are general, justifying all, and not only this kind of actions? The necessity
of giving and getting good counsel, or alms, is all reducible to the same
head.

Wherefore, all these considerations resolve themselves into that general
ground which I tender; that Christianity supposes the lawful state of the
world, according to the reason of civil Government, and alters no man's
condition in it, of it self, but maintains every man in that estate in which
it finds him, (as S. Paul argues at large 1. Corin. VII, 17-24.) being such
as Christianity allows. By reason whereof, the avoiding of the excomunicate,
(easily to be visibly performed by Christians among themselves, when their
conversation was among many times more men that were not Christians) becomes,
without limitation, impossible to be observed of them that live only with
Christians. How feasible that obligation is as the Casuists now make it, I
leave it to them to maintain, or how feasible it may be made. This I say, that
all these reasons conccurre, to oblige all Christian subjects, not to forbear
the conversation of their Sovereigns. The civil Laws of every state, the
advantage which the state of all subjects does or may require from the
sovereign, the in^eriority wherein they are, and the necessity which all these
reasons produce. For, neither can Christianity pretend to disolve the Law of
the land: Nor can justice go forwards without conversation of the subject with
the sovereign: And Christianity obliges superiors and inferiors to maintain
the relations in which it overtaketh them: And finally, the necessity of these
reasons creates an exception, even to the Law of the Church communion, though
settled by our Lord and his Apostles. And this, as much as to say, that the
greater Excommunication takes no place against Sovereigns. And this position
is so far from being new in England, that in my nonage, it was disputed at
Cambridge upon an eminent occasion, at the reception of the Archbishop of
Spalato, by an express order of King James of excellent memory, as I conceive
I am well informed; and thereby satisfied, that I maintain hereby no novelty
in the Church of England. But, those that distinguish not this from the act of
S. Ambrose, in refusing the communion to the great Theodosius, upon a horrible
murder done by his express commandment, may do well to consider, either
with what conscience they censure such a Prelate in what they understand not,
or why they condemn the whole Church, whereof all Christians are or ought to
be members. For, how can the Church refuse any Christian the communion, if it
refuse not the same to all Christians, even the sovereign in that case wherein
the condition of all is one and the same? And hereby also we may see, what was
the opinion of the learned Prince, King James, concerning this action of S.
Ambrose, whatsoever may have been said; Who, had he made question of the less
excommunication, consisting in excluding from the Eucharist, would never have
caused it to be disputed, that the greater has no place against Sovereign.

As concerning the Jurisdiction of the Church in the causes of Christians if
the question be made, whether or no it now continue, that common wealths
profess Christianity; the argument seems peremptory, that it does not
continue, because then, of necessity, all civil powers should resolve into the
Power of the Church; because all Jurisdiction, by consequence to this
privilege, must needs resolve into the jurisdiction of the Church, all causes
being the causes of Christians, and resorting therefore to the jurisdiction of
the Church, and therefore no use of secular Courts, but the power of the sword
must become subordinate to execute the sentence of the Church. And therefore,
seeing that, on the otherside, the reason why S. Paul forbids them to go to
suit before secular courts is this; because they were the Courts of Infidels,
and that the scandals of Christians were by that means published before
unbelievers (which, it is evident was the reason, why this course was thought
abominable even among the Jews) it is manifest, that the jurisdiction of the
Church, in matters that arise not upon the constitution of the Church, though
enforced by S. Paul and our Lord, cease, together with the title and cause of
it, when secular Powers profess Christianity. Which notwithstanding, it is a
thing well known, that the line of Charles the Great, in the West, revived
those privileges which Constantine had granted the Church, as his act also is
repea^ed in their Capitulares VI. 281. which Gratiane also has recorded XI.
Quaest. cap. Quicunque From which beginning many sorts of causes, especialy
such as charity seemed to have most interest in (which the Clergy were thought
fittest to manage) have continued to be sentenced by the Ecclesiastical Court
in all Christian dominions; Notwithstanding that they rise not upon the
constitution of the Church, nor do originally be long to it to sentence. And
all this, not distinguishing these several titles, has been usually
understood by the name of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or, the ju^isdiction of
the Church. Neither is there any doubt to be made, that, not only France, in
their appeals from the abuse of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, (which are there
warranted of course) but also all Christian states (as England in their
premunires and injunctions) have always provided to redress the wrong that
might be don by the abuse thereof. Nor do I doubt that Spain it self has
made use of such courses; as may appear, not only ^y great volumes upon that
subject, by Salgado de Somoza and Jeronymo de Cevallos whom I have not seen,
but more lively by the letters of Cardinal de Ossat, where there is so much
men^ion of the differences between the Sea of Rome and the ministers of that
Crown in Italy, about the jurisdiction of the Church. But will all this serve
for an argument, that there is no such thing as a Church, no such jurisdiction
as that of the Church, in the opinion of Christendom, but that which stands by
the act of Christian powers, because they all pretend to limit the abuse of it?
When as the very name of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in the title of those
books, and those actions, is sufficient demonstration that they acknowledge and
suppose a right to jurisdiction in the Church, which they pretend so to limit,
as neither the Church, nor the rest of their subjects to have cause to
complain of wrong, by the abuse of it; Whether they attain their pretense or
no remaining to be disputed, upon the principles hitherto advanced, by any man
that shall have cause to enter into any treaty of the particulars.

Neither is the publishing of Erastus his book against Excommunication at
London to be drawn into the like consequence, that those who allowed or
procured it allowed the substance of that he maintains, so long as a
sufficient reason is to be rendered for it otherwise. For, at such time as the
Presbyterian pretenses were so hot under Queen Elizabeth, it is no marvel, if
it was thought to show England, how they prevailed at home. First, because he
has advanced such arguments as are really effectual against them, which are
not yet* nor ever will be answered by them, though void of the positive truth,
which ought to take place in stead of their mistakes. And besides, because, at
such time as Popes did what them listed in England, it would have been to the
purpose to show the English, how Macchiavell observes that they were hampred at
home. And, for the like reason, when the Geneva platform was cried up with
such zeal here, it was not amiss to show the world how it was esteemed under
their own noses, in the Cantons and the Palatinat. And here I cannot forbear
to take notice of the publishing of Grotius his book de Jure summarum
potestatum in sacris, after his death, because, that also is drawn into
consequence. For, it is well enough known, that at his being in E^gland,
before the Synod at Dort, he left it with two great learned prelates of the
Church of England, Lanctlot Lord Bishop of Winchester, and John Lord Bishop of
Norwich, to peruse. And that, both of them agreeing in an advice that it should
not be published, he constantly observed the same till he was dead. So that,
though the writing of it was his act, yet the publishing was not; But the act
of those that would have it appear, that his younger works do not perfectly
agree with the sense of his riper years. He that, in the preface to his
Annotations on the Gospels, shall read him disclaiming whatsoever the consent
of the Church shall be found to refuse, will never believe that he admitted no
Corporation of the Church, without which no consent thereof could have been
observed. And therefore, may well allow him to change his opinion, without
giving the world express account of it. I will add hereupon one consideration
out of the letter of late learned Hales of Eton College, from the Synod at
Dort, to the English Ambassador at the Hague; For Grotius was then, every man
knows, one that adhered to the Holland Remonstrants. He speaks of denying
them the copy of a decree of the states, read them in the Synod December 11.
This at the first, seemed to me somewhat hard, but when I considered, that
those were the men, which, heretofore, in prejudice of the Church, so
extremely flattered the civil magistrate, I could not but think this usage a
fit reward for such a service; And that, by a just judgment of God, themselves
bad the first experience of those inconveniences, which naturally arise out of
their doctrine in this behalf.

It remains onelly, as concerning this point, that I give account of the
article of the Church of England, which acknowledges the King Supreme
Governor in all causes and over all persons as well Ecclesiastical as Civil,
to this effect, as having all that Right in matters of Religion, which the pious
Kings of Gods ancient people, and Christian Emperors and Princes, have always
exercised in the Church. And the account that I am to give is, what the meaning
of this collective, which has been exercised by the Kings of Judah and
Christian Princes, must be. For, I have showed, that it is not to be granted,
that Christian Princes may do that in Christianity, which the Kings of ^srael
did under the Law. Because the Law was given to one people, for a condition of
the Land of promise; the Gospel to all Nations, for the condition of
everlasting happiness. It is therefore consequently to be said; That, in as
much as the reason and ground, upon which the right, which those Kings are
found to exercise under the Law, holds the same under the Gospel, so far, that
power, which the Church of England ascribes to the King in Church matters, is
the same which those Kings are found to exercise in the scriptures: But,
wherein the reason holds not the same, insomuch it is necessary to distinguish,
and acknowledge a difference. It seems to me; that, when the Law refers the
determination of all things questionable concerning the Law, in the last
resort, to the Priests and Levits and to the Judge that shall be in those days
at Jerusalem, or the place which God should choose Deuteronomy. XVIII. 8-12. the
reason, why it speaks indefinitely of Priest and Judge, is; because it intended
to include the sovereign, whether High Priest, (who, from after the Captivity,
until the coming of Herod, was chief of the people) or Chief Judge; whether
those that are so called (who as I said before, were manifestly sovereigns) or
after them the Kings; so that by this Law, nothing could be determined without
the King, either by himself or by subordinate Judges. And the reason is
evident. For, the penalty of transgressing this law being death, otherwise, we
must allow inferior Judges the power of the sword, without the authority of the
Sovereign. And therefore we see, that, afterward, the good King Jehosaphat
manifestly gives commission to these Judges at Jerusalem as well as to their
inferiors, when he restores them to the exercise of their office according to
law, upon what occasion soever it may seem to have been interrupted 2. Chron.
XVII. 7, 8. 9. XIX. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 And hereupon the Psalm says CXXII. 5.
There is the seat of judgment, even the seat of the house of David. But the
Leviathan hereupon argues; That, as Solomon consecrated the Temple by his own
prayers, so Christian Princes may, in their own person, consecrate Churches,
and not only that, but ordain, and celebrate the Eucharist, and Preach, and
do all things themselves, which their subjects may do, who are but their
ministers. The answer to which is, first; That herein he contradicts his own
position, that, by the scriptures (that is, by Gods Law) the right of designing
persons to be Ordained, and of doing other things of like nature, belonges to
the people of every Church; But, the office of solemnizing the ordination by
imposition of hands, and, in like manner, of executing other acts of like
nature, to the ministers of those Churches, succeeding the Apostles. Secon^ly,
that he is not able to show a reason why the great Turk should not, by
consequence, be able to consecrate Eucharist, Preach, and do any office,
wherein Christianity obliges his Christian subjects to communicate, and they
accordingly stand bound to receive them at his hands. For he challenges not
this right for the Sovereign, as Christian, but as Sovereign. And therefore a
Christian Sovereign can no more do that, which every Christian his subject
cannot do of this nature, then a Sovereign that is not a Christian. Lastly,
that the consequence is not true, nor can be proved, for the reason aforesaid,
which if it were not, all that he infers, though never so gross, would
follow.

Indeed, there were, as I observed, three estates established by the Law in
that people. The Priests, the Judges, and the Prophets. And, because
established by the Law, therefore successive. The Priests by birth, yet a
Corporation by Law, as by Law endowed with the rights of their Tribe.
Therefore, when it comes to settle their courses and ministeries in the Temple.
I have observed in my book of the rights of the Church, p. 230. that this is
not done by David alone, but with the assistance of the principal of that
Tribe. For the Judges, there is no reason why we should not believe the
Tradition of the Jews, that they were all qualified, to fit in any of their
Courts, by imposition of the hands of some that had received the same from
Moses and his Judges; Though this quality made them only capable of being
Judges, to which they were still actually to be chosen, by the King or by the
Court. So that, when the Talmudists relate, that King David ordained XXXM. on
one day, they understand, that he did not this as King, but as qualified to
ordain; though as King, he might actually make Judges. But being zealous of
the Law, as they describe him spending his time about the niceties of it, and
having his guard of Cerethites and Pelethites (whom they understand to be
Doctors all, or Scholars of the Law) they consequently make us believe, that he
meant to store the nation wi^h persons qualified to be Judges. As for the
succession of the prophets, tha depended merely upon Gods free Grace; though a
course of learning and discipline was, without question, founded by Moses and
maintained by his successors, to make them fit, by such education, for the
Grace. And these, being the Schools of the prophets in the Scriptures, when the
spirit of prophesy failed, became the schools of Scribes, and Doctors, and
learners of the Law, out of whom Judges came. As Prophets then had their
authority immediately from God, so were they the forerunners of our Savior
Christ and his Apostles, as our Savior shows, when he says Mat. XXIII. 34.
Behold I send unto you Prophets, and Scribes, and wisemen, and of them ye shall
kill and crucify, and of them you shall scourge in your Synagogues, and
persecute from city to city. For, God having appointed them, by the Law of
Deuteronomy. XVIII. 18-22 to have recourse also to the prophets, which he should
raise, until the Messiah should come, in whom, S. Steven challenges, that Law
to be fulfiled Acts VII. 37. if Prophets preaching by Gods commission,
displeased evil rulers* they easily found pretenses to quarrel the evidence of
their commission, and to put them to death as false prophets; which was that
which they did to our Savior Christ and his Apostles, and those who preached
Christ afterward. These then, having commission from God alone, had in them,
as I showed before* the qualities, both of Priests, in offering to God that
service in spirit and truth which Christianity pretends, and of judges, in
determining that which should become questionable in the Church. And, as the
Kings of Israel were bound by Gods Laws, to maintain all those qualities, in
the execution of their office; So, the Church being founded, and having
subsisted three hundred years, by this power of the Apostles; Constantin^, and
all Christian Princes aster him, finding ^^ in that estate, become obliged, by
Gods Law, to maintain the Church whereof they became members by professing
Christianity; in that estate and quality wherein they become member of it. And
upon these terms have the Kings of England, and all other Christian Princes,
the same rights in Church matters, which the godly Kings of Israel, and
Christian Emperors are found to have exercised. Whereof, it shall be enough
here to give the most eminent instance, that can be alleged, in the Heresy of
Arius, and all the factions that were canvased in the Church, to restore it,
being once suppressed by the Synod of Nicaea. Which one act of the Church,
though the whole power of the Empire, in two Emperors, Constantius and Valius
(though perhaps with far different intents) labored to make void, yet they
never took upon them to do it immediately of themselves, but by means of
Synods which they might work to their intent, or by the means of persons
apposted by them, to have the power of the chief Churches. And therefore,
whereas that Synod, as it was an act of the Empire, was easily recalled by the
breath of either of those Emperors; as it was an act of the Church, it
prevailed over all their intentions, and by the prevailing of it we continue
untainted with the heresy of Arius. The reason, because the right of the Church
was so notorious to all Christians, that those Emperors that did not profess
Christianity, when they did not persecute it, made good the acts of it; As it
is to be seen in that eminent example of Aureliane which I will repeat again,
because it is still alleged to argue* that Paulus Samosatenus was
excommunicated by the secular power of Aureliane. But when it shall appear by
Eusebius, that the Councile of Antiochia, having created a new Bishop, and
adjudged the possession of the Bishops Palace to him, which Paulus Samosatenus
defended by force; and the Emperor, being appealed to by the parties for
execution, adjudged the possession to him whom the Bishop of Rome and Italy
should account lawful Bishop. I suppose I shall not need many words, to show
any reasonable man, the very terms which I hold, in this sentence; to wit,
that the matter of it was determined by the Church, the force and execution of
it came from the Power of the Empire.

I had purposed here to examine some of those instances produced in the first
book de Synedriis cap. X. some passages of Church Writers alleged in the
Oxford Doctors Paraenefis, to prove the Ecclesiastical power merely the
effect of the secular because limitable by it. But having debated thus far,
the bounds between Gods Law and the Laws of the Church, and found the Law of
the Church to be nothing but the limitation of Gods Law, the force whereof
comes from Gods general Law in founding the Church; I find not the least cause
to distrust him that admits it, as one to be turned aside with pretenses of
so vast consequence upon such slight appearances. I shall therefore thus turn
him loose to apply the general ground upon which I proceed, to the particulars
that may be alleged out of the ancient Church. Only one I must not leave
behind me, the contest between the Emperors and the Popes about the
Invest^^ures of Churches, as carrying in it the means of changing the Regular
Power of the Pope, which I own, into the pretense of that infinite power which
infallibility speaks. Yet is it not my purpose to state the case in debate*
because it would require the examining of many records in point of fact, not
advancing the discovery of the right a whit more then supposing it stated. For,
supposing the investiture of a Church to signify a right of contradicting an
Election, or to signify a right of delivering possession* no man, admitting the
premises, can deny, that all Princes and States that are Christian have ^^
them a right to do both, though the term of Investiture seem properly to
signify only the latter, as signifying the ceremony of investing some man in
the rights of his Church. For if the Church be protected in the rights of it by
the Laws of the Land (as upon the premises it cannot be denied, that upon the
States acknowledging the Church as founded by God it ought to be, and must
needs be protected) all the reason in the World will require, that the secular
power be enabled to except against any man's person, as prejudicall to the
State, and to render no account of such exception to any man, as having no
superior in that trust, to whom to render it. But, if under the title of
Investiture, the right of electing and consecrationg, originally resident in
the Clergy and People of each Church, and the Bishops of the Province, be
seized into the hands of the secular power, by the force thereof constraining
each party to do their own parts in admitting the nomination thereof, whether
allowing it or not; whatsoever trouble any Sovereign procure, in such a cause,
is mee^ wrong, and in a wrong cause; The foundation of the Church settling the
rights that concur to the doing of it, upon the qualities which it self
creates. But this is not therefore to say, that the Pope, or all the Church,
has any right to depose such a Prince, or to move war against such a State,
by what means soever it may be done; Because that is the effect of temporal
power that is sovereign, which the Church has not in point of right, but
usurpeth in point of fact, by so doing. He that can enjoin another man either
to eject a Prince or destroy a State, upon what terms soever he may dispose of
it, when that is done, as he shall make the tenures of this world to depend
upon Christianity, so he makes himself Sovereign in the world, that ownes him
in the doing it, upon the same title of Christianity. So the Popes had
certainly a wrong cause in stirring war, which they had no title to do. The
Emperors, whether they had a right or a wrong cause (which God would punish, by
suffering the Popes to move war without a title) the state of the case must
judge, though for the most part, in wars, both parties are in the wrong,
insisting upon that which they have no right to insist upon, for the terms of
peace.

Let us consider what brought the Popes to this height of really and actually
claiming temporal power over Soveraignties, (that is to be Sovereign over
Sovereigns) by moving war to destroy Princes and States. I will suppose here
the defection of the Italian forces from the Emperor Leo Isaurus, for ejecting
all images out of Churches; and that he, in reprisall for it, seized the
possessions of the Church of Rome in his dominions, and translated the
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, through the same, upon his Church of
Constantinople. For, in reprisall for this, Pepin, whose usurpation of the
Crown of France, Pope Zachary had allowed, at the request of Pope Steven,
constraining the L^mbards, to render, or to forbear those parts of the Empire,
which the Emperors at Constantinople were not able to maintain any more
against them; bestowed them upon the Church of Rome, under his own protection,
as the case sufficiently shows; especially, admitting the Charter of Ludovieus
Pius his Grandchilde, to be but the confirmation of his Fathers and
Grandfathers acts, saving the difference of that title under which they were
done. For, the Charter of Ludovicus Pius in Sigonins de Regno Italiae IV.
manifestly reserving the Sovereignty to himself and his successors, remits both
the fruits and the administration of them to the Church, charging himself to
protect it in the same. Which burden we must needs understand that Pepin, by
his grant, did undertake, seeing that in point of fact, the Church could
neither undertake to hold them against the Lombard^, nor against the Empire,
(which, till this act, it acknowledged Sovereign) whatsoever in point of right
it might do. The act of Charles the Great, coming between these two, upon the
ruin of the Lombards, that is, his own Sovereignty, in reason, must needs seem
to have given the form to the act of his son. The power of this line decaying
in Italy, and, those who had attempted to succeed it, failing, it is no
marvel, if, among the States of Italy, that contracted with the Germans to
invest them in the same Sovereignty which Charles the Great and his line, as
Kings of Lombardy by conquest, (or, as declared Emperor by the City of Rome,
the Head whereof was then the Pope, whatsoever that declaration might signify)
the Pope, in behalf of the City and Church of Rome appeared most considerable.
While the Germans, through their strength at home, were able to make good that
protection which they undertook, by the loyalty of them that enjoyed it, things
must, by consequence, continue in this estate. But, when the removing of the
Germane power from the line of Charles the great, had done the operation, of
rendering them who succeeded obnoxious at home, to them by whose faction they
obtained it, there was no great likelihood, that the obedience of strangers,
and Italians, accustomed to changing of masters, should continue. This was the
time, that Gregory VII Pope, and his successors took, when the power of the
Emperors, in disposing the Churches of Germany, by the right of investiture,
(whatsoever in point of right it signified) must needs render their interest
envious, as well at home as at Rome, whatsoever occasions of discontent besides
an Elective Crown might produce. For, Charles the great, as our William of
Malmsbury notes, had heaped wealth and power upon the Churches, by which he
planted Christianity in Germany, as placing a greater confidence of Loyalty in
them, then in any estate of his subjects besides. And, the example of that
credit which the usurpation of Pepin had received by the allowance of the Pope,
seemed to justify any insurrection, either of Italians or Germans, to which
the Pope was a party. For, as to the issue of those Wars, though the Pope got
no more then reducing the adverse party to composition; because he could not
pretend any dominion for his Church, by conquering; yet must it needs turn to
the advantage of his authority, that had the greatest stroke in moving that
war which others made. This is the story; the moral whereof became the theme
for those, that undertook to preach the Popes temporal power over
Soveraignties. For, success, to them that consult not with their Christianity,
is a plausible argument of right. But the Interest of the Pope in Soveraignties
having swelled so far beyond the whole capacity of the Church, the bad
consequence of necessity follows, that his original power in the Church must
needs swell so far beyond the bounds, as, of regular, to become infinite. I
will not now contend, that the subjects of the Empire in Italy fell away from
it, because they thought themselves free of their allegiance, by the
excommunicating of the Emperor Leo Isaurus. There is reason enough to think,
that the Sea of Rome cried up the worship of images, contrary to the moderation
of Saint Gregory some hundred years before, out of hope to advance their own
power, by impairing the rights of their Sovereign. But I charge no more then
they pretend. And there is appearance for another plea, which is, want of
protection from the Empire, at such time as recourse was had to the protection
of the French. But the vexation of the Germane Emperors manifestly pretended
the temporal effect of the Popes excommunication in dissolving the bond of
allegiance, wherein the temporal power of the Pope consists. The effect of
which being such as it was, it is the less marvel, that the rest of the
Soveraignities of Christendom have entered into capitulations with the Pope,
(such as the Concordates which I spoke of before with France) whereby, to secure
the government of their people in peace on that side, they make the Popes
pretense of power without bounds in Ecclesiastical matters of law to their
respective Dominions and Territories.

It is strange to him that considers without prejudice, how they who imagine
the Pope to be Antichrist, could make their pretense popular, that Episcopacy
is the support of Antichrist* For, his unlimitted power in Church matters is but
the regular power of all Churches united in one. It is plainly made up for the Sea of Rome, of feathers plucked from every Church. So that, if Episcopacy be
the support of Antichrist, then do their rights maintain his usurpation, by
whom they are destroyed. Did the Soveraignities of Christendom maintain the
Churches of their respective dominions, in that right which the regu^ar
constitution of the Church settleth upon them, (and that is it which the
protection of the Church signifies) it would soon appear, that he is
Antichrist, if Antichrist he be to their prejudice and disadvantage. The Sea of
Rome, having got a decree at the Councile of Trent, scorns any terms but
absolute submission to it. But the end of such an intestine war by conquest,
as it would be extremely mischievous, bearing all down before the pretense of
infallibility, which must then prevail; So, finds hindrances, answerable to
the advantages, which the disunion of the adverse party ministers. The
animosities of Potentates that adhere to it have made it visible, that* their
interest consists in hindering the reunion of the Reformation to the Church of
Rome. And the pretense of dissolving allegiance by the sentence of
excommunication is become no way considerable by the subsistence of them who
regard it not. Nor, is the advantage which the favor thereof lends the arms
of those Princes, who tie themselves the most strictly to the interests of it,
any more considerable. Whether or no it be time for them to bethink themselves,
that it were better for them to enjoy the unquestionable title of a true
Church, and of the chief* Church of Christendom, which it is absolutely
necessary for all Churches to hold communion with, the common Christianity
being secured; then catching at the disposing of all men's Christianity, without
rendering any account to the Church, (which how dangerous for their own
salvation is it?) to hang the, unity of the Church merely upon the interest of
the World (which, how prejudicial is it to the salvation of Gods people?) not
upon the interest of Christianity; themselves must judge. This I am sure; If
Christian Powers maintain their due right and title of Protectors of Gods
Church, it is the regular constitution thereof which they must maintain. The
exemption of Monastical Orders and Universities from the jurisdiction of their
Ordinaries, under whom they stand, and the Synods to which they resort; the
reservation of cases, dispensations in Canons, provisions of Churches, and the
rest of those channels, by which power as well as wealth is drained from all
Churches to Rome, must needs be stopped up, at least for the greatest part, if
Christian Sovereigns did protect the Church of their dominions in the right of
ending causes, that concern not the whole Church, at home. This were such a
ground of confidence between Sovereigns and the Clergy of their dominions,
that it would be very hard to imagine any interest considerable to engage
against that interest by the prejudicing whereof neither of them could expect
any advantage. And this confidence the means to restore and to maintain that
intercourse and correspondence between the Churches of several Soveraignties,
by which when all Churches (at least as many as easily outweighed the rest)
were under the Roman Empire, the Unity of the Church was maintained without
that recourse to temporal power which made it infinite. Nor would there
remain any just ground of jealousy between the Pope and the Councile. The
calling of a general Councile, I yielded to the Empire, during the time that
it contained the whole Church. Now that it is broken into several
Soveraignties, and the Pope and Church of Rome subject to none of them, but
sovereign of considerable dominions; how should it not depend on him, with the
consent of the Soveraignties whereof Christendom consists? How should not
the consent of their Churches be involved in the same? Indeed if by that
original intercourse the Churches understood one another, there could arise no
cause to complain, that any vote should be unduely obtained, when it should be
known before, that it could have no further effect then the voluntary consent of
those who receive it, which the free carriage of the debate must produce. What
prejudice the Sea of Rome could imagine to any regular preeminence that it may
challenge, by such proceeding as this it would be difficult to evidence. As for
the prejudice that matters in difference may create to the common Christianity
which are at present the pretenses, why this moderation cannot seem rightful
and necessary when the parties are sufficiently wearied with prosecuting the
extreamities which they pretend, then will it appear, though too late for the
preserving of the common Christianity, that the preservation of the common
Christianity does indeed consist in abating the extreme pretenses on both
sides. I have showed my opinion, at least in gross, how and to what point they
ought to be abated; And I shall impute it to the common Christianity whatsoever
offense I procure my self by showing it.

The end of the Third Book.
Laus Deo.
A CONCLUSION To all CHRISTIAN READERS.
BY the premises, though I must not take upon me to determine that which the
whole Church never did, nor never will, undertake to declare; what is necessary
to be believed for the salvation of all Christians, as the means without which
it is not to be had; what is necessary to the salvation only of those, who
become obliged by their particular estate; Yet, I conceive my self enabled to
maintain, that, only those things which concern a Christian as a Christian
are necessary to be known for the salvation of all Christians: Those things
which concern a Christian as a member of a Church, becoming necessary to that
salvation of every member of the Church, according as the obligation which the
Communion of the Church creates, takes place, by virtue of his particular
estate in the Church. For, it is not the same obligation that takes hold on the
young and the old, on the ignorant and the wise, on those that have liberal
education, and those that live by their hands, on Superiors and Inferiors, on
the Clergy and the People; But the profession of that Christianity which our
Lord Christ delivered to his Apostles to preach, when he gave them authority to
found his Church, being the condition, without undergoing whereof, no man was
to be admitted a member of the Church, by being baptized a Christian; as it is
supposed to the being of the Church, so must it, of necessity, contain
whatsoever the salvation of all Christians requires. What a man's particular
estate will require him to know, that, by his knowledge he may be enabled to
discharge the obligation of it, becomes necessary to his salvation, by virtue
of that particular estate. But, whatsoever obligation the acts and decrees of
the Church can create, is necessarily of this nature; taking hold upon every
estate, as it stands bound to be satisfied, that they injoyne nothing to be
believed or done, that is not necessarily, either dependent upon, or consistent
with that, which the necessity of salvation requires all to profess.

It is therefore necessary for the salvation of all Christians to believe, that
there is one true God, who made all things, with all mankind, having immortal
souls, and all Angels, to endure for everlasting. That, governing all things
by his perfect Providence, (which supposes the maintenance of them in acting
according to their several natures) he shall, at the end of the world, which
he has determined, bring the actions of all men and angels to judgment, and
assign them their respective estate for everlasting, as it shall appear, their
actions have deserved, according to his Law. For, all this, it was necessary to
the salvation of all those that were saved under the Law, to believe; and
therefore, it is all presupposed to that wherein Christianity properly
consists. The people of God therefore held it, when our Lord came, neither
had he any thing to reform them in saving that pernicious opinion which the
Pharisees had perverted it with, that the Law of Moses, whether Civil or
Ceremonial, was the Law by which that people was to be saved or damned. The
incongruity whereof was so gross, that the Sadduces, on the contraryside, took
advantage thereupon, to deny the World to come. The corruptions therefore,
which these Sects had brought in, being cleared; The Faith of Gods ancient
people remains, thus far, the Faith of his Church; If any question may
remain, concerning the end of the World, whether or no, necessary then
expressly to be believed, it is not considerable here. But further, in regard
the coming of Christ, which brought Christianity, must be maintained necessary
to the salvation of all; It is necessary to salvation to believe, that, our
first parents being seduced from the obedience of God, by apostate Angels,
neither themselves, nor their posterity would have been able of themselves, to
recover that amity with God here, which might bring them to happiness in the
world to come. That therefore God, by his Word, diversely ministered before and
under the Law, indeavored to reconcile mankind to himself again; But with so
little success, (the greatest part thereof being swallowed up in Idolatry;
and, of his own people, the greater part being carried away with the hope of
salvation, by outwardly keeping Moses Law) that at length it appeared
requisite, that the Word of God should become incarnate by the holy Ghost, of
the Virgin Mary; And by his obedience to God, in preaching the terms of
reconcilement with God, to his People, and suffering death at their hands for
so doing, should void the interest which God had allowed the apostate Angels
in mankind, whom they had cast down; And by rising again, and going up to the
right hand of God, should give the holy Ghost (the fulness whereof dwelt in
his manhood, as planted in the Word incarnate) both to reduce them to
Christianity, and to enable them to persevere in it; Undertaking to give,
whomsoever shall profess Christianity by being baptized into the Church, and
live according to it, remission of sins here, and everlasting life in the
world to come, in consideration of the obedience of Christ, provided by him for
that purpose. For, by his second coming, raising all from death to life, he
that was judged here before, shall then judge the world, and, rendering them that
have disobeyed God everlasting punishment, shall render everlasting happiness
to them, whose bodies, the holy Ghost that dwelt in them here raises.

This is that precious pearl, and that hid treasure, this is that grain of
mustard seed, that leaven, which being purchased at the price of all we have,
and sowed in the heart, and laid up in the past of our thoughts, makes all our
actions fruitful, to the riches of everlasting happiness. This is that little
spot of truth, for the maintaining whereof, so many bloody fields of
Controversies in Religion are and have been fought, by souls that perish, by
maintaining division in the Church, to the prejudice, if not the loss, of that
truth for which they fight; As the country always suffers, by the war that
is made for it.

All this while, it is to be remembered, that Baptism tieth, not only to
profess this faith unto death, but, to live according to Christianity. Whether
it be by virtue of Moses Law, cleared by our Lord of the false glosses of the
Scribes and Pharisees, or by the New Law of Christ, clearing the spiritual
intent of the Old, it is not necessary to salvation for a Christian to know;
For, Irenaeus, briefly distinguishing matter of Faith from matter of Knowledge in
the Scriptures, 1. 2, 4. makes all that, which concerns the reason of the
difference in Gods proceeding under the Law and the Gospel, to be matter of
abundant knowledge, not of necessary faith. But, it is necessary for the
salvation of a Christian to know, that, by being a Christian, he undertakes to
suppress, mortify, and prevent, as far as in him lies, even the first motions
of concupiscence, whether in the lusts of the flesh, or the lust of the eyes,
or the pride of life; as our Lord in the Gospel has clearly laid forth,
howsoever the Law have expressed or intimated the same. And this is that war
with the devil the world and the flesh, for the keeping of Gods commandments,
which our Baptism undertaketh. For, there is no difference, in things to be
done, concerning a private Christian as a private Christian, that seems to be
any considerable ground of division in the Church. The substance of our common
Christianity in that part, seems to remain without dispute. In things that are
to be believed, it were well if it could be said so truly, that there is no
part of the rule of Faith in dispute. In the mean time, the substance of
Christianity, containing whatsoever it is necessary for the salvation of all
Christians to know, whether in matter of Faith, or of manners, (whereof, to
speak properly, the rule of Faith signifies only the first part) consists
only in that which concerns a particular Christian, as such, whether to be
believed or to be done.

But, what then shall the belief of one holy Catholic and Apostolic
Church, in our Creed, signify? Only, that there are Christians in the world?
Shall a Christian be saved by believing that which all Christians see? that
there is a company of men that call themselves Christians? Or, shall it
therefore be necessary to the salvation of all Christians, to know, that God
has founded the whole body of the Church, consisting of all Churches, for a
Society and Corporation subsisting by his Law? shall it concern the salvation
of simple Christians, to understand the nature of Corporations, and to know,
how visible communion in Christian Offices makes the Church such a one;
believing that this comes by Gods appointment? I do not imagine any such thing.
Indeed, whosoever allows no ground of difference, between true Christians on
the one side, and heretics and schismatics on the other side, cannot admit
the belief of one Catholic Church, for an article of his Creed. For, had
there never been heresy or schism, the communion of all Christians with all
Christians going forwards without interruption; the Church had been no less
Catholic, then now, that it is called Catholic, to distinguish it from
heresies and schisms, which prevailed sometimes in some places, but never
spread, nor lasted with the Church. But, had there been no profession
qualifying for communion with the Church; Had there been no power in the
Church, to limit the Order and circumstance of Communion in the Offices of
Christianity; it could never have been visible, whom a Christian was to
communicate with, professing himself bound, by believing one Catholic Church,
to communicate with it. Because by this means it was visible, and because,
being visible, an obligation was acknowledged, of communicating with it, the
profession of this obligation was to be part of the common Christianity, which
the Creed was to signify. But, when it is no more visible whom a Christian is
to communicate with, by reason of division in the Church; what is it then that
resolves, whom a Christian is to communicate with? That is, indeed, the
question which this whole business intends to resolve. For, the Reformation
having occasioned division in the Church, the parties are both visible, but,
which is the true Church, remains invisible, so long as it remains in
despute. For, though it be not invisible to that reason which proceeds aright,
upon due principles, yet, that is not required of all Christians that would be
saved; And therefore, if it be not visible to the common reason of all men, it
is invisible. This I allege to no further purpose, then to show, how much all
parties stand obliged to procure the reunion of the Church; as answerable for
the souls that may miscarry, by choosing amiss in that, which Gods ordinance
makes visible, but men's disorder invisible, to common sense. For, the more
difficult the way of salvation proves by this means, the more shall all
estates stand obliged to clear it.

Let us then see, wherein the difficulty of the choice consists; let us see,
what satisfaction the parties tender common sense, that salvation is to be had,
by leaving of them. The Word and the Sacraments are the marks of the true
Church. So say the Doctors of the Reformation, so say, perhaps, their
confessions of Faith. It were too long to dispute that. But, how are these
marks distinctive? For, I suppose, they pretend not to make known the Reformed
Churches to constitute the true Church, in opposition to the Church of Rome, by
marks common to both? And, will any common sense allow, that the Church of
Rome will grant, that they have not the word of God, or the Sacraments? which
they allow the Reformed to have? If you add, the pure preaching of the Word,
and the pure ministering of the Sacraments, you advance not a foot. For, is
common sense able to judge, that the Reformed way is pure, that of the Church
of Rome impure? It judges, that they who call it so think so; Whether it be so
or not, it must come under dispute. And, appealing to the Scriptures, it
appears, that common sense is not judge in the meaning and consequence of
them, upon which the resolution depends. It is therefore manifest, that the
preaching of the word, and the ministering of the Sacraments is no mark of the
Church, unless you say something more, to limit the ground upon which they may
be no less. What limitation I would add, is plain by the premises. The
preaching of that Word, and that ministering of the Sacraments, which the
Tradition of the whole Church confineth the sense of the Scriptures to intend,
is the only mark of the Church that can be visible. For, I suppose, preaching
twice a Sunday is not, if a man be left free to preach what he will, only
professing to believe the Bible (which, what Heresy disowneth?) and to make
what he thinks good of it. And yet, how is the generality of people provided
for otherwise, unless it be, because they have preachers, that are counted
godly men by those, whom, what warrants to be godly men themselves? In the mean
time is it not evident, that Preachers and people are overspread with a
damnable heresy of Antinomians and Enthusiasts, formerly, when Puritanes were
not divided from the Church of England, called Etonists and Grindeltons,
according to several Countries? These believe, so to be saved by the free
Grace of God, by which our Lord died for the Elect, that by the revelation
thereof, which is justifying Faith, all their sins, past, present, and to
come, are remitted; So that, to repent of sin, or to contend against it, is
the renouncing of Gods free Grace, and saving Faith. How much might be alleged
to show, how all is now overspread with it? The Book called Animadversions upon
a Petition out of Wales shall serve to speak the sense of them who call
themselves the godly party, as speaking to them in Body. Thus it speaks page
36. Look through your vail of duties, profession and ordinances, and try your
heart, with what spirit of love, obedience and truth you are in your work: And
whether will you stand to this judgment? Or rather, that God should judge you
according to grace, to the name and nature of Christ written upon you, and in
you? Sure, the great Judge will thus judge us at last, by his great judgment,
or last judgment; Not by the outward conversation, nor inward intention, but
finally, by his eternal Election, according to the Book of Life. This just
before, he calls, the seed of Christ and his righteousness, in a Christian.
And page 38. When we are enraged, we let fly at men's principles, being not
satisfied to rebuke men's actions, opinions, and works, but would be avenged of
their Principles too; As if we would kill them at the very heart, pull them up
by the Roots, and leave them in an uncurable condition, rotten in their
Principles. -- But Principles ly deeper then the heart, and are indeed Christ,
who is the Principle and beginning of all things; who, though heart fail, and
flesh fail, yet he abides the root of all. Shall he pretend to be a Christian
that professes this? Shall any pretend to be a Church, that spue it not out?
Let heaven and earth judge, whether poor souls are otherwise to be secured of
the Word, then by two sermons a Sunday; when the sense of the Godly is claimed
to consist in a position so peremptorily destructive to salvation, as this. It
will be said, perhaps, that now, the Ministers of the Congregations have
subscribed the confession of the Assembly. But alas the covering is too short.
When a Bishop in the Catholic Church, subscribed a Councile, there was just
presumption that no man under his authority could be seduced from the Faith
subscribed; Because no man communicated with the Catholic Church, but by
communicating with him that had subscribed it. Who shall warrant that the godly
who have this sense, not liable to any authority in the Church, shall stand to
the subscriptions of those Ministers? or to the authority of the Assembly,
pretended by the Presbyteries? If they would declare themselves tied so to do,
who shall warrant, that there is not a salvo, for it, in the Confession which
they subscribe? If there were not, why should any difficulty be made to spue
out that position which is the seed of it; That justifying Faith consists in
believing that a man is of the number of the Elect, for whom Christ died,
excluding others? Why that which is the fruit of it; That they who transgress
the Covenant of Baptism, come not under the state of sin and damnation, come
not from under the state of Grace? Why, but, because a backdoor must be left
for them, that draw the true conclusion from their own premises; reserving
themselves the liberty to deny the conclusion, admitting the premises? It is
not then a confession of faith that will make the Word that is preached a mark
of the Church, without some mark visible to common sense warranting that
confession of Faith.

As for the Sacraments, no Church no Sacraments. If they suppose that ground
upon which, that intent to which the whole Church has used them, there is no
further cause of division in the Church; (for that secures the rule of Faith)
If not, they are no Sacraments, but by equivocation of words; they are
sacriledges, in profaning Gods Ordinances. The Sacrament of Baptism, because
the necessary means of salvation, is admitted for good, when ministered by
those who are not of the Church; but always void of the effect of grace; To
which it reviveth, so soon as the true Faith is professed in the unity of the
Church. If a Sacrament be a visible sign of invisible grace, that baptism is
no baptism, which signifies the grace it should effect, but indeed effects
not. Such is that Baptism which is used, to seal a Covenant of Grace, without
the condition of Christianity; a Covenant that is not the Covenant of two
parties, but the promise of one. Whence comes the humor of rebaptizing, but to
be discharged of that Christianity, which the baptism of the Church of England
exacteth? Why do they refuse Baptism in New England, to all that refuse to
enter into the Covenant of Congregations? How comes it more necessary to
salvation, to be of a Congregation, then to be Baptized, and made a Christian?
Is it not because it is thought, that salvation is to be had, without that
profession of Christianity, which the Sacrament of Baptism seals? That it is
not to be had without renouncing it? Upon these terms, those that are denied
Baptism by the Congregations, because they are not of the Congregations, are
denied salvation as much as in them lies; but not indeed and in truth. For, the
necessity of baptism supposing a profession of the Catholic Church, they
perish not by refusing it, who will not have it by renouncing the Catholic
Church; that is, by covenanting themselves into Congregations. They that are so
affected must know, that they have authority of themselves, to baptize to
effect, which no Congregation in New England is able to do. If the Sacrament of
the Eucharist seal that Covenant of Grace, which conditioneth not for
Christianity, it is no sacrament but by equivocation of words. Where that
conditional is doubtful, or void, there is no security for poor souls that
they receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist. They who depart from the Church
that they may minister the Sacraments on such grounds, and to such effects, as
the Church allows not, incur the nullities, and sacriledges, which,
departing from the Church infers.

But if, beside the Faith of the Church, the authority of the Church be
supposed to the effect of the Sacraments; how shall the Sacraments be
Sacraments though ministered upon profession of the true Faith, where no
authority of the Church can be pretended for the ministering of them; Or, where
it can only be pretended, but is indeed usurped and void? Posterity will never
forget, that, there are in a Land inhabited by Christians called England,
Country Parishes, in which, the Sacraments have not been ministered, for so many
years, as the order of the Church of England has been superseded, by the late
war. If the Word and Sacraments be the marks of the Church; what pretense for
a Church, where, there is indeed a pretense of the Word (though no presumption
that it is Gods) but of Sacraments, not so much as a pretense? What has the
rest of England deserved of the Congregations, or of the Presbyteries, that
they should be left destitute of the means of salvation, because they cannot
see reason to be of Congregations, or Presbyteries? Lay men preach, and Lay men
go to Church to hear them preach, because they cannot preach themselves at home
to their families. The horror of profaning the Sacraments of the Church by
Sacrilege, is yet alive, to make them tremble still, at usurping to celebrate
the Sacrament of the Eucharist. But, will those Lay men that preach answer for
the Lay men's souls to whom they preach, that they have sufficient means of
salvation, by hearing them preach; being of no Church, that might answer, that
it is Gods Word which they preach; ministering no Sacraments, for a mark of the
Church? Is it possible a Christian should hold himself able to preach, who
holds not himself able to baptize? Or, is it the appetite of devouring
consecrated goods, that insnares men to preach; who, when it comes to
baptizing, had rather let innocent souls perish then own the authority of the
Church, which inables every Christian to baptize, in case of necessity, because
they know, they usurp the office of preaching, without authority from the
Church? It is I that have said, that a Lay man may be authorized to preach by
the Church? And I believe still, I said true in it. But shall I therefore
answer for him that preaches without authority from the Church? Should he
preach by authority from the Church, there were presumption for his hearers,
that it is the Word of God, which the Church authorizeth. When he preaches
without authority from the Church, shall he not answer for the souls, whom he
warrants salvation by his preaching, without Church, or Word, or Sacraments?
But these are not the Godly. Those that know themselves such, are thereby
authorized to retire themselves into Congregations, that they may enjoy the
purity of the Ordinances. It is then men's Godliness that inables them to
forsake the Church, and betake themselves into Congregations. And indeed, I
know an Oxford Doctor, who, to prove himself no Schismaticke for it, has
alleged, that he can be no Schismatic, because, he knows himself to be
Godly, and to have Gods Spirit. I deny not that he has alleged other reasons
why he is no Schismaticke; the ground whereof I considered before. But what
Quaker could not have alleged the Spirit of God as well as he? And did not he
who pretends himself Christ, allege reasons for it as well as pretend the
Spirit? A nice mistake it is, to imagine that a Christian is to accept the
Scriptures for the Word of God, because the Spirit of God assures him that so
they are. For of a truth, until the Spirit of God move him to be a Christian,
he accepts them not for such. When it does, he is moved so to accept them by
the Spirit of God, as by the effective cause; But for reasons, which though
contained in the Scriptures, yet were they not visibly true before a man can
accept the Scriptures for the Word of God, he could never so accept them by
Gods Spirit; Unless we can imagine, the virtue of Gods Spirit not to depend
upon the preaching of his Gospel; which, I suppose, only Enthusiasts do
imagine. Nor does the Spirit of God distinguish to any Christian the Apochrypha
from Canonical Scripture, but by such means, as may make the difference
visible. No more does it assure him that he is a good Christian, but upon the
knowledge of such resolutions, and actions, wherein Christianity consists. If
it be requisite, to make a man no Schismatic, that it be not his own fault,
that he is not of the Catholic Church; If he persuade himself upon
unsufficient reasons, that there is no such thing by Gods Law, as the visible
body of a Catholic Church; Just it is with God, to leave such a one, to think
it Gods Spirit that assures him a godly man, being a Schismatic. It is not
therefore supposition of invisible godliness, that can privilege men to
withdraw themselves from the Church, into Congregations; supposing such a thing
as a Catholic Church. The purity being invisible, but the bar to it,
separation from Gods Church, visible; the Ordinances for which they separate,
will remain their own Ordinances, not Gods.

The Presbyterians, sometimes plead their Ordination in the Church of England,
for the authority by which they ordain others against the Church of England,
to do that, which they received authority from the Church of England to do,
provided that, according to the order of it. A thing so ridiculously
senseless, that common reason refuses it. Can any State, any society, do an
act, b^ virtue whereof, there shall be right and authority to destroy it? Can
the Ordination of the Church of England, proceeding upon supposition of a
solemn promise, before God and his Church, to execute the ministry a man
receives, according to the Order of it, enable him to do that, which he was
never ordained to do? Shall he, by failing of his promise, by the act of that
power which supposed his promise, receive authority to destroy it? Then let a
man obtain the kingdom of heaven by transgressing that Christianity, by the
undertaking whereof he obtained right to it. They are therefore mere
Congregations, voluntarily constituted, by the will of those, all whose acts,
even in the sphere of their ministry once received, are become void, by
their failing of that promise, in consideration whereof they were promoted to
it. Void I say, not of the crime of Sacrilege toward God, which the
usurpation of Core constituteth, but of the effect of Grace, toward his
people. For, the like voluntary combining of them into Presbyteries and
Synodes, creates but the same equivocation of words, when they are called
Churches, to signify that which is visible by their usurpation, in point of
fact, not that which is invisible, by their authority, in point of right. For
want of this authority, whatsoever is done by virtue of that usurpation being
void before God; I will not examine whether the form, wherein they execute
the Offices of the Church which they think fit to exercise, agree with the
ground and intent of the Church, or not. Only, I charge a peculiar nullity in
their consecrating the Eucharist, by neglecting the Prayer, for making the
elements the body and blood of Christ, without which, the Church never thought
it could consecrate the Eucharist. Whether, having departed from the Church,
Presbyteries and Congregations scorn to learn any part of their duty from the
Church, least that might seem to weaken the ground of their departure; Or,
whether they intend, that the elements remain mere signs, to strengthen men's
faith, that they are of the number of the elect; which they are, before they be
consecrated, as much as afterward; The want of Consecration rendering it no
Sacrament that is ministered, the ministering of it upon a ground destructive to
Christianity, renders it much more.

On the other side, the succession of Pastors from the Apostles, or those who
received their authority from the Apostles, is taken for a sufficient
presumption, on behalf of the Church of Rome, that it is Catholic. But, I
have showed, that the Tradition of Faith, and the authority of the Scriptures
which contain it, is more ancient then the being of the Church, and
presupposed to the same, as a condition upon which it stands. That the
authority of the Apostles, and the Powers left by them, in and with the Church,
the one is originally the effective cause, the other immediately, the Law by
which it subsisteth, and in which the government thereof consists. That the
Church has Power in Laws of less consequence, though given the Church by the
Apostles, though recorded by the Scriptures; where that change which succeeds
in the state of Christendom, renders them useless to preserve the unity of
the Church, presupposing the Faith, in order to the public service of God.
But, neither can the Church have power in the faith, to add, to take away, to
change any thing, in that profession of Christianity, wherein the salvation of
all Christians consists, and which the being of the Church presupposes; Nor
in that act of the Apostles authority, whereby, the unity of the Church was
founded and settled; Nor in that service of God for which it was provided. There
is therefore something else requisite, to evidence the Church of Rome to be the
true Church, exclusive to the Reformation, then the visible succession of
Pastors; though that, by the premises, be one of the Laws, that concur to
make every Church a Catholic Church. The Faith upon which, the powers
constituted by the Apostles, in which, the form of government, by which, the
service of God, for which, it subsisteth. If these be not maintained, according
to the Scriptures, interpreted by the original and Catholic Tradition of the
Church, it is in vain to allege the personal succession of Pastors, (though
that be one ingredient in the government of it, without which, neither could
the Faith be preserved, nor the service of God maintained; though with it they
might possibly fail of being preserved and maintained) for a mark of the true
Church. The Preaching of that Word, and that Ministering of the Sacraments,
(understanding by that particular, all the offices of Gods public service in
the Church) which the Tradition of the Whole limiteth the Scriptures,
interpreted thereby, to teach, is the only mark, as before, to make the Church
visible. To come then to our case;

Is it therefore become warrantable to communicate with the Church of Rome,
because it is become unwarrantable to communicate with Presbyteries or
Congregations? This is indeed, the rest of the difficulty, which, it is the
whole business of this Book to resolve. To which I must answer, that
absolutely, the case is as it was, though comparatively, much otherwise. For,
if the State of Religion be the same at Rome, but in England far worse then
it was, the condition, upon which communion with the Church of Rome is
obtained, is never a whit more agreeable to Christianity then before; but it is
become more pardonable* for him that sees what he ought to avoid, not to see
what he ought to follow. He that is admitted to communion with the Church of
Rome, by the Bull of profession of Faith, inacted by Pius IV. Pope, (not by the
Councile of Trent) besides many particulars there added to the Creed (which,
whether true or false, according to the premises, he swears to as much as to
his Creed) at length professes to admit without doubting, whatsoever else the
sacred Canons, and general Councils, especially the Synod of Trent has
delivered, decreed, and declared; damning and rejecting as anathema, whatsoever
the Church damneth and rejects for heresy, under anathema; But whether the
whole Church, or the present Church, the oath limiteth not.

Here is no formal and express profession, that a man believes the present
Church to be Infallible. And therefore it was justly alleged in the first
Book, that ^he Church has never enjoined the professing of it. But here is a
just ground for a reasonable Construction, that it is hereby intended to be
exacted; because a man swears to admit the acts of Counciles, as he does to
admit his Creed, and the holy Scriptures. Nor can there be a more effectual
challenge of that privilege, then the use of it, in the decree of the
Councile, that the Scriptures which we call Apocrypha, be admitted with the
like reverence as the unquestionable Canonical Scriptures, being all enjoined
to be received, as all of one rank; Which, before the decree, had never been
enjoined to be received, but with that difference, which had always been
acknowledged in the Church. For this act, giving them the authority of
prophetical Scripture, inspired by God, which they had not before; though it
involve a nullity (because that which was not inspired by God to him that writ
it, when he writ it, can never have the authority of inspired by God, because
it can never become inspired by God; Nor can become known that it was indeed
inspired by God, not having been so received from the beginning, without
revelation anew to that purpose) yet usurpeth Infallibility, because it
injoyneth that which no authority, but that which immediate revelation
creates, can injoyne. Further the decree of the Councile concerning
justification involving a mistake, in the term, and understanding by it the
infusion of grace, whereby, the righteousness that dwells in a Christian, is
formally and properly that which settles him in the state of righteous before
God; not fundamentally and metonymically that which is required in him that is
estated in the same by God, in consideration of our Lord Christ; Though I
maintain, that this decree prejudiceth not the substance of Christianity; Yet
must it not be allowed to express the true reason by which it takes place. The
Councile then transgresses the Power of the Church, in erecting a Position of
the School, (and that, in the proper sense of the terms, not true) into an
article of the Faith; But the Bull much more, in requiring to swear it. And
whether or no, the decree of the Councile concern the salvation of a single
Christian, being under it; The swearing to it, which the Bull injoyneth,
necessarily concerns the salvation of him, who, if he understand the business,
knows it not to be true, if he understand it not, cannot swear it. But, that
the satisfaction of Penance is not to abolish the guilt of eternal death, by
changing the love of this world into the Love of God above all things; but to
redeem the debt of temporal punishment, remaining when the sin is remitted
by the Sacrament, (or, when it cannot be had, by the mere desire of it) as it
is decreed Sess. VI. cap. XIV. this is necessarily prejudicial to the
Christianity of those, who must needs be induced by it, to think themselves
restored to Gods grace, without the means which his Gospel requires. For, be
Penance never so much a Sacrament, if the Church suppose the Gospel, the
applying of the Keys thereof cannot abate that condition which the Gospel
requires, but is employed to effect it. Therefore absolution proceeds, not but
upon supposition, that the change of a man's disposition is visible, by the
performing of his Penance. If the case of necessity create an exception, which,
the Church presumes that God dispenses in, and therefore reconcileth all in
the point of death, by giving them the Eucharist; It is not because there is
ground of pardon in their being reconciled, but in the procuring of their being
qualified for it, which must not have been presumed upon otherwise. For, the
presumption of pardon not lying in the act of reconcilement, by the power of
the Keys, but in the ground of it; upon the corrupt custom, of absolving
first, and imposing Penance to be performed afterward, to decree this
construction, that it is not imposed for remission of sin, (as conditionally
depending on it) but to pay the temporal punishment remaining when it is
remitted; was to heap abuses upon abuses. For, hence is come the change of
attrition into contrition by the sentence of absolution, in him, in whom, all
the Penance that is in joined pretends nothing else, then to effect it. So
that, pardon being held forth upon undue grounds, the corruption of our nature
must needs presume upon it, when it is not effected. How then shall a man
swear to admit this, without consenting, and concurring, to the intangling of
simple souls in the snares of their sins? And this is therefore a point,
wherein, the Christianity which the decree constituteth is necessarily
defective; as not providing for that which the Gospel makes requisite to the
remission of sin; but teaching to expect it, from the act of declaring it, by
the Church, without supposing the ground, upon which the Gospel tendreth it.

If the decree of Transubstantiation could possibly be expounded, to signify
only the Sacramental presence of the body and blood of Christ, which, I
maintain, the consecration effects; what would that serve the turn, when it
is further required, that we hold him anathem^, that believes the substance of
the elements to remain? which, being so manifestly justified by the
Scriptures, neither any Tradition of the Church, nor any reason, rendering the
bodily presence of them inconsistent with the Sacramental presence of the
flesh and blood of Christ, excludes. Nor is it enough, that Christian people
frequent themselves, and admit in others, the use and effect of these offices,
which the Councile of Florence first decreed to make up the seven Sacraments;
unless they swear to hold them for Sacraments, without distinguishing, either
in that grace which the ceremony signifies, or in the force whereby they
concur to the obtaining of it. Whereas the difference between our common
Christianity, and, that which the Church is able to contribute toward the
effect of it, by any office which it is enabled to celebrate, ought to
distinguish the grace of the holy Ghost, which Baptism and the Eucharist,
immediately bestow, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, which they inact and
establish; from that which any office of the Church, by Gods promise to hear
the prayers thereof, is able to bring to pass. Further, seeing that, by the
Scriptures, expounded according to the original Tradition of the Church, the
souls of those that depart in grace are in an imperfect state of happiness,
till the general judgment, according to the state in which they depart;
Neither can any prayers be made, to redeem souls out of Purgatory pains, to
the sight of God, (which the decree of the Councile of Florence supposes) upon
those terms, Nor any assurance be had, that the prayers which are made to the
Saints do come to their knowledge. And how then shall a good Christian swear to
believe, that Souls are helped out of Purgatory by the prayers of the living;
or, that he is to pray to saints, of whom he can by no means be assured that
they hear his prayers? Surely it cannot be imagined, that the communion of the
Eucharist in one kind, the making of these prayers to Saints, which
distinguish them not from God (desiring of them those things which only God
can give) the setting up of their images in Churches, to be worshipped and
prayed to, in the house of Gods service, the worshipping of images, as the
objects of that worship, in respect of their principals, which is not the
worship of their principals, the serving of God in an unknown Language, the
barring of Christian people from the Scriptures, the maintaining of Masses
where no body communicates, scarce any body assisteth, the opinion of applying
the virtue of Christ's death by them, to those who neither communicate nor
assist them with their devotions, by virtue of the Sacrisice, the tendering of
pardon for sin by Indulgences, whereof there can be no effect but the
releasing of Penance enjoined; These and other customs of that Church, which
have the force and effect of Law, (which written laws many times never
attain) are so far from being reasonable means to advance the service of
God, that to live, under them, and to yield conformity to them, is a burden
unsufferable for a Christian to undergo; to approve them, by being reconciled
to the Church that maintains them, a scandal incurable, and irreparable. But
to swear further, and to profess, firmly to admit and embrace them as
contained within the title of constitutions, and observations of that Church,
is a thing which, to me it seems strange, that it should ever be required of a
Christian. The effect of this Bull is of so high a nature, in regard of those
whom it concerns, that never any General Councile pretended to produce the
like. That every man should own the Laws of the Society wherein he lives, so
far, as to live in conformity with them, is a thing necessary to the
subsistence of all communities. Nor is a private person chargeable with the
faults of the Laws under which he lives, until it appear, that, by the
means of those faults, he must fail of the end for which the community
subsisteth; That is, of salvation, by communicating with the Church of Rome.
But, to make a private Christian a party to the decrees and customs of the
Church, (by swearing to admit and embrace them all) because he communicates
with it; is to make him answerable for that which he does not. He that would
swear no more then he believes, nor believe more then he can see cause to
believe (being a private Christian, and incapable to comprehend what Laws and
customs are fit for so great a Body as the Church) must not swear to the Laws
of the Church, as good or fit (were there no charge against them) because past
his understanding; but rest content, by conforming to them, to hold communion
with the Church. But, in stead of mending the least of those horrible abuses,
which the complaints of all parts of Christendom evidence to be visible, to
exclude all that will not swear to them; is to bid them redeem the communion
of the Church, by transgressing that Christianity which it ought to presuppose.
Well may that power be called infinite, that undertakes to do such things as
this. But how should the means of salvation be thought to consist in obeying
it? Here is then a peremptory bar to communion with the Church of Rome; only
occasioned by the Reformation, but fixed by the Church of Rome. That order
which several parts of Christendom had provided for themselves, under the
title of Reformation, might have been but provisionall, till a better
understanding between the parties might have produced a tolerable agreement,
(in order whereunto, a distance for a time had been the less mischievous) had
not this proceeding cut off all hope of peace, but by conquest, that is, by
yiedling all this. And therefore, this act being that which formed the Schism,
the crime thereof is chiefly imputable to it. As therefore I said before, that
the Sacrament of Baptism, though the necessary means of salvation, becomes a
necessary bar to salvation, when it inacteth a profession of renouncing,
either any part of the Faith, or the unity of the Church; So here I say, that
the communion of the Eucharist, obtained by making a profession, which the
common Christianity allows not a good Christian to make, is no more the
means of salvation to him who obtains it upon such terms, how much soever a
Christian may stand obliged to hold communion with the Church. And this is the
reason that makes the communion of the Church of Rome, absolutely, no more
warrantable then before, now that it is become unwarrantable, to communicate
with Presbyteries and Congregations.

But comparatively, an extremity, in respect to the contrary extremity, holds
the place of a means; Nor did I ever imagine, that the humor of reforming the
Church, without ground or measure, may not proceed to that extremity, that it
had been better to have left it unreformed, then to have neglected those
bounds, which the pretense of Reformation requires. I say not that this is now
come to pass, comparisons being odious; But this I say, that he who goes to
reform the Church, upon supposition that the Pope is Antichrist, and the
Papists therefore Idolaters, is much to take heed, that he miskenne not the
ground for that measure, by which he is to reform; And, taking that for
Reformation, which is the furthest distant from the Church of Rome that is
possible; Imagine, that the Pope may be Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters,
for that which the Catholic Faith and Church allows. It is a marvel to
see, how much the zeal to have the Pope Antichrist surpasses the evidence of
the reasons which it is proved with. For otherwise, it would easily appear,
that, as an Antipope is nothing but a pretended Pope, so Antichrist is nothing
else but a pretended Messiah; He who pretends to be that which Christ is
indeed, and to give salvation to Gods people. Our Lord foretells, of false
Christ's and false Prophets, Mat. XXIV. 24. Mark XIII. 22. and those are the
Preachers of new Sects, which pretended to be Christ's, and which pretended not
to be Christ's. Simon Magus, and Menander, we know by Irenaeus and Epiphanius;
Dositheus, by Origin upon Matthew, pretended all of them to be the Messiah, to
the Samaritanes; who, as Schismatic Jews, expected the Messiah as well as
the Jews. Saturninus and Basilides were false prophets, but not Antichrists;
because not pretending that themselves were the Messiah, but pretending, some
of those, whereof they made that fulness of the Godhead which they preached
to consist, to be the Messiah. Among the Jews, all that ever took upon them to
be the Messiah, besides our Lord Jesus, are properly Antichrists; Among whom,
Barcochab under Adriane was eminent. But there is reason enough to reckon
Manichaeus and Mahomet both of that rank; As undertaking to be that, to their
followers, which the Jews expected of the Messiah; to save them from their
enemies, and to give them the world to come. For Manichaeus seems indeed to
have given himself the Name of Menahem, signifying in the Ebrew, the same as
Parucletus, in Greek; because he pretended to be assumed by the holy Ghost;
as, not he, but Christians, believe, that the Word of God assumed the manhood
of Christ. But, when he writ himself Apostle of Jesus Christ, in the head of
his Epistle called the foundation, which S. Austine writes against, it was not
with an intent to acknowledge our Lord the true Christ, whose coming he made
imaginary, and only in appearance; but to seduce Christians, (with a
colorable pretense of the name of Christ, and some ends of the Gospels, as you
heard Epiphanius say) to take himself for that which Christ is indeed to
Christians. Saint Austine contra Epist. Fund. cap. VI. suspecteth, that he
intended to foist in himself to be worshipped in stead of Christ, by those whom
he seduced from Christ; And shows you his reason for it there. But whether
worshipped or not; (for, it cannot be said, that Mahomet pretended to be
worshipped for God, by his followers) though he could not be that which our
Lord Christ is to Christians, unless he were worshipped for God; yet he might
be that which the Messiah was expected to be to the Jews, in saving them
through this world, unto the world to come. Whether Christians are to expect a
greater Antichrist then any of these, toward the end of the world, or not, is
a thing no way clear by the Scriptures; And, the authority of the Fathers is no
evidence, in a matter, which evidently belongs not to the Rule of Faith. It is
not enough that Saint John says, Ye know that the Antichrist is coming, (...),
1 John II. 28. for, how many thousand articles are there that signify no such
eminence; and therefore, how shall it appear to signify here any more then him
that pretends to be the Christ? For it is evident that Saint John, both there,
and 1 John IV. 3. speaks of his own time. As for the Revelation, neither is it
any where said, that it prophesies any thing of Antichrist; nor will it be
proved, that it says any thing of the Pope; Much of it, being a Prophecy,
has been expounded to all appearance of something like the Pope, though with
violence enough. All of it, without Prophesying what shall come to pass, could
never be expounded to that purpose; and it is not strange that so great a
foundation should be laid upon the event of an obscure Scripture, (such as all
Prophesies are) to be conjectured by that which we think we see come to pass?
For, I refer to judgment, how much more appearance there is that it
intends the vengeance of God upon the Pagan Empire of Rome, for persecuting
Christianity; both in the Text and composure of the prophecy, and in the
pretense of tendering and addressing it. Nor is there any thing more effectual
to prove the same, then the Idolatries, which it specifies, that the Christians
chused rather to lay down their lives then commit. True it is, no man can
warrant, that by praying to Saints, for the same things that we pray to God
for, and, by the worship of Images, Idolatry may not come in at the back door,
to the Church of Rome, which Christianity shuts out at the great Gate. But if
it do, the difference will be visible, between that and the Idolatry of Pagans,
that profess variety of imaginary deities, by those circumstances, which, in
the Apocalypse, expressly describe, the Idolatries of the Heathen Empire of
Rome. And therefore I am forced, utterly to discharge the Church of Rome of
this imputation, and to resolve, that the Pope can no more be Antichrist, then
he that holds by professing our Lord to be the Christ, and to honor him for
God, as the Christ is honored by Christians, can himself pretend to be the
Christ.

Nay, though I sincerely blame the imposing of new articles upon the faith of
Christians, and that of positions, which I maintain not to be true; yet I
must, and do freely profess, that I find no positinecessary to salvation
prohibited, none destructive to salvtion enjoined to be believed by it. And
therefore, must I necessarily accept it for a true Church, as, in the Church of
England I have always known it accepted; seeing there can no question be made,
that it continues the same visible body, by the succession of Pastors, and
Laws, (the present customs in force, being visibly, the corruption of those
which the Church had from the beginning) that first was founded by the
Apostles. For the Idolatries, which I grant to be possible, though not
necessary, to be found in it, by the ignorance and carnal affections of
particulars, not by command of the Church, or the Laws of it; I do not admit
to destroy the salvation of those, who, living in the comunion thereof, are not
guilty of the like. There remains therefore, in the present Church of Rome,
the profession of all that truth, which it is necessary to the salvation of all
Christians to believe, either in point of faith or manners. Very much darkened
indeed, by inhansing of positions, either of a doubtful sense, or absolutely
false, to the rank and degree of matters of Faith. But much more overwhelmed
and choked, with a deal of rubbish opinions, traditions, customs, and
ceremonies; (allowed indeed, but no way enjoined) which make that noise in the
public profession, and create so much business in the practice of Religion,
among them, that it is a thing very difficult, for simple Christians to
discern the pearl, the seed, and the leaven, of the Gospel, buried in the
earth and the dough of popular doctrines, and observations, so as to embrace
it, with that affection of faith and love, which the price of it requires. But
if it be true as I said before, that no man is obliged to commit those
Idolatries, that are possible to be committed, in that communion; it will not
be impossible for a discerning Christian, to pass through that multitude of
doctrines, and observations, (the business whereof being merely
circumstantiall to Christianity, allows not that zeal and affection to be
exercised upon the principal as is spent upon the accessory) without
superstition and will worship, in placing the service of God in the husk and
not in the kernel; or promising himself the favor of God upon considerations
impertinent to Christianity. As for the half Sacrament, the service in an
unknown language, the barring the people from the Scrptures, and other Laws,
manifestly intercepting the means of salvatian, which God has allowed his
people by the Church; It seems very reasonable to say, that the fault is not
the fault of particular Christians, who may, and perhaps do many times wish,
that the matter were otherwise. But that the Church being a Society concluding
all by the act of those who conclude it, there is no cause to imagine, that God
will impute to the guilt and damnation of those who could not help it, that
which they are sufferes in, and not actors. Nay, it is much to be feared, that
the authors themselves of such hard Laws, and those who maintain them, will
have a strong plea for themselves at the day of judgment, in the
unreasonablenesse of their adversaries; That, it is true, all reason required,
that the means of salvation provided by God, should be ministered by the
Church. But, finding the pretense of Reformation without other ground, than
that sense of the Scriptures which every man may imagine; and therefore without
other bounds and measure, then that which imagination (for which there are no
bounds) fixes; They thought it necessary so to carry matters, as never to
acknowledge, that the Church ever erred in any decree or Law that it has made;
Least the same error might be thought to take place in the substance of
Christianity, and the Reformation of the Church to consist in the renouncing of
it; Which we see come to pass, in the Heresy of Socinus. And that, finding the
Unity of the Church, which they were trusted with, absolurely necessary to the
maintenance of the common Christianity, whereby salvation is possible to be
had, though more difficult, by denying those helps to salvation, which, such
Laws intercept; They thought themselves tied, for the good of the whole, not
to give way to Laws, tending so apparently to the salvation of particular
Christians.

On the other side, supposing the premises, there remain no pretense, that
either Congregations or Presbyteries can be Churches; as founded merely upon
humane usurpation, which is Schism, not upon divine institution which orders
all Churches, to be fit to constitute one Church, which is the whole. I need
not say that there can be no pretense for any authority visibly convayed to
them by those which set them up, having it in themselves before. I do not deny
that a Christian may attain to a kind of moral assurance, concerning the
sincerity of another Christian; That he is in the state of Grace, and endowed
with Gods Spirit. Not by any imediate dictate of the holy Ghost, to his own
heart; which is not promised to that purpose. Not by any vehemence or
suddenness in the change which made him so, inabling him to design the time,
and place, and means, by which it came to pass, that it may appear the work
of Gods Spirit, preventing and swallowing up all concurrence of his own free
choice; For this, the change of the end and design of a man's whole life, and
the course of it, admits not. But by force of those arguments and effects of
it, visible in his conversation, which, the prudence of a sincere Christian can
impute to nothing else. But I deny therefore, that every true Christian can, by
the ordinary means which God allows, be so assured of the sincerity of other
true Christians, as thereby to be privileged, to forsake the Church of God in
which they live, as consisting of others as well as of such, to retire
themselves into Congregations, in which they may serve God in that order, which
the sincerity of their Christianity assures them to contain the purity of
Gods ordinances. For it is manifest, that the gift of Gods Spirit, requisite to
the salvation of all Christians, is not promised to this effect, as to give
them that discretion, which inables to value the consequence of such
appearances. And if it were, and if all true Christians could attain assurance
of all Christians of whom the question may be made, whether true Christians or
not; yet has not God provided, that the truest and sincerest Christians retire
themselves from communion with those, of whom there is no reasonable
presumption that they are such, but are only qualified members of the Church,
by such Laws as may comprise all the world, professing Christianity, in the
communion of the Church. For, whatsoever our Lord has foretold of the Church
in the Gospel, as of a net that catches both good and bad fish, as of a
floor, containing chafe as well as grain, as of a flock, containtaining
goats as well as sheep (as the Arc contained as well unclean beasts as clean)
necessarily falls upon the visible Church; (and has been so accepted by the
Church, in the case of the Donatists) to assure us, that the good are not
defiled by communion with the bad, but obliged to live in it, for the exercise
of their charity and patience, in seeking their amendment. For separation, upon
pretense of satisfaction, in the Christianity of some, to them who profess not
to have it of others, as it carries in it a necessary appearance of spiritual
pride, in overseeing all those that concur not in it; So, it sets up a banner
to the imposture of hypocrites, and turns the pretense of sincere Christianity,
to the justifying of, whatsoever it is, that a faction so constituted shall
take for it; Not measuring men's persons by the common Christianity, but the
common Christianity, by that which appears in the persons of those, who
without due grounds, are supposed true Christians, exclusively to others. The
ground of Congregations being thus void* the constitution of them must needs
involve the sacrilege of Schism in the work, and therefore a nullity in the
effects of it. The Baptism which they give, void of the effect of Grace. The
Eucharist, though consecrated in the form of the Church, (which, it is not to
be doubted that the Novatians, Meletians, and Donatists held, because they are
not blamed in it; Nor do I doubt that Tertullians Montanists did the like,
whatsoever abuse might come in among them afterward, by being separated from
the Church) void of the thing signified by it. The prayers of the Church void
of that effect which the promise of hearing the prayers thereof imports,
whatsoever Offices, the Church exercises and solemnizeth therewith.

How much more the constitution of Presbyteries, which, pretending no such
thing as separating the clean from the unclean, admits to the communion, upon
no further pretense of Reformation, then answering the Assemblies Catechism,
at the demand of Triers, constituted by those, who, contrary to that solemn
promise, upon supposition whereof they were advanced to Orders in the Church of
England, usurp the Power, not of their Bishops, but of the whole Church, in
prescribing an order of Ecclesiastical communion, in all Offices of the
Church, without warrant from it; Ordaining those, who undertake to warrant the
salvation of poor souls, as sufficiently provided for thereby, by becoming
their Ministers; to be their Ministers. For, what pretense can color this
usurpation, can obscure the Sacrilege of Schism in the act, the nullity of
Gods promises in the effect of it; when the difference consists in reno^ncing
that authority, which themselves deny not to have been in possession according
to Gods Law, pretending further, so strongly as they know, by virtue of it? In
disclaiming single heads of Churches, and the Clergy that think themselves
bound to do nothing without them, though limited, both by the Law of the
Church, and the Law of the Land, And in setting up themselves in their stead,
to manage that authority, without the exercise whereof themselves believe
Christianity cannot subsist, by Presbyteries and Synods. As if the tyranny of
an Oligarchy were not more insufferable, then the tyranny of a Monarch. Or, as
if there were not presumption of tyrannizing, in those, who find themselves
free from the bond of these Laws, which fall to the ground with the authority
that used them, to use the authority they usurp at their own discretion;
which is necessarily the law of all Government, that is not limited by laws
which it acknowledges. For if they allege, that they provide us a confession
of Faith; (which is a strange allegation, not alleging, either what we wanted
before, or what we get by it) I shall quickly bring them to the trial, by
demanding of them, to spue out that damnable Heresy of Antinomians and
Enthusiasts, in turning the Covenant of Baptism into an absolute promise of
life everlasting, to them for whom Christ died, without conditioning, that
they believe and live like Christians. Which they can never do, without
contradicting themselves, until they make that Faith which only justifies to
consist in that loyalty, wherewith a man undertakes his Baptism, out of a
choice, the freedom whereof excludes all predetermination of the will, though
by that Grace which effectually brings it to pass. For this condition, making
all assurance of salvation the fruit of justifying faith, not the act of it,
(as if one could be assured of it, by believing that he is sure of it*)
obliges a man to his Christianity, for that very reason, which first moves all
men to be Christians; to obtain the promise which depends upon the performing
of it. The substance therefore of Christianity consisting in it, that baptism
which inacteth it not, that Eucharist which restores, and establishes it not,
is not Baptism or the Eucharist, but by equivocation of words; which, so long
as we are not secured of, how should the word and Sacraments which such
establishments hold forth be that word and those Sacraments, which are the
marks of Gods Church? And are they not revenged of the seven Sacraments, in the
Church of Rome, beyond the measure of moderate defense, who, to renounce them
for Sacraments, suppress the offices which by them are solemnized? If they
allow the Baptism of Infants, and the Covenant of Baptism, what reason can
they have to abolish the solemn profession of it, at years of discretion;
with the blessing of the Church, for the performance of that, to which their
profession obliges? What account will they give, either for not blessing
Marriages, leaving private Christians to contract without the authority of the
Church; Or for blessing them, without being warranted by the Law of the Church,
that they are such as Christianity allows? Are they not most Christianly
revenged of extreme Unction, by providing no visitation for the sick? Of
auricular confession, by consining the Keys of the Church to the taking away,
not of sin, from before God, but of scandal, from before the Church?
Ordinations, I mervaile not that all are forced to maintain; for, how should
altar be set up against altar, not providing who should minister at it? As for
the ceremonies and circumstances of Gods service, does not superstitious
strictness in abolishing them oblige reasonable men to think, that they
imagine themselves nolesse acceptable to God, for neglecting them, then the
Papists for multiplying them, beyond that which the order of them to their end
can require? That the memories of the Saints should be fit occasions of serving
God, (which, the Christianity of the ancient Church made one of the
powerfullest means to extinguish Hethenisme) is now so abhorred, as if we had
found out some other Christianity, then that which it served to introduce. That
there should be set times of Fasting, is so f^rre from the care of Reformers,
as if there were no such office of Christianity to be exercised by Gods Church.
In fine, what is become of the substance, while we talk of ceremony and
circumstance? Whether Churches were provided, revenues founded, persons
consecrated, to the intent, that the service of God might daily and hourly
sound in them, by the Psalms of his praises, by the instruction of his word,
by the prayers of his people, by the continual celebration of the Eucharist?
Or, that there should be two Sermons a sunday, with a prayer at the discretion
of him that preaches, before and after it; Provided, nothing be done, to
signify that humility of mind, that reverence of heart, that devotion of spirit,
which the awful majesty of God is to be served with; I report my self to the
piety of Christendom, from sun, to sun. This I see, (woe worth my sins,
that have made me live to see it!) an effectual course is taken, that the
Church doors be always shut, and no serving God there, unless some body
preach. This is the sum of that which the premises enable me to allege, why I
can have no part in the present reformation, so called. Besides the utter want
of all pretense for authority; the whole title and pretense upon which, and the
end to which, an equitable mind might question, whether ordinary authority,
though of Gods institution and appointment, may be superseded, in a case of
extrarodinary necessity, to restore the true Faith and service of God (which,
all authority of the Church presupposes for the ground, and proposes for the
end of all communion with it) is found utterly wanting, upon the best inquiry
that I have been able to make. I am to seek for a point, any one point,
wherein, I can justly grant, that the change is not for the worse. Even that
frequency of preaching, which was the outside of the business, even granting
it to be by the Rule of true Faith; Yet has the performance of it been so
visibly, so pitifully defective, that he must have a hard heart for our common
Christianity, who can think, that there is wherewith to defend it from the
scorn of unbelievers, had they nothing to do but to mind it.

I confess, as before, I allowed the Church of Rome some excuse, from the
unreasonablenesse of their adversaries; So here, considering the horrible
scandales given by that communion, in standing so rigorously upon Laws, so
visibly ruinous to the service of God and the advancement of Christianity, and
the difficulty of finding that mean, in which the truth stands between the
extremes; (as our Lord Christ between the thieves, says Turtulliane) I do
not proceed, to give the salvation of poor souls for lost, that are carried
away with the pretense of Reformation, in the change that is made, even to hate
and persecute, by word, or by deed, those who cannot allow it. For, as for the
appearance of Heresy, though the mistake be dangerous to the soul, because, if
followed, it becomes the principle of those actions, which, whosoever does shall
not inherit the kingdom of God; Yet it may be so tenderly held, as not to
extinguish other points of Christianity, which necessarily contradict it. For,
though indeed they do not stand with it, yet it is possible, that those who,
through the difficulty of finding the truth, have swallowed a mistake, may not
proceed to act according to the consequence of it, but of the rest of that
Christianity, which they retain and contradicts it. For, as for the
authority of the Church, (the neglect whereof creates that obstinacy, in
consideration whereof, heresy is held heretically) the rigorousnesse of the
Church of Rome, extending it beyond all bounds that our common Christianity can
allow, and necessitating well disposed Christians to waive it; what mervaile,
if, the due bounds becoming in visible to common sense, by communion with the
Church, the misprision of Heresy possess them with the esteem of
Christianity? And the difficulty of avoiding the temptation create an excuse to
God, for them whose intentions are single? As for the crime of schism, justly
sticking to them, who presuming upon their understanding in the scriptures, by
the scriptures alone, which God has no where promised to assist, without using
the helps which he has provided by his Church; though the sacrilege thereof
justly render void of effect, the ordinances of God, which are ministered by
virtue of that usurpation which it involveth, yet, there being abundance of
souls, that may live and dye without knowing any better, much less, that can
ever be able to judge the best, upon true principles; why should I not hope,
that God, passing by the nullities which it creates, will make good the effect
of his Grace to those, who, with singleness of heart, seek it in a wrong way,
when, by his Law, he cannot be tied to concur to the means? But, this
resolution, being the result of the premises, demonstrateth how much reason the
parties (that is, those who create the parties by heading the division) have,
to look about them, least they become guilty of the greatest part of souls,
which in reason must needs perish, by the extremities in which it consists.
And, the representing of the grounds thereof unto the parties, though it may
seem an office unnecessary for a private Christian to undertake, yet, seems
to me so free from all imputation of offense, in discharging of our common
Christianity, and the obligation of it; that I am no less willing to undergo
any offense which it may bring upon me, then I am to want the advantages,
which, allowing the present Reformation might give me.

In the mean time, I remain obliged, not to repent me of the resolution of my
nonage, to remain in the communion of the Church of England. There I find an
authority visibly derived from the act of the Apostles, by means of their
successors. Nor ought it to be of force to question the validity thereof, that
the Church of Rome, and the communion thereof, acknowledges not the
Ordinations, and other Acts, which are done by virtue of it, as done without
the consent of the whole Church; which, it is true, did visibly concur to the
authorizing of all acts done by the Clergy, as constituted by virtue of those
Laws, which all did acknowledge, and under the profession, of executing the
offices of their several orders according to the same. For, the issue of that
dispute will be triable by the cause of limiting the exercise of them, to those
terms which the Reformation thereof contains, which if they prove such, as
the common Christianity, expressed in the Scriptures expounded by the original
practice of the whole Church, renders necessary to be maintained,
notwithstanding the rest of the Church agree not in them; the blame of
separation, that has insued thereupon, will not be chargeable upon them that
retire themselves to them, for the salvation of Christian souls, but on them
who refuse all reasonable compliance, in concurring to that which may seem any
way tolerable. But, toward that trial, that which has been said must
suffice. The substance of that Christianity which all must be saved by, when
all disputes, and decrees, and contradictions are at an end, is more properly
maintained in that simplicity which all that are concerned are capable of, by
the terms of that Baptism which it ministers, requiring the profession of
them, from all that are confirmed at years of discretion) then all the disputes
on both sides, then all decrees on the one side, all confessions of faith on
the other side, have been able to deliver it. And I conceive, I have some
ground to say so great a word, having been able, by limiting the term of
justifying faith in the writings of the Apostles, according to the same, to
resolve, upon what terms, both sides are to agree, if they will not set up the
rest of their division upon something which the truth of Christianity
justifies not, on either side. For, by admitting Christianity (that is, the
sincere profession thereof) to be the Faith which only justifyeth, in the
writings of the Apostles; whatsoever is in difference, as concerning the
Covenant of Grace, is resolved, without prejudicing either the necessity of
Grace, to the undertaking, the performing, the accepting of it, for the reward;
or the necessity of good works in consideration for the same. The substance of
Chrianity, about which there is any difference, being thus secured, there
remains no question concerning Baptism, and the Eucharist, to the effect for
which they are instituted, being ministered upon this ground, and the profession
of it, with the form which the Catholic Church requires, to the consecration
of the Eucharist. Nor does the Church of England either make Sacraments, of the
rest of the seven, or abolish the Offices, because the Church of Rome makes
them Sacraments. Nor wants it an order, for the daily morning and evening
service of God, for the celebration of Festivalls, and times of Fasting, for
the observation of ceremonies, fit to create that devotion and reverence, which
they signify to vulgar understandings in the service of God. But, praying to
Saints, and worshipping of Images, or of the Eucharist, Prayers for the
delivery of the dead out of Purgatory, the Communion in one kind, Masses
without Communions, being additions to, or detractions from that simplicity of
Gods service, which the original order of the Church delivers, visible to
common reason, comparing the present order of the Church of Rome with the
Scriptures, and primitive records of the Church; there is no cause to think
that the Catholic Church is disowned, by laying them aside. It is true, it was
an extraordinary act of Secular Power in Church matters, to enforce the change,
without any consent from the greater part of the Church. But if the matter of
the change be the restoring of Laws, which our common Christianity, as well as
the Primitive orders of the Church (of both which, Christian Powers are borne
Protectors) make requisite; the secular power acts within the sphere of it,
and the division is not imputable to them that make the change, but to them
that refuse their concurrence to it. Well had it been, had that most pious and
necessary desire thereof, to restore public Penance, been seconded, by the
zeal and compliance of all estates; and not stifled by the tares of
Puritanisme, growing up with the Reformation of it. For, as there can be no
just pretense of Reformation, when the effect of it is not the frequentation of
Gods public service, in that form which it restores, but the suppressing of
it in that form which it rejects; So, the communion of the Eucharist being
the chief office in which it consists; the abolishing of private Masses is
an unsusticient pretense for Reformation, where that provision, for the
frequenting of the communion, is not made, which, the restoring of the order in
force, before private Masses came in, requires. Nor can any mean be imagined
to maintain continual communion, with that purity of conscience, which the
holiness of Christianity requires, but the restoring of Penance. In fine, if
any thing may have been defective, or amiss, in that order which the Church of
England establishes, it is but justice, to compare it in gross, with both
extremes which it avoideth; and considering, that it is not in any private
man, to make the body of the Church such as they could wish, to serve God with;
to rest content, in that he is not obliged, to become a party to those things
which he approves not; conforming himself to the order in force, in hope of
that grace, which communion with the Church in the offices of Gods service
promises.

For, consider again, what means of salvation all Christians have, by
communion with the Church of Rome. All are bound to be at Mass on every
Festival day, but, to say only so many Paters, and so many Aves as belong to
the hour. Not to assist with their devotions, that which they understand not;
much less, to communicate. All are bound to communicate once a year at Easter,
and before they do it, to say they are sorry for the sins they confess;
undertaking the Penance which is enjoined, not for cleansing the sin, but to
remain for Purgatory, if they do it not here. The like at the point of death,
with extreme unction over and above. Within the compass of this law,
Christians may fall into the hands of conscientious Curates and Confessors,
that shall not fail to instruct them, wherein their Christianity and salvation
consists, and how they are to serve God in Spirit and in truth; preferring the
principal before the accessory rubbish of ceremonies, and observations,
indifferent of themselves, but, which spend the strength of the seed and root
of Christianity in leaves and chaff without fruit. But they may also fall under
such, as shall direct them to look upon the virtue of the sacrifice, that is
repeated in the Mass, and promise themselves the benefit thereof by the work
done, without their assistance. To look upon their Penance, only, as that
which must be paid for in Purgatory if not done here. To do as the Church does,
and to believe as it believes, promising themselves salvation, by being of
communion therewith, though it import no more then I have said. Nay, though
they be directed such devotions, as are common to God with his creature, as
spend the seed of Christianity in the chafe of observations, impertinent to
the end of it. On the other side, departing thence to Congregations and
Presbyteries, what means of salvation shall a Christian have? Two Sermons a
Sunday, and a prayer before and after each; But, whether it be the Word of God,
or his that Preaches, whether Christianity allow to pray as he prays, or not;
no Rule to secure. And, whether Christian liberty allow, that men be tied to
serve God from Sunday to Sunday, or not, until Gods spirit indite what every
man shall say to God; no way resolved. A man may possibly light upon him, that
does not take justifying Faith to consist in believing that a man is of the
elect, for whom alone Christ died; or that, believing it, presses the
consequences which contradict his own premises, as if he did not. But, how
easy is it to light upon him, that draws the true conclusion from the premises
which he professes, and makes mere Popery of the whole duty of a Christian?
Certainly, the Church of Rome holds no error in the Faith, any thing near so
pernicious as this. That of transubstantiation is but a fleabite in comparison
of it. He who, by reason of his education, is afraid to think that the
elements remain, is he therefore become incapable of the Spirit of God
conveyed by the Body and Blood of our Lord in the Sacrament? And certainly,
that is the prime Interest of our Christianity in it; though, the bodily
presence of the elements is no way prejudicial to the same. But, who so
believes he has Gods Word for his salvation, not supposing any condition
requisite, may think himself tied to live like a Christian, but by no means,
but by holding contradictories at once; Which, though all men by consequence
do, because all err; Yet, in matters of so high consequence, to do it cannot
be without prejudice to the work of Christianity, and dangerous to the
salvation it promises. Nor can Baptism or the Eucharist be Baptism or the
Eucharist but equivocally, to them that allow the true consequence of this.
And, shall any man persuade me, that, unless a man will swear, that which no
man is able to show that a Christian may swear, he perishes without help, for
want of this communion so obtained? Or, on the other side, that his salvation
can be secured, who, to obtain that means of salvation which Congregations or
Presbyteries tender, concur to the open act of Schism which they do? So
necessary is it for me to continue in the resolution of my nonage, as being
convinced, upon a new inquiry, that the means of salvation are more
sufficient, more agreeable for substance, to the Scriptures expounded by the
original practice of the whole Church, (though perhaps not for form) in that
mean, then in either extreme.

This resolution, then, being thus grounded, what alteration can the present
calamity of the Church of England make in it, to persuade a man, to believe
thosearticles, which the Bull of Pius VI. adds to the common faith; to
maintain, whatsoever is once grown a custom in the Church of Rome, as for
that service of God, which it destroys? Or on the other side, to become a
party to that express act of Schism, with misprision of Heresy involved in
it, which the erecting of Congregations and Presbyteries imports? Epiphanius
mentions one Zachaeus in Syria, that retired himself from communion with the
Church, to serve God alone. If the force of the Sword destroy the opportunities
and means of yielding God that service which a man's Christianity professed
upon mature choice, requires; shall it be imputable to him, that, desiring to
serve God with his Church, he is excluded by them, who ground their communion
upon conditions which the common Christianity allows not? Or, to them, by
whom he is so excluded?

I can only say to the scattered remains of the Church of England, whose
communion I cherish, because it stands upon those terms, which give me
sufficient ground for the hope of Salvation, which I have cherished from my
cradle; that, the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of England, being no longer
in force by the Power of this world, are by cons^quence, no longer a sufficient
Rule, for the order of their communion in the offices of Gods service; In which
Order the visibility of every Church consists. Not as if the nature of good
and badde, in the matter of them, had suffered any change; but because, being
the mean to preserve unity in the service of God, upon those terms, which the
Law of the Land enforced, they are no sufficient mean to preserve it upon
those terms, which only our Christianity requires; To wit, that it be
distinct from Congregations and Presbyteries, as well as from the Church of
Rome. Which, in my opinion, making it necessary to the salvation of every
Christian to communicate with the Catholic Church (that is, with a Church
which ought to be a member of the whole Church) is of great consequence. For,
neither is it actually and properly a Church, the order whereof, in the service
of God, is not visible; Nor is there sufficient means in that case for the
effect of a Church, and of that visible order in which the being of a Church
consists, toward the salvation of those who are of it, or might be of it.
And this is that which must justify that which I have done, in speaking out so
far, what I conceive the Rule of Faith, what the Laws of the Catholic
Church, require, to be provided for, in every Church and every estate. For if
they be not wanting to themselves, to their Title, to the salvation of Gods
people, they have enough in the Scri^tures, interpreted by the Original
Tradition and practice of the whole church, both to condemn the errors, which
the ground of their Com^^nion obliges them to disown, and to give such a rule,
to the order of (...) Communion, in the offices of Gods service, as the present
state (...), compared with the primitive state of those Christians, who ^^fir
^ucceeded the Apostles, shall seem to require. It is indeed, a very great case
to me, that, having declared against untrue, and unsufficient causes, for
dividing the Church, (for which there can be no cause sufficient) I have owned
the cause which I think sufficient, for a particular Church, to provide for it
self without the consent of the whole. For by this means, I secure my self,
from being accessory to Schism, and the innumerable mischiefs which it
produces. But I confess, this declaration makes me liable to a consequence of
very great importance; That there is no true mean, no just way to reconcile
any difference in the Church, but upon those grounds and those terms which I
propose. For, supposing the Society of the Church, by Gods Law; upon what
terms, the least sucking Heresy amongst us is reconcilable to the party from
which it broke last, (supposing it reconcilable upon the grounds and terms of
our common Christianity) upon the same terms is the Reformation reconcilable
to the Church of Rome, the Greek Church to the Latin, all parts to the Whole,
the Congregations and Presbyteries to the Church of England. Whereas, not
proceeding upon those grounds, not standing on those terms, all pre^ense of
reconciling, even the Reformed, among themselves, will prove a mere pretense.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the firse Book.
PAge 7. line 47. r. shall it be disc. page 20. l. 45. r. to all sentences p.
21. l. 50. 1 These. V. 14, 15. r. 12, 13. l. 52 Heb. XII. r. XIII. 23. 39. r.
the act 40. 6. then those r. better then ^. 28. under-r. undertook 48. 30. r.
washing or sitting down to 59. 53. r. adulterers 66. 28. Ladies day r. Lords
day 89. 53. secret to the r. se^re^, so 95. 46. with r. which, 115. 26. those
found. r. these. 116. 33. that this r. that is 121. 4. r. intertainment 122. 7.
Church with r. with him 137. 8. without r. within 140. 13. r. virtue of the
147. 1. we had r. he had 57. r. indowment. 155. 25. now have r. now are 172.
34. after Acts? put) 176. 25. dele rome 177. 52. r. he eat 178. 28. then it was
r. as it was 181. 57. r. so continual. 182. 51. to Gods r. to use G. 183. 37.
coming from Christ r. of Christ 185. 6. after lamented put) 186. 21. there may
r. may be 189. 29. r. change 190. 14. banquet r. banquet 28. passive r.
positive 45. r. owned 193. 16 ^ele argument 221. 2. not up r. cast up. 235. 18.
if when r. when 237. 16. which the r. with the 37. aliver r. alone 241. 16.
Ahab r. Jehn 248. 50. Jeroboams then r. Jeroboams sin 250. 38. neither r.
either.

Second Book.
Page 7. l. 30. r. we be p. 8. 36. John 7. 37. r. 39. 40. r. now if 20. 41.
Joh. IV. r. Ephesians. IV. 22. 12. that those r. those that. 62. 19. he pert. r. be
p^rt. 23. Heb. IV. 16. r. 1. 68. of as r. of man, as 71. 33. r. evidenced 101.
55. r. the Angels. 109. 9. and both r. so b^th. 116. 56. as you may by r. as
you may see by 118. 35. Solomon's r. Solomon's words 36. r. composed. 119. 51.
dele ^^. 125. 28. r. to deri^e 26. 53. which r. with which 128. 31. r. they
thought. 162. 5. tendered r. raended 164. 54. serve or the -- purpose not r.
serve the -- purpose or not. 165. 24. concerning r. consining. 56. upon
necessity r. upon the like n. 166. 21. after that r. the line before i^ports --
this or that. 167. to see that it supposes r. that it is, sup. 171. 55. r.
comes not to pass 174. 45. will not r. shall not 184. 28. of that k. r. or
that k. 57. for which they addict themselves to love r. which they addict
themselves to for love 51. r. with the 189. 35. discern r. deserve. 192. 36.
ye, knowing r. ye know 193. 34. or r. if 195. 15. ^ay r. might 35. 1. Ad ^^^ah
198. 24. that is r. that it is. prophets r. prophet 199. 12. were r. we are 17.
in r. is 49. r. soverainty 201. 13. upon pass r. to ^asse 203. 31. generation
r. regen. 206. 49. observations r. observation 207. 51. lusted r. lasted 208.
56. teach r. reach. 209. 10. dece^t r. decree. 22. you r. them. 26. verifying
r. resolving 211. 34. supposed r. suppose 215. 21. causes r. clauses 216. 6.
XI. r. I. 217. 53. refutes r. refuses. 218. ^agined r. imagining 52. without
the bonds r. w^th^n the bounds 219. 9. adxe r. add 220. 3. of the r. to the
37. r. always freely do it. 221. 24. whereby r. that order 922. 34. by one
r. by some 223. 37. revealed r. related 224. 30. S. S. Austine, point, S.
Austme 225. 57. of God r. to God. 240. 31. (...) r. (...) 247, 49. r. or to
show 250. 12. they can be r. can be 251. 32. this part. r. his ^. 256. 55. in
sending r. ^endri^g. 259. 16. r. conceiving 260. 32. r. having excluded. 35. r.
proposes. 261. 29. 31. r. premises premises. 264. 27. r. (...) 281. 6. r. ^^^
can 282. 38. r. distinguis^e^h. 289. 45. r. which the 296. 26. let him in. r.
let them 297. 7. the rank of it r. the werk 300. 25. as I said 1. I said 304.
33. should be r. that God should 307. 13. but the r. be ^^^ ^^.

Third Book.
Page 6. l. 9. r. to be no more 12. 54. it not r. is not, 14. 2. which r. with
16. 1. is not r. is the 19. 6. after r. before 37. 47. r. though not under 54.
7. r. times r. terms 55. 53. r. promises 58. 21. truly one r. done 61. 23. r.
on purpose 64. 21. r. S. Peter 65. 51. r. Zonar^^ 66. 10. a door r. alone 69.
37. r. refused 38. r. construed. 48. r. whatsoever 70. 1. r. Predestinatians
86. 1. r. Novatians 88. 55. r. Homil. 91. 25. r. Cappadoc^^ 95. 25. r.
Synedr^^s 98. 58. repentance r. upon rep. 110. 55. r. prescribed. 111. 22. r.
ministry 32. was Apostle r. we Apostles 113. 56. r. import 57. practice 1.
Priests 115. 53. r. prefers 116. 4. for forn. r. except for ^. 117. 54. r. draw
them 119. 57. corrected r. (...) 122. 1. time r. ^erme 123. 12. r. is it 128.
2. r. Mileu. 137. 49. r. Gentium secu^^^m (...) 139. 13. r. her husbands
brother 145. 4. r. all one 151. 29. r. settled 160. 16. r. Eldest 163. 58. r.
will find 164. 41. according the r. to the 169. 33. r. the third, 43. r. of the
chief 178. 42. r. rights 191. 44. r. good works 197. 2. first r. seventh 206.
39. r. further, for the ord. 209. 1. r. so subject to 25. r. once a month 252.
2. r. if it be true, all 273. 32. or so, as 276. 46. or r. nor 277. 54. r. no^
by the order 279. 2. r. conferred 280. 12. r. preached 282. ^2. and more. r.
and not 283. 46. r. oblige 285. 17. r. which God 44. upon r. up an 288. 10. r.
God, which, tho. 292. 20. seem r. serve 31^. 22. r. apparitions 316. 10. r. it
is 318. 56. r. if the fire 327. 26. our r. one 328. 58. dele ne 334. 41. r.
consecration 335. 29. in the r. is 336. 41. as he r. she 338. 7. r. grounded
56. this rec. r. (...) 339. 31. r. variety 341. 22. r. and makes 26. not
missing r. missing. 29. any dif. r. ^o ^. 342. 16. r. which, by to blessing
345. 30. r. Chrisme 36. hands. r. b^nds? 5^. some r. serve 349. 50. r.
subsiste^^. 352. 6. r. premises, 353. 53. instructing r. in serving. 356. 55.
sometimes. 360. 7. r. no ^. 364. 58. r. reas^^able though no^^. 370. 55. r.
Laick^ 372. 53. r. ground 373. 38. r. necessarily 374. 5. r. degrees 374. 39.
sure^y r. society 378. 13. r. as when 381. 36. r. upon Ep. but upon acts of the
385. 1. r. supposes 40. r. supposition 54. r. of ^^^ -- then, that.


