Puretologia, A Rational Account OF THE CAUSE and CURE OF AGUES, With their
SIGNS Diagnostick and Prognostic. ALSO Some specific MEDICINES prescribed
for the Cure of all sorts of AGUES; With an Account of a successful Method of
the Authors for the Cure of the most Tedious and Dangerous QUARTANS. Likewise
some OBSERVATIONS of CURES performed by the aforesaid Method. Whereunto is
added A short Account of the Cause and Cure of FEVERS, and the GRIPING in the
GUTS, agreeable to Nature's Rules and Method of HEALING.

Authore RTO TALBOR Pyretiatre.

Non multa, sed multum. London, Printed for R. Robinson, and are to be sold at
his Shop near Greys-Inne Gate in Holborn, 1672.

To his worthy Friends B. Aylemore, A. Blackwell, Esquires; Mr. R. Alchorn, Mr.
W. Thornton, Citizens; and the rest of those worthy persons that have been my
Patients.
Worthy Patients and Patrons,
A Book sent abroad into the World, is like a Ship lanched forth into the Sea;
It must expect not always to sail with the fair gale of judicious Censures, but
sometimes to meet with blustering storms, raised either by the puffing blasts
of Critics breath, or the envious murmurings of the ignorant: From these two,
viz. the seeming-wise Critic, and the grossly Ignorant, I can expect little
favor: the one will cavil at the Rational part, because perhaps it does not
square with his Imaginary Fancies; the other will deny the Rational and
Experimental parts; and both will endeavor to withdraw the breath of people
from it, that wanting the air of Reputation, it may be either becalmed by that
little notice people take of it, or else be stranded on the dangerous sands of
prejudice. I have therefore chosen you my Patrons, whose known Reputation is
sufficient to check the insolence of any that shall contradict or deny what
your selves can testify of your own knowledge and experience. And I desire
that your mouths may only speak my Actions, and let the world from them read
my Merits; From whom I request nothing more than a kind acceptance of that
which is intended for a general good,

By him who is ever ready to serve, his Country and his Friends, R. Talbor.

To the Reader.
WHen I first began the study and practice of Physic, amongst other Distempers
incident to humane Bodies I met with a Quartan Ague, a disease that seemed to
me the ne plus ultra of Physic, being commonly called Ludibrium and opprobrium
Medicorum, folly and derision of my Profession, did so exasperate my spirit,
that I was resolved to do what study or industry could perform, to find out a
certain method for the cure of this unruly distemper: In order thereto I first
dived into the cause of it, and to that end read most Authors that have writ on
this subject; but I could find no more satisfaction from them, than I can in
Philosophy from that odd solution by occult qualities. I considered then there
was no other way to satisfy my desire, but by that good old way, observation
and experiment: To this purpose I planted my self in Essex near to the Sea
side, in a place where Agues are the expidemical diseases, where you will find
but few persons but either are, or have been afflicted with a tedious Quartan:
In this place I lived some years, making the best use of my time I could, for
the improving my knowledge; curiously observing all Symptoms, Diagnosticks and
Prognostics; by which observations, and the assistance of my reason (God
blessing my endeavors) I have attained to a perfect knowledge of the cure of
the most inveterate and pertinacious Agues, and can inform a patient to a day
when I will remove the fits, and what method I will proceed in with him; though
to several persons, according to their several constitutions and other
complicated diseases, I use different methods. If our Physicians would use the
Primitive way of the Egyptians, apply themselves to the study of some one
disease, they would in a short time bring this noble Science to great
perfection; but idleness has so possessed this age, that most of us care for no
more than a little smattering of every thing. As you accept these my Primitiae,
you encourage him to proceed,

Who is Yours and his Countries Friend, R. Talbor.

To his Friend the Author on his Puretologia.
THe Learned Author in a generous Fit,
TO oblige his Country has of Agues Writ:
Physicians now shall be reproacht no more,
Nor Essex shake with Agues as before,
Since certain health salutes her sickly shore.
Philosophers spend oil and time in vain,
And no Minerva issues from their brain,
Whilst here a general good accrues to all,
Like the disease, it is Epidemical.
Man, though the lesser world, does far surpass
All that is in the greater world, or ever was,
Whilst he these earthly gods obliges thus,
He shall be styled an Esculapius.
J. D.

The Introduction to the Discourse of Agues.
MAN being subject to as many and more distempers than his famous structure can
boast variety of parts, all the faculties of his soul have been continually
employed to find out Remedies for the preservation and restoration of his
decaying body.

Now the first man Adam had a perfect knowledge of the virtues of all Plants,
Minerals, or Animals; but whether it was immediately dictated to him by the
Creator, I shall not here argue; or whether their innate virtues were engraven
upon the front or superficies of every creature, in those lines we see on
Plants, etc. which I believe are not flourishes a-la-vole of natures Pen, but
fair characters legible to our forefather Adam, and some few of his posterity:
But since the Fall, Soul and Body have deviated from their first perfection,
all the faculties of the Soul are depraved, the Memory is subject to fail, the
Judgment given to err, and the Will often known to rebel, and become a
voluntary slave to passion: so is his Body subject to so many infirmities, that
he that shall consider upon what slender filaments the life of man depends,
will have greater cause to admire at the Providence of the Creator seen in the
preservation of Man, than at his Wisdom known in his Creation, though both of
them surpass the scale of our reason; for our Reason being fallen from its
primitive purity, is as much confused as our Languages: now, tot homines, tot
sententiae, and tot rations; Reason is at best but the harmony or musical
sound of a well tuned Hypothesis, wherewith the fancy is delighted, and it
suffers the same fate with our common Music; for as every tune delights not
every ear, so every reason pleases not every fancy. We have nothing certain in
Physic or Philosophy but Mathematical and Experimental Demonstration, and what
we have learnt in either Science, has been by industrious Observations and
Experiments. Thus by the industrious toils and labors of those Primitive
Heroes (the ancient Empiricks) in their observations and experiments, the
foundation of this famous structure of Physic was laid, and in some ages by
the same hands reer'd and finished; but since polished and refined by the more
curious wits, but less industrious persons of our latter ages: but were they
more industrious and less witty, this conjectural art of Physic would become
more certain by the help of observations and experimental demonstration.

The art of Physic began originally either from accidental Experiment, or
Observations taken from the irrational Creatures, as Birds, Beasts, and Fishes,
which being led by some instinct of Nature to convenient remedies for the cure
of their proper Maladies, have furnished Man with many wholesome remedies and
medicaments. Thus the virtue of Celandine in the effects of the eyes was learnt
from the Swallow, who has been often observed to squeese the juice of that
herb with her bill upon the blind eyes of her young, by which means they gain
their sight. It is observed of the Dear in Candy and those parts, that being
wounded with a poisonous Arrow, they repair immediately to Dittany, an herb
that grows plentifully in those Countries, which by an Alexipharmick virtue
expels both Arrow and Poison.

According to Virgil, Plutarch, Pliny, and others, Naturalists:

Dictamnum genetrix Cretea carpit ab Ida
Puberibus Caulem foliis, and flore Comantem
Purpureo: non illa feris incognita capris
Gramina, cum tergo volucres haesere sagittae. Virg. Aeneid.
Thus englished by Mr. George Sandys.

With her white hand she crops from Cretan I Would,
The fresh-leav'd stalk with flower in Purple died;
A sovereign herb, well known to fearful Deer,
Whose trembling sides the winged Arrows bear.
The Egyptian Ibes was the Inventor of Glysters; a Bird not much unlike the
Stork, and a great Enemy to Serpents, who filling his beak with salt water, and
spouting it up into his guts when he was hard bound, taught the world the
convenience of provoking a stool that way.

Letting Blood we learnt from the Seahorse in Nilus, who finding himself
oppressed with too much blood, does at such times come to the shore side, and
with a sharp reed or thorn pricks his leg, then stands and bleeds some time,
and afterward dips his leg in the mud, which stops the bleeding and heals the
wound. I could insert a great many more observations from Naturalists, but
these are sufficient.

To these we must join that ancient custom of bringing the sick into their
public market towns, where they were lodged in convenient places, such as our
Hospitals; there being placed one or more Overseers, who were sworn to take
care of the sick, and administer such medicines as should be prescribed by such
as came to visit the sick (all persons being obliged to view the sick before
they acted in their own affairs,) who did commonly give an account to the
Overseers whether they at any time had been afflicted with any of those
diseases the sick labored under, and if they had, by what means and remedies
they were relieved and recovered; which remedies were administered to the sick,
and if they had good success, they were recorded with a Probatum. By this way
they in time came to have a stock of approved remedies for all known diseases;
and thus was the foundation of Physic laid: and these Overseers took upon them
the name of Empiricks (or experienced men) and such a one was Archagathus the
first Physician we read of, who was called from Peloponnesus to Rome, and for
his skill in healing, was made a Freeman of that famous City. Then our
Empiricks or Protomedicks began curiously and with much industry to observe the
precedent signs of a disease, and the several symptoms in the beginning,
state, and declination of every distemper; and by these observations they
framed their Diagnosticks and Prognostics, by which they could foresee a
disease, and tell the event of it: With this knowledge only our Protomedicks
were satisfied, viz. to know a distemper, and to foretell its event; as, whether
long or short, sharp or mild, terminate in life or death, and to know how to
cure it by approved Medicines delivered them by their predecessors, not
troubling themselves with that which we call the rational part of Physic, as
to give reasons for the causes of Diseases, the operation of Medicines, and
several such niceties which after ages dived into. Then started up a second
sort of Medicks which called themselves Methodists; these did a little smooth
and plain the former rough cast structure of the Empiricks, by reducing the
several diseases to general heads, as to the eight principal parts, viz. the
head, heart, lungs, stomach, liver, spleen, reins, womb; and appropriating
Medicines and Herbs to the several parts, calling them Cephalicks, Cordials,
Pectorals, Stomachical, Hepaticks, Spleneticks, Nephriticks, Hystericks; and to
these they added Arthritick Medicines appropriated to the joints. Thus far the
Methodist. Then came the Dogmatists, and they undertook to dive into the causes
of Diseases, and the reason of the various Operations of Medicines; and having
framed this Hypothesis of the four humors, they made the Plethora or Cacochymy
of those humors in the various parts of the body, to cause the several
diseases: But for the reasons of the operation of Medicines upon these humors,
and their appropriation to such parts of the body, they were absurd and
ridiculous; as, because they did assimilate the form or color of the part and
humors, therefore they must operate upon that part or humor they did
resemble. This they rendered the reason why Eyebright was specifical to heal
the distempers of the Eyes, because its flower they say resembles a Birds eye;
elder Mushromes, or Jews Ears, good against the swelling of the Glandules of
the Ears; Lung-wort for the Lungs; Beans for the Reins and Testicles, from the
similitude they have to those parts; so Rheubarb to purge Choler; Agarick,
Phlegm; black Hellebore, Melancholy, because they are of that color they
suppose the humors to be of. But what rational man would be satisfied with
such reasons? Were it not better to tell a Patient, these have been approved
Medicines in those cases, confirmed by the experience of many ages? Others in
our latter days, styling themselves rational Physicians, have rendered more
plausible reasons, being grounded upon Experimental Philosophy: these by
anatomizing the parts of Plants and Minerals, know the natures of them, as also
the effects and constitutions of the whole body or parts, not only by ordinary
dissection, but by a spagyrical examination and separation of those parts; and
the reasons grounded upon these trials make a greater impression on our belief,
because they are demonstrable by some analogous Experiments.

Thus have I shown you (Physiophilus) the progress of Physic through the
several ages to this present time. I shall now treat something of the present
state of the Practice of Physic as it stands divided between the Learned
Rational Physician, and the Illiterate Modern Empirick; the one has Law and
Reason to warrant his Practice, the other only success; the one in his Practice
is guided more by reason than experience, the other not so much by reason as
experience; but if a golden mean were found out between both, it would be the
best and surest practice. We find many strange virtues in Plants, Stones, and
Minerals, which our reason cannot solve; and if we should therefore leave off
the use of them, we should do great injury to Mankind. The polar virtue of the
Loadstone surpasses the scrutiny of the most solid judgment and refined reason,
and yet nothing of greater use to Mankind in the universal benefit they receive
by Navigation. The effects produced by the herb Lunaria, precious Stones, are
beyond the reach of our Reason. That Gold and Antimony do emit virtue by
Infusion without loss of weight of their substance, is unquestionable, and yet
inconsistent with our reason. So have several Medicines been found by
experience to be specifically successful in the cure of many diseases, and yet
their composition, or the several ingredients, may not square with some of our
rational Hypotheses. The Experimentum mirabile of Rulandus, seems to our common
reason to be an astringent medicine by its composition, and yet by only
applying it to the pulse, it is found by experience to purge. I knew an
Empirick in the Country, that did use a preparation of Opium with extraordinary
success in Pleurisies, and in the Stone, and yet nothing seems more Irrational,
since we suppose Opium to bind, and contract the vessels, and so would hinder
expectoration, that necessary evacuation by which nature is chiefly relieved in
Pleurisies, and by the same quality it should exasperate in the Stone, by
causing greater obstructions in the urinous passages. But I have seen contrary
effects; for Nature being relieved by the cessation of pain, expectoration
followed of course, either without or with little help of Prisan or Liquorish
drink, and in the Stone I have known it to move Urine powerfully, and
oftentimes stones have come forth upon the taking of it. I knew another
performed strange cures of Gouts with a mercurial Plaster, or Unguent, and yet
few persons can give a rational account either of the cause of the Gout, or why
Mercury should be specifical to its cure. I have experienced it, and found it
successful in six or seven, and the Empirick, from whom I had the receipt, in
hundreds. The gathering of Cinquefoil and Verbascum at certain elected times,
observing the aspects of the Planets, seems to savor more of Superstition than
Reason; but whosoever shall observe the contrary effects of them that are
carelessly gathered, and those gathered at elected seasons, will be convinced;
the one viz. Cinquefoyl, gathered in the hour of Jupiter, with some other
necessary observations Astrological, becomes a good specific in Quotidian,
Tertian, and new Quartan Agues, and operates by Vomit; whereas the Cinquefoyl
carelessly gathered is unsuccessful, and has rarely any sensible operation: the
like of Verbascum, observing the time (prescribed by Hartman) in gathering it,
is a good specific in Catarrhes, and performs admirable effects. I have two or
three hundred of these Empirical observations by me which I reserve for a
particular Treatise; I have made it my business some years to converse with
that sort of people, from whom a Physician may learn more of the true and
experienced virtues of Medicines in a few days, than he shall by reading, or
his own practice alone in many years; for these having but two or three
medicines (delivered them by Tradition) which they call their Arcana's, they
try them in all cases, and find out those virtues in them by accident, that a
rational Physician would never dream of. It was the advice of an ingenious and
learned Physician, Let not a Mountebank go out of the Town before you discourse
him, and by exchanging some good medicine with him, get his, or rather than
fail tell him two for one. This advice I have followed and found no small
benefit from it; for from these weeds (that start up in every corner of our
Physic Garden) I have (like the industrious Be) sucked honey, as well as from
the flowers of learning and ingenuity; and this (I ingenuously confess) not for
my own, but my Countries benefit, and do intend to publish them, that they may
come into the hands of learned and judicious persons, who will make a better
improvement of them than such illiterate persons in whose hands the best of
Medicines are often found to be like a well-tempered Sword in a mad man's hand.

But methinks I hear some ill-natured people, from that Proverb, Homo
cognoscitur exsociis, affirm, because I have made Empiricks my companions, I
must be such a one, (in their worst sense.) But their words I shall count no
slander; for I had rather be, or be called an Empirick, (that is in English an
experienced Physician (for (...) comes from (...) experior) than to be a
Dogmatical or rational Physician, without experience, and those well-tried and
approved Medicines I have gained by such Empirical converse: and I hope no
judicious person will think the worse of me for my industrious endeavors, to
improve this noble science of Physic.

CAP. I. Of the Use and Offices of the Spleen and Stomach.
IN order to your better understanding my following discourse (Physiophilus) it
will be necessary that I first treat of those two noble parts, the Spleen and
Stomach, which the ingenious Helmont calls the Duumvirate, whose defects give
birth to all internal diseases: I shall begin with the Spleen being the
principal part deficient in these distempers.

1. Of the use and office of the Spleen.
The Bulk of the Spleen is different, in some bigger, in some less, according
to the variety of men's bodies; its figure commonly oblong, its color in
children red, in adult persons inclining to blackness, its substance of black
blood congealed amongst the fibers: It is furnished with three sorts of
Vessels; first a branch from the Coeliac Arteries, which disperseth it self in
many small twigs amongst the fibers: In the second place, it has a vein which
sprouts into it from the Porta, which is all spent and lost in the substance of
it, except two arms, the Vas breve, which goes away to the stomach, and the
other the Haemorrhoidal vein, which runs away to the Anus: In the third place,
it is furnished with nerves from the eight pair, which with their numerous
threads and fibers, weave themselves into a kind of Net, upon which the
Parenchyma sticks, leaving every where multitude of little holes, into which
the small arteries running every where dispersed among the threads of the
nerves, empty themselves of the blood, which having passed through, and washed
the whole substance of the Spleen, is again drunk up and carried away by the
veins. The use of this part is to prepare a ferment for the blood, and to
supply the stomach with that acid juice or menstruum that serves for the
concoction of aliment. It prepares a ferment for the blood after this manner;
The blood brought hither by the Coeliac Arteries, passing through many turnings
and windings, being strained through the Parenchyma, does leave behind it some
salt and earthy parts; which after they have suffered some alteration by their
attrition, and justling in the several passages, through the cells, cavities,
and Pores of the Parenchyma, are by fresh blood, which perpetually flows
thither, by continual circulation carried back through the veins into the mass
of blood, in which they serve for a most useful ferment, by which the blood
becomes rarefied, and is made more brisk and lively, fit to circulate for the
better supply of the parts.

2. Of the use and office of the Stomach.
In the next place (Physiophilus) I shall show you the use and office of its
compeer, the Stomach.

The office of the Stomach is to prepare Chyle, of which by several alterations
by several ferments, is made that vital juice, the blood; the manner of which
is as follows: Food being conveyed into the Stomach, is by virtue of a
ferment or menstruum, inherent in that part, reduced into a whitish chyle
subacid; from whence, when it has attained Natures ends, it is emitted by the
passage of the Pylorus into the Intestins, where it suffers another alteration
by a bitter ferment in those parts; the more pure part of which is sucked up by
the lacteous vessels implanted in the mesentery, and the grosser parts
discharged by the intestins: In these lacteous vessels runs the Chyle through
the Pancreas into the Vena cava, by means of which it is conveyed into the
right ventricle of the heart, and by motion of that Engine by the pulmonary
Arteries is flung into the Lungs; out of which, having there separated some
crude and phlegmatic Excrements, it hasts through the pulmonary Veins to the
left ventricle of the Heart, out of which it is sent by the aorta into all the
parts of the body.

CAP. II. A discourse of the cause of Intermitting Fevers or Agues.
I Know (Physiophilus) it will be expected by this curious Age, that I should
be as happy in finding out the cause, as I have been successful in finding out
the cure of this supposed unknown and uncurable disease, a Quartan Ague; which
that I may not seem altogether Irrational and Empirical, I shall here endeavor
to give the world my opinion of the seat and cause of Agues, which I shall not
confidently assert (as some have their dreams and conjectures) but only propose
and submit it to the more mature judgments of the learned and judicious; and if
any nice Critic shall take the pains to contradict it, I shall return him no
other Answer than that of Martial; Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.

The principal seat of Agues is the Spleen, which being deficient, the blood
wanting its ferment is obstructed in its circulation, and likewise the ferment
of the stomach wanting a supply from this part, is depraved; so that Concoction
not being well performed, tough viscous humors are generated, which with the
Chyle conveyed into the mass of blood, do at certain periods when they arrive
at the heart disturb that noble part, by obstructing the passage of the chyle
or blood; upon which violence offered to Natures chief Fortress, a trepidation
of the whole microcosme does ensue, which lasts so long till by the impulse of
the blood or chyle following it, it is at last forced through: No sooner does
the blood find a free passage, having been for some time dammed up, but it
flows more violently; as when a Sluyce is opened in a Mill, or other current of
water; from which violent motion an ebullition of the blood does ensue, which
causes the hot Fit: The Ebullition being ended, and the blood running again in
its ordinary course, Nature relieves her self by Transpiration, resettling the
blood disturbed by the commotion of the late Fit: Then does the Patient
continue well, till the morbifick matter come round again, continually
recruiting it self with fresh supplies from the imperfect digested chyle, till
that cause be taken away, either by nature alone, by recovering strength and
vigor, or by help of proper Medicines, assisting her against so subtle and
potent an enemy. The distances of the Fits (some being once in 24 hours, as
Quotidians; others once in 48 hours, as Tertians; and some but once in 72
hours, as Quartans,) are from the levity or ponderosity of the materia
morbifica, whether Phlegm, Choler, or Melancholy: The heavier body moving
more sluggishly in the sanguinary Channel than that which is lighter; as we see
in a current of water, a piece of Fur shall move swifter than a piece of Oak,
or heavier wood; and a Paper or Feather swifter than the Fur. The length or
shortness of the Fits are from the quantity of the matter, more or less: Double
Tertian, double and treble Quartans, are occasioned by a quick supply of the
morbifick matter; so that there may be two or three several masses of the
morbifick matter, in the veins, which arrive at the heart by succession.

But since the most plausible reasons, unless backed by some demonstrable
experiments, seem but suppositions, or conjectures; I shall instance one common
experiment used for the cure of Agues; which though it does not certainly cure,
yet it always delays the fit, and that is strong ligature to the pulse, which
by retarding the circulation of the blood, does likewise hinder the coming of
the morbifick matter to the heart, and it may accidentally cure (as some times
it is known to do) by retaining the morbifick matter, if it be on that side the
ligature, that it must pass under it before it arrive to the heart, where by
the continual impulse of the blood, the morbifick matter may be so dissipated
and disunited, that it may never unite again. I have observed where it has
cured, the part has been extraordinarily swelled, and they endure a great deal
of pain, and once a Gangrene happened upon this ligature.

Another confirmation of the cause of Agues, being from tough viscous humors,
is that which the country people in Essex and other parts call an Aguecake. I
have observed these in four Patients; two were cast out of the stomach by
nature, and the other two by Emetick medicines: One of them was like a clotted
piece of phlegm, about the bigness of a Wallnut, pliable like Glue or Wax,
weighing about half an ounce; another about the bigness of the yolk of a
Pullets Egg, and like it in color, but stiffer, weighing about five drachmes;
the other two of a dark color, more tough, about the like bigness, and
heavier. It is a general observation amongst them, that their Ague comes away
when they see those Ague-cakes. In those before mentioned it was verified, and
I have reason to believe it, since the observation has been confirmed by so
many experiments.

CAP. III. Of the Diagnostick Signs of Intermitting Fevers, or Agues.
THe signs of Intermitting Fevers in general are these: They suddenly invade
the Patient with a trembling or shaking and vomiting, or at least some
provocation thereto, and sometimes they have convulsive motions in the mouth
and other parts. The hot fit is attended with heat, great thirst, pains in the
Head, shinings in the Eyes, a quick Pulse, and sometime with Phrensies; the
Urine is thick, crude, and ill-digested: The fits go off by sweat, urine, and
insensible transpiration, and return again at certain periods, as once in
twenty four, forty eight, or seventy two hours, more or less, and are
distinguished by the names of Quotidians, Tertians, and Quartan Agues.

Of the Diagnostick Signs of particular Agues.
First of Quotidian Agues.
The Quotidian Ague invades the sick once in twenty four hours, with a
trembling or chilness in the back, which shortly passes through the whole body;
after which a mild and gentle heat follows, with some swelling or pain in the
hypochondria's; they continue eight, twelve, and sometimes twenty hours: The
Urine is pale, thin, and crude, and toward the end of the fit, thick,
inclining to redness; the pulse flow and weak.

Of the signs Diagnostick in Tertian Agues.
The Tertian Ague comes once in forty eight hours, with a great shaking, which
is succeeded by a vehement heat, thirst, headache, and, often, phrensies, a
high quick pulse, urine high colored, thick toward the end of the Fits, with a
red sediment. The double Tertian, from an increase of the morbifick matter,
comes twice in forty eight hours, and has the same symptoms, by which it is
known from a Quotidian.

Of the Signs Diagnostick in Quartan Agues.
The Quartan Ague invades the Patient once in seventy two hours: First with
gapings, yawnings, and stretching of the limbs, paleness in the nails of the
fingers and toes, and coldness in the extreme parts; then a tremor at the
heart, and soon after a trembling or shaking throughout the whole body, which
is mild at first, and afterward increases gradually; after which follows a
burning heat, diffusing it self through all the parts of the body; the pulse in
the beginning slow and weak, intermitting often, and that an hour or more
before the fit; in the hot fit it is swift and high; the urine in the cold fit
thin and waterish; in the hot fit higher colored, and toward the latter end of
the fit, thick; the sweats in the beginning of the disease little, and after
some continuance copious. Double Quartans afflict the patient two days, and
intermit one; and treble Quartans come once every day, but differ from the
Quotidian in their symptoms, and by their beginning, which is always a single
Quarran. The like may be said of double Quartans, whose causes are treated of
before.

CAP. IV. Of the Prognostics in Agues.
Of the Prognostics in Quotidian Agues.
QUotidians generally invade the Patient about the Winter solstice, and last
till the spring, if they be not cured before by proper medicines. In the Spring
they go off with a little help, except in cachectical bodies, which do often
fall into Dropsies, and other Chronick diseases: Its cure in the beginning is
easy, but if complicated with chronick distempers, it is as hard to be cured
as the Quartan Ague.

Of the Prognostics in Tertian Agues.
Tertian Agues invade the sick in the Spring, or Summer solstice, and are often
known to go off in seven or fourteen days without help of Physic; but it is
not good trusting to it; for the fits of a Tertian are so violent, that nature
is often foiled before the fourth fit, and the Patient many times miscarries
for want of timely help: Its cure in the beginning is very easy, viz. in one
or two fits, and afterward, if nature have any strength, without great
trouble, if a proper method be used. There are some Tertians (whose symptoms
are mild, and such generally happen after a Fever) that last a month or two,
and often change to Quartans.

Of the Prognostics in Quartan Agues.
Quartans generally seize the sick about the Aequinoctials (that is about
September or March) but more in the Autumnal than Vernal Aequinox; they rarely
go off alone, but have been known to continue two or three years commonly, and
in some bodies seven, nay, twelve years; and in that time bringing such a
Cachexia, or ill habit upon the body, that they live miserably, or die of a
Dropsy or Consumption, soon after. Amongst the great number of persons I have
been conversant with, that have had this distemper, I could never meet with any
whose Agues were conquered, either by nature, or those ill cures they sometimes
accidentally met with, though it continued but half a year, but they were
troubled with great obstructions in the spleen, an ill digestion in the
stomach, and a general cachexia; so that at first sight I could read where a
Quartan did lodge, or had been lodged. A Quartan Ague is the most subtle Enemy
nature has to deal with; sometimes it seems to make a truce, or take its final
leave; but breaking it, and rallying again in few days, surprising her who
perhaps was mean time busied in managing the great affairs in the economy of
the body, and rectifying the disorders that unruly guest had made in it: Other
times, it slightly creeps upon the body, and does not shake the frame, lulling
the Patient asleep; whilst nature watching its coming, is deceived, and
performs not what she intended, or could have done, if the Enemy had appeared
in open hostility. I have observed that those Patients who had mild fits, (as
they thought them) because they generally slept, and were not much sensible of
them, were longest troubled with them. And such Agues are harder to be cured
than those where these fits are more strong and violent. It sometimes will take
its leave for a fortnight, and return again with more violence; at other times
it divides it self in two or three parts, making the double and treble Quartan.

It very often deceives the Patient about May, and bids farewell, and as
certainly returns about August, as it went off. I never could yet read or hear
of any Quartan, discharged by nature without help of means, but went off about
the Aequinoctials, but most generally about the vernal Aequinox, viz. March,
and then oftentimes caused by the imprudence of Physicians to return, by their
giving Purges, those imaginary helps to nature, but pernicious in this
distemper, because they do weaken and debilitate nature, and ferment that
humor she had concocted and precipitated.

CAP. V. Of the several Remedies used for the cure of Agues.
YOu have often heard (Physiophilus) that the number of Medicines invented and
used for the cure of Agues, exceed all others: the reason is, our Physicians in
all ages have mistaken its cause or care, and have only shot at a venture, as a
blind man at a mark, sometimes curing, but more often failing, trying all
things they could think of, or meet with, hoping at last to meet with something
that would do; and having after the observations of many Ages, and the
experiments of many hundred Medicines, at last found out something that would
sometimes cure, they thought themselves happy, and began to write discourses of
the cause and cure of Agues, though their supposed specificks were specifical
only to some particular constitutions, and not to the disease; more often
failing than curing. Hence it came that Agues (and especially Quartans) were
called Opprobrium Medicorum, the reproach of Physicians, which is now taken
off; for I do assert, that a Quartan Ague is as easily cured as any chronick
distemper the body of man is incident to, and will undertake the cure, and
perform it with as much certainty, as a Surgeon can heal a cut finger.

Of Medicines used in the cure of Quotidians.
First of all, a Vomit is administered of Infusio Croci Metallorum j, Oxymel.
Scillitici vi; or if the Patient be weak, only Oxymel 3 or 4 Ounces before the
fit, and sweating in two or three following fits, with this following Bolus:

Rad. Contrayervae serpentariae an. ss. laudani Land. gr. j. Conserv. rosarum
vitriolisat. j. misce, fiat bolus.

After this, take a spoonful of Vinum Scilliticum every morning and night for
three weeks or a month.

Topics.
Apply this Plaster to the wrists and navel:

Myrrhae, Aloes, olibani, croci, an. j. Terebinth. Venet. q. s. fiat emplastrum.

Of Medicines used in Tertians.
Emeticks.
Juice or Infusion of Asarum, Sal vitrioli, Infusion of Crocus Mettallorum,
oxymel simplex and scilliticum.

Diaphoreticks.
Aq. cardui benedicti iij. salis absynthij j. Succi limonum j. misce, fiat
potio.

Rob sambuci ss. Aqua vel spir. lumbricorum, mixtura de tribus, spir.
Theriacalis Camphorat. Crollii.

Topics to the Wrist and Feet.
Conserva rosarum ij. croci pulverisati j. carpis applicand. Cataplasmes of
Plantane, Mouseare, Tormentill, to the Wrists: To the Feet apply this
Cataplasme; Carnis Halecium ex muria ij. Radicis brioniae j. saponis nigri iss.
salis nigri hispanici vj. misce, fiat cataplasmus.

Of Medicines used in Quartans.
Digestives.
Sal Tartari, Tartarum vitriolat. etc.

Emeticks.
Infusio Croci mettallorum, Absynthiaci Minsichti, sal vitrioli, pulveris
Radicum asari ad j. Aluminis Rochae iss. pull. nucis moschat. ss. misce oxymel
scillit. Mercur. vicae ad gr. 6. cum multis aliis.

Diaphoreticks.
Rob. sambuci, extractum gentiani, ana iss. salis Absynthij ss. laudani gr. j.
misce, fiat bolus; Arcan. duplicati ss. Bezoardicum Joviale; Bezoard. minerale;
elixir Tartari, etc.

Topics.
Emplast, Febrifugum Helmontis. Artificum naturae domest. cum toto j.
contundantur, and optime misceantur, Balsami veget abilis ij. lachrymarum pini
inspiss at. j. misce, fiat emplast. Carpis applicandum hor. 2. ante paroxysmos.

Spleneticks.
Aqua Penoti, Tartarum Chalybiatum, Spiritus Tartari Alkalisatus, Tinctura
Tartari, etc.

I have inserted these Medicines (Physiophilus) that my Countrymen may not be
left remediless, they being the choycest and best Medicines I could meet with,
before I found out my particular and more effectual method.

CAP. VI. Of Charms used for the cure of Agues, how they operate; with the
dangerous consequences that have attended the use of them.
THe Quartan Ague, being supposed by the people to be an unknown and uncurable
distemper, because it so often resists the force of Medicines, and baffles the
skill of Physicians; they have left untried nothing that has been proposed to
them for a cure. Thus amongst other fancies came in the use of Charms, Sigils,
etc.

Charms are of three sorts; either words of no sense, which disturb not the
Imagination; or words of similitude, that humor and feed the Imagination; or
Scripture words, which, out of a conceit that such texts and words have power,
do strengthen the Imagination.

Sigils are certain characters engraven upon Metals, impregnated with the
influences and virtues of certain Stars and appropriated Plants. These are
commonly found to be of greater force than Charms; because, being backed with
some show of reason, they more confirm and corroborate the Imagination. By the
help of these last, Paracelsus is supposed to do his great Cures.

I shall next (Physiophilus) acquaint you with two or three Examples, wherein
you will find what dangerous effects were produced by the use of these unlawful
means.

Being at Cambridge about November 1666, in an Inn, a Countryman came into the
room where I was, shivering with a fit of a Quartan Ague: A certain Smith that
worked to the house, being in the same room, enquired of him how long he had
been troubled with an Ague? The man answered, about three months, and that it
was a Third Ague, that he had tried many Medicines to little purpose, and now
was resolved to try no more, but endeavor to work it away. The Smith replied,
he had a Remedy that did never sail to cure any Ague, and persuaded the
Countryman to try it, promising to give it him for a Pot of Ale. The Medicine
being to be purchased at so easy a rate, the Countryman accepts it. I fat by
all this while, expecting to see the remedy, which proved a Charm; the word was
Kalamiris, which was to be writ nine times on several Papers, abating a Letter
every time, till it came to the last letter K: These nine Papers were wrapped up
close, and put into nine Raisons of the Sun, and were ordered by the Smith to
be swallowed down at nine mornings following, beginning with the largest, and
ending with the least. The Countryman went his way, and so far as I could
perceive, of a pretty strong and healthy constitution, free from any
complicated disease: But the next news I heard of the Countryman was, that
upon the next Fit-day, having swallowed three of his nine charmed Raysons, he
died.

Another sad effect happened upon the use of a Charm in Essex; which was thus:

A Farmers Wife having long been afflicted with a Quartan Ague, a Beggar one
day coming to the door, and observing her to be then in a fit, told her, he
could cure her of that troublesome disease: She willing to be rid of it,
accepts his proffer, and desires him to give her something for it. The Beggar
called for a Pen and Ink, and writ some words in a piece of Paper, which he
sealed up, and bid her wear it about her neck for two or three months, and then
to burn it. She used the Charm according to his directions, and from that time
was freed from her Ague, and continued well two months after: About which time,
the Minister of the Parish coming to her house, and enquiring after her health,
she relates to him the passages before mentioned; Upon which, the Minister told
her the danger of using Charms, and that he believed it was the Devil, or some
messenger of his that gave her the Charm; and wished her to pull it off; which
she did, and was going to burn it: But he took it from her, and opened it,
where he found written these words, Ague farewell, till we meet in Hell.

This then confirmed the Minister in what he had said, viz. that the Devil, or
some Messenger of his, had given her the Charm, and exhorts her to repentance.
But this was the event; the next day she had a violent fit of her Ague, and in
that fit became distracted, and in a little time after made away her self.

Sigils are made of an electral Metal, either simple, or mixed, under the
dominion of some proper Planet; as the Lord of the tenth House, in the Scheme
of the decumbiture, if he be well dignified and aspected. This is melted down
in an elected hour, and quenched or infused in the juice of some proper
specific Plants, impregnated with their own or other analogous salts: Then it
is melted again, and cast into some proper Figure, on which is to be engraved
the characters of some friendly Planets; and this worn about the neck or other
proper part, is intended to cure the disease. Sigils are likewise made for
Epidemical Diseases, and serve indifferently for all persons having the same
disease.

Another Relation I had from a creditable person of the effects of a Sigil,
made against Epileptick Fits. A child in Cambridgeshire, being troubled with
Epileptick Fits, some years, internal means proving unsuccessful, the Father of
the child consults an Astrological Empirick, that lived near him; who
undertakes the cure for ten pound. Both thus agreed, the Astrologer, with the
help of some of his brotherhood in London, makes a Sigil of electral Metal, and
orders it to be hung about the child's neck, which did immediately cure the
child, and free it from Fits, during the time of its wearing the Sigil. But at
length the Astrologer demanding Money for his cure, was refused payment, and
instead of it, was apprehended, and carried before a Justice of the Peace for a
Sorcerer; but he there cleared himself, and by the Justices order had his Sigil
returned: upon which the Fits return with greater violence, and in a few days
the Child dies. And not long after the Astrologer, as strangely, with a slight
fall he got by wrestling, after which he never spoke or stirred.

Thus, you see, (Physiophilus) how justly they are punished that leave the
lawful way, and refuse the help of Physicians, which are styled in Scripture
the hands of God, and seek for help from the hands of the Devil; who ever makes
a palliative cure, sometimes pretending to heal, that he may have the
opportunity of future mischief. As to Agues, I can assure you, wherever I met
a Patient that used Charms, I found the disease more difficult to remove. Let
these Examples be caveats.

Deem veneficiis, Carminibusque fidem.

CAP. VII. The Author's particular method of curing all sorts of Agues.
I First administer a convenient dose of a specifical Emetocathartick Powder
(which was communicated to me by the name of Febrifugum Riverii;) It is
composed of three Herculean Medicines, each of them requiring twelve several
labors in their preparations: To which is added a fourth, which is not unfitly
called Athleta; because like a powerful Champion, it dissipates, and expels all
Natures enemies; It agrees likewise with that account Riverius gives of the
operation, dose, and success of his Febrifugum, (though of the last, viz.
success, I might boast more than he.) This Febrifugum is administered three
hours before the Fit; after its operation, which is very mild, and the Patient
got to bed, a Febrifuge Cordial is given, which operates gently by sweat and
urine, for five or six hours: In the interval I administer a Cordial Elixir,
that rectifies the stomach and spleen, removes obstructions, and reduces them
to a due temperament. If the Ague be a Tertian, or new Quotidian, this method
cures them; but if it be a long Quotidian or Quartan, at the second fit I give
a more powerful specific, which, pro re nata, is made to work either by sweat
and urine, or only by urine and insensible transpiration. This specific is a
preparation from four Vegetables, whereof two are foreign, and the other
domestic; At the third fit I administer a specifical splenetick medicine,
which is a preparation from five or six Vegetables, pro re nata, whereof two
only are foreign, and the rest domestic; upon the taking of which, I advise my
Patient to walk or ride abroad, and never fail upon this dose to remove the
Ague: Then with splenetick and antiscorbutick Medicines, or as the diseases
complicated require, taken for some time after, the disease is perfectly cured,
without any ill effects remaining after it; all the complicated diseases being
with it eradicated, and the person left in good and perfect health. Neither
(though this method seem tedious) are the Patients consined within doors, or
from any business above two or three days at most, during the whole course of
their Cure. And let me advise the world to beware of all palliative Cures, and
especially of that known by the name of the Jesuits Powder, as it is given by
unskilful hands; for I have seen most dangerous effects follow the taking of
that Medicine uncorrected and unprepared, viz. Convulsions, Epileptick Fits,
Frenzy, greater obstructions than before; and such as do take it have only a
cessation for a time, the Ague returning in a fortnight or three weeks
generally. Yet is this Powder not altogether to be condemned; for it is a noble
and safe medicine, if rightly prepared and corrected, and administered by a
skilful hand; otherwise as pernicious a medicine as can be taken. I always find
that Patient, whose Ague has been palliated with Jesuits Powder, to require a
double method to cure him. Palliative Cures are always succeeded with some or
most of these distempers, viz. Dropsy, Consumption, Scurvy, Tumors in the
Spleen, Hypochondriack pains, and always an ill digestion; by which the Patient
is condemned to a miserable life, or lingering death. For the prevention of
which mischiefs, Consulite peritos, Take the advice of the skilful.

CAP. VIII. Of the proper Diet to be observed by such as have Agues, and during
my method of curing Agues.
1. Diet to be observed in the Quotidian.
IN this Distemper a thin moderate Diet is required; For nature is so often
opposed by the disease, that she has little leisure to attend the digestions.
Let the diet therefore be little at a time, and often, during the intervals,
and let it be broths of Chicken, Lamb, or Veal, well boiled with Parsley,
Fennel, and Sparagusroots; Let the drink during the Paroxysmes be White Wind
Posset Drink, and in the intervals, good fresh small Beer, with a fourth part
of White Wind.

2. Diet to be observed in the Tertian.
During the Fits, or two hours before, no food is proper; for drink in the
Fits, let it be White or Rhenish-wine possetdrink, tinctured with a little
Saffron; or, in the hot sit, small Beer, with a fourth part of Rhenish-wine.
During the intermission, eat good broths, made of Mutton, Chicken, or young
Cock, boiled with Plantane, Sorrel, Endive, and Dandelyon.

3. Diet to be observed in the Quartan.
In the intervals, let the Diet be Chicken, or Mutton-broth, boiled with the
five opening Roots; a little Hartshorn and Cordial flowers, and sometimes
Gruels: and the gravey of Mutton stued with a little Clarret-wine, and Spice,
with a little Anchovy, to give it a relish: Let their table drink be small
Beer, with a fourth part of Rhenish-wine, with Horseradish-roots, Raysins of
the Sun, and Orange-pill steeped in it; and sometimes small Beer and Ale warmed
with a gagge of steel: during the Fit, and four hours before, no food is to be
eaten. For drink in the cold Fit, Rhenish-wine alone, about a glass or two; In
the hot Fit, small Beer and Lemmon, with a fourth part of Rhenish; and Sack, or
White Wind posset drink in the time of sweating.

CAP. IX. Observations of this successful method in some long tedious Quartans,
complicated with other Chronick diseases.
1. Observation in Essex.
ABout the beginning of October 1666, I was called to visit a child of B. A.
Esquire, which had been severely handled, with a Quartan Ague, above a year:
The Child was about six or seven years of Age, a thin body, Consumptive, having
a desperate Catarrh; and that which at first was a single Quartan, was become a
treble Quartan. I enquired after the method of the Physicians which had been
there before me, and was informed that they had prescribed only opening and
purging drinks, and some strengthening Cordials: but these gave little relief to
nature, and did rather exasperate than mitigate the distemper. In this weak
condition I found the Child, and undertook the Cure, and performed it after
this manner:

I first administered eight grains of Febrifugum Riverii, which wrought very
mildly with the child about six or seven times; after which I administered a
Febrifuge Cordial, and the two following fits, the Specificks: then I gave a
Splenetick wine for a month after, to be taken at several times in the day, by
which, with proper Syrrups, and a tincture of Coral, the child was perfectly
recovered.

2. Observation in Essex.
October. 25. 1667, I was called to visit A. B. Esquire at Malden, who had been
afflicted with a Quartan Ague about a year, which was now trebled, and he so
weak, that he had kept his bed twenty or more weeks, sweating cold sweats every
Fit. I first administered 25 grains of Febrifugum Riverii, which wrought gently
with him six or eight times: after its working I gave him a Diaphoretick Pill,
after which he fell into a warm breathing sweat, and continued in it eight or
nine hours: This threw off one of the fits, and it became a double Quartan. The
next Fit I repeated the same method, and reduced it to a single Quartan; and
then by reason of his weakness, I desisted from giving him any more Vomits, and
gave Diaphoretick Cordials (for at that time I had none of my first Specific
by me;) neither was I so exact in the Cure, as I am now; yet in three weeks
time I provided my Specificks, and administered them to him at the two following
Fits, which removed his Ague, and he in a months time, from the time I first
came to him, was able to walk abroad, and has been ever since free from an
Ague, except two or three Fits, which he had upon a relapse about a month
after, which I may attribute to his neglect in taking the Splenetick Wine which
was prescribed to him. Yet it was taken off again by the Specificks, and some
Diaphoretick Pills, and he restored to perfect health.

3. Observation in London.
July 8. 1671. Mr. W. T. consulted me about his Ague, which was a single
Quartan, and had continued with him above a year, having tried many Medicines,
and especially (that supposed never failing Medicine) Jesuits Powder, eight or
ten times, till it had like to have taken away Ague and life together: As he
informed me, that upon the taking of it, he lay for some hours convulsed, and
in a manner bereaved of life and senses, and being recovered, had only a
cessation for three weeks, or a month, and then it returned with more violence.
Now almost despairing of help, I undertook to cure him; and July the ninth,
being his Fit day, I administered 30. grains of Febrifugum Riverii, and after
its working, a Cordial Diaphoretick. July the 11. I administered a Febrifuge
Diaphoretick, with which he sweat 8 or 9 hours. July 14. I gave him the first
of my Specificks, after which he sweat three or four hours: and July 18. the
second Specific: Upon the taking of which, he walked four or five miles, and
returned home without his Ague: then by the Splenetick and Antiscorbutick
Medicines for some time after, he was cured, and remains so ever since.

4. Observation in London.
Aug. 13. 1671. I undertook the Cure of the Daughter of Mr. R. A. in
Covent Garden, who had been afflicted with a Quartan Ague a year and half, or
more, and had neglected no means that could be heard of for her recovery; as
the advice of the ablest Physicians in Town, change of Air, Tunbridg and Epsom
waters; had taken Jesuits Powder ten times, (with the like dangerous success I
mentioned in the last Observation:) But all proved ineffectual; her distemper
increased, and was complicated with the Scurvy in a high degree; obstructions
in the Spleen, and an incipient Dropsy. I first administered Febrifugum Riverii
twenty grains; after which I gave the Cordial Diaphoretick; in the interval I
gave an Elixir to rectify the Stomach and Spleen: The next fit was administered
the first of my Specificks; and the fit after, viz. the third fit from the time
I began the Cure, she took the second Specific; after which she rid two or
three miles out of Town, and returned home without her Ague; then she continued
four or five weeks, taking some Antiscorbutick and Splenetick Medicines, and
was perfectly recovered, and continues in good health.

I might insert many more observations, but these may suffice, being as strange
and difficult Cures as I can expect to meet with. As I find the world grateful
in their acceptance of this Treatise, I intend hereafter to publish a larger,
and with it a fuller account of my particular Method, and Medicines, not being
willing to conceal such useful remedies from the world any longer, than till I
have made some little advantage my self, to repay that charge and trouble I
have been at, in the search and study of so great and unheard of secrets.

Non nobis sed Patriae nascimur. I would not have the tediousness of the Cures
mentioned in my Observations, deterr any from seeking my help; for except their
cases be as difficult as those there mentioned, I can perform the Cure in less
time, as sometimes in a fortnight, week, or less, as the disease may be.

Multum novit, qui unum been novit. Appendix. Nature's Method in time of
Sickness, and by what means she opposes her Enemies.
SECT. I.
DIseases, Nature's enemies, though their shapes and number be many, yet they
may be reduced to these two general heads, viz. Chronick, and Acute.

Chronick diseases move slowly at first, slightly invading Natures Castle; so
that she, Non vacans exiguis Rebus adesse, is often surprised: sometimes the
spirits evacuated, or evaporated, the ferment of the stomach becomes weak and
feeble, not able to perform its Office; from hence proceeds a general decay of
the parts, as in Consumptions, etc. other times the Ferment grows exorbitant,
and will not admit of Nature's Rules; here food may be quickly dissolved, but
not so well digested: From hence comes the Scurvy, Rheumatismus, vagrant Pains,
etc. sometimes the passages as well for the conveyance of the Chyle, as
evacuation of excrements, become so obstructed, that not only a decay of the
superior parts do ensue, but Tumors and Inundations in the inferior parts do
arise; from whence Dropsies, etc. do proceed.

But although upon the first sensible invasion of these diseases, Nature uses
her utmost endeavors to oppose them; yet in these Chronick distempers she
meets with so many obstructions, that she rarely or never overcomes them,
without the assistance of her friend, the Physician.

Acute diseases charge more violently; but Nature having timely notice, she
presently applies all her force to oppose them, and is sometime known to throw
off these distempers without the help of a Physician. But when, either by the
irregularity of the Patient in his diet, or otherwise, the distemper is
reinforced, or re-invigorated; Nature is often known to be overpowered
without the timely assistance of her friend, the Physician.

In these Distempers, a sudden and violent charge being given to Nature, a
Tremor shakes the whole body; after that the Enemy having got into the
sanguinary channel, all force is used to drive it out; but this is not done
without much violence. Hence a Fermentation or Ebullition of the blood does
ensue, and continues so long till the morbifick matter is discharged, part per
poros cutis, and the rest by the Ureters and Intestines.

SECT. II. Natures several Indications in Chronick and Acute diseases,
according to which the Physician ought to frame his method of Cure.
IN Chronick diseases, where the stomach is troubled with tough viscous humors
sticking to the sides thereof, Nature indicates vomiting, by the Nausea that
attends that part, and offers of Nature to be relieved that way. If these
humors be fluid, they generally participate of an acid quality, being
impregnated with a fixed acrimonious salt, which mixing with the chyle,
converts it into a juice of the same nature, whose exorbitant acidity resists
the alteration designed by nature in the intestines; and by its acrimony,
extimulating and exciting the expulsive faculty of those parts, a Diarrhoea,
Bloody Flux, griping of the Guts, etc. are caused: Nature here indicates
dulcoration of the Acrimony, and Evacuation, with emollient and lenitive
Medicines. Where the passages by which the chyle is conveyed, or the excrements
pass through, are obstructed, occasioned from a defect of the splenetick
ferment, or otherwise, Nature indicates opening and attenuating Medicines, and
such as do excite the ferment of the Spleen.

In Acute diseases, as Nature is most watchful and industrious in opposing
them, so is she most curious in her indications, giving timely notice of the
approach, and critical Battalia of the Enemy; for no sooner does the adversary
invade, but a sudden tremor gives notice of the approach of a potent Enemy, and
when it assaults her, she leaves all to oppose it. Therefore we are not to
charge the stomach with too much, or any gross food; for nature and the spirits
being employed otherwise cannot attend the digestions: And no sooner does she
get a little respite, but she indicates to the Physician (her friend) how part
of the morbifick matter is expelled, and how the rest by his assistance may be
carried off. And this she does by those pearly drops displayed upon the
superficies of the Cutis, as so many Trophyes of her late acquired Victory: but
if the disease be so potent, that she cannot by her own desired way, viz. per
poros cutis, throw it off; she is forced to throw the morbifick matter into
some other parts, till she can recover more strength to vanquish it: and here
she acquaints her friend (the Physician) where she has lodged the enemy,
calling for his assistance.

The symptomatical Pleurisy and Frenzy, and other symptoms in Fevers, are
only signs of nature's weakness, who wanting ability to discharge the morbisick
matter her own way, was forced to throw it into some other part, as into the
Membrane Pleura, or into the meninges of the Brain, from whenoe Pleurisy and
Frenzy happen in Fevers: when she has separated and vanquished her Enemies,
she usually offers to drive them out at the inferior Postern, indicating to the
Physician that way she would be assisted. I could instance many more, but to
the rational this is sufficient, to acquaint them with Natures method and wise
government in the Economy of our body, and that the true method of cure ought
to be according to Natures own prescripts and indications. For which I will
bring the authority of that true friend of Nature, the learned Helmont, page
802. Naturam esse morborum medicatrioem, eam confortandam ideo non
consternandam: Nature being the Physicianess of diseases, she is to be
strengthened, and comforted, not frightened, or disquieted.

SECT. III. A Discourse of the cause and cure of continuing Fevers.
FEvers, though by some distinguished by various names, may be reduced to these
two heads, viz. Putrid and Malignant.

Of the signs Diagnostick of Putrid Fevers.
They invade the sick with a chilness in the back, and oftentimes shaking like
an Ague; after that a burning heat, which diffuseth it self through the whole
body, and increases gradually to the 4th. 7th. 14th. or 21. day, and then
decreaseth accordingly: It is attended with Thirst, a quick Pulse, high
colored Urine, Headache, Frenzy, Convulsions; with many more dangerous
symptoms, if the disease be high.

Of the signs Prognostic.
These Fevers happen commonly in the Spring or Summer; and if the symptoms be
mild, they sometimes go off in 4. or 7. days; if violent, they last 14. 21.
and 42. days: when a Frenzy, Delirium, Epilepsie, Convulsion, an irregular
Pulse, no signs of concoction are seen in the Urine after a Crisis, or such
like violent symptoms appear, the Patient hardly recovers without powerful
remedies, and the diligent care of the Physician, and his Assistants. But if
milder symptoms appear, as, if the thirst be not great, the Patient not
disturbed in his sleeps, and wakes somewhat refreshed after them, good Crises
happen, and Nature at those times gives some signs of a conquest, either by
sweat, urine, or a looseness; the Patient recovers with little care and help.

Of the signs Diagnostick of Malignant Fevers.
They seize the Patient with a pain in the back or head; the strength is
debilitated without any manifest cause, viz. more than could be expected from
the nature or heat of the Fever, a dry Cough, palpitation of the Heart,
involuntary Weeping; the heat in these distempers at first touch mild, but
after some time more sharp; the Pulse low and quick, often intermitting; the
Urine oft-times pale, and like the urine of healthy persons, but sometimes
thick, with a red sediment; if the disease run high, Frenzy, Convulsions,
Madness happens; Spots, Pustules, Blains, Buboes, Carbuncles, etc. break forth.

Of the signs Prognostic in Malignant Fevers.
These Distempers generally afflict the people about the Autumn and Winter,
more than the Spring and Summer; they last (according to the nature of the
disease, and strength of the Patient) four, seven, twenty one, or forty two
days: The dangerous symptoms in these diseases, are unquiet sleeps; the
Patient not relieved by them; madness; imbecility of the retentive faculties;
a creeping, low, and irregular Pulse; black and turbid Urine; Convulsions,
Epilepsies, etc. otherwise, if the Patient is relieved by sleeps, has a
regular pulse, good Crises happen, moderate sweats, and the Patient appearing
refreshed after them, signs of concoction in the Urine, etc. the Patient is in
no danger.

SECT. IV. A discourse of the cause of Fevers.
YOu know (Physiophilus) such is the humor of this present age, that they are
not contented with those accounts of Fevers the Ancients thought rational, but
must have some new well-tuned Hypotheses to please their humors: that I may
not be thought altogether Empirical, I will follow the steps of some of our
modern ingenious Physicians, and run with them in their rational accounts of
Fevers, which being pleasant and coherent, do gratify our humors, and delight
our curious fancies. But I must beg their pardon, if I leave them sometimes in
the method of curing, and follow the experienced and well-troden paths of the
Ancients.

The Hypothesis granted, that Blood and Wine are analogous, and observe the
same rules and method in casting out extraneous bodies; the cause of Fevers
will be thus understood, when either from the defects of the Duumvirate, i. e.
the Stomach and Spleen, change of Air or Diet, whereby the habit of the body is
altered, violent Passions, retention of Excrements, and the like; an imperfect
and ill-digested chyme is prepared, and conveyed into the mass of blood, which
being not fit for mixture and assimilation, is resected and cast forth as an
Heterogenous matter: From hence is caused a commotion, or hermentation of the
whole mass of blood, which last so long till the extranious matter be cast out,
either by the Pores of the skin, Ureters, Intestins, or other emunctories.

The Experiment may be proved in Wine; into which if you put any Heterogeneous
matter, as a drop of a Candle, Sugar, or any Liquors, it will immediately
ferment, which will not cease, till the extraneous matter be thrown out, or
separated from the Wine, and lodged at the bottom of the Vessel, and the whole
body of the Wine remain pure and clear. Thus, we see, persons after excess in
eating or drinking, fall into Fevers; the ferment of the stomach being diluted,
and depraved by such excess, and the parts designed for conveyance of chyle, or
nutriment, are obstructed; so that an unsuteable chyme is sent to the Veins,
which the blood cannot admit of.

So likewise we may observe from such persons as have fed upon ill diet a long
time, as at Sea, or in Captivity, the body at length has been accustomed to
it; but when such have returned home, and came to feed upon good and wholesome
food, they have oftentimes fallen into very high Fevers; the reason of it may
be this: The parts of the body designed for concoction were not acquainted with
such food, and through depravity could not digest them sufficiently; or, if
this food were digested into good Chyme, yet when it came into the veins, the
blood could not admit of its mixture and assimilation, because it is of a
contrary nature to that which was produced from the former ill diet.

When this Chyme, from some ill food, or bad air, has contracted a poisonous
nature; the blood touched with this venomous Miasme, is either too much fused,
from whence follows a greater ebullition in the mass of blood, by which the
vital spirits are wasted and dispersed; or sometimes the blood is coagulated,
by which its circulation is hindered, and a stagnation of that vital current
follows, as in the high malignant and Pestilential diseases.

SECT. V. Of proper Diet (to be observed) in Fevers.
IN putrid Fevers, in the beginning and state of the disease, a thin diet is
necessary; as Water-grewel, broth of Chicken, Mace-Ale, Barly-water, with
cooling and cordial Syrrups: In the declination, Mutton or Veal-broth, or
gravey of meat stued with a little Claret, and a chive of Mace: after the first
Purge, (which is not to be administered till signs of concoction appear in the
Urine) Chicken boiled, or roasted, Mutton, or Veal, etc. may be allowed: For
drink, White Wind Posset Drink, or small Beer, with a fourth part of White Wind.

In Malignant, the Diet must be thin, but spirituous; as, clear Sack
posset drink, Mace-ale, broth of Chicken, with Hartshorn, and cordial Flowers
boiled in it: In the declination of the disease, Whitewine Cawdles, gravy of
Mutton stued with Claret, a little Mace and Nutmeg; then after purging, Flesh
may be permitted, viz. such as is of easy digestion, as Chicken, young Rabits,
Lamb, or Veal: the drink, during the increase or state of the disease, must be
cordial Julips, but afterward good fresh Beer, with half Ale, that is well
boiled, and neither too new, or stale.

SECT. VI. Of the method of curing putrid Fevers.
FIrst of all take care to clear the Stomach, if you be consulted in time, and
nature will bear it.

Proper Vomits are these: Oxymel scilliticum, Oxymel simplex, Infusio croci
metallorum, Sal vitrioli, vel Gilla Theophrasti.

Then prescribe as a Julip this tincture of Roses, viz.

Florum Rosarum Rubr. j. Spir. vitrioli iv. Aquae Fontanae live. infundantur in
loco calido per horas sex, postea coletur and colaturae depuratae add sacchari
albissimi iij. Aquae Rosarum Damascenarum iv. misce, fiat tinctura, de qua
bibat aeger ad libitum.

At other convenient times, let the Patient take this Cordial;

Aquarum melissae, cardui benedicti, una iij. perlarum Corallii praeparat. an.
j. sir. acetositatis citri iss misce, fiat Julapium pro quatuor dosibus.

If the Fever increase, and violent symptoms appear, as Delirium, Frenzy,
etc. apply blistering playsters to the Neck, Arms and Anckles; and Herrings, or
this following Cataplasme to the Feet.

Carnis Halecum ex muria iij. Radicis Brioniae j. fol. Rutae M. j. Salis nigri
vj. saponis nigri q. s. fiat cataplasma plantis pedum applicandum.

After which Applications administer this following bolus;

Conservae Rosarum Rubr. vitriolat. j. pulveris ex chelis cancrorum compositi
j. laudani Londinensis gr. j. misce, fiat bolus.

Then administer other proper Cordials, pro re nata, till you observe a good
crisis, and signs of concoction in the Urine; at which time, observe Natures
indications; as, which way she offers to drive out the morbifick matter,
whether still by the Pores of the skin, or by the Intestines; and according to
your observation assist her either with proper Diaphoreticks, such as, Pulvis
ex chelis cancrorum compositus, cum Rad. contrayervae, and serpentariae; Or
else with a lenitive Purge, such as follows; viz.

Fol. endiviae, cichorei ana pj. coquantur in Aquae font. vj. ad iv. postea
add. Rhabarbari electi ij. sennae mundatae j. Zinziberis j. sam. Anisi ss. and
infundantur per noctem, mane colentur, and colaturae add sir. Rosarum solutiv.
vj. misce, fiat potio.

The same Potion, or another, may be afterward repeated as occasion serves.

SECT. VII. Of the method of curing malignant Fevers.
IF you are consulted in time, first clear the stomach with Oxymel seillitic.
iij. vel iv. After its operation is ended, give this Cordial, viz.

Aquae cardui benedicti, iij. corallii praeparati, boli armenii ana j.
diascordii ss. sir. Garyophyllorum j. misce, fiat potio cordialis.

Then let the Patient drink of this following Julip every three hours: viz.

Cornu cervi usti, j. Rad. Scorzonerae ss. Rad. Contrayervae, Serpentariae, ana
iss. Lujulae M. j. coquantur in Aquae fontanae Lb. iv. ad Lb. ij. colaturae
add syrrup. melissae, Garyophyllorum ana j. confectionis de Hyacintho, elect.
de sassafra ana ij. misce, fiat Julapium, de quo capiat Cochlear. quatuor,
tertia quavis bora, tepide.

Once in two hours, let the Patient take a spoonful of this Cordial, viz.

Aquae melissae, Scordii ana iij. Aquae Pezoardicae, j. sir. Garyophyll. iss.
confectionis de Hyacinth. ij. corallii, perlarum, praeparat. ana j. misce, fiat
Julapium cordiale, de quo capiat cochlear. j. secunda quavis bora tepide.

If violent Symptoms appear, apply blisters to the Neck, Wrists, and Anckles;
Pigeons, or Herrings, to the Feet; Chickens split to the Heart and Stomach;
Heighten your Cordials as the disease increases, and change them often in
these distempers: Administer nothing cold, either actually, or potentially:
when you see signs of concoction, you may administer a gentle Purge, such as
that before prescribed in putrid Fevers.

Thus have I given you (Physiophilus) that method which I have used with
extraordinary success some years; but except there be judgment and experience
joined with it, viz. to know a disease; and what doses, according to the
several ages and constitutions of Patients; when to administer and apply
Remedies; the best methods and medicines are used in vain.

SECT. VIII. A discourse of the disease called the Griping of the Guts.
THere has appeared (Physiophilus) amongst many other diseases, a strange
Monster, called the Scurvy, acting its part upon the stage of this little world
in various shapes, counterfeiting the guise of most other diseases: sometimes
it consumes by little and little, as it were grating and crumbling the body
into the grave; then again it rends and distracts separating the union of body
and soul suddenly puffing out the lamp of life sometimes it is couchant, other
times rampant; so alternately chronick and acute.

But amongst the many appearances of this Protean disease, there is none more
eminently atrocious, than this termed the Griping of the Guts; and though by
some, it may be accounted a substantial disease; it appears to my reason to be
only a product, or an effect of a virulent scorbutic root.

Of the signs Diagnostick of the Griping of the Guts.
It seizes the Patient with wringing gripes usually, and oftentimes with
intolerable racking, and convulsive pains: some have only a flux downward,
others evacuate both by vomit and stool; they are accompanied with a Fever
manifest, or hidden; giddiness, great pains in the Head, Drowsiness, Phrensies,
tedious Watchings, weakness of the Limbs, difficult breathing, a weak and
irregular Pulse, pains in the sides and loins, fluxes of blood, oppression at
the stomach, the urine for the most part like healthy persons; but sometimes it
is thick and troubled, oftentimes spots appear of a reddish, or purple color,
being small, and lying deep in the flesh.

Prognostics in the Griping of the Guts.
If a Fever, with other bad symptoms, as Lipothymie, Convulsion, Phrensies,
etc. be joined with these griping pains; the patient generally miscarries,
except the virulent Ichor be transmitted by large sweats, or more gentle
breathings, with eruptions of Pustules, Spots, or red Blotches.

If these malignant Gripes, joined with a Fever, invade any that have been
debilitated by a long infirmity; or intemperate persons, the ferment of whose
stomach is diluted and depraved, the case is dangerous. Sometimes it happens,
that the Torminous matter is translated into the limbs, whereupon Palsy,
Rheumatismus, or Gowt happen, to the preservation of life.

If none of these symptoms appear, the Patient recovers with little help of
proper Remedies; but otherwise, not without great care and industry, annexed
with medicines of some force and energy.

SECT. IX. Of the cause of the Griping of the Guts.
ITs Cause may be supposed (Physiophilus) from an exorbitant acidity of the
stomachs Ferment, occasioned from the ill disposition of the Air, Diet,
Contagion, or Hereditary constitution: By this luxuriant exorbitancy of the
stomachs Ferment, the food dissolved and digested is converted into a juice of
the same sharp and corroding nature; and resisting the alteration and
dulcoration designed by the Ferment, implanted in the intestins, by its
acrimony frets, extimulates, and excites the expulsive faculty of those parts,
colliquating the nitrous juices, turning them into an acid, fretting, and
vexatious Ichor, bringing a damp upon the spirits, and if not timely prevented,
totally extinguishing them.

SECT. X. Of the method of curing the Griping of the Guts.
IF consulted in time, a gentle Vomit will be necessary, such as Oxymel
scilliticum, from i. to iv. after that some proper Diaphoretick, such as Pulvis
ex chelis cancrorum compositus, lapis contrayervae, prepared Pearl and Coral;
these do dulcorate acid and corroding juices, and relieve nature, by throwing
out the offending humors, per poros cutis: Let the Patient drink Julips made
of Cornu cervi ust. Rad. scorzonerae, contrayervae, serpentariae, etc.
Administer Cordials made of spirit of Juniper, Scurvy Grass, Hartshorn, with
proper Sytrups, Elixir proprietatis Par^si, Spirit of Tartar, Tincture of
Coral, Haematitis or Bloodstone: proper chalybiate Medicines may be used at
convensent times, as the judicious Physician shall find occasion.

The Diet may be the same prescribed in malignant Fevers.

Let this short discourse suffice at present. (Physiophilus;) as occasion
offers, and acceptance answers, I shall be ready to serve you, and my Country,
to the utmost of my power.

-- Si quid scis rectius istis
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.
From my dwelling, next door to Grey's-Inn-gate in Holbourn. July the 14th 1672.

ERRATA.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, line ult. for yours read your; page 34. lin. 1.
for Halecium read Halecum; lin. 4. read cataplasma; lin. 12. read extracti;
lin. penult. read Helmontii; page 33. lin. 13. read conservae.

FINIS.
The Contents.
THe Introduction to the Discourse of Agues. Page 1. CAP. I. Of the Use and
Offices of the Spleen and Stomach. p. 15. CAP. II. A discourse of the cause of
intermitting Fevers or Agues. p. 19. CAP. III. Of the Diagnostick signs of
intermitting Fevers or Agues. p. 23. CAP. IV. Of the Prognostics in Agues. p.
27. CAP. V. Of the several Remedies used for the cure of Agues. p. 31. CAP. VI.
Of Charms used for the Cure of Agues, how they operate: with the dangerous
consequences that have attended them. p. 35. CAP. VII. The Authors particular
Method of curing all sorts of Agues. p. 42. CAP. VIII. Of the proper diet to be
observed by such as have Agues, and during my method of curing Agues. p. 45.
CAP. IX. Observations of this successful method in some long tedious Quartans
complicated with other Chronick diseases. p. 47.
Appendix.
SECT. I. NAtures method in the time of sickness, and by what means she
opposes her enemies. p. 54. SECT. II. Natures several indications in chronick
and acute diseases, according to which the Physician ought to frame his method
of cure. p. 56. SECT. III. A discourse of the Cause and Cure of continuing
Fevers. p. 60. SECT. IV. A discourse of the cause of Fevers. p. 63. SECT. V. Of
proper Diet to be observed in Fevers. p. 66. SECT. VI. Of the method of curing
putrid Fevers. p. 68. SECT. VII. Of the method of curing malignant Fevers. p.
70. SECT. VIII. A discourse of the disease called the Griping in the Guts. p.
72. SECT. IX. Of the Cause of the Griping in the Guts. p. 75. SECT. X. Of the
method of curing the Griping of the Guts. p. 76.

