A DISCOURSE AGAINST Transubstantiation.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill: And William Rogers, at the Sun, over
against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1684.

A DISCOURSE AGAINST Transubstantiation.
COncerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, one of the two great positive
Institutions of the Christian Religion, there are two main Points of difference
between Us and the Church of Rome. One, about the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; in which they think, but are not certain, that they have
the Scripture and the words of our Savior on their side: The other, about the
administration of this Sacrament to the People in both kinds; in which we are
sure that we have the Scripture and our Savior's Institution on our side; and
that so plainly, that our Adversaries themselves do not deny it.

Of the first of these I shall now treat, and endeavor to show against the
Church of Rome, That in this Sacrament there is no substantial change made of
the Elements of Bread and Wine into the natural Body and Blood of Christ; that
Body which was born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered upon the Cross; for so
they explain that hard word Transubstantiation.

Before I engage in this Argument, I cannot but observe what an unreasonable
task we are put upon, by the bold confidence of our Adversaries, to dispute a
matter of Sense; which is one of those things about which Aristotle has long
since pronounced there ought to be no dispute.

It might well seem strange if any man should write a Book, to prove that an
Egg is not an Elephant, and that a Musket-Bullet is not a Pike: It is every
whit as hard a case, to be put to maintain by a long Discourse, that what we
see and handle and taste to be Bread is Bread, and not the Body of a man; and
what we see and taste to be Wine is Wine, and not Blood: And if this evidence
may not pass for sufficient without any farther proof, I do not see why any
man, that has confidence enough to do so, may not deny any thing to be what
all the World sees it is, or affirm any thing to be what all the World sees it
is not; and this without all possibility of being farther confuted. So that the
business of Transubstantiation is not a controversy of Scripture against
Scripture, or of Reason against Reason, but of downright Impudence against the
plain meaning of Scripture, and all the Sense and Reason of Mankind.

It is a most Self-evident Falsehood; and there is no Doctrine or Proposition
in the World that is of it self more evidently true, than Transubstantiation is
evidently false: And yet if it were possible to be true, it would be the most
ill-natured and pernicious truth in the World, because it would suffer nothing
else to be true; it is like the Roman-Catholique Church, which will needs be
the whole Christian Church, and will allow no other Society of Christians to be
any part of it: So Transubstantiation, if it be true at all, it is all truth;
for it cannot be true unless our Senses and the Senses of all mankind be
deceived about their proper objects; and if this be true and certain, then
nothing else can be so; for if we be not certain of what we see, we can be
certain of nothing.

And yet notwithstanding all this, there is a Company of men in the World so
abandoned and given up by God to the efficacy of delusion as in good earnest to
believe this gross and palpable Error, and to impose the belief of it upon the
Christian World under no less penalties than of temporal death and Eternal
damnation. And therefore to undeceive, if possible, these deluded Souls, it
will be necessary to examine the pretended grounds of so false a Doctrine, and
to lay open the monstrous absurdity of it.

And in the handling of this Argument, I shall proceed in this plain method.

I. I shall consider the pretended grounds and reasons of the Church of Rome
for this Doctrine.

II. I shall produce our Objections against it. And if I can show that there is
no tolerable ground for it, and that there are invincible Objections against
it, then every man is not only in reason excused from believing this Doctrine,
but has great cause to believe the contrary.

FIRST, I will consider the pretended grounds Rome for this Doctrine. Which
must be one or more of these five. Either 1st. The Authority of Scripture. Or
2ly. The perpetual belief of this Doctrine in the Christian Church, as an
evidence that they always understood and interpreted our Savior's words, This
is my body, in this sense. Or 3ly. The authority of the present Church to make
and declare new Articles of Faith. Or 4ly. The absolute necessity of such a
change as this in the Sacrament to the comfort and benefit of those who receive
this Sacrament. Or 5ly. To magnify the power of the Priest in being able to
work so great a Miracle.

1st. They pretend for this Doctrine the Authority of Scripture in those words
of our Savior, This is my body. Now to show the insufficiency of this
pretense, I shall endeavor to make good these two things.

1. That there is no necessity of understanding those words of our Savior in
the sense of Transubstantiation.

2. That there is a great deal of reason to understand them otherwise.

First, That there is no necessity to understand those words of our Savior in
the sense of Transubstantiation. If there be any, it must be from one of these
two reasons. Either because there are no figurative expressions in Scripture,
which I think no man ever yet said: or else, because a Sacrament admits of no
figures; which would be very absurd for any man to say, since it is of the very
nature of a Sacrament to represent and exhibit some invisible grace and
benefit by an outward sign and figure: And especially since it cannot be
denied, but that in the institution of this very Sacrament our Savior uses
figurative expressions and several words which cannot be taken strictly and
literally. When he gave the Cup he said, This Cup is the new Testament in my
blood, which is shed for you and for many for the remission of Sins. Where
first, the Cup is put for Wine contained in the Cup; or else if the words be
literally taken, so as to signify a substantial change, it is not of the Wine
but of the Cup; and that, not into the blood of Christ but into the new
Testament or new Covenant in his blood. Besides, that his blood is said then to
be shed, and his body to be broken, which was not till his Passion, which
followed the Institution and first celebration of this Sacrament.

But that there is no necessity to understand our Savior's words in the sense
of Transubstantiation, I will take the plain concession of a great number of
the most learned Writers of the Church of Rome in this Controversy. de ^^uch.
l. 3. c. 23.
Bellarmine, in 3. dis. 49. Qu. 75. Sect. 2.
Suazer and in 3. part. disp. 180. Qu. 75. art. 2. c. 15.
Vasquez do acknowledge Scotus the great Schoolman to have said that this
Doctrine cannot be evidently proved from Scripture: And Bellarmine grants this
not to be improbable; and Suarez and Vasquez acknowledge in Sent. l. 4. did.
11. Q. 1. n. 15.
Durandus to have said as much. in 4. Sent. Q. 5. and Quodl. 4. Q. 3.
Ocham, another famous Schoolman, says expressly, that the Doctrine which holds
the substance of the Bread and Wine to remain after consecration is neither
repugnant to Reason nor to Scripture. in 4. Sent. Q. 6. art. 2.
Petrus ab Alliaco Cardinal of Cambray says plainly, that the Doctrine of the
Substance of Bread and Wine remaining after Consecration is more easy and free
from absurdity, more rational, and no ways repugnant to the authority of
Scripture; nay more, that for the other Doctrine, viz. of Transubstantiation,
there is no evidence in Scripture. in canon. Miss. Lect. 40.
Gabriel Biel, another great Schoolman and Divine of their Church, freely
declares, that as to any thing expressed in the Canon of the Scriptures, a man
may believe that the substance of Bread and Wine does remain after
Consecration: and therefore he resolves the belief of Transubstantiation into
some other Revelation, besides Scripture, which he supposes the Church had
about it. Cardinal in Aquin. 3. part. Qu. 75. art. 1.
Cajetan confesses that the Gospel does no where express that the Bread is
changed into the Body of Christ; that we have this from the authority of the
Church: nay, he goes farther,, that there is nothing in the Gospel which
enforces any man to understand these words of Christ, this is my body, in a
proper and not a metaphorical sense; but the Church having understood them in a
proper sense they are to be so explained: Which words in the Roman Edition of
Cajetan are expunged by order of Pope Aegid. Conink. de Sacram. Q. 75. art. 1.
n. 13.
Pius V. Cardinal de Sacram. l. 2. c. 3.
Contarenus, and Loc. Theolog. l. 3. c. 3.
Melchior Canus one of the best and most judicious Writers that Church ever
had, reckon this Doctrine among those which are not so expressly found in
Scripture. I will add but one more, of great authority in the Church, and a
reputed Martyr, contra captiv. Babylon. c. 10. n. 2.
Fisher Bishop of Rochester who ingenuously confesses that in the words of the
Institution there is not one word from whence the true presence of the flesh
and blood of Christ in our Mass can be proved: So that we need not much contend
that this Doctrine has no certain foundation in Scripture, when this is so
fully and frankly acknowledged by our Adversaries themselves.

Secondly, If there be no necessity of understanding our Savior's words in the
sense of Transubstantiation, I am sure there is a great deal of reason to
understand them otherwise. Whether we consider the like expressions in
Scripture; as where our Savior says he is the door, and the true Vine (which
the Church of Rome would mightily have triumphed in, had it been said, this is
my true body) And so likewise where the Church is said to be Christ's body; and
the Rock which followed the Israelites to be Christ, 1. Cor. 10. 4. They drank
of that rock which followed them, and that rock was Christ: All which and
innumerable more like expressions in Scripture every man understands in a
figurative, and not in a strictly literal and absurd sense. And it is very well
known, that in the Hebrew Language things are commonly said to be that which
they do signify and represent; and there is not in that Language a more proper
and usual way of expressing a thing to signify so and so, than to say that it
is so and so. Thus Joseph expounding Pharaoh's dream to him, Genesis 41. 26. Says,
the seven good kine are seven years, and the seven good ears of corn are seven
years, that is, they signified or represented seven years of plenty; and so
Pharaoh understood him, and so would any man of sense understand the like
expressions; nor do I believe that any sensible man, who had never heard of
Transubstantiation being grounded upon these words of our Savior, this is my
body, would upon reading the institution of the Sacrament in the Gospel ever
have imagined any such thing to be meant by our Savior in those words; but
would have understood his meaning to have been, this Bread signifies my Body,
this Cup signifies my Blood; and this which you see me now do, do ye hereafter
for a Memorial of me: But surely it would never have entered into any man's
mind to have thought that our Savior did literally hold himself in his hand,
and give away himself from himself with his own hands.

Or whether we compare these words of our Savior with the ancient Form of the
Passover used by the Jews from Ezra's time, as Dialog. cuus Tryph. p. 297.
Edit. P^ris. 1639.
Justin Martyr tells us, (...), this Passover is our Savior and our refuge:
not that they believed the Paschal Lamb to be substantially changed either into
God their Savior who delivered them out of the Land of Egypt, or into the
Messiah the Savior whom they expected and who was signified by it: But this
Lamb which they did eat did represent to them and put them in mind of that
Salvation which God wrought for their Fathers in Egypt, when by the slaying of
a Lamb and sprinkling the blood of it upon their doors their firstborn were
passed over and spared; and did likewise foreshew the Salvation of the Messiah,
the Lamb of God that was to take away the Sins of the world.

And nothing is more common in all Languages than to give the name of the thing
signified to the Sign. As the delivery of a Deed or Writing under hand and Seal
is called a Conveyance or making over of such an Estate, and it is really so;
not the delivery of mere wax and parchment, but the conveyance of a real
Estate; as truly and really to all effects and purposes of Law, as if the very
material houses and lands themselves could be and were actually delivered into
my hands: In like manner the names of the things themselves made over to us in
the new Covenant of the Gospel between God and man, are given to the Signs or
Seals of that Covenant. By Baptism Christians are said to be made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. 4. And by the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper we are
said to communicate or to be made partakers of the Body of Christ which was
broken, and of his Blood which was shed for us, that is, of the real benefits
of his death and passion. And thus St. Paul speaks of this Sacrament, 1 Cor.
10. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body
of Christ? But still it is bread, and he still calls it so, v. 17. For we being
many are one bread and one body; for we are partakers of that one bread. The
Church of Rome might, if they pleased, as well argue from hence that all
Christians are substantially changed first into Bread, and then into the
natural Body of Christ by their participation of the Sacrament, because they
are said thereby to be one bread and one body. And the same Apostle in the next
chapter, after he had spoken of the consecration of the Elements still calls
them the bread and the Cup, in three verses together, As often as ye eat this
bread and drink this Cup, v. 26. Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this
cup of the Lord unworthily, v. 27. But let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that bread and drink of that cup, v. 28. And our Savior himself
when he had said, this is my blood of the new Testament, immediately adds,
Matthew. 26. 29.
but I say unto you, I will not henceforth drink of this fruit of the Vine,
until I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom, that is, not till after
his resurrection, which was the first slep^ of his exaltation into the Kingdom
given him by his Father; when the Scripture tells us he did eat and drink with
his Disciples. But that which I observe from our Savior's words is, that after
the consecration of the Cup and the delivering of it to his Disciples to drink
of it, he tells them that he would thenceforth drink no more of the fruit of
the Vine, which he had now drank with them, till after his Resurrection. From
whence it is plain that it was the fruit of the Vine, real wine, which our
Savior drank of and communicated to his Disciples in the Sacrament.

Besides, if we consider that he celebrated this Sacrament before his Passion,
it is impossible these words should be understood literally of the natural body
and blood of Christ; because it was his body broken and his blood shed which he
gave to his Disciples, which if we understand literally of his natural body
broken and his blood shed, then these words, this is my body which is broken,
and this is my blood which is shed, could not be true, because his Body was
then whole and unbroken, and his Blood not then shed; nor could it be a
propitiatory Sacrifice (as they affirm this Sacrament to be) unless they will
say that propitiation was made before Christ suffered: And it is likewise
impossible that the Disciples should understand these words literally, because
they not only plainly saw that what he gave them was Bread and Wine, but they
saw likewise as plainly that it was not his Body which was given, but his Body
which gave that which was given; not his body broken and his blood shed,
because they saw him alive at that very time and beheld his body whole and
unpierc'd; and therefore they could not understand these words literally: If
they had, can we imagine that the Disciples, who upon all other occasions were
so full of questions and objections, should make no difficulty of this matter?
nor so much as ask our Savior, how can these things be? that they should not
tell him, we see this to be Bread and that to be Wine, and we see thy Body to
be distinct from both; we see thy Body not broken, and thy Blood not shed.

From all which it must needs be very evident, to any man that will impartially
consider things, how little reason there is to understand those words of our
Savior, this is my body, and this is my blood, in the sense of
Transubstantiation; nay on the contrary, that there is very great reason and an
evident necessity to understand them otherwise. I proceed to show,

2ly. That this Doctrine is not grounded upon the perpetual belief of the
Christian Church, which the Church of Rome vainly pretends as an evidence that
the Church did always understand and interpret our Savior's words in this
sense.

To manifest the groundlesness of this pretense, I shall, 1. show by plain
testimony of the Fathers in several Ages, that this Doctrine was not the belief
of the ancient Christian Church. 2. I shall show the time and occasion of its
coming in, and by what degrees it grew up and was established in the Roman
Church. 3. I shall answer their great pretended Demonstration that this always
was and must have been the constant belief of the Christian Church.

1. I shall show by plain Testimonies of the Fathers in several Ages, for above
five hundred years after Christ that this Doctrine was not the belief of the
ancient Christian Church. I deny not but that the Fathers do, and that with
great reason, very much magnify the wonderful mystery and efficacy of this
Sacrament, and frequently speak of a great Supernatural change made by the
divine benediction; which we also readily acknowledge. They say indeed, that
the Elements of Bread and Wine do by the divine blessing become to us the Body
and Blood of Christ: But they likewise say that the names of the things
signified are given to the Signs; that the Bread and Wine do still remain in
their proper nature and substance, and that they are turned into the substance
of our Bodies; that the Body of Christ in the Sacrament is not his natural
Body, but the sign and figure of it; not that Body which was crucified, nor
that Blood which was shed upon the Cross; and that it is impious to understand
the eating of the flesh of the Son of man and drinking his blood literally: all
which are directly opposite to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation and utterly
inconsistent with it. I will select but some few Testimonies of many which I
might bring to this purpose.

I begin with Justin Martyr, who says expressly, that Apol. 2. p. 98. edit.
Paris. 1636.
our blood and Flesh are nourished by the conversion of that food which we
receive in the Eucharist: But that cannot be the natural body and blood of
Christ, for no man will say that that is converted into the nourishment of our
bodies.

The Second is lib. 4. c. 34.
Irenaeus, who speaking of this Sacrament says, that the bread which is from
the earth receiving the divine invocation is now no longer common bread, but
the Eucharist (or Sacrament) consisting of two things, the one earthy, the
other heavenly. He says it is no longer common bread, but after invocation or
consecration it becomes the Sacrament, that is, bread sanctified, consisting of
two things an earthly and a heavenly; the earthly thing is bread, and the
heavenly is the divine blessing which by the invocation or consecration is
added to it. And lib. 5. c. 2.
elsewhere he has this passage, when therefore the cup that is mixed (that is,
of Wine and Water) and the bread that is broken receives the word of God, it
becomes the Eucharist of the blood and body of Christ, of which the substance
of our flesh is increased and consists: but if that which we receive in the
Sacrament do nourish our bodies, it must be bread and wine, and not the natural
body and blood of Christ. There is another remarkable Testimony of Irenaeus,
which though it be not now extant in those works of his which remain, yet has
been preserved by Comment. in 1, Pet. c. 3.
Oecumenius, and it is this; when (says he) the Greeks had taken some Servants,
of the Christian Catechumeni (that is, such as had not been admitted to the
Sacrament) and afterward urged them by violence to tell them some of the
secrets of the Christians, these Servants having nothing to say that might
gratify those who offered violence to them, except only that they had heard
from their Masters that the divine Communion was the blood and body of Christ,
they thinking that it was really blood and flesh, declared as much to those
that questioned them. The Greeks taking this as if it were really done by the
Christians, discovered it to others of the Greeks; who hereupon put Sanctus and
Blandina to the torture to make them confess it. To whom Blandina boldly
answered, How would they endure to do this, who by way of exercise (or
abstinence) do not eat that flesh which may lawfully be eaten? By which it
appears that this which they would have charged upon Christians, as if they had
literally eaten the flesh and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, was a false
accusation which these Martyrs denied, saying they were so far from that that
they for their part did not eat any flesh at all.

The next is Tertullian, who proves against Marcion the Heretic that the Body
of our Savior was not a mere phantasm and appearance, but a real Body, because
the Sacrament is a figure and image of his Body; and if there be an image of
his body he must have a real body, otherwise the Sacrament would be an image of
an image. His words are these, Advers. Marcionem l. 4. p. 571. Edit. Rigalt.
Paris. 1634.
the bread which our Savior took and distributed to his Disciples he made his
own body, saying this is my body, that is, the image or figure of my body. But
it could not have been the figure of his body, if there had not been a true and
real body. And arguing against the Scepticks who denied the certainty of sense
he uses this Argument: That if we question our senses we may doubt whether our
Blessed Savior were not deceived in what he heard, and saw, and touched. lib.
de Anima p. 319.
He might (says he) be deceived in the voice from heaven, in the smell of the
ointment with which he was anointed against his burial; and in tho taste of the
wine which he consecrated in remembrance of his blood. So that it seems we are
to trust our senses, even in the matter of the Sacrament; and if that be true,
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is certainly false.

Origin in his Edit. ^^uetii.
Comment on Matthew. 15, speaking of the Sacrament has this passage, That food
which is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, as to that of it which is
material, goes into the belly and is cast out into the draught, which none
surely will say of the Body of Christ. And afterward he adds by way of
explication, it is not the matter of the bread, but the word which is spoken
over it, which profits him that worthily eats the Lord; and this (he says)
he had spoken concerning the typical and Symbolical body. So that the matter of
bread remains in the Sacrament, and this Origin calls the typical and
Symbolical body of Christ; and it is not the natural body of Christ which is
there eaten, for the food eaten in the Sacrament, as to that of it which is
material, goes into the belly and is cast out into the draught. This testimony
is so very plain in the Cause that Sextus Senensis suspects this place of
Origin was depraved by the Heretics. Cardinal Perron is contented to allow it
to be Origen's, but rejects his testimony because he was accused of Heresy by
some of the Fathers, and says he talks like a Heretic in this place. So that
with much ado this testimony is yielded to us. The same Father in his Cap. 10.
Homilies upon Leviticus speaks thus, There is also in the New Testament a
letter which kills him who does not Spiritually understand those things which
are said; for if we take according to the Letter that which is said, EXCEPT YE
EAT MY FLESH AND DRINK MY BLOOD, this Letter kills. And this also is a killing
Testimony, and not to be answered but in Cardinal Perron's way, by saying he
talks like a Heretic.

St. Cyprian has a whole Epistle Ep. 63.
to Cecilius, against those who gave the Communion in Water only without Wine
mingled with it; and his main argument against them is this, that the blood of
Christ with which we are redeemed and quickened cannot seem to be in the Cup
when there is no Wine in the Cup by which the Blood of Christ is represented:
and afterward he says, that contrary to the Evangelical and Apostolical
Doctrine water was in some places offered (or given) in the Lord's Cup, which
(says he) alone cannot express (or represent) the blood of Christ. And lastly
he tells us, that by water the people is understood, by Wine the blood of
Christ is shown (or represented) but when in the Cup water is mingled with Wine
the people is united to Christ. So that according to this Argument Wine in the
Sacramental Cup is no otherwise changed into the blood of Christ than the Water
mixed with it is changed into the People, which are said to be united to Christ.

I omit many others, and pass to St. Austin in the fourth Age after Christ. And
I the rather insist upon his Testimony, because of his eminent esteem and
authority in the Latin Church; and he also calls the Elements of the Sacrament
the figure and Sign of Christ's body and blood. In his Book against Adimantus
the Manichee we have this expression, Aug. Tom. 6. p. 187. Edit. Basil. 1569.
our Lord did not doubt to say, this is my Body, when he gave the Sign of his
Body. And in his explication of the third Psalm, speaking of Judas whom our
Lord admitted to his last Supper, in which (says he) Enarrat. in Psalm. Tom. 8.
p. 16.
he commended and delivered to his Disciples the figure of his Body; Language
which would now be censured for Heresy in the Church of Rome. Indeed he was
never accused of Heresy, as Cardinal Perron says Origin was, but he talks as
like one as Origin himself. And in his Comment on the 98 Psalm speaking of the
offense which the Disciples took at that saying of our Savior, except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, etc. he brings in our Savior
speaking thus to them, Id. Tom. 9. p. 1105.
ye must understand Spiritually what I have said unto you; ye are not to eat
this body which ye see, and to drink that blood which shall be shed by those
that shall crucifyme. I have commended a certain Sacrament to you, which being
Spiritually understood will give you life. What more opposite to the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation, than that the Disciples were not to eat that Body of
Christ which they saw, nor to drink that blood which was shed upon the Cross,
but that all this was to be understood spiritually and according to the nature
of a Sacrament? For that body he tells us is not here but in heaven, in his
Comment upon these words, me ye have not always. Id. Tract. 50. in Johan.
He speaks (says he) of the presence of his body; ye shall have me according to
my providence, according to Majesty and invisible grace; but according to the
flesh which the word assumed, according to that which was born of the Virgin
Mary, ye shall not have me: therefore because he conversed with his Disciples
forty days, he is ascended up into heaven and is not here.

In his 23d. Epistle; Id. Tom. 2. p. 93.
if the Sacrament (says he) had not some resemblance of those things whereof
they are Sacraments, they would not be Sacraments at all; but from this
resemblance they take for the most part the names of the things which they
represent. Therefore as the Sacrament of the body of Christ is in some manner
or sense Christ's body, and the Sacrament of his blood is the blood of Christ;
So the Sacrament of faith (meaning Baptism) is faith. Upon which words of St.
Austin there is this remarkable Gloss in their own Canon Law; de Consecr. did.
2. Hoc est.
the heavenly Sacrament which truly represents the flesh of Christ is called
the body of Christ; but improperly: whence it is said, that after a manner, but
not according to the truth of the thing but the mystery of the thing signified;
So that the meaning is, it is called the body of Christ, that is, it signifies
the body of Christ: And if this be St. Austin's meaning, I am sure no
Protestant can speak more plainly against Transubstantiation. And in the
ancient Canon of the Mass, before it was changed in compliance with this new
Doctrine, it is expressly called a Sacrament, a Sign, an Image and a figure of
Christ's body. To which I will add that remarkable passage of St. Austin cited
by de consecrat. did. 2. Sect. Vtrum.
Gratian, that as we receive the similitude of his death in Baptism, so we may
also receive the likeness of his flesh and blood; that so neither may truth be
wanting in the Sacrament, nor Pagans have occasion to make us ridiculous for
drinking the blood of one that was slain.

I will mention but one Testimony more of this Father, but so clear a one as it
is impossible any man in his wits that had believed Transubstantiation could
have uttered. It is in his Treatise Lib. 3. Tom. 1 8. p. 53.
de Doctrina Christiana; where laying down several Rules for the right
understanding of Scripture, he gives this for one. If (says he) the speech be a
precept forbidding some heinous wickedness or crime, or commanding us to do
good, it is not figurative; but if it seem to command any heinous wickedness or
crime, or to forbid that which is profitable and beneficial to others, it is
figurative. For example, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink
his blood, ye have no life in you: This seems to command a heinous wickedness
and crime, therefore it is a figure; commanding us to communicate of the
passion of our Lord, and with delight and advantage to lay up in our memory
that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. So that, according to St.
Austin's best skill in interpreting Scripture, the literal eating of the flesh
of Christ and drinking his blood would have been a great impiety; and therefore
the expression is to be understood figuratively; not as Cardinal Perron would
have it, only in opposition to the eating of his flesh and blood in the gross
appearance of flesh and blood, but to the real eating of his natural body and
blood under any appearance whatsoever: For St. Austin does not say, this is a
Figurative speech wherein we are commanded really to feed upon the natural body
and blood of Christ under the species of bread and wine, as the Cardinal would
understand him; for then the speech would be literal and not figurative: But he
says, this is a figurative speech wherein we are commanded Spiritually to feed
upon the remembrance of his Passion.

To these I will add but three or four Testimonies more in the two following
Ages.

The first shall be of Theodoret, who speaking of that Genesis 49. 11.
Prophecy of Jacob concerning our Savior, he washed his garments in Wine and
his clothes in the blood of grapes, has these words, Dialog. 1.
as we call the mystical fruit of the Vine (that is, the Wine in the Sacrament)
after consecration the blood of the Lord, so he (viz. Jacob) calls the blood of
the true Vine (viz. of Christ) the blood of the grape: but the blood of Christ
is not literally and properly but only figuratively the blood of the grape, in
the same sense as he is said to be the true Vine; and therefore the Wine in the
Sacrament after consecration is in like manner not literally and properly but
figuratively the blood of Christ. And he explains this afterward, saying, that
our Savior changed the names, and gave to his Body the name of the Symbol or
Sign, and to the Symbol or Sign the name of his Body; thus when he had called
himself the Vine, he called the Symbol or Sign his blood; so that in the same
sense that he called himself the Vine, he called the Wine, which is the Symbol
of his blood, his blood: For, says he, he would have those who partake of the
divine mysteries not to attend to the nature of the things which are seen, but
by the change of names to believe the change which is made by grace; for he who
called that which by nature is a body wheat and bread, and again likewise
called himself the Vine, he honored the Symbols with the name of his body and
blood: not changing nature but adding grace to nature. Where you see he says
expressly, that when he called the Symbols or Elements of the Sacrament, viz.
bread and Wine, his Body and Blood, he made no change in the nature of the
things, only added grace to nature, that is, by the Divine grace and blessing
he raised them to a Spiritual and Supernatural virtue and efficacy.

The Second is of the same Theodoret in his second Dialogue between a
Catholic, under the name of Orthodoxus, and an Heretic under the name of
Eranistes; who maintaining that the Humanity of Christ was changed into the
substance of the Divinity (which was the Heresy of Eutyches) he illustrates
the matter by this Similitude, As, says he, the Symbols of the Lord's body and
blood are one thing before the invocation of the Priest, but after the
invocation are changed and become another thing; So the body of our Lord after
his ascension is changed into the divine substance. But what says the
Catholic Orthodoxus to this? why, he talks just like one of Cardinal Perron's
Heretics, Thou art, says he, caught in thy own net: because the mystical
Symbols after consecration do not pass out of their own nature; for they remain
in their former substance, figure and appearance and may be seen and handled
even as before. He does not only deny the outward figure and appearance of the
Symbols to be changed, but the nature and substance of them, even in the proper
and strictest sense of the word substance; and it was necessary so to do,
otherwise he had not given a pertinent answer to the similitude urged against
him.

The next is one of their own Popes, Gelasius, who brings the same Instance
against the Eutychians; Biblioth. Patr. ^om. 4.
surely, says he, the Sacraments which we receive of the body and blood of our
Lord are a divine thing, so that by them we are made partakers of a divine
nature, and yet it cease not to be the substance or nature of bread and Wine;
and certainly the image and resemblance of Christ's body and blood are
celebrated in the action of the mysteries, that is, in the Sacrament. To make
this Instance of any force against the Euty^h^ans, who held that tho body of
Christ upon his ascension ceased and was changed into the substance of his
Divinity, it was necessary to deny that there was any substantial change in the
Sacrament of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ. So that here
is an infallible authority, one of their own Popes expressly against
Transubstantiation.

The last Testimony I shall produce is of Facundus an African Bishop, who lived
in the 6th. Century. Upon occasion of justifying an expression of one who had
said that Christ also received the adoption of Sons, he reasons thus. Facund.
p. 144. edit. Paris. 1676.
Christ vouchsafed to receive the Sacrament of adoption both when he was
circumcised and baptized: And the Sacrament of Adoption may be called adoption,
as the Sacrament of his body and blood, which is in the consecrated bread and
cup, is by us called his body and blood: not that the bread, says he, is
properly his body and the cup his blood, but because they contain in them the
mysteries of his body and blood; hence also our Lord himself called the blessed
bread and cup which he gave to his Disciples his body and blood. Can any man
after this believe, that it was then, and had ever been, the universal and
received Doctrine of the Christian Church, that the bread and wine in the
Sacrament are substantially changed into the proper and natural body and blood
of Christ?

By these plain Testimonies which I have produced, and I might have brought a
great many more to the same purpose, it is I think evident beyond all denial
that Transubstantiation has not been the perpetual belief of the Christian
Church. And this likewise is acknowledged by many great and learned men of the
Roman Church. In Sent. l. 4. Did. 11. Q. 3.
Scotus acknowledges, that this Doctrine was not always thought necessary to
be believed, but that the necessity of believing it was consequent to that
Declaration of the Church made in the Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent
the III. And In Sent. l. 4. did. 11. q. 1. ^. 15.
Durandus freely discovers his inclination to have believed the contrary, if
the Church had not by that determination obliged men to believe it. de ^nchar.
l. 1. p. 146.
Tonstal Bishop of Durham also yields, that before the Lateran Council men were
at liberty as to the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament. And In 1.
Epist. ad Corinth. c. 7. citante etiam Salmerone, Tom. 9. Tract. 16. p. 108.
Erasmus, who lived and died in the communion of the Roman Church, and than
whom no man was better read in the ancient Fathers, does confess that it was
late before the Church defined Transubstantiation, unknown to the Ancients both
name and thing. And de Haeres. l. 8.
Alphonsus a Castro says plainly, that concerning the Transubstantiation of the
bread into the body of Christ, there is seldom any mention in the ancient
Writers. And who can imagine that these learned men would have granted the
ancient Church and Fathers to have been so much Strangers to this Doctrine, had
they thought it to have been the perpetual belief of the Church? I shall now in
the

Second place, give an account of the particular time and occasion of the
coming in of this Doctrine, and by what steps and degrees it grew up and was
advanced into an Article of Faith in the Romish Church. The Doctrine of the
corporal presence of Christ was first started upon occasion of the Dispute
about the Worship of Images, in opposition whereto the Synod of Constantinople
about the year DCCL did argue thus, That our Lord having left us no other image
of himself but the Sacrament, in which the substance of bread is the image of
his body, we ought to make no other image of our Lord. In answer to this
Argument the second Council of Nice in the year DCCLXXXVII did declare, that
the Sacrament after Consecration is not the image and antitype of Christ's body
and blood, but is properly his body and blood. So that the corporal presence of
Christ in the Sacrament was first brought in to support the stupid worship of
Images: And indeed it could never have come in upon a more proper occasion, nor
have been applied to a fitter purpose.

And here I cannot but take notice how well this agrees with de Eucharist. l.
1. c. 1.
Bellarmine's Observation, that none of the Ancients who wrote of Heresies,
has put this error (viz. of denying Transubstantiation) in his Catalogue; nor
did any of the Ancients dispute against this error for the first 600 years.
Which is very true, because there could be no occasion then to dispute against
those who denied Transubstantiation; since, as I have shown, this Doctrine was
not in being, unless amongst the Eutychian Heretics, for the first 600 years
and more. But Ibid.
Bellarmine goes on and tells us, that the first who called in question the
truth of the body of the Lord in the Eucharist were the ICONOMACHI (the
opposers of Images) after the year DCC in the Council of Constantinople; for
these said there was one image of Christ instituted by Christ himself, viz. the
bread and wine in the Eucharist, which represents the body and blood of Christ:
Wherefore from that time the Greek Writers often admonish us that the Eucharist
is not the figure or image of the body of the Lord, but his true body, as
appears from the VIIth. Synod; which agrees most exactly with the account which
I have given of the first rise of this Doctrine, which began with the corporal
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and afterward proceeded to
Transubstantiation.

And as this was the first occasion of introducing this Doctrine among the
Greeks, so in the Latin or Roman Church Paschasius Radbertus, first a Monk, and
afterward Abbat of Corbey, was the first broacher of it in the year DCCCXVIII.

And for this, besides the Evidence of History, we have the acknowledgment of
two very Eminent Persons in the Church of Rome, Bellarmine and Sirmondus, who
do in effect confess that this Paschasius was the first who wrote to purpose
upon this Argument. de Scriptor. Eccles.
Bellarmine in these words, This Author was the first who has seriously and
copiously written concerning the truth of Christ's body and blood in the
Eucharist: And in vita Paschas^^.
Sirmondus in these, he so first explained the genuine sense of the Catholic
Church, that he opened the way to the rest who afterward in great numbers
wrote upon the same Argument: But though Sirmondus is pleased to say that he
only first explained the sense of the Catholic Church in this Point, yet it
is very plain from the Records of that Age which are left to us, that this was
the first time that this Doctrine was broached in the Latin Church; and it met
with great opposition in that Age, as I shall have occasion hereafter to show.
For Rabanus Maurus Archbishop of Mentz about the year DCCCXLVII reciting the
very words of Paschasius wherein he had delivered this Doctrine, has this
remarkable passage concerning the novelty of it; Epist. ad Heribaldum. c. 33.
Some, says he, of late, not having a right opinion concerning the Sacrament of
the body and blood of our Lord, have said that this is the body and blood of
our Lord which was born of the Virgin Mary, and in which our Lord suffered upon
the Cross and rose from the dead: which error, says he, we have opposed with
all our might. From whence it is plain, by the Testimony of one of the greatest
and most learned Bishops of that Age, and of eminent reputation for Piety, that
what is now the very Doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning the Sacrament,
was then esteemed an Error broached by some particular Persons, but was far
from being the generally received Doctrine of that Age. Can any one think it
possible, that so eminent a Person in the Church both for piety and learning,
could have condemned this Doctrine as an Error and a Novelty, had it been the
general Doctrine of the Christian Church, not only in that but in all former
Ages; and no censure passed upon him for that which is now the great burning
Article in the Church of Rome, and esteemed by them one of the greatest and
most pernicious Heresies?

Afterward in the year MLIX, when Berengarius in France and Germany had raised
a fresh opposition against this Doctrine, he was compelled to recant it by Pope
Nicholas and the Council at Rome, in these words, Gratian. de consecrat.
distinct. 2. Lanfranc. de corp. and sang. Domini. c. 5. Gu^tmund. de Sacram. l.
1. Alger. de Sacram. l. 1. c. 19.
that the bread and wine which are set upon the Altar, after the consecration
are not only the Sacrament, but the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and are sensibly, not only in the Sacrament but in truth, handled and
broken by the hands of the Priest, and ground or bruised by the teeth of the
faithful. But it seems the Pope and his Council were not then skillful enough
to express themselves rightly in this matter; for the Gloss upon the Canon Law
says expressly, Gloss. Decret. de consecrat. did. 2. in cap. Ego Berengarius.
that unless we understand these words of BERENGARIVS (that is in truth of the
Pope and his Council) in a sound sense, we shall fall into a greater Heresy
than that of BERENGARIVS; for we do not make parts of the body of Christ. The
meaning of which Gloss I cannot imagine, unless it be this, that the Body of
Christ, though it be in truth broken, yet it is not broken into parts (for we
do not make parts of the body of Christ,) but into wholes: Now this new way of
breaking a Body, not into parts but into wholes (which in good earnest is the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome) though to them that are able to believe
Transubstantiation it may for any thing I know appear to be sound sense, yet to
us that cannot believe so it appears to be solid nonsense.

About XX years after, in the year MLXXIX Pope Gregory the VIIth. began to be
sensible of this absurdity; and therefore in another Council at Rome made
Berengarius to recant in another Form, viz. Waldens. Tom. 2. c. 13.
that the bread and wine which are placed upon the Altar are substantially
changed into the true and proper and quickening flesh and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and after consecration are the true body of Christ, which was
born of the Virgin, and which being offered for the Salvation of the World did
hang upon the Cross, and sits on the right hand of the Father.

So that from the first starting of this Doctrine in the second Council of Nice
in the year DCCLXXXVII, till the Council under Pope Gregory the VIIth. in the
year MLXXIX, it was almost three hundred years that this Doctrine was
contested, and before this misshapen Monster of Transubstantiation could be
licked into that Form in which it is now settled and established in the Church
of Rome. Here then is a plain account of the first rise of this Doctrine, and
of the several steps whereby it was advanced by the Church of Rome into an
Article of Faith. I come now in the

Third place, to answer the great pretended Demonstration of the impossibility
that this Doctrine, if it had been new, should ever have come in, in any Age,
and been received in the Church; and consequently it must of necessity have
been the perpetual belief of the Church in all Ages: For if it had not always
been the Doctrine of the Church, when ever it had attempted first to come in
there would have been a great stir and bustle about it, and the whole Christian
World would have rose up in opposition to it. But we can show no such time when
it first came in, and when any such opposition was made to it, and therefore it
was always the Doctrine of the Church. This Demonstration Monsieur Arnauld, a
very learned Man in France, pretends to be unanswerable: whether it be so or
not, I shall briefly examine. And

First, we do assign a punctual and very likely time of the first rise of this
Doctrine, about the beginning of the ninth Age; though it did not take firm
root nor was fully settled and established till toward the end of the eleventh.
And this was the most likely time of all other, from the beginning of
Christianity, for so gross an Error to appear; it being, by the confession and
consent of their own Historians, the most dark and dismal time that ever
happened to the Christian Church, both for Ignorance, and Superstition, and
Vice. It came in together with Idolatry, and was made use of to support it: A
sit prop and companion for it. And indeed what tares might not the Enemy have
sown in so dark and long a Night; when so considerable a part of the Christian
World was lulled asleep in profound Ignorance and Superstition? And this agrees
very well with the account which our Savior himself gives in the Parable of
the Tares, of the springing up of Errors and Corruptions in the Field of the
Church. Matthew. 13. 24.
While the men slept the Enemy did his work in the Night, so that when they
were awake they wondered how and whence the tares came; but being sure they
were there, and that they were not sown at first, they concluded the Enemy had
done it.

Secondly, I have shown likewise that there was considerable opposition made to
this Error at its first coming in. The general Ignorance and gross
Superstition of that Age rendered the generality of people more quiet and
secure, and disposed them to receive any thing that came under a pretense of
mystery in Religion and of greater reverence and devotion to the Sacrament, and
that seemed any way to countenance the worship of Images, for which at that
time they were zealously concerned. But notwithstanding the security and
passive temper of the People, the men most eminent for piety and learning in
that Time made great resistance against it. I have already named Rabanus
Archbishop of Mentz, who opposed it as an Error lately sprung up and which
had then gained but upon some few persons. To whom I may add Heribaldus Bishop
of Auxerres in France, Io. Scotus Erigena, and Ratramnus commonly known by the
name of Bertram, who at the same time were employed by the Emperor Charles the
Bald to oppose this growing Error, and wrote learnedly against it. And these
were the eminent men for learning in that time. And because Monsieur Arnauld
will not be satisfied unless there were some stir and bustle about it, Bertram
in his Preface to his Book tells us, that they who according to their several
opinions talked differently about the mystery of Christ's body and blood were
divided by no small Schism.

Thirdly, Though for a more clear and satisfactory answer to this pretended
Demonstration I have been contented to untie this knot, yet I could without all
these pains have cut it. For suppose this Doctrine had silently come in and
without opposition, so that we could not assign the particular time and
occasion of its first Rise; yet if it be evident from the Records of former
Ages, for above D. years together, that this was not the ancient belief of the
Church; and plain also, that this Doctrine was afterward received in the Roman
Church, though we could not tell how and when it came in, yet it would be the
wildest and most extravagant thing in the world to set up a pretended
Demonstration of Reason against plain Experience and matter of Fact. This is
just Zeno's Demonstration of the impossibility of motion against Diogenes
walking before his Eyes. For this is to undertake to prove that impossible to
have been, which most certainly was. Just thus the Servants in the Parable
might have demonstrated that the tares were wheat, because they were sure none
but good seed was sown at first, and no man could give any account of the
punctual time when any tares were sown, or by whom; and if an Enemy had come to
do it, he must needs have met with great resistance and opposition; but no such
resistance was made, and therefore there could be no tares in the field, but
that which they called tares was certainly good wheat. At the same rate a man
might demonstrate that our King, his Majesty of great Britain, is not returned
into England, nor restored to his Crown; because there being so great and
powerful an Army possessed of his Lands, and therefore obliged by interest to
keep him out, it was impossible He should ever come in without a great deal of
fighting and bloodshed: but there was no such thing, therefore he is not
returned and restored to his Crown. And by the like kind of Demonstration one
might prove that the Turk did not invade Christendom last year, and besiege
Vienna; because if he had, the most Christian King, who had the greatest Army
in Christendom in a readiness, would certainly have employed it against him;
but Monsieur Arnauld certainly knows, no such thing was done: And therefore
according to his way of Demonstration, the matter of fact, so commonly reported
and believed, concerning the Turks Invasion of Christendom and besieging Vienna
last year, was a perfect mistake. But a man may demonstrate till his head and
heart ache, before he shall ever be able to prove that which certainly is, or
was, never to have been. For of all sorts of impossibles nothing is more
evidently so, than to make that which has been not to have been. All the
reason in the world is too weak to cope with so tough and obstinate a
difficulty. And I have often wondered how a man of Monsieur Arnauld's great wit
and sharp Judgment could prevail with himself to engage in so bad and baffled a
Cause; or could think to defend it with so wooden a Dagger as his Demonstration
of Reason against certain Experience and matter of Fact: A thing, if it be
possible, of equal absurdity with what he pretends to demonstrate,
Transubstantiation it self. I proceed to the

Third pretended Ground of this Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and that is,
The infallible Authority of the present Church to make and declare new Articles
of Faith. And this in truth is the ground into which the most of the learned
men of their Church did heretofore, and many do still resolve their belief of
this Doctrine: And, as I have already shown, do plainly say that they see no
sufficient reason, either from Scripture or Tradition, for the belief of it:
And that they should have believed the contrary had not the determination of
the Church obliged them otherwise.

But if this Doctrine be obtruded upon the world merely by virtue of the
Authority of the Roman Church, and the Declaration of the Council under Pope
Gregory the VIIth. or of the Lateran Council under Innocent the III. then it is
a plain Innovation in the Christian Doctrine, and a new Article of Faith
imposed upon the Christian world. And if any Church has this power, the
Christian Faith may be enlarged and changed as often as men please; and that
which is no part of our Savior's Doctrine, nay, any thing though never so
absurd and unreasonable, may become an Article of Faith obliging all Christians
to the belief of it, whenever the Church of Rome shall think fit to stamp her
Authority upon it: which would make Christianity a most uncertain and endless
thing.

The Fourth pretended ground of this Doctrine is, the necessity of such a
change as this in the Sacrament to the comfort and benefit of those who receive
it. But there is no color for this, if the thing be rightly considered:
Because the comfort and benefit of the Sacrament depends upon the blessing
annexed to the Institution. And as Water in Baptism, without any substantial
change made in that Element, may be the Divine blessing accompanying the
Institution be effectual to the washing away of Sin, and Spiritual
Regeneration; So there can no reason in the world be given why the Elements of
Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper may not, by the same Divine blessing
accompanying this Institution, make the worthy receivers partakers of all the
Spiritual comfort and benefit designed to us thereby, without any substantial
change made in those Elements, since our Lord has told us, that verily the
flesh profits nothing. So that if we could do so odd and strange a thing as
to eat the very natural flesh and drink the blood of our Lord, I do not see of
what greater advantage it would be to us than what we may have by partaking of
the Symbols of his body and blood as he has appointed in remembrance of him.
For the Spiritual efficacy of the Sacrament does not depend upon the nature of
the thing received, supposing we receive what our Lord appointed, and receive
it with a right preparation and disposition of mind, but upon the supernatural
blessing that goes along with it, and makes it effectual to those Spiritual
ends for which it was appointed.

The Fifth and last pretended ground of this Doctrine is, to magnify the power
of the Priest in being able to work so great a Miracle. And this with great
pride and pomp is often urged by them as a transcendent instance of the Divine
wisdom, to find out so admirable a way to raise the power and reverence of the
Priest; that he should be able every day, and as often as he pleases, by
repeating a few words to work so miraculous a change, and (as they love most
absurdly and blasphemously to speak) to make God himself.

But this is to pretend to a power above that of God himself, for he did not,
nor cannot make himself, nor do any thing that implies a contradiction, as
Transubstantiation evidently does in their pretending to make God. For to make
that which already is, and to make that now which always was, is not only vain
and trifling if it could be done, but impossible because it implies a
contradiction.

And what if after all Transubstantiation, if it were possible and actually
wrought by the Priest, would yet be no Miracle? For there are two things
necessary to a Miracle, that there be a supernatural effect wrought, and that
this effect be evident to sense. So that though a supernatural effect be
wrought, yet if it be not evident to sense it is to all the ends and purposes
of a Miracle as if it were not; and can be no testimony or proof of any thing,
because it self stands in need of another Miracle to give testimony to it and
to prove that it was wrought. And neither in Scripture, nor in profane
Authors, nor in common use of speech, is any thing called a Miracle but what
falls under the notice of our senses: A Miracle being nothing else but a
supernatural effect evident to sense, the great end and design whereof is to be
a sensible proof and conviction to us of something that we do not see.

And for want of this Condition, Transubstantiation, if it were true, would be
no Miracle. It would indeed be very supernatural, but for all that it would not
be a Sign or Miracle: For a Sign or Miracle is always a thing sensible,
otherwise it could be no Sign. Now that such a change as is pretended in
Transubstantiation should really be wrought, and yet there should be no sign
and appearance of it, is a thing very wonderful, but not to sense; for our
senses perceive no change, the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament to all our
senses remaining just as they were before: And that a thing should remain to
all appearance just as it was, has nothing at all of wonder in it: we wonder
indeed when we see a strange thing done, but no man wonders when he sees
nothing done. So that Transubstantiation, if they will needs have it a Miracle,
is such a Miracle as any man may work that has but the confidence to face men
down that he works it, and the fortune to be believed: And though the Church of
Rome may magnify their Priests upon account of this Miracle, which they say
they can work every day and every hour, yet I cannot understand the reason of
it; for when this great work (as they call it) is done, there is nothing more
appears to be done than if there were no Miracle: Now such a Miracle as to all
appearance is no Miracle I see no reason why a Protestant Minister, as well as
a Popish Priest, may not work as often as he pleases; or if he can but have the
patience to let it alone, it will work it self. For surely nothing in the world
is easier than to let a thing be as it is, and by speaking a few words over it
to make it just what it was before. Every man, every day, may work ten thousand
such Miracles.

And thus I have dispatched the First part of my Discourse, which was to
consider the pretended grounds and Reasons of the Church of Rome for this
Doctrine, and to show the weakness and insufficiency of them. I come in the

Objections against it. Which will be of so much the greater force, because I
have already shown this Doctrine to be destitute of all Divine warrant and
authority, and of any other sort of Ground sufficient in reason to justify it.
So that I do not now object against a Doctrine which has a fair probability of
Divine Revelation on its side, for that would weigh down all objections which
did not plainly overthrow the probability and credit of its Divine Revelation:
But I object against a Doctrine by the mere will and Tyranny of men imposed
upon the belief of Christians, without any evidence of Scripture, and against
all the evidence of Reason and Sense.

The Objections I shall reduce to these two Heads. First, the infinite scandal
of this Doctrine to the Christian Religion. And Secondly, the monstrous and
insupportable absurdity of it.

First, The infinite scandal of this Doctrine to the Christian Religion. And
that upon these four accounts. 1. Of the stupidity of this Doctrine. 2. The
real barbarousness of this Sacrament and Rite of our Religion upon supposition
of the truth of this Doctrine. 3. Of the cruel and bloody consequences of it.
4. Of the danger of Idolatry; which they are certainly guilty of, if this
Doctrine be not true.

1. Upon account of the stupidity of this Doctrine. I remember that Tully, who
was a man of very good sense, instanceth in the conceit of eating God as the
extremity of madness, and so stupid an apprehension as he thought no man was
ever guilty of. De Not. D^orum l. 3.
When we call, says he, the fruits of the earth Ceres, and wine Bacchus, we use
but the common language; but do you think any man so mad as to believe that
which he eats to be God? It seems he could not believe that so extravagant a
folly had ever entered into the mind of man. It is a very severe saying of
Averroes the Arabian Philosopher (who lived after this Doctrine was entertained
among Christians) and ought to make the Church of Rome blush, if she can;
Dionys. Carthus. in 4. did. 10. art. 1.
I have traveled, says he, over the world, and have found diverse Sects; but so
sottish a Sect or Law I never found, as is the Sect of the Christians; because
with their own teeth they devour their God whom they worship. It was great
stupidity in the People of Israel to say, come let us make us Gods; but it was
civilly said of them, Let us make us Gods that may go before us, in comparison
of the Church of Rome, who say, Let us make a God that we may eat him. So that
upon the whole matter I cannot but wonder that they should choose thus to expose
Faith to the contempt of all that are endued with Reason. And to speak the
plain truth, the Christian Religion was never so horribly exposed to the scorn
of Atheists and Infidels, as it has been by this most absurd and senseless
Doctrine. But thus it was foretold that 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
the Man of Sin should come with power and Signs and Lying Miracles, and with
all deceivableness of unrighteousness, with all the Legerdemain and juggling
tricks of falsehood and imposture; amongst which this of Transubstantiation,
which they call a Miracle, and we a Cheat, is one of the chief: And in all
probability those common juggling words of hocus pocus are nothing else but a
corruption of hoc est corpus, by way of ridiculous imitation of the Priests of
the Church of Rome in their trick of Transubstantiation. Into such contempt by
this foolish Doctrine and pretended Miracle of theirs have they brought the
most sacred and venerable Mystery of our Religion.

2. It is very scandalous likewise upon account of the real barbarousness of
this Sacrament and Rite of our Religion, upon supposition of the truth of this
Doctrine. Literally to eat the flesh of the Son of man and to drink his blood.
St. Austin, as I have showed before, declares to be a great Impiety. And the
impiety and barbarousness of the thing is not in truth extenuated, but only
the appearance of it, by its being done under the Species of Bread and Wine:
For the thing they acknowledge is really done, and they believe that they
verily eat and drink the natural flesh and blood of Christ. And what can any
man do more unworthily toward his Friend? How can he possibly use him more
barbarously, than to feast upon his living flesh and blood? It is one of the
greatest wonders in the world, that it should ever enter into the minds of men
to put upon our Savior's words, so easily capable of a more convenient sense
and so necessarily requiring it, a meaning so plainly contrary to Reason, and
sense, and even to Humanity it self. Had the ancient Christians owned any such
Doctrine, we should have heard of it from the Adversaries of our Religion in
every page of their Writings; and they would have desired no greater advantage
against the Christians than to have been able to hit them in the teeth with
their feasting upon the natural flesh and blood of their Lord, and their God,
and their best Friend. What endless triumphs would they have made upon this
Subject? And with what confidence would they have set the cruelty used by
Christians in their Sacrament, against their God Saturn's eating his own
Children, and all the cruel and bloody Rites of their Idolatry? But that no
such thing was then objected by the Heathens to the Christians, is to a wise
man instead of a thousand Demonstrations that no such Doctrine was then
believed.

3. It is scandalous also upon account of the cruel and bloody consequences of
this Doctrine; so contrary to the plain Laws of Christianity, and to one great
end and design of this Sacrament, which is to unite Christians in the most
perfect love and charity to one another: Whereas this Doctrine has been the
occasion of the most barbarous and bloody Tragedies that ever were acted in the
world. For this has been in the Church of Rome the great burning Article; and
as absurd and unreasonable as it is, more Christians have been murdered for
the denial of it than perhaps for all the other Articles of their Religion. And
I think it may generally pass for a true observation that all Sects are
commonly most hot and furious for those things for which there is least Reason;
for what men want of Reason for their opinions they usually supply and make up
in Rage. And it was no more than needed to use this severity upon this
occasion; for nothing but the cruel fear of death could in probability have
driven so great a part of mankind into the acknowledgment of so unreasonable
and senseless a Doctrine.

O blessed Savior! thou best Friend and greatest lover of mankind, who can
imagine thou did ever intend that men should kill one another for not being
able to believe contrary to their senses; for being unwilling to think, that
thou should make one of the most horrid and barbarous things that can be
imagined a main Duty and principal Mystery of thy Religion; for not flattering
the pride and presumption of the Priest who says he can make God, and for not
complying with the folly and stupidity of the People who believe that they can
eat him?

4. Upon account of the danger of Idolatry; which they are certainly guilty of
if this Doctrine be not true, and such a change as they pretend be not made in
the Sacrament; for if it be not, then they worship a Creature instead of the
Creator God blessed for ever. But such a change I have shown to be impossible;
or if it could be, yet they can never be certain that it is, and consequently
are always in danger of Idolatry: And that they can never be certain that such
a change is made, is evident; because, according to the express determination
of the Council of Trent, that depends upon the mind and intention of the
Priest, which cannot certainly be known but by Revelation, which is not
pretended in this case. And if they be mistaken about this change, through the
knavery or crosness of the Priest who will not make God but when he thinks fit,
they must not think to excuse themselves from Idolatry because they intended to
worship God and not a Creature; for so the Persians might be excused from
Idolatry in worshipping the Sun, because they intend to worship God and not a
Creature; and so indeed we may excuse all the Idolatry that ever was in the
world, which is nothing else but a mistake of the Deity, and upon that mistake
a worshipping of something as God which is not God.

II. Besides the infinite scandal of this Doctrine upon the accounts I have
mentioned, the monstrous absurdities of it make it insupportable to any
Religion. I am very well assured of the grounds of Religion in general, and of
the Christian Religion in particular; and yet I cannot see that the foundations
of any revealed Religion are strong enough to bear the weight of so many and so
great absurdities as this Doctrine of Transubstantiation would load it withal.
And to make this evident, I shall not insist upon those gross contradictions,
of the same Body being in so many several places at once; of our Savior's
giving away himself with his own hands to every one of his Disciples, and yet
still keeping himself to himself; and a thousand more of the like nature: But
to show the absurdity of this Doctrine I shall only ask these few Questions.

1. Whether any man have, or ever had greater evidence of the truth of any
Divine Revelation than every man has of the falsehood of Transubstantiation?
Infidelity were hardly possible to men, if all men had the same evidence for
the Christian Religion which they have against Transubstantiation, that is, the
clear and irresistible evidence of sense. He that can once be brought to
contradict or deny his senses, is at an end of certainty; for what can a man be
certain of if he be not certain of what he sees? In some circumstances our
senses may deceive us, but no Faculty deceives us so little and so seldom: And
when our senses do deceive us, even that error is not to be corrected without
the help of our senses.

2. Supposing this Doctrine had been delivered in Scripture in the very same
words that it is decreed in the Council of Trent, by what clearer evidence or
stronger Argument could any man prove to me that such words were in the Bible
than I can prove to him that bread and wine after consecration are bread and
wine still? He could but appeal to my eyes to prove such words to be in the
Bible, and with the same reason and justice might I appeal to several of his
senses to prove to him that the bread and wine after consecration are bread and
wine still.

3. Whether it be reasonable to imagine that God should make that a part of the
Christian Religion which shakes the main external evidence and confirmation of
the whole? I mean the Miracles which were wrought by our Savior and his
Apostles, the assurance whereof did at first depend upon the certainty of
sense. For if the senses of those who say they saw them were deceived then
there might be no Miracles wrought; and consequently it may justly be doubted
whether that kind of confirmation which God has given to the Christian
Religion would be strong enough to prove it, supposing Transubstantiation to be
a part of it: Because every man has as great evidence that Transubstantiation
is false, as he has that the Christian Religion is true. Suppose then
Transubstantiation to be part of the Christian Doctrine, it must have the same
confirmation with the whole, and that is Miracles: But of all Doctrines in the
world it is peculiarly incapable of being proved by a Miracle. For if a Miracle
were wrought for the proof of it, the very same assurance which any man has of
the truth of the Miracle he has of the falsehood of the Doctrine, that is, the
clear evidence of his senses. For that there is a Miracle wrought to prove that
what he sees in the Sacrament is not bread but the body of Christ, there is
only the evidence of sense; and there is the very same evidence to prove that
what he sees in the Sacrament is not the body of Christ but bread. So that here
would arise a new Controversy, whether a man should rather believe his senses
giving testimony against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or bearing witness
to a Miracle wrought to confirm that Doctrine; there being the very same
evidence against the truth of the Doctrine, which there is for the truth of the
Miracle: And then the Argument for Transubstantiation and the Objection against
it would just balance one another; and consequently Transubstantiation is not
to be proved by a Miracle, because that would be, to prove to a man by some
thing that he sees, that he does not see what he sees. And if there were no
other evidence that Transubstantiation is no part of the Christian Doctrine
this would be sufficient, that what proves the one does as much overthrow the
other; and that Miracles which are certainly the best and highest external
proof of Christianity are the worst proof in the world of Transubstantiation,
unless a man can renounce his senses at the same time that he relies upon them.
For a man cannot believe a Miracle without relying upon sense, nor
Transubstantiation without renouncing it. So that never were any two things so
ill coupled together as the Doctrine of Christianity and that of
Transubstantiation, because they draw several ways and are ready to strangle
one another; because the main evidence of the Christian Doctrine, which is
Miracles, is resolved into the certainty of sense, but this evidence is clear
and point blank against Transubstantiation.

4. And Lastly, I would ask what we are to think of the Argument which our
Savior used to convince his Disciples after his Resurrection that his Body was
really risen, and that they were not deluded by a Ghost or Apparition? Is it a
necessary and conclusive Argument or not? Luke 24. (...), 39.
And he said unto them, why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your
hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self; for a Spirit has
not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. But now if we suppose with the Church
of Rome the Doctrine of Transubstantiation to be true, and that he had
instructed his Disciples in it just before his death, strange thoughts might
justly have risen in their hearts, and they might have said to him; Lord, it is
but a few days ago since thou did teach us not to believe our senses, but
directly contrary to what we saw, viz. that the bread which thou gave us in
the Sacrament, though we saw it and handled it and tasted it to be bread, yet
was not bread but thine own natural body; and now thou appealest to our senses
to prove that this is thy body which we now see. If seeing and handling be an
unquestionable evidence that things are what they appear to our senses, then we
were deceived before in the Sacrament; and (...) they be not, then we are not
sure now that this is thy body which we now see and handle, but it may be
perhaps bread under the appearance of flesh and bones, just as in the
Sacrament, that which we saw and handled and tasted to be bread was thy flesh
and bones under the form and appearance of bread. Now upon this supposition, it
would have been a hard matter to have quieted the thoughts of the Disciples:
For if the Argument which our Savior used did certainly prove to them that
what they saw and handled was his body, his very natural flesh and bones,
because they saw and handled them, (which it were impious to deny) it would as
strongly prove that what they saw and received before in the Sacrament was not
the natural body and blood of Christ, but real bread and wine: And
consequently, that according to our Savior's arguing after his Resurrection
they had no reason to believe Transubstantiation before. For that very Argument
by which our Savior proves the reality of his body after his Resurrection does
as strongly prove the reality of bread and wine after Consecration. But our
Savior's Argument was most infallibly good and true, and therefore the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation is undoubtedly false.

Upon the whole matter I shall only say this, that some other Points between
us and the Church of Rome are managed with some kind of wit and subtilty, but
this of Transubstantiation is carried out by mere dint of impudence and facing
down of Mankind.

And of this the more discerning persons of that Church are of late grown so
sensible that they would now be glad to be rid of this odious and ridiculous
Doctrine. But the Council of Trent has fastened it to their Religion and made
it a necessary and essential Point of their Belief, and they cannot now part
with it if they would; it is like a Millstone hung about the neck of Popery
which will sink it at the last.

And though some of their greatest Wits, as Cardinal Perron, and of late
Monsieur Arnaud, have undertaken the defense of it in great Volumes; yet it is
an absurdity of that monstrous and massy weight, that no humane authority or
wit are able to support it: It will make the very Pillars of St. Peter's crack,
and requires more Volumes to make it good than would fill the Vatican.

And now I would apply my self to the poor deluded People of that Church, if
they were either permitted by their Priests or durst venture without their
leave to look into their Religion and to examine the Doctrines of it. Consider,
and show your selves men. Do not suffer your selves any longer to be led
blindfold, and by an implicit Faith in your Priests, into the belief of
nonsense and contradiction. Think it enough and too much to let them rook you
of your money for pretended Pardons and counterfeit Relics, but let not the
Authority of any Priest or Church persuade you out of your senses. Credulity is
certainly a fault as well as Infidelity: and he who said, blessed are they that
have not seen and yet have believed, has no where said, blessed are they that
have seen and yet have not believed, much less, blessed are they that believe
directly contrary to what they see.

To conclude this Discourse. By what has been said upon this Argument it will
appear, with how little truth, and reason, and regard to the interest of our
common Christianity it is so often said by our Adversaries, that there are as
good arguments for the belief of Transubstantiation as of the Doctrine of the
Trinity: When they themselves do acknowledge with us that the Doctrine of the
Trinity is grounded upon the Scriptures, and that according to the
interpretation of them by the consent of the ancient Fathers: But their
Doctrine of Transubstantiation I have plainly shown to have no such ground, and
that this is acknowledged by very many learned men of their own Church. And
this Doctrine of theirs being first plainly proved by us to be destitute of all
Divine warrant and Authority, our Objections against it from the manifold
contradictions of it to Reason and Sense are so many Demonstrations of the
falsehood of it. Against all which they have nothing to put in the opposite
Scale but the Infallibility of their Church, for which there is even less
color of proof from Scripture than for Transubstantiation it self. But so fond
are they of their own Innovations and Errors, that rather than the Dictates of
their Church, how groundless and absurd soever, should be called in question;
rather than not have their will of us in imposing upon us what they please,
they will overthrow any Article of the Christian Faith, and shake the very
foundations of our common Religion: A clear evidence that the Church of Rome is
not the true Mother, since she can be so well contented that Christianity
should be destroyed rather than the Point in question should be decided against
her.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of the several Cases, etc.
1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England.

2. A. Resolution of some Cases of Conscience which respect Church Communion.

3. The Case of Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, proposed and
stated, by considering these Questions, etc.

4. A Discourse about Edification.

5. The Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of Englands
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England?

6. A Letter to Anonymus, in answer to his three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about
Church Communion.

7. Certain Cases of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining
with Forms of Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts.

8. The Case of mixed Communion: Whether it be Lawful to Separate from a Church
upon the account of promiscuous Congregations and mixed Communions?

9. An Answer to Dissenters Objections against the Common Prayers and some
other parts of Divine Service prescribed in the Liturgy of the Church of
England.

10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament stated and resolved, etc. In
two Parts.

11. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and of going to hear where Men think
they can profit most.

12. A serious Exhortation, with some important Advices relating to the late
Cases about conformity, recommended to the present Dissenters from the Church
of England.

13. An Argument to Union; taken from the true interest of those Dissenters in
England who profess and call themselves Protestants.

14. Some Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving Offense to the
Weak Brethren.

15. The Case of Infant Baptism, in Five Questions, etc.

16. the Charge of Scandal; and giving Offense by Conformity, Refelled and
Reflected back upon Separation, etc.

17. Case of Lay-Communion.

18. A Persuasive to Frequent Communion.

19. A Defense of Symbolizing.

20. A Vindication of Indifferent Things.

21. The Case of Compelling Men to the Holy Sacrament.

22. A Case of the Cross in Baptism.

23. A Discourse of Conscience.

1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther?

2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and what
Tradition is to be received, and what Tradition is to be rejected.

3. The Difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the
Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England.

4. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.

5. A Discourse concerning a Guide in matters of Faith, etc.

6. A Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints.

7. A Discourse concerning the Unity of the Catholic Church, maintained in the
Church of England.

8. A Discourse of Auricular Confession.

9. A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Demonstration of the Messiah. In which the Truth of the Christian Religion
is proved, especially against the Jews, By Richard Kidder, in Octavo. Printed
for B. Aylmer.


