THE BOTTOMLESS PIT Smoking in FAMILISME As may appear by ashort discourse on
Gal. 1.9. together with some breef notes on AB. COPP^^ Recantation Sermon (as
'twere) Preached at Burford: Sept. 23. 1651.

By JOHN TICKELL Min^^^^^ to the Church in ABING^ON Berks

This may serve for a Key to Familisme ('till another) opening to most (if not
all) their chambers of Imagery.

Also, to vindicate the true Gospel, God, and Scripture-purity, and answer
several weig^ty questions concerning the Mystical Union.

There shall arise false Christ's, etc. Mat. 24.24.

Printed at Oxford by L. ^ for (...) Anno. D^^ 165^.

To the Reverend his honored Father Mr GEORGE HUGHES, Pastor of the Church in
Plymouth DEVON.
Honored Sir,
I Can never tell the World how much I owe you, Natures account is much but
that of Grace is more: you have me on both in eternal obligations bound as
yours. Rich and free grace all powerful love, through your self as the
instrument, Gave me my true, my best, my lasting, I mean my spiritual being,
the form of Christ in me. Not Familistically.
Sir I bless God for Himself, his Son, his Spirit, his Gospel, your self.
What cause Sir have I to bless God for you? you have begotten, nouresht,
brought me up as your own Son in the Gospel. I will not like Jacob pluck my
Brother by the heel. Who ever were the first; I bless God I was not the last
of your first fruits in Tavestocke Devon. Sir I am a plant of your planting,
watering and a member, and a Minister in the Church of Christ. unworthy of
either, (but blessed be God for both) who planteth a vineyard, and eats not
the fruit thereof, I send you here a cluster, I would they were either fair or
ripe: they are yet too green for your taste: however they are the first fruits
from a slip of your own. I beg your Acceptance, I am sure of your protection
-- what I am and have is yours, blessed be God, that I have the honor to
subscribe

your Son in the Gospel J. TICKELL.
Abingdon October. 3. 1651.
To All that love the Lord JESUS in or near BURFORD
Grace and Peace.
SPECIAL providence brought me to Burford, had there not been more of Gods
will then of my will in it, I had not been there that day, nor staid there that
hour: some suspected a design: I can assure them, I knew not of any lecture
there that day, till as I was riding by the Churchyard, one told me that Mr
Coppe was then to Preach, having not long before heard of his Recantation and
liberty, I was very willing to understand of the work of God upon him: upon
this account I hastened to the Church, when I came to the door, I saw there
much people ready to hear, but the Pulpit empty, and no one there as yet to
Preach. I was no sooner thinking, whether I were best to stay that hour, or
immediately to return from whence I came, then I was pressed in Spirit, a
Scripture with strong impressions being presented to me, to take the
opportunity of speaking something to the People, ere Mr Coppe came in. This
motion put me on motion toward the Pulpit, from whence (assistance from God
desired) this exhortation such as it is was then delivered a Gospel blessing
rest upon it, Preached and Printed. So much may serve for that.

If any desire the knowledge of my Commission let them read Mark. 16.5. Math.
28.19, 20. 2 Timothy 4.2. from thence take satisfaction. as for my principle, the
searcher of hearts best knows it, to whom I shall refer inquiries: only thus
much, I am not a Son of contention: I love truth and peace: nay more then this,
my over-love to peace has often wronged truth, but the blood of sprinkling wash
this away. Notwithstanding this, 'has been my lot to pass^ by peace, for twice
or thrice, to stand by truth: the prince of peace once taught me this. my soul
bleeds when I hear the person, the nature, the offices, the undertakings, the
death, the blood, the Righteousness, that
all-glorious-soule-saving-imputative-righteousnesse of the Lord Jesus Christ,
blaspheamed. I had rather ye would rend my bowels, stab me to the heart, spill
my blood as water upon the ground, then reproach, blaspheme, despise, that
blood, which was the price of my redemption, God will judge for this. Should
not I speak, the stones would, man's blood cries, but Christ's cries loud. The
Lord deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse. through his grace, I am resolved the
blood of souls, the blood of Christ shall not be laid to my account, when
their avenger makes inquisition, and comes to reckon. I judge not Mr Coppe, but
experience tells me, that some, he knows, can more closely deceive then ever,
to be plain, I met with one not long since, that told me my self and twenty
more, that he that had two natures was Antichrist: again, he that said that
Christ had two natures is The Antichrist. farther, he that says the fullness
of the Godhead dwells not in us in the same way and manner as it did in Christ,
is The Antichrist. the man passes for a convert, but God convert him. enough
for that.

If any ask what makes this untimely birth abroad, with this homely dress,
until another let them take this answer.

1. Truth will abroad as well as error, and reason good: she lives in light.

2. Truth is best seen naked. error like a Strumpet, dares not appear without
a mantle, a painted face, a gorgeous dress. a crucified Christ would have a
crucified style: I desire to know no other Christ, I am sure this Gospel
without the wisdom of man's words is the power of God unto salvation.

3. Fantastic preaching, hearing, praying, writing in the great sin of our
age. Luther was not of the garb, wherein most of our late admired Preachers
have appeared. I wish good men would seriously consider and lay to heart, the
advantage which Familisme has taken from their seraphicall notions and
speculations. O that some had not set Truth on tenter-hookes to reach their
phancies. Christ will give them but little thanks for this. for mine own part
I desire rather to be understood, then admired, I am not willing to be taken by
the ignorant or the unlearned as a Barbarian. I would have the meanest
capacities take in my notions, especially such as have universal relation to
faith and practice. When I speak to the meanest, I am sure the chiefest
understand me. For the thing it self. I must acknowledge it is an hasty birth,
but blessed be God for this, as for these whence had I them? Well, I most
gladly glory in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.
and this too such as it is. if God own it, as he did, the enemies themselves
being judges, I Will own it too, and pray that the blessing of the Father of
Lights may rest upon it: that what is wanting in these lines, may be made up in
your hearts. A farther account of their public view take thus.

1. When I had done, Mr Coppe did again and again, under most dreadful
execrations profess his assent, and that particularly to the principal points
which were delivered by me.

Whether willingly, or unwillingly, truly and syncerely, or faignedly, and
Reservedly. (though I suspect) God is his judge and knows his heart, and will
reckon unto him all those curses, which he reckoned unto himself, if he were
not right in this.

If Mr Coppe be a real friend to these truths, and as they were delivered,
blessed be God, that once a blasphemer is now a Gospell-preacher.

If Mr Coppe be still an enemy, and like the Devil appears in All forms for
his advantage, the World shall know the most diabolical Hippocrisies of such
blasphemers.

There was one passage, as eminent among all the rest, dropped from him. Let me
be accursed (said he) and that with an Anathema maranatha, if I deny any one of
all those things which were delivered by him.

Should this fall to the ground? no, through Gods help it shall not.

1. Truth shall triumph as well as conquer.

2. It shall not loose one testimony, which may, to good effect, proclaim its
sovereignty and divinity.

The Gospel would not loose a testimony from ehe devils mouth, to the divinity
of this son of God, whose cause we now take up. This testimony is
considerable. whether free or forced. if free: see here what Truth will do, it
will at length prevail. if Mr Coppes Recantation be right, and God have
changed his heart these lines will not offend him. If forced: then see what God
can do for truth. let the World know, that at such a time, and such a place,
God over ruled his tongue, suppressed his rage, and made him speak for truth.

2. As this may serve to proclaim Gods truth, so Mr Coppes conversion and true
return (if such) to ways of truth, and let those know who have been formerly
deceived by him, what he now professes, that ye also if God will, may be
informed, convinced, and converted.

3. But if ye know Coppes mind in this, and he prove a dissembler and a
deceiver still: I say, I will not judge him, I do profess I do suspect him,
then let these lines, the pillars in that house, the stones in those walls
within which these things were first delivered, rise up in judgment, and bear
witness against the wretch in the great day of the Lord Jesus, and let his
damnation which of a long time slumbreth not, be proved from God as just, and
himself as inexcusable.

As for the notes on the principal passages of his Sermon: they serve.

1. To clear the truth by me asserted, and by Coppe in the former part of his
discourse with execrations owned.

2. To vindicate the Scriptures purity, verity and harmony.

3. To let the World know, that Familists have double tongues, and can
sometimes use both at once for their advantage. A Familist before a Committee
at Redding could say Christ was not God, and yet at Ildesly could say, the
fiery deity of Christ did mingle and mix it self with our flesh, and was in
the center of our Souls, burning and consuming etc. and at the same time at
Redding, could call in all with I meant not so. Mr Coppe said, Christ was
crucified at Jerusalem, Cursed were the man that should deny it: and that
Christ was crucified at Sodom and at Egypt, and Cursed was he that should not
say it: what is his meaning I cannot tell: but let that pass.

4. These notes do likewise serve to vindicate the Spotles purity, and
holiness of God, from those black and hellish imputations of sins original,
approbation, liberally conferred upon his Holy, pure, spotless, being, nature,
word, and will, and power. One told me a while since professedly, that the
Devil was God appearing in darkness and distance. Coppe himself told me too
once in Newgate, that light and darkness was all one to God, speaking upon
this account of sin. there is something in the wind, to use his own expressions
in his Sermon and Recantation.

The Parliaments Act concerning Ranters, has done blessed be God for it, much
good. but occasionally (as Gods laws) provokes some to sin the more, if not in
one kind yet another 'thas made the Devil break out in another strain. he
loves not Newgate so well, as to speak directly, however, he is resolved, he
will be known to be the same, Collaterally; but more of this anon.

Christian friends, for your sakes I have done this, the Lord bless it. I
shall desire but one or two things from you, and so conclude.

First I beseech you study, and keep to the true Gospel, recorded in the
Scriptures of truth, preached by the God of truth in our natures, and those
that heard him, and received it from him. the Son of God has with his own
blood sealed it.

To it, even to this Gospel, have the Apostles and Martyrs, in several ages,
with their bloods witnessed.

It Is that Gospel which never can, though to the price of your bloods too be
overvalued.

It Is that Gospel which will maintain it self, and maintain you, by which you
must be saved, and its accursed despisers and blaspheamers damned. o be tender
of Gospel Truths, and the God of Gospel truths you shall find, as tender of
your comforts.

You see whither men run, when they forsake the Gospel. (whether the Scriptures
or Ordinances, or most especially the Christ of the Gospel, the Imputative
righteousness of our Gospel-Christ. (it seems I mistook Mr Coppe, when I
spoke against a Righteousness within us of our own, though of Gods working,
as the matter of our Acceptance, or the Gospel righteousness. refined
Familists are for this, in opposition to the imputed righteousness of Christ,
the grosser sort of them know none at all, but that which bears conformity to
hell. to whom light and darkness, purity and uncleanness, God and Satan make
but one. the Lord rebuke you. I say you see whether they run, they seldom
stop, till they come to irreligion, to Atheism, nay what shall I call it, Hell
it self. where I leave them, unless God show mercy to them which I suspect
will never be.

2. Let Accursed Gospellers be accursed by you -- their Doctrines, their
Persons with their doctrines, bid them not good speed ((...)) the ordinary
salutation, least you be partakers of their sins, and of their judgments. I
mean their plagues. of which a reprobate judgment to refuse the truth, and
entertain the wrong, is not the least. Contend earnestly for the faith which
was delivered to the Saints. I must conclude, the fullness of the blessing of
the Gospel rest upon you

In the Gospel-Christ, I am yours to further your Gospel-Interest in what I may
J. T
Abingdon October. 3. 1651.
A Sermon preached immediately before M. Coppe came in to Preach at Burford
Sept. 23. 1651.
GALAT. 1. 8, 9. Though we or an Angel from Heaven should preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that which we have Preached unto you, let him be
accursed: as I said before, so say I now again, if any man Preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that which you have received, let him be accursed.


THe words are the Apostles censure past on all false Gospels, and such Gospel
preachers: it is short, but sharp; they are, and let them be accursed.

As for the occasion of the words and the Epistle, you may understand, Galatia
was a newly planted-Church, the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ
had lately broken in upon them, in purity and with power. the Apostles had so
Preached it, these Galatians had so received it.

It seems it fell out with them, as with most other Churches, not only in
ours, but the Apostles times where ever God had yet his Church, there the
Devil would have his Chapel. He Will have his Gospel and his Preachers too,
though both accursed.

There were some troublers, perverters of this glorious Gospel of Christ crept
in among them, and as it seemed overthrew the faith of some. I marvel that
you are so soon removed etc. from him that called you into the Grace of Christ.
to be removed from the sound profession of the Gospel, which is the doctrine of
the free and rich grace of God, saving sinners by a Christ, his righteousness,
his death v. 6. his blood, his sacrifice, is to be removed from
God-Salvation-Grace, to another Gospel, any other doctrine of salvation, beside
that by the grace of Christ, is another Gospel far different from, and
directly contrary to, that Gospel which God revealed, and declared, which is
not another. though the Devil and false Apostles may conspire to frame and
devise another Gospel, then the true Gospel, revealing Salvation by the grace
of Christ, yet it is no true Gospel. there is but one Gospel, there is not
another Gospel, beside that one which is indeed a Gospel, brings glad tidings
of salvation. there is not another Gospel. to us there is but one God, one
salvation, one Mediator, one Faith, one Gospel. against such Gospels and
Gospellers, the Apostle opposes these two or three verses, which I have read.

He tells them their troublers were the Perverters of the Gospel, nay more then
so, these Perverters and their Doctrines were both accursed, and so to be
accounted by them, whatever they might pretend themselves, or theirs to be.
Might the Apostle say, be sure there is no other Gospel, no more to be
revealed for Gospel truth, ^hen what we have made known unto ^ou, and what you
have already recei^ed, and entertained. Talk not of new ^ight, Revelations,
New-teachings, this or that, though we our selves, or an Angel from heaven,
could you be infallibly persuaded, he came from the throne of Glory etc. yet
believe him not, there are no new Editions, to be expected of the true Gospel.
No more additions or alterations to be past upon it, Christ has sealed it up
with his own blood, and revealed unto us fully, clearly, by his infallible, and
unerring spirit. So we have Preached it, so you have Received it. I tell you,
there is no other Gospel, though we or an Angel from heaven should Preached
etc. Thus for the occasion and scope of this Text. I shall be very plain and
brief in what shall follow. For observations take these

1. Obs.

You shall hear of such in the purest Churches, the Primitive Churches,
Churches planted even by the Apostles themselves. Gos. Pist. Romans 1. Cor. 15
John met with such as denied the Divinity of the Son of God. Paul such as
denied the Imputative Righteousness of Jesus Christ, the Resnrrection of the
Dead. Some there were that told them the Resurrection was past already, of whom
was Hymaneus and Philetus. 2. Tim. 2.16.17. etc.

It cannot be more strange now in our days, on whom the very ends of the world
are come: Our blessed Savior for 1600 years ago foretold us this, read
through the 24th Chap. of Matthew, and there you will see that even in these
dais, there are to be false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, and if it were possible, deceive the very Elect: they shall
say lo here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, but believe them not, take
heed that no man deceive you. Here Is a Prophecy of false Teachers, even the
grossest in these latter Ages of the World, note first their Doctrine, they
hold new Christ's, and many Christ's, several Christ's, lo here, and lo there a
Christ, even as many Christ's as men. Secondly their growth, their ptogresse, to
deceive even the very Elect. The Temptation it seems must fall hard even upon
the Elect of God, not the grosser part only of the world, but even the very
Elect should be quite (were it not Impossible) to be deceived by them. Such as
belong to Election, given to Christ, taken into an everlasting Covenant with
God, it may go hard with them, but because of their Election, they shall not be
finally deceived. Thirdly, Their power, signs, and wonders, but for lying
wonders, we have enough of those. Fourthly, Take this Caution, think not this
strange, when it comes to pass, see I have told you, be not deceived there
will be, if Christ be true, false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall
deceive, and utterly deceive many, though the Elect shall stand. So you have in
2. Pet. 2. throughout, and in the Epistle of Jude, there shall be false
Teachers, even denying the Lord that bought them. Damnable Heresy, they bring
upon themselves swift destruction, read the Chapter, and the 3. verse of Jude,
ungodly men denying the only Lord God, and even our Lord Jesus Christ, turning
the grace of God into Lasciviousness, (as some of these say, let us sin that
grace may abound,) even as Sodom and Gomorrah and the Cities about them, in
like manner giving themselves over to Fornication, and going after strange
Flesh, filthy Dreamers, note that, I have heard enough of them, defile the
flesh, despise Dominion, speak evil of Dignities, etc. these are spotts, etc.
woe unto them.

Think it not strange if you meet with such now, the Scripture is true, they
make it good, you are forewarned, their Gospel are cursed Gospels, but of this
anon.

2. Obs.

That it is the work of the Ministry of the true and everlasting Gospel of God
in Christ, as to Preach this Gospel to every Creature, to take all
opportunities for this, and to lay out themselves in this, so to defend this
Gospel, and to take all opportunities, and to lay out their strength, and to
bestir themselves with might and maine, in maintaining this true, and opposing
all false Gospels, and perverters of the true.

You shall find this was the work of the true Prophets against the false: the
true Apostles against the false Apostles. The Apostles themselves had as much
to do, in preserving Churches, as in planting them, in defending the true
doctrines of the Gospel as in Preaching. The series and scope of most of their
Epistles are taken up with this.

See the charge which Paul gives unto the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Acts
20. from 28. to 32. read the Scripture.

It Is a special commendation which Christ gave the Angel of the Church, of
Ephesus, Revel. 3.
I know thy works, and thy labor. etc. how thou can not bear with them that
are evil, and thou have tried them which say they are Apostles and are not,
and have found them liars, etc. Paul's words in 20. Acts (there shall grievous
wolves com in among you) it seems were true, etc. and for my namesake have
labored, and have not fainted. O it is an excellent thing to spend, and be
spent for the sake of the name of Christ, to labor and not faint. This Angel
had his faults too, but yet this was praiseworthy, that the deeds of the
Nicolaitans he hated, which he also hated, what ere this generation were, it
appears they were too bad. Some would have them of near kin to these sprung
up in our generations, etc. a filthy beastly sect it seems it was. God hates
such, and the Ministers of the gospel should hate such Wretches, Jude.
for they are accursed.

Contend then earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints,
or else the blood of Christ, the blood of Souls, will cry against you. Paul
buckles himself against them, our matter which we have now to do with, is
other-guess'd matter, then that which Paul had: (the point of Circumcision, and
Jewish observations imposed on the Gentiles, though that were bad enough) the
whole Gospel perverted, the very Foundations overturned in their Doctrines, the
Person, the Office, Understandings, the Righteousness, the Death, the Blood, the
Gospel, the Ordinances, the ways of Christ Blaspheamed and reproached, some
turning the very grace of God into lasciviousnes, denying even the Lord that
bought them, giving themselves over unto uncleanness, to follow all manner of
lasciviousnes, and that with greediness. How should we plead with this
Accursed Generation, you that love Christ, hate these.

3. Obs. That Gospel which Paul preached, and the Apostles preached, and in the
Scripture is recorded, which holds out the grace of God in Christ unto
salvation, that is the true Gospel, be side this thereis no other, and this
Gospel is the rule, and Standard of all Gospel doctrine: by which all men's
doctrine must be tried.

This Gospel is the Everlasting Gospel' the same Gospel which was from the
beginning. Revel. 14.6.
The Fathers knew no other Gospel, glad tidings of salvation but through the
blood death and Righteousness of Christ. The Apostles received no other Gospel
from Christ, they preached no other the Churches planted by them received no
other, into this, and this alone they were baptized? There is, there can be,
no other Gospel or doctrine of salvation, but this, there is no other name,
Act. 4.14
by which we can be saved, but only by the name of the Lord Jesus, and that
as, dying upon the Cross, at Jerusalem, for our sins, according to the
Scripture.

Let all other Gospel be tried by this. If they speak not according to this
they are accursed Gospels.

I shall give you some Characters of true-Gospel doctrine and preachers. I had
rather show you the true then rake all dunghils for the false, truth will
manifest error. I take this as the maine. That Is the true Gospel, and they are
the true-Gospel preachers, that lay the whole weight and burden of our
salvation on the Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, the son of man Equal with
God, that is God, yet God in our flesh, our nature I mean not our particular
persons, as they would have it, who despise this Christ, they lay salvation on
a Christ within them, this Christ within, in the Gospel sense, is true but in
theirs is grossly false. however the stresse of our salvation lies not there,
that may be an Evidence, an Earnest of salvation but Christ in the womb of
the virgin Mary, Christ lying in the manger, Christ living in Judaea, that
poor despised Christ, that Carpenters son, as some abominably call him, is the
true Christ; and the strength of our salvation: that Christ, that lived here on
earth in a low mean way was crucified at Jerusalem, dying upon the Cross,
lying in the grave, arising again the third day, visibly and corporally
ascending into heaven, and fitting now there at the right hand of the Majesty
on high, that's the true Christ, and our Savior, that Christ, that shall come
again in the same visible way, bodily way, and manner, as he went up into
heaven, to judge the World, render to quick and dead, Good and bad, every man,
all flesh, according to their deeds done in the flesh, that shall take his
Saints into heaven, and curse the wicked and blaspemous to eternal torments:
that's the true Christ, and the true Gospel places Salvation in this Christ and
in no other. This is our Savior, our Redeemer, neither is there Salvation in
any other. not in Men, not in Angels, no not in God himself abstracted from
this Christ that was borne of Mary, lay in the manger, died on the Cross do
ye know what God out of that Christ is? he is a consuming fire. Everlasting
burning, and who shall dwell with him? shall stubble? God out of that Christ
considered is an Idol not our God. for God is now God manifest in our flesh,
in our nature, the flesh that was at Jerusalem upon the Cross, now in heaven.

2. That Is the true Gospel which holds out the true salvation, and true
damnation, the states of men after this life. Salvation it is true in some sense
is begun here, in title, earnest, first fruits. but salvation, to speak fully
and properly of salvation, is a state to come. the wrath from which we are
saved, is a wrath to come, and the great Evil of sin, though I say some be
here, is yet to come Even then when Christ, that Christ, of whom we speak
shall appear. not to our fancies, not in the work of grace, neither in the
special tokens of his spiritual presence, but appear bodily, corporally,
visibly. then shall we see him as he is, and not till then. then shall he
appear unto our complete Salvation, and not till then. other salvation there
is not. vile wretches ye are that would destroy and annihilate salvation it
self: We shall have our bodies, and with these eyes shall we then see our
sweet redeemer. Salvation is not a fancy. it is real and for its fullness it is
yet to come. first comes death and judgment, and then complete salvation. and
for damnation and hell, let fools make a mock of Hell, they shall find there
is another hell, beside that fancied hell of theirs in this life, some of them
(I will not say all) are ordained of old unto this destruction, they are
reserved in chains of darkness, to the blackness of the darkness of that
day. He that believes shall be saved, but he that believes not he shall be
damned.

3. The true Gospel lays the maine cause of our salvation next to the work of
God the father, on the obedience, on righteousness, Rem. 1.17. Romans 3.25. Romans
5. Es. 53. Heb. 10.
on the sufferings, on the death, on the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ his
soul presented unto God as an offering, a sacrifice, a propitiation for our
sins, making satisfaction to divine justice, bearing, the wrath of God, which
was due unto us for our sins. He was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. ult.
though he knew no sin, our sin was imputed unto him, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him, that his Righteousness might be Imputed unto
us for our Righteousness. Romans 9.6.
thus the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, as it reveals this
righteousness of Christ (imputed to us) from faith to faith the gospel places
the maine cause of our salvation, not in any thing within us, but without us,
not as righteousness, though wrought in us by the power of God, but a
righteousness without us in the person of the Son of God, Romans 5.
that was made flesh, and dwelt among us. There is no other saving name but
this. you are saved by the merits alone of that precious blood, Acts 20.
that very corporal blood of the man crucified at Jerusalem as ye call him. 1
Pet. 1.17.


4. Romans 3.25. Mark. 16.16.
That Is the true gospel which holds out the true application of these merits of
Christ unto us, in believing, by faith, which holds out the true faith, as
carrying in it these few particulars.

1. True gospel faith, saving faith has this for its general argument, it
sets its seal to all Scripture truth, 1 Ino 4.2.3. Ino, 1.1.
a free and a powerful assent to the whole doctrine of the gospel.
particularly, that the man at Jerusalem, as they call him, was and is the Son
of God. God blessed for ever.

2. That he is true man, God-man Immanuell. Es. 7. Mat. 1.
these two natures meet in one person. one told me not long since, that he that
had two natures in one person was Antichrist.

3. That he is our Mediator sufficient, 1 Timothy 2.5.
only mediator, surety, between God and us.

4. That he lived, died, rose again, ascended. Sits in glory, shall visibly
come again, judge the World, and whatever else the Scripture speaks of him.

5. Heb. 10.
That his death was a sacrifice for sin. That it is his imputative
righteousness, by which we are justified, on the account of which our sins are
pardoned, our souls accepted, saved, etc.

6. Ino 6. 1 Cor. 15.
That there is a life, a salvation to corn, a judgment, a resurrection of the
body. I know not how any man can be saved that denies any of these. I am sure
he that professedly blasphemes any one of all these, so living and so dying he
shall not. he that believes not shall be damned. Mar. 16.16.

Take heed bow ye depart from the faith, least ye depart from salvation with it.

If you be saved by Christ's righteousness, mediation, you must believe all these
truths and more.

2. Romans 3.25.
True gospel faith carries the soul of it self, and from of any thing else,
and applies it, by a clinging and a cleaving of the soul, unto Christ above fo
Salvation.

It casts the soul upon that person, hi offices, his righteousness, the
merits o^ his death and sufferings, and there expects Salvation, and no where
else, like a shipwrackt creature that catches at a planke, and on that lays
hold to come to shore. Not one fallen soul shall come alive to shore (that ever
heard of Christ and the Gospel) but this way.

Faith casts the soul on Christ the son of God, the son of Mary, and if
there be no salvation in this crucified Christ, 'twill be content to perish in
those floods of guilt, and flames of wrath, to all eternity. 1 Cor. 2.2
it knows no other, it will have none else, Christ, and none but Christ for me.

3. Romans 6.
That Is the true faith which purifies the heart, and transformes the soul into
the likeness of this death of Christ, to dye to sin to live to righteousness,
there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
and they are such as walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, as have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Faith derives a power from
the death of Christ to kill us to sin, and sin to us there is the likeness
of his death brought home unto us, and wrought within us, but this is not (as
Familists would have) that death of Christ by which we are saved, and have our
sins pardoned, our persons justified, this is the consequent, the fruit of
that.

Such Gospel, and such faith as leads unto Licentiousness, that is a false
Gospel, an accursed Gospel, and such Preachers are cursed Preachers, so living
and so dying, Heb. 12.
ye shall never see God. without holiness no man shall see the Lord.

You see the true Gospel, you may hereby know the false. they that deny that
deny that Christ, his righteousness, reproach his blood, his death, that deny
those Gospel truths, they that preach not this faith; take this from me, (but
not from me, take it from God himself) their Gosples, they are false accursed
Gospells, and such preachers they are false and cursed Preachers, they are so
to God, they should be so to you. and that's the next point. with which I end.

Other Gospels, and Gospel-pretending-preachers besides the true, the old, the
everlasting, they are accursed Gospels, accursed gospel perverters: God so
looks upon them, and so should all good men.

An accursed thing what is that? It Is a thing most abominable, detestable, to be
abhorred by all that come a near it. like the accursed things that were under
the law accursed. Deuteronomy. 2.26.

2. An accursed thing (such as these gospels) is such as render every person,
thing it touches or comes near unto accursed. Josh. 6.18.
you know what it was with Achan, the accursed thing rendered him accursed, and
some of this fell upon the whole camp; and accursed gospel is the plague of
the person, that preaches it, that hears it, to entertaines it, the plague of
the place to which it comes, and where such like are: unless detested,
abhorred, looked upon both as to their persons and doctrines as accursed, by
all that know them.

O what a curse goes with false gospel, what delusions, Romans 1. 2 These. 2.11.
what a reprobate mind? what horrid wickednesses bring they with them? leave
once Christ, his truth, and gospel, and entertain a legion of unclean Devils.
nay more, even the best of such, if there be any that belong to God, as some
there be. what a spot get they. I never knew any one yet, though I have known
many of this generation that ever came of roundly to the ways of truth, to a
Crucified Christ. Some may escape, but it is an hard matter if they die not in
these sins, read Heb. 6.4. what hopes there are of such, and 2 Pet. 2.20, 21,
22. I cannot note it now. it is a dreadful word to me. Oh what a curse goes
there along with false gospels. many of them profess to return to ways of
truth, and some may write their recantations; but lord show mercy to them, they
have that abiding on them, which denotes a curse, a plague in error.

3. An accursed gospel in gospel sense binds over to the curse indeed, the
wrath of God, everlasting burnings. the very bottomeles gulf of hell. 2 Pet.
2.1.
if Christ's blood don't sprinkle them (as it is rare if ever) they are damned for
ever. I Will speak it boldly as their doom: such as wilfully blaspheame the name
of Christ, and turn apostates from him, damnation is theirs, there is no hope
for them. see a most dreadful Scripture 10 of the Heb. and then judge whether
this be true. in the beginning you have Christ in his death and blood preached
to remission of sin, as we have now preached it, in the 26 you see the
sentence on Apostates: if we sin wilfully, after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, the truth that is in Jesus, there remains no more
sacrifice for sin, I tremble to read this Scripture, and to think of their
forlorn condition: there is no hope no help, but a certain fearful looking
for of judgment. a certain, o there is the dreadful word, as God is true,
these shall not live but dye, read the 28s of how much sorer punishment.
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant a vain thing, or an unholy, a
common thing, and has done despite unto the spirit of grace, once enlightening
him, and working somewhat on him still shining in the Scripture to him but
rejected by him.

We know him that has said vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense
says the Lord. it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God. Let me close up all with this exhortation which the Apostle in these words
gave unto his people. you see what the true Gospel is, what false gospels are,
o be persuaded to sacrifice your souls upon this Gospel. and forall other
gospels, who ever bring them, whether we our selves, who have preached this true
Gospel unto you, and which you have received, I say whoever, whether we our
selves, or others, nay an Angel himself from heaven, (should he by infallible
demonstrations make it out unto you, that he came from the throne of God)
believe them not, abhor them, their doctrines their persons and such
Preachers, look upon them as upon the plague, as upon the Devil himself, they
are accursed: touch not with them, their doctrines their principles, Ioh. ep. 2.
least you be partakers of their sins, and partakers of their plagues. I
beseech you in the bowel. of the Lord Jesus Christ, as ye love his person,
prize his righteousness, expect salvation by him, as you look that his blood,
his death, his mediation, his intercession should save your immortal souls,
keep and hold to this his Gospel, let none deceive you, let the truths of
Christ (the least of which is worth your souls) the blood of Christ, the
ordinance of Christ, the works of Christ, the ways of Christ be precious to
you. o tender his name, that he may tender yours, stick close and cleave to
him, that he may cleave and stick close to you. his gospel is the true Gospel,
the power of God to save y our souls, though we or an Angel from heaven should
preach any other gospel unto you, then this which we have Preached and you
received. What I said before, I say again, and not I but the Holyghost
himself, (men may say we speak in passion, and we rage and rail, but God
himself says it, and the Apostle by the inspiration of the blessed Spirit
speaks it) let them be accursed AMEN.

Animadversions on Mr COPPS Sermon at BURFORD:
Wherein is cleared the doctrine of the Gospel in general, in special, the
Person of Christ, His Righteousness, His union, presence with us, Scriptures
harmony, Gods purity, etc.

WHen I had done, Mr Coppe began: he first Prayed and after Preached: as for
his Prayer, I shall not meddle with it, I heard but little of it, and of what I
heard, I knew not what to make: some told me he began as Aristotle ended, Thou
being of beings, with another new-coyn'd appellation, unlimited Almightinesse.
I refer these points to that God that heard it. As for his Sermon, it
contained two parts, the first had most relation to what I had spoken in my
exhortation: The second concerned the text in Esaias 40. ult. Who gave Jacob to
the spoil, and Israel to the robbers, did not I the Lord.

In these two was much to be observed. I shall briefly note the chiefest in it.

As for the former part of his discourse which referd to mine, something in it
concerned my self, and otherwhat the matter.

For what concerned my self, there was a hint of Usurpation.

Ans. My preaching there and then, was not from usurpation. I was called to it
by God, Mark. 16. 2 Timothy 4.11.
its a general Gospel warrant Go preach the Gospel to every creature, we will
take in the Apostles limitation in another general, Let every thing be done in
decency and in order. to apply it. I found a people there to hear, I had a
word from God to Preach, time and season suited with it. for order, had I known
the Minister, I would have craved his leave, I had it after. in the mean time,
though through a mistake, I took it for Mr Osburnes turn, on whom I would
presume, it made no stir. as far as I conceit 'twas done with decency and
in order. I was no Stage player, I bless God. his presence was in mine eye,
his fear upon mine heart, my matter was Evangelicall, my method clear and
plain, I know not an exotic term which Scripture does not use, or the
peoplet Mat heard it understand. I thank God my desire was to observe the form
of wholesome words, I wish others had done so too.

It Was said some preached they knew not what, and talked of Gospel, but did not
understand what Gospel was.

An. I ever took the Gospel, to hold out the doctrine of salvation by Jesus
Christ the son of God Containing in it good news, or glad tidings of salvation
in that way, to lost and undone sinners. I am sure this was gospel with Christ,
and Paul and all saints, as may appear by the exhortation. I desire to know no
other.

If M. Coppe have another gospel beside that which Paul and after him, I
preached I tell him.

That M. Coppe and his gospel are both accursed.

Will you know said M. Coppe what is the gospel? the gospel is the power of God.

An. If he mean what Paul meant, I grant it 3 his words seem to me to
Confound the gospel and the power of God, I put no meaning on M. Copps words,
am loath to misunderstand or represent him: but for the peoples sake.

I write not now to quarle with M. Coppe but to inform the people, as to this
question. How the Gospel is the power of God.

You must understand the gospel sometimes notes the matter contained in the
gospel, Q. 1. An.
as the person of Christ, his righteousness, the way of salvation by him,
especial in his Crucifixion, death for sin.

In this sense I understand, that the power of God unto salvation works. in
the person of Christ, Romans 1.17.
and through his righteousness applied unto us by faith, unto salvation. this is
the way of salvation even the righteousness of Christ etc. which is preached in
the gospel Gods power goes forth through this Christ, and no way else unto
salvation.

2. ibid.
The gospel notes the word the doctrine that holds out this salvation by Christ
whether written or preached: 1 Cor. 1.
so then understand: though the doctrine the preaching of salvation, through
the cross, be a way despised by the world, a Crucified Christ accounted a
weak a Contemptible savior, the doctrine, a foolish simple doctrine, and the
preaching of this by men a weak foolish and Contemptible thing.

Yet Gods power works this way unto salvation.

A crucified Christ carryeh in him both the wisdom and power of God unto
salvation. 1 Cor. 1. ult.
Gods wisdom and Gods power too shine in it unto Salvation: no way so wise, no
way so powerful because God appoints it, and God works with it, to a full
salvation.

2 The gospel preached, the Greeks count it foolishnes, and Jews weakness, but
Instrumentaly is the wisdom and the power of God.

God makes use of the foolishnes and the weakness of preaching to save those
that beleve, and so Christ Crucified in himself and in his gospel preached, is
both the wisdom of God and the power of God unto salvation. Let none despise
this gospel then. I am not ashamed of this gospel, Romans 1.16.
there might be more said, let this suffice. I will be brief and God willing
clear.

Gods power working in us holds not out so fully this gospel to us but as if
this very power were the very gospel: and we were to look for no other gospel.

I say the Gospel is the Gospel though Gods power be not actually put forth to
the Application of this Gospel unto salvation. (...)
the word is a good word, and an heart-gladding word, though thousands to whom
the gospel comes feel not this power.

The gospel is the power of God isntrumental, I mean the word and the word
preached is the instrument, the power of God, his being, put forth with
strength efficient, is the working, the principal working cause of this
salvation. you must distinguish between the tool which is used, and the force
the hand puts forth with this tool or instrument. strictly the tool is not
your hand or the working virtue in your hand.

Some men love to darken words without knowledge, merely that people may not
know where to find their meaning, others would abuse the Scripture but they
dare not speak plainly. 'twere a gross thing for a Familist especially new
converted, to say the glad tidings of Salvation by Christ contained in the
Scripture is not the gospel, if he say you understand not the Gospel it is the
power of God; he has his design, though we cannot take him.

If Mr Coppe mean, the gospel is the unlimited Almightinesse of God, with a
mighty power carrying him out to sin, swear, blaspheme. He be bold to tell
him, he is worse then the devil. I say not, this is his meaning. but if that
be his meaning, my words are plain and need no explanation. So much for that.

M. Coppe said there was much spoken after others.

If I spoke after Christ, after the Apostle, after the faithful witnessers to
gospel truth, I speak as I desire it seems it was no new gospel, but it
harmonized with Christ, prophets and Evangelist. I would not speak after mine
own spirit, nor after any but after Christ, and as they speak after Christ. I
tell you friends, our accursed gospellers love not the old way of God and
Christ in scriptures: ye must have something new, like Afrike; and that makes
them such monsters. I told you other gospels then the old gospel preached after
Christ and Paul (for patterns) are cursed Gospels. my soul abhorres them.

For other trivial things I let them pass.

As to the matter I beseech you ponder well these words.

As to the matter by me delivered Mr Coppe spoke two ways.

1. By way of Assent and Confirmation.

2. By way of Gloss, and Opposition. I say not an opposition of contrariety
and contradiction.

I have something to say to both these.

First. Let these lines make known, that Mr Coppe again and again with
dreadful curses, execrations, professed his assent in full words to several the
maine passages in mine exhortation. should I repeat the particulars, I should
transcribe the whole. I have therefore let the whole lie open to public view,
that the world may see, if Mr Coppe be right, what through Gods grace he is
brought to see.

If otherwise, what by Gods power he was made to say.

I intend it not to reproach him, but let the world receive this testimony from
him to these gospel truths.

1. The divinity. 2. The humanity. 3. The mediation. 4. The undertaking. 5. The
righteousness of Christ. 6. The resurrection of the dead, with several others
delivered by him, particularly in this form.

Let me be accursed, if I deny that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

Let me be accursed if I deny the Righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Let me be accursed if I deny the Resurrection of the body, etc.

At length to sum up all, as 'twas noted in the Epistle.

Let me be accursed, with an Anathema Maranatha, if I deny any one of all those
things that were delivered by him.

What I have to say upon the account of these assertions of divine truth under
execrations is briefly this.

I most gratefully accept these asseverations from Mr Coppe. I heartily thank
him for them, upon the account of truth, that he would so freely, so
pathetically profess his assent unto it. if he were ingenious, (I will not yet
question it) Christ and truth will thank him too. 2. Upon mine own account, I
thank him, that he would take so much pains as to repeat it, even in mine
own words, and to confirm it, as he did with execrations. I profess I had no
particular prejudice against his person as such, in my discourse, I thank him,
he expressed no more against mine in his.

1. I wish all Mr Coppes hearers would well consider his asseverations, that
such as have been deceived, would be informed, and as I said before, if God
will, convinced and converted.

2. I wish that all sound Christians would take notice, 1. Of the sovereignty
and divinity of Gospel Truth, even Mr Coppe himself does at length acknowledge
it. we thank God and him for it.

3. If Mr Coppe did defaulter with us, speak one thing and mean another. learn
from hence never more to trust a Familist, unless you can by better
demonstrations then their verbal recantations, make good their real
conversions to the ways of God and truth. 2. And as for him, if it may appear
by these notes or his own discourse, that he is the same what he was before,
only more cunning. 1. To preserve himself from bars and bolts, Newgate a
type of Hell. 2. To deceive others, the very picture of the Devil. I say if
this appear (I will not say it is so, though you may see my guess anon) then
1. let the World know what to expect, when the Bottomless pit is opened, and
the Devil loosed. 2. Let the people of God where ever they hear the name of
Coppe, look on it as accursed, either stop their ears, or pray to God, some
way or other to stop his mouth, that he may no more disse^ble, blaspheme. 3.
Let them likewise observe the mighty power of God which does accompany that
weak and foolish (so accounted gospel preaching, if not to convince, convert
save, yet to harden (judicially, from God, occasionally from the gospel,
efficiently from the Devil and man's own heart.) to kill to damn besides to
overawe to overpower: that hell it self shall not open its mouth, (sometimes,
this is not always,) to Contradict. if Coppe be still what he was before,
see here how God suppressed his rage, overul'd his tongue what a testimony to
divine truth, what a witness against himself, has the gospel God forced and
wrested from the wretches mouth. but of this before in the Epistle.

To the second his opposition, Reader understand, that Mr Coppe would now and
then oppose to what by me and himself was spoken, to what end I know not, I
shall give you the opposition, and then my thoughts.

As I remember this was the first, however let it be the first here. Christ was
Crucified at Jerusalem, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth if I deny
that. Christ was Crucified in Sodom and Egypt, cursed be he that denies this.
These words were again and again repeated, without a syllable to their
reconciliation or interpretation.

What might be his meaning let the World judge.

1. He tell you how Familists use to speak, and what they generally intend when
they thus speak.

2. I shall show you the Scripture meaning, as to those Assertions under this
Question. How is it said that Christ was Crucified at Jerusalem? How may it be
said that Christ was Crucified as in Sodom and Egypt.

1. Familists use to speak one thing and mean another: Por:
as you may see in the Epistle: One disputed with me about the Deity of Christ
before a Committee, he denied that Christ was God, or Jehovah, 'twas proved,
the man was charged by the Committee with it, he presently told them he meant
not so. the like.

Christ's Imputative righteousness is a saplesse righteousness, but he meant not
so. They will say and unsay in one breath.

2. Before the late Act against Raunters, they spoke boldly, now they dare not,
especially in points against the light of nature.

3. Since the pretense of the conversion of several of them to the way of
truth, they have a general strain of Clothing their corrupt notions with
sound words, especially such Scripture expressions as will bear a general
sense, as to Instance. They will tell you that Christ was Crucified at
Jerusalem, a sound expression, there general sense is true, he was Crucified
at Jerusalem, but in what sense? abominably corrupt, as a type and figure of
the true death of Christ in them (as they pretend.) An harmless Christian,
that would wrong none, and things none would wrong him, takes all well, the man
(says he) speaks truth, delivers special truth, he granted that Christ died
on the Cross, he does not deny that Christ died for our sins, according to
the Scripture but poor heart, he never intended thou should so apply it.
Again he will tell you, by Christ's blood, that you are saved: my self not long
since heard words like these, I thought no harm, but that by Christ's blood, the
man meant the meritorious cause of our salvation. But it seems it is one of
their cursed forms of swearing, like that, the plague of God take all flesh,
of cursing: I should tremble to write this, but to discover Familists --

4. It seems to me, from what I have known of them, they will put themselves
on all expressions, ways and windings, to keep themselves from being known,
but to their own: you shall not know where to find them, so as to fasten on
them, but their own shall know their meaning, and so may you when you have once
got their Key.

I have heard of canting Beggars, and seen some such books, for their sakes I
shall not easily believe some Recantations. A Key to Familisme has cost me
more than I Will now mention.

5. They are designers, and we may not be ignorant of their devices, they have
learnt these of their blasphemous ringleader, when it is for their purpose, they
will tell you Scripture speaks it for them, and none then shall speak for
Scripture, more then they. Another time they will let you know, they care no
more for Scripture then Gesta Romanorum, and likely scarce so much.

6. When they speak on the account of Scripture Revelation, they will tell you,
if you will believe it, that the Authentic Copy is their Imagination.

7. I find it is one of their close designs and undertakings, in undermining
Scripture, if possibly they can, to make one clash against another. Their drift
is to weaken the Verity, Harmony, and Purity of the Scripture, in the weakest
Imagination. When they have done that, they laugh, you are as they would have
it: they will set truth and Scripture as 'twere together by the ears, and sport
at it. I say Scripture they undermine, and they have an 100 ways for this,
whereof this is one now hinted.

8. Take this Rule wherever they be, they will be sure (I mean the craftiest
of them) to close in with you, in all discourses, duties, that they may promote
their design upon you: you shall find it, for a never failing observation,
they will first insinuate an interest in your affections, and then corrupt your
judgments. They will smile upon you, and cut your throat: use melting words,
Honny-sweet, smooth as oil, but full of poison. A Christ would they exalt
within, and who would not? meekness, love, peace, and righteousness would
they promote, who likes not this? but friends, their Christ within, is to
Crucify that Christ without, to crucify him as to your faith, your love, your
delight, your joy -- it will not be long ere ye hear of him, That he was the
Type, and but the Type of this within. God never intended that you should
besaved by the corporeal blood of a man, that is a fleshly Christ we know him.
So no more: abusing that Scripture, where Paul Preaches the spiritual strength
of the flesh and blood, the natural death of Christ in order to our
Reconciliation: we know not Christ, it is true, barely as in the flesh, but with
spiritual consideration, that blood as the price of our redemption that's the
mystery, Christ only dying that is but the History) on this farewell Christ,
farewell righteousness, farewell too I say, salvation. and what becomes of love
and meekness: Antichrist, The Antichrist? the mystery of Iniquity is the best
notion they can fasten on the Choicest Saints, and ways of holiness. I have had
the experience of these: and therefore let the world know, themselves know, I
do not wrong them.

9. Take this note likewise: there be several sorts of Familists, the devil
is cunning he draws them on by steps: and secondly Gods more gracious, they
would follow faster, but because they are his election, he will not so far
leave them.

I have heard of several sorts of devils some white, some black. some of
stronger parts, others more base, and servile, and beetle-headed. See Burton
melanch. it may be so, there are as many sorts of Familist.

10. These several sorts they have their several streynes: the Lascivious
Familist he turns all that way, the speculative the Scepticall Familist he
strikes another way, will go as far as hell in principle, though not in
practice. He say this for all, they all dance the devils dirge 1. he loves
variety, there were no pleasure for him else his sport might be sooner spoiled.

11. Their Common principle is this, (though some will say it, others Conceal
it they believe it.) God is All, and All is God, but whether am I gone, let me
now resolve the question. I hope if this may be counted a digression, yet not
from my main design, defense of truth, discovery of Enemies: It may be of
much use. if well read and weighed. I have many more, but they may serve for
another purpose. to the question.

Quest. How Christ was Crucified at Jerusalem, and at Sodom, and Egypt.

Sol. 1. I say Christ was literally Crucified at Jerusalem, I think none
question this, and therefore it needs no explanation. Christ Jesus did
literally hang there without the City upon the Cross, as a Sacrifice for our
sins.

2. I say too that Christ was Crucified at Sodom and Egypt. but How? these
places literally are far asunder, but hark a little, and you shall find them
in a safe Scripture sense, so near together, that I think 'twill be beyond
man's skill to put them once again asunder.

The Scripture in Rev. 11. v. 8. holds out the slaying of the witnesses. I pray
of whom speaks, the Scripture, Rev. 11.8.
when it speaks of these? are they not the Martyrs, that have testified to
Jesus under Romes cruelty? well.

What Is that City, that great City, in one street whereof, these latter
witnesses are slain? For shame let none but a popeling say, it is not Rome,
but it is well known, Papists and Familists can both agree to mangle Scripture,
and kill the witnesses. Well, and what do ye think is meant of Rome, and the
City? is it only the space of ground within Romes walls, or else the
territories belonging to it? I need speak no more.

1. It Is well known the Scripture speaks of Rome.

2. For its spiritual a dultery and cruelty.
It Is well known how fitly called Sodom and Egypt.

3. It Is well known that Rome takes in the Empire Romes jurisdiction.

4. It Is well known Jerusalem was under the power of Rome, and jurisdiction of
Rome, a street of that City to use the expression.

5. It Is as well known that Christ was crucified by a power from Rome.

Join these together, Christ was crucified in Jerusalem, his blood is reckoned
with the blood of all his members on Romes account, spiritually called Egypt
and Sodom, and good cause why the blood of Christ should lie upon the head of
that Scarlet Whore. 'twas within Rome that Christ was Crucified, within its
territories, by the power of Rome, that Christ was crucified. a child may
understand this.

I think likewise, few but understand how Christ is said to suffer with his
members, even in the same sense that they are said to be his members. I hope
none is so gross to take it in a gross sense, though I knew a Familist once
that did. I Will let that pass.

There is a crucifying of Christ, and puttiug him to an open shame, even now
while he is in glory, and Familists bloody hands cannot reach him in a literal
sense. See Heb. 10.28. etc.

I fear the crucifixion of Christ may be too sadly put upon their account, and
they will find it so, when God comes to render recompense. how have they
tortured Christ in Scripture? how reproachfully have they spoken of the death,
the cross, the blood, the person of Christ? I fear this will be reckoned and
accounted Crucifying the Lord of glory. surely, they will be found as guilty of
the body and blood of Christ, as those that discern not the Lords-body in the
Sacrament. 1 Cor. 11.
the murder has more accessaries then we are aware of. as bad as the
principal agents, nay ten thousand times worse. So much for that.

Let the Second opposition be this.

Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, cursed be the man that denies that.
Christ is born or formed in you, and cursed be the man that denies that.
I desire the reader to view once again the characters of Familists noted but
now, and then judge of this. The key of Familisme will show all the Chambers of
Imagery in this too. I Will not consider these words now as Mr Coppes, but first
what use a Familist would make of this opposition. yet not all that use which a
Familist knows to put it to.

1. He would Amuse his simple hearers.

2. He would carry on his design o^ undermining Scripture, and Scripture truth.

3. He would let you know that Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, that you
might not know, but count him orthodox.

4. He would let his brother Familists to understand, that he was their own. (I
mean such, as are well acquainted with their Canting, and something too of the
kinds of their Recantings.)

5. Should he speak his mind in plai^ English, he would let you know. Christ
borne of Mary true, but that is not the true birth of Christ, that was but a
type, there is the birth of Christ within you, and that is the true Christ, and
the true birth.

I say this use a skillful Familist would make of such an opposition. Mr Coppe
knows best whereto he might intend it. I charge him not: not because I fear
him, but God. I would not wrong him, and that is the principle I go upon.
perchance there may be a work of God upon him, and it comes on but by degrees.
I bless God if there be any -- I hope it will do him no hurt if truth be
cleared, and error discovered. I wish however Mr Coppe would speak plainer
next.

Let the question be, How Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, and how Christ
is formed in us.

1. Note this, Mat. 1. Luke 1.
Christ was really and literally borne of the Virgin, according to the history
of his Nativity. he was true man. Some Familists will not grant this, let them
stay till I farther prove it.

2. Christ was not borne mere man as we are, Ioh. 1.
but Christ was borne Godman.

He was, before he was borne: and he was with God, that was borne: and he was
God, that was thus borne. See for this Ioh. 1.1. In the beginning was the Word
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

3. The union between these two natures is a personal union.

Though some Familists say he was no more God then we, Heb. 1.2. Ioh. 1.4. W.S.
they lie.

Though some Familists say Christ had not two natures, they lie.

He was a person before, though divine, he is but one person now, though he be
likewise humane.

It is not now a God, and a Man, to speak personally, but God man, though Man
and God.

4. The word was so made flesh, that the Godhead was not the Manhood, nor the
Manhood the Godhead: the natures were distinct without mixture, confusion,
composition, though met in one person, and in a personal way united.

A Familist told me the Deity was mingled with the soul of Christ. Por.
The Scripture clearly speaks against this, and reason too. but Familists care
for neither.

5. The Word was so made flesh, as that the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in
Christ bodily, Christ had not only the fullness of created Grace, in respect of
which it is said the spirit was communicated unto him not by measure, and said
to be full of grace, and again of his fullness, have all we received grace for
grace. this had special relation to his Manhood, I say he had not only this
fullness of grace, (I call it created because it is not the Godhead but the
work of God, a creature called a new creation, would Familists but understand
this 'twere somewhat, the Lord teach them.) but he had the fullness of the
Godhead in him, likewise, more then grace, the Godhead not only something
divine, a nature divine, somewhat like God, and from God, a near resemblance
of God, but the Godhead or the Deity, and this the fulness of the Godhead as
much as the Deity is, was in Christ, and that bodily, in conjunction with his
humane nature and body: or after some bodily, i. e. substantially, or
subsistentially, but it may be these are terms too high for weak Capacities,
the are Scripture expressions, Heb. let it suffice weak ones to believe that
it is so, though they know not how it is so, nay though their reason as weak,
might tell them it is not so.

6. This word was so made flesh or assumed flesh, and took it into such a near
(Conjunction with himself I say himself to note the personality of Christ
before his incarnation) as that their is a communication of properties, and
attributions. Christ God-man was God, though man, Act. 20.
Jesus Christ, Imanuel, died, Ever-lived, etc. though only true according to
one nature, yet spoken of the person, and the other nature with relation to the
person, or the person in the other nature.

Quest. The Scripture says that Christ is formed in us: so says Paul to his
Galatians: this is a nice point, Gal. 4.
but I shall speak very plainly to it in few words.

1. I shall tell you what familists do understand by this.

2. I shall tell you what Paul meant by it, and how we are to understand it.

Familists, their notion improved speaks this, that the Godhead (for persons in
the Trinity they acknowledge not, or as we understand it.) the second person
in the Trinity, assumes unto himself our particular personal flesh, and
bodies, as it assumed that particular flesh and body which was framed and
fitted for him by the Holy Ghost in the Virgins womb.

This is the thing they aim at; some of clearer reason note it so, others have
more gross conceptions of it, according to their several Capacities.

Some think that Every thing is God, and so they speak plain, they say the
Devil himself is God, as one told me expressly that the Devil was God in
darkness.

The Creation to God (the pure being of God) being nothing else (according to
their apprehension) but so many appearances of God, God sporting himself in so
many shapes. now they distinguish when you come to ask whither they be God or
no: as to instance, their body? they will tell you, no: they are not God: that
is, their appearance, and the Creature (they will call it so) it is not God and
in truth they judge so. (For the most part though sin be gross indeed) I say
they will distinguish thus, between the Creature and God, for they make it the
appearance of God, if you ask them Concerning the nature of this appearance,
what being it is, they vanish, and can talk no longer. it is not they say, a
real thing but apparent, as the image in the glass or water, or the image in
our fancy, etc.

This is their notion generally: others that are Come off from this, they take
it in the first notion, the Godhead entering into a relation toward us our
personal flesh, particular bodies, and soul as it did to Christ: and this they
understand by Christ formed in you.

They say, this Christ (so now, they call it with relation to our flesh, though
sometimes they call it God in us.) or God is fully in us, as he was in Christ:
only it is not manifested we do not see it, ask them why it works not so,
as it did in Christ? they will tell you it has its growthes and detriments, it
is young, a babe, grown Crucified, and rises again in them, and many more
such stories they have of this.

Many expressions they have to set out the nativity of Christ in us, as they
term it -- after the same manner as it is spoken of the birth of Christ in the
womb of the Virgin Mary.

This is their opinion -- now let me show you Paul's and I have done.

1. It is not as the Familists would have it -- God is not every thing, and
every thing is not God.

We are come now to the very root of the Devil. the Assertion that every thing
is God is most hellishly blasphemous.

1. Briefly, the Devil himself never told our first parents that every thing
was God, and therefore let God enjoy every thing, nothing is sin to God, for
every thing is God.

He told them, they should be As Gods, that's another matter.

2. If every thing were God, I say there were then no God. a God is a most
absolute spiritual simple immense eternal infinite being, etc.

For that which is every thing is no God. it implies contrariety,
contradiction, weakness, multiplicity, and what not? if God be every thing --
he must be then good and evil, weak and strong, finite and infinite,
temporal and eternal, etc. but why rake I here, when man's natural heart
cannot but abhor this principle.

Ob. 2, If they say, true, the Creature is not God, in its being, so
considered, but as it is in Union with God it is God.

Ans. I answer, without all question Mr Coppe knows the meaning of this,
Familists, do indeed say it. the Creature is not God, why? God is invisible,
and the creature visible, God a substance and the creature a shadow, God
infinite and unlimited Almightinesse, but the creature weakness, etc. but yet
say they, there is some thing in the wind, they will tell you, that as they are
creatures, qua creatures, men and women, they are not God: no more then Christ
was God qua man: the Manhood was not the Godhead, but in nature property and
operation distinct, but that as they are in union they are God. Even as was
said of Christ, the two natures united make a Christ, and that person is God --
I say, here is the root of the Devil in Familisme.

If they mean this as to every creature, its most grossly blasphemous. the
Devil himself by this reckoning is God too.

I think in my conscience he is generally the God of Familists, they have no
other God for their God.

But some I do suppose refer it to good men, though I have but little reason
so to think, yet I will be so charitable for the sake of those that are
deceived, and may think no more of it, especially at first, then this, that a
true convert is God in union.

I say, first that every union with God cannot give the denomination of God, it
is only a personal, as was said of the person of Christ: there must be the
very being of God personally subsisting, or else it cannot be.

2ly Every thing in union with God is not God. therefore cannot be truly called
God, as it might be said of Christ. if they were God, the properties of a
divine nature, or the Godhead, were likewise theirs, they were omnipresent,
omnipotent, omniscient. I desired once that Familists would make it appear
they were God in union, as was said of Christ. 1. By their omnipotency, let
them raise the dead, let them open the eyes of those that are borne blind, let
them do that which man as such, and assisted by the Devil cannot do. Christ
could, and did so manifest his Godhead. my works bear witness of me that I
am true, and in the true sense the Son of God. O poor weakness -- what have
you yet done? Some I confess, have played the juglers and Conjurers, and
Sorcerers -- could raise Devils, and show you fine sights -- dance over joint
stools, and a hundred such prankes you will play.

2. Let them make it out by divine testimony, I mean immediate from God in
glory, Christ had it -- particularly personally, this is my beloved Son, and
in Scripture the mighty God. Es. 9. Heb. 1. Heb. 1.
and thy throne o God, etc.

3. When did ever God say of them, as once of Christ, let all the Angels of God
worship them. you Devils, will ye rob God of his honor? spoil him? you shall
not, he will not give his Glory to Another, Es. 42.
the glory of divine worship, nor his praise to graven Images -- had the Devil
in union bin God, Christ might very well have worshipped him, Christ gotten some
Kingdoms by it, (if the Devil had any to give him, which were not his own
before.) I Will say to such, get thee behind me Satan. Mat. 4.
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

4. Let them manifest it by their immutability -- at least in judgment. I have
known some who will be for God and holiness to day, and for the Devil and
darkness, as the phrase is, to morrow -- God never yet changed his mind though
men have thought so, nor God in union, the Lord Christ, he is the same
yesterday, and to day, Heb. 13.
and for ever.

He was not to day a Saint, to morrow a Devil.

5. Are ye God in union show it by your omnisciency- Can ye like Christ search
hearts, and know their thoughts, Mat. 9.4.12.25.
that are far enough from you. Can ye say as Christ of Nathaniel, Ioh. 2.
or can ye so declare our hearts, and all our thoughts unto us, as that we may
acknowledge that you know them. poor wretches ye are scarce yet men, I am sure
ye are not man enough, ye want reason. ye are so far from being God in union.

This is most clear, if it be with them as it was with the man at Jerusalem,
as they call him, they could do as much as he, know as much as that Christ, it
should be spoken of them as it was of that Christ.

That he is the word, with God, is God, it should be spoken of them.

That they are the only begotten sons of God (but it seems they are sons
without glory) that they made the world, uphold all things by the word of their
power, Heb. 1.
that they purged away sin, are sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on
high, that their thrones as God indures for ever, that they are the same
yesterday to day and for ever.

3. Such as have been in union with God, as much as the choicest Saints now
are. Speak of Christ as they could not speak of themselves, or of any other.
we know and are assured, that thou art The Christ, Ioh. 6.
the Son of the living God. nay God himself. to which of the Angels said he,
thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. (poor creatures,) again of
his fullness all we received grace for grace. which of all the Familists in
England has so much grace. can communicate as Christ does, from that stock of
grace, he has, if he have any? Col. 2.
and again the Fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily -- how more in him
then others, if this be true of all? poor Familists is their fancied Christ in
them? or they, (as they are in union with God) I say, are they the head over
all things to the Church? do they fill all in all? Fie upon it, that ever
wretches should thus derogate from Christ, and appropriate to themselves what
God never gave them.

4. If the union of God and Saints be a personal union, as it was with Christ.
then it follows, so many ways as God is personally united, so many persons
must there be in the Deity --: and where is a Trinity? there must be as many
persons in the Godhead, as ways of personating the Godhead, or of its
subsistence.

5. Again, Every such person must be a Christ, God and Man personally united
make a Christ: gallant! we shall be all Christ's, several Christ's: as many
Christ's as Christians, all of us Lords as was said of Christ. Fools, there
will be Lords many, but we have but one Lord Jesus Christ.

If this union be personal, then it follows, as what is proper to the Godhead
may be attributed to the person, so what is attributed to the manhood, should
be attributed to the person.

The person thus in union should be God-man. Infinite Immense, Eternal, etc.
Again take the persons of Familists as sinners, and it may be said as of
Christ, God dying, so of Familists, God sinning. God a swearer, God a drunkard,
God a blaspheamer. This would be sweet stuff, yet it must be so, if God and a
sinner be personally united.

Let me give you Paul's sense of Christ formed in us, in the true sense, and so
conclude with this Question.

For the clearer understanding of this mystery; I shall speak as plainly as I
can, and the rather, because some would charge me with denying, that Christ is
in us, formed in us, etc. I shall therefore grant as much as may be granted.

First I say, that true believers the called of God, they are really united
unto Christ, one with Christ, one with the humane nature of Christ, one with
the Divine nature of Christ, one with the person of Christ. But how to be
understood anon.

2. We are one with God, in union (if you will) with God; one with the nature
of God, one with the persons in the Godhead, Father, Son, and Spirit.

3. I say that Christ is really in us, nay the person of Christ is in us.

4. Nay the Godhead is in us: Farther,

5. I say that Christ is formed in us.

6. That we are partakers of the divine nature.

For my meaning in all this, I intend not what the Familists intend when they
speak this, as I have before delivered, I take it not in that sense.

1. I say we are really united to God and Christ, as really as a branch is
united to the vine, the wife to the husband, the building to the foundation,
the head unto the members, and the members to the head; as really as the
Father, and Son, and Spirit are one, which is one step-farther. I say, as
truly and as really. It follows not in all respects, the same kind of union,
to the same participation and communion; these comparisons and resemblances of
our union do not always hold out the kind of the union, but for the most part
the verity, the truth of the union it were gross blasphemy to assert other
wise.

2. Christ and God are really in us, but not in the same manner is God in us,
as in the several persons of the Trinity, or as in the humane nature of
Christ, I have proved this already.

3. We are united to the person of Christ but not made one person with Christ.

4. Christ is formed in us, but not in the same way and manner as he was
formed in the womb of the virgin, the word is not so made flesh in us, as
there it was: not so manifested in our particular flesh as in that particular
flesh, this I have already prooved.

4. We are really pertakers of the divine nature, but not in the same way and
manner as Christ was partaker of the divine nature, I have likewise proved this
already and therefore shall speak no more to these negatives.

I shall not speak of the several sorts of union, it is well known there are
several, he that knows not this knows nothing, the union of the soul and
body is one kind of union, the union of head and members a secondly the union
of members in one body a 3d. the union of husband and wife a 4th. of foundation
and building a 5th. of vine and branches a 6th. of the two natures in Christ a
7th. of the persons in the divine essence an 8th. etc. Of a Christian with God
and Christ a 9th. etc.

2. Nor of the several respects of Gods being or presence: in himself, in his
son, in all Creatures; in heaven, in hell, in his ordinances, in his people:
who knows not but that these are several, and must not be Confounded, neither
shall I speak how Christ is in himself, in his father, in earth, in heaven, in
his ordinances, in his peoples hearts. etc.

3. I shall not speak in the 3. place of the several sorts of Gods working,
manifesting himself, in heaven in Glory, one way to saints in Glory, another to
saints on earth in Grace, in types, in truth. nor how he may make known in
creatures, his power and God head etc.

For the better understanding of the mystical union observe these points. The
matter is very high, the words shall be the plainer: that the meanest
capacities may take it in, I shall use as few terms of art as may be, the
truth in this point is above art. note.

1. That there is a general union, and an especial union, between God and his
Creatures.

2. This union whither general or special is real, really uniting them.

3. This real union is the original of a real Communion between God and the
creature.

4. This real union may be diversely Considered, according to the diverse
respects, and diverse effects of union.

5. Every union between God and the creature, is not this mystical union of
which we speak.

6. The Gracious soul mystically united unto God. may be thus united unto God
in more respects then one.

7. For distinctions sake (whither properly or improperly) we may say there
are several unions: though indeed, properly, several modes or ways of union,
between God and the elect soul. this premised I conclude.

1. The elect soul has God united to it, (though not only,) in the general
and universal union. in respect of which God may be said to be united to the
whole creation. this is not as an Elect soul, but in Common as a creature,
this union I take to be held out in that text. In him we live and moove and
have our being. this union for its form, is made up 1. on gods part, by that
common spirit, (or spirit in common in fluences) which actuates the whole
creation, in' esse and operari, in essence and operation, see Genesis 1.2. 2. on
the creatures part, by that dependence (natural) which the creature has on
God, for this esse and operari, through the spirit. he that knows not this,
knows little, this union every creature has with Gods: Familists go no
higher then this, they may be thus united unto God, and yet devils. but this
union the elect soul has, as a creature, and more.

2. The elect soul has God united to it, in a special: (which is called a
my. sticall union.) in respect of which God is not united to the whole
creation, Ephesians. 1.
it being proper to the elect viz. Christ, Angels, and Saints: though to Christ
Angels and Saints, under several respects.

3. This union, wherein the elect soul has God united to it, is not an
Immediate but a mediate union, through a mediator Jesus Christ. Mat. 1. 1 Cor.
1.30. 2 Cor. 5.19.
God-man the Imanuel, God whith us. of him are all things, especially
spiritual. God is in Christ uniting and reconciling etc. God and the fallen
creature cannot unite without a mediator. no more then a consuming fire and
stubble. Christ is this mediator and the union is through him. John 17. read
the Scripture.

4. This union through a mediator may be considered, either first as uniting
God and the soul, (the mediator intervening.) or secondly, as uniting the
mediator and the elect soul.

5. This union may be considered, with respect 1. to the present state of
grace: or secondly the future State of glory.

6. Considered with respect to God, (the mediator intervening) and with
respect to the present state of grace 1. God is relatively united. i.e.

1. According to the uniting virtue of love divine, love unites God to the soul
loved, 1 Samuel 18.1.
with the special gratious-union of special love, hence that Scripture, he
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, for God is love, 1 John
4.16.
ubi amor tbi anima. love brings an indwelling.

2. 1 Samuel 18.3.
Hence God stands united to the elect soul, in a special-gratious-Covenant
relation, league, hence among men the term of the united provinces etc.

3. Hence in those sweet relations that depend on love, and a love Covenant,
Hosee 2.18.
father, husband, friend, in reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5. Ephesians. 1. Col. love, Amity
etc. make the most of it.

2. Sec. 2.
God is (I could never meet with a fit word, to set out this respect of union
by it: there are words used, but they serve rather to veil our ignorance, then
reveal this mystery, mystical it is, because secret, hidden, and a mystery:
so says Paul Ephesians. 5. in natural things I would call it physical, set out by
the union in Contact virtuall, but in these supernatural I profess, I know
not any word used fitly to note the nature of it. I shall not Coin new, but
give you the notion it self in plain words:) I say god is united as a special
grace working cause, I have spoken already, how he is not united, I speak now
to show you, how he is united, 1 John 3.2.
as well as I can, I shall better tell you, and you will better understand it,
when we are come to heaven.

God, through the mediator, as a principle, a working-cause of a spiritual
being and operation, unites himself to the elect soul enlightening it,
quickening it, etc. with special grace.

This is on gods part, 1. 1 Cor. 6.19.
by that special spirit (or the special Influences of the spirit) which
actuates the spiritual elect soul, in its spiritual being and operation. 2.
1 John 4.13.
on the creatures part, by the dependence of the spiritual soul on god for
this, wrought in it by the spirit.

From this union, it is said: he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, 1
Cor. 6.7.
and 1 Cor. 12.13. by one spirit we are united etc.

7. Considering it with respect to the mediator, his union with us, it is.

1. A Relative union: I shall not speak, of the union of love, wherein Christ
is united to the elect soul. 2. nor of that special Covenant, Cant. 2.6.
wherein, the mediator stands united. 3. nor of all the sweet relations that
flow from it, as husband father, friend etc. I should be then too large. but
thus.

1. Christ stands (as it were) in a spiritually Civil, Ep. 1.22. Romans 5.14. 1
Cor. 5.21.22.45. Romans 11.16.17. Heb. 7.22. Es. 53. 1 Ioh. 1.2. 2 Cor. 5.21. 2
Cor. 5.14. Kor. 6.11. 1 Cor. 12.12. Gal. 3.16.
and political union mystically united to his Church: as an head-man: a
repraesentative. thus he is said to be the head of the Church, the second
Adam, the second man; root, roote-man, you know the union between the surety
and his friend of the proxy, the representative the Burgess in parliamt. etc.
hence flows communion spiritual, Christ is reckoned to us, and we reckoned
to Christ, Christ made our sin: we made the Righteousness of God in him. read
at large Romans 5. we are (in divine Law) reckoned as really one with him, as if
(though not) one person, hence our communion, in election, Justification,
Adoption, sanctification, glory.

Christ is that, in respect of us, what he is not, in respect of himself and
we are that, in respect of Christ, what we are not, as in our selves hence
that in Joan. 17.23. I in them, and they in me, hence the Communion in
attribution (Communicable) so Also is Christ: Christ mystical: Christ Jesus in
union with his Church: as Christ, he is not considered without his Church, (he
is as God. therefore that is not communicable,) and his people, as such, are
not considered without Christ, no more then a body without an head. This is a
soul enriching-union, call it what you will.

This union is by Gods gracious Covenant Grant on Gods part. Ephe. 1.4
This may be, before we be, from eternity, (chosen in him we thus are) in Gods
account, or virtually.

2. By the spirit working faith.

3. Ephe. 3.17.
Faith wrought by the spirit, bringing us on our part in time, actually into
this Covenant, state, and so union with Christ's The union of Christ I shall
speak unto elsewhere.

2. The kind 1. Cor. 15 Ioh. 6. 1. Cor. 8.6.
Christ stands in such an union as we were but now speaking to, in respect of
God, as a principle active, and a working cause (in subordination to God the
Father) united to the elect soul. Cod works by Christ. Heb. 1.2.

This is by the spirit from Christ, The form
(and the Father) being to us as the soul is to our body, a quickening
principle, though not in every particular, as the soul to the body. (I speak
as to influence -- quickening -- to a spiritual life, 1. Ioh. 4.12.13.
) working in us habits of Grace (as anon) whereby we are enabled likewise, by
faith and love, and other Graces, in several respects, to unite to Christ, and
maintain Communion with him.

This is set out by the union between (not a civil -- but) a natural head and
members. So 1. Cor. 12. 1. Cor. 12 Col. 1.18.19. Col. 2.19. Ioh. 15.1. Pet. 2
the head is the seat of the spirits natural, giving out influence to all the
body by these spirits, so Christ. Hence (not only civilly but otherwise) this
is set out by the Vine and Branches -- building and foundation. Hence the
Communion of Sanctifiing influences. The same spirit working that in measure in
us, Ioh. 1.16. Ioh. 3.34. Col. 1.19 1. Ioh. 5.20. Ephe. 3.19.
which it wrought in Christ's humane nature in fullness, Even grace for grace, and
we are said to have it from his fullness. On this account I might now here
speak of the union as it is on our parts with God. As 1. Intellectual, the
understanding and God, by knowledge and vision of faith. 2. Moral, the will by
faith cleaving to God in Christ, and so of love etc. but this would make this
Volume swell. From what has bin spoken concerning union, you may answer the
question concerning Presence. thus briefly.

1. God and Christ are present Symbalically or Typically, and analogically, the
rock followed them, and that was Christ, Typical. So the Cloud, and Temple,
etc.

2. Essentially, by his Immense presence filling all things, places, filled of
none. Mat. 28.29.
So he is in every thing, place, even Hell. So is the Godhead of Christ, or
Christ as God, every where: Familists make a great matter of this. But alas
this is not his special presence, Devils have this, though we have more.

3. Act. 17.27.
Energetically: by power and providence operative. 1. General, and common in
all creatures, to works of nature. Of him are all things, in him we live. 2.
Special and Saving, the special works of grace in the hearts of his people,
from regeneration to perfection. But this is not as in himself, and in his
Son.

4. Objectively, the mind by understanding, and will by choosing, love
embracing, makes God present. But especially faith. Christ is said to dwell in
our hearts by faith, faith bringing in a presence, and an abiding presence of
Christ unto the heart, according to the presence faith gives -- faith sees God
who is invisible, and faith lays hold on God, Heb. 11.27. Moses his Optiks.
in Christ: nay faith will make the humane nature of Christ present, with the
presence that faith gives, which is a real presence: it can feed upon this
humane nature of Christ, and eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, and
really nourish the soul hereby, as really as the body is nourished by its
food, etc. Christians indeed know this, from hence by the being that faith
gives, the soul shall be in God: and God in the soul: Christ in the Saints,
and the Saints in Christ, without jumbling of their Persons, natures together.
Alas it is to be feared, they know not this Inbeing and Indwelling of God,
that talk so grossly of it: many talk of Gods being in them, and their being
in God, but they know not what they say.

I shall speak a word concerning the Effects of these Unions, these operations,
this In-being of God and Christ in us. God forbid I should not say that Christ
is in us. The Deity, and the humanity of Christ, the Person of Christ, but how?
you have seen. I will speak no more to that.

Q. The agent working in us is Christ, the Father, the Spirit, but what is the
thing wrought upon us? the working virtue is the power of God; but what is the
effect?

An. This is not God himself. God of God, Ioh. 1.16
I say that grace wrought in us (I suppose we may agree to call it grace, let
it be what it will) is not God, the Being the Essence of God, produced in us:
there is the Being of God, the Essence of God God himself producing, but the
thing produced, is not God, is not the Person of Christ, is not the Person of
the spirit, though these Persons be there, in a speall way of Presence and
Union to effect it. Gal. 5.22 Pet. 5.21 Ephesians. 1.18
1. I say grace is a fruit of the spirit. 2. It is a disposition in us, a
qualification of our understandings and wills, and affections, and Gods working
in us is not to set up a third thing between God and us, 1. Pat. 1.21.
but to dispose, and frame, and order our spirits to move toward him.

3. This work is that which is conveyed through instruments, Gal. 4.19.
means, and ordinances, ministers. Paul travels in birth to form this Christ,
and the word, the Scripture word, and that preached, is that which is the seed
of God too, it is that which things humane, as well as divine concur unto, 1.
Pet. 13.25.
to effect and produce on the hearts and minds of men in an ordinary way as
Instruments: true, man cannot do it alone without God, and God will not do it
alone without man, I mean ordinarily.

4. The alteration it makes upon the man, on whom it is wrought, it is no
Essential alteration, substantial alteration, the man is man still, and but
man, though better qualified, a spirituallized man, his understanding is
cleared of darkness, and strengthened by the enlightening of the spirit of God,
to understand more clearly the things of God. There is not a new faculty of
seeing, but the hinderance removed, (the veil as it were before the
understanding) and help afforded, light brought into a dark room, 1. Cor. 3.16.
the objects clothed with light.

So the will, the will is will still, no new soul, but the action of the soul
purified. There Is a new disposition, its called new, because it was old and is
made new as 'twere there is a new stamp upon it, a piece of filver was silver
before the Goldsmith touched it. An old piece of Plate put into the Furnace, put
in a new mould, comes forth not the old piece of Plate for form, but a new
though the same for substance.

If it be God, then the soul is turned into God, a creature made a God: for
it is the soul that has this work.

6. Or else it is God changed and converted into a creature, which is
blapheamous.

7. We need not go so far, the Scripture tells us, 1. Cor. 5. Ephesians. 3.17
it is a creature, if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature throughout,
whatever is new, its a creature still, and therefore not God, ye are the
workmanship of God in Christ Jesus, created unto good works, God in Christ
works upon you, and creates you a new unto good works, that you may be able to
work new works: its you that are created, you that have the alterations, this
alteration is not the adition of another substance, which may be called you,
but you, even you are created unto good works, new made. It is Gods Image
created in Righteousness and true Holiness. There can be no more, for former
reasons: which showed that the Deity of Christ is not formed in us, and assumes
not our flesh, as it did the flesh in the Virgins womb.

8. This work of god upon us has several names but they all note the same
thing, only with several relations as the new creature, because it is a
creature and new wrought by the creating power of god.

The new birth Regeneration, Ioh. 3. 1 Pet. 1.23.
because it is like a birth, and is a new state like the state of a man brought
a new into the World.

A birth from above, because it came from God above, this work does -- the
spirit, the word that is the seed of God is from above, etc.

Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. ult.
because it purifies our hearts, sets us apart from sin and the world,
creature, and disposes us for God devotes us, directs us to him.

The life of Christ, because wrought by Christ, 2. because it acts in the
strength of Christ, he is the bottom, the principle, the original, though not
the subject of this life, 3. because it makes us live like Christ.

Christ formed in us, as Christ may be said to be formed in us, that grace
which is in Christ being communicated to us by the spirit as before.

There being the stamp, the image of Christ upon us -- not in the Godhead. the
Godhead of Christ, as Christ is the express image of the fathers person, Heb.
1.2.
we have proved this already -- that that is not in this sense formed in us --
but as the nature of man is conveyed from the father and formed in the Son, so
is the nature of grace (created) from Christ conveyed to us and formed in us as
in Christ, (the Godhead is incommunicable.) and so the divine nature, because a
Godly nature, 2 Pet. 1.4 Ephesians. 4.24.
from God, like God, a participation of some of the attributes of god. though
not in the same way as attributed unto god, they are in god per modum
essentiae, in abstracto.
in us per modum qualitatis, or habitus. in god it is his essence, in us the
representation of god. god is holy. his essence is holiness, in concrete
we are holy -- it is our quality: though it streams from god yet it is not
god, though a nature divine, something beyond and above the natural strength
of man and pitch of man, it is his nature humane improoved nearer to a divinity.

Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.
not because of the substance of the heavens, but the Analogy, that is between
the heavens and this thing, this work of grace. they that are heavenly -- it is
said 1 Cor. 15. etc. but enough for this.

Christ was formed in the Virgins womb naturally and literally, but in us
mystically and spiritually.

So much for what related to my discourse, now follows, what related to his
Sermon. The more gross and principal passages concerning gods giving up his
people to sin -- you will see here that Familists (if Coppe does not) father
blasphemously their wickedness on god.

I shall not speak much as to Mr Copps Sermon, only clear some passages, and
vindicate the purity and holiness of god and Scripture.

Esai 40. ult. Who gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the robbers, did not
I the Lord? was his Text.

His point of doctrine (as I remember) was this: that God gives up his own
people to robbers and spoilers.

In the explication, he told us, that these robbers were such as should spoil
gods own people of their Priests and Altars, etc. and at length of their
holiness, by sin, blasphemies, wickednesses.

Mr Coppe on the Lords day before this lecture, preached near Witney: his Text
(as I am informed) was. There is a time to sing, and a time to dance. it seems
he was very merry. (some men such as rejoice in wickedness, are very merry
when, (they cannot be unless) they have, the Devil for their playfellow. as I
have read of Witches, so I have heard of some Familists and Ranters that
(literally) they dance dirges with the Devil.) in that discourse (as I heard
from some that knew it.) he said that the whole Scripture from the beginning of
genesis to the end of the Revelations was to be understood allegorically. This
I am sure, is the sense of all Familists. No wonder then that such doctrines
are drawn from such Scripture. Familists (ex professo) bring Scripture to
their private spirit, and make Scripture speak according to that. They will not
try their spirit by the true spirit of god in the Scripture, nor speak
according to the Law, and to the testimony in Scripture. When men leave
Scripture: or presume to interpret Scripture in their own (if not the Devils)
sense: what doctrines must we expect? no wonder, that gods giving his people
over to afflictions, and (as I take it from the scope of the Scripture) Israel
to captivity and (literally) robbers and spoilers be interpreted. a giving up
of his own people to sin, curse, swear, blaspheme. God as a father may well
chastise correct and his children, actually, effectually; I trow, not so give
up his people to the power of sin.

1. Take this note: James 1.13.
god tempts no man to sin, he that sins is lead away into sin by his own
Lust; and the instigation of the divell-understand this effectively as the
working cause. sin is of the devil, he is the Father, and our corrupt hearts
they are the mothers of these hellish brats. Iam. 1.15.


2. There is not a principle of sin in god, Exodus 15.11. 1 Pet. 1.
he is good, and purely good, and perfectly good. he were not god had he such
weakness, and contradiction. The god of Familists whom they generally so serve
is the --, he is the sink of sin.

3. Farther, god permissively, may suffer sin to be, for ends best known unto
himself.

4. On the same account, God may suffer the Devil to lay his snares, and leave
his people to themselves- and they may be ensnared in these, and sin, but yet
he is not the cause of sin.

5. He forbids sin, gave strength once against sin, and now more then they will
use: if men neglect this strength, nay sin away this strength, is God bound to
renew their strength, that they may not sin? and shall God on this be the cause
of sin? god forbid.

6. God may judicially give over some men to sin -- give Satan the charge of
them, Romans 1.
the power of them. to do upon them what he will and can, god withdrawes from
them (judicially) his good gifts, and what is his own, and whom have these to
blame? if they with a full careere run on in sin, they run freely down the
stream of sin, it is their choice to sin, why shall god be blamed for this?

If God and Christ do say, thou shall not take the name of god in vain, Euod.
20.
and Coppe and others swear themselves into the bottomless pit of hell, why
may not god leave them there? Rev. 22.
if they will be unclean, why may not god say let them be unclean? what
comfort is this to Mr Coppe, and others thus robbed and spoiled with him?

Mr Coppe applied his doctrine, first to their comfort, who with himself were
spoiled, they should not be troubled: for god gave them up. Hellish comfort for
such wretches. I grant, god judicially gave the Devil leave to do what he
would with them. I say this is hellish comfort, to be in the devils hands by
Gods judicial appointment. he would have others not only pity them, but love
them as Brethren. but what compassion should others show them? the weak god
pitties, spares, pardons, so should we.

The obstinate, the rebellious, he lets run the long run to hell and judgment,
let them take what they meet with in the way of sin, Justice from god,
ordinary, by the Magistrate; extraordinary, by his own hand, and damnation in
the end of sin.

As for us we must mourn for sin, their sin, reprove them for sinning; 1 Cor.
5.
if all will not do, but they will sin, deliver them to Satan: pray down
mercy, 1 Tym. 1.20.
or gods vengeance on them. 2. Let gods ordinance take hold upon them by the
Magistrate. Romans 13.


To love them as brethren, is to reckon our selves their brethren in iniquity.
it is to partake in their sins, 2 Ioh. 10.11.
and the next step to partaking with them in their plagues.

You have the seeds of these. says he.

What though we have the same Corrupt principles of sin within us, if God
change our natures, and kill us to sin, and sin to us, Romans 6.
must we love sin still, where we see it is? shall we call the Devil father
still, in calling these brethren, that bear his Image, and because they bear
his Image, no let us hate sin, where it it is, in our selves, in others, and
hate our selves, and others too, if worthy, on this account of hateful sin:
Hate I not, Lord, the works of Iniquity, Psalm. 129.21.22.
such as hate thee Lord, I hate them with a perfect hatred.

Again says Mr. Cop. God may give you up too, to be robbed and spoiled.

And what though God may leave us? must we therefore to provoke him to it,
Prove. 4.6.
leave God? no let him know if we keep to God, he will keep us, if we
forsake not God, heel never forsake us: and what though it be an hour of
trial? snares there be, shall we let fall our watch, and run upon them: let
us keep to God, and I say, that god will keep us, resist one sin manfully, and
heel give strength to withstand another, Ephesians. 6.12.13.
where you see your weakness Call in his strength and stand.

Raunters may take their fill of sin, they say god is unlimited Almightines,
and unlimited Almightines is in them and they may do any thing.

Mr. Coppe gave us some reasons for his doctrine. 1. god is unlimited
almightinesse god can and may do any thing, pull down his own ordinances as
circumcision, etc. Reader, this you have at, large in his book caled Cops
return to ways of truth.

God Almighty he is infinite, yet he cannot sin and that's his Almightinesse,
sin cannot fasten on him to do Contrary to the nature of god, nay he cannot
be so far fastened on by sin, to will what is contrary to the nature of god. and
proclaims him weak, imperfect, that were not almighty.

For the Abolishing of Jewish ordinances know: they were erected but for a
time: when scripture says they cease they must cease: might they have been
nelected when they were in force, without sin? I trow not, read Gal. 3.10. to
this Mr. Coppe brought in (as I have heard of Juglers) his sic volo sic Jubeo
let that pass: nay, says M. Coppe as another reason for his doctrine.

"He that said thou shall not murder, Coppe.
bade Abraham slay his son: and he that said thou shall not Commit adultery,
said to Hosea, take a whore.

Foul mouth's, blaspheaming god and scripture, will belch out this with open
mouth: Raunters will bring such reasonnings for their Adultery, Cursing,
blaspheming? murders and what not they would make god like unto themselves a
murderer, Ps. 51.
an Adulterer, a blasphemer, these things will they do, and god it may be,
may keep silence too: but be will reproove them and set their sines in order
before their eyes: he will tear them in pieces, and there shall be none to
deliver: o that such as forget god would Consider this.

What do ye think now readers of Mr Coppe Recantation?

Concerning god's will in sin, note.

1. Gods will in precept determins sin, not gods will in decree or providence,
gods will revealed in his word, not his essential will as they call it,
unless they mean this essential will manifesting, in his word, what shall be
sin, what not.

2. Some things god cannot but will to be sin, such as contradict his nature,
the truth of his divinity: he cannot deny himself.

3. Other things are sin or not sin as he does in his precepts will them to be
sin: and no otherwise: such are things as in their own nature strike not at his
Majesty, but may be by his wisdom ordered for his glory.

4. These latter, as his will of precept makes them sin, by forbidding it, so
his will of precept makes it no sin by Enjoining it (this was Abraham's and
Hosees case) nay the omission of the things thus enjoined is sin; a trial it
was to Abraham, and to Hosee, but no sin: (were it done really, Abraham's was
not, and as most say, Hosees was but an allegory, or a parable, as to him: read
Pareus, Buroughs on the text, the law maker has this power to change his own
laws, laws were made for god not god for laws.

Examples of sin, and particular repeales of statutes to particular persons are
no warrant for us to sin.

6. Inclinations to sin, opportunities to sin, suggestion by immediate voices
or instincts, unto sin, they are not warrants to sin.

7. The Commissions for such actions as will be no sin the statute repealed,
must have the broad seal of heaven infallible dem^ostration evincing that
repeal.

Thus you have the point stated brefly, and I hope clearly -- let me close up
all with a note or two and so farewell.

1. Familists are grown extremely cunning, to order their words so as that 1.
They may be in a sense true, 2. Defend themselves from the hands of the
Magistrate. 3. And yet to let their own know their divelish and blaspheamous
meaning.

2. A Familisticall Repentance is a divel-trick, they will as it were take all
sin to themselves, yet most grossly, though craftily, charge all on god.

3. If this be Copps Repentance (reader judge by what is here noted) he is a
very -- incarnate, the Lord rebuke him, and from Sin, Satan, and Ranters
deliver us.

FINIS.

