TIDINGS FROM ROME OR, Englands Alarm.

Wherein several Grounds to suspect the Prevalency of the Popish Interest are
seasonably suggested; Londons Ruin pathetically lamented; Arguments to
dissuade from the Popish Religion, are urged; And the Duties of Christians in
this time of common Danger, and Distraction, persuaded.

Nostri adversarij etiamnum vivunt and quotidie audaciores fiunt; nocte and die
hoc agunt, med tantu^, ut exortum Evangelij lumen extinguant; antiquasque
tenebras revocent, interea nos, qui ^^itio uxanimes per Dei gratiam Evangellium
annunciav^mus, conversis armis in mutua vulnera rumus; gratumque hostibus
spectaculum exhibemus: qui plus praesidij, atque fiduciae in concertationibus
nostris quam inani causae suae fundamento, totaque art and po^entia sua
collocan.

Brentius in Praefat: de Caena. Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.

Cant. 2.8. Every man has his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the
night.

Psalm. 137.8. O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be,
that rewards thee, as thou have served us.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1667.

Tidings FROM ROME: OR, Englands Alarm.
EVery faithful Minister of Christ, sustains the relation of a Watchman unto
the Nation wherein he lives, Ezekiel 3.17 Acts 20.28
as well as; of a Pastor to the particular flock over which the Holy Ghost has
set him; and therefore not only ought to be of a public spirit, to observe the
first approaches of N^tional calamities; but also of a courageous and faithful
spirit, to give warning of them. Being thus a debtor to my dear native Country*
and hearing round about me the noise of b^oody Papists rallying together, and
prepar^ng themselves to make a slaughter; and finding the fears and jealousies
of the Nation (lately awakened by the f^ames of London* and the instruments of
cruelty there discovered) beginning to abate, though their dangers are still
increasing upon them; I could not but present to the public view, these
awakening considerations and counsels following; if happily thereby true zeal
for the protestant Interest might be provoked, and the g^owing design of the
common enemy detected and retarded. For alas! ^ow can I endure to see the evil
that shall come upon my people, Esth. 8.6.
and upon my kindred? As Esther said in a like case of common danger: yea, were
I sure of personal safety in such a da^ of slaughter and desolation, yet how
terrible a thing would it be to stand upon the shore and see so glorious a
Vessel as England is, to be cast away! the Golden Candlestick removed and the
doctrines of Devils preached and professed in those places where Jesus Christ
has been so purely and sweetly worshipped.

Isa. 62.6.
O England! God has set Watchmen upon thy walls who will not hold their peace
day or night: and though men have endeavored to muzele and gagg them, yet like
Cr^^sus his dumb Son, they will cry out when they see thee in dan^er.

If thou inquire of the Watchmen in thi^ night of thy trouble as it is, Isa.
21.11, 12. Fingit respondere custodem desperatis civibus, and augere dolorem.
Watchmen, what of the night? they all with one voice return thee the same
answer; The morning come^h and also the night. There is indeed a glorious
morning of salvation and mercy, which will shortly down upon thee England; but
before that, there will be a night of dismal darkness and distress upon thy
children: Luth. veni^ quidem mane verum simul cumillo venit nox ista ^rassio^
ac terribiliar Muscul. in ^c.
For we have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and no^ of peace; we see
every man with his hands upon his lo^ns, as a woman in travail, and all faces
are turned into paleness: alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it,
it is even the day of Jacobs (...); but he shall be del^vered out of it. They
speak unto thee as (...) spoke to Ahab, arise, get thee up, for there is the
sound of a und(...) in; and there came a shower indeed: And that there is a
sound of judgment and wrath coming upon us will appear, if you have any regard
either, first to the predictions of friends or 2 dly, 1 King. 18.41.
to the (...) of enemies; or 3 dly, to the present sta^e and p^st u^e of things
among our selves at this day.

1. As for the predictions of friends, you have had many both ordinary and
extraordinary.

First ordinary, upon the observations which the Messengers of God have made of
your barrenness, wantonness and unchristian divisions, under the fullest
Gospel Light and liberty that ever was enjoyed by an unthankful Nation; amongst
which I cannot omit what a grave and worthy Divine upon the ground
fore-ment^oned, for diverse years past, gave us warn^ng of: And (...) that we
had been so wise and happy to have improved such a se^sonable admonition! his
words are these:

Gurnels. Christian armor 2 d. part p. 429.
Consider where you are, and among whom; are you not in your enemies quarters?
If you fall out what, do you but kindle a fire for them to warm their hands by?
aha! so would we have it say they, the Se^ of their rage will weaken this bank
fast enough; you need not cut it for them. The unseasonableness of the strife
betwixt Abraham's herdsmen and Lots, is aggrevated by the near neighborhood of
the Heathens to them, Genesis 13.7. And there was strife betw^x^ them, and the
Cananites and Per^z^tes dwelt in the land. To fall out when these Idolaters
look on, this would be Town-talk presently, and put themselves and their
Riligion both to shame. And I pray who have been in our land all the while the
people of God have been scuffling? those that have curiously observed every
uncomely behavior among them, and told all the world of it such as have wit
and malice enough to make use of it for their wicked purposes; they stand on
tip-toe to be at work, only we are not yet quite laid up and disabled (by the
soreness of those our wounds which we have given our selves) from withstanding
their ^uty; they hope it will come to that, and then they will cure us of ou^
own wounds, by giving one if they can, that shall go deep enough to the heart
of our life, Gospel, and all. O Christians! shall H^^od and Pilate put you to
shame? they clapped up a ^eace to st^engthen their hands against Christ; and will
not you unite against y^u^ common enemy? it is an ill time for Mariners to be
fighting when an enemy is boring a hole at the bottom of the ^hip.

How often have you been told both from the Pulpit and Press, what the sad
fruit and issue of these things would be? and as God has given you timely
warnings of this enemy by your faithful Watchmen in on ordinary way, so that he
vouchsafed us some extraordinary ones too, amongst which I cannot here omit a
strange and remarkable passage, which for diverse years since fell from the pen
of an English Prophet; and because I live to see one part thereof sadly
verified, and the other disposing it self toward its accomplishment (if
providence step not out of its ordinary path to prevent it I shall transcribe
some of the most remarkable and bearing pass^ges of it for you* my Author
having reproved the wantonness and vanity of professors, particularly those of
London, breaks forth into this threatening and terrible prediction.

London was Troy nova^^, Mr. Reeves Gods plea for Nineveh; ^^^nted about eight
years since.
it is Troy le grand; ^il will be Troy l'extinct. p. 2.7. I see you bringing
Pickaxes to digg down your own Walls and Springing mines to blow up your own
houses, and kindling sparks that will set al^ in a flame, page 223. They which
were rich owners, must then wander abroad for relief, and be glad to beg
gratuities, or be glad to kise ^he feet of the adversary for an alms, out of
his own fullness; and happy were I, if I could here make an end and the last
post were arrived. But after all other extremities, conscience at last comes to
her punishment, this must be made a captive. Men are not only locked out of
their houses, but out of their Temples; their goods are not only enforced from
them, but they are deprived of the Pearl; their libe^ties are not only lost,
but the freedom of the Ordinances, pure doctrine, worship and faith are in
bondage, and the soul enthralled. Men that will not permute a God, and suffer
their faith to be new stamped, must either run or die for it: Your
looking-glass will be snatched away your bright diamond shivered in pieces; this
goodly City of yours all in sheards; ye may seek for a threshold of your
ancient dwellings, for a pillar of your pleasant habitations and not find them;
nothing left but naked streets or naked fields of shelter, etc. But this is but
the misery of stonework, of arches, dormans and roofs; but what will you say,
when it comes to skin work, arms, necks and bowels? Ye which have walked the
streets in state, may then run the streets in destractions, with one leg or
half an arm, they may beg the preservation of the rest of your members: What
inventions will ye then be put to, to save your lives? your tears will not
rescue, nor your gold reedeem you, but your veins must weep as well as your
eyes; and your sides be watered, as well as your cheeks; when they allow you no
showers of rain, but showers of blood to wash your streets, when you shall see
no men in your Corporation but the man led Citizen; and hear no noise in the
street, but the cries, and shreeks, yells, and pants of Gasping, dying men:
when ye shall see your kindred slain in one place, your wives in another, your
children in a third, and your selves at last (it may be cut in two, to increase
the number of the dead carc^sses.

As popolus as ye are, ye shall then ^e numbered to the Sword; as puissant as ye
are, the valiant shall be swept away; as fine fed as ye are, ye shall be fed
with your own flesh, and made drunk with your own blood* your politicians can
no longer help you* but have their subtle brains dashed in pieces with yours;
nor your Lecturers can no longer save you; but you must meet together at the
Congregation near the Shamb^es, when this great City shall be but a great
Chopping, board to quarter out the limbs of sinners, or the great Altar where
in a whole City is to be sacrificed. Oh doleful day! when your breasts shall
try the points of Spears, your sides the keenesse of the Swords, your heads the
weight of Poleaxes your bodies made footstools, and your dead Carcasses
steppingstones for truculent foes, to tread and trample on; when there will be
no pity upon the aged, nor cmpassion upon the young: but heaps upon ^eaps:
tumbling of garments in blood, and Swords made fat with slaughter. Oh! see what
a Crimson City, Crimson sins will make!

If you escape the dint of the Sword, and your lives be given you for a prey;
Shall no^ your goods be made a prey? yes, (...) me may be reserved out of the
greatest Massacre; when men are weary with killing, a re^reat may be sounded,
and called off from the slaught^r? yet (...) ye then challenge your own houses,
or bring yur Keys to your old Chests? No, your Titles gone, your Interest lost
ye have tra^ed your sel^es out of your Estates, or sin^ed your selves out of
your Propri^ties: The Enemy is now houskeepe, Land-holder; ye have forfeited
all to the Sword; farewell Inheritances, Purch^ses, Leases, Wares, Wardrobe,
Furniture, Jewels. As you have gotten these goods unjustly, so they shall be
taken away unjustly; and if they be no sla^n in the heap, yet they do but ^ive
to see their own m^sery, their sins have made them Bankrupts, they are undone;
ruined*

And Oh! if the loss of money were the greatest mischief; bnt there is a
treasure of great^r value in danger; there is not an absolute conquest made,
till the inner ^an be in fetters; thou must be a slave in principles: Oh! it is
an hard thing at that time to be a Ie^ inwar^ly to keep the girdle of truth
about thy loins; thou must then bare the fruit of the degenera^e p^ant, or
strange vine: pour out the drink off r^ngs of other Sa^rifices, follow the
sorcery of the Mistress of witchcrafts, or learn Magic with them that are
brought up in the Doctrine of Devi^s; thou mu^t limp with the halting age: fit
thy mouth to answer ^he general shout* that great is Diana of ^he Ephesians:
thou must taunt thy own Father, spit in the face of thi^e own Mothe^, and ^iss
away all thy true Brethren: thou must be divorced from thy own Faith, though
never so chaste, and deny ^arah to be thy Wife, though thy Espousals with her
were never so solemn. There will be no safety incontaminate faith: thou will be
either a Nicodimus to come to Christ by ^ight: ^r if with Daniel thou open the
windows towa^ds Ierusa^em, thou will ^e cast in^o the Den of Lions. Thus far
he.

Dr. Ushe^.
An inundation of Popery was also predicted by the Learned Biwop of A^magh,
immediately before his death, as is well known to many. And where is the hearr
that has any spiritual sense, or tenderness in it, that trembles not in
afearful expectation of these things? Amos 3.7.
Surely, the Lord will do nothing, but he reveals his secrets to his Servants
the Prophots. This is one ground of fear.

2. And your fears cannot choose but increase, when you consider the preparation
and progress these Enemies have already made; Have they been sleeping; think
you, all this while? no no they have dug as deep as hell in their Counsels,
their numbers among us are already formidable, their combinations strong, their
confidences high, Ier. 4.17. Isa. 9.11.
and their Foreign assistants ready. As the keepers of a fi^ld, so are our
enemies round about us; the Syriane before, and the Philistines behind to
devour England with open month. Two considerable advantages they have already
obtained: ( first,) The removal of so many able and Godly Ministers out of the
way. This is done to their hands by a sa^^ providence: It is an old and true
observation, That whosoever will attempt the overthrow of Religion, must begin
with the Ministry first. ^hese are set for the a^^ence of the Gospel. It was
the counsel that Adam ^onizen (a deep-pated Achitophel of theirs) long since
gave in this case; Suppres (says he) the Ministers; ( Et error cui pat^acinium
deerit, sine p^^n^ concidet) and then the error that has none to patronize it
will fall of it self: So he calls the precious truth of Jesus Christ; I dare
not affirm that this was intentionally done to open a door of opportunity to
them; but that eventually 'its like to prove so, who that exercises reason sees
not? When so many pious Ministers went off the Stage, it was apparent enough
what an opportunity these men had to ascend it and act their part.

2. Secondly, The destruction of our Famous City, the strength and glory of the
Nation, which they have laid in the dust; a design no douht, contrived in the
Pop^sh Conclave: they well enough knew how able London was to give check to
their designs.

My heart bleedeth for thee London to see thee made of a City, an Heap, of a
Defenced City a Ruin; a Palace of strangers to be no City. And if they can
have their will, that which follows in the text should be added; It shall never
be built If Parliaments will hea^ken to them, they will persuade like Rehum and
Shini^ai, Ezra 4.14. that it may lie sti^l in its Ashes, and upon the same
pretentions, let search be made (say they) in the Book of Records of thy
Fathers, so shall thou find in the Book of Records, and know that this City is
a rebellious City, and hurtful unto Kings and Prov^nces, and they that have
moved sedition within the same of old t^me; for which cause it was destroyed.
But I trust the Lord will make our Rulers wise, to discover their bloody
intentions; how speciously so ever palliated with pretenses of Loyalty and
Fidelity.

But mean while London is ruined! A Lamentat^^on for London
that goodly mountain laid was^ed the most glorious City in all respects, that
ever the Sun looked upon, now a desolate Wilderness! O London! who can
sufficiently bewail thy misery! for mine own part, as the Orator solem^izing a
sad Funeral, desired to have learned Mortality from another ^ubject, rather
then that of Scaliger: So (might it have pleased the Lord) I should have been
glad to have learned the vanity of all worldly glory from another example, then
that of Lon^^n.

How does the City sit solitary, Lam. 1.1.
that was full of people? she that was great among the Nations, and Princess
among the Provinces! O London! Lam. 2.15. Ezekiel. 28.15. Ezekiel. 16.14.
thou sealest up the sum and wast perfect in beauty: Thou wast perfect in thy
ways from the day thou wast created until in^quity was found in thee. Thy
renown went forth among the Heathen for thy beauty, for it was perf^ct through
the comeliness thy God had put upon thee. Ezekiel. 28.1^. Ezekiel. 28.18.
But thy heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou d^dst corrupt thy
wisdom by reason of thy brightness. Therefore the Lord has cast thee to the
ground, and brought forth a fire from the midst of thee, which has brought
thee to ashes. London has grivously sinned, therefore is she removed; all that
know thee among the people, Lam. 1.8.
are astonished at thee, thou art terror to them. London may now sit down by
her Sister Jerusalem in the dust, and say, Lam. 1.12.
Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by, see and behold, was there ever any
sorrow li^e unto my sorrow: which is done unto me, wherewi^h the Lord has
affl^cted me in the day of his fierce anger^? They have heard that I sigh,
there is none to comfort me* all mine enemies have heard of my trouble, Lam. 1
21.
they are glad tha^ thou have done (...); thou will bring the day that thou
have called, and they shall be like unto me. ver. 2^. Jer. 1^.34.
Let all their wickedness come before thee, and do unto them as thou ha^^ done
unto m^. Mine enemies have dev^u^ed me, they h^ve crushed me, and made me an
empty vessel; they have s^allowed me up like a Dragon, ve^. 3^.
The violence done unto me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall the
Inhabitants of London say. Remember O Lord, the Inhabitants of Babylon, in the
day of London, who said, (...) 137.7 ver. 8.
Raser, raze it even to the foundations. O daughter of Babylon, that art to be
destroyed, happy shall he be, that rewards thee, as thou have se^ved us.

Let no man think that I endeavor to obscure the righteous Hand of God, which
is to be owned and trembled at in such a judgment. Though London must
acknowledge his justice in all that is come upon her; yet the wickedness of
Instruments, is not in the least to be excused thereby: God and man may
concur in the fame action, and yet neither his holiness have any fellowship
with their wickedness; nor their Injustice, be excused by his Righteousness;
Idem quod duo faciunt non est idem, His work is perfect, for all his ways are
judgment; a God of truth, and without iniquity; just and right is He, they have
corrupted themselves, Deuteronomy. 32.4.5. Will thou not confess, London, that thy
sins were the sparks that kindled thy flames? doubtless thou will such was thy
pride, Epicurisme Formality, and Barrenness, under such precious waterings as
thou once enjoyedst, above all the Cities in the world, that thou may say,
it is of the Lords mercy, thine Inhabitants had not all perished with their
Habitations; and that God had not made thee like Sodom; for what could thou
expect when thy Lots were going, but that devouring flames were coming?

But to return from this sad (though necessary) digression; hereby it is
manifest the common Enemy has obtained a singular and long expected advantage
to their design; often have they in vain attempted it; but now God has
delivered it into their hands: Well might they rejoice (as they did) to see its
flames ascend, and drink healths to its ashes. For upon diverse politic
considerations it might easily be demonstrated, that their cause and interest
is revived and warmed by that fire.

3. Lastly, it cannot but much more heighten our fears, if we consider the sad
posture we are in at this day of our Eminent Danger. Three or four sad
particulars I shall here suggest* and let none think it to be a laying open of
our nakedness and weakness to the Enemies; for I shall tell them no News, in
telling you that.

1. They are much encouraged, in that the Ceremonies of their Religion find
such acceptance among us: It was long since observed, That as the morning
ushers in the day, so the Ceremonies of any Religion, serve to bring in the
Religion it self; If we are heartily resolved against Popery, What do we with
their Garments, Gestures, Altars Crosses, Liturgies, and Officers among us?
upon this reason the Divines of Hamburgh withstood the Ceremonies of INTERIM;
of which they gave this account to Melancthon. These indifferent things (say
they) are nothing else but the seeds of corruption, Ep. ad Mel.
the nerves of Papistical Superstition, and the little passages, by which the
Adversaries endeavor to creep into our Churches, that they may turn them off
the foundation. To the same purpose the Divines of Saxony speak; Satan (say
they) from those small beginnings of the Ceremonies, Contet. Saxon edit. 1560.
makes progress to the corruption of Doctrine it self. If any say these are but
groundless surmises, a fighting with our own shadows; the papists themselves
are more charitable then such Objectors, and cannot but know, that although we
use these Ceremonies, yet not in the same sense that they do. Pray hear what a
Jesuit has observed concerning it. Protestanisme (says Mr. Chillingworth in
his Prefa^e, Sect. 20.) waxes weary of it self, the professors of it, they
especially of greatest Worth, Learning and Authority, Love, Temper and
Moderation; and are at this time more unresolved where to fasten* then at the
Infancy of their Church. their Churches begin to look with a new face, their
Walls to speak a new language, their Doctrines to be altered in many things. If
it be again objected, this is but the groundless construction of a peevish
ad^ersary. To conclude the controversy: here what a Prelate of our own says
in the case, Doct. Usher of the Ce^e^ page 209.
they are the words of the learned Primate of Ireland. The Kings and Queen of
England (says he) imposed these Ceremonies, that thereby they might decline
the charge of Schismatics, wherewith the Church of Rome labored to brand
them, seeing it did appear hereby, they only left them in such Doctrinal
points, wherein they left the truth. Again, hereby they would testify, how far
they would stoop to win and gain them, by yielding as far as they might in
their own way: But (says he) the exp^rience of many years has showed, that
this condescension has rather hardened them in their errors, then brought them
to a liking of our Religion; this being their usual saying, if our Flesh be not
good, Why do you drink of our broth?

And have we not grounds for our fears, think you now? if we are blamed for our
jealousies, we must blame them, that give cause for them. Would Bishops cast
out those Popish Ceremonies, our fears of Popery would be so much abated; but
those that nurse up these Romish brats, we cannot but suspect to have too much
love for that Harlot that begot them.

2 We are at this day persecuting and suppressing the faithful in the Land*
even those that stand in the gap to intercede for it; and are the most
considerable persons, both for Parts and Piety, to oppose the designs of this
enemy. How are we hacking at the bow we stand upon? and pulling down our wall,
whiles the Enemy lies round about them? Is this the time to stop the mouths of
so many able and faithful Ministers? to drive them into corners and not only
so, but to pull them out of those corners too; and thrust them out of the
breach, where they stand with prayers and tears, which are their only weapons,
and the Nations best Defense against the common Enemy? Would any Physician
that regards the life of his Patient, having to do with a weak consumptive
person that has but little blood, and few spirits left, open a vein, and let
out a drop thereof? it may be you looked not upon them so, but rather as the
disease of England, than the good blood thereof: but God judges otherwise
concerning them: The innocent preserve the Island, and it is delivered by the
pureness of his hands, Job 22. ult. You think if you were once rid of these,
you should quickly be a prosperous Nation: But verily, except the Lord of Hosts
had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, we should
have been like unto Gomorrah, Isa. 1.9.

Ah! how little do our bold informers think whose work they are doing! little
do Constables think they are breaking down of the Walls and Gates of the
Nation; when breaking up the peaceable Meetings of Gods people. Poor men! did
you but see how the Papists laugh among themselves, to see their work so
industriously performed by your hands, it would surely cool your courage* and
check your irregular zeal: Alas! they are not so much afraid of your Swords, as
of these men's prayers. That Popish Qu^en of Scotland spoke out and professed
she dreaded more the Prayers of Mr. Knox (a godly Noncon^ormist) the^ an Army
of ten thousand men. And will you so officiously serve them, by disarming so
many ten thousands of your friends of their best weapons? Oh ungrateful
England! do thou thus requite the Saints for all the good they have been
Instruments to procure unto thee? wi^t thou make them enter an appeal in Heaven
against thee, in the words of the Prophet? Ierem. 18 20. Shall evil be
recompensed for good? for they have d^gg^d a pit for our souls; remember O
Lord, how we stood before thee to speak good for them; and to turn away thy
wrath from them.

3. Are not the professing part of the Nation at this day divided, both in
their judgments and affect^ons? add what a singular advantage the enemy has;
thereby is obvious to every considering person; we have been often told, that
except the sgirit of love did speedily close up those unchristian breaches, the
common adversary would enter in at them. It was a worthy speech of B^entius,
when the Divines of Germany were scuffling one with another, in the midst of
the Popish party; Tollenda merito, etc. let all quarrelling and bitterness be
laid aside, and let us subject our judgments to our Lord Jesus Christ: Our
Adversaries yet live and are daily more bold; night and day they labor to
extinguish the light of the Gospel which is risen among us, and to bring back
the ancient darkness; mean while we who in the beginning, by the grace of God;
professed the Gospel unanimously* turn our weapons one against another, and
exhibit a grateful spectacle to our Enemies; who place more trust and
confidence in our contentions, than in the vain foundation of their own Cause;
and all their own art and power:

I have a long time looked upon our contentions as upon a Blazing Comet,
portending utter desolation, if the Lord heal it not speedily. Think upon this,
you that fear the Lord, and tremble at his judgments: How have we beaten our
fellow servants? unsainted those that jumped not with us in our opinions? this
Saint was too high, and that too low; but here is an Enemy, that like
Procrustes the tyrant, P^oc^u^es.
will cut you all of a length: If you were ten thou^sand more then you are, you
were no match for them, as long as you lie in this posture. How easily did
Gideon with his little handful, vanguish the huge Host of the Mediantes; when
every man set his sword to the breast of his fellow, and instead of opposin^
him, show every man his brother? Judge. 7.22 I make no question but the Papists
have blown up these sparks of discention among u^, to warm their own fingers by
our flames; they have anima^ed and fomented that spirit of bitterness and wrath
among us as one that s^ts two Cocks a fighting^ that having killed each other,
he may sup upon them both at night. This was the sad posture of Jerusalem when
the Enemy entered in her Gates. O England! England! thy destruction is of thy
self. If the hearts of the fathers be not turned to the children, and the
hearts of the children to the fathers, what can we expect, but that God should
come and smile the earth with a curse? Mal. 4. ult. Lord heal the breaches of
England, for it shakes Psalm. 60 2.

4. Fourthly and lastly, that which much appalls and daunts my spirit, is, they
find us as deeply guilty of the abuse of the best merc^es, as ever any Nation
was. So that I am afraid this enemy will prove the H^gel um Dei, the scourge of
God, (as Totila of old, from his cruel persecution of the Christians was
called) to avenge our unthankfulness for those choice favors, which Heaven
has showered down upon this ungrateful Nation. Saint Ierom^ speaking of the
Churches enemies, By our sins (says he) our enemies are made str^ng; and
History tells us, that when Ves^asian had conquered Jerusalem, he refused to
have the Crown set upon his head, saying I ind^ed am the rod in the hand of
God, but it is their sins only that have subdued them* Upon what Nation under
Heaven has God more richly heaped his blessings, than upon England and ^ha^
people have more wantonly abused them? or more comtemptuously spurned at the
tender mercies of him that conferred them? what blessing is it, which deserves
to be styled matchless, transcendent, glorious, that England has not enjoyed?
If ^eace be it, we have had it: if Plenty, we have had it: if the Light of the
blessed Gospel shining in its Meridian Splendour be it, we have had it: But
Iesurun waxed fat, and kicked; O dreadful fore runner of National ruin! What
was it that gave the Sa^acen^ footing in the Eastern Empire, but the wantonness
of those Churches, abusing the Light which they enjoyed? how impatiently did
the people of God in former times, thirst for liberty to worship God purely!
and when they had obtained it, What was the use they made of it? horresco
referens, I tremble in speaking it; Did we not play with our Light, fight with
our brethren by it, till God blowed out the Candle? and so (I wish I could say)
ended the quarrel.

We may say of our liberty, as the Philosopher speaks of waters, Suis terminis
diffisile continentur, they are difficultly kept within their bounds; why,
brethren did you think that God could suffer such precious mercies to run at
the waste spout much longer? Did you think he was weary of his mercies, to
continue them to such as little regarded them? or that it was not as grievous
to the blessed God, that his children should smite one another, as to see the
Enemy smiting them? no darkness is more formidable then that of an Eclipse,
which assaults the very vessels of light: no taste more unsavory, then that of
sweet things when corrupted; and no sin more hideous, then that which darkens
the brightness of Gods love, and corrupts the sweetness of his mercy. O
England! thou have abused a darling attribute of God, thou have sinned against
the most d^eply engraven Principle, and Law of Nature: The very irrational
creatures, yea, the heaviest and dullest among them, the Ox and Ass are not so
deficient in gratitude to their owners, as thou have been to thy God, Isa. 1.3.
justly therefore may he upbraid thee, and say, be astonished O ye Heavens at
this, and be ye horribly afraid etc. Sic ne repend^s? Is this thy kindness to
the God of thy mercies? marvel not then if God pluck up the hedge of his
protection from about thee, and let in cruel foes upon thee, to chastise thee
for thine ingratitude; and though he will not make a full end of thee; yet may
he say, concerning thee, as of Israel, 2 Chro. 127, 8. I will not utte^ly
dest^oy them, but will grant them some deliverance, and my wrath shall not be
poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishack; nevertheless they shall be
his servants, that they may know my service, and the service of the Kingdoms,
of the Countries. The Lord I tru^t will not utterly forsake his dwelling place
in England; but verily I fear he may permit Antichrist for a time to afflict
us, that we may know the difference between the sweet and easy yoke of Christ
which we would not endure, and the yoke of Antichrist that shall gall our necks
and consciences with cruel servitude: And because we served not the Lord our
God with joyfulness and gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things,
that therefore ^e shall serve our enemies, which the Lord shall send against
us, in hunger, and thirst, and nakedness, and the want of all things; Deuteronomy. 28
47. that so we may return to God with the Church, and say, as it is Isa. 26.19.
O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee ^ave had dominion over us, but by thee
only, will we make mention of thy Name; and as Hos. 2.7. I will return to my
first husband, for it was better with me then, than now.

These are some of the principal grounds of Englands fear at this day, in
reference to the Popish Party. Let the serious and considering Reader lay them
together, allow them but a just and even balance, and doubtless it will hereby
appear, that how great soever our fears are, yet our dangers much exceed them.

Having thus hinted the grounds of our fears what remains but that next I
address my self to the principal work designed i^ these Papers; which is to
call upon England to awake out of her destructive security, and not to suffer
her enemies to surprise her sl^eping? and I would do it in the words of the
Prophet, Zeph. 2.1, 2. Gather yourselves together yea, gather together, O
Nation no^ desired; before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the
chafe, before the fierce anger of the lord come upon thee. O that I could
^ound this Admonition so loud that all in the Nation might hear it! Had I any
hopes that these poor Papers might be honored with a glance of His Majesty's
Eye, I would, as it were, prostrate my self at His feet, and cry as that woman
did, 2 Kings 6.26. Help my Lord, O King!

An humbl^ Address to the King.
Great Sir, the Lord has done great thin^s for you, and You are scarcely
capable doing a g^eater service for him and his people; then v^go^ously to
withstand the Attempts and Encrochments of thi^ subtle and formidable Enemy; in
that it has pleased the Lord to move Your heart to send forth Your Royal
Proclamation aginst them, we accept it always and in all places, with all
thankfulness; and pray, That he would not only secure Your Royal Pe^s^n from
their attempts, but also make You a Shield to his people in these Nations.

It is not hid from Your Majesty what a perfidious and bloody Enemy this is,
whose principles as well a practice, en^ to the subversion both of Kings and
Kingdoms. One of them affirms it lawful to murder any one (though his own
Prince) if the Pope hold him excommunicate; I^m. S^.
and another se^^ down rules how it may be done^ and thinks poisoning to be the
best way. Mariana.
What but Treason and Rebel^ion can flow from those bloody Doctrines of the
Popes temporal ^ risdiction over Princes; and his power to dissolve all Gathes
and ^yes of Allegiance? So that neither Your Person nor Honor can be safe in
their hands; or should Your Royal Person be exempt from danger, yet if this
Enemy prevail. How many Thousands of your poor Innocent Sub^ects may fall by
their merciles^ hands? What a field of blood will they make Your Kidgdo^? and
surely the E^n^my can never co^^ e^v^il the King^ damage herein, Esther 6.16.
Most gladly at Your Command* would we offer our lives on the high places of the
field against them; but to fall by treachery, and be butchered in our beds, ^s
horrible to think.

And O that God would make our Honorable Representatives in Parliament still
vigilant to observe, An humble Supplication to the Parliament.
and zealous to oppose the motions of this Enemy! we bless the Lord for what
you have already done, in detecting them so far; but yet we cannot think our
danger over, whilst they swarm in such numbers among us. Hannibal was wont to
say, Magis se a non pugnante, Fabio quam a pugnante Marcello timere; he more
feared Fabius not fighting, then fighting Marcelus. O be as zealous for the
Protestant Interest, as they are against it; if they dare to smite with the
fist of wickedness we hope you will not be afraid to smite them with the Sword
of Justice. Remember what a matchless salvation was once given to our English
Parliament, I mean from the Powder plot, that Catholic Villainy, as one aptly
calls it: Such a delivernce as ages past cannot parallel in any History, and of
which we may say, as the Historian in another case, Si in annalibus non foret
fabula videre ur. Had it not been recorded in our own Annals, posterity would
never believe it: They have indeed studiously endeavored in their late Bold
Remonstrance to hide from your eyes the goodness of God in that deliverance,
that so by forgetting his goodness, they might bury in silence their own
wickedness; we hope none of your actings against this Enemy, will be stained
with luke-warmness; if justice be sprikled with a favorable hand, like a few
drop of water upon fire; we doubt instead of quenching, it will rather increase
the flame. Rome is a nettle, the more gently its handled, the more it ^^ings.
My Lords and Gentlemen, here is an Enemy that deserves your hotest zeal and
greatest vigilance, much better then honest loyal Nonconformists, who plead
with God night and day on your behalf.

It Is acknowledged they differ in lesser matters, from the established worship
of the Nation; but from the toleration of such Differences, no Public Danger
can arise. Some differences in Opinion (says an Honorable Author) are as the
striving of one Israelite with another; and these Moses quiets and parts them
fairly; and some are like the Egyptian striving with the Israelites, whom Moses
smites down. It was a noble Speech of An^hony of Bourbon King of Navar, Ld
Virulam. Oliand. Coment de stat. reip. and relcent. 16.
to the Danish Ambassador; this King being a Peer of France, and first Prince
of the Blood, challenged the Regency of that Kingdom during the French Kings
minoraty: He told the Ambassador, that he hoped in a short time to procure a
free passage for the Gospel throughout France; the Ambassador was pleased with
it; but desired that Luthers Doctrine, not Calvines, might pass for current:
The King replied, Luther and Ca^vin agree in for^y Points, and differ but in
one. Let those therefore tha^ follow the tenets of these two, unite their
strength aginst the common Enemy, and at better leisure; in a more conveni^nt
season, compound their own differences: Grant that Nonconformists be in an
error, yet the difference is not fund^mental; and the Famous Emperor
^heodosius, did not only b^a^ with the Novations, but familia^ly consult with
their Le^r^ed Pastors about Church Matters, though differing in several Poin^s
of Dis^ipl^ne, Soz lib. 7. Cap. 12.
and Constantine, although ^e made a La^ in-terrorem, yet in point of
executi^on he spared them. O that with one shoulder you mig^t suppo^t the
to^tering Interest of Christ in these Nations! and be^st led the Saviors of
England in this time of danger; which will be a more Honorable Title, then any
other you are, or can be dign^fied with.

Queries to the Bishops.
I would also propound it as matter of serious consideration to the Prelates;
Whether this be a time to vex and persecute the Conscientious and Fai^hfull in
the Land, for Ceremonies and Trifles, when the substance of Religion lies
exposed? Will not the late dreadful Alarms by the Popish Party sound a Retreat
and put an end to this work? suffer me to propound two or three Queries to your
Consciences.

Are not Papists hereby hardened in their errors, and confirmed in their Cruel
and Tyrannical impositions upon Conscien^es, Quere.
whilst they see you to use the same medium? what plea is left you against
their Tyranny, if ever God permit them to re-kindle the Flames of Martyrdom ^n
England? If your way be good, why is not theirs? magis and minus non variant
speciem; Is there not as much strength in their Arguments of Fire and Faggot to
convince you, as in your Excommunications Imprisonments, Mulcts and Pena^ties,
to convince us of the lawfulness of your Ceremonies? It Is said of Molineus
Bonifac^us, that his silly reasons for the Popes Supremacy did well enough,
being propoudded wish a Sword in bis hand; a keen Sword will make a dull
argument cut to the quick; and if you cannot answer such Argument your selves,
me thinks you should be tender of urging them against others. Sure I am,
Confiscations, Imprisonments, and Death are the most irrefragable Arguments for
Popery; and it is a thousand pitties we should tell the word, that the reformed
Religion must be supported by the like Artifices: It would better serve their
Design in Spain, then Christ's Interest in England. I am sure it is the proper
Cognizance of Antichrist: and O that it might remain with them only. Hear what
a man of your own Character says, it is observed says Doctor Tailor, That the
restraint of Prophesying and imposing upon other men's understandings, Liberty
of prophesy. p. 109.
being Masters of their Consciences, and Lording it over their faith, came in
with the retinue and train of Antichrist, that is, they came as other abuses
and corruptions of the Church did, when the Churches Fortunes grew better, and
her Sons worse, and some of their Fathers worst of all; for in the first three
hundred years, there was now sign of persecuting any man for his Opinion,
though at that time there were many horrid Opinions. -- A Wolf may as well give
Laws to the understanding, as he whose dictates are only propounded in
violence, and written in blood: and a Dog is as capable of a Law, as a Man, if
their be no choice in his obedience, no discourse in his choice, no reason to
satisfy his discourse.

Are you not like to have the same measure, Quer.
you mete to us, meted back to you again with an overplus, if this enemy
prevail? and then you will find how good it is to afflict for Conscience sake.
Certainly, if you resolve to be fai^hful to protestant Principles, you will
escape upon no easier terms, then us.

Are not these very persons against whom you discharge your cannons, Quer.
and woory up and down by your apparitors, like to prove as stiff assertors of
the Protestant cause, (if God call for more blood to witness to it) as your
selves? you find them (I believe) inflexible enough to your Ceremonies; all
your menacies, and punishments cannot cudgel them into conformity with them,
because they find aliquid commune cum antichristo, a spice and tang of Popish
Superstition in them; and doubtless, they will as freely lay down their lives
in defense of ^he fundamental and weightier points of Religion, as their
Places, Liberties, and Earthly Comforts, for the lesser Circumstantial truths
thereof: and is it not pity, that you should (especially at such a time as
this) suppress afflict, and silence such men, whose abilities might now be
improved to such singular advantage?

But, aquilia non capit muscas, Lordly spirits scorn to stoop to such mean
composures, An application to the Not on in general.
or take notice of a creeping Pamphlet; Let me therefore speak to the Body of
the People, and especially to those among the People, who profess to fear the
Lord, and tremble at his Judgments. Will you shut your ears to seasonable
counsel also? Will you despise your dangers till you are suprised by them? O
England! Will thou not begin to fear, till thou art past hope? Shall thine
Enemies find thee sleeping, and leave the dead? Wretehed England! here is thy
misery, that thou know not thy time; but as the fishes are taken in an evil
net, and as the birds are caught in the snare; so wilt thon be snared in an
evil time, when it falls on thee suddenly, Ecles. 8.12. May I freely express
my apprehensions in the Case; I much doubt thine Enemies have so contrived and
laid their design against thee, that (in their apprehensions at least) all thy
struglings now, are but as the flutterings of a bird in the net, which instead
of freeing, does but the faster entangle her. However if God at last, will but
open thine ears to seasonable Counsel, and persuade thine heart to thy present
duties, who can tell but the Lord may yet be gracious to his Land, and spare
his people?

It is not so much their confidence as our impenitence that is to be feared,
Haman was as confident as they can be, and had cast Pur for the Jews as well as
they for us. Esth. 3.7. So was Pharaoh too when he said I will pursue; I will
pursue; God can quickly give their pregnant designs a miscarrying womb; so that
they which have conceived mischief shall bring forth but a lie; and thou that
fear continua^ly because of the Enemy, shall yet praise him and say; The
h^athen are sunk down in the pit that they made; in the net which they hid is
their own foot taken: the Lord is known by the judgments which he executes,
the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands; Higgaion ^elah. Psalm. 9.
15.16. and when the Enemy comes in like a flood; the Spirit of thy God can
set up a Standard against him: if men cannot, winds and waves shall fight for
thee, as they have done in former exigencies. O nimium dilecte Deo cui militat
ether
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.


Only obey the Counsels of God, and let thine ear be circumcised; and as ever
you expect that a door of hope should be opened to you in this valley of achor,
let these following Counsels be speedily and heartily practiced.

1 COUNSEL.
Abhor Popery, and be eminent in your zeal against it. Rome is that Amalek,
with whom God will never make peace; neither should we: It was Queen Elizabeth's
Motto, No peace with Spain and it should be ours. No peace with Rome. My dear
Countrymen, I beseech you, be not deceived with vain words; suffer not your
selves too be circumvented by a Stratagem of the Enemy let not prejudice, and
discontents which they endeavor to beget and foment in you against your real
friends, cause any of you to fall in with the Design and Interest of your
Enemies: it is a dangerous thing to comply with that Interest which God has
engaged himself against, and as sure as Christ sits at his Fathers right hand,
shall be destroyed: and what cause you have to abhor Popery: you will see by
that time I have showed you, that it is a FALSE: BLOODY: BLASPHEMOUS:
UNCOMFORTABLE: AND DAMNABLE RELIGION.

First, It is a False Religion, and that's reason enough to abhor it. You would
be loath to be cheated with Counterfeit Coin, especially if you were to receive
your whole portion in it) how much more with a False Faith; when it amounts to
as much as all your souls are worth in another World! the falsity of the
Popish Religion (if it yet remain a question with any among us) may be thus
evinced.

That Religion which is not built upon the Foundation the Prophets and Apostles
but stands in the wisdom of man, 1 Argument.
is a False Religion.

But the Popish Religion is not built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, but stands in the wisdom of man; therefore the Popish Religion is a
False Religion.

The ma^or proposition is undeniable, and stands upon the authority of these
Scriptures: Ephesians 2 20 And are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles: Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone. 1 Cor. 2.5, That
your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men: but in the power of God. Isa,
8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this
word: it is because there is no light in them.

The minor proposition is as evident: For (1.) the Papists themselves
acknowledge that their worshipping of Creatures, Mass, Purgatory, the Popes
Supremacy, and most other Doctrines, wherein they differ from us, cannot be
confirmed by Scripture: Az^rius, instit. mor. par. 2 d. lib. 4. ca. 18 (2.)
They set up the Pope, as a Judge above the Scriptures, subjecting them to the
Popes authority: this many of their Learned Doctors are not ashamed expressly to
affirm and defend; Pigh^us Hierarch, Lib. 1, Cap. 2.3, 4. Card. Cusan Epist.
7th. ad Bohem. Cocteus, Holli^s, etc. ^3.) They reproach and deprave the
Scripture, calling it an uncertain thing, dead letter, an insufficient guide of
it self, without their tradition* or unwritten Word, Belar. de sut. Serip. (4.)
They add to, and detract from the Scriptures at pleasure. Bellarmin says,
Pontificem posse mutare per ut Eclesiae expedit positivae precepta Apostolorum,
(i. e.) The Pope can change the positive precepts of the Apostles, for the
behoof of the Church. (5.) They will not stand to Scripture Trial and Judgment
for the Decision of Controversies, but cry out to the Fathers, to Counsels, to
Schoolmen, as appears in our own Acts and Mon. in multitudes of examples. (6.)
They restrain the people by penalties, from reading the Scriptures persuading
them to resolve their Faith into the Authority of the Pope, and believe
Implicity, as the Church believes. Ergo.

2 Argument.
That Religion which ascribes the glory of man's salvation to himself* and not to
Christ alone, is a false Religion. But the Popish Religion ascribes the glory
of man's salvation to himself, and not to Christ alone; therefore it is a False
Religion.

The Major is undeniable; the end of Religion is the glory of God; the
Christian Religion utterly excludes the glorying of man in himself, Romans 3.27.
where is boasting then? it is excluded; by what Law? of works? nay, but by the
Law of Faith. Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy be saved us, etc.

The Minor is evident, for themselves teach that the proper certainty of hope
is in merits, 3 Argument.
that certainty which is not presumption is of merrits and to be measured by
merits, Alexand. Ales. quest. 3 d 65. Merits (says another are the foundation
of our hope, Piliucius* tract 22. n. 244 therefore,

That which is the Religion of Antichrist, is a false Religion; but the Popish
Religion, is the Religion of Antichrist; Ergo.

The Major is evident, for the Doctrine of Antichrist is a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
a mystery of iniquity. ver. 7.

The Minor appears as evidently, in that the Notes and Characters by which
Antichrist is described and indigetated in Scripture, agree to Popery, and to
it only. The Pope is that Ho Anomos that lawless one, 2 These. 2.8. He sits in
the Temple of God, challenging Supremacy over all Churches. He sits there as
God, exalting himself above all that is called God, ver. 4. They attribute to
him the Name of the Lord our God. Oraclo v^cis mundi moderaeris habenas,
Et merito in terris c^ederis esse Deus.
Sixty 4th.

His coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying
wonders, of which there are numberless multitudes in Popery, their Legends
swarm with them. He has horns as a Lamb, (viz) pretenses of meekness and
innocence, but speaks l^ke a Dragon, Rev. 13.11. He arose out of the earth,
stirpium more, after the manner of plants, growing by insensible degrees to
this monstrous greatness; to him only agree all the other Caracters in Rev. 17.
and alibi, therefore,

That Religion which tolerate and countenances all manner of Pride, 4 Argument.
Covetousness, Lust, Murders, etc. is a False Religion* but the Popish Religion
tolerates and countenances these, and many other fleshly lusts* therefore it is
a false Religion.

The Major if doubted) may easily be proved by all those Scriptures which show
the purity of true Religion, as Jam. 1.27. pure Religion and undefiled before
God, etc, Tit. 2.12. teaching u^, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
etc. Psalm, 19.9 the fear of the Lord (which is there put for his Worship) is
c^ean, etc.

The Minor may be as easily proved from their own Histories and Writings, and
many other credible Authors* As for their Pride, let an instance or two
suffice: Sir Richard Baker in his Chron. p. 30. tells us that Aldred Arch
Bishop of Canterbury, upon the repulse of his Suit by King William the first,
grew discontent, and offered to depart, when the King, in awe of his
displeasure, staid him, fell down at his feet, desired pardon, and promised to
grant him his Suit; the King being all this while down at the Archbishops
feet, the Nobles that wete present put him in mind, that he should cause the
King to rise; nay says the Archbishop let him alone, let him find what it is
^o anger St. Peter: Richonius that proud Papist, was not ashamed to tell the
world in Print, that a Priest is as much above a King, as a King is above a
Beast; yea, as God i^ above a Priest. Their Covetousness is also insatiable,
all things are vendible at Rome, even the Blood of Christ is set to sale for
money, they have vast Revenues from the very Stues and Brothels. The blindest
times took s^ much notice of their Covetousness, that though they durst not
speak out* yet expressed their apprehensions, and just indignation against them
in Pictures. There was found in the the Abbey of Fu^ba (besides other Embldms
taxing Popish Prelates) the Picture of a Wolf in a Monks Cowle, and shaven
Crown, preaching to a F^ock of Sheep* with these words coming in a pendant out
of his mouth, God is my witness, how I long for you all in my bowels; and
underneath was written: John Wolf ^ect. memor. Tom 1. adan 130^.
This hooded Wolf is the Hypocrite, of whom in the Gospel, beware of False
Prophets: this Picture was made two hundred years before the Reformation by
Luther. Another like this, was found at Ptortzheim, only with this difference,
that the Wolf was preaching to a Flock of Geese, every one holding in his bill,
a pair of praying beads. Prodigious Lusts are found among them: they forbid
Marriage, and scatter their Lusts like bru^e beasts promiscuously. St. Gregory
commanded that their Priests should not marry; but understanding what
filthiness they committed, and finding in one Fishpond, six thousand Heads of
young ^nfant^ that had been murdered; Vallarins lives of the Popes. p. 33.
he repealed his decree: Yea, their own Writers tell us such stories of their
wickedn^ss in this kind that I am ashamed my pen should English; the Learned
R^ader may find more then enough in Bernard, in Cant. Sermon. 66. Alva^^z. ^el^g.
de ^l^^ct. Ecles lib. 2. artic. 24. Peter Aliacus, Paliugeriu^, C^^nelius Mu^
etc. Most horrid murders are frequently practiced by them, yea, and encouraged
with promised rewards in Heaven.

Hospin. hist* Jesus. p. 225.
Hospinian shows us how the Jesuits animate him, whom they employ for the
murdering of Kings; they bring him into a Chapel, where the Knife lies w^apt
up in a Cloth with agnns Dei engraven upon it; then they open the Knife and
sprinkle it with Holy Water, fastening to the Haft some Consecrated Beads, with
this Indulgence. That so many Stabs as he gives the King so many Souls he saves
out of Purgatory* they they commend to him the Knife in these words. O thou
chosen Son of God* take to thee the Sword of Iephte, Sampson, David, Gideon,
Judith, of Maccabeus, of Julius the Second who defended himself from the
Princes by his Sword; go, and be wisely courageous and God strengthen thy hand;
then they all fall upon their knees with this prayer, Be present. O ye
Cherubims and Seraphims, be present ye Thrones, Powers, Holy Angels, fill this
Holy Vessel with Glory, give him the Crown of all the Holy Martyrs; he is no
longer ours, but your companion; and thou, O God, strengthen his arm, that he
may do thy will; give him thy Helmet and Win^s to fly from his Enemies; -- then
they show him a Crown of Glory, and say, Lord respect this thy Arm, and
Executioner of thy Justice: -- then they tell him they see a Divine Luster in
his Face, which moves them to fall down and kiss his feet, and now he is no
more a mortal man, etc,

These, and all other lusts are indulged, even by the Doctrines and Principles
of Papists; for, if venial sins do not render a man unworthy of the love of
God, are but trif^es, toys, gnats, a^ Bellarmi^e calls them, Lib. 2d. de
peccatorem: If the Pope can get great Indulgencies, of which he has so many
kinds, Indulgencies for certain days, or years, some partial, some plenary; for
all sins, yea, interdum plena plenior for more then all; some for this life,
some for ever: What should hinder, but that they should take the bit in the
mouth, and rush into all wickedne^s, Belar de indulg* Ch 4. ^. Qu. 5. loc. cit.
as the Horse into the battle? especially adding what Navarrus Cordubensis, and
others by Bellarmi^'s own confession, teach, that if men rush into sin, upon
the hope of such Indulgencies, they may be nevertheless absolved. But I have
stood too long upon this head; our Protestant Writers have clearly and
learnedly evinced the falsity of this Religion; only because many of their
Arguments are in Latin, I thought it not amise to add somewhat for the
satisfaction of vulgar Readers.

2. Abhor Popery, for it is a bloody Religion; Rev. 17.6. and I saw the woman
drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.
The Pope writes his Laws in blood, wherever he erects his Throne; he is the
Son of perdition in an active, as well as in a passive sense. Poor England has
had experience of Popish cruelty, and so has Ireland too; in one of whose
Provinces 140000 Protestants were Massacred by them in the late rebe^lion.
Popish cruelty spares none, pi^ies none; how have Protestants been compelled
(...) tortures to discover their dearest relations! wives (being first defiled)
have been forced to give the deaths wound to their dear husbands, bloody
villains, putting the sword into their hands, and guiding them in the
Execution: Godly Christians compelled to carry Faggots, to burn their own
Faitful Pastors: Children of eight years old, whipped to death for Religion: Yea,
such has been their rage against the sincere professors of the truth, that
beyond all examples of malice, (for pascitur in vivos l^vor post fata quiescit)
they have not only hunted after the Living but violated the Graves; and burnt
the bones of dead Sams^^ thu they dealt with Bucer, ^agius, Wickliffe, etc. O
England! What cause have thou to bless the Lord, for so long a respit from
Papish cruelty! thine own Histories may sufficiently inform thee, what rivers
of precious blood have streamed through thee, what flames of Martyrdom have
raged within thy Cities and Villages, when these ravenous Wolves and bloody
^ygers were let loose to raya^e in all thy borders? And what cause have thou to
tremble at the first approaches of these ^urculent foes whose rage is boiled up
to a greater height then ever? and should they return upon thee again, (which
Heaven prevent) they would exceed all former examples of crue^ty. Poor England!
those knives which lately providence put into thine hand, were intended to be
sheathed in thy bowels: art thou able to endure such another bout, as the last
age did? Hear how one of the faithful Watchmen (now out of their reach)
expostulated upon the same account with thee.

Mr. S^rong.
Can you (says he) endure to see a stranger to Lord it in your Habitations and
your Dwellings? to cast you out? for your pleasant and well tilled Fields to be
made a prey? for you to sow, and another to reap? impius has segetes, etc. for
the delicate Woman, upon whom the wind must not blow, that scarce dare venture
to set the soul of her foot upon the ground for tenderness, to be exposed to
the lusts and cruelty of an enemy; to be glad to fly away naked to prolong a
miserable life, which would gladly be parted with for death, were it not for
fear of the exchange? for the tender mother to look upon the child of her womb,
and consider, Must this child in whom I have placed the hopes of mine age* (for
omnis in Ascanio stat chari ^ura parentis) he that has been so tenderly bred
up, Must he fall into the rough hands of a bloody Soldier skilful to destroy?
It had been well for me if God had given me a miscarrying womb, and dry
breasts, rather then to bring forth children unto Murderers. Or if you could
be safe, How could you endure to see the evil that shall come upon your people,
and the destruction of your kindred? I do not rhetorize and fa^^^ to draw
affection, your brethren are a sad Comment upon what I have spoken and Ireland
the Stage upon which you may see this Tragedy acted before your eyes.

3. O hate Popery, For it is not only a Bloody, but a blasphemous Religion. If
we be Christians indeed, the dishonor of Gods Name should affect us more then
the shedding of the warmest blood in our veins; this Scarlet Whore is full of
the Names of Blasphemy, Rev. 17.3. ^d. Tome. Oper. Luth. Lat. p 125.
Popery is a mere Rapsodie of Blasphemies: Luther has gathered several of
their blasphemous doctrines out of their own Cannons to our hands, of which let
a few suffice: (1) Papa and sui, etc* (i. e.) The Pope and his, are not bound
to be subject and obedien^ to the Commands of God. (2.) Sole significari, etc.
(i. e.) By the Sun is signified the Papal, and by the Moon the Imperial, or
Sec^lar Power in the Christian Common wealth. (3.) Pa^^am habere i^ Sirinio
pectoris sui etc. (i. e.) That all Laws are in the Coffer of the Popes breast,
and full power over all Laws. (4.) Si p^p^ suae, etc* (i. e.) If the Pope be so
negligent of his own salvation, so negligent and remiss in his Office, that he
should draw innumerable multitudes to hell with him, to be there ever
tormented; yet may no mortal man reprove him of any fault in so doing. (5.)
Papam habere potestatem, etc. ^ (i. e.) The Pope has power to commute and
dissolve vows made to God, and then if any man defer to pay his vow according
to Gods Command, he is not held guilty. (6.) Quad non Papa a Scriptura, etc.
from the Pope. (7.) Summa Summarum, etc (i. e.) The sum of all their C^mical
Law is this, that the Pope is a God in the Earth, Superior to all Celestial,
Terrestrial, Spiritual and Secular persons; that all things are his, and none
may say unto him, what do thou? I am loath to offend Christian ears with more
of their Blasphemous Tenants, this is enough to turn the stomachs of Christians
with indignation aginst them.

4. It Is a most uncomfortable Religion; it is impossible to get, or keep true
peace of Conscience in that way. Rev. 9 5, 6. And their torments was as the
torment of a Scorpion when he smites a man: And in those days, s^all men seek
death, and shall not find it, but death shall fly from them: That is, (says a
worthy Divine) the Consciences o^ poor sinners being stung with guilt and
horror of sin, and finding no satisfaction nor remedy in their way, shall be
endlesly perplexed and tortured with inward troubles of spirit, which are like
the stinging of a Scorpion; so that they shall choose death rather then life:
For do but consider, (1) They are enemies to free grace and all
Gospel-preaching. Gardener would not have this gap of free grace opened to the
People: See (says ^ont^^^ a Jesuit) The fruit of Protestantism and their
Gospel praeching. Conts. in Math. 24.
(2) They deprived the people of the Scriptures, wherein are treasured up all
the Cordial and soul-reviving Comforts of a poor distressed sinner: If the Law
(says David) had not been my delight, I should have perished in my affliction;
and again, This is my comfort in my affliction, thy word has quikned me, Psalm.
119. (3.) They lay the stress of their hopes for salvation (as you have heard)
upon their own merits and the merits of others, like themselves: so that all
the comforts they build upon that foundation, must needs be loose and delu^ory
things: debile fundamentum fallit otus: every thing is as its foundation is.
Lastly, they deny the possibility of the assurance of ^alvation in this life;
and so coseq^ntly, their Consciences must be alwais cauterized and dead, or
fluctuating and dubious. O what a religion is this!

5. Lastly, it is a Damnable religion; we have no ground from Sripture, to
conc^ude the salvation of any among them, that know the depths of Satan, and
live and dye in destructive Opinions Hear what the Scriptures say, Rev. 17.8.
The beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit, and go into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth, shall
wonder (whose Names are not written in the Book of L^fe from the foundation of
the Word) when they see the beast that was, and is not, and yet is; 2 These,
2.21. And for this cause, God shall send them strong del^sions that they should
believe a lie, that they all might be damned that believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteosness. When their sorest plague shall come upon them,
they shall not have a heart given them to repent; but shall blaspheme the Name
of God, because of them. Rev. 16.9. And therefore to shut up this first
Counsel, you that love the Lord, hate that by which he is so much dishonored,
it will make your blood boil in your veins, to see how he is Crucified,
Dethroned, and trampled on by these his Enemies.

2 COVNSL.
Use all proper preventive means to avert this threatening judgment; of which
sort I shall recommend these three in special.

1 Me^nes.
Mourn for the abuse of former Light and Liberty, and say, O remember not
against us former iniquities? let thy tendeo mercy speedily prevent us; for we
are brought very low, Psalm. 97.8. O England! What a day of Mercy have thou had!
how have thou been exalted to Heaven with Capernaum! thou might once have
worshipped God as purely, as thou would, you might have been as holy as you
would; the lot of this generation was cast upon such an happy nick of time, as
is scarce to be found in the history of Ages past; but the most glorious
morning has its evening, the brightest Sun its clouds, and time of setting. We
know not the time of our Visitation, but were both wanton and barren under
those precous Mercies. God is now coming with his Ax in his hand, to hew down
barren Trees. Nothing but unfeigned repentance and speedy reformation can
reprieve us. Romanae leges ^^nam pregnanti deferunt. Nothing but those fruits
can be a good sign of mercy to England. And will you not yet mourn for the
loss of such a day? such peace neglected, and not mourn! such liberties abused,
and for their abuses removed, and not a tear! So many flourishing Churches
broken, and the heart not broken! So many shining Lights extinct, and none lay
it to heart! Such black clouds of Popish darkness and blood gathering over us,
and none tremble! Lord! what hearts have we? how wonderful is the stupifying
power of sin! O ye Professors of England, that ye had known at lea^^ in that
your day the things of your peace! but now they are hid from your eyes, You
once had those mercies, now you have them not; and the Lord only knows whether
ever you shall see them again. I am out of hopes of them, till I see the people
of God more humbled for the sins that removed them.

Make up your breaches speedily; 2 Means.
it is time (I think) when the enemy is entering in at them. Hear me all ye
friends of Christ, by what names so ever distinguished among your selves: Will
you some and be friends one with another? have you yet enough of your
Divisions? how do the fruits of your Animosities, Contentions and Reproaches,
relish now with you? do you see who God is sending to part you? can^t you yet
pray together, mourn together? strive with God together? Why then, can you go
to Prison together? Will you stand quietly at the stake together? What say you
friends? you profess to be the children of the God of Peace, and I am sure
Christ is the Prince of Peace, and the Gospel, the Gospel; of Peace; and will
not you be the Sons of Peace? if you will not yet unite, let the ruin of
England lie upon your score. Do you make no more of the Commands of Christ, the
Credit of Religion, the safety of the Nation; Ah! methinks, as Tertullian told
Scapula, Si non vis tibi parcere parce Corthagim. If you have no pity for your
selves, have pity for the Nation; don't sacrifice all to your unruly lusts* If
you profess love to Christ, and yet have no love for those in whom is his
Image; if you pretend to be Saints, and yet had rather hazard the honor of
Christ, then deny your passions and lusts, pray pull off your Vizards, fall
into your places, and appear as you are.

Brethren, I beseech you seriously to consider these three Particulars, and if
there be any force in them, or tenderness in your Consciences, let them at last
persuade you to love one another. 1. That Scripture makes your love to the
Brethren a positive mark of your Regenration, 1 John 3.14. We know that we are
passed from death ^o life, because we love the brethren: He that loves not his
Brother, abides in death. And 1 John 5.1. Every one that loves him that begat,
loves him also that is begotten of him. And to speak truth, it is (ordinarily)
the clearest sign that many poor Christians can find in their own breasts:
Upon the hazard therefore of your own peace and assurance be it, if still, you
continue to bite and devour one another. 2. I will farther and, that this
endeared and mutual love of the Saints, is the charge yea, the dying-charge of
Christ to them; they were some of the last words of Christ in this world, John.
15.12. This is my Commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you.
Dying charges are commonly received with geatest Veneration, and men (what ever
they neglect) will be sure to ful^fill the will of the Dead. So Genesis 50.10.
When Joseph's Brethren were afraid lest (his father being now dead) he would
remembe^ the old injuries they have done him, urge this pacifying argumen^ upon
him, Thy Father did command, before he dyed, saying, Forgive ^ pray thee now
the trespasses of thy Brethren. And ver. 21. you see how it prevailed with him,
He comforted them, and spoke kindly to them. O my brethren! will you not lay
down your private differences and animosities when God threatens you with a
common ruin? when a common danger is upon you all* In the year 1607. when by
the irruption of ^he Severn sea the Country in Sommersetshire was over flown
almost 20 miles in length, and four miles in breadth, and many persons drowned:
Worthies of England, in his farewell to Somersetshire.
it was then observable (says Mr, Fuller) that Creatures of contra^y Natures,
as Dogs, and Hares, Foxes and Conies yea Cats and Mice, getting up to the tops
of some Hills dispensed at that time with their Antipathies, remaining
peaceably together, without sign of fear, or any violence one toward another.
My Readers thoughts will doubtless anticipate me in the application of this
strange passage. Our want of love has cut the banks and let in an inundation
of Calamities upon us, and a more fearful flood of judgments is yet expected;
and will not such public dangers yet cause us to depose our private
Differences? shall we act below Dogs Cats, and Foxes? shall we prefer private
revenge before common safety? If so, I much doubt God will still us, and part
the fray in a more terrible manner then most think of. I doubt it may be said
of us ere long, as he said who saw the dead carcasses of Enemies that had been
slain in a duel lie quietly together, as if they had embraced each other,
quanta amicitia se invicem amplectantur, qui mutua implacabili in m^citia
perierunt? How lovingly do they embrace each other being dead, who perished
through their mutual and implacable enmity? how justly may the Lord sweep away
this generation of Professors, and raise up others in their room who will
agree, and love one another better?

What shall I say more? If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies fulfill ye
my joy; that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one acccord and
of one mind Phil. 2.12.

Strive day and night with God by importunate prayers, for the prevention of
those eminent judgments* but strive no more one with another, no more of that
work I pray. O it is a thousand pities to see the sheep (...) ^^rist to push and
go^e each other. Non Secu^ ac
Cum duo conversis inimica in prelia tauri
Frontibus incurrent --


O rather put out as the Elect of God, bowels of mercy and compassion; let the
^^ople of God be but once heartily united, and then Rome do thy worst.
Associ^te ^^out selves, O ye people, and you shall be broken in pieces; and
give ear, all (...) of far Countries: gird your selves, and ye shall be broken
in pieces: take ^ounsel together, and it shall come to naught: speak the word,
and it shall ^ot stand: for God is with us.

^ye day and night at the throne of Grace, interceeding with God for your
^^ves, and for the Nation. What Mr. P^rkids said of his times, it i^ no less
sui^^^^le to these, Non sunt istae litigandi, sed orandi tempora: these are not
times for ^^tention, but Prayer: This will be a good omen of mercy and
deliverance at ^^nd: we may say of the spirit of Prayer, as Christ said of the
budding of the (...)-tree, Mat. 24. when ye see the Fig Tree and all the trees
of the field put forth under leaves, ye know that Summer is nigh. So the
reviving and budding forth the spirit of Prayer is a sign that Salvation is
nigh? The Psalmist knew the ^^ne to favor Sion was come, and that God would
arise and have mercy upon (...), because he found a spirit of compassion and
prayer for Sion poured out, ^s. ^2.13.14. When the decree for judgment is gone
forth, and God will not be ^^pt, he usually shuts up and straitens the spirits
of praying ones, Jer. 7.16. he ne^^r shuts out prayer till the case become
desperate and ^emediless: Jer. 15.1. O ^^^ds, great is the efficacy of prayer.
prayer will rain all your enemies: David (...) up but one petition against
Achitopnel, 'Lord turn the council of Achitopnel into foolishness, and it
ruined both him and his design. 2 Samuel 15.3. Prayers and tears will do more
then Guns or swords. 2 chronicles. 14 9.

O be not discouraged, because you presently see not the effects and returns of
^ur Prayers: your prayers are heard though their answers be suspended, and
(...) confident in due time they shall be answered also. O how many millions of
^^ayers are upon the file in Heaven, as a Memor^al before God upon this
accoun^^ ^ot a good man all the world over but joins with you in this cry,
Lord, raze the ^oundations of Antichrist, pull down Babylon, and build up Sion.
Yea; the pray^^s of thousands, who are now in heaven, are yet to be answered in
that matter^ or though we may say of their persons as the Church speaks of
Abraham, they ^now us not: yet me may say of their prayers as the Church speaks
of Abel, though ^^ey be dead, their prayers are not dead, they live, and yet
speak. O then stir up ^our selves to take hold o^ God, weep and make
supplication.

Two things exceedingly discourage our spirits in prayer, great guilt in u^,
and ^^ng delays of answers from God: against both these, she Lord has laid up
encouragements and sweet support^ in the word* are we under great guilt? have
we abused mercies? so did Israel, Ps. 106.7.8.16.17 18.19.28. Yet mercy comes
tri^mphing over all their unworthiness with a non obstante, ver. 44.
Nevertheless he regarded their affliction when he heard their cry. What though
England like Israel be a polluted Nation: yet Israel has ^ot be^n forsaken,
nor Judah of his Go^: though their land was filled with sin against the holy
one of Israel, Jer. 515. or does God exercise your faith and patience by
delaying the returns of praye^? so that you are ^eady to look at your prayers
as lost. See another Nevertheless in that ca^e to raise (...) your hearts and
hopes. Psalm. 31.22. I said in my have, I am go^ off from before thine eyes:
Nevertheless, thou heardest the voice of my supplication when I cried unto th^^
Up therefore every one in whom is the spirit of prayer, pour out your hearts
before him in this time of common danger, your God will hear you: but if you^
speechless now, it is a sad forerunner of death, and National ruin.

3. COUNSEL.
Prepare your selves for the worst, that if times should alter (for there are
cha^^ges in the right hand of the Most High) yet your hearts may not be turned
ba^^ nor your steps decline from those paths of truth and holiness wherein you
ha^^ been engaged.

O cleave to the Lord with purpose of heart, and when fiery trials come
(whe^^of most serious and considering Christians are in a trembling
expectation) (...) do not basely dissert Christ in open field. To do evil
(says Metellus) where the^^^ is neither pain nor danger, is easy and common;
but to do good in the face ^^ danger is virtuous and truly noble. It was the
saying of a Martyr to his Perse^^tors, Though you pluck my heart out of my
bowels, yet you shall never pluck the tr^^^ out of my heart. O how is Christ
honored, enemies daunted, and your Souls cured by your Constancy in a time of
danger! hold fast what you have recei^^^ and though, you lose your Heads, yet
save your Crowns. it was a resolute (...) noble saying of Luther, when hard put
to it to defend the Truth of Christ aga^^^^ so many Enemies. Ego Martinus
Lutherus, etc. I Martin Luther an unwor^^^ Preacher of the Gospel of Christ, do
believe and hold, that this Article, (...) That we are justified before God, by
faith alone without works shall never (...) overthrown neither by Roman Caesar,
nor by the Turk, Tartar-Persian, Pope, (...) all his Cardinals Priests, and
Monks, Kings, Princes, Potentates, and all the ^^^vils in Hell, will they, nill
they, shall leave me this Article unshaken.

Brethren, I much doubt the wantonness, Scepticisme, and contentions of (...)
Professors of the age, have so weakened the Authority and Reputation of Religi^^
in the world, that God will once more call for Christian blood to seal his
Tru^^^ and convince the world that there is reality in Godliness. And if it
should co^^ to that: I even tremble to think what shrinking will be among
Professors. (...) prevent which, all that I shall add shall be in these two
words. 1. See the gro^^^ you stand on be good. I do not speak of the Cause, for
it is beyond dispute (...) most glorious cause that was ever sealed by the
blood of any Witness: but (...) your Condition. O see that be good also! look
to it that you die in, as well (...) for the faith, are you upon sure and safe
grounds, as to your eternal state? if (...) but that you be still dubious, its
time to make both sure and quick work. 2. Sta^^ your ground, he deserves to be
hanged in everlasting chains in Hell, that relinq^^^shes such a Cause, and such
a Christ on earth. Christian, I would fain know, h^^ thou can imagine to
close up thy life more honorably, or more comfortab^^ then by offering it up
in defense of the precious truths of Christ against his b^^^ and blaspheming
enemies? the very Heathens heated with love to their Coun^^^ have made many
brave and bold adventures for it, and will you shrink? Ephesians. 16.13
O (...) unto you the whole Armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in
the ^^vil day; and having done all, to stand.

FINIS.

