A TREATISE OF THE NATVRE OF CATHOLIC FAITH, AND HERESY, WITH Reflection upon
the Nullitie of the English Protestant Church, and Clergy.

By N. N.

Printed at ROUEN, in the year 1657.

Permissu Superiorum.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IF Heresy could have been brought to a stand in its own opinions, it would
long since have been sunk in the opinion of all; but finding it self upon
quick sand, it is forced to change footing, and not to stay long upon the same
ground, for fear of sinking under ground, and falling from its present state of
improbabilitie, to its ancient state of invisibilitie. And albeit by this often
shifting, it appears to be brought to desperate shifts, yet is it content
rather to appear any thing, then utterly disappeare into its own nothing. A
Cheat must often change his disguise, a Mountebank his market, a Sophister his
Medium, and an Army of defeated disordered Troops, can not long with security
keep the same place, and posture. It is not so hard to rout them, as to find
them out: so unarmed, unfortified, so disbanded, and scattered they are, for
want of a Commander in chief, that they are no sooner in sight, then put to
flight, and forced to retreat to some new passage of less peril.

First, Scripture alone was thought a sufficient defense, but finding it failed
them, they found it necessary to change, and even cut off some parts of this
fortification, which were of advantage to their enemies. After, an outwork of
Tradition was judged expedient for more security; although in effect nothing
proves of more danger unto them. Bishops, and Priests formerly cast out, as of
more expenses then profit, were soon called back, and desired to appear armed
with true Orders, received not by extraordinary vocation, but by legal
succession. Faith alone was thought armor of proof, before they had found by
experience the need of good works. The Church which in the beginning they gave
out for lost, and utterly perished for many ages, they came at length to seek
out with more solicitude then success; being resolved not to find it in that
place in which alone it is to be found: and now they seem willing to open the
doors of the Church to all Christians, that they in the crowd may get in with
the rest. The pretended clearness of Scripture in it self, or at least as
subsigned with the testimony of the private spirit, made the definitions of
Counsels seem of no use; now upon better consideration, foreseeing the
prejudice they do to their cause, by appealing from the verdict of all
Counsels in general, they think expedient to admit of some in particular,
but namely such as treated of matters not apertaining to our present
controversies: by which evasion they engage themselves in greater difficulties,
then those they pretended to avoyde; for no just exception was, or can be
alleged against the Council of Lateran deciding the question of
Transubstantiation, which may not be urged against those Counsels which
obliged all Christians to believe the mysteries of the Trinity, and Incarnation.

They have been so beaten from place to place, and so battered, and broken in
every place they undertook to maintain, that diverse of the best
understanding, and least passion, would be glad to capitulate, and come to an
accommodation with us, as far as it may stand with their honor, and
interest. They are content to wave that maine article of the Popes
Antichristian tyranny, and yield him a preeminencie in stead of a supremacy.
The respect we give Images most will free from the sin, and many from the
danger of Idolatry, so it may be left as a matter of superfluity: in which
rank they will place our prayers to Saints, without imputing hereafter unto us
any injury done to Christ's mercies, or merits. Upon the score of Tradition they
will grant us prayer for the dead, provided we leave it to their private
intention, whether it be to diminish their pains, or increase their glory. As
to the real presence, so much excepted against by their Predecessors, they
refuse not to accept of, upon condition they may shape Christ's power, and
words, to the narrow model of their own senses, and be exempted from the labor
of searching so far into Metaphysick (a science not suitable to the grosser
heresies of this age) as to find a distinction betwixt the appearance, and
substance of bread. Notwithstanding their want of speculation in the
Theoriques, they might in this mystery, as well as in that of the Trinity,
have learned this practical moral Lesson, that Reason is never more
reasonable, then when it leaves reasoning in things above reason. Auricular
Confession heretofore traduced for a torture of Consciences, and Tyranny of the
Clergy, many confess to be of good use, but few of necessity; and none can be
brought to descend to particulars, for want of humility in themselves, and for
want of secrecy in their Ministers. Reason of state will make them subscribe to
the article of Bishops, that the Prince may have so many Peers of his own
creation, and at his own devotion; and a chain of consequence draws after
them, Priests, and Deacons; for, to say the truth, their winking so long at the
clear signs of their Bishops invalid Ordination, is a shrewd sign of their
looking more upon their Votes in Parliament, then their functions in the Church.

They are willing to fall thus far, and yet further, from their ancient
Tenets, with hopes to be admitted as part of our Church, and cleared of the
reproachful name of Heretics, as not dissenting in the fundamental points of
Catholic Faith. But whilst they talk of fundamentalls, they never pass the
mere superficialls, and they are far from digging so deep as to come to the
maine foundation of Faith. It is in vain to decide fundamental matters before
we resolve upon the fundamental motive of Christian belief. No man calls in
question the truth of Gods Word, but the question is about the sufficient
proposal of it. That is a fundamental article of Faith, and undeniable under
pain of damnation, which is sufficiently proposed as revealed by God: we
relying upon the infallible and unchangeable Truth of the Churches proposal,
remain settled in the same Tenets, notwithstanding the opposition of Luther,
Calvin, and other Sectaries; whilst they on the contrary, accepting Gods Word
upon the proposal of private inspiration, or human persuasion, neither agree
with us, nor with one another, nor even with themselves in different times. As
to our new English Religion, it is very remarkable, how the pretended
supernatural inspiration, and natural persuasion, has been always flexible
to temporal respects. First they were inspired, and persuaded to pull down
Monks, and cry down the Pope, and proceed no further, this being sufficient
to comply with King Henry the Eighths lewdness and coveteousnesse. After, they
went on as far as they were led by the interest of the Protector Seamour. But
when Queen Elizabeth's illegitimacy made the Popes authority be judged wholly
inconsistent with her security; then was it time to make him Antichrist, and
to pursue his party with fire and sword. The title of the ensuing Kings not
being questioned by the Pope, made him an object of less hate, and his
adherents subject to less cruelty, and the Religion was fashioned to the
humor of the Prince, yet with some regard to popular faction. Lastly the
liberty of war giving license to those infinite Sects (which lay lurking in
every corner of the English Church) to sally forth, and to appear to the world
in their different colors, every one took notice, how few were grounded on
those Tenets, whereon the Church of England is built; and how by leaving the
true proposal of Gods Word, and the ancient rule of Divine Faith, men come to
be so unsettled in all points of Faith, that their Religion is as changeable as
private fancies, and public factions. And that all may see, how the curse of
Cain, the first father of Heretics, as being the first opposer of Gods true
Worship, is fallen by inheritance upon our English Protestants, their last
change is to turn into Quakers, whose Sect is nothing else but Protestancy
fallen into a Paulscy, and inclining to a sudden Apo^lexy.

THE INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. How Protestancy begun and came into England. CHAP. II. Of the
nullitie of the English Protestant Clergy. CHAP. III. Of Heresy. CHAP. IV. In
what does the obstinacy of Heresy consist? CHAP. V. Of the Catholic Church.
CHAP. VI. Whether all Christians be the Catholic Church; or whether it may b^
composed of any two, or more Congregation of them, if agreeing not in all
matters whatse ever which any one Congregation, or Church pretends to be
revealed by God. CHAP. VII. Whether the testimony of t^^ Catholic Church be
infallible not only ((...) Protestants term them) in fundamental, b^ also in
not fundamental articles of Faith? CHAP. VIII. Whether any reformed, (...)
Protestant Church of the world be the Catholi^^ and Apostolic Church? And
whether the pretended clearness of Scripture does suf^^ciently propose their
doctrine as Divine reve^^tion? CHAP. IX. Whether any Puritanicall Congregation
be the Catholic Church, by reason of their pretended spirit? CHAP. X. Whether
that Congregation of persons which live in communion with, and subjection to
the Roman Church, be the Catholic and true Church of God? CHAP. XI. Whether
Transubstantiation and the lawfulness of the worship of Images be sufficiently
proposed by the testimony of the Roman Catholic Church, as Divine revelation?
and whether Protestants have any lawful exceptions against them? CHAP. XII.
Whether Protestancy be Heresy? CHAP. XIII. Whether any Protestants may be
saved? CHAP. XIV. Whether Protestancy be manifestly against reason, and common
sense? and how may the most learned Protestants be convinced in disputes of
Religion by every illiterate Roman Catholic? SECT. II. A Dialog between a
learned Protestant Minister, and a Catholic Cloune. CHAP. XV. Of the
difference between Christian Faith, and the historical belief of Protestants.
A TREATISE OF THE NATURE OF CATHOLIC FAITH, AND HERESY, WITH Reflection upon
the Nullitie of the English Protestant Church, and Clergy.
CHAP. I. How Protestancy begun, and came into England.
IN the year 1516. there was no other Religion in our parts of the world
acknowledged Catholic, and Apostolic, but that which Protestants are now
pleased to call Popery. In the year 1517. Leo the X. Bishop of Rome (following
the ^cample of other Popes) granted and published Indulgen^^s to all such as
voluntarily contributed toward the war against the Turk; who at that time was
grown formi^able, and threatened all Christendom, having added Syria ^^d Egypt
to the Otteman Empire.

2 The Archbishop of Mentz (to whom the Pope com^itted the business of
Indulgences in Germany) appointed one John Tetzel a Dominican Friar, to preach
in the publishing of them, notwithstanding that for a long time before, this
office had been given to the Augustine Friars. The preferment of Tetzel was ill
taken by Martin Luther, who being an Augustine Friar, and a famous Preacher,
expected himself should have been the man named to preach, and publish the
Indulgences; but seeing his hopes frustrated, he resolved to write as much
against Indulgences and the Pope, as he had prepared to preach in favor of
both.

3 Therefore taking occasion of some abuses (which are unavoydable in things
that pass through many hands) he printed certain Conclusions, and Libells
against Indulgences. These were condemned, and burnt as heretical by John
Tetzel, Luthers Competitor, who at the same time exercised the office of
Inquisitor in Germany. This fire did so warm Luther, and added such flames to
his hot disposition, that most parts of Europe felt the smart of it. For, being
once engaged, and enraged by Tetzels Declaration against him, he would not
recant his first error, but added others by denying Purgatory, the Popes
authority, merit, necessity of good works etc.

4 Amongst others who writ against Luthers novelties, one was Henry the VIII.
King of England, composing a learned Book in defense of the seven Sacraments,
the Popes supremacy, and his spiritual jurisdiction over all Christendom:
this Book moved the Pope to add to Henry the VIII. titles, that of Defender
of the Faith; which had been the most glorious of all his titles, if he had
not so violently opposed afterward the Popes primacy, which he then so piously
maintained against Luther. But being weary of his wife Queen Catharine,
despairing to have issue male by her, and enamoured of Anne Builen, because the
Pope refused to declare his marriage with Queen Catharine invalid, he made
himself Pope of England, challenging all spiritual jurisdiction within his
own Kingdoms, and by Act of Parliament made it treason to acknow ledge any
spiritual jurisdiction of the Pope in his Dominions, himself being proclaimed
spiritual Head of the English Church. This was the occasion, and beginning of
the pretended Reformation. Henry the VIII. notwithstanding did stick to the old
Religion in all points, the Popes primacy only excepted; because he thought no
other of the new Religion was necessary to marry Anne Bullen, and to enrich
himself by the spoil of Monasteries. He persecuted all other novelties, and
herefies in such a degree, that though many crept into England in his reign,
yet very few durst profess them, because as many as did, were burnt by his
command.

5 To King Henry the VIII. Edward the VI. a child of 9. years old; his uncle
the Earl of Hartford was made Protector both of the King, and Kingdom; he was
inclined to Zuinglius his heresy. Twenty days had scarce passed after his
Protectorship, but his fingars did so eagerly itch to be doing, and tampering
about innovation in Religion, Horinshed, Stow, and others an. 1547.
as upon the sixth of March next following, he sent away Commissioners into all
parts of the Realm, to pull do^^ne Images, and other Ecclesiastical
ornaments. He also invited out of Germany diverse Sectaries of what Religion
soever, but especially he desrred to have Apostata Friars, that had tied
themselves to Sisters; assuring himself that they would be most pliable to his
purpose. And so there came into England Martin Bucer a Dominican Friar, who had
been an earnest Lutheran; Peter Martyr a Cannon Regular, that inclined to
Zuinglius his opinions, but yet came with great indifferency to preach, and
teach what he should be appointed; as afterward appeared, being a Lector in
the University of Oxford, when the Parliament in London was debating what
opinion the Kingdom should follow concerning the Real presence: Peter Martyr
kept all his Scholars in suspense, until news came of the Parliaments
resolution, to which he accommodated himself: for, having detained his
Scholars with tedious glosses upon the words precedent to This is my body, not
to declare his sense of them before he understood the sense of the Parliament,
which having received by the Post, to be interpreted in a ^gurative, not real
way, he was presently inspired, that this was the clear sense of the
Scaipture, and wondered now any could be so blind as not to see a thing so
mani^est Bernard ^chinus was the third, who had been a Ca^ecl^in, but being
weary of that austere life, took a woman, Annal. Cap. 1543.
and writ a Book in defense of having two wives at (...) Some say he died a
Jew, but the Annalls of the Capuchins testify, that he repented, and died a
Cath^ lick.

6 These three Apostles of the Reformation were d^stributed into three
principal fountains of the Land, London, Oxford, and Cambridge. With these
joined Coverda^ an Augustine Friar, Bale a Carmelite, and other Apostates who
did so vary in their Doctrine, and Religions which they preached to the people,
that all was in confusion; i^ so much that the Protector writ to Cranmer, and
Ridley that they should make have to end the common Servic^ book, or of Common
prayer, Doctrine, and Rites, which they had begun.

7 But from hence arose a great Controversy; for tha^ Bucer would have one
thing, Peter Martyr another, Ochin^^ a third. John Bale, and Miles Coverdale
would saine put i^ their opinions also. Above all others did trouble the market
two heady Priests, John Hooper, and John Roger, com^ from beyond Seas, the one
from Wittenberg, the other from Strasburg. These two dissenting wholly from the
course begun by Cranmer, and Ridley, made a great faction against the Common
prayer book, especially afte^ that Hugh Latimer sided with them, who was of
great regard with the common people.

8 The Protector seeing such differences in Religions and confusion, called a
Parliament an 1547 but the Common prayer book could not then pass; this only
wa^ determined about Religion, that none should speak irre^ verently of the
Sacrament of the Altar; and that all for mer Statuts made by the Kings of
England against what soever Heretics, or Sectaries, namely against Lohards
VVickliffians, Hussits, Anabaptists etc. should be recalled and annulled. So as
now every man might think, say preach, or teach what he thought fit.

9 But in the next Parliament the Common praye^ book was approved, because it
seemed in matter of the Sacraments to favor, and humor diverse Sectaries wh^
before had opposed it. Yet the common people in man shires of England took
arms in defense of the old and Catholic Religion, complaining that most
Sacrament were taken from them, and they had reason to fear the rest (if they
did not look to it) would follow within short time. This was King Eduards
Reformation, which he could not perfect, because he died within six years
after he had begun.

10 It is very remarkable how in this Kings time it was resolved, that
whatsoever should be determined by six Bishops (such as they were) and six men
learned in the Law of God, or the major part of them, concerning the Rites and
administrations of Sacraments; that only should be followed; so that seven
men in England were thought a sufficient number to change the whole frame of
Christian Religion, by changing the matter, and form of Sacraments, abolishing
the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the ancient Rites, and ceremonies of the
Catholic Church, which had been practiced for so many ages, and reverenced by
all the pious, and learned men of the world. Heresy is always accompanied
with presumption; yet never did any Sectaries before this time attribute to
themselves so much, as ours did, preferring the judgment of seven men to that
of all the world, confirmed by so many general Counsels, and holy Fathers.
The form of consecrating Priests set down in the new Ritual, is this: Receive
the holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven, and whose
sins thou do retain, they are retained, and be thou a faithful dispenser
of the Word of God, and of his holy Sacraments; in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: See the Ritual printed at London 1607. and
for the Act authorizing it, see Kallend an 3. Ed V^. cap. 12. and Mason page 94.

11 After King Eduard the VI. reigned his Sister Queen Mary, who being a
Catholic her self, restored the Catholic Religion by Act of Parliament,
Cardinal Poole the Popes Legate absolving the Kingdom from the excommunication
and schism incurred. Some Histories of that time relate that 30 thousand
Sectaries, all strangers, Were banished out of England, and amongst the rest,
the two holy Apostles Peter Martyr, and Bernard Ochinus. All King Eduards
pretended Bishops were deposed and imprisoned, the Catholic Bishops set at
liberty, and restored to their Seas. This Queen is as much condemned by
Protestants for crucltie against their Religion, as Queen Elizabeth is
censured by Catholics: as if, forsooth, there were no difference between
punishing upstart seditious novel^ists, and the maintainers of that Faith,
Which had been in possession from the time Christianity was brought into the
Land.

12 Queen Mary deceased without issue, her Sister Elizabeth was proclaimed
Queen, notwithstanding that all Catholics knew Mary Steward the Queen of
Scots, to be the lawful heir of the Crown. Queen Elizabeth showing
inclination to the new Religion, all the Catholic Bishops refused to crown
her; yet at length by great ado she was crowned, and anointed, after the
Catholic manner, by Oglethorp Bishop of Carlisle. The Reformation was by Act
of Parliament again established, notwithstanding the great opposition made by
all the Bishops, and others in the upper House. The Queen was resolved to puil
down Catholic Religion, because Cecill, and others of her Council persuaded
her, that she could not be secure as long as the Popes authority was
acknowledged in England; seeing the Sea Apostolic had declared her a bastard,
and all Catholics looked upon the Queen of Scots, as the true heir to the
Crown

13 Notwithstanding it was the Queens temporal interest to pull down
Catholic Religion in England, yet it was much for her quiet, and peace of the
Realm, to keep always a resemblance of it in the Clergy, as the best remedy
against Puritanisme, which was thought by Her Majesty dangerous to Monarchy.
Therefore the titles of Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters were
retained, as also in her own Chapel some Images, the Altar, and a Crucifix
upon it.

Though the titles of the Catholic Clergy were bestowed upon persons who
favored the new Religion, yet the Ordination was not; because that which was
instituted by Edward the VI. was judged invalid by all Catholics, and so
declared by public judgment in Queen Marys reign; in so much, that leases
made by King Edwards Bishops, though confirmed by the Deane, and Chapter,
Brooks novell cases. Placito 463. fol. 101 printed at London 1604.
were not esteemed available, because they were no, (says the sentence)
consecrated, nor Bishops. Some Protestants are so charitable as to say, that
King Edwards Bishops were declared no Bishops, to the end Bonner, and other
Catholic Bishops restored by Queen Mary, might make the leases void: let the
world judge whether 3 Bonner, and others, who loft their Bishoprics for
conscience sake alone, would commit so great a sacrilege as must needs follow
out of declaring invalid King Edwards new form of Ordination. They who
renounced the propriety for Religions sake, would not damn themselves for the
profit of new leases.

14 Seeing therefore it concerned the Queen to have consecrated Bishops, and
that in King Edwards reign the Catholic Consecration was held to be
superstition (most of the Clergy then being Zuinglians, or Puritans) the Queen
endeavored by all possible means to have such as she named for the
Bishoprics, consecrated by Catholics; but they all resolved not to make
Bishops in that Church, whereof themselves refused to be Members. An Irish
Archbishop prisoner in the Tower was offered his liberty, and great rewards, if
he would consecrate the newly elected; but he denied to commit so great a
sacrilege.

CHAP. II. Of the Nullitie of the English Protestant Clergy.
1 THe Queen notwithstanding all this reluctance of Catholic Bishops, named
in her Letters Patents Anthony Kitchen Bishop of Landaf amongst others, to
consecrate Parker, and his fellows; because he was the only man amongst all
the Catholic Bishops that took the oath of Supremacy in her reign. But this
frailty was not a sufficient ground to think that he would consecrate Parker,
and others whom he knew to be Heretics, and averse from the Doctrine of the
Roman Catholic Church, which himself so constantly adhered unto (the
Supremacy only excepted) during his life. Sacrobosc^ lib. de investig. Christi
Ecclesia cap. 14. D. Champ. cap. 14.
Many others of the Catholic Bishops complied with Henry the VIII. in that
particular, who now refused to ordain Parker: the same was Landaffe resolved
to do; but at last by fair words and promises, they prevailed with the old man
to give them a meeting at the Nags head in Cheap Side, where they hoped he
would ordain them Bishops, despairing that ever he would do it publicly in a
Church; because that would be too great and too notorious a scandal for
Catholics, amongst whom Landaffe desired to be numbered. Bonner Bishop of
London being well informed of all that passed, sent one Master Neale his
Chaplain, an honest and learned man, who had formerly been Lector in Oxford,
to the Bishop of Landaffe, forbidding him under pain of excommunication, to
exercise any such power of giving Orders in his Diocese: wherewith the old man
being tertified, and otherwise also moved in his own conscience, refused to
proceed in that action, alleging chiefly for reason of his forbearance, his
want of sight. Which excuse Parker, and the rest, interpreting to be but an
evasion, were much moved against the poor old man; and whereas hitherto they
had used him with all courtesy, and respect, they then turned their copy,
reviling and calling him doting fool, and the like; some of them saying, This
old fool thinks we cannot be Bishops unless we be greased, alluding to the
Catholic manner of Episcopal unction.

2 Being thus deceived of their expectation, and having no other means to come
to their desire, they resolved to use Master Scoryes help, an Apostata
religious Priest, who having borne the name of Bishop in King Edward the VI.
time, was thought to have sufficient power to perform that office, especially
in such a straight necessity as they pretended. He having cast off together
with his religious habit all scruple of conscience, willingly went about the
matter, which he performed in this sort; having the Bible in his hand, and they
all kneeling before him, he laid it upon every one of their heads, or
shoulders, saying, Take thou authority to preach the Word of God sincearly.
And so they rose up Bishops of the new Church of England.

3 This story of the Nags-head was first contradicted by Mason in the year
1613. yet so weakly and faintly, that the attentive Reader may easily perceive
he feared to be caught in a lie, and convinced by some aged persons that might
then be living, and remember what passed in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
reign. In the year 1603. none of the Protestant Clergy durst call it a fable,
or a tale of a Tub, as some now do. Bancroft Bishop of London being demanded
by Master William Alabaster how Parker, and his Colleagues were consecrated
Bishops? answered, He hoped that in case of necessity, a Priest (alluding (...)
Scory) might ordain Bishops This answer of his was ob^^cted in print by
Holiwod against him, and all the English ^lergy, in the year 1603. not a word
replied, Bancroft ^imselfe being then living. I have spoken with both
Ca^^olicks, and Protestants that remember near 80. years, and acknowledge
that so long they have heard the Nags^ead story related as an undoubted truth.
In the begin^ing of the late Parliament some Presby terian Lords pre^nted to
the upper House a certain Book, proving that ^^e Protestant Bishops had no
succession, nor consecra^ion. and therefore were no Bishops, and by consequence
^ad no right to sit in Parliament. Hereupon Doctor Mor^on pretended Bishop of
Durham, who is yet alive, made (...) speech against this Book in his own, and
all the Bishops behalf, then present; he endeavored to prove succession from
the last Catholic Bishops, who (said he) ^y imposition of hands ordained the
first Protestant Bishops at the Nags-head in Cheap Side, as was notorious ^o
all the world etc. Therefore the aforesaid Book ^ought to be looked upon as a
groundless Libell. This was told to many by one of the ancientest Peers of
Eng^and, present in Parliament when Morton made his speech. And the same he is
ready to depose upon his oath. Nay, he can not believe, that any will be so
impudent, as to de^y a thing so notorious, whereof there are as many witnesses
living, as there are Lords and Bishops, that were that day in the upper House
of Parliament.

4 This narration of the Consecration at the Nags-head have I taken out of
Holiwood, Constable, and Doctor Champneys works; they heard it from many of
the ancient Clergy, who were prisoners for the Catholic Religion in Wisbech
Castle, as Master Bluet, Doctor Watson Bishop of Lincoln, and others. These
had it from the said Master Neale, and other Catholics, present at Parkers
Consecratiod in the Nags-head, as Master Constable affirms. The story was
divulged, to the great grief of the newly consecrated; yet being so evident a
truth, they durst not contradict it; notwithstanding that not only the
nullitie of their Consecration, but also the illegalitie of the same,
Counterblast fol. 301.
was objected in print against them not long after, by that famous Writer
Doctor Stapleton, and others, whose words I will set down in the proper place.

5 Parker and the rest of the Protestant Bishops not being able to answer the
Catholics arguments against the invaliditie of their Ordination, nor to cry
down the illegal and extravagant manner of it at the Nags-head, were forced
to beg an Act of Parliament, whereby they might enjoy the temporalities,
notwithstanding the known defects of their Consecration against the Canons of
the Church, and the Laws of the Land. For, albeit Edwar^ the VI. Sanders lib.
3 de schism. Mason Page 121. Poulton in his Kalend. page 141. n. 5.
Rite of Ordination was reestablished by Act o^ Parliament in the first year
of Queen Elizabeth's reign^ yet it was notorious, that the Ordination of the
Nags head was very different from it, and framed ex tempore b^ Scorys
Puritanicall spirit, that hated no less a set form o^ consecrating Bishops,
then of praying to God. The word of the Act are: Such form and order for the
consecrating (...) Archbishops, Bishops, Priests etc. as was set forth in the
tim^ of King Edward the VI. shall stand, and be in full force, and effect; and
all Acts and things heretofore had, made, or done by any person, or persons, in
or about any Consecration, Confirmation, or Investing of any person, or persons
elected to the office or dignity of Archbishop, Bishop etc. by virtue of the
Queen^ Letters Patents, or Commission sithence the beginning of he reign, be,
and shall be by authority of this Parliament declared, and judged good, and
perfect in all respects, and purposes any matter or thing that can, or may be
objected to the contrary thereof in any wise, notwithstanding. 8. Eliza. 1. By
which Act appears, that not only King Edwards Rite, but any other used since
the beginning of the Queens reign upon her Commission, was enacted for good,
and consequently that of the Nags-head might pass. Hence it wa^ that they were
called Parliament Bishops.

6 Master Mason a great stickler for the valid Ordination of Parker, Page 133.
of whom depends that of all the Protestan^ Clergy, seeing this to be over
clear to be denied, labors to shadow it at least in some sort, saying, that
the Queen did but dispense with the trespasses against her own Laws, not in
essential points of Ordination, but only in accidental; not in substance,
but in circumstance. But if the Consecration was at Lambeth, and according the
form o^ King Edward the VI. what ueed was there of any dispensation,
especially given not in conditional, but in very absolute terms? both
substance, and circumstance was ac^ording the Protestant Laws. The truth is,
all the world ^ught at the Nags-head Consecration; and held it to be ^valid,
not so much for the circumstance of being per^rmed in a Tavern, as for the new
form invented by ^ory, differing not only from that of the Church, but al^^
from that which is prescribed in the English Ritual of ^dward the VI. and
confirmed 1. Eliza.

7 This is demonstrated in the public, Abridgement of Diers reports 7. Eliza.
234.
and notorious ^se of Bishop Bonner, who being prisoner in the Marshal^a was
indicted by Master Horn (one of the first Protestant ^^shops, consecrated by
Master Parker, or together with ^m) for refusing to take the oath of supremacy
He ap^eared before the Judges of the Kings Bench. The indi^ment being read, he
excepted against it, because the oath ^as said to have been tendered unto him
by Robert Horn ^^shop of Winchester, who was by no Law Bishop, and therefore
had no authority to tender him the oath. After ^uch debate at the bar, and
after by all the Judges at ^argeants-Inne in Fleetstreete, in Judge Catline the
chief justice his Chamber, it was resolved by all the Judges, that Bishop
Bonner his plea upon this issue, that he was not ^ulpable, because Horn was no
Bishop when he tendered ^im the oath, should be received, and that the Jury
should ^y it: no^ what the trial was, appears by that he was ^t condemned,
nor ever troubled any further for that ^se, though he was a man specially shot
at. Hereupon in ^e next year following 8. Eliza. the aforesaid Act of
^arliament was made.

8 Notwithstanding all these testimonies, and evidences ^f Protestants against
themselves, and the constant prause of Catholics reordaining their Ministers
not condi^onally, but absolutely, (an evident argument of their ^eere
secularitie, and laytie) the modern Protestant ^ergy endeavor to make the
world believe, that Parker, ^d the first Protestant Bishops were consecrated by
im^sition of hands of true and lawful Bishops with great ^^lemnity at Lambeth.
This they prove by certain Re^rds produced by Master Mason in the year 1613.
fifty ^ares after they ought to have been showed, and in a ti^e, it can not be
testified by any lawful witnesses of ^eirs, that they were not forged. There
can not be a more evident mark of forgery, then the concealment of Registers,
if they be useful, and necessary to the very same persons in whose custody
they are: if they did produce none, when their adversaries did insult, and
triumph over them, its as impossible any should be then extant, as it is, that
men should conspire with their greatest adversaries, to take upon themselves,
and their Church, an everlasting infamy. It is not worth the refuting, that
which some modern Protestants say: Ye have no Witnesses for the stor^ of the
Nags-head, and other things objected against Protestants, but Roman Catholics,
we value not their testimony, because they are our known adversaries, a party
concerned against us etc. This weak answer is very frequent, though no less
ridiculous, then the exception that a certain Officer of the Parliament in
Ireland, made against the testimony of all the Inhabitants of a Village he had
pillaged. They complained to his Commander, who showing unto the Officer, how
many witnesses there were of his misdemeanour; he replied, there was not one
lawful witness amongst them, because they were all concerned in the business
and a part: when Protestancy begun in England, and the first Protestant
Bishops were consecrated at the Nags-head, all who were not Protestants, were
Roman Catholics; no others could be witnesses of their Ordination but
Catholics, or themselves; and truly their own silence in a matter that
concerned them so much to speak against, does demonstrate they had nothing to
say against the testimony of Catholics. Silent witnesses in some circumstances
prove more then any others. Qui tacit, consentire videtur.

9 As soon as Master Mason published his Records. Fitz Herbert suspected them,
his words are these: It was my chance to understand that one Master Mason has
lately published a Book, Wherein he endeavors to prove the first Protestant
Bishops Consecration by a Register. Thou shall therefore understand, good
Reader, that this our exception against the English Clergy is no new quarrel
now lately raised, but vehemently urged diverse times heretofore many years
ago, yea in the very beginning of the late Queens reign urging them to show
how, and by whom they were made Priests, Bishops etc. And what, trow you, was
answered thereto? was there any Bishop named who had consecrated them? was
Master Masons Register, or any other authentical proof thereof produced by
^aster Jewel, or Master Horn? No truly. This then being (...), I report me to
the judgment of any indifferent man, What redit Master Masons new found
Register deserves being pro^uced now after fifty and odd years to testify
this Consecra^ion, whereof not so much as any one witness was named, nor any
Register pretended by those whom it most imported to prove (...). 5. or 6.
years after it was supposed to be done. This and much more did Fitz Herbert
print in the year 1613. in his Appendix to the Discovery of Doctor Andrews
absurdities, ^alsities, lies etc. I say that no mention was ever made of
Registers, or Records testifying Parkers Consecration at Lambeth, until Master
Mas^n printed his Book by Master Abbots command. For, though in a Book called
Antiqui^ates Britanniae page 39. edit. Hanoviae an. 1605. there be a Register
of the Protestant Bishops in England, thrust in withbut any necessity, or
purpose, immediately after Saint Austin the first Archbishop of Canterbury, yet
that very Register does not mention any certain place, or form of their
Consecration; so that it might be performed as well at the Nags-head, as at
Lambeth.

But that all the world may see how this very Register was forged. I will set
down the words of the learned Author of a Book called The Judgment of the
Apostles, and first agein points of Doctrine questioned between the Catholics
and Protestants of England, printed an 1633. Page 209.
It has been pretended from a newborn Register of Matthew Parker, that ^he
was made a Bishop by Barlowe, Scory, and three others, by virtue of a
Commission from Queen Elizabeth, and this new work was acted on the 17. day
of December, an. 1559. but ^alas, they had then no form, or order to do such a
business. Page 349.
Whereas this printed Book of Parkers Antiquitates Britanniae is the first
that mentions any such pretended Consecration of him, and the rest, and the
other VVriters seem to borrow this from thence: in the old Manuscript of that
Book which I have seen, and diligently examined, there is not any mention, or
memory at all, of any such Register, or Consecra^ion of either Matthew Parker,
Page 211.
or any one of those pretended Protestant Bishops, as the obtruded Register
speaks of. And any man reading the printed Book will wanifestly see it is a
merely foisted, and inserted thing, having no connection, correspondence, or
affinity either with that which goes before, or follows it. And contains
more things done after Mathe^ Parker had written that Book. But now let us see
how the Protestant Clergy was charged with the nullitie, and illgalitie of
Ordination; and how they never stopped the Adversaries mouths with Masons
Registers, or Records.

10 Consider (says Doctor Bristow) what Church that i^ whose Ministers are but
very laymen, Mot. 21.
unsent, uncalled, unco^ secrated, holding therefore amongst us, when they
repent, an^ return, no other place but laymen, in no case admitted, no n^
looking to minister in any office, unless they take Orders, which before they
had not? Master Fulke, who was ignorant of no^ thing in this point, that Master
Mason did know, answering Bristow his objection, denies ordinary calling to b^
always necessary; which desperate shift he would never have used, if he had
been provided of so easy and sufficient an answer, as Master Masons Records
would have afforded him, if they had been authentical, or extant.

11 Master Reynolds: Calvino Turcis lib. 4. cap. 15.
There is no heardman in all Turkey which does not undertake the governmen of
his heard upon better reason, and greater right, order, and authority, then
these your magnificent Apostles, and Evangelists can show for thi^ divine, and
high office of governing souls, reforming Churches etc.

12 Doctor Stapleton in his Counterblast against Maste^ Horn pretended Bishop
of Winchester has these urging speeches: Fol 7. and 9.
To say truly you are no Lord Winchester, nor elsewhere, but only Master
Robert Horn. Is it not notorious that ye, and your Colleagues were not ordained
according to the prescript, I will not say of the Church, but even of the very
Statues? How then can you challenge to your self the name of the name of the
Cord Bishop of Winchester? Fol. 301.
You are without any Consecration at all of your Metropolitan, himself poor
man being no Bishop neither.

13 Doctor Harding in his Detection of sundry foul errors against Master
Jewel. Fol. 129.
You tell not half my tale (which truly is noted by many, that Master Jewel
passes over the difficulties without answering, or mentioning) I laid for my
foundation out of raint Hierome the se words Ecclesia^onest, quae non habet
Sacerdotem: that is, no Church, which has not a Priest, or Bishop, etc. for
Sacerdos, as you know, does signify both a Priest, and Bishop. I ask then as
well of your Bishoply vocation, and of your sending, as of your Priesthood etc.
These being my questions, Master Jewel, you answer ^^ither by what example
hands were laid on you, nor who sent ^u, but only say, he made you Priest,
that made me in King ^dwards time. Verily I never had any name, or title of
Priest^od given to me, during the reign of King Edward. I only ^ke the order
of Deaconship, as it was then ministered, fur^er I went not, etc. Truly after I
had well considered with ^y self these questions, which in my confutation I
moved unto ^u, I took my self neither for Priest, nor yet for lawful Dea^n
in all respects, by those orders which were taken in King ^dwards days, being
well assured that those, who took upon ^em to give orders, were altogether out
of order themselves, and ministered them not, according to the Kite, and manner
of ^e Catholic Church, as who had forsaken the whole succession (...) Bishops
in all Christendom, and had erected a new Conregation of their own planting,
the form whereof was ima^ned in their own brains, and had not been seen,
nor pra^ised in the world before.

14 Master Jewel answers all this with profound silence, ^s though it had
never been written, albeit he would have the world believe that he has fully
answered in sub^ance, at least the whole Book, wherein these things are
^ontained. Now whether the true reason of this dissem^ling silence be not the
want of all probable means, and ^ecords, let the discreet Reader judge. Only
he says without any proof, that their Bishops are made by form. and order,
and by the consecration of the Archbishop, and other ^hree Bishops, and by the
admission of the Prince.

To this Doctor Harding replies: But ye were made you ^ay, by the consecration
of the Archbishop, and other three Bishops. And how I pray was your Archbishop
consecrated? what ^hree Bishops in the Realm were there to lay hands upon him?
You have now uttered a worse case for your selves, then was by ^ne before
named. For your Metropolitan, who should give an^horitie to all your
consecrations, himself had no lawful conse^ration. If you had been
consecrated after the form, and order which has ever been used, ye might
have had Bishops out of France, to have consecrated you, in case there had
lacked in Eng^and. But now there were ancient Bishops enough in England, who
either were not required, or refused to consecrate you; which (...) an evident
sign that ye sought not such a Consecration as had ^eene ever used, but such
an one, whereof all the former Bishops were ashamed.

15 All this sharp reply affirming so directly Master Paker not to have been
consecrated, whereby the consecrations of all the rest are necessarily and
confessedly prove to be none, Master Jewel (finding nothing to answer the
reunto) dissembleth, as he does the former, and takes occasion from some words
of Master Harding, to discour^ of the notice which ought to be given to the
Bishop (...) Rome, and others, when Bishops were consecrated. Bu^ not one word
of the maine point, nor of Master Mason h^^ Records. What therefore can any man
of indiffere^^ judgment think in this case, but that these Records were not
then extant, or were forged? For if they had been i^ those days, and not
forged, how is it possible that the (...) should not be produced by Horn,
Jewel, Parker, and the rest whom it specially behooved to make proof of their
own calling, being so often, and earnestly urged thereunto by their
adversaries, triumphing over them for want o^ due, and authentical proof
thereof? Yet these Record were never mentioned by any of them. To say that i^
Parkers life the Reader is remitted to I know not wha^ Registers, as also that
an Act of Parliament 8. Eliz relate to some Registers, or Records concerning
the consecration of the English Clergy, is no proof of Master Masons Records;
because its but a general term, and a word o^ course, which men do rather
suppose then examine, when they mention things that have been practiced in
form times. But that there were no Records of Parkers consecration at Lambeth
in the eighth year of Queen Elizabeth, nor when his life was written, is
evident to any man who will reflect upon how much the Catholic Doctor then,
and before, urged to see some evidence of his, an^ others consecration, and yet
none was ever produced. But suppose there were Records of Parkers consecration
8. Eliz does that prove they were not forged? could they not b^ forged as well
in Queen Elizabeth's time, as in King Iame^ his reign? If they were then
extant, and not produce^ against the Catholic Doctors, it was because in
Queen Elizabeth's time, many were living who would have proved them to be
forged. So that the Act of Parliament, and the life of Parker relating the
Records, makes them more incredible, then if no mention at all were made of
them.

16 An other reason why Master Masons Registers, Sect. 2.
and Records ought to be judged counterfeited, is, because they disagree with
those that Master Goodwin used in his Catalogue of Bishops, sometimes in the
day, sometimes in the month, and sometimes in the year, as is manifest in the
consecrations of Doynet, Ridley, Coverdall, Grindall, Horn, Gneast, Piers:
which necessarily proves falsitie in the one at least, with a prudent
suspicion of forgery in both. Again Master Mason, Master Sutcliffe, and Master
Butler, all speaking of Master Parkers consecration, do all differ one from the
other in naming his Consecrators. For Master Mason says it was done by
Barlowe, Scory, Coverdall, and Hodgekins. Master Sutcliffe says besides the
three first named by Master Mason, there were two Suffragans, as the Act of
consecration yet to be seen (says he) mentions. Master Butler says the
Suffragan of Dover was one of the Consecrators, who notwithstanding is not so
much as named in the Queens Patents, whereby Commission was given to the named
therein to consecrate Master Parker. So that these men seem to have had three
diverse and disagreeing Registers of one and the same action, and therefore the
credit of every one of them is made uncreditable. Master Mason ought to have
answered as Master Whitaker, and Master Fulke, who had reason to be better
informed of the Records, then he, because they lived in, and about the time,
the English Ordination was first called in question. Contra Dureum page 821.
Answer to a counterfaite Catholic, page 50. page 67.
I would not have you think (says Whitaker) we make such reckoning of your
Orders, as to hold our own vocation unlawful without them, and therefore
keep them to your selves. Master Fulke speaks more plainly: You are highly
deceived if you think we esteem your Offices of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons
better then Laymen. And in his retentive: With all our heart we defy,
abhor, detest, and spit at your stinking, greasy, Antichristian orders. Is it
credible that these prime Protestants would answer thus, if they had not known
full well that the story of the Nags-head was true?

17 But (grant the Records were not forged) there can be produced no Records
to witness, that Master Barlowe was consecrated, and yet Master Mason
acknowledges, that Master Barlow was the man who consecrated Parker: Champn.
cap. 14.
because Hodgekins the Suffragan of Bedford, was only an Assistant in that
action, and the Assistants in the Protestant Church, do not consecrate. Master
Mason proves Barlowes consecration only by conjectures, because he discharged
all things belonging to the order of a Bishop, even Episcopal consecration.
But by the like form of argument might he be proved (says Doctor Champney) to
have been a lawful husband, because he had a woman, and diverse children.
Secondly (says Mason) Barlowe was acknowledged, and obeyed as a Bishop. So
were Ridley, Hooper, Farrer, and others, during the time they held the rooms
of Bishops in King Edward the VI. time, and ye^ were they judged (as we have
seen before) by both spiritual, and temporal Court, not to have been
consecrated.

18 Seeing therefore no Records of Master Barlowe consecration do appear, and
that we have no reason to believe they perished by fire, or other extraordinary
accident, happening to the Metropolitanes, and all other Registers, how can he
be judged to have been truly consecrated? Especially seeing (as Master Mason
says) the Register of Cranmer bear record of Master Barlowes preferment to
the Priory of Bishame, Page 127.
of his election to the Bishopric of Saint Asath, and of the confirmation of
the same; how is it therefore possible that his consecration (if ever it had
been) should not be found likewise recorded? But the truth is, that Barlowe,
as most of the Clergy of England in those times, were Puritans, and inclined to
Zuinglianisme; therefore they contemned, and rejected Consecration as a rag of
Rome, and were content with the extraordinary calling of God, and the Spirit,
as all other Churches are, who pretend Reformation Neither is it credible that
there was any other consecration of Parker, and his Camerades, but that which
pass at the Nags-head. For if there were, John Stow would not conceal it in
his Annalls, who is so diligent in setting down all that passed, in and about
London, especially concerning Master Parker, to whom he professes love, and
respect; therefore he would not omit his consecration, i^ it were for his
advantage to have it published; he having related the consecration of Cardinal
Poole ( Parkers imme^ diate Predecessor) with so many particulars. This dot^
confirm Doctor Champneys and Master Constables testimony concerning Stow his
acknowledging by word o^ mouth to many persons, that the story of the Nags-hea^
was very true, and that Parker had no other Ordination.

19 But what then must be said of Master Masons Records? Its no want of
charity, to judge they were forged; because they who make no conscience to
falsify Scripture, will forge Records. How notoriously the English Clergy
falsified Scripture, is demonstrated by Gregory Martin, in a learned Book,
entitled, A Discovery of the manifold corruptions etc. Its little judgment, or
much passion to think, that Master Masons Records are not forged; for, if they
were true, how could they be concealed from Catholics, and Protestant the
space of 50. years; the knowledge of them being so necessary for to determine
the controversy of Protestant Ordination. Its want of charity, and judgment,
to think that all the English Catholic Doctors would charge the Protestant
Clergy with nullitie of Consecration without ground. Stapleton, Harding
Bristow, and others, who did forsake all athomes for conscience sake, did
surely examine the business before they published to the world in print the
nullitie of Parkers Ordination, and charged him, and all the rest of being
unsent, uncalled, unconsecrated, and thereby engaging posterity to commit so
many damnable sacrileges in reordaining those who had been already validly
ordained.

20 Master Mas^n in his second Edition endeavors to answer some of the
exceptions here mentioned against his Records, as also Barlowe, and Parkers
Consecration. But truly he brings nothing that can satisfy any prudent, and
indifferent person. He proves that Parker was consecra^ed at Lambeth, and not
at the Nags-head; because the Right Honorable Charles Howard Earl of
Nottingham (says Mason) told a friend of his (not named) in the year 616.
that he was invited to Parkers consecration at Lambeth, and that he was present
at the banquet thereof. This story, though it were true, only proves, that
there was a good dinner at Lambeth which might very well be to con^eale the
shameful consecration at the Nags-head. Besi^es, we must take the Earls
friend word for the Earls ^estimony; and Master Masons word for this anonymous
friends testimony. We bring more then one to witness of the Nags-head
consecration, not only Master Neale, and other Catholics present thereat, men
of learning, and nature judgment; but also John Stow a Protestant: all of them
knew how to distinguish between an Episcopa^ Consecration, and a banquet. This
testimony of Maste^ Neale, and other Catholics, who were present (as Mast^
Constable affirms) were not delivered to one only friend as that of
Nottingham, but to many virtuous Priests wh^ communicated the whole story to
Holiwood, Champn^ Parsons, Fitzsimons, and many others, all men of known
integrity, who published it to the world in print. The Priests and Jesuits to
whom the Records were known (...) King James his time, protested against them
as forged, an^ improbable, as appears by the testimony of men yet living,
whose honesty can not be called in question: an^ Father Fairekloth himself,
one of the imprisoned Jesuit^ testified so much to many, by word of mouth, and
in w^ting. So that its strange how some Protestants have g^ ven out so
confidently the contrary: and how they e^ deavour to make this so well grounded
story a mere f^ ble; and thereby call so many persons of much mo^ learning,
virtue, and prudence then themselves, fools, (...) knaves.

21 Master Mason does also endeavor to prove, the Barlowe was consecrated
Bishop in Honry the VIII. reign because (quoth Mason) he sat in Parliament,
and was (...) possession of the temporalities. But Honry the VIII Le^ ters
Patents whereby he was installed in the temporalit^ of his Bishopric, which
Mason himself cites, makes o^ ly mention of his Acceptance, and Confirmation,
but no^ of his Consecration. Why should this last be omitted, (...) he were
really consecrated, and the two first mentione^ If he was installed in his
temporalities not being concrated, he might also sit in Parliament without
consection. As for the pretended exactness of the English R^cords, and the
authentic Copies of every Bishops Cosecration, not only in the Archbishops
Registers, but so in the Chancery, and other Courts, and Bishopric (which is
the only ground whereby the Protestant C^ gy do now endeavor to make credible
the new Record and Parkers Ordination at Lambeth) in case all this sho^ be
granted as true, it does rather prejudice, then man taine their cause: because
it proves as much against B^ low, as it seems to favor Parker. For, if the
exactne^ and multiplicity of Records concerning every Bisho^ consecration, does
demonstrate (as they pretend) their ^ot being counterfeited; it being morally
impossible to ^ounterfeit so many hands, and testimonies; how is it ^ossible
that no Copies of Barlowes consecration do appear in any Court, or Bishopric
of England? Yet Ma^ter Mason objects that Gardener his Consecration does ^ot
appear in any Records that ever he could see, and ^et we hold him to be a true
Bishop. Therefore we ought ^o believe the same of Barlowe, though his
Consecration ^e not registered. To this I answer first, that its very like,
Master Mason did not trouble himself so much with seeking after Gardiners
consecration, as after Barlowes; because one did not import him as much as the
other. But in ^ase Gardiners Ordination were as necessary for the valid
Consecration of the Roman Catholic Church, as Bar^owes, and Parkers are for
the English Protestant Church: my second answer is, that if (all circumstances
considered) Gardiners Consecration were as doubtful as Barlowes, and Parkers,
we Roman Catholics would take to our selves ^he same advice, we give English
Protestants; that is, to repair with all speed to some other Church of
undoubted Clergy. If not, they are guilty of the loss of their own souls,
for venturing so rashly (being forewarned) to ^ommit so many, and so great
sacrileges against God, and his holy Sacraments

22 But as to the impossibility of forging so many Registers; in case there be
so many, it is easily answered, that it is no more, then that the Consecrator,
and other persons concerned, should have conspired to give in, a fal^e
Certificat, that the Consecration was performed with all due ceremonies, and
rites; and thereby deceive the Courts, or make them dissemble: and this is a
thing mo^e possible, and probable, then that all the Protestant Clergy should
have conspired not to produce the said Registers when they were so hardly pressed
by their adversa^ies. Or that so many Catholics should have been so ^oolish
to invent, and maintain the story of the Nags^ead in such time, when if it had
been false, they might ^ave been convinced by thousand witnesses. Or that so
many grave and learned Divines, who for conscience sake ^eft all, should
without fear of damnation engage themselves, and posterity, in damnable
sacaileges, by occasioning so many sacrilegious reordinations upon their char^
ging Protestants with no Ordination: no moderate an^ prudent man can suspect
that such persons should damn^ their souls out of mere spite against the
Church o^ England. If we Catholics did reordaine the Protestant Ministers upon
title of their heresy, and not of their known invalidity, we should also
reordaine the Grecia^ Priests, which is notoriously against our practice, and
Tenets: in so much that we hold our selves obliged to examine with all
diligence, whether there be any probability of the person having received valid
orders; and finding but any probable appearance thereof, the practice is, and
has been for diverse ages, to give orders not absolutely but conditionally;
whereas it is notorious that all our English Ministers who after their
conversion have been made Priests, received their Orders in absolute terms
without any condition adjoined, in the same manner which w^ use in ordaining
mere laymen.

23 Let us go one step further with our Protestant Clergy, and suppose that
their first Bishops were ordained by Catholics, we reserve yet another
nullitie in store for their consecration. And to wave many doubts that might be
moved concerning the matter of their Ordination, w^ will only speak of the
form, or words prescribed in the Protestant Rituall. It is a known principle
common to both Protestants, and Catholics, that in the form of Ordination
there must be some word expressing the authority, and power given to the person
ordained; the intention of the Ordainer expressed by general words,
indisserent, and appliable to all, or diverse degrees of holy Orders, is not
sufficient to make one a Priest, or a Bishop^ As for example, Receive the holy
Ghost, these words being indifferent to Priesthood, and Episcopacy, and used i^
both Ordinations, are not sufficiently expressive of either in particular;
unless Protestants will now at length profess themselves Presbyterians,
making no distinction between Priests, and Bishops; but they are as far from
that, as we Catholics. In the words, or form whereb^ Protestants ordain
Bishops, there is not one word expressing Episcopal power, and authority. The
form (...) this: Take the holy Ghost, and remember that thou stir (...) the
grace of God, which is in thee by impositions of hands, for God has not given
us the spirit of fear, but of power, and love, and soberness. The grace of
God is given by imposi^on of hands in all holy Orders, as also the spirit of
^ower, love, and soberness. There is not one word in ^his form expressing the
difference, and power of Episco^acy. Let Protestants search all Catholic
Rituals not ^nely of the West, but of the East; they will not find any one
form of consecrating Bishops, that has not the lord Bishop in it, or some
others expressing the particuar authority, and power of a Bishop, distinct from
all other degrees of holy Orders. See Ioannes Morinus in his ^earned
Commentaries De sacris Ecclesiae Ordinibus, printed ^t Paris an. 1655 who sets
down the ancient forms both ^n Greek and Latin, as well of Priesthood, as of
Episco^acy.

24 The form, or words whereby men are made Priests, must express authority,
and power to consecrate, or make present Christ's Body, and Blood: whether with,
or without Transubstantiation, is not our present Con^roversy with Protestants,
but only whether their form has words expressing authority, and power to
make Christ's Body truly present. See the form of Priesthood used by the
English Clergy set down by me in the first Chap. number. 10. and you will not
find one word expressing this power, and authority. Receive the holy Ghost,
does not involve it, because its used in the consecration of Bishops, who would
be recordained Priests when they receive Episcopal Order, if the said words
include power ^o consecrate Christ's Body. To dispense, or minister the
Sacraments come far short of the power, and authority of consecrating the
elements, or making present Christ's Body: Deacons did minister, and dispense
the Body of Christ to the people in ancient times, but were never ^houht to
have power, and authority of consecrating. The power of remitting sins does
not include power to consecrate, or make present the Body and Blood of Christ;
for, every layman has power to remit sins by baptizing, and no layman has
power to consecrate, or make present Christ's Body. Therefore words giving power
to remit sins, does not include power to consecrate all Sacraments ordained
for remission of sins, as some Protestants endeavor to make the ignorant
believe. In all forms of ordaining Priests that ever were used in the
Eastern, or Western Church, is expressly set down the word Priest, or some
other words expressing the particular, and proper function, and authority of
Priesthood. If any States, or Country should say, We choose such a person to
be King, in the word King is sufficiently expressed all Kingly power, and
authority. Therefore the Grecians using the word Priest, or Bishop in their
forms, do sufficiently express the respective power of every Order.

25 The true reason why the English form of making Priests, and Bishops, is so
notoriously deficient, and invalid, is, because it was made in King Edward the
VI. his time, when Zuinglianisme, and Puritans did prevail in the English
Church; the real presence was not believed by them of the Clergy who bore
sway, therefore they did not put in the form of Priesthood any word expressing
authority, and power to make Christ's Body present. They held Episcopacy, and
Priesthood to be one, and the same thing; therefore in the form of making
Bishops, they put not one word epressing Episcopal function, only some
general terms that might seem sufficient to give them authority to enjoy the
temporalities and Bishoprics. This is also the true reason why Parker, and his
Colleagues were content with the Nags-head consecration, and why others recurred
to extraordinary vocation in Queen Elizabeth's time. Its very credible, that if
Master Laud had found success in his first attempts, he would in time reform
the form of the English Ordination, and thrust in some words expressing the
power of Priests, and Bishops; seeing he, and others of the Protestant Clergy
of late, Kallend. an. 3. Ed. Vl. c. 12. Mason page 94.
did differ so much in opinion concerning Priesthood, and Episcopacy, from
those who lived in King Edward the VI. time, and in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign. He could not miss with six Prelates, and six other men
learned in Gods Law, whereof the greater number might devise as warrantable a
form of making Bishops, and Priests, as was devised by the same number in King
Edwards time. Yet all had been in vain, because neither Master Laud himself,
nor any of the rest then living, could consecrate others, even with the
Catholic form, seeing none of them all had valid Ordination, as has been
demonstrated. Therefore it was thought expedient to cover the want of the
reality of true Ordination, with an exterior formality of long cloakes, and
surplises, and supply the want of Sacrifice with crosses, and candlesticks upon
the Altars.

26 Master Mason commends much the wisdom of the English Church that so
discreetly, and religiously pared away all superfluous Ceremonies in
Ordination: and says, it was a singular privilege of Master Parker, that
being the 70. Archbishop after Saint Austin the Apostle of England, yet of all
that number he was the only man that received Consecration without the Popes
Bulls, and superfluous Aaronicall ornaments. How discreet, and religious the
English Church was in paring away pretended superfluities in Ordination, can
not be determined by Master Mason, until he makes appear that all is
superfluous in that kind which he, and the Puritans, who made the English
Rituall in King Edward the VI. time, fancied superfluous. It is not the part of
any particular Church to pare away any thing that has been delivered to them
by antiquity to be observed. Though some words have been added to ancient
forms of Ordination, for their greater explanation, or solemnity, yet none
were ever so rash, as to pare away any, especially those that seemed to
signify the power, and authority intended by the Ordainer.

27 To conclude this matter, I say with Saint Jerome: Ecclesia non est quae non
habet Sacerdotem. How can the Protestant Church be the true Church, seeing it
has not any one Priest, or Bishop? Though it were not evident that it has no
valid Ordination, yet so many manifest uncertainties, and doubts, as themselves
must acknowledge concerning their Ordination, does demonstrate the nullitie of
their Church. For if there remain but one solid, and prudent doubt of the
validity of Ordination of any Church, its impossible it should be the true
Catholic, and Apostolic: because a doubtful Clergy makes a doubtful Church;
and a doubtful Church is no Church. The first step to Christian, and Catholic
belief, is the well grounded credibility, excluding all prudent doubts, of
that Church whereof we are members; if we have any prudent ground to doubt of
the Clergy, we have the same to doubt of our Church, and of the Faith, or
Doctrine proposed by its testimony: and the true Faith admits of no such
doubts. Therefore Protestants before they can prudently believe to have true
Faith, or be in the Catholic, must clear all the doubts heretofore objected
against their Ordination, which I will briefly sum up.

28 First they must prove clearly, that the story of the Nags-head was a fable,
and consequently that Master Neale, and the other Catholics, who said they
were eyewitnesses of what passed, were impudent Impostors, and content to be
convicted as such in the same place, and time that they invented so palpable a
lie. Secondly, they must make appear evidently, that all the Catholics of
that time, both Bishops, Priests, and others, who believed Master Neale, and
suffered much for conscience, were all run mad, because they believed so
great a foppery; or if they did not believe him, they were most wicked, and
sacrilegeous persons, to engage posterity by their relation and testimony, to
reordaine the Protestant Clergy. Thirdly, they must demonstrate, that all the
first Protestant Bishops, and others consecrated by them, did conspire, not to
contradict the story of the Nags-head, and their own invalid consecration, for
the space of fifty and odd years, to the great discredit of themselves, and
their whole Church: where as they might easily stop their adversaries mouths,
by producing witnesses, and Records of the pretended solemn Congregation at
Lambeth, being so often demanded in printed Books, by whom, and how were they
ordained? Fourthly, it must be made appear to the world, that Bancroft Bishop
of London, could be ignorant of the public Registers of Parkers Ordination at
Lambeth, himself being so much concerned in it, and in the knowledge of it: if
he were not ignorant of the public Registers, why did he answer so fondly, and
contrary to the very Protestant principles, that a Priest might ordain Bishops
in case of necessity? Fifthly, it must be manifestly proved, that not only
Bancroft was ignorant of the public Registers, but that all the Bishops of
England, who were present in the late Parliament, knew nothing of them; whereas
Doctor Morton pretended Bishop of Durham, affirmed publicly in the upper
House, that the first Protestant Bishops were consecrated at the Nags-head.
This answer all the rest approved by their silence, and were glad to have that
retiring place against the Presbyterians, who proved clearly, that they were
not consecrated at Lambeth, as Master Masen pretends. But if Doctor Morton and
the rest of the Bishops knew any thing of Masons Book, and Registers, as
infallibly they did, why did not they stick to that? This proves evidently,
that none of them did give credit to Masons new found Registers.

29 Sixthly, supposing Master Masons forged Records were true, it must be made
clear that there was in their Ordination a competent number of true Bishops,
and consequently that the Bishops of Edward the VI. were validly consecrated,
notwithstanding the Declaration of the contrary by public Acts, and sentences
in Queen Maryes reign. Seventhly, if there was not a competent number of true
Bishops, whether in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign there, as any
such necessity as Protestants pretended, having then in England 14. Catholic
and true Bishops. Eighthly, it must be made appear that Barlowe was
consecrated, who was the principal Consecrator of Parker, for if he were, how
is it possible that in all the Registers of England, and Wales, there should be
no mention of his Consecration? Lastly, it must be proved clearly, that the
form used in the ordaining of Protestant Ministers, and Bishops, is valid. It
will be a very hard task to clear all these doubts, and exceptions How
unfortunately was Charles the First, late King of England, misinformed in
matter of his Bishops, and Clergy. What scruple could he have had, if he had
known the truth, to give way to the Parliament, to pull down Parliament
Bishops; who were so far from being de Iure Divino, that they were not so
much as de Iure Ecclesiastico.

30 And thus much I thought fit to produce at the present in confutation of
what either has, or may be said in behalf of the English Protestant Clergy,
and report me to the judgment of the impartial Reader, how much he ought to
rely upon their ministry, that by so many titles is proved to be null. But
though any person should not be convinced of the nullitie of their Ordination,
he can not but harbor a prudent doubt thereof, there being so evident reasons,
and motives for it, as have been set down in this Chapter. Now, to receive
the Sacraments from Priests of so doubtful authority, is without all doubt a
damnable sacrilege, it being a thing in the highest degree against the light of
reason, and the rules of Faith to expose to so manifest hazard the reverence of
the Sacraments, and the remedy of our souls. It is time now to pass from the
historical relation of the introduction of a new found Heresy, and the
intrusion of a new fashioned Clergy, to a more strict, and Scholasticall
examination of the nature of Heresy, and Catholic Faith.

CHAP. III. Of Heresy.
1 BEfore Protestancy be compared with Heresy, its necessary to declare what
Heresy is. Catholic Divines commonly define it to be an obstinate error
against any Doctrine of the Catholic Church. But because Protestants do not
agree with us in determining what the Catholic Church is; that we may not be
engaged in a new dispute, before we explain what we have in hand, I thought
fit to define Heresy in such a sort, that the definition may seem indifferent
to all Christians, and suppose, or beg nothing to favor Catholics, or
condemn Protestants; because if adversaries agree not in some principles, they
can not come to an issue to end the Controversies.

2 The definition is this: Heresy is an obstinate error against the Word of
God, or the true sense thereof sufficiently proposed as Divine Revelation. How
shall it be known when any verity is sufficiently proposed as Divine
Revelation? The bare word, or testimony of men does not seem to be a
sufficient proposal of Gods revealed truths: because every Sect give their
word, and testimony, in favor of their own Religion; assuring us that God
revealed the doctrine, and interpretation of Scripture which they follow. And
yet the contrary is evident; seeing God can not reveal the contradictions,
nonsense, and contrary Tenets which are taught in so contrary Religions.
Therefore the testimony of men, if not confirmed by some supernatural sign,
or miracle, can not be a sufficient proposal of Divine Revelation.

3 But if any Doctrine be testified by lawful witnesses to be Divine
Revelation, and their testimony be confirmed by miracles, all men are bound to
believe that the said Doctrine was revealed by God. This is the reason why the
perfidious Jews did sin grievously in not believing the Doctrine of Christ,
being confirmed with so many evident miracles. It is not necessary every person
see a miracle, that the true Faith, and Doctrine of the Catholic Church be
sufficiently proposed to him as Divine Revelation; its enough that he can not
prudently deny, or doubt, that miracles have been wrought in confirmation of
the Doctrine proposed. Christ's Doctrine was sufficiently proposed as Divine to
many Jews, who were not present at his miracles; its enough they were credibly
reported. Saint Augustine proved that miracles were wrought in confirmation of
Christian Religion by this ingenious Dilemma. Either the world believing such
strange, and improbable things (to human sense) as our Faith teaches; and so
contrary to our natural inclinations; did see them confirmed by miracles, or
no. If they did see miracles, we have our intent. If they did believe without
seeing any miracle, we have our intent also; because that very belief is the
greatest of all miracles: for how is it possible that sober, and wise men
should be so mad, as to believe, and embrace a new and strange Doctrine, so
repugnant to their senses, and contrary to their liberty, and natural
inclinations, if they had not been wrought upon by some supernatural power,
and signs? In one word therefore we may conclude, that only Faith, or
Doctrine is sufficiently proposed as Divine Revelation, which is not only
proposed as such by the testimony of a Church, but of such a Church whose
testimony has been confirmed by unquestionable miracles, either seen by the
believer, or at least so credibly reported to him by the testimony of honest,
and learned men, that it were want of prudence in any person whosoever, to deny
the truth, and sufficiency of such a testimony, and proposal.

CHAP. IV. In what does the obstinacy of Heresy consist?
1 THere was never any Heretic so madly obstinate, as to give God the lie to
his face, and in plain terms; all Sectaries acknowledge him to be Truth it
self, and therefore not capable of deceiving, or of being deceived. The
obstinacy of Heretics is against Gods verities, not as they are uttered
immediately by himself, but as they are proposed by his Church. If God himself
were pleased to speak immediately to men, in such a manner, that it were
evident, and clear to them, the words, and sense which the Church proposes,
were dictated by himself, we should be little troubled with Heresies, none
would be obstinate All the obstinacy of Heretics proceeds from the difficulty
they find in believing that God does speak, or declare his sense by the
Church: this once granted, our understanding has no difficulty to ubmit by an
implicit Faith to whatsoever the Church proposes as Gods Revelation, or Word.

2 Against clear evidence there can be no obstinacy; the object of it must be
involved in some obscurity, otherwise the will (which is the source of
obstinacy) could not master the unstanding. He who denies what is clear, and
evident, is more mad, then obstinate. There is nothing more generally
acknowledged, or more cleate, and evident to the understanding of all
Christians, then this proposition, If God said, or meant any thing its very
true. The obstinacy therefore of Heretics, does not contest with this clear,
and confessed truth: it only doubts, or denies, that God said, or meant any
such thing as the Church pretends; but no Heretic ever denied, or doubted, but
that if God meant, or said what the Church pretends, it must be true.

3 The difference therefore between an Heretic, and a Catholic, is not, that
the Heretic denies, or doubts, all that to be true which he thinks God
revealed, or meant; but the difference consists in this, that the Heretic does
obstinatly deny, or doubt, that God said, or meant what ^he Church proposes as
Divine Revelation; and the Catholic does firmly believe, he did say, and
mean, whatsoever the Church proposes as revealed. The Heretic believes what
the Church proposes, only conditio^ally, If God revealed it; reserving to his
own private judgment (or to that of his first Patriarchs, Luther, Calvin,
Chillingworth etc.) the decision of this controversy, Whether God revealed
it, or no? But the Catholic believes absolutely, and doubts not but God
revealed what the Church proposes as revealed, submitting his judgment (in
matters of Faith) to whatsoever the Church does define, or declare.

4 The obstinacy of Heresy may be well compared to the obstinacy of Rebellion,
Heresy being indeed a Rebellion of private, and proper judgment against Gods
authority, and veracity appearing sufficiently in his Church. Put the case that
a Province of Spain, or France did reject any Laws, or Ordinances made by
their King, and intimated by his Officers to the people, and proclaimed in the
same Provinces. In case these Laws, and the said Officers (who have all the
exterior signs, or marks whereby the Kings authority is usually discerned)
were contemned by the people, not because they doubt of their Kings legiflative
power, but because they will not believe he made such Laws, or gave any such
Commission to his Officers; would not the people, notwithstanding all this
pretended ignorance, be Rebels, and obstinate against their Sovereign? would
it excuse them from the guilt of Rebellion, to allege in their own behalf,
that they did not think, or believe, the King commanded any such thing, as his
Officers pretended, and proclaimed? Their very excuse involves obstinacy, and
Rebellion. The obedience and duty, which Subjects owe to their King, must be
extended also to his Officers; they must obey their Sovereign, not only when
himself commands, but also when the Officers that have the ordinary signs of
his authority, do command in his name.

5 This is the case of Heretics. They protest if they had thought, or
believed, that the Doctrine of the Roman Church was revealed by God, they would
embrace it with all their heart. But they do not consider, that this very If,
or doubt, is their crime, and heresy. What reason, or prudent ground have they
to doubt, that Go^ does speak by the Roman Church, as Kings do by the^
Officers? No Officers, or Ministers have more authen^tick, and credible signs
of their Kings authority, the the Roman Catholic Church has of Gods
Commission and trust, of proposing his Revelations, and interpretin^ his
meaning of Scripture, as is demonstrated in the 14^ and other Chapters. Now its
sufficient to know, that the signs of the true Church are Miracles, Sanctity
of Doctrine and life, conversion of Nations, continual succession (from the
Apostles to the present age) both of Pastors, and Doctrine etc. These signs
are obvious to our senses, and may b^ perceived by all people, Clounes,
Soldiers, and other illiterate persons, that will inquire, and examine the
history of their own Country, or the Religion of their Ancestors. Whatsoever
amongst all the Christan Churches, has these signs, That Church must be
heard, obeyed and believed, as having Gods authority, and Commission to decide
all doubts, and controversies of Faith; whosoever believes not her Definitions,
and obeyes not her Decrees, is an obstinate Heretic, and Rebel.

CHAP. V. Of the Catholic Church.
1 SEeing the obstinacy of Heretics is against Gods Revelations, as they are
proposed by the testimony of the Catholic Church, its required something be
said of this Church. That there is a Catholic and visible Church in this
world, is granted (tacitly) by all Heretics, seeing every Sect o^ them
pretends to be the whole, or at least one part of the Catholic Church.

2 The Catholic Church is a multitude, or Congregation of men, whose testimony
does so sufficiently propose their Doctrine to be Gods Word, and the true
meaning thereof, that it is evidently imprudence, and infallible damnation in
any person whosoever, not to acquiesce i^ the said testimony, and not to
believe (without the least doubt) what it proposes as Divine Revelation. There
are but two ways to convince the understanding of man; the one is evident, and
clear reason; the other is authority. To some things its necessary, even for
salvation, we give our assent, though no evident, and clear reason appears;
authority (that is, the testimony of lawful witnesses) must be taken for
reason, and supply the want of it. It is unreasonable, and damnable, not to
honor our Princes, and Parents, though they have no other evidence, or reason
to show, that they are our lawful Princes or Parents, but the authority, and
testimony of lawful witnesses. God therefore having decreed that men should
believe some mysteries above reason, commanded all, to believe under pain of
damnation whatsoever the Church says he revealed. It is not unreasonable that
God should condemn us for not believing the testimony of the Catholic Church
in matters of Faith, which are above reason; seeing we shall be condemned, if
we believe not the testimony of our Neighbors concerning our Princes, and
Parents. Is it a lawful excuse for any man to say, If I had believed such a
man to be my Sovereign, I would obey him; or such a woman to be my Mother, I
would honor her? If there be lawful witnesses for Prince, or Parents, their
testimony is to be believed; the very not believing them is a crime, though
there be no more evidence for it, then the said testimony. Therefore a
fortiori, the not believing the testimony of the Church, confirmed with so many
signs, in matters of Faith, is a crime, and obstinate heresy.

3 Some Protestant Divines of the English Church are so civil, as to admit of
us Roman Catholics, and so eharitable, as not to exclude any Christians from
being a part of the Catholic Church: yet we have reason to think, that its no
civility, or kindness, but interest, that moves them to open the door to us,
because if they reject us, themselves can not pretend to be a Church, having
neither succession of Bishops, nor (without begging our testimony) any solid
proof, that Scripture is Gods Word. What Books of Scripture they are pleased
to accept of as Divine Revelation, they do it upon our score and word; but the
sense which we delivered to them with the said Books, as the most principal
part of Gods Word, they do refuse; never being able hitherto to give any
tolerable reason why they take our word more for the letter o^ Scripture, then
for the sense, and meaning of it? If we deserve credit in one, why not in both?
being no less against our conscience, and as much in our power, to corrupt the
letter, as the sense. But of their obstinacy in this particular, and others, I
shall discourse more at large when speak of Protestancy. Now I will proceed in
the discovery of the true Church.

CHAP. VI. Whether all Christians be the Catholic Church or whether it may be
composed of any two, or more Congregations of them, if not agreeing in all
matters whatsoever which any one Congregation, or Church pretends to be
revealed by God?
1 THis is as much as to demand, Whether Catholics, and Protestants both, may
be part of the Catholic Church? Protestants (as w^ have seen in the former
Chapter) say, that a^^ Christian Congregations are parts of the Catholic
Church, as well as we Roman Catholics. Thi^ assertion they ground upon the
signification of the wor^ Catholic, which is as much to say, as Universal. In
the sa^ me sense they explicate Catholic Tradition to be onel^ that which is
contradicted by any Christian Church. According to this opinion, no
Congregation of Christian can be Heretics; because Heretics must be obstinate
against the Doctrine of the Universal, or Catholic Church: but no Christians
can be obstinate against the Doctrine of the Catholic or Universal Church;
seein^ themselves are part of it, and they can not be obstinate against
themselves, or their own Tenets, and Doctrine therefore none can be Heretics.
This absurd, and heretical sequel is a sufficient refutation of the
Protestant principle, and their explication of the word Catholic.

2 But let us prove directly that neither all Christians, nor any two Churches
dissenting in their testimonies, concerning whatsoever matters of Faith, can be
the Catholic Church. My proof is this: The testimony of the Catholic Church,
concerning what is pretended to be revealed, or not revealed by God, must
oblige all persons who are informed of it, to believe what it says, and
proposes. But if all Christians, or any two Churches not agreeing in their
testimonies (suppose Roman Catholics, and Protestants) be parts of the
Catholic Church, the testimony thereof can not oblige any sober person to
believe what both say, and propose. First, because one Church contradicts the
other, and its impossible to believe contradictions at one, and the same
instant. Secondly, when witnesses do not agree in their testimonies, if they be
of equal authority, no man is obliged to believe either side, but rather is
bound in prudence, to suspend his judgment. Therefore if the Catholic Church
be composed of all Congregations, and Churches of Christians, or of any two
Churches not agreeing in their testimonies concerning matters of Faith, no man
is obliged to believe the testimony of the Catholic Church, but rather to
suspend his judgment, and credit nothing: which sequel is absurd, and
contrary to the Doctrine not only of Catholics, but also of Protestants.
Therefore the Catholic Church must not be all Congregations of Christians, or
any two dissenting, but one only Congregation of persons who agree in one
Faith.

CHAP. VII. Whether the testimony of the Catholic Church be infallible not
only (as Protestants term them) in fundamental, but also in not fundamental
articles of Faith?
1 THough we Catholics say that all articles of Faith, if once sufficiently
proposed, are, in one sense, fundamental; because under pain of damnation
they must be believed: yet in ananother sense we admit a distinction between
fundamental, and not fundamental articles of Faith. Fundamental articles may
be called such as no ignorance of them can excuse men from damnation, for not
being believed. Not fundamentalls may be called such articles as if proposed,
must be believed; but if not proposed sufficiently, the ignorance of them is
excusable.

2 But whether these articles be both called fundamental, or only the first
sort of them, our controversy with Protestants is the same, and the question
is not set here out of its proper place; because the resolution of it is
necessary to answer an objection, which Protestants make against the Doctrine
of the former Chapter. All Christians (say they) do agree in fundamental
points of Faith, as in the Trinity, Incarnation, etc. what great matter is it,
if they agree not in other things of little importance, without the knowledge,
and sufficient proposal whereof, they may be saved, as Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, etc? Why should we be obliged to believe things that are
not absolutely necessary for salvation? especially seeing Roman Catholic
Divines do not deny, that ignorance of not fundamentalls is not damnable?
Therefore all Christians (though dissenting in not fundamentalls) may be called
Catholics, and the universal Church; because they agree in all necessary
articles of Catholic Religion; and though their testimonies do not agree in
Purgatory, v.g. being an article of Faith; why should their disagreement in
that petty point invalid their testimony concerning the mystery of the Trinity,
Incarnation, and other fundamental articles.

3 This discourse, and objection of Protestants has damned many a soul,
because they did not examine the truth of it as they ought. But to declare the
fallacy of it, something must be said of the Churches infallibility. Most
Protestants do grant, that the testimony of the Church is infallible in
proposing the fundamental articles of Christian Religion; as, in delivering
Scripture to be Gods Word, and in declaring the mystery of the Trinity etc.
because Christian, and Catholic Faith must admit of no doubts concerning the
truth of fundamentalls; and if the Church be not infallible in proposing those
to us, we must necessarily doubt of their truth; for, though we doubt not that
whatsoever God said is true, yet we can not but doubt, whether he revealed or
meant any such thing as the mystery of the Trinity, or Incarnation, if we do
not believe that the Church is infallible in proposing the said mystery? God
therefore in his Providence can not permit the Church to err, or deceive us in
fundamentalls, seeing its necessary for our salvation not to doubt of the truth
of fundamental mysteries; but if the Church may err in proposing them, we can
not but doubt of their truth. This reason (say Protestants) can not be applied
to not fundamentalls, because they are not absolutely necessary for salvation;
and our salvation is the only motive that God had to make the Church
infallible in proposing articles of Religion. Therefore none is bound to
believe, that the Church is infallible in not fundamentalls.

4 If the only motive that God had to make the Catholic Church infallible,
were our salvation, this discourse of Protestants might have some color of
truth; but Gods motive in all his actions, is not only our salvation, but (in
first place) his own honor, and glory. There is nothing concerns Gods honor
more, then that, whatsoever is sufficiently proposed as revealed by him, be
credited by us without the least doubt; whether the matter be great, or of
little importance. Therefore the Churches infallibility, and our obligation of
believing it, ought not to be measured by the greatness, importance, or
absolute necessity of the matter proposed, in order only to our salvation; but
also by the sufficiency of the proposal, in order to Gods honor, and
veracity. If a matter not absolutely necessary for salvation be as sufficiently
proposed to be revealed by God, as the mystery of the Trinity, the obligation
is as great of believing the one without any doubt, as the other. The reason is
clear; because there is as great an injury done to God, by denying, or
doubting of his veracity, and revelation, in a small matter, as in a great. In
believing we are as much bound to have a regard to Gods honor, as to our own
salvation; and his honor is as much concerned in being believed without the
least doubt concerning Purgatory, as concerning the Trinity, if both mysteries
be equally, or sufficiently proposed as Divine Revelation.

5 Seeing therefore that the self same Roman Catholic Church, and testimony,
which proposed sufficiently in the year 1516. to Luther, and all other
Protestants since that time, Scripture, the mystery of the Trinity etc. to be
Divine Revelation; did in the same year, and does now also propose Purgatory,
Transubstantion, and other points (which Protestants call not fundamental) to
be revealed by God: its evident that there is as great obligation of believing
without any doubt Purgatory, Transubstantiation, and others not thought
fundamentalls by Protestants, as the fundamentalls. But these articles which
Protestants call not fundamental, can not be believed without some doubt, if
the Church be not infallible in proposing them; as they themselves must grant
by force of the parity made with their fundamental articles. Therefore the
Catholic Church is as infallible in its testimony concerning not fundamental
articles being Divine Revelation, as it is in fundamentalls; or if not, it must
be fallible in both.

6 Yet if matters be well considered, we shall find, that its impossible to
deny any article of Faith, (though not absolutely necessary, and therefore (in
the opinion of Protestants) of little importance) but a necessary and
fundamental article must be denied together with it. There is no article of
Faith more fundamental, and necessary for salvation, then Gods veracity. They
who deny Purgatory, v.g. deny Gods veracity; because they who deny any thing
that is sufficiently proposed as Divine Revelation, deny Gods veracity, whether
the matter proposed as revealed by him, be great, or small. Neither can
Protestants give any other reason; why by denying the Trinity, Gods veracity is
denied, but because the Trinity is sufficiently proposed as Divine Revelation.
Therefore if Purgatory, or Transubstantiation be as sufficiently proposed as
the Trinity; by denying them, and others the like, Gods veracity is also
denied. So that all articles of Faith, if sufficiently proposed, are
fundamental, and necessary for salvation.

7 My second answer to the discourse, and argument of Protestants, is, that
witnesses contradicting themselves in circumstances, though of little
importance, are not to be prudently credited in the maine points wherein they
agree. The testimony of the two old Judges was not valid in the crime of
adultery objected by them against Susanna, Dan. 13.
because though their testimonies did agree in the crime, and in what was
material to condemn her; yet they varied in some circumstances not material.
What did it import (as to the guilt of Susanna) whether she committed adultery
under a Fig Tree, or a Pine? Though it was a circumstance very indifferent, and
of little importance in it self, yet the incoherency in it did prove that the
two old men's testimonies in the maine were invalid. Therefore although not
fundamental articles were not necessary for salvation, yet the incoherency in
such little matters does invalid the Catholic Churches testimony even in
fundamentalls, and the maine points of Christian Religion. Therefore it must be
granted that the testimony of the Catholic Church either is not prudently
credible, and infallible, in necessary, and fundamental articles; or that it
is prudently credible, and infallible in not fundamentalls. It follows also
out of the premises, that the Catholic Church can not be all Churches of
Christendom, because there are not two of them whose testimonies concerning
Faith do not differ, at least in not fundamental points of Religion, and by
consequence the testimony is absolutely incredible, because incoherent.

Against what hitherto has been said, some may object, that the Fathers
unanimously testifying fundamental articles to be revealed by God, ought to be
credited, though they contradict one another in matters not fundamental.
Therefore the same may be said of many dissenting Churches, or Congregations of
Christians; why should not the Catholic Church be composed of all Christians
agreeing in the principal points of Christian Religion, though they agree not
in others of less importance. The example of tke Babylonian Judges in the case
of Susanna, can not be applied to the Catholic Church: they were not credited
by Daniel in the fact which they unanimously testified, because the
circumstance wherein they varied, was so concomitant, and connected with the
fact it self, that it was impossible to see one, and not the other. Therefore
the contradicting themselves in the circumstance of the tree, did demonstrate
that they never saw Susanna commit adultery. But no such connection appears
between fundamental, and not fundamental articles of Christian Religion; the
Trinity, or Incarnation may be sufficiently proposed as Divine Revelation by
the testimony of both Protestant, and Roman Church, though Purgatory, or
Transubstantiation be only held by Protestants, to be only a probable opinion
of the Roman Clergy, and consequently not sufficiently proposed as Divine
Revelation, because it wants the concurrence of a considerable part of
Christianity in the testimony which it gives of those, and the like not
fundamental Tenets.

To the first part of this argument I say, that the Fathers in their greatest
differences agree in submitting their judgments to the Sea Apostolic, or to a
general Council, as to the visible and infallible Judge of Controversies Not
to Protestant Churches, each one pretending to be Independent of the other, and
of the Roman also. Such independency, and obstinacy of judgment is wholly
inconsistent with unity of Faith, and identity of Church.

Now to the second part concerning Susanna, and the two old Judges, I answer,
that all mysteries of Christian Religion are connected in the motive of
belief; so that we can no more discover a matter of Faith without the motive,
then a matter of fact without its circumstance. Wherefore the motive being the
same in all, they are all united to the motive, and consequently so inseparable
one from another, that denying one you deny all, as denying the motive, whereon
all, and every one do rely.

If the greatness of the matter proposed, or the number of proponents, and not
the quality of the proposal, did authorize, and induce the obligation of
believing whatsoever the Catholic Church testifies to be Divine Revelation,
the aforesaid argument might trouble Catholics: but seeing that both the
testimony of few, and matters not absolutely necessary for salvation, may be
confirmed with supernatural signs, and with true marks of the Catholic
Church, and Doctrine, there is no necessity of obtruding upon it any Protestant
Congregation, thereby to give more credit. Christians were not very many in the
beginning of the primitive times; and yet they filled up the number of the
Catholic Church. The Arrians were thought to be more numerous then the
Catholics, and yet it was never thought necessary, by any Orthodox, to have
the concurrence of their suffrage, or testimony concerning Religion, and
declaring what was fundamental, and not fundamental. I see no reason why the
Catholic Church of this age should court Protestants more ^hen the Church of
the fourth and fifth age did Arrians, Nestorians etc. I am sure the Arrians
were more in number then Protestants, and much more learned, they had a more
certain Ordination of Priests, and Bishops, and many of them were of as good
life, and conversation as any Protestants are, or were since the beginning of
the pretended Reformation. Why therefore should Protestants be a part of the
Catholic Church, and not Arrians, or Nestorians?

If Protestants be admitted as part of the Catholic Church, the Turks, Jews,
and all others, who believe there is one God, may with reason complain, that
they also are not looked upon as Catholics. For they, and we agree in the two
fundamental articles, which only (according the opinion of many learned
Divines) are necessary, necessitate medij; to wit, that there is a God, and
that he is Remunerator. Turks, and Jews believe this, therefore they agree
both with us, and Protestants in fundamentalls. Let us all therefore be parts
of the Catholic Church. And though Jews, or Turks be not baptized, that can
not prejudice them, according the principles of Protestants; their implicit, or
conditional faith will excuse them, as well as Protestants from damnation, If
God revealed the necessity of Baptism, or that Scripture is his Word (says a
Turk) I believe both, but until that be made clear unto me, I am not more
bound to believe either absoluly, and without doubt, then Protestants are to
believe Transubstantiation. I see no reason why this implicit, and
conditional faith should not save Jews, and Turks, as well as Protestants,
if the mysteries not believed by either, be equally proposed. Therefore
Protestants are no more part of the Catholic Church, then Turks, or Jews: I
am certain we have no more need of the testimony of the one, then of the
other, to establish what ought to be believed as Catholic Faith, or what
articles are fundamental.

CHAP. VIII. Whether any reformed, or Protestant Church of the world be the
Catholic and Apostolic Church? And whether their pretended clearness of
Scripture does sufficiently propose their doctrine as Divine Revelation?
1 IN the fifth Chapter number. This definition of the Church is clearly
insinuated in Scripture Act. 1. v. 8. Luc. 24.48. Joan. 18.37. Act. 5.32. Act.
2.32. Act. 4.33. Romans 10. Math. 28. etc.
2. it has been said, that the Catholic Church is a multitude, or
Congregation of persons, whose testimony does so sufficiently propose their
Doctrine, or Faith, to be Gods Word, and the true meaning thereof, that it is
evidently imprudence, and infallible damnation in any person whosoever, not to
acquiesce in the said testimony, and not to believe without the least doubt
what it proposes as Divine Revelation. The testimony of the true Catholic
Church must not be credible only to silly souls, that believe any thing they
hear, by reason of their ignorance, or because they were not rightly informed:
it must be credible to the most prudent, and informed persons, by reason that
the said testimony is confirmed with so clear signs, and marks of Gods
providence in planting, and propagating the Faith professed by the true Church,
that (all circumstances considered) no informed, and prudent person may judge
any other Church to have as much as a probable appearance of the true one, when
they are compared with the Catholic.

2 How the Protestant Churches, and Reformation did begin, has been said in
the first Chapter; which supposed, let us now examine whether any person can
prudently believe, that either the Protestant Church of England, or that of
Stratzburg, or Zurick, or Geneva, be the true Catholic Church of God? The
ground of the belief of these, and all other reformed Churches, are reduced to
two; one is clear Scripture pretended against the Roman errors, (as they call
them;) the other is, the private Spirit, whereby they interpret the true sense
of Scriptures to be contrary to the Tenets, and Doctrine of the Roman Catholic
Church. This is all the evidence which Protestants have to prove, that each of
their own Congregations is the true Spouse of Christ, and that the Church of
Rome is the Whore of Babylon. Miracles they do not pretend to; and as for the
two other signs which most of their Authors brag of, (that is, the sincere
preaching of the Word of God, and the lawful administration of the Sacraments)
these two can not be known, nor perceived, until that, whereupon they depend,
be first known to be the true sense of Scripture, or the true Faith be known.
But when the true Faith is known, we have no more need of signs to bring us
to the knowledge of it, or the true Church that professes it, then a Pilot
has of marks to be guided by into the haven, after he is within safe, and at
anchor. Therefore these two signs of Protestant are not true signs, because
they are as unknown, and as hard to be found out as the Church it self, which
^s contrary to the nature, and essence of a true sign.

3 As for the first ground of Protestancy, and Reformation, which is the
pretended clearness of Scripture against the Doctrine of the Roman Church; it
can as little confirm the testimony of the Church of England, or Zurick, etc.
as the Turks Alcoran. First they tell us that Scripture is against
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, worship of Images etc. We deny it, and bring (at
least) as clear texts of Scripture for our selves, as Protestants do against
us. They say the words, and sense of Scripture are so clear against our
Doctrine, that none can deny them. Yet we reply, that we are not so impious,
nor obstinate, as to maintain Doctrine point blank against Gods Word, and
sense. Now the question is, whether the testimony of Protestant Churches
against us, or ours in our own behalf, and defense concerning the clearness
of Scripture, be most credible to sober, and prudent men? I answer that the
testimony of Catholics of the obscurity of Scripture, against
Transubstantiation, worship of Images etc. is not only more credible then the
testimony of Protestants to the contrary; but also that the testimony of
Protestants, saying, that Scripture is clear against Transubstantion, worship
of Images, Purgatory etc. may be demonstrated to be false.

4 That this may not be thought a vain undertaking, suppose that our
controversy with Protestants concerning the clearness, and obscurity of
Scripture in controverted points, is to be understood after all combinations
and confronting of texts, which seem to have relation, o^ dependence one of
the other. I suppose also, that some Catholic Doctors have read, and
considered Scripture and all controverted texts, as diligently as Protestants;
a^ may appear by their printed Books, wherein they answer all Objections made
by Luther, Calvin, Jewel etc. (...) think it also no discredit for
Protestants to admit, tha^ (at least) some of our learned men, and well versed
in Scripture, have so much honesty, as not to conceal from the world that true
sense of Scripture, which seems to themselves clear and evident, after the
combination, and examination of all controverted texts. But to be brief and
decline all comparisons, which are odious, let us suppose for the present
(which Protestants ought, to take as a courtesy) that learned Protestants, and
learned Catholics, are equally honest, and equally learned; both honest, and
both learned, if the contrary be not made appear by the ensuing demonstration.

5 It is impossible for men equally learned, and equally honest, to have any
controversy about the sense of any words of Scripture, if the sense be clear,
and evident. But Protestants, and Catholics (who are supposed to be equally
learned, and equally honest) have controversies about the sense of such words
of Scripture as concern Transubstantiation, worship of Images, and other
controverted points. Therefore its impossible that the sense of such words of
Scripture as relate to Transubstantiation etc. should be clear, and manifestly
against the Doctrine of Catholics. Therefore the testimony of all Protestant
Churches maintaining the clearness against them, is not only incredible, but
manifestly false. Because the testimony of Catholics (though in their own
defense) is made evidently true by the controversy it self, a visible, and
undeniable effect, that can proceed from no other cause (amongst learned, and
honest men) but from the obscurity of the words, and sense, wherein their
judgments differ. If they squable about what is clear, both parties, or at
least one, is ignorant, or not honest. We Catholics have no reason to think
that all our Doctors want knowledge, and sincerity; its clear to all
Christen^ome, that in our Church we have in all parts of the world ^oth
learned, and honest men: and if Protestants think ^he same of themselves, they
must grant that our contro^ersies do manifestly demonstrate the obscurity of
Scripture.

6 Seeing Scripture is obscure, and in no place clear against
Transubstantiation, worship of Images, Purgatory etc. what ground, or warrant
had the first Protestants for their pretended Reformation? would not all the
world have reason to laugh at us Catholics, if we should part with that
ancient sense of Scripture in favor of Transubstantiation, Purgatory etc.
(which we received from the Church that went before us, assuring it was
revealed by God) upon the bare word of Luther, Calvin, Knox, or the ^2. persons
that made the Ritual, and pretended to reform in Edward the VI. time, the
Sacraments, both in matter, form, and number? What signs, or miracles did
they show for their extraordinary Mission, and Apostleship of reforming the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church? If any man who received his Land, by
inheritance from his Ancestors, ought not to part with it, if not forced by
better evidence then his own, how can we part with our Faith, and sense of
Scripture (which is the ground of all our supernatural inheritance, and
happiness) until Protestants show a better title, then the inheritance, or
continual succession of our Doctrines from the Apostles? They must produce
better evidence then their pretended clearness of Scripture. If they laugh at
Quakers, notwithstanding all the texts of Scripture which they have at their
fingers ends, against Protestant Doctrine; how do they imagine did Catholics
look upon the first pretended Reformers? One advantage these new Quakers have
against all Protestants, which Protestants have not against Catholics; and it
is, that a new Quaker may say with truth to an old or new Protestant, he has
as prudent ground, and as good evidence for his own interpretation of
Scripture, and Religion, as the Protestant has for his; their fancies (the
only ground of both their Faith) being much alike, and their Mission being not
warranted by any precedent Church. This the Protestants can not object against
Catholics, because we had always the word, and warrant of a precedent visible
Church for our interpretation of Scriptures, and Religion.

CHAP. IX. Whether any Puritanicall Congregation be the Catholic Church, by
reason of their pretended spirit?
1 THere not a tradesman, or simple woman, amongst the purer sort of
Protestants, who do not imagine themselves to be more infallible in
interpreting Scripture, then the Pope, and all the general Counsels together
This infallibility they attribute to the Spirit of God, which they all pretend
to have. But this fond imagination is as easily refuted, as the clearness of
Scripture has been in the former Chap. because every pure Protestant, or
Puritan, pretends to have the Spirit of God; but that Spirit contradicting it
self according the diversity of Tenets which the purely inspired hold, it is
impossible it should be the Spirit of God, who can not inspire contradictions.
Yet they are so obstinate, that its impossible to persuade them to the
contrary, though you may clearly convince them. The Pope must be Antichrist,
Catholic Kings the horns of the Beast, and religious Orders, rags of Rome
wherewith the Whore of Babylon adornes her self. The Puritans must only be
the Elect, the Saints, and pure Zealots of the beauteous discipline of Sion:
which to carry on, though whole Nations be extirpated, their holy Spirit does
not only rid them from any remorse of conscience, but assures them no work
can be more meritorious. If you inquire of them, how they know whether this
spirit of theirs be good, or bad, of God, or the Devil? Calvin their Patriarch,
and Master answers, that they do discern it as clearly as they do white from
black, sweet from sower, and light from darkness; his proof is the experience
and testimony of every one of the faithful Brethren, concerning the pureness
of his own spirit.

2 This Calvinisticall and private spirit being so hidden, and undiscernable,
can not be a sufficient, and prudent ground (at least for any man that has it
not) to believe it is the Spirit of Truth, and of the Catholic Church. Men who
are not in the true Church, must be led into it by some credit, and exterior
signs. And though Faith be a gift of God, yet it is communicated by preaching,
and hearing, Romans 10. We do not deny that God must help all Catholics
interiourly with his supernatural grace, and spirit; but the difference
between the Puritan, and Catholic spirit, is, that the Puritan spirit
inspireth a belief contrary to reason; the Catholic spirit inspires a belief
non contrary, but agreeable to reason. Though Christian Faith be above reason,
it is not unreasonable. But it can not be agreeable to reason that any person
believe a Puritanicall spirit without any more proof of the goodness of it,
then a Puritans word, against a sense of Scripture which has been continued
in the Roman Churches since the primitive times, as is evident by tradition,
testimony of Fathers, and acknowledged by the Magdeburg Centuries, and other
Protestant Writers. Therefore the private spirit can not be a sufficient
proposal of the true Faith, or a credible, and convincing sign of the true
Church.

3 Another proof that no private spirits interpretation of Scripture can be
the true one, being contrary to the public testimony of the Church which went
before it, and Puritans pretend to reform; may be borrowed from Saint Peter,
who gives to understand, Pet. 1.20.
that no private interpretation can be the true sense of Scripture. The reason
is clear, because there is none (if not confirmed in grace) who may not be an
obstinate Heretic against the true sense of Scripture in controverted texts;
but no man can be obstinate against his own private interpretation, and the
sense of his private spirit. Therefore he can not be an Heretic, if the
private interpretation of Scripture against the public testimony of the
precedent, or present Church which he impugneth, be the true meaning, and sense
of Gods Word.

4 Perhaps Puritans will grant that its impossible for any of them to be an
Heretic, seeing their spirit is infallible. If this be granted, its also
impossible for any other to be an Heretic, or obstinate against their spirit,
or interpretation; because he who is obstinate, may be convinced; and its not
possible to convince any man but by clear reason, or at least by lawful
witnesses. Clear reason Puritans can not pretend for their spirit, because its
against reason to believe it. Lawful witnesses for it there can be none, or no
more then one; which is not enough, nor allowed as lawful in a man's own case.
Though every Puritan gives not only a testimony of his own, but also of his
Brethrens spirit, yet he is no lawful witness for any other man's spirit;
because he has no better evidence, or ground for the testimony he gives, then
the other man's own word in commendation of his own spirit; he neither sees
the spirit of the other, nor any sign whereby it may be made credible; only
he may witness that the man whose spirit it is, says, it is of God; but one
man's word, in his own case, is no sufficient evidence for a lawful testimony.
Therefore there are no lawful witnesses for the private spirit, and
consequently, none can be obstinate against us, because none can be convinced
that it is of God. Whence it follows, that the spirit can be no sufficient
proposal of Gods Word, or sense; and therefore no inspired Congregation of
Protestants can be the Catholic Church.

CHAP. X. Whether that Congregation of persons which live in communion with,
and subjection to the Roman Church, be the Catholic and true Church of God?
1 THis question seems to have been resolved by what is said in former
Chapters. Because i^ there be a Catholic Church, Vide summam Conc^liorum A.F.
longo in Con^il. ^^or^n, (...) (...) (...).
and that is no^ all Congregations of Christians taken together, nor any
Protestant Church in particular, the dispute can only be now between the Greek
Church, and the Roman; but the Grecians having so many times altered their
Faith, so many of their ancient Patriarchs being condemned Heretics, and all
their Church being legally convicted of Schism, and Heresy, in three general
Counsels, of Florence, Lions, and the Lateran, they can not pretend to be the
true Church, which never erred I do not speak of that part of the Greek
Church which communicates with us Roman Catholics, because that is part of the
Roman. But suppose the Roman Church were not the Catholic, I see not what
advantage Protestants may have by pleading for the Grecians, seeing these agree
not with them, but are altogether against the pretended Reformation, and
condemn it as Heresy, as appears by the answer of the Patriarch of
Constantinople to the Protestants of Germany, mentioned by Bellarmine lib. 3.
de Euchar. cap. 21. in fine.

2 To prove therefore that the Roman Church is the true Catholic, it must be
made appear, that it proposes sufficiently its Doctrine of Faith, as Divine
Revelation, this sufficient proposal can not be done by clear and evident
reason, because the mysteries of Christian Religion are above humane capacity.
Therefore it must be done (according to what has been said in the 4. Chap.)
by authority, and the testimony of lawful witnesses. But lawful witnesses in
matters of Faith, are only they, whose testimony has been confirmed by
miracles, as has been demonstrated in the 2. Chap. Therefore we must prove
also miracles, if we intend to prove that the Roman Church is the whole
Catholic, and that it proposes sufficiently its Doctrine as Divine
Revelation. Now to the proof of the assertion.

3 That Doctrine is sufficiently proposed as Divine Revelation, which is
delivered to us as such by the testimony of lawful witnesses, confirmed by
miracles. But the Doctrine of the Church of Rome is delivered to us as Divine
Revelation by the testimony of lawful witnesses, and their testimony is
confirmed by miracles. Therefore its sufficiently proposed as Divine
Revelation, and by consequence the Church of Rome is the true Catholic

4 If the Minor, or second proposition be proved, my intent is concluded. That
the Roman Church has lawful witnesses of its Doctrine to be Divine
Revelation, has this difficulty: A lawful witness requires not only
knowledge of what he testifies, but also honesty; both qualities are
necessary, an honest fool being as little to be credited as a knowing knave.
But how can the Roman Church now extant in the 17. age of Christianity, have
lawful witnesses of the Doctrine, and sense of Scripture, which Christ and the
Apostles taught the world so long since? Though honesty can not be denied to
many Roman Catholics, yet the knowledge what the Apostles taught, which is
required for a lawful witness of the true Church, can not be granted to any,
seeing none is now living on earth, that conversed with the Apostles. This
argument does equally impugn all Churches, yet none can answer it but we Roman
Catholics.

5 It concerns all the world, even our very adversaries, to grant, that the
Roman Catholics have lawful witnesses with sufficient knowledge of what
Religion, and sense of Scripture was taught by the Apostles in the primitive
Church, nay which is more, that no other Church pretending to Reformation, can
have sufficient knowledge required for lawful witnesses of the true Religion,
sense of Scripture, and Doctrine of the primitive Church. If the Roman Church
has not sufficient knowledge for lawful witnesses of Christ, and the Apostles
Doctrine, no hereditary King, or Prince, can have a title, or right to his
crown; because the right descended to them by inheritance, does depend upon a
lawful testimony averring, that they are the true heirs of such a man, who
reigned perhaps three or four hundred years ago. Henry the IV. of France
proved himself by lawful witnesses to be the heir of Saint Lewis But who
couldbe a lawful witness that Henry the Great descended of Saint Lewis? All
France did give a lawful testimony of it, because it was a constant tradition
in the whole Kingdom, descended from Saint Lewis his time to this present age.
That is to say, in every Century, or age, there were honest men, and lawful
witnesses who testified, that Henry the IV: Ancestors descended from Saint
Lewis; though one only age could remember, or see Saint Lewis, yet the next
ensuing did see the first, and heard their testimony; the third did see the
second etc. In every age did live men whose testimony might be relied upon. It
must be granted therefore by all, that the knowledge which is grounded upon a
continual, and never interrupted tradition, is sufficient for lawful
witnesses.

6 That the Roman Catholic Church has a continual, and never interrupted
tradition of its Faith, and sense of Scripture being taught by Christ, and the
Apostles, can not be denied by our adversaries, it being evident to the world,
that they who contradicted any article of this Faith we now profess, in former
ages, were looked upon, and condemned as Heretics; which is an infallible
argument that we, in every age, received our Doctrine from the former not as
the word of men, but as the Word of God, or as Divine Revelation: for, if it
were not believed as Divine Revelation, why should we condemn men as
Heretics, because they denied it? Neither do Protestants deny, that we
believed our tradition, and the testimony of our Church, to be grounded upon
Divine Revelation; they only say we were mistaken, and that both our
tradition, and testimony of the Roman Church was fallible. But then we urge,
that they acknowledge both were infallible in delivering to them the Scripture,
and testifying that it was the Word of God: therefore in delivering, and
testifying all the rest, seeing the same testimony delivering many things
together, must be of equal authority in all, and equally believed by them who
accept of it as a lawful proof. All our pretended Reformers had no other
ground in the year 1517. to believe Scripture as Divine Revelation, but the
testimony of the Roman Church. Therefore they ought to believe all the rest, or
not to believe Scripture.

7 I said, it concerns also our adversaries to grant, that their reformed
Churches have no lawful witnesses in matters of Faith; because there can not
be that sufficient knowledge which is required in a lawful witness of Faith,
without tradition, whereby it may appear, that the Faith and sense of
Scripture of this age does agree with that of the primitive Church. If once our
adversaries acknowledge lawful witnesses of things past long since, without a
constant, and never interrupted tradition, every man whose spirit of ambition
moves him, may pretend to be true heir of any hereditary crown, or estate;
and without further proof then his own word, and spirit, or some obscure text
of Scripture, will exclude Kings and others, whose rights are grounded upon
tradition. But if tradition be so necessary to preserve, and make credible the
testimony of men in matters of estates, and rights in the Commonwealth, it can
not be superfluous to make credible the testimony of men concerning matters of
Faith.

8 It remains now we prove that the testimony of the Roman Catholic Church
has been confirmed with supernatural signs, or miracles. But seeing there
are in the Roman Church lawful witnesses who prove, that the Faith which they
now profess, is the same with that of the primitive Church, miracles also are
proved by the same witnesses, it being granted by Protestants themselves, that
miracles were wrought in the primitive Church to confirm the Faith, which
Christ, and his Apostles taught. Yet in the Roman Catholic Church there are
now lawful witnesses, and have been in every age since Christ's preaching,
that there have been miracles done in confirmation of the Roman Faith. This is
evident to all who read the Ecclesiastical Histories of present, and past
times. Neither can our adversaries deny, that we have lawful witnesses for
miracles now wrought in our Church (even in confirmation of that Doctrine
wherein we differ from them) and reported by so credible testimonies, See the
13. Chap.
that it were imprudence in any person whosoever to deny them, which is enough
to propose sufficiently our Doctrine as Divine Revelation.

But Protestants do not believe our miracles, because they imagine that they
are against Scriptures, that is, against their own interpretation of it, and
that some miracles have been false, and forged. We do not say that all things
which the common people think to be miracles, are really true miracles; but we
affirm that true miracles there are in our Church, and very frequent,
confirming that very Doctrine which Protestants reject: the forgery or knavery
of some particular wicked men in feigning miracles, can not prejudice all,
especially such as are seen, and experimented by persons of known integrity,
and learning, able to discern between true and false miracles: otherwise it
will follow, that all the new Testament must be called in question, or denied
to be Gods Word, because Saint Thomas his pretended Gospel, or Nicodemus his
writings are condemned as forged, or Apocryphal.

That no reformed Church of Protestants can have lawful witnesses to propose
sufficiently their Doctrine as Divine Revelation, is evident; because for the
space of 1500. years, they were without any visible Church, or tradition;
therefore their witnesses also are invisible, and by consequence not lawful,
or credible. Fox and others made a certain Catalogue of men who opposed the
Doctrine of the Roman Church in former ages; but they were known Heretics, and
did neither agree amongst themselves, nor with Protestants, in their Tenets, or
Religion, as has been demonstrated by Father Persons in his Examination of
Fox his Calendar, and by many others.

9 I conclude therefore, that seeing Protestants grant there is, and has
always been a Catholic Church upon earth, and that Church must have lawful
witnesses testifying their Doctrine to be Divine Revelation; it being evident,
that no Congregation of men can produce any such lawful witnesses, but the
Roman Catholics (amongst whom I include also them of the Greek Church who
agree with us) its also evident, that there can be no Church Catholic but the
Roman.

CHAP. XI. Whether Transubstantiation, and the lawfulness of the worship of
Images be sufficiently proposed by the testimony of the Roman Catholic Church,
as Divine revelation? and whether Protestants have any lawful exceptions
against them?
1 THere are so many Books printed in defense of these Catholic Tenets, that
I judge it superfluous to treat of them ex professo. I will only answer some
exceptions that Protestants have made against them to my self, in diverse
occasions. That the Roman Church does propose these articles sufficiently as
Divine Revelation, is clear; because it proposes them by the same testimony,
and confirmed by the sames signs, whereby it proposes Scripture to be Gods
Word: this last proposal Protestants themselves grant to be so sufficient,
that no man may in prudence deny it. Therefore the same must be said of all the
rest, and in particular of Transubstantiation, and worship of Images.

2 But let us hear the exceptions of Protestants against each of these
mysteries. Against Transubstantiation they object the evidence of our senses;
it never being read in Scripture (say they) that God by a miracle deceived men's
senses, or made appear to them one thing for another. Moses and Aarons rod in
Egypt, was really converted into a serpent, and seemed so also to the senses of
the spectators. The Magicians rods seemed to be serpents to the senses, but
really were not. From hence they conclude, that by false miracles, and
illusions the senses may be deceived, but never by true supernatural signs,
or miracles. Against Transubstantiation they object also novelty of the word,
and of the thing defined, which was in the Council of Lateran first, and after
in the Council of Trent.

3 As for worship of Images they look upon it as idolatry, or at least as a
thing inclining the common people to it, and therefore both dangerous, and
unlawful. Some object also novelty against it, the first time (say they)
worship of Images was heard of, being some 800. years ago, in the second
Council of Nice.

4 Now to their first exception, and the evidence of their senses against
Transubstantiation, I answer, that the senses are not deceived, because
(according to common Philosophy) their proper object (which are the accidents)
do remain. But seeing diverse both Catholics, and Protestants do deny that
there be any accidents separable from their proper substance, my second answer
is, That there are two sorts of miracles. Some miracles are wrought, not to be
seen, but to be believed; because they are not only miracles, but also
mysteries of Christian Faith. The Incarnation, or Union of God and man in one
person is one of the greatest miracles, yet it was not done to be seen, or
manifested to our senses in this life, but (being concealed from them) to be
believed. The miracle of Transubstantiation is called by Christ himself
Mysterium Fidei, a mystery of Faith; it was not done to be perceived by our
senses, but to be believed by our understanding.

5 Other miracles there are which have been wrought by God, to the end they may
move us to believe, not themselves, (for they are seen, and manifest) but some
other revealed truth; these miracles are patent to our senses, because they
give us sufficient evidence, that the mysteries of Faith may prudently be
credited as Divine Revelation. Such was Moses his miracles in Egypt; the rod
was not turned into a serpent, that Pharao, and the Egyptians should believe
what they did see with their eyes, but that they should believe somewhat else,
to wit, that Moses was sent by God.

6 Supposing this difference between miracles, there can be no difficulty in
answering the objection made by Protestants against Transubstantiation.
Miracles which are not wrought principally to the end that they may be believed
by Faith, but rather to the end they may be evidently seen, and by their
means other mysteries believed, can not deceive the senses; because then they
would be of no use, Gods providence, and end in working them, would be
frustrated. Miracles which are together mysteries of Faith, and are done that
they may be believed, and not seen, must not appear evidently to our senses,
but rather be concealed from them; otherwise we should have evidence, and
belief of one thing in the same time. The mystery of Transubstantiation is a
miracle not to be evidently seen, but to be believed. Therefore its no
mervaile that it be not patent to our senses: when Christ turned water into
wine, he did it in such a manner, that the sense perceived it to be wine,
because from that evident and sensible miracle, they might infer, and
believe, that he was the true Messiah. But when he changed bread, and wine into
his own Body, and Blood, there was no appearance of change, it seemed to
remain still bread, because the insensible change of one substance to another,
was a mystery to be credited, and not to be seen. The Manna (which was a
figure of the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar) did savor to the Jews
whatsoever they fancied, though it remained the same substance it was before: I
see therefore no reason why we Christians should give more credit to our palate,
then the Jews, who had as much reason to doubt of the Manna, as we of the
Sacrament; nay we have less, because Christ's words are so absolutely, and
clear, This is my Body: if it be his Body, it is not bread; being impossible
that Christ's Body should be bread.

7 Seeing God will not have the mystery of Transubstantiation be evident to our
senses, its not to be thought either superfluous or incredible, that the
species, or appearance of bread and wine, work the same effects, which their
substance would have done, if it were present: for, God is as coherent in
supernatural things, as in natural; its necessary therefore for the
concealment of this mystery, and for the merit of Christian Faith, that no want
of the substance of bread, and wine, may be perceived in the Sacrament by any
curious experience of men, who would eat, and drink only conscerated
species. The not manifesting this great mystery to our senses, requires, that
the same effects be worked by the species, as by bread, and wine.

8 Some Protestants think it a contradiction that one body be present in many
places together. But all Catholics hold that Christ's Body, and Blood, have a
spiritual presence in the Sacrament, which once granted, there can be no
difficulty in believing that our Saviors Body, and Blood, may be in many
places at the same time; because its granted to all things which have a
spiritual presence.

9 If any inquires, how can a body have a spiritual presence? I answer him
with demanding, how can a spirit have a corporal presence? How can an Angel
have the appearance, and presence of a young man? whereof there are many
examples in Scriptures Whence it follows, that our senses may be deceived, or
(to speak more properly) may give occasion to the understanding to be
deceived, not only in the mystery of Transubstantiation, but also in others,
expressed in Scripture; which is contrary to what our adversaries object.
Angels seemed to the eyes of Abraham, Iosue, Tobias, and others to be young
men, and yet they were not men, but spirits.

10 As for their saying that Transubstantiation is a novelty brought into the
Church by the Council of Lateran an. 1215. its a mistake; because the very
condemning of of Berengarius as an Heretic, for impugning this mystery, does
demonstrate it was no novelty; but believed as an atticle of Faith, not only
before the Council of Lateran, but since the Apostles. For otherwise, how were
it possible that the Patriarchs of Jerusalem, and Constantinople, 70.
Metropolitanes, 400. Bishops, and 800. Conventuall Priors, who were present at
that Council, should all agree to declare Transubstantiation to have been
revealed by God to the primitive Church, and yet the same to be at the same
time invented, when the Council defined it? The Church does not make new
articles of Faith when it defines any controverted Doctrine, it only declares,
that such Doctrine was delivered to the primitive Church, though perhaps it was
not proposed generally to all Churches, and Catholics; it groundeth the
definition upon Scripture, or Tradition. The same which Protestants object
against the word Transubstantiation, did the Arrians against Consubstantiality
in the Council of Nice, saying it was a novelty, and not in Scripture.

11 The lawfulness of worshipping Images is sufficiently proposed as Divine
Revelation by the second Council of Nice in these words: We do unanimously
profess to stick to Ecclesiastical traditions which are in force eather by
custom, or writing; whereof one is the making of Images, Which is agreeable to
the Gospel, and profitably invented for the belief of Gods true Incarnation.
This supposed, following the beaten rode, and the steps of our Divine, and holy
Fathers, and observing the tradition of the Catholic Church, wherein the holy
Ghost does inhabitate, we define that holy Images ought to be worshipped etc. of
Christ, of our Lady, Angels, Saints etc. For so the discipline of our holy
Fathers does conclude, as also the tradition of the Catholic Church, which
from one end to the other has received the Gospel.

12 Notwithstanding this clear testimony of the Catholic Church. Protestants
confound the worship of Images with idolatry, not distinguishing between an
Image, and an Idol ( Idol signifies the likeness of a false God; Image is the
likeness of any thing that does, or may exist) translating in the English
Bible Image for Idol, and make the poor ignorant people believe, that we
Catholics dare not set down in our Cathechismes the first Commandment at
full, as it is in Scripture; because it forbids worship of Images: whereas
out of the very text it appears, that God forbids only the likeness of any
thing to be adored as God, or made to that purpose. In Canisius the Jesuit his
Cathechisme is set down the first Commandment as it is in Scripture. In all
other Cathechismes the substance of the first Commandment is set down: for in
adoring but one God is employed, we must not worship any other things as Gods.
It might be as well objected against our Cathechismes, that in the last
Commandment we put in brief only these words, Thou shall not covet another
man's goods; omitting oxes, and asses etc. which these wise Objectors put us in
mind of. Cathechismes, being briese instructions for childrens memory, require
the shortest expression of the substance of every Commandment.

13 But when Catholics urge Protestants with the same Commandment, because
they have their own statues, and pictures made, which are as much prohibited
by the Commandment, as the statues, or Images of Saints; they can find an
explanation for the text, and distinguish between civil, and religious
worship: we honor (say they Kings, and Princes Images with a civil worship
only, and not religiously, as ye do the Images of Saints: which religious
worship is due to God alone. I would feign know why can not religious worship
have a latitude, and be more, and less, supreme, and inferror, as civil
worship has Its civility not only to worship Kings, but also noble men and
others; ho are their servants; but the supreme civil^ worship is due only to
the King himself; an inferior de^ gree is due to his servants, to every one
according his calling. What inconveniency is it to hold the same (with
proportion) of religious worship. The supreme religiou^ worship, which is
called Latria, is due to God alone; why may not there be an inferior degree of
religious worshi^ due to Saints, and their Images; religious worship being
only an exterior acknowledgement of some religious, o^ supernatur all
excellency in the person worshipped: Saint Poter is known because he was a
Saint, and not because h^ was a Fisher. Sure Protestants will not deny, that
the Saints who enjoy God, have a supernatural excellenc^ bestowed upon them by
his Divine Majesty. Therefore the Saints (and by consequence their Images) may
be ho^ noured, with a religious worship of an inferior degree.

14 As for the danger of idolatry amongst the common people, we Catholics have
no reason to apprehend any having so long experience of the contrary. We resort
more to the Church, or Chapel where one Image is, the another, according the
graces which we receive our sel^s, or the miracles which we credibly hear to
be done (...) others. To persuade us not to believe any such mira^es, is to
take away all belief, and society amongst men. ^s evident some miracles done
at these Images are true, ^ough some may be false. For its impossible that all
the ^atholicks, and many Heretics, should conspire toge^er to deceive the
world, and damn themselves, for a ^ing which (if false) imports most of them
nothing. If ^ere be miracles, the worship of Images can not be un^wfull,
because God induces not men by miracles to ^nne; rather there is an obligation
of believing, that it is ^ry lawful. And as for the danger of idolatry, there
is (...) more in worshipping Images, then there is, that the ^mmon people of
England should cry up an Image, or atue of the King, for their King, and rebel
with it a^inst himself.

CHAP. XII. Whether Protestancy be Heresy?
BY Protestancy I mean all, and every point of that Doctrine of Protestants,
wherein they differ from any Tenet which Roman Catholics hold as a point of
Faith. The articles of Christian Religion in which they, and we agree, ^n not
be properly called Protestancy, because they are infferent to both, and were
believed by us Roman Catho^ks long before any Protestants were seen, or heard
of (...) the world. Most of the articles of Protestancy, are ne^tive, that is,
not ot believe Transubstantiation, Purgatory, (...) lawfulness of praying to
Saints, or worshipping them in ^ir Images, etc. so that to be a Protestant, is,
not to beve. Protestants on the other side say, that to be a Ca^lick, is, to
overbelieve, and to be a Protestant, is, to be^ve only that which is
necessary. But then we ask, who all be Judge of what is necessary, and
superfluous? Not ^man Catholics, say they, because they are a part, and
^cerned. By the same reason we may exclude all Prote^nts from judging, and not
only Protestants, but all Christians, because every Church of Christendom
pretends to believe all that is necessary; all therefore and ev^ry one may be
excepted against, as a part, and concerne^ So that if Roman Catholics be
excluded from determ^ ning what is necessary to be believed, we must be judge
by the Turks, Pagans, or Jews, in the controversies (...) Christian Religion,
and of Scripture. Me thinks we Ca^ tholicks are beter conditioned, more
prudent, and mo^^ provident in our belief, then Protestants; because thoug^ we
should believe too much, we can not be damned for want of necessary belief; we
may lend some to o^ Neighbors, and reserve to our selves as much as is nece^
sary. But Protestants stand upon such nice terms wit^ God, and the Church,
that if they come not short of wh^ is necessary (as twenty to one they will)
their Neighbou^ shall be nothing the better for their belief.

2 I might urge this argument in a serious way, and v^ home, if this were its
proper place. But to return to the question, whether Protestancy be Heresy? I
answer, the all opinions, or Tenets, whether negative, or affirmativ^ that
Protestants hold contrary to that which the Rom^ Catholic Church believes as
an article of Faith, are H^ resies; which I demonstrate in this manner.
Whatsoev^ opinion is contrary to any Doctrine sufficiently propose as Divine
Revelation, is Heresy; but all Protestants prper Tenets, or opinions are
contrary to some Doctri^ sufficiently proposed as Divine Revelation Therefore
(...) Protestants proper Tenets, or opinions are Heresies. The first
proposition is granted by our very adversaries, an^ has been proved in the 3.
and 4. Chap. The second (...) clear by what may be borrowed from the same
Chapter and from the so. and I apply to our question by this sy^ logisme. All
the proper Teners of Protestancy are co^ trary to some Doctrine which the Roman
Catholi^ Church does testify to be Divine Revelation; (that is, (...) have
been revealed by God to the primitive Church;) b^ the testimony of the Roman
Catholic Church is a suf^ cient proposal of any Doctrine to be Divine
Revelatio^ Therefore all Tenets, or opinions proper to Protestanc^ are contrary
to some Doctrine sufficiently proposed Divine Revelation.

3 If the second proposition of this last syllogism, argument, be
demonstrated, Protestancy is demonstrated ^o be Heresy. Therefore I prove it
(in my judgment) ^ery clearly. That testimony is a sufficient proposal of
Sods revealing any Doctrine to the primitive Church, which testimony is
confirmed by miracles, and has con^inued without interruption, being exhibited
in every ^ge (from the time of the Apostles to this present) by ho^est, and
knowing men. But the testimony of the Roman Catholic Church has all this.
Therefore its a sufficient ^toposall of any Doctrine to be Divine Revelation,
or to ^ave been revealed by God to the primitive Church. That the testimony of
the Roman Church is confirmed by ^^iracles even in those very points of
Doctrine wherein ^rotestants differ from us, is so evident, that no prudent
^an, if not obstinate, can deny, and is particularly proved (...) the 13. Chap.
For how is it possible, that all the world ^as I said before) should conspire
to abuse Protestants, and ^amne themselves by feigning miracles; and that, not
^nely in this age, but in every age since the primitive Church. The forging of
some is no prudent proose that ^ll are forged If there are no miracles in the
Roman Ca^olick Church in confirmation of Transubstantiation, Pur^atory, Worship
of Images etc. there is no Faith to be given my men whosoever.

4 Now it remains only to be proved, that there has ^een a continual
succession of honest, and learned men ^f the Roman Church in every age since
the primitive Church to this present, who did bear witness that the Doctrine
which every respective former age delivered to ^he next ensuing, and we believe
as Faith, was revealed by ^od to the first Christians. But this being evident
by the ^ondemning as Heretics all those who in any age held ^rotestant Tenets,
and being also proved in the 10. Chap. ^s superfluous, and troublesome to
repeat it here again. Whosoever desires to be informed more at large, and of
^very point in particular, let him read the Protestant Apo^gy for the Roman
Church. There he will find what I ^ay to be so clear, that our very learned
Adversaries are ^orced to acknowledge it, and recurre to that old, and
^esperate shift of Heretics, who say, that the word of ^en is not to be
believed, as if the word of the same men who assure us that Scripture is the
Word of God, were credible in that, but in nothing else. Of this we have sai^
enough before in the 5. Chap.

5 Yet I will not omit to argue against Protestants a^ Saint Augustine did
against Jews, and Pagans with that in^ genious Dilemma, whereof I made mention
in the 3. Chap Either the first learned, and honest men who adored the Blessed
Sacrament, believing there was no bread in it worshipped Images, etc. did see
miracles to confirm these pretended novelties, which crept in (as Protestant
say) t^ the Church; or they did see no miracles to confirm them. If they did
see miracles, I have my intent. If they did se^ none, I have also my intent,
because the greatest of all m^ racles is, that wise, and learned men should
without an^ miracles seen, adore for God that which seems to be piece of
bread, and worship a statue, or picture; which (...) not only contrary (as
Protestants say) to clear Scripture but also to common sense, and reason. By
the same Di em^ ma I prove that every point of the Doctrine of Catholic
against Protestants: was sufficiently proposed as Divine Revelation. Either it
was sufficiently proposed to the fir^ Christians who believed it, or not. If it
was, Protestanc^ is Heresy. If it was not, how is it possible, that not only
the first who believed, or taught these superfluities, bu^ all the wise, and
honest men of the world for many age before the pretended Reformation, should
impose upon themselves unnecessary articles, as necessary, and thereb^ betray
posterity, and damn themselves, for believin^ things which had no ground in
Scripture, nor were testi^ fied to them by any credible testimonies of the
Christian^ who went before them, to be Divine Revelation? All tha^ Protestants
can say in their own defense has been con^ futed in the 3.4.7.8. and 9.
Chap, for all must be reduce^ to three heads: 1. That Scripture, and Fathers
are clea^ against Roman Catholics. 2. That the private spirit i^ for
Protestants 3. That Protestants are neither obstinate nor Heretics, because
they do not believe that God re^ vealed Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. All
these thre^ evasions, and more have been confuted in the foreme^ tioned
Chapters, to which I remit the Reader.

6 I do not see what exception Protestants can add t^ their former against the
testimony of the Roman Cath^ lick Church, unless they say, I that it is not
make an^ thing prudently credible as Divine Revelation, because we Catholics
can not make appear by reason how what we say, is true, as, how accidents can
be without their proper subject etc. but upon this score they may as well
reject the mystery of the Trinity, Incarnation, as Transubstantiation. The
Catholic Church is not the Author of the Doctrine it proposes, its only a
witness, as Christ himself declared, when he sent the Apostles to preach, Ye
shall be my witnesses in Jerusalem etc. Act. 1.
Only God who is the Author of Catholic Doctrine, can give a clear reason of
some mysteries; and though the Church can not, its testimony ought to be
believed. Many Clownes who unanimously say they have seen an Eclyps, or
extravagant inundation of the Sea, deserve credit, though they be no
Philosophers, or Mathematicians, and consequently can not give any clear
reason of an Eclyps etc. Therefore the testimony of Catholics ought not to be
rejected concerning Transubstantiation, or any other mystery, though they can
not give clear reason for it; its enough for them to recurre to Gods
omnipotency.

7 But how (say Protestants) can we be called Heretics, or obstinate, if we
are content to submit our judgments, and believe what is sufficiently proposed
as Gods Revelation? We only deny, that the Roman Church does propose
sufficiently as Gods Revelations their Decrees in the Counsels of Trent, and
Lateran etc. To this I have answered in the third Chap. and now again do
affirm, that there is no Prince who does propose his commands, and sense
concerning any matter, more sufficiently by his subordinate Ministers, then God
does his Word, and sense of Scripture, by the Roman Church. Because there has
not been only a continual succession of this Doctrine we profess, from the
primitive Church to this present (which neither the Greek Church, See Chap. 9.
nor any other can pretend to, having changed the Doctrine of Faith more then
once;) but because there do appear such evident signs of the Roman Churches
being appointed by God to declare to all the world the true Faith, and sense of
Scripture, that it must be obstinacy in the highest degree, to doubt of the
sufficiency of the Roman Churches proposal, and testimony. First the
conversion of Nations by Roman Catholics in all parts of the world is evident.
Secondly, no other Church does pretend to miracles, but we alone. Thirdly, we
hear of no eminent sanctity confirmed by prophecy, and other supernatural
signs in any Church but in ours. Fourthly, there is no unity, peace, or end of
controversies but amongst us, all submitting our judgments in matters of Faith
to any general Council approved by the Pope. Fifthly, no Church has
continual tradition, and succession of Doctrine, but we Roman Catholics.

8 All these signs are marks of the true Catholic Church, and are so obvious
to our senses, that idiots may take notice of them; if they will but inquire,
and spend as much time in that, as in reading the History of their own
Country, or of informing themselves of their Ancestors. This is the true
reason why no Protestants can pretend ignorance of the true Church, nor rely
upon the word of their Ministers. If they inquire not, they will be damned for
being ignorant. If after due inquiry made, they become not Roman Catholics,
they will be damned for Heresy, not only for denying the truth of our
Doctrine, and Faith, but also the sufficiency of its proposal He is a rebel
who denies, that the accustomed exterior signs of the Princes commission, and
authority, which are seen in his Officers, is not a sufficient proposal of
his will and pleasure, to have the said Officers obeyed as his Judges, or
Deputies etc. I see no reason why the same ought not to be grated (with
proportion) in our case; unless Protestants think that Princes ought to be
more respected in their Ministers, then God in his Church; or that there is
greater evidence required to believe that God does speak by his Church, then
to believe that Princes do speak by their subordinate Ministers. Truly though
this greater evidence were required, Protestants can have no excuse, because
the signs of the Roman Church are greater evidence, that it alone is the true
one, by which God declares, and speaks his mind, then the signs of any
Magistrate in a Commonwealth, or Kingdom, are of the true regal authority of
the said Magistrate, by which Kings, and Princes declare their mind to the
Subjects. See more in the 4. and 5. Chapters.

CHAP. XIII. Whether any Protestants may be saved?
1 THough Protestancy be Heresy, all Protestants are not Heretics; there is a
difference (says Saint Austin) between Heretics, and them who believe
Heretics. The greatest wits may be misinformed, if they rely upon other men's
informations.

2 To the question proposed I answer, that such Protestants as never had any
occasion to doubt, whether their own Religion be the true one, may be saved,
if they never committed a mortal sin; because they are baptized, and dye in
the grace of God, which they received in the Baptism. Now whether there be any
Protestants who never committed a mortal sin, the Lord knows; this I am
sure of, that there are very few in any part of the world, who have not great
reason, and many occasions to doubt of their own Religion. Because amongst
them, or near unto the places where they live, there are Catholics; who (as
Christians and true Friends) advertise them of the falsehood, and novelty of
their Sect. And though the Protestant Ministers assure them, that they are in a
safe way of salvation; when others as honest, and learned as the Ministers tell
them the contrary, they are bound, under pain of damnation, at least to
examine the truth, and grounds of both Religions, according their capacity, and
possibility; which if they do sincerely, that is, setting aside all regard of
honor, interest, convenience, and all other temporal affections, which
obstruct the understanding, God in his providence will give them knowledge of
the truth, and resolution to embrace it.

3 But in case Protestants contemn the charitable warnings given them by
Catholics, of the Schism, and Heresy wherein they are involved, and neglect
Gods inspirations of examining the truth; there is no question to be made that
if they dye in that condition, they are damned; because though they were
brought up Protestants, they had reason to doubt of their Religion, seeing as
honest, and learned men as those that gave them their education, and
instruction, advertised them seriously of their danger. And not to examine
whether the danger be real, or not, in a matter of so high concernment, is not
excusable; no ignorance can be pretended, after they are admonished by sober,
and honest men.

I conclude therefore, that only such silly souls as believe the Pope has
horns, and the Jesuits cloven feet, can be excused by ignorance from
damnation, for not believing as Catholics do; because if any such be, they
are so simple, that they believe all which the Minister says, as Gods Word,
and that nothing ought to be called in question. How many Ministers there be,
who deserve this credit, and esteem of infallibility, even amongst the least
prying, and simple people, let their own Parishes, and the world define. This
I dare say, that there are few Protestants who commit not at least one mortal
sin; and that is enough to damn them, though their invincible ignorance (as
school men speak) may excuse their want of true Faith. But the want of
Charity is as damnable as the want of Faith; and we have no reason to judge
that God will do so extraordinary a favor to Protestants, who are out of the
Church, and have not the help of the true Sacraments, as to give them an act
of contrition in the last hour.

4 I have often said, that I can not but admire to see any person of solid
judgment, and good understanding, a Protestant. The more I consider the
grounds, beginning, and progress of these new Religions, the more I am
confirmed in my admiration What matter can then be of greater wonder, then to
see wise men prefer the testimony of some few wanton, and dissolute Priests,
and Friars, to the testimony of the grave, and ancient Fathers of the Catholic
Roman Church? Let the Council of Lateran be confronted with Cranmer, and the
six or seven Ministers, who invented the English Church, and with the
Parliament that confirmed it. Let both the Counsels of Lateran, and that of
Trent, be compared with the petty Assemblies of Ministers in the English
Protestant Church, or in the Kirk of Scotland, Dort, or any other, pretending
Reformation. Shall a few Ministers know better the Catholic tradition, the
sense of Scripture, and Fathers, then the Council of Lateran, wherein sat two
Patriarchs, and the Pope, 70. Metropolitans, 400. Bishops, 800 Conventuall
Priors, all learned men, out of the most parts of Christendom? Shall one
Apostate Paulo Dolce his word be taken concerning the Council of Trent, and
preferred to the testimony of all the Catholic Churches, which has accepted
all its Decrees in matters of Faith? I speak not of other Counsels, nor of
the clear testimonies of Fathers, which are obvious to all persons who
understand Latin, in Bellarmine, Coccius, and other Authors.

5 Most of all I admire to see any person stick to the Common prayer Book, or
to that Church, as if it were the true Catholic. How is it possible, that God
should permit the public exercise of Catholic Religion, and Church, to be
brought so low, and to so narrow a compass, as we see the Common prayer? If
Antichrist reign were come, or the Turk had possessed the whole world, then
it might be thought, that the Church fled to the wilderness, and became almost
invisible; but when (through the mercy of God) we see Christianity flourish,
not only in Europe, but in all other parts of the world, how is it credible,
that God should permit the true, and pure exercise of Catholic Religion to be
invisible?

6 Therefore I judge it a duty of conscience, and charity, to warn all
Protestants, that they may be pleased to reflect upon the Authors, and first
Apostles of their Reformation Is it credible that God would make choice of such
wicked persons as they were known to be, to reform his Church? Suppose there
were some abuses in the Court of Rome; must therefore the Popes authority be
tread under foot? Must Kings loose their Crowns, because some Courtiours are
lewd? If Luther had been appointed to preach for Indulgences, he had never
writ against them, the Pope, or the Church of Rome. If Henry the VIII. had
prevailed with the Pope to declare null his marriage with Queen Catharine of
Spain, he had never made himself spiritual Head of the Church of England. If
Calvin had obtained the Bishopric of Geneva, Puritans had never been so
fierce against Episcopacy. If Queen Elizabeth had not been declared
illegitimate by the Doctrine, and Church of Rome, the Common prayer, and
Reformation had ended with Edward the VI. who begun it. Does not the world
see, that these pretended Reformations of Religion were only pretexts for
Princes to obtain their politic ends; and for dissolute, and incontinent
Clergy, to gain authority, whereby their liberty, and vices might not only be
excused, but applauded by the ignorant, and common people. Let Protestants
therefore examine how things past, because ignorance in so important a matter
can not be warranted by relying upon other men's judgments, seeing they may so
easily inform their own.

7 Neither ought they to sooth themselves with that no less usual, then
groundless excuse. Agree you Clergy men amongst your selves, and we will
agree, and submit our judgments etc. But until then, we are not obliged,
seeing our Ministers are learned, and honest men. We Catholics declare to all
the world, and the same must Protestant do, that the Church out of which there
is no salvation, may be so easily discerned from all false Sects, by signs so
visible and obvious to all persons though illiterate, that to trust to
Ministers testimony in so important a matter, is damnable negligence;
especially seeing we charge them of not believing Clergy men, nor ordained. As
for the Protestant Ministers being learned, and honest men, its certain that
either we, or they want learning, or honesty, and that either they, or we
impose upon the people manifest falsehoods; which may easily be discovered by
any person, that desires to be saved. Let our Doctrines, and Tenets be
examined, and it will clearly appear, that the Protestant Faith does tend to
liberty of believing, and doing what every man thinks convenient; which is an
infallible mark of Heresy, and damnation.

CHAP. XIV. Whether Protestancy be manifestly against reason, and common
sense? and how may the most learned Protestants be convinced in disputes of
Religion by every illiterate Roman Catholic?
SECT. I.
1 THe true Christian and Catholic Religion is so evidently credible, that all
others must necessarily be evidently incredible. It is not in Religion, as in
cases of moral Divinity. Two contrary opinions in moral matters may be
prudently followed; each of them as probable; because there are learned men
that patronize both. If there were two, or more Gods, and they could differ in
opinion, or judgment, men might accommodate themselves to which they pleased
But seeing there is but one God, there must be but one Faith, and one Religion.
This one Faith is more then any probable opinion, it is an undoubted and
prudent assent of the understanding, to whatsoever is sufficiently proposed as
Divine Revelation. An undoubted and prudent assent does suppose there can be no
prudent probability in any other contrary Faith, or Church: for, if once we
grant, that two Religions are probable, or prudently credible, we have none at
all; because we reserve a doubt of both, and are indifferent for any. True
Faith admits no doubts, or indifferencies. Supposing this, no prudent
Protestant can take ill that, which I intend to prove in this Chap. unless he
will have Catholics acknowledge, that they have one true Faith, or Christian
Religion.

2 If it be proved that Protestancy is contrary to reason, its evidently
demonstrated to be a false Religion, because whatsoever is against reason can
not be true. The true Christian Faith does perfect the understanding, and not
deceive that faculty of man, whereby he is distinguished from brute beasts. God
is the Author both of Reason, and Religion, one must be subordinate to the
other; its true, Faith is above Reason, but never stands in opposition with it,
there must be good correspondence between both. Rational creatures are saved
by a rational way There is a generation of men that think, none can enter
into the true Church by Faith, if he leaves not his wits behind him at the
door; so great an antipathy they conceive is between Faith, and Reason, that
to embrace the one, is to renounce holy, and exclude the other. This error
proceeds from confounding the mystery believed with the belief. Its very
certain that the truth of Divine mysteries ought not to be censured by human
understanding, because they are above its reach; that which seems to man very
improbable, may be an infallible verity. But that we fall not into extremes,
on the other side, its fit we know, that no person is bound to believe any
mystery he understands not, before he sees reason to believe it: though that
reason cleares not the mystery, yet it makes manifest our obligation to believe
it. None is bound to part with his ov^ne Religion, or opinion, before he
knows upon what score. There is nothing so much, and so properly our own, as
our thoughts; our lands, and all other properties may be forced from us, our
thoughts can not, they remain free, though our selves should be slaves. Seeing
therefore its a right of nature, not to part with our own goods, being in
possession, unless better evidence be produced by others, then we can show for
them; the same right must be extended to our thoughts, even in matters of
Faith; because the Law of grace does rather perfect, then destroy the Law of
nature, and equity.

3 To prove that Protestancy is manifestly against reason, its enough to prove,
that it is manifestly against reason to believe as Protestants do. There is not
one article of any Protestant Church, opposite to the Roman Catholic Faith,
that is, not manifestly against reason in this sense. This assertion may be
proved first, because Protestancy is Heresy, as has been proved in the 12.
Chap. and Heresy is manifestly against reason; for Heresy involves obstinacy,
and an obstinate man is manifestly unreasonable; because he is guided by his
will, not by his understanding. None can properly be obstinate, if not
convinced; convinced none can be but by clear reason, or by lawful witnesses,
to whose testimony evident reason commands all men give credit, and submit
their judgments, if there be not clear evidence against it. All
Commonwealths do acquiesce in, and take the word of honest men, in both
public, and private affairs; as in punishing Malefactors, disposing of
inheritances etc. That the Catholich Church has a great multitude of lawful
witnesses, and testimonies against Protestancy has been demonstrated.
Therefore Procestancy is manifestly against natural reason, which dictates to
all rational creatures to conform themselves to the testimony of lawful
wicnesses, when they have no evidence against the said testimony. Protestants
can not pretend evidence of reason against Catholic Tenets, because they are
above reason. Evidence of the private spirit is ridiculous, and incredible to
others, therefore unfit for the true Catholic Church, as has been proved in
the 9. Chap. There remains only their pretended evidence, or clearness of
Scripture, which has been alsoo confuted in the 8. Chap. Other lawful
witnesses against ours, they have none, unless we grant that an invisible
Church never heard of before Luther, has lawful testimonies. And as for the
sentences of some Fathers which they wrest in their own behalf, we produce
others against them of the same Fathers, in which they explain themselves.
Therefore its manifestly against reason to believe as Protestants do, because
they have no prudent ground for Protestancy; their Faith is not above reason,
but below it; that is, unfit to be embraced by any rational creature.

4 Another manner of proving Protestancy to be manifestly against reason, is,
by this clear principle. When witnesses, and testimonies are contrary, they
only are to be believed, who confirm what they say, with visible, and evident
signs. Solomon judged that the child (about whom there was so great a dispute
betwixt the two women) did belong to her, who showed a visible, and sensible
horror against the dividing of the infant into two parts. Though the other was
confident enough in testifying the child was her own, yet because her
testimony was not confirmed by any exterior, and visible sign, the contrary
testimony was preferred, and believed by Solomon. If we will judge of
Religions, as wise, and rational men, we must examine, which of all Christian
Churches testimony is confirmed with evident, and visible signs. No Protestant
Church (all of them being invisible for so many ages) can pretend so evident,
and visible sign. The Roman Catholic Church does not only pretend to visible
signs, but they are so evidently appearing in the said Church, that no
Protestant can deny them without forfeiting his judgment, or his ingenuity.
The visible signs of the true Church, must have so evident a relation to God
the Author of both Church, and Faith, that whosoever will reflect upon the said
signs, can not prudently deny that they are a sufficient proof of God being
the Author of the Doctrine, or Faith confirmed by them. There can not be a more
rational and sufficient proof of any Doctrine being taught by Christ, and his
Apostles, then a continual succession from them to us, both of Pastors, and
Doctrine, delivered from age to age by the Doctors of the Church. See this in
Esaias 59.21. Psalm. 45.16. Ephesians. 4.11.12.

5 As for our succession of Pastors, it is confessed by Protestant. Our
succession of Doctrine from the Apostles to this present, must also be granted;
because they could never tell us (though continually pressed in that particular
point) when did the Roman Church fall from the true, and sincere Faith, which
confessedly it once professed And And truly before Protestants prove that the
Roman Faith was changed in any age, they must first prove, that all the
Pastors, and Doctors of that age did conspire together to damn both
themselves, and posterity, or, if they did not conspire to so incredible a
thing, it must be necessarily said, that in that age wherein the first change
of any article of Faith happened, all the Catholics of the world weremad, or
slept for the space of a hundred years; because if they were awake, and sober,
its impossible, but in some parts of the world (nay in every part, and
Country) some learned, and honest men would contradict so damnable, and
abominable practices, and advertise future ages of the innovation of Christian
Religion, contrary to clear Scripture, and the known belief of all
Catholics in former ages. Its as evident therefore that we Roman Catholics
have not changed that Faith, which we received from the Apostles, as it is
evident, that there was not any age wherein all the world conspired to damn
themselves, and their posterity; or, as it is evident, that there was not any
age wherein all the world was so benumbed, stupefied, or enchanted, that no
Writer had the use of his fingers to set down in writing a matter of so great
consequence; having notwithstanding the free use of their pen in relating a
thousand other changes of less importance. We have no reason to judge that
former ages were less vigilant, and careful in preserving the purity of
Christian Religion, and the true sense of Scripture, then the present is,
because their vigilance appears by their suppressing of Heresies in every
age: which suppression, and protestation against the said Heresies of every
respective age, was never judged, or condemned, for an innovation against the
Doctrine received from former times; but rather is a confirmation of it; so
that the exceptions made by Berengarius, VValdo, and other such persons against
Roman Catholics, does rather strengthen, then weaken the Doctrine of the Roman
Church, seeing their exception was so strongly, and constantly cried down by
all the world for innovation.

6 Some have said, that as gray hears grow in a man's head, and the corruption
of a language grows on by little, and little, without particular notice taken
of the precise time; so the change, and corruption of Religion has crept in
insensibly in the Roman Catholic Church. But this is a most silly similitude;
as if men were as much concerned to watch the new growth of every gray hear,
or the mispronunciation of every word, as the Pastors, and Doctors of the
Church, and all Christians, are concerned to observe the beginning of a new
article of Faith; or as if this were no more observable, or making no more
impression upon men's minds, or no more change in the practice of the Church,
then a gray hair in a man's head, or an odd word in common speech. Put the
case, that in this age, to fertile of sopperies, some great, and considerable
part of Christianity should set up a calfe to be adored for the God of the
Christians, would this be no more remarkable then a gray hair in a man's head?
No less remarkable is it to hold up a wafer cake for the like adoration; and
over and above to oblige people to swear, that it is no bread. Is it credible,
or possible, that if in Berengarius his time, this had been begun, that the
whole world would not have cried out against it, and not only the Doctors out
of Scriptue, but the very children out of their Cathechismes had cried it
down; or that so many Bishops, and learned men assembled in so many Counsels,
namely in that most univerfall complete Council of Lateran, should have
declared so hard a matter to be a necessary p^int of Christian Faith; and that
so many ages since, should have universally accepted it, and defined it again
in other Councels, if it had been a mere innovation, and not an ancient
tradition, and belief of the Catholic Church? The like may be said of the
respect we give to Images, or any other articles of our Faith.

7 Another evident, and visible sign confirming the testimony of the Roman
Catholic Church alone, Joan. 14.12.
is, Miracles; whereof in all ages we have good store to spare to the
Protestant Churches, which never could produce one clear, Lib 22. de Civit.
Dei cap. 8 prope sinem.
and undeniable Miracle: whereas Saint Austine tells us how that in the
presence of him, and oaths, a devout woman called Palladia, who being sore
diseased, and repairing for her health to the monument of Saint Stephen,
recovered suddenly her health by praying to the Saint: a thing now condemned
by Protestants as superstition, or idolatry, and injurious to God. Ad sanctum
Martyrem (says Saint Austine) orare perrexer at, I. Aug. lib. 22. de Civit.
Dei cap. 8. II. Nazian. in Cyprian. says, Omniapotest pulvis Cypriani cum fide
etc. miraculum usque ad nos transmiserunt. Chrysostom. in libro contra Gentiles.
III. Eusebius hist. l 7. c. 14. Athan de Passione imaginis Christi in Berito
alleged in 2 Council. Nicen. act. 4. IV. S. Chrysostom. de Sacerdot to lib. 6. c.
4. V. VI. S August. de Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 8. circa mediuw. S. Gregor. hom. 37
in Evang. S. Beda hist. l. 4. c. 22. ante med. VII. S. Hieron. in vita
Hilarionis versus finem. S. Athanasius in vita Antonij. VIII. Epiphanius haer.
30. ante med. Theodoret. hist. l. 5. c. 21. IX. Cyprian. in sermon. de lapsis
post med. S. Ambros. in Orat. funebri de obitu fratris sui Satyri cap. 7. X.
Optatus lib. 2. contra Donatistas. Bernard. in vita Malachiae. XI. Evagrius l.
4. c. 25. XII. Ioann. Clymachus in lib. Climax grad. 4. Beda hist. l. 5. c. 14.
XIII. S. Bernardus in vita Malachia.
quae mox ut cancellot attigit, collapsa similiter velut ad somnum, sana
surrexit etc There is not any point of our Faith, wherein Protestants differ
from us, but God has worked miracles in confirmation of it against our
adversaries. See the Saints, and Fathers cited in the margen for proof of this
Assertion: and in particular concerning 1. Prayer to Saints, 2. Relics, 3.
the Image of Christ, 4 real presence, 5. Sacrifice of Christ's Body, 6.
Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, 7. the great virtue of the sign of the
Cross, 8. Holy water, 9 reservation of the Sacrament, 10. Holy Chrisme, 11
Adoration of the Cross, 12. Confession of sins to a Friest, 13 and extreme
unction.

8 Another cleate, and visible sign of the true Church, is the conversion of
the Kings, Apocal, 20.11. Esaias 49.24.
and Nations of the Gentiles. Only the Roman Catholics can challenge this
mark, not only in former ages, but also in this present, as is notorious to
our very adversaries in both the indies, Jason, China, Persia etc I have heard
of some Catholic Countries perverted by Protestants, as England Scotland,
Swe^^land etc. but never of any converted to Christianity. It were tedious to
run over all the signs of the true Church: these are sufficient to
demonstrate, that the testimony of Catholics ought to be preferred in matters
of Religion, before the testimony of Protestants; because outs is confirmed by
visible, and supernatural signs; theirs with none; unless you will take for
true miracles John Fox his ridiculous dreams, and stories, which he relates in
his Acts, and monuments; a Book so condemn! by most wise men, that one of
them hearing a certain person to be much taken with the reading of it,
concluded him to be a very silly man, and of less judgment then he was
esteemed by others, that were ignorant of his being so addicted to Fox.

9 If Protestancy be as contrary to reason, and common sense, as has been
hitherto proved, what wonder is it, that any illiterate Catholic should
convince the most learned Ministers, and pillars of Protestant Churches;
unless it be supposed that we are deprived or at least, know not how to make
use of our reason, and common sense? Controversies of Christian Religion are
not to be decided by examining the truth of the mysteries we believe; that is
to be supposed, and not disputed. To be a good Controvertist, is not to give
reason of what you believe; but to give reason why you believe what you
understand not; this last requires no Greek, or Hebrew, nor School learning,
and therefore may be as well performed by a Catholic Clown, is by a Bachelour
of Oxford, or Cambridge.

10 Now to descend to particular methods, hereby the learned Protestants may be
convinced by illiterate Catholics, I will only mention two, both of them very
ordinary, and usual, amongst the most vulgar sort of people. The first is by
asking of Protestants, What news of Religion? The second by inquiring of them,
by what right, or warrant, do they condemn any article of the Roman Catholic
Faith? I do seriously aver, that every Countreyman, who has wit, and
judgment enough to except, at the Assizes, against an illegal, and false
witness, has leaming enough to convince in controversies of Religion, the
most learned Protestant Minister. And every carrier, or husbandman, who has so
much wit, and judgment, as not to believe an extravagant, and incredible
history, or ballads, of some strange feigned Monster, has wit, and judgment
enough to convince any Protestant whosoever. The reason of this Assertion is
very clear; because there was never so incredible a Monster, or Chymera,
composed of so many contradictions, and impossibilities, as this new fangled
Religion, framed by the fancies of a company of dissolute Priests, and Friars,
pretending to have been enlightened by the Spirit of God, and sent by an
extraordinary calling (without miracles) to reform not only the manners, but
also the Doctrine of the Catholic Church. What Country Clown amongst
Catholics can be persuaded to believe, that all this which the first
Protestants pretend, is true? Is it not obvious to every rational creature,
that God never made use of so wicked instruments to reform the world, and
plant the true Religion. What evidence do Reformers produce against the
Doctrine of the Roman Church? what witnesses? what signs to confirm their
testimonies? Do Protestants agree amongst themselves? All this will be more
clearly understood by the ensuing Conference between a Catholic Clown, and a
learned Protestant Minister.

SECT. II. A Dialog between a learned Protestant Minister, and a Catholic
Clown.
11 CAth. What news good Master Doctor of your English Protestant Church?
Minist. As much persecuted as ever Bapists were by Queen Elizabeth. There is
liberty given to all Sectaries, Anabaptists, Quakers, etc. we only are
excepted against. Cath. I see no reason why ye Protestants should not be
reformed by Puritans, and Quakers, as ye reformed us Catholics; I am sure they
bring as many texts of Scripture against your Doctrine, and Discipline, as ye
did against ours. Minist. We reformed only your Papisticall abuses that were
contrary to the clear Word of God. Cath. The same thing do Puritans, or
Presbyterians say against you. But its incredible news to me that, which you
tell me, of any abuses we should have in our Church, contrary to the express
Word of God. Minist. Did thou ever read the Scripture? Cath. No truly.
Minist. I knew so much: the reason why ye are not permitted to read the Bible,
is, that ye may not discover the errors which Jesuits, and other Mass Priests
teach ye; as the respect to Images, and Statues, praying to Saints, Purgatory
etc. These, and many more are clearly contradicted by Scripture. Cath. Though I
were permitted to read Scripture, I can not; because I never learned to read.
Yet I have spoken with many learned men who read Scripture, and they all
unanimously assure me, that there is not one word in all Scripture,
contradicting worship of Images, praying to Saints, or Purgatory. Now, I see no
reason why I should reject their testimony, and take yours.

12 Minist. Faith is a gift of God, thou must not tie it to any man's sleeve:
pray to God that he may give thee his Spirit. Cath. I have heard much of a
Spirit that every one of ye Protestants, and Puritans, pretend to have; but I
could never see any effect, or sign of it. Minist. We Protestants pretend no
such Spirit. Cath. How come ye then to alter the old sense of Scripture, which
was in England for a thousand years before Edward the VI. if no Spirit did
inspire, or interpret the Scripture after the reformed fashion, why did ye not
stick to the old way? Minist. Because we could not in consciences there being
so many clear texts against Popery. Cath. That is incredible; for in the space
of a thousand years, some man or other would meet with those clear texts.
Minist. Well, thou art an honest fellow, we will not dispute, thou art not
capable of understanding what I have to answer to that objection of thine.
Cath. Nay good Master Doctor, trust my understanding for once, I pray resolve
my doubt. Min. Truly I must deal clearly with thee, I am of opinion that for
the space of one thousand years past, all Roman Catholics did hold damnable
Doctrine, manifestly contrary to Scripture, yet I believe their ignorance did
excuse them from damnation.

13 Caeh. How is it possible that there should be so much ignorance in all the
world for the space of a thousand years that none could see those clear texts
of Scripture which you, and other Protestants pretend to see? Min. Mistake me
not Countreyman, the texts of Scripture which we produce against your errors,
and superfluities, are not so very clear, but that they may be misunderstood,
if God does not enlighten the understanding, as he has done to us Protestants.
Cath. I thought you pretended no such Spirit, or private inspiration. I hear
reported by credible Authors, that the first Protestants, or Reformers in every
Country, were dissolute Piests, or Friars, who married, and lived not so
exemplarly as the Catholic Clergy does. Therefore I can not persuade my self,
that God would enlighten them more then us; at least I am not bound to believe
it, unless I see miracles, or some other marks of sanctity, which is more
then ever I perceived as yet in any of your Religion. I hope you will pardon my
freedom. Min. I warrant thou do believe all the miracles that are reported
to have been done at Loreto, Sichem, and other Chappells Did thou ever see
any miracle thy self? Cath. No indeed, but I have seen others who were
present at the working of strange miracles, as that of Naples, when the Jefuit
Mastrilli was cured on a sudden by Saint Francis Xaverius, and sent by him to
lapon, where he dyed a Martyr. Many others I have heard testified by credible
Authors, that I have as much reason to believe, as any who should endeavor to
persuade me the contrary; therefore trouble not your self in this matter,
unless you will have me doubt of all things I hear, because I have been
deceived in something Min. Why believe not ye our miracles, as ye would have us
believe yours? Cath. Because we never hear of any clear, and undeniable
miracles; I am sure ye have none to confirm the articles wherein ye
Protestants differ from us, no nor any that looks like miracles when they are
compared with ours.

14 Minist. Seeing thou do not desire to speak of miracles, let us return
to Scripture. Grant, that the texts of Gods Word, which we bring against
Popery, were not clear; must they not therefore be believed, because
(forsooth) they are obscure. Christian Faith must be obscure, honest fellow.
Does not thy Parish Priest instruct thee thus? Cath. My Pastor, and Confessor
both tell me, that the mysteries of Christian Faith are obscure, but never
incredible. Min. Now friend I have caught thee. Is it not incredible that there
is no bread in the Sacrament of the Altar? Why therefore do thou believe
Transubstantiation as a mystery of Faith? Cath. It is rather incredible there
should be any bread in the blessed Sacrament; for if there were, why should all
Catholics deny a thing that has so great appearance? Whether bread be there,
or no, Priests have the same alms for saying Mass: no gain acrues to them by
Transubstantiation. On the other side, its impossible that all Catholics
should be so mad, as to contradict their own senses, if God had not commanded
them not to credit their eyes and taste in this Divine mystery; but rather to
rely upon his words, and believe, that the blessed Sacrament is his Body: if it
be Christ's Body, it can not be bread, because our bodies are no bread, and
Christ's Body is of the same nature with ours.

15 Min. Alas poor ignorant soul! Christ's words must be understood
spiritually, he himself told the Disciples, that his words are spirit, and
life. Cath. John 6.
I heard our Pastor the last Sunday explain that same text to confirm
Transubstantiation. For, he said, that Christ is in the Sacrament truly, and
really, but with a spiritual presence, and that we receive his very Body, and
Blood, though not in a corporal manner: there is some difference (quoth he)
between eating of Christ's Flesh, and eating a piece of beef. This only was
Christ's meaning, when he said that his words were spirit, and life, which no
way can prejudice Transubstantiation, though some Puritans think that they are
contrary to the real presence. Whether bread be there, or no, Christ's true
Body, and Blood, is received in the Communion, according Protestants; so that
it concerns them, as much as Catholics, to interpret these words of Christ's,
as we do: unless ye will become Calvinists, by saying, that ye eat Christ's
Body by Faith; that is, ye believe to receive him, when ye do not; which is a
lying, and false Faith; or that ye receive his grace, but not himself; and that
is to deny in plain terms, the real presence. All this did our Pastor teach
in the Cathechisme.

16 Min. Well, in this matter none is bound to believe your Pastor, or his
Cathechisme: we believe that Christ is really present in the Sacrament; but how
he is there, we do not examine; neither ought the Roman Church, or the Council
of Lateran impose Transubstantiation upon us, as a thing necessary to be
believed. Cath. I have heard talk much of that Council of Lateran, they say
there were present thereat the Pope, and two Pattiarchs of the East, 70.
Metropolitans, 400. Bishops, and 800 other learned men, out of all parts of the
world If Transubstantiation was not a necessary article of Faith, they did very
ill to declare it one, and condemn as Heretics all such as denied it. Yet me
thinks, the testimony of so many learned men is of greater weight (I pray Sir,
pardon me if I offend you, I do not intend it) then the testimony of any
reformed Church to the contrary. I never heard of such a Council in any
Protestant Church. Its true, I hear that the Ministers of Stratzburg, and of
the Church of Zurick, look as reverendly as the Protestant Church of England;
and have set forth as exact a Confession of their belief, as ye have done of
yours in the 39. articles; but I could never learn that any of you had such an
Assembly as the Council of Lateran, or of Trent. Therefore ye can not blame
Catholics to prefer the testimony of these Counsels before the testimonies
of the Church of Stratzburg, Zurick, or that of England, which was modeld (as
our Priests tell us) by six Bishops, and six other men, or the major part of
them; seven of them were sufficient to cast Christian Religion, take away
Sacraments, alter the matter, and form of them, and change the ancient
ceremonies. Without doubt its more reasonable to rely upon the Council of
Trent, then upon the twelve, or seven persons that invented the Common prayer
Book, and the Ritual of the English Church.

17 Min. Have thou ever heard of one Fr. Paulo, who writ the History of the
Council of Trent, and describes how the holy Ghost was sent in a bag thither
from Rome? Cath. I have heard much of that man; they say he was no Saint, at
least of our Church, and had a spleen against the Pope. If what he writes,
were true, not only the Bishops, and others who were in the Council of Trent,
had been mad, or Impostors; but all the Catholics of the world, who accepted
the same as a true Council, ought to be declared, and recorded natural
fools. Its more credible that Fr. Paulo was a lying Knave, then that all the
Catholics of the world are natural fools, or that all the Bishops of the
Couuncell were Impostors. Therefore I can not believe his History of the
Council of Trent. Truly his expression of the holy Ghosts journey in a bag,
proves him to have been a profane fellow. They say his history is both solidly,
and elegantly confuted by Palavicini the Jesuit. Its strange to me, how sober
Protestants can believe such fopperies, and wicked practices of the chief
Prelates, and persons of the Catholic Church

18 Min. Hold there friend. Do thou think that only the Roman Catholics
are the whole Catholic Church? ye are but a part. Cath. I am sure Roman
Catholic alone were the whole Catholic Church before that Luther, and Calvin
begun their pretended Reformation. They, and all ye Protestants differ from us
in Faith. Therefore ye are no part of the Catholic Church that was called so
in the year 1516. If God has Instituted another Catholic Church since, and ye
make that appear. I am content to call ye Catholics; but until then, Master
Doctor you must excuse me. Min. Ye and we believe the same things, only ye
differ from us in some petty matters, not necessary to be believed, as
Transubstantiation. Cath. Do you call that a petty thing, which the Catholic
Church defined to be a matter of Faith? who shall be the Judge of what is
necessary, or not necessary to be believed? Min. Not your Pope, nor his
Councels, because y are a part, and have a prejudice against our Doctrine.
Cath. So have ye against ours, and by your consequence ye must not judge of it.
Ye are best be judged by the great Turk, if ye will not admit of the Pope to
be Judge of Controversies in Religion. Yet its not credible that God would have
us be judged by Turks, or Jews. What think you Master Doctor? Min. But why
should the Pope, or Roman Church judge us Protestants, and we not judge them?
Cath. Your Protestant Churches are not yet come to years of discretion. Our
Church was in possession of judicature before yours was born: ye must produce
better evidence then we can show, before you can rationally pretend to deprive
us of what we possessed these 16. hundred years.

19 Min. I never met with a more obstinate Clown then thou art. Cath. Why do
you say I am obstinate? Is it because I take not the word of your English
Church (that is of 12. or 7. men) in matters of Faith, and Sacraments, against
the testimony of all Catholic Counsels, and the tradition of the whole
Church? Min. I wonder that thou did not make mention of tradition before now.
Woe to them that prefer the traditions of men before the Word of God! Cath. I
do not take Scripture (as you interpret it) to be the Word of God Our Preachers
teach us, that the Word of God must necessarily involve Gods meaning, and
sense. But ye Protestants intrude your own fancies, and dreams, and make them
a part of Gods Word, rejecting the true sense and meaning of Scripture, which
the Catholic Church had learned of the Apostles, and preserved from the first
age of Christianity to this present. Minist. What a calumny is this? Name but
one fancy, or new interpretation of ours intruded into Scripture. Cath. Do not
ye say that the respect we give to Images is idolatry, or at least forbidden in
Scripture, as a thing inclining men to idolatry? The Catholic Church condemned
long since this fancy of yours as heresy: and ye make the common people
believe, that we are idolaters for holding that sense of Scripture, which has
been taught, and practiced in the Church since the beginning, as learned men
assure us, and they say the second Council of Nice do testify.

20 Min. Worship of Images is dangerous, and therefore forbidden in Scripture.
Cath If that be so, how did all the Church approve of it for so many ages, and
stick to it still, notwithstanding your contradictions? We have men of
conscience and learning; how is it possible they should damn themselves, and
others, for worship of Images? Min. I see there is no ground to be expected by
discoursing with thee, because when thou art pressed with Gods clear Word,
thou do recurre to the tradition, and practice of the Church, and to I know
not what miracles. Therefore I fear God has delivered thee over to Satan, as
an obstinate, and reprobate Heretic. Cath. Make it appear to me, that your
sense of Scripture is Gods meaning, and then I will not contradict your
Doctrine. But I see no prudent ground to believe, that your new
interpretations, contrary to the practice, and tradition of the ancient
Catholic Church, should be dictated by God. On the contrary side, ye can not
deny, that we Catholics have all the reason in the world to stick to our old
sense of Scripture, confirmed by so many miracles, and testimonies of antiquity.

21 Let this suffice to show how illiterate Catholics may convince the most
learned Protestants. Our cause is so good, and clear, that common sense is
enough to defend it, and confound our greatest, and most able adversaries. No
Catholic Clown can be convinced by any learned Protestant, if he be not more
then ordinarily simple. Truly there is nothing more incredible, then that all
the visible Churches of the world should have been forsaken by God, and in
damnable errors, for so many ages, as Protestants pretend; and that to reform
the world, God should pick out amongst all men, the most ^icked, who continued,
or rather increased their abominable, and scandalous conversation, after they
begun to preach their new Gospel. See the lives of all new Reformers in the
three Conversions of England, and in the prudentiall Balance, if you doubt of
this assertion. Is it not a mere foppery to think that 12. or 7. men, who
modeld the new Church of England in Edward the VI. time, should judge better of
Christian Faith, matter, and form of Sacraments, and of religious ceremonies,
then the Counsels of Lateran, and Trent, and all the world in former ages? Is
it not impossible, and contrary to Christ's own promises, that the exercise of
true Religion, and Faith, should be as invisible, as the English Church is at
this present, in times; wherein Christianity (through the mercy of God) does
flourish in all parts of the world? The Catholic Church was never brought to
be invisible by the Arrians, though by them much persecuted. Let any Catholic
Clown but reflect upon these, and other things, visible to all the world, and
he may confidently dispute, and convince the most learned Protestant.

CHAP. XV. Of the difference between Christian Faith, and the historical
belief of Protestants.
THat supernatural Faith is a special gift of God, is granted even by
Protestants themselves. The superuaturality of it consists not in believing an
extravagant, and improbable object; because that may be done naturally. For
there is nothing however so false, and improbable to the understanding, that
will not at length be believed by men, if constantly reported to them by others
of whom they have a good opinion, and not contradicted by any whose testimony
they value. The Turks believe that Mahomet was a great Prophet, and Saint The
Jews believe that the Messiah is not yet come. The Puritans believe that every
one of themselves is inspired with a Divine spirit etc. And though every one of
these stories be false, improbable, and also contradicted by Catholics, yet
because these Sectaries have a good opinion of their own Congregation, and a
very bad one of us, Catholics, they believe the first, reject, and contemn
the second. Turks, Jews, and Puritans do not believe these fond articles of
their own Religion with any supernatural Faith; their belief is merely
historical, just as children believe the history of the Knight in the Sun,
Don Quixote de la Manche etc.

All Christians have not supernatural, and Christian Faith. Many who received
it in their Baptism, loose it by heresy. Heretics are called Christians,
because they are baptized, and not because they are endued with Christian
belief. They believe some mysteries of Christian Religion, but with a mere
historical Faith They assent to the mysteries of the Trinity, and Incarnation,
not because God revealed them, but because they are pleased to judge it very
probable, or certain, that God revealed some such thing. That their own fancy,
or opinion, and not Gods Revelation, does move Protestants to believe what they
do believe of Christian Religion, is evident; because they choose to themselves
amongst all articles, which the Catholic Roman Church proposed to the first
Authors of Protesta^cy Luther, Cranmer, Calvin, etc. before the pretended
Reformation, what they think fit, and most probable. All the rest (though
equally proposed to them by the testimony of the said Roman Church, as Divine
Revelation) they reject as fabulous, or apocryphal, because it suites not with
their liberty, fancy, and manners.

Hence it is that all Heretics are damned by their own proper judgment, and
opinion; for he that makes choice of some articles, and rejects others, when
all are equally testified to be revealed by God, does not believe the very
articles he chooses because God revealed them, but because he is of opinion
that God revealed them, and not the others which he rejects; not regarding the
testimony of the Church proposing all equally as revealed A Jew believes that
the Messiah is not come, because he thinks God revealed Christ not to be the
Messiah, and yet his Faith is not supernatural. Protestants therefore may
believe what they please, because they think God revealed it, and yet their
Faith be neither Christian, nor supernatural: their own persuasion alone, is
not sufficient (...) supernaturalize their belief. The difference between
historical, and Christian, or supernatural belief, is not, that Christian
belief alone has for its object, supernatural mysteries; (a man may believe
the mystery of the Trinity, or Incarnation with as historical a belief, as
the history of Julius Caesar.) The difference consists in this, that the
understanding does meet with so great, and manifest difficulties, in crediting
what is sufficiently proposed as Divine Revelation, to be really revealed, and
true, that it may appear to any indifferent, and rational man, God does
concur more particularly to the assent of what is proposed as Christian
Faith, then he does to the assent we give stories, Chronicles or any other
human history, though containing never so strange and extraordinary events. To
believe not only strange, and (to the sense of man) improbable things, but
also to believe them with a prudent belief (not out of ignorance, or
misinformation) without the least doubt, or suspicion of falsehood, is so much
above the way, and faculty of nature, that the Faith whereby this is done, must
of necessity be an extraordinary, and supernatural gift of Gods omnipotency.

Now let us examine, whether Protestants do so strain their understanding by
their belief (even of supernatural mysteries) that it may be evidently called
an extraordinary gift of Gods omnipotency? To be brief, I do say, that
Protestants have no more supernatural Faith in believing the Trinity, or
Incarnation, etc then in believing any strange, or extraordinary accident that
John Stow recounts in his Chronicles: and consequently, their Faith is merely
historical. My reason is this: Protestants believe as articles of Faith only
those points wherein all Christian, though heretical Churches agree to be
clearly contained in Scripture, or to be delivered by Tradition of the said
Churches. Whatsoever is controverted amongst Christians, they look upon it as
not necessary to be believed. Its true most of them tell you, they believe the
Apostles Creed; others come as far as Saint Athanasius his Symbol; some are
pleased to admit of the 4. first general Counsels. The motive of this their
belief is not, because the true Catholic Church testifies that God revealed
what they believe, but because no Christian Church, or Sect, wherewith they
converse, ^oth contradict any of these points. Such things as are contradicted,
or controverted by any, are not believed as articles of Faith If this be not
merely historical, and human belief, there is none at all. What man is there,
whether Turck, or Jew, that does not believe after this manner, whatsoever is
reported by many, and condicted by none whose authority has any weight in his
opinion? The reason why Turcks stick to their Alcoran, and the Jews to the Law
of Moses, notwithstanding all our contradictions, and testimonies, of the one
being wicked, and the other abolished, is, that they have a prejudice against
us Christians, they value not any thing we say in matters of Faith If
Protestants had not the same prejudice, by their education, against Turcks,
that Turcks have against Christians, they would make the Catholic Church yet
more universal then at the present they do: the Alcoran perhaps should be part
of the Bible; those only should be articles of Faith wherein both agree; not
only all Heretics, but Turcks should be members, and part of the Catholic
Church.

Many are of opinion, that the liberty of life which Protestants have (warrante
by their new Religion) is the strongest motive of their obstinacy in it, and of
propagating the same. Though this be true in some persons, it can not be
applied to all Protestants: some of them (give the Devil his due) have
morality, and come near the old Pagan Philosophers in their life, and
conversation. But there is not one amongst all the Protestants of the world,
especially of the English Church, or Common prayer men, that is not inveagled,
and carried away with a liberty of believing only that, as an article of
Faith, which is not contradicted by any Christian Congregation, or Church,
however so different from his own. Why should Papists (says every Protestant)
impose unnecessary articles of Faith upon us? why should any one be obliged to
believe what is not clear in Scripture? There is no liberty more earnestly
sought after, then that of the understanding; all men are naturally taken with
it; no captivity is more troublesome then that of proper judgment: its
impossible, without a supernatural favor, and grace of God, to b^dle the
inclination, and ordinary course of that faculty, which of its own nature is so
curious, and vehement that it can not be quiet until it knows the reason of
what we hear. To believe, is to captivate and confine the understanding to a
dungeon of darkness Not to believe, is to leave it at its own choice, and
liberty; this last is natural, and agreeable to our inclination, and by
consequence is no proper effect of a supernatural power. Its impossible
therefore that it should be Christian Faith, or a supernatural gift of God. In
this sense the way of heaven is straight, because Christian, and not
historical belief, is the foundation, or first step to salvation: we must
force our selves to it by straining our understanding to believe, and not give
it liberty to accept, and reject what we please, making our selves Judges of
all Controversies concerning Scripture, and Christian Religion. Let the
negative articles of Protestancy be examined (as Protestants, they have no
affirmative) and we shall find that nature, and not grace, leads them to that
liberty which they assume to themselves of shaking off not only the yoke of
interior acquiescence, and exterior obedience to the decrees, and definitions
of the Catholic Roman Church; but also it will manifestly appear, that
Protestants, and all men are solicited by a natural propension to make our
selves Scripture (as our selves shall interpret it) or (which is the same) the
Rule, or Judge of Controversies. Therefore its no supernatural action, nor no
meritorious act, to believe after this manner, as Protestants do: for men have
no difficulty in believing themselves; and they believe themselves, not God,
when their own interpretation of Scripture is followed against that of the
Church.

It remains now a reason be given, Why do Protestants believe the most
obscure, and difficult mysteries of Christian Religion, if their Faith be
merely historical? How can they without a supernatural power, and favor,
believe that the Scripture is Gods Word, the Trinity, the mystery of
Incarnation, etc.? To this doubt I answer, that (as I said in the beginning of
this Chapter) there is no difficulty in believing the most improbable, and
extravagant things, when they are told us by persons we credit, and are not
contradicted by any whose testimony we value. In matters of Religion
Protestants value no men but Christians, and such mysteries as they believe,
are not contradicted by any Christians, at least in our parts of the world.
They believe therefore all they believe, because they have been told so by
their Parents, and others who had the charge of instructing them; and not
because God revealed it, which is the only motive of Christian, and
supernatural Faith.

Its a received principle, that he who denies one article of Christian
Religion, believes none at all. It can not be said that he believes none with
historical belief, as Protestants believe the mystery of the Trinity,
Incarnation, and Scripture to be Gods Word. The meaning of all Divines is, that
he who denies one article of Faith, believes none at all with Christian, or
supernatural belief. This is most true; for, to believe like a Christian, is
to believe the mysteries of Christian Religion, because they are sufficiently
proposed as Divine Revelation by the testimony of the Church; not of every
Church, but of the true Catholic one, which only gives lawful authority,
and sends Preachers, and Doctors to instruct the people. God has not promised
his help, and supernatural inspi^ations (which are necessary to believe with
Christian Faith) to them who are unsent, uncalled, unconsecrated, but only to
such lawful Ministers as are appointed, and ordained by them who derive their
Doctrine and succession from the Apostles through a never interrupted line.
That no Church but the Roman Catholic does propose sufficiently as Divine
Revelation the Doctrine which they preach, has been proved in the 8. Chapt.
whence it follows, that out of the Roman Catholic Church there can be no
true Faith, nor salvation; and that to deny one article of Faith in the least
matter, is to deny all; because the motive of our belief is denied as much in
a little matter, as in the greatest. See the 7. Chap. The motive being denied,
or rejected; nothing can be believed with Christian Faith, because of the
motive depends all. An infallible argument of denying the motive of Christian
Faith is, to contemn the testimony of that Congregation of men which has the
signs of being the true Catholic Church, as a legal, and orderly succession
of Doctors, and Doctrine, conversion of Nations, Miracles, and marks of so
eminent, and extraordinary sanctity of life, that the like was never found in
Heathen Philosophers, but far exceeds all that has been discovered in any
that wanted supurnaturall grace, as is the entire renunciation of all the
worldly pleasure, profit, and honor; an inflamed affection toward God, and
his glory, with an unfatigable zeal of the salvation of souls, and desire of
suffering for Christ's sake, whereof we Catholics alone have an infinite number
of undeniable examples. No other but the Roman Church can as much as pretend to
have the signs of the true Church, as miracles remarkable either in number, or
quality, etc. Therefore whosoever denies one article of the Roman Religion,
denyth also the motive of Catholic Faith, which (as we have proved) is
proposed only by the testimony of the Roman Catholic Church; and consequently
he who does not stick to it, believes nothing at all with Christian, and
supernatural Faith. The very Devils, and damned souls have the Protestant, or
historical belief. God, who is Author of all graces, and favors, both
natural, and supernatural, grant to all Protestants that precious gift of
Faith, without which it is impossible to please His Divine Majesty, or to
obtain the end whereunto we were all created.

FINIS.

