THE DVTY AND COMFORT OF SVFFERING SVBIECTS.
Represented by PETER TALBOT in a letter to the Roman-Catholiks of Ireland,
particulary those of the City and Diocese of DVBLIN.
Dearly Beloved, in Christ.
I Should be very sorry there were any just reason to believe that since my
departure from that Kingdom any endeavors have bin used to instruct you
otherwise than I have don, as to the inviolable Duty and Obedience you ow to
His Maiesty's Government, and the Laws you live under. And, though your former
unanimous and humble acquiescence to my constant Doctrine in this particular
will not permit me to have the least doubt of your loyalty and peaceable
behavior, yet, because Adversity is a strong Temptation, and temporal
necessities the most forcible of all motives to our corrupt nature, I thought
fit to arm your soul against all such assaults, by summing up in this Epistle
the substance of what I have so often inculcated unto you by word of mouth in
my Exhortations.

I hope you remember that I always endeauor'd to print this Great Truth lively
in your Minds, that the Happiness of Man in this present state consists more in
possessing the riches of a good Conscience than the conveniences of this
world: Good and Bad Fortune (as they call them) are but improper Nicknames and
foolish Notions, if by that language be meant Riches and temporal Prosperity.
It Is the depraved condition of human nature which makes us affectionately covet
and unresignedly resent the loss of such paltry trash; whose very Nature tells
us' it is of too base an alloy and of too mean and low a pitch of worth for a
soul sprung from Heaven and winged by Christianity to fly at. The apprehensions
we frame of our greatest and most important concerns of Eternity, and of the
proper Means for it is attainment, are so dim, for want of rendering our Faith
lively by attentive consideration, that we are apt to miscall that Persecution
which is indeed a sweet Providence of our Heavenly Father; and to imagine that
Poverty and other Marks of Predestination are so many Misfortunes which make us
miserable: Never considering from how good a hand they com, or indeauoring by
Patience to make that excellent use of them for which they were intended, to
wit the Salvation of our Souls.

To confirm you there fore in these Truths, and to settle you steadily in the
submission you owe to the Laws of the Land, as well as in the Charity you are
by Christ's sweet law obliged to bear toward your Protestant Neighbors and
fellow-subiects, I will state your case worse than really it is, and suppose
you were all driven to that utmost and worst extremity of begging your bread: I
say, though you were reduced even to that staruing condition, yet ought you not
endeavor to better it by plotting or conspiring against His M.ty's Government,
Person or Subjects; or by disturbing the peace of the Kingdom. You ought not, I
say once more, do this and the reason why you ought not, is as evident as it is
that you ought not to sin; to deny which Truth is to deny, not some one point
or some few single truths, as do Heretics, but the whole entire Doctrine of
Christianity, and the Common Light of Reason to boot. Romans 13.
Read the Holy Scriptures, and you will find S. Paul tells us that Christians
are bound in conscience to obey their Heathen Emperors; and that, who ever
resists them, resists the ordinance of God; also, that by so doing they
purchasse to themselves Damnation? Matt 22.
Does not Christ himself command us to pay Tribute unto Caesar, (...) 21.
the badge and token of our Temporal vassallage and Obedience? ^ Pet. 2.
Does not S. Peter bid us be subject to the King as having Preeminences?

(...) their attainment of Eternal Happiness.

Did Mortals make sober and attentive Reflections upon the surviuency of their
Soul, and that the future condition which finally attends it, stretches its
duration to an endless Eternity, their Reason, which Custom and Passion
hoodwink, would readily discover how just it is to conform them selves to Gods
holy will in this particular, and even to take content in their afflictions,
For, tell me, I beseech you, what is this world? Truth makes answer for you,
and assures us all yt. it is only a Theater of foolish and false shows: A short
Comedy, or rather indeed a short Prologue of euerlastlng sadness to such as take
most delight in it. A perpetual Conflict between life and Death, Sickness and
Health, Fear and Hope, Joy and discontent. Again, what is an Inheritance? A
parcel of land whereof our Ancestors were Masters as long as they lived; which
term of Life (the only interest any of them could pretend to) is valued but at
seven years purchase: Is it reasonable then think you, to fix your hearts so
unremouably and passionately upon that earth, as if your Souls were to turn
into it as well as your Bodies? Poor Souls! After a man's death he has no
expectation of any good for his Temporal Estate, being quite out of all
circumstances of enjoying the least conueniency from it. Nor has any separated
Soul the least Concern for any worldly Inheritance, but those vahappy ones who
having ouer-loud' it here, feel the fond affection to such a perishable and
fleeting Good, racking their wills with a bitter torment for the eternal loss
of it. Nor lastly, do they concern themselves so highly for the Temporal
Prosperity of their Children or Relations. No, no, the blinding veil is then
taken from their eyes, and they see plainly, nay feel experimentally, that
nothing is at all valuable but as it conduces to attain Heaven; and that
neither Riches nos Poverty (but only virtue) are the proper Means to compass
that happy End, both of them indifferent and unconcerning, and only good or
bad, as they are well or ill made use of; but yet with this difference, that
Riches are by far a more dangerous incitement to lull our souls with the love
of this world, and deturn us from virtue: Nay even the damned Souls are wiser
than to concern themselves with wislshing those Friends whom they retain a
natural affection for, such trifling advantages. That rich man who so much
enuyd' the Happiness of Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, was not sollicitons for his
Brethrens worldly Interest, but for their instruction. which passage though it
be a Parable, yet it is a most sure proof of the Folly of such as lament the loss
of their Fortunes more than the loss of Gods Grace, and are more concernd' for
acquiring or conseruing an Inheritance in this world for themselves or their
Relations, than for that of Heaven. what does it profit a man to gain the whole
Universe if his Soul in the mean time suffers any Detriment? And that soul
suffers not only Detriment but Eternal Damnation, that will attempt to
possess an Estate by so unlawful means as Rebellion against Superior Powers,
and the Laws by them established.

I remember one of the greatest Peers of Ireland ( wentworth, late Earl of
vildare) desired my opinion concerning the apparition of a Spirit which hanted
him not long before his last sickness, and the advice it gave him. Some
circumstances which were observed by his virtuous Lady and others as well as
himself, made his story very credible to me: but his assuring that the spirit
never recommended to him Repentance of his Sins, or reflections upon the
Uncertainty of this world, or any other thing for the good of his Soul, and
that it only exhorted him to mind Temporal affairs, and to restore his Family
to its ancient greatness, made me suspect (as I told him) it was no good spirit
that appeared to him; nay a worse one than that of Dives; for this desired that
some would preach to his Brethren against the vanities of this world, that did
the quite contrary. And, truly, a Spirit that would move men to restore their
Friends and Families to the Seats and Splendour of their Ancestors by violating
the Laws of the Land, must be of the same nature.

Therefore Dearly Beioned, I conjure you earnestly (as one who tenders your
salvation as his own, and belieues he must render to God an Account for your
Souls) to bear with Patience this Cross which Christ has shared with you. Faint
not under so light a Burden; he carries the heauiest part: He was innocent,
you are guilty; He submitted himself voluntarily, you must suffer unauoidably.
Be spiritually wise then, and make a meritorious virtue of this happy
necessity. Let not the vain hopes of better Times, or the desire of passing a
short Moment some thing more commodiously plunge you in to the intolerable
miseries of Hellfire for all Eternity. Lose not the solid Substance of true
Happiness for an ayery shadow; the fruits of Faith for a groundles Fancy. You
have lost your real Estates, let not Imaginary ones fool you out of your Duty
and the recompense which God has promised such as will patiently expect it.
Resist manfully against those deceitful temptations, and build not Castles in
the air. I say deceitful; for of all Temptations Hope, if not well grounded,
is the most dangerous: In others, a man runs the hazard of being deceived by
the Devil and out ward appearances; but when he has once entertained Hope,
both ungrounded and also of false Goods, he will most certainly be deceived by
himself; and the more, by how much he is in this case confident and assured
that he intended himself no prejudice, but an advantage. Against the fair
words and promises of others we are armd by the suspicions and cautions
wherewith nature and Experience has furnished us: but against that fair prospect
of distant Goods within our view, where with we please and entertain our
thoughts, represented rather by our fond wishes than by any probability of
releef, there is no defense. wisdom is naturally the safest Guard against such
an inbred Enemy lying in a close ambush in our own breast; but (alas!) those
inordinate affections to worldly things paint them to our deluded Imagination
in such gay and lively colors of Hope, and so easily attainable, when there is
no such thing, that the wholesome Maxims of wisdom are stifled in our passion,
and Folly (which now has got the rains) drives the will blindly head long into
the dangerous precipice of ouer-late and fruitles Repentance. That therefore
which I principally aim at, is, to root out of your hearts this delusiue Hope,
as the chiefest obstacle of our happiness in the next world, and of our content
in this; which is apt to entice whole nations to their ruin, and lastly, is the
most moving Temptation to make weak Souls break the best Orders of the world,
and infringe the most sacred Laws of Christianity and Conscience.

You will say that were it not for Hope, Heart Would break: Nor will I deny
that Christian Hope is the most comfortable cordial for afflicted souls; That
Hope, I say, which is grounded upon Divine Faith of an everlasting Inheritance:
Hope that does secure as well as promise possession: Hope that makes us despise
all Temporal Happiness, and erecting the Soul to take her flight to wards
Heaven, makes her at her taking her rise, spurn the subject Earth. Let this
Hope replenisht with all solid satisfactions, be your comfort, not that empty
one of possessing estates already disposed of, whose flashing glimpses has
daseld your eyes, and deluded you for so many years. Do but lay it once to
heart how great the disproportion is between a Temporal and an everlasting
Inheritance, and it will quickly cheer up your Spirits, and wean your wills
from that fond propension we are still apt to retain to what was once our own,
though we know it could never long continue so. The longest liver that ever
was since the Creation, did not arrive to enjoy the world a thousand years;
and, put case every man did so, yet it would signify little or nothing to such
as still long to continue it, because the present time, (or to speak more
properly, Instant) fills us but with sorrow for the time that is past, and with
perplexity for the future. Those noble Souls who fix their Hopes and Thoughts
upon Heaven, do from that height look down unmoud upon the vicissitudes of
sublunary affairs, and the storms of subject Fortune; and it is only those
weaker ones that degenerate from the Excellency of their spiritual Being, who
are shock't with the loss of a piece of Land which God knows they had not right
allowd' them by the course of nature to enjoy above a moment: And that too such
a moment, that on it E'ternity depends: A moment on whose well or ill' spending
is grounded the determination of our final and euerduting state, either of
Salvation or Damnation. Can we then be so stupid' as to misspend this
precious Moment, and the time which God's merciful Providence has allotted us
to prepare for death, and purchase the Kingdom of Heaven, in sighing and
soliciting for a pitiful parcel of earth; and that, because we hope to
pass our days as our Ancestors did theirs, in more plenty and folly than now
we can? This argues want of courage as well as Christianity. Omne solum forti
patria est, says the Roman Orator. If the constant man makes every Country his
own, questionles a Christian ought not be so set upon any worldly Inheritance
as to endanger his sure Title to Heaven and the eternal loss of his Soul for
the enioyment of so uncertain a Settlement.

Perhaps some may conceit this doctrine too sublime for the Layty, and more
proper for Monks and Hermits than for married men who are bound in Duty and
Conscience to provide for their wives, Children and Families. Be not seduced,
Dearly Beloved, by such specious mistakes or false suggestions: The Layty is as
much obliged to practice Christian Virtues as the Clergy, and married men ought
to love their Neighbors and suffer patiently their own Crosses, as well as
Monks and Hermits. Some Evangelical Counsels and works of Supererogation are
peculiar to the Ecclesiastical state, but God's Commandments are proper to
all Christians. I do not pretend that Laymen are bound to sell their Lands and
voluntarily embrace that Poverty which Religious Orders profess; but I must
maintain that they are obliged in conscience to submit to Providence, and to
bear patiently the forfeiture of their Possessions, without disturbing the
Publix peace or the Private Rights of such as enjoy them by virtue of de Laws
of the Land. They may have recourse to the Course of Judicature and to His
Maty's Justice and Mercy, but not to any other Tribunal upon earth.

Though the ancient Practice of Gods Church be a sufficient and most
conuincing proof of this Truth, yet it were not amiss to confirm it with a
reason deduced from the particular auersion which God has to Rebellion, and
Disturbers of Government. Soueraigns are the Images of God, as we maysay,
according to his Prerogative: Nor does their Soul only naturally resemble him
as he is a Spirit, but their Sovereignty and Office represent him under a
Civil or Politic notion, as he is Supreme Lord and Master of his Creatures.
As sure as he is King of the whole Universe, so surely they are his Viceroys
in their respective districts. And can we think yt this Great King will look
on those with any other eye than as on Traitors who disobey and rebel against
his Viceroy? Does not the Order of the world plainly inform us that every
Superior Power resents the contempt of a Subordinate one, as avilifying his
own, which instituted it, and in virtue of which it acts? Or can we think that
God is not more offended when we disregard him under that character and Title,
than when we commit other Sins? Do not we see that it stands with good reason
yt sublunary Kings pass by some disrespects and indignities which reflect upon
them in other regards, without inflicting very severe punishments on the
offenders; But such Transgressions as touch their Supremacy or Power of
governing, are accounted Treason, and punished with the utmost of all Temporal
Ills, Death? And this is the reason why Idolatry is so heinous in the sight of
God, because it dethrones him who is King of the whole creation, and setts up
an usurper in his place, to receive that incommunicable honor, which is so
justly and properly his. Applying this then we shall find that when subjects
rebel against their King or his laws, they contemn God, who appointed them his
officers to rule his world, according to his Attribute of Supreme Lord and
Master; because Kings, as such, represent God's Sovereignty, and are in that
regard his Images as well as his Anointed; and who so ever contemns the Image,
contemns the Prototype; It Is the known Doctrine of those of our Profession that
we ought to honor the former for the later's sake; they only therefore that
hold no distinction between an Image and an Idol may take an ombrage at this
doctrine, but the very grain and genius of our Religion obliges us to it
strongly, and leaves us no power to unrawell that ty of inviolable obedience to
our Earthly Sovereigns which is so manifoldly interwouen in our very
Christianity. The sum of all is this, that since Disobedience to our King
necessarily implies a disobeying God, it is evidently consequent that we can
have no more right to rebel against him than against God himself: and that,
since God has so essential a hatred against sin as not to consent we should
commit the least venial one, though by so doing we should convert and save
the whole world, how can it be imagined that he will allow of so great a crime
as rebellion upon any score, even of maintaining Religion or converting Souls,
much less upon that mere Temporal motive of saving or regaining an Estate?

And now, Dearly-Beloued, give me leave to exhort you in Christ's name, who is
the Author and earnest Recommender of that best Soul-saving Virtue of Charity,
and in God's name as he is the Soueraign Governor and Disposer of the World,
not to look with a maligning and spiteful eye upon your Protestant Neighbors
as Usurpers of Estates, but as placed in Possession of them by the King who is
God's Vicegerent, and consequently by God himself; as also to consider yt the
Divine Goodness doing ever what is best for the spiritual good of his
Creatures, if they make right use of it, his holy Intention was by permitting
your Temporal losses, to lay more effectual means for the salvation both of
theirs and your own Souls. Consider that their Souls are by creation the Images
of God as well as yours; for which reason alone, were there no other, you ought
to love and honor them, and pray for their Conversion; which doubtless has been
God's design in this great Revolution: In doing which you have God's own word
(and who would not take his security), it is impossible you should be losers if
you practice the doctrine you profess and we teach. If any of them be harsh to
you, bear it patiently; if charitable, be thankful. I know there are many of
them pity your condition, and offer to compound for your claym,
notwithstanding their Possession and the Legality of their Title. I know also
that every man is apt to conceit himself to be the best Judge of his interest;
but give me leave, who ought to have no other but the good of your Souls, and
am equally concerned for the Salvation of all, to wish with all my heart you
did agree and live together in true Christian Brotherly Charity, lest your
Dissension cause your damnation; as it must ineuitably if it arrive to that
height as to break that most excellent virtue, without which all others are
dead, (as wanting that which only gives life to all the rest) and bear no
fruit of merit toward the attainment of Heaven. What a happy man should I
esteem my self if by my prayers and endeauours I could contribute any thing to
so pious a work, and so proper for one of my calling? what pains and dangers
would I not undergo? How willingly would I leave the contentmens and
conueniencies I at present enjoy in the best Climate and Country of
Christendom, to live in that less happy soil, not so favorable to men of my
profession? I shall not value any inconveniences if you give me the least
encouragement by receiving cheerfully and heartily my advice in this present
matter, which concerns so nearly the good of your Souls and the peace of that
Kingdom. I flatter my self, and I hope, not vainly, with expecting your ready
inclinations for so necessary a resolution, and so becoming persons of your
principles: and therefore resting in this confidence I will make no farther
delay, but prepare my self (as I hope I have you by this letter) for so
Christian and meritorious a work. Notwithstanding this only is my design, I
fear, that if in order thereunto I should once more implore and obtain with my
Lord Lieutenants allowance a Justice of the peace his warrant for securing a
notorius malefactor (though a Friar by profession) falsely pretending papal
privileges, of not being questioned for his adulteries, rapes, sedition,
exacting moneys by counterfeit Bulls as the supposed Vicar Apostoliks
Collector, and his Keeping a Community of vicious vagabonds, upon poor peoples
charges, under the name and pretext of Religious Nouices, I fear, I say, if I
should in a legal way endeavor to have such scandals and seditions punished by
the Kings authority, it will be represented again to the Parliament of England
as an exercise of foreign jurisdiction, and be made the ground of an other
persecution.

Howeuer I conjure you most earnestly, that if any should endeavor to teach
you any doctrine contrary to this which I give here under my hand, and am ready
to seal with my blood, you will look upon them as Wolves, whatsoever their
profession or habit seem to be. You have had experience of some Preachers who
pretend great zeal to God and the Kings service, and yet, at the same time
Rebellion, and Murders were proou'd against them. These are the men you must
not give ear to, nor converse with, lest you be infected with their Doctrine
and perverted by their Example. Hear and follow the Pastors who are answerable
to God for your souls, not mercenary hirelings to whom the care of them does
not properly belong. And yet if either these, or I, or an Angel from Heaven
should go about to persuade you that it is lawful to molest your Protestant
neighbors, or defraud them of their goods, or enter upon their possessions by
any means or method which the Law of the Land does not allow, give them no
credit, but let them be to you as an Anathema. God of his mercy grant you
light to see, strength to bear, and a truly wise Christian Prudence to husband
and make that excellent advantage of your sufferings which God's Allseeing
Wisdom ordaind them for. In the Iargon of wordly language they are called
Misfortunes; but, believe me they are the same measures which the
sweetly-contriuing Economy of divine Providence ever took to make his Servants
happy.

Be of good comfort then and rejoice that your names are writ in the Book of
Life: nay bless' God that you are thought worthy to imitate Christ's Example,
and that you have the surest Marks of Predestination, which are wordly Poverty
and Contempt; But to have their due and full effect of benefiting your Souls,
these sufferings must be accompanied with Patience and accepted as favors
from that hand, which alone can redress them here, or else will surely reward
them hereafter: but it seldom does both. I hope you will be so wise as to make
choice rather of the last; and pray and endeavor that both your selves and
your posterity may rather remain in the condition you are reduced to, than seek
to better it for the moment o^ this life by hazarding that everlasting
Inheritance, the loss whereof (and of no other) can possibly make you
unfortunate. The Peace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST be with you.

PETER TALBOT.
Patis May the 2d 1674.

