A DEFENSE OF Humane Learning IN THE MINISTRY: OR, A TREATISE Proving That it
is necessary a Minister (or Preacher) should be skilled in Humane Learning.

Frange leves Calamos, and sci^de Thalia libellos,
Si dare Sutori Calceus ista potest.
By H. Th. St. Chapter Chapter

OXFORD: Printed by A. Lichfield, Printer to the University, for Rich: Davis.
1660.

TO The Reverend and Worshipful JOHN WALL, Doctor of Divinity, and Prebendary
of Christ Church, My very good Friend and Patron.
Much Honored Sir,
HAVING considered the great diligence of men formerly, and what perfection
they would arrive unto in knowledge, before they undertook the Ministry: and
withal the earnestness of some in these times, that decry learning and pretend
wholly to a Spirit: and having also had some thoughts to betake my self to the
study of Divinity, I stood amazed what I should do. And truly, at first
(through my ignorance I confess) I knew not whether those Persons might not be
in the right: Sure I was, they took the easiest and shortest way to (if I may
so phrase it) Preaching. But deliberating with my self, I resolved to study the
Question, and to be convinced in the point. Having examined the Arguments on
both sides, my reason presently condemned the haters of humane learning, as
irrational, brutish and irreligious persons; that took their rise either from
their ignorance, for Scientia non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem: or from
malice, and a desire to have religion, Julian like, betrayed, or lastly from
avarice, and a Sacrilegious mind to devour the revenues, that Benefactors have
bestowed upon the Schools of learning. Now being fully satisfied, They were
guilty of some of these, or of all: and digesting my thoughts into some order,
I compiled this small Treatise, the which I resolved to expose to the veiw of
one, that made good my Thesis in all its respects, and that is, Reverend Sir
your self; who have been pleased formerly to honor me with the writing out of
some of your most learned Sermons. The which could I imitate in the style, and
transcribe in my conversation: the one would bespeak me eminent for knowledge,
the other for holiness: from the former I might promise my selfrepute here, and
from the latter, happiness hereafter.

Indeed, all that I pretend hereby, is to acquit my self with due gratitude to
you for your many favors: and let me further tell you, the subject I handle
made me reflect on the eminency of your learning. And be it spoken to the
Honor of your person, and the University wherein you live: My Lord Bishop then
of Lincoln, Docter Williams (whilst you honored his family with your learning
and Piety) gave this honorable character of you, that you were the best read in
the Fathers of any he ever knew.

I wish heartily, I had as much eloquence to express the excellency of your
knowledge in all manner of learning, as I do hereby tender respect and zeal to
your service. But I must comply with your Modesty, that thinks every one too
luxuriant in your praises, and no body sparing enough. I shall say no more, but
humbly beg your pardon for this boldness, and to retain me under the title of,

^h. Church Oxon July 14. 1659 Most worthy Sir, Your most humble Votary and
Servant Hen. Thurman.

THE Necessity of a Learned Ministry.
AS the Callings and Offices in this world are many, and diverse, so also are
the Gifts and Graces belonging to them. But of them all, There is not any to be
compared with the office of the Ministry; either for variety or the excellency
of their Gifts, which the Holy Ghost in Scripture does appropriate to them:
For, besides that, they have the Gifts of Nature, as also those we call the
Gifts of Fortune; common unto them with other men: (As to the former, by the
Law of God, if in nature they had any imperfection, spot, or blemish, they
might not minister about the Tabernacle; and as to the latter, those that we
style bona fortunae, they had their own portions, and part in the portions of
their brethren) ^hey had certain gifts of grace powered upon them, in greater
variety and in greater measure then the rest of their fellows. As the
operation of great works, Prophecy, Discerning of Spirits, diversity of
tongues, faith to work miracles, the gift of healing, the word of wisdom, and
the word of knowledge. Which is all noted by a learned tongue by Isaiah, who
says, The Lord has given unto me the tongue of the learned, that I should know
how to speak a word in season to him that is weary.

Which Gifts although they are not in every individuo, in every particular
minister, but some in one, some in another: Nor all at one time, and in one
age, but at diverse times and in diverse ages: Some in the beginning, for
propagation of the Gospel; Some afterward for the continuance of it; Some for
times of persecution; Some for peace and tranquillity of the Church; Some for
the converting of the Gentile to Christ: Some for the saving of their souls
which are converted; Yet this gift of the word wisdom, or the word of
knowledge, or of a learned torgue is ever required in the ministry, at all
times, in all places, in all persons, to all purposes, though in diverse
measures: Some having but one Talent, some two, some five Talents, and so
upwards.

For our Savior does not say to any, Operamini donec venio, to whom he has
not given one Talent at least to work with all. For as he gave us sundry
callings, some to be ^postles, some Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors,
and some Doctors; Some preaching Deacons, some ministering Deacons, not for one
time, or all times, not for one place, or all places, but diversely according to
the diverse times and places. In these times and these places, Prophets: In
those times, and those places, Apostles; In other times and places,
Evangelists: In other times Pastors; At all times and in all places, Teachers,
(call them by what name you please) So he gave gifts to those diverse ^^llings
and diverse times: But to Preachers and Teachers, Priests or Ministers (who were
for all times) this gift of knowledge and utterance, this gift of a learned
tongue.

It Is the humor of the times now to dispute about the title of a Bishop, or
Presbyter, or Superintendent: but with names we meddle not at present, nor the
form of Church discipline. Indeed herein does partly consist the excellency
and perfection of the state of the Church under Christ, that it is not bound,
or tied up (as it was under Moses) to Jerusalem, or any set place, to this or
that order of ministry or government, to these, or those necessary ceremonies;
but is at liberty to appoint any thing that serves for the decency or building
up of the Church. For to prescribe an exact form, as Moses did of his Church,
were to make a Coat for the Moon, whereunto the Church is likned very well
because it is sometimes increasing, sometimes in the wayne, sometimes in the
full, and sometimes in the Eclipse.

B^t that I may not seem to build a portall too big for my house, I come to the
assertion the which I have taken upon me to defend: viz. That it is necessary,
a Minister or Preacher should be skild in humane Learning:

This Thesis I shall prove by these ensuing Arguments:

1. From the power of the tongue, and that, 1. As it is a natural gift, common
to all 2. As it is a special gift, proper to the Priest or Minister.


2. In that it is necessary, that the Preacher should exceed the people iin
knowledge, since he takes upon him by his preaching to instruct them.

3. Because learning is especially necessary for the understanding of the
Scripture. And under this head I shall speak concerning the Preachers knowing
the Tongues, the liberal Arts and Sciences (under which is comprehended
Philosophy,) then History, and somewhat concerning Classical Authors, not
forgetting (the main thing of all) the Civil Law.

4. From the example of, 1. Moses, Daniel, and Solomon in the old Testament. 2.
Paul, Stephen, Apollos, Nathaniel, Nicodemus in the New Testament. 3. The
Fathers, that were the Pillars of the Church, and instructed in humane
literature.


5. Because learning in a Preacher is necessary in a politic sense: And to
contemn it brings in disorder, both to the Church and Common Wealth.

6. From the Use and End, of learning.

7. And lastly (to take in all) by answering all objections to the Contrary.

1. As to the First Argument drawn from the power of the Tongue, and that,
1. As it is a natural gift common to all with a Preacher Of what power and
prevalency a learned and well managed Tongue is of, ancient writings witness
sufficiently, and daily experience teaches us. It Is like the Achates, which
stone no painter can paint for the variety of its colors. It peirces into men's
breasts, winding and turning, and putting them into any posture, captivating
the Auditors as it pleases. Serpent-like it can cunningly insinuate, and enter
at the smallest hole; when it pleases, can presently put its self into a
posture of war, and falls upon the enemy with a lion like violence. It
sights, it makes peace, it can highly commend and as bitingly disgrace: ^t
laughs, it cries, it has the dominion over all, and is the sole Paramont and
Emperor of the Universe. ^ut I may be silent, since St. James does largly
describe its qualities in his Epistle c. 2. and (as to my purpose more in hand)
I shall speak of it more particularly,

2. As it is a spiritual gift proper to the Preisthood, and the Organ or
Instrument of the holy Ghost.

For (as we know) the gift of a Tongue is common to all sorts of men, together
almost withal sorts of Creatues, and is used to deliver sounds, if not speech,
but speech amongst those that are rational; And yet they that can naturally
say Lord and Jesus cannot say, that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost, as
St. Paul speaks to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. c. 12. v. 3. i.e. cannot speak
honorably and reverently, and preach his majesty and benefits, but by a
farther gift of the spirit (which takes not away learning, but lets it be with
it, as its servant and subordinate) And seeing Moses could speak readily enough
in civil matters, and say to the Hebrew, wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?
Exodus 2.13. Yet when he was sent on Gods special message to Pharaoh, says O
Lord I am not eloquent, but heavy of mouth and of a slow tongue Exodus 4.10 And
seeing Isaith, ^hen he should be sent to preach, could say, He was a man of
unclean lips, and he durst not use them, till the Seraphin had touched his mouth
with a Coal from the Altar: And seeing Jeremy (though God told him that he had
ordained him a Prophet to the nations) says, Ah Lord God, behold I cannot
speak, for I am a Child; And seeing David, when he would sing praises, cries,
Lord open thou my lips, when he himself before had opened them to wantonness
and murder: Finally, seeing St. Paul before his conversion, could breath out
threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord: but being sent to
preach desires the Saints to pray for him, that a door of utterance might be
given him, that he might open his mouth boldly to publish the secrets of the
Gospel; All these considered, It is manifest, that it is one thing to speak,
and another to preach, one thing to have a tongue by nature and another thing,
to have the gift of a tongue by the Holy Ghost. And that is a special honor
and privilege granted to the Calling of the Ministry.

And here a little I must stand to obviate the pretenses of the Enthusiasts,
who would have us believe, that they have (like those fore mentioned) such a
tongue from the Holy Ghost, and what they speak is from the spirit within them.
^o these I answer 1. That those single men of old that delivered Gods word
were 1. publicly designed Prophets. 2. Approved of by the high priest and
Sanhedrim, and 3 endued with a public spirit, and its doctrines were always
agreeable to the other Scriptures. But how far they are different from these,
All men in their right senses can easily discern. But 2ly. To expostulate the
case with these men: ^ither their spirit (by which they say they preach) is a
private one, or a public one? If private, then it is to themselves only, and
useful to none else. And how often have we read, how men's malancholy tempers
have deluded them, and made them fancy such Chimeras? But again; If public?
Then it must enter in at the door of the ministry and divine Ordinances, of
Gods grace and man's Endeavors, (I repeat it again, man's Endeavors, which will
take in also our Endeavors after knowledge and learning) and it must be
subject to the Prophets, and their censures of it. Else it must justify its
extraordinariness by miraculous effects, the which none of us yet ever saw. And
such a spirit they must confess, they have not.

I think, we never read of any Doctors, that have been isntrumental in
preaching the word, since the Apostles: but what had the groundwork of humane
learning laid in them. And no doubt, God most extraordinarily giving the
Apostles the gift of Tongues by the holy Ghost, did infuse all those habits of
Science which we are now put upon to acquire: though, they were not taught as
we are, to make a Syllogism perhaps in Barbara, or told there were ten
Praedicaments. I confess our Philosophy, Arts, and all humane Sciences without
Gods spirit are but some glimmerings; but like the Stars that shine in the
night they keep our reason from being quite in the dark. True, when Gods
spirit is superadded, like the Sun arising, it out shines all those smaller
lights, but they are not put-out, but remain still as useful.

Now of this gift of a learned tongue, nothing is spoken but favors and
blessings. Solomon that most learned P^e^cher, says of it in his Proverbs, It Is
as choice Silver, c. 10. v. 20. The Tongue of the wise man is health. v. 21.
The lips of the righteous feed many. The tongue of the wise is health. The law
of the wise is a fountain of life. And the like. And whatsoever things proceed
from such learned preachers, they are styled by ^t. Be^nard ^er. 2. in resur.
Dui. aromata, sweet s^ices, and the instruments of teaching, reproving, and
instructing in righteousness that the man of God may be made perfect unto all
good works. And therefore this gift of a learned tongue is very excellently
called oleum effusum, Oil powered out to the comfort of others, which is better
then oleum infusum, Oil powered only in to ones own comfort. For they that are
wise ( says Daniel) shall shine as the brightness of the ^irmament: but they
that turn others unto righte^^sness shall shine as the Stars for ever and
ever.

There is a double operation of the Holy Ghost in ministers; the one, whereby
it does inwardly strengthen them with virtues to their own salvation: a 2d.
whereby it does outwardly adorn them with gifts to the s^lvation of others. As
for example, Faith, Hope and Charity, and such other virtues, are given unto
themselves, dan^ur illis propter illos: without hich they could not be saved.
But the word of wisdom, and the word of knowledge, a learned tongue,
prophesying and such other gifts (which men may want and yet be secure of their
salvation) are given unto ministers to be poured out, and spent to the profit
of their neighbors. And these operations of the Holy Ghost, as Ministers
receive them to their own comfort are called infusiones, and as they pour them
out upon others are styled effusiones. And of what force and efficacy they are
of to a Minister in his function, has in part been shown and will appear
further in what does follow.

2 Arg. In that it is absolutely necessary, that the Preacher should exceed the
people in knowledge, since he takes upon him by his Preaching to instruct them.
It is at least an imperfection in the land, where it may be said: Such as is
the people for knowledge such is the Teacher. And the people of this land,
especially in Cities and great towns are no less exercised in the body of the
Scripture, and the translated Commentaries of late writers, then their
ministers are. And if their knowledge reach no further, may they not truly say
of them, such people such priest? Again. If it be the nature, custom, and
practice of the people, nihil tam vereri, quam ne dubitare aliqua de re
videantur (as Tully says of Velleius) tanquam ex Deorum consilio descendissent:
as though they dwelt in the bosom of the Fathers and ancient Counsails; How
shall Ministers be able to reprove and reform them, being endued but with the
same measure of knowledge? How shall they take them up that be fallen, having
no more strength in their arms then they? If industry, memory, utterance, and
strong lungs be to be found among the people in as high a degree, as those of
the Clergy; and they have for their advantage boldness (which is Soboles
imperitiae) the seed and offspring of their ignorance: for alas what is their
knowledge but armed ignorance against themselves?) will not the hand despise
the eye, if it see no more then it does? And the body contemn the head, if
their gifts be equal? Every Saul will be ready to thrust them out of their
Chaires. Pulpits and Offices, if they can Prophecy as well as they. Yea, to
our grief and the ruin of the Church, we now experience, what a Father of old
(speaking to the like purpose) feared, ne hic securim, ille stivam, alius
pellem, alius ligna, alius denique forcipem ab^iciens, se ^^c conserant,
aliusque alium circa mensam sacro sanctam, and Pulpita and Cathedras protrudant
and comprimant. We in this nation are past fearing, and the words are made good
amongst us, for already, hic securim, ille stivam, alius pellem, alius ligna,
alius denique forcipem abjiciens se huc contulit etc. I wish it could not be
said, It Is no the trade of Preaching, and the merchandise of Religion.

But stay: Perhaps some one may say, I miss of my mark: and that like People
like Teacher is no inconvenience, where the people may be learned. And I would
to God, (said Moses to Joshua, Number. 11.29. when he seemed to envy the Prophecy
of ^^dad and Medad) that all could Prophecy. But if we look into that place,
we shall see, that that gift of Prophecy was extraordinary and miraculous to
some: upon whom God by promise, and upon special purpose poured out his
spirit: If not for that instance (as some think) yet for someone special
regard, as to make them able to govern the people As for this greater
knowledge in the people, it enforces a greater knowledge in the ministry: For
as the knowledge which now is found in many of our Artificers, would have
seemed a good measure for a parish Priest in time of Popery, when the people
were muzled up in ignorance and error: so must there also be an anolagy and
proportion between the knowledge of the people now adays, and our Priests and
Ministers. A type of this is noted to be the appearing of the mighty God Jehova
on the mountain, where only Moses and Aaron were admitted to see his back
parts, and that which might be seen of him standing on the mountain. But
Sacrorum administri, who were not the Priests and Levites, (for as yet they
were not ordained, but (as I yra notes out of R. Solomon, Jun. and Tremellius
affirm the first born of the Princes of the twelve tribes, who used to offer
Sacrifice) These, I say Sacrorum administri, and the people might not touch the
skirt of the Hill, but that which God said, they should learn, not immediately
from him but by the means of Moses and Aaron. A notable figure of the
excellency of knowledge, which is required in the ministry above the capacity
of the common people: arguing, that the people must learn, and the minister
teach: the preacher seek to learn, whatsoever may be known of God, the people
should be content with whatsoever is answerable to their capacity, and
profitable for their edifying.

I must acknowledge, that this title or attribute of learning may be attributed
to every good Christian. For how may he be accounted unlearned, who (if he knew
nothing elss) has learned out of the Apostles Creed, ultra mundanam
philosophiam, (as I rasmus calls it) a philosophy beyond the philosophy of the
world? which neither Pythagoras nor Plato, but jesus Christ, the son of the
living God has delivered unto us. How may he be accounted unlearned, who has
had Christ and his holy Apostles for his Schoolmasters, and has learned of
them the right path way to felicity? And they which have not learned these
things how are they called Christians? And how can they be called rude and
ignorant, which have learned and believed them? For (as Erasmus says again)
nulla est sancta rusticitas, sicut nulla est rusticana sanctitas: ubicurque
enim est vera sanctitas, ibi est magna Philosophia, minimeque vulgaris
eruditio. But yet amongst these learned there is a difference. For they excel
and exceed the rest in learning, unto whom it is given by a special
prerogative from the Holy ^host to instruct others to righteousness unto whom
the Lord has given a pure and aclean heart a principal and invincible spirit
the wisdom of Serpents joined with the innocence of doves, a tongue like the
pen of a ready writer, a learned tongue to know how to minister a word in
season to those that are weary; lips in which not only the Flexanimis Pytho of
the Heathen has its residence: but on which are poured heavenly graces, by the
power and efficacy of the Holy Ghost.

For its fit and convenient, that that they excel others in degree and calling
should excel in virtue and gifts. There are already started by the Casuists
five Thousand cases of Conscience and daily more wise: and therefore Ministers
that are to answer the doubts of a whole kingdom, whose office it is to
determine in divine scruples should be men of extraordinary endowments. For
their office is of larger extent then to make. Sermons, and speak well enough
to the pleasing of vulgar and undiscerning Auditors. Neither is it enough that
they be good amongst the bad, learned amongst the ignorant; but they must be
best amongst the good, and of greatest knowledge among the learned. Ye are the
light of the world (says our Savior Mat. 5.14) rays, as 'twere, issuing from
the fountain of eternal light. Christ therefore, we see, bespeaks his
ministers to be as torches or eminent luminaries, like the Sun in the
firmament, for all the world to be enlightened by it. Their luster should be
great as at noon day able to dispell all the mists of error; for a knowledge in
them, like the twilight is not sufficient, and is next unto darkness.

Learning qua learning, i.e. an ability to teach others, challenges a natural
pre-eminence and superiority. For all dominion is naturally founded in the
understanding and we submit that imperious faculty to none but God and our
Teachers. Hence Paul is said to have sat at his Tutors feet, which implies
duty and subordination. Now a presidency or authority in the ministry is
intimated by that power our Savior gave his Apostles. It is said Mat. 28.19.
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth, go ye therefore and teach.
So that now the Apostles had a power given them^ore the understandings of the
people. Now how can unlearned persons regulate men's ununderstandings? And so
how can they be (...), Presidents and governors of the Church, if they know no
more then those they pretend to instruct? Wisemen (we know) are only fit to
govern: and learning maintains that relation, whilst it keeps of contempts,
stops the mouths of all gainsayers, searches out truth and states what it is,
and must necessarily force all that are in their senses to honor it. I am sure
amongst wiser persons it has always been esteemed a title of nobility and great
eminency. Ego enim, quid aliud munificentiae adhibere potui, ut studia, ut sic
dixerim, in umbra educata, e quibus Claritudo venit, said Seneca to Nero. No
doubt but learning enableth men to procure more favor, and bring more
reputation to religion by the greatness of their parts. Great then is the
boldness of those illiterate persons that venture upon this calling with more
confidence by reason of their greater ignorance, and being not able to
discharge the duty of a minister by reason of their want of learning, they
become workmen who need to be ashamed, not rightly dividing the word of Truth.

3. Arg. Because learning is especially necessary for the understanding of the
Scriptures.
This I lay down for a ground work, that there is unum necessarium with Mary,
to set at the feet of Jesus and his Apostles; and hear and read the Scriptures.
And that we must, not with the Egyptian Dog bihere and fugere, taste of Nilus
and begone, and be satisfied with a draught. But (as it is said of wisdom) we
must so eat of them, that we may be the more hungry after them. And as it is
said of the woundrous works of God: That when a man has considered them, and
done his best. he must begin again: and when he thinks to come to an end he
must go again to his first labor; for the consideration is infinite. So when
we have read over the Scriptures and considered them, and done our best, we
must begin again. And when we think we have made an end, go again to our first
labor, for the knowledge and profit of them is infinite. Having, I say, set
this down for a rule and ground, that the Scriptures are all-sufficient and
only sufficient for the work of our Salvation, and that they are the ground of
all Truth; It is not absurd, says Clement the Pope in the Decrees, did. 37. Si
aliquid etiam ex eruditione communi, ac liberalibus studiis quae forte etiam in
pueritia attigimus ad assertionem very dogmatis conferimus. And so I say, a
third Reason why a minister should be skild in humane learning, may be the
great necessity and help it is of, for the understanding the holy Scriptures.

And here I must descend to particulars, and speak

1. Of the study of the Tongues, Hebrew and Greek, in the which the holy
Scripture is wrote.

Now these are necessary for five Reasons.

1. Since, there is no translation that is not in many places faulty: and those
that are the most learned, disagree much in interpreting the meaning of those
places; how shall that minister, that is ignorant of the Original Tongues be
able to consult the Context, to satisfye and inform his own judgment and
others that will cavil with him? He must presently be at a stand, and confess
his ignorance. He that it forced to read a translation, can no more clearly
understand the Authors Original, then those that look through a thick black-bag
can see the graces of a picture. And remember, waters the further they run from
the fountain, the less clear they are, and more impure.

2. Every tongue has its Emphasis and particular graces, that can never be
genuinely expressed in another language. The exactest Translator can never lively
express that Majesty and sublimity of style the Holy Ghost writes in. Never
did any interpreter reach the Authors mind in every thing, and the best has
erred in somethings. So that I must commend Themisto^les, that being in
banishment, and having leave to speak to the King of Persia, chose rather to
spend a twelvemonths time first to learn the tongue rather then discover his
mind by proxy.

3. Because it has been the practice of the Church always, for those that
preach to learn those tongues. Origin would had the Hebrew words to have been
translated into no other tongue, but kept uncorrupted by those that knew them.
They report Hierom, a very old man, to have learnt the Hebrew Rudiments. And
Luther was of opinion to neglect the study of these tongues, were to recall the
ancient barbarism. This is sure, that when in the year 1470, the knowledge of
them was revived, the Egyptian darkness was dispel'd, and the Gospel shined
forth in greater splendour.

4. Because they that by the help of them have searched the context, have
proved amongst us the most eminent Divines: witness Luther, Melancthon,
Musculus, Mercer, Paraeus and others; Moreover the Papists the more any of them
were skild in these tongues, were by so much the less corrupted then others,
as Montanus, Masius and others. And others (though in other things very
learned) through their ignorance herein have erred very grossly, as their
Commentaries sufficiently witness against them.

5. Because learned men have always esteemed highly of the study of them.
Luther preferred his knowledge of the Hebrew language before all riches. So
Melancthon, Mercer, Pareus and others. And don't retort upon me, That there
have been very learned divines without them, as Bernard and Aquinas For in
their days the study of those tongues was not quite so necessary as it is in
ours. For in their times all Europe was of the same faith and worshipped God in
the same manner; whereas in our days, there are as many religions almost as
men. Notwitstanding though, Those Fathers who by reason then of their great
troubles and Cares had not leausure so to do, persuaded others to study them:
And if they could not for their business, that then they should address
themselves to the most eminent linguists. As to the Greek language in
particular, he that is ignorant of it, must be also of the new Testament, the
Septuagint, Aquila, Symmachus and Theodotion and in short the Greek Fathers:
And truly he that wilfully will neglect these, may as well kick Divinity out
of doors. In a word, as to tongues which a Minister should know, the Cross of
Christ tells us, where our Saviors name was wrote in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.

2. The liberal Arts and Sciences.

1. Grammar. For this tells us the various acception of a word, and how such a
Conjunction of number, case, or gender alters the sense, from whence so many
disputes have risen. Yea particles themselves misunderstood and misplaced have
made parties and divisions in Religion.

2. Rhetoric. This is as necessary to a Preacher, as the eye is to the head:
and of what power and force it is of to win upon an Auditory I have briefly
spoak before. I must confess some have misused it, but they that rightly apply
it cannot be discommended: so that their Eloquence be according to the nature
of the Subject, high, majestic, and heavenly: such as we find in Moses and the
Prophets and St. Paul, and other the holy writers; more Elegant, I say, then
the greatest Rhetoricians amongst the Greeks and Romans. I appeal to St.
Austin l. 4. c. 6. de Doct. Christ. that obseves out of St. Paul's Epistles and
the prophecy of Amos, Colons, Commas, Periods and Figures more accurately then
any Rhetorician has done out of Demosthenes or Cicero. And if you approve not
of the florishes of Rhetoric, and the adorning of things, go and accuse God
(if you dare) that has Created so beautiful a heaven and earth, and the
ornaments thereof. If our Shoes must be so fine, why may not our tongue receive
its graces also? by whose eloquence we are especially distinguished from Brutes?

3. Logic. Py this we understand the contexture, method, argumentation and
analysis of the Scripture. By this only we know when we speak truth or no. It
is as the helm to guide us, and the rule to measure all things by. Here is our
storehouse for all arguments to prove our Text by, and without it we should
all be confounded, and know not how to get out of the dark. Our Savior was the
great master of it: whilst we read of him daily disputing in the Temple, how
closely does he prove his doctrine, retorting upon the Pharisees their own
arguments, and wholly silencing them with his unanswerable Dilemmas? What shall
I say of Paul's famous Sorites, whereby he proves God to have foresawen, called
and justified by faith, the Elect? Take this Science away, and I will warrant
you, the Jesuits will easily dispute us out of Protestantisme. Take away this
touchstone, and they will make any metrall seem good with us, and pass for
pure Gold. Whether free will be to be granted? Whether there is an universal
redemption, or no? and a numberless such like propositions of great moment are
to be examined hence by the Rules of de omni and de nullo, and other rules in
this Science. I will only insert a story that I have heard of one (of what sect
he was of, I mention not, because I would give no body offense) that should
come peremptorily to a Dr. of this nation to dispute his Tenants with him. The
Dr. entertained him freindly, and first of all asked him what profession he was
of: A Tailor, says he. Very well says the Dr. but preethee friend, let me ask
thee one Question. What Is that, says, the Tailor? Did thou never put a piece
of new cloth into an old Garment? Perhaps I have, what then? Then, says the
Doctor, I will prove you out of Scripture to be no man. That I don't believe,
says the Tailor, Well I Will do it thus: Says our Savior, No man puts new
cloth into an old Garment, but you confess you have, therefore you are no
man. The man was astouished at it: and finding himself to be caught in a
Labyrinth, knew not what way to get out, but by telling the Doctor, he was a
Sophister. Thus we may see how necessary Logic is, and that without it a
Minister will almost as absurdly be surpised, as this simple fellow was.

4. Ethics. This Science was the Heathens only divinity, and has God for his
Author, from whence we know him to be the Summum bonum, and so to attract the
will unto him. Hence we know how the will obays the understanding, what virtues
and what vices are, those to be followed, these are to be avoided. What the
passions are and how to be moderated, several distinctions of sin and
ignorance, and how far we are, or are not at sometimes excusable. In short
most of the Questions of Polemicall Divinity are grounded upon this Science,
and decided from it. It Is said to be the Handmaid to, a degree of
approximation if not of participation of Divinity. Of which may be said, as it
is of the air, compare it with the heavens and it is a kind of earth, compare
it with the earth and it is a kind of heaven: So compare moral Philosophy with
Divinity it is much inferior, compare it with the other lower arts, it is a
Divinity.

5. Natural Philosophy. Hence a Divine h^s many things concerning the Soul, of
the nature of stones, plants, living Creatures etc. And the Scripture in many
places sends us to the la^ of nature. Prove. 6.6. Go to the Ante thou Sluggard,
consider her ways and be wise: where the Holy Ghost would spur us up to be
industrious by the example of an abject worm. Jer. 8.7. The Storke in the
heavens knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the
Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my people know not the judgment
of the Lord: where God upbraids the people of their supinesse, and the not
foreseeing their imminent dangers, from Creatures that are without all
understanding. So our Savior Christ (Mat. 6.) bids his disciples, Consider the
Fowls of the are, and the Lilies of the field, and so cast themselves upon
Gods providence. Again, it is said 1. Cor. 11 14. Does not even nature it self
teach you, that if a man have long hair etc. The grace of God supposes nature
and the Scripture teaches it not but takes it for granted, that we know
whatsoever of nature may be known by the light thereof.

6. Metaphysics. This is the noblest of all sciences, that contemplates upon
the nature of God, his attributes and his works, and on those spiritual
substances the Angels. It tells us how the divine nature is united to the
humane in Christ, and how to confute the Papists in their vanity of
Transubstantiation, their Quantitas sine extensione, their Corpus sine loco,
their materia sine forma, their Accidents without a Subject. Lastly it helps
much for the explaining those great mysteries of predestination, regeneration.
and Justification by faith in Christ.

7. Mathematics, As there is both profit and delight in them, so they are
exceeding necessary to attain other Arts more clearly and demonstratively; but
especially tend to the study of divinity: For they are (as the Platonists style
them) Disciplinae Purgatoriae, whilst they take the mind off from grosser
material things, and many irrational desires, and so render it most fit for
the contemplation of things that are more divine. Of what use they are of for
the understanding and interpreting holy Scripture, St. Austin l. 2. c. 16. de
Doct. Chr. Iargly declares: Showing that through the ignorance of Music, many
things are not well understood, as being metaphorically and mystically put in
the Scriptures. He instances in many examples and reiterates this his opinion
very fully in the same book c. 37. So Jerome is of opinion, that the knowledge
of numbers is of great virtue for understanding the mysteries of the Scripture.
In which place also, where he speaks that, he asserts, that Geometry is of
great use to Divines. And again St. Austin in the place forementioned says
Music is very necessary for one that preaches Christ: adding withal, that
Divines should be very well instructed in Geography. Greg. Nazianzene knowing
that right well, does highly commend his Master, for his being so very well
skilled in Astronomy, Geometry, Arithmetic, and other Mathematical Sciednes.

How can a Divine without Geometry auswere an Atheistical Julian, or a
scoffing Lucian, that laugh at the arc for a Mosaicall figment, to be reported
to contain Noah with his whole family, and all sorts of living Creatures
besides? Yet Euteon, an excellent Mathematician has demonstrated to be there
not only space enough for them all, but also to contain a twelvemonths
victuals for them.

Again. How can a Divine without Astronomy tell the Eclyps, the Chronology of
the Scripture; and what it speaks concerning the constellations of heaven, the
Sunns degrees, the sun and moons course, of which speaks Job 9.9. and 5.38.
Amos chapter 5. v, 8. As also the Prophet Isaiah, St. Matthew, and others, It may
therefore shame a divine to be ignorant of Astronomy, that by its stars, leads
us (as it did of old the wise men) to Christ to worship him.

In short, all other subordinate Sciences are of very great use to ripen our
reasons, and heighten them to contemplate the wisdom of the Creator in his
beautiful creation of all things, And as a bladder if not blown is useless,
and if with wind is more ready for any use;:So the Arts and Sciences sharpen
our faculties, and proportion them for greater things.

3. History, and that for these four respects.

1. Because there are many allusions in the books of Ezra, Nehemiah, and
Esther to the Customs of the Persians: many passages in the Prophets
illustrable out of the historyes of the times and places to which they refer,
many expressions in the New Testament best explicable out of the Roman Laws and
Antiquities. Many passages exquisitely paralle'd in humane Authors, and
receiving much light from them as Mr. Gataker has observed. Furthermore, the
historyes of the Scripture, and them iracles of Moses, of Christ and his
Apostles, may even out of Heathen writters be confirmed (and a testimony from
Adversaries is of great validity) as has been largly proved by Mornay, and
Grotius de veritate Chr. Religionis. As the most learned Dr Reynolds hints in a
sermon of his.

2. Because, the Prophetical Scriptures of the four Empires, of the Turk and
Pope, and various state of the Church cannot be understood without history. As
also the knowledge of times by the Olympiads, the Fasti consulares, and other
standing ways of computation are exceeding necessary to the exact
distinguishing and digesting of sacred Chronology, and of the occurrences of
Scripture to their proper times, as Austin has noted l. 2. b. 28. de doct.
xtina.

3. Because History adds much to the understanding of ancient writers, and
without Ecclesiastical hi^^ory first read, the Fathers cannot be.

4. Lastly, Because the History of all times is a theater to behold the
singular providence of God, that continually watches over his Church, and takes
vengeance on the enemies thereof.

Now as to Classical Authors, we suppose them to be taught every Scholar in
his minority. The which, though a Preacher is not to mix with divinity, so as
to stuff up his Sermon with quotations and scraps of sentences out of them:
yet by his preaching it will appear whether he ever read them or no. Thus young
men are taught to dance, not so much for to tread such a measure of steps to
the tune played, as to carry their bodies well at all times and places; So that
you may easily see whether any one has been t^uht that Art, (though he makes
not Coupes before you) by the neat and graceful depo^tment of his body. Now
how far Classical Authors may advantage a divine for promoting Christianity in
preaching, we may fairly guess from Julian the Apostate: who in his Epistle to
Iamblichus tacitly hints that he should forbid the Christians to interpret
publicly the ancient authors, as Homer, Hesiod, Demosthenes, Herodotus,
Thucydides, Isocrates, Lysias, and the like; least from thence they might
persuade the Gentiles to Christian holiness. That so being destitute of all
eloquence, they might be less able to win upon the minds of the Gentiles.

Lastly. As to the Civil Law, it refers especially to the Scripture, and
without it a divine cannot well and clearly explain adoption, justification, the
power of the keys, and very many heads in divinity; And how much it is
necessary, the Prudent, learned and pious Mr. Barlow, now Provost of Queens
Coll. in Oxford has judiciously pointed out in a Manuscript, that I have seen,
very frequent in the hands of others. I will not now speak of its praises, that
it whets, directs, cleares and confirms our reason; It is the Seminary of
wisdom, and the storehouse of all prudence, and of so near affinity to
divinity, that they who take degrees in it before they do in Theology have
(according to ancient custom) higher privileges then others. I am confident
Mr. Calvin had never arrived to that maturity without it.

In conclusion, I contend not for the knowledge of the whole Encyclopedy to be
in a minister, as though none were to enter into that office, but what run
through it all: But I say it prepares men for divinity, and is to be premised.
In a word, Every one should be initiated in secular learning: It is a stock to
graft divinity on, a better blue to the taking of the right black: And I wish
all first well studied Humanity, that so they may be the abler Doctors in
Divinity: whom their formalities may mind of what the dyers thereof do, who
first dye their cloth ith some inferior Color, that it may be a more perfect
Purple.

Now after all. If any ask me how far we should enter into the study of the
Tongues, Arts, Philosophy, History and the rest, before we take upon us the
function of the ministry, and with what conditions we should study them: it
would require a longer consideration, and is more then I can or dare take upon
me to prescribe: And we have in this nation most learned men that are able and
ready to advise and direct. Dr. Wilkins Ecclesiastes, and others.

But if it may be lawful for me to speak s^ne praejudicio alterius, aut paris,
aut melioris intelligentiae (as one speaks upon the same matter) you may be
pleased to call to mind that ancient distinction of knowledge in eminentem,
sufficintem, and mediocrem. Now for that knowledge, which they call eminentem,
It is more then is necessary for a minister. Then, That which they call
sufficient (however the word seem tolerable, yet as they understand it) is too
little. A mediocrity is the best: which may as well be required in a minister,
as Castalio in a Courtier, or Tully in an orator, or Vitruvins in a Architect.
Whom we expect not to be a most excellent Grammarian, as was Aristarchus, nor
yet (...): not an absolute Musician, as was Aristoxenus, neither yet (...): not
an excellent Painter as Apelles, neither yet imperitus (...): nor a Physician
as Hippocrates, nor yet (...); Thus in a minister is required not singular
excellency in the Sciences, but a convenient mediocrity. And in order to this,
it is lawful and necessary to study profane learning, with this condition
resectis unguibus and Capillis, setting aside all vanities and superfluities.
For that there is both good and bad in those writings, the most heathen Poet of
them all confesses, (who deserves especially to be castrated) Cum legis
Aedipodem, caligantemque Thyesten,
Colchidas and Scyllas, quid nisi monstra legis?
Quid te vana juvant miserae ludibria chartae?
Hoc lege quod possis dicere jure Tuum est.
Martial.

So that, as we read in Exodus c. 4. How Zepphora circumcised her children,
which the Angel else had slain, according to Gods command, and by that means
preserved them alive: So the Carnale praeputium (as I may say) of secular
learning being taken away, what remains may be Israeliticall. Thus you may
gather the roses only, whilst you let alone the briars and bushes: and imitate
the Be, that though she fall upon bitter as well as sweet tasted flowers, she
leaves what is unsavory behind, and sucks out nothing but the honey part.

4. By the Examples of, 1. Moses, Daniel, and Solomon in the old Testament.
Whether the Philosophers borrowed their Sciences from the Scripture, or that
they had them otherwise taught them by the Holy Ghost (whose gifts, and most
excellent gifts no doubt, they are) is not greatly material. But this we find
(which may serve for our instruction) that, Moses and Daniel were instructed in
them. Sure it is Moses had a most Noble Education in a Princes Court, and was
brought up in all kind of good literature: says one of him.

(...)
(...)
And in the Acts of the Apostles, c. 7. v. 22. it is said of him, Moses was
learned in all the learning of the Egyptians, and was mighty in word and deed.
Here we have first his intellectual perfections described, in that he was
learned in all the learning of the Egyptians: and secondly his Civil, moral,
and religious perfections, a mighty man for oratory, a mighty man for action.
His book of Genesis is full of natural philosophy: and that he as skild in
Astrology and Physics does often appear from his laws. And Josephus tells us
Moses had a special care of the education of Children in good literature, and
we find some evidence of it in Scripture, where he commands the people to
teach the words of the law diligently unto their Children, Deuteronomy. 6.7.

And as to Daniel, It Is mentioned to his honor and his three Companions, that
God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom: Dan. 1.17.
meaning, as appears v. 4. of the same chap. the Caldeans learning.

Shall I speak of Solomon, no doubt but David had a special care of his
education: And I think none ever arived to a higher pitch in learning. His
Proverbs witness his Ethics, Oeconomicks, and Politics: And in his
Ecclesiastes it is apparent he was a most excellent naturalist, as we read in
the book of Kings: And these are the copies that Preachers should transcribe,
that so they might bring great reputation to Religion.

2. Paul, Stephen, Apollos, Nathaniel and Nicodemus in the new Testament.

Paul he was brought up at the feet of a most learned Lawyer, instructed in
Philosophy and Poetry, as is manifest from his writings. And he quotes even
Heathen Poets sayings in the holy Scripture. As Act. 17.28. (...) out of
Aratus. And 1 Cor. 15.33. (...) out of Menander, and Titus 1.12. (...), etc.
out of Epimenides. Apollos is commended, in that he was (...). Stephen is said
to have been of so poverful a reason, that he stopped his Adversaries mouths, as
we may read it, Acts 6.9, 10. where it is said, There arose certain of the
Synagogue, which is called the Synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and
Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia, and of Asia, disputing with Stephen. And
they were not able to resist the wisdom and spirit by which he spoke.

Moreover we find it, Acts 19.9. That Paul, for two years together, did (...),
in the School of one Tyrannus a Philosopher: And (which is most remarkable) he
wrote almost the greatest part of the New Testament, and brought off more Souls
from Idolatry to serve Christ, then any else: I know not where I may not
rightly say, because he was the most learned of all our Saviors followers,
knowing best how friendly and prudently to suit himself to the manners of all
Nations. By the shield of Faith he routed the Minerva of the Graecians, and
opposed every Nation with their own Weapons, whilst he armed (as I may say)
the knowledge of those things they best knew against them. Hereupon he
confounded the Jews in their Genealogies, shamed the Epicureans, humbled the
proud and self-conceited Stoics, and brought the barbarous Heathens to a
Christian meekness. So great an affinity there is (we see) between the Gospel
and Learning, the Church and University, the Divine and the Peripatetick.

Now although Christ for the most part chose to himself Disciples that were
unlearned, lest the flesh might glory and be proud in Learning: Whereas God, by
the inspiration of his All-powerful Spirit, can make the mouths of Babe: and
Sucklings to be instrumental to his glory; yet the Apostles, and others, had
all kind of humane Learning, as well as the knowledge of Heavenly Mysteries;
not indeed acquired from Schools and Universities, but infused into them by the
Holy Ghost. But withal, he admitted those two learned persons, Nathanael and
Nicodemus, into the number of his Disciples, lest he might seem to impose upon
the simpler sort, as having to do with none, but whom their simplicity might
betray, and 'twere no difficult thing to deceive.

3. The Fathers. We read of Nazianzene, and Basil, to have been well instructed
in all the learning of the Gentiles, and that they were public Professors of
it in their Schools and Universities, and that they blessed themselves for having
studied humane Learning. Austin being eminent in all Studies, having told us,
That Eloquence was taken out of profane Writers, Well, says he, Aspicimus
quanto auro and argento and vest suffarcinatus exierit ex Aegypto Cyprianus,
Doctor Suavissimus and Martyr beatissimus; quanto Lactantius, quanto
Victorinus, Optatus, Hilarious, ut de vivis taceam, quanto innumerabiles Graeci?
He is withal noted by his Successors to have used all kind of Learning in his
Books de Civitate Dei, and other his Works. So Jerome also uses the Poets, as
well as Authorities out of Galen and Hippocrates. And what is there in the
Encyclopedy, that whole Circle of Arts, Grammar, I ogick, Rhetoric,
Philosophy, and Mathematics, which is not by name commended unto us by some of
the Fathers? And by the ancient Canons of the Church, (all which Bucer thought
necessary to be restored, and whose opinion, if we should take up, we might
defend well enough) the study of Physic, and of the Law, was thought
convenient for him that professed himself a Divine.

5. Because Learning in a Preacher is necessary in a politic sense: And to
contemn it, brings in dis-order both to Church and Commonwealth.
Julian the Apostate (who was not noted to be bloody (for a cruore abstinuit,
says the History) he sought not the lives of the Priests, but that which was
worse, the everlasting overthrow of the Priesthood, and so by consequence of
Christianity) used two ways to bring his purpose to pass; one by taking away
the maintenance of the Church, for which he had Scripture, beati pauperes;
another, by taking away Learning, for which he had Policy. For as Theodoret
notes, Eccl. Hist. l. 9. he used to say, propriis pennis configimur, ex nostris
enim libris Christiani armacapiunt, quibus in bello adversus nos utantur, and
therefore forbad them the reading of Philosophy, and profane Authors, (as
Ammianus Marcellinus notes, l. 22. and 25.) futurum sperans ut absque liberali
eruditione religionem tueri suam non possint. As indeed it is impossible, but
only by miracle, whereof we have had but one or two examples in the primitive
Church.

Now if we don't require Ministers to be learned, then any illiterate persons,
and all forts, (as now to our grief they do, and are too much countenanced)
promiscuously may take upon them the Office: And so there will be no security
against all the evil Doctrines that shall be broach't by a promiscuous,
unchosen company of Preachers. And hereby the door is opened to all such as
will pretend to extraordinary Light, and a private Spirit, who will belly the
holy Spirit to cozen us, as often as they have a mind to it: And such as these
directly overthrow all Order, Government, and a public Ministry. For where
these are, the Peace of a Nation or Kingdom, must be as mutable as their fancy;
and their Oracles, being (as they pretend) the Dictates of God always, will
bring in daily new Tables of Divine Commandments, which in all reason must
cancel the former, though never so firmly established.

Next I proceed to show how that the contempt of Humane Learning, under which
we reckon the reading of the Fathers, and ancient Commentaries, brings in a
further Ataxy.

Nestorius is noted to have fallen into his Haeresie of denying the Virgin Mary
to be Deipara, because having a natural Eloquence of his own, and so thinking
himself very Learned, scorned to read any Interpreters: For being puffed up
thereby (says the History) veteribus accurate non incumbebat, sed seipsum
potiorem omnibus judicabat. And when the Historiographer had showed wherein he
might have been instructed in that question by the Fathers, he concludes him
therefore ignorant, because he contemned the ancient. The Arrians were guilty
of the same pride, who would not suffer any of the ancient Fathers to be
compared with them; nor would they admit (...) in any that was not of their
party, boasting in the Invention of their own Opinions, and the revelation of
such things that never were heard nor thought of. This is that which brought in
that disorder spoken of by Isaiah, to wit, The children behave themselves
proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honorable, Isa. 3.5.

For when some by reason of a plausible Tongue, and a great memory by nature,
think themselves to have all the Learning in the World (as did Nestorius) and
thereupon despise the Commentaries of the Ancient; what marvail we, if new
Opinions arise, and strange Innovations, and Tumults, and Haeresies, and
Elasphemies, and Churches scorned, and Authority reviled, whilst they say there
is more Divinity in a Country man, then all the University; more of truth in
one Sectarist, then all the Councils? Thus learned Sophocles the Father is
reckoned a dotard by his young Son Sophon: But no wonder, again, Et sua riserunt
saecula Meoniden,
Homer was contemned whilst he lived.


But pray what is the ground of these men? Why? For fear if they did not cry
down parts in men of greater knowledge and merit, they should catch nothing;
and they have as great a mind to be in as high an esteem as the best, and
therefore in Policy they cry up nothing in a Minister but the Scripture, being
willing to persuade us to know no more then themselves do, and so, as 'twere,
to level Learning. Else let no man use Art, no man use Learning, no man use the
Authority and Judgment of the Fathers, and so every man abounding only in his
own sense, and his own fancy, all alike ignorant, we shall all be equally
regarded and preferred. And if there be any difference, then let him be most
honored, that can most boldly perfricare frontem, and absterso pudore linguas
volvere, I use Erasmus his words in this Argument, and not my own. And I pray
what is this, but to bring in disorder? which has not only brought our
degrees into contempt, but effected, that Sheep take upon them the office of
the Shepherds, Mechanics the Function of the Ministry, Children and Women the
practice of Preaching, when they hear Preaching and speaking is all one, and in
Sermons nothing else delivered but that which is obvious to every Tongue.

Indeed they that are learned and wise now adays, may complain with Seneca,
Nunquam potui populo placere; nam quae ego scio, non probat populus, quae
probat populus, ego nescio. And they that are unlearned, knowing the favor of
the People is acquired by ill means, frame themselves to their humors,
commending them only, as the true Successors of the ancient Apostles, who of
fishers, and unlearned crafts-men, became Teachers and Preachers to the whole
World. For facit hoc illos hyacinthos, ignorance begets such their esteem. And
some hereupon have said, That if you should enter into a town or city, and
would know who are learned or unlearned in the Ministry, you need no other
expe^iment, then that which Pliny the second taught Maximus, to discern the
unlearned Orators in Rome, that were in those days in highest repute. Si forte
(says he) transibis per basilicam, and scire voles quomodo quisque dicat,
nihil est quod tribunal ascendas, nihil est quod praebeas aurem: facilis
divinatio, Scito eum pessime dicere, qui laudatur maxim.

Nor would I be understood to have spoken any thing to disgrace the Fathers of
latter memory, whom we ought to reverence, and read also. For as God has not
given all his gifts to one man, so neither all his excellent men to one Age.
Nay we have great cause to thank him for those very many learned and godly
Preachers (as almost ever were) in this our age. But all my intent is, to show
the antiquity of receiving the Ancient, the reason of their being contemned,
and the inconveniences of Disorder, Heresy and Ignorance, that ensue thereon;
that so we may make the reading of them, and other humane Learning, subservient
to the study of the Scriptures, which is the end of all our Learning, whose
enemy is Disorder, Tumult, Faction, and Enthusiasme.

6. From the use and end of Learning.
As to the use and end of Learning, Isaiah, in the place first of all
mentioned, resolves all into this, To be able to minister a word in season to
him that is weary. Ignorance, and Error, and Sin, and Weakness, and
Imperfection, are burdens: And to ease them that are wearied under these
burdens, is the end the Prophet prescribes learning. For curiosity,
vainglory, desire of fame, desire of honor and riches, are the abuses thereof.
And in relation to this end, I might show for a sample what use may be made
thereof, and what arguments may be drawn to this purpose out of Philosophy, and
profane Authors: As from, 1. The necessity of Misery and Affliction. 2. The
commendation of patience in bearing it. 3. The Testimony of a good Conscience.
4. The Example of others. 5. The hope of deliverance. 6. The final cause or end
why they suffer them. 7. Lastly, That which they call Collatio eventuum.


Of all these the Philosophers have spoken, and used them as comforts to those
that were afflicted; and they that are unacquainted with them, will never be
able to enlarge, and pathetically set home those other that may be drawn out of
the Gospel.

To proceed: Ministers are Pastors, and so their duty is to preserve their
Sheep from the Wolves abroad, for which purpose they must be able, respondere
de jure, to give account of their faith, in defiance of the numerous Armies of
Heretics. They are to watch for their flock, and so must know all excellent
arts and ways to arm them against all their weaknesses within, and their
enemies without: And Learning highly conduces unto this; as also to make them
the abler to strengthen the weak, confirm the strong, compose the scrupulous,
satisfy the doubtful, and readily to answer all cases of Conscience. None but
a learned man can resolve Kings and States their grand Questions, whether their
Designs are agreeable to Gods holy rule, or no, and to consult with such, has
been the practice of the Princes of this Nation.

But this sixth Argument falls in with the third: I say no more therefore, but
only propose one that used his Learning to a right end, seasonably and
successfully. Look we upon St. Paul, that became all things to all men, that he
might win them to Christ. How sometimes he makes himself an Abject, sometimes
raises himself even Lordly (as I may say) in Christ Jesus: Sometimes he uses
the authority of his Apostleship, threatening the rod of severity: Sometimes
speaks fair, playing rather a Nurse, or a Mother, then an Apo^^le: Sometimes
rebukes sharply, sometimes mitigateth that which is hardly spoken: Sometimes
speaks in part, referring the rest to a fitter place. Consider how
circumspectly he invites us to those things that are Consilii and perfectionis
(as they term them) being very wary not to entrap or ensnare any one: How
sometimes he brings not the Lords Commandment, but gives a profitable
counsel, as a faithful dispenser: How fitly he applies the testimonies of the
Scripture to the present cause: How wisely he opens the cloud of an Allegory,
when the letter is of little force unto godliness. How unto the perfect he
speaks the Wisdom of God in a Mystery: Among the weak he knows nothing, but
Christ Jesus and him Crucified: How he has Milk for them that are Infants, and
more substantial meat for them that are elder: How he resists Peter the Apostle
to his face, and is suppliant to Philemon, and becomes as it were a surety for
Onesymus his servant: How dealing with them that ascribed too much to the
Ceremonies of Moses; he so extolleth Faith in Christ Jesus, and the grace of
the Gospel, that he seems to neglect the works of Charity. Again, disputing
with them that thought it enough to be Baptized, and profess the Name of
Christianity, without repentance and newness of life: How he exhorts to good
works, preferring Charity before all other gifts, even before Faith, which he
so notably Preached: How disputing at Athens, in the Street of Mars, he takes
his Exordium from the Inscription of the Altar, and cites the Authority of
Aratus, a Learned, but a Heathen Poet; So Preaching Christ, that he termed him
a man only: But when he writes to them which had accepted of the Gospel, how
full of Honor and Divine Majesty are all those words which he delivered of
Christ? Finally, whilst he fitteth himself to the circumstance of time, place
and persons, he is so diverse, that he seems to speak contrarieties, and to
vary from himself, when indeed he is most constant and like himself.

7. Lastly, By answering all Objections.
Ah, but. Ad quid temporis perditio haec? Why do we loose so much time in the
Arts, in Philosophy, in humane studies, in Fathers, in Councils? Were it not
better, that time were spent in reading the scriptures, which is but a small
volume, sooner learned and read over then Aristotle, Livie, and Austin, and
easy enough to my capacity: containing indeed all divinity, and sufficiently
furnishing us with knowledge for the instruction of the people? Does not even
Origin, one of the Fathers, well studied in Philosophy, writing upon Exodus
confess, that that plague of Lice and Flies, which so stinged the Egyptians,
resembles Logic, quae acutis and subtilibus verborum stimulis animum
circumvenit, ut deceptus nec videat, nec intelligat? Does not Bernard say, that
the mountain upon which Lucifer set his seat, was the Hill of knowledge? Does
not Asclepiadorus paint well without colors, only with Cole and Chalk? And
do not many with their curious Rhetoric bring to pass, dum diserte
loquuntur, ut ne a disertissimis intelligantur? Did not little David, with the
staff of the word of God, overthrow great Goliath with his Sword and Target,
and his complete armor of profane knowledge and Philosophy? Does not Picus
Mirandula write of two hundred haeresies, and show out of what parts of
Philosophy they had their beginning?

Does not St. Paul say 1 Cor. 2.4. That his speech and his preaching was not
with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and of
power. Knowledge puffs up. c. 8. v. 1. Let no man deceive you through vain
words. Ephesians. 5.6. Also beware no man spoil you through Philsophy, and vain
deceit etc. Col. 2.8. To say no more, what says Solomon in his Ecclesiastes,
He that increases knowledge, increases sorrow. c. 1.18.

These, and many the like (which for brevity sake I omit,) are daily urged
against learned Ministers, to bring them and their degrees into contempt among
the people. All which may be answered in one word, they argue from the abuse of
those studies, not from the use of them. And we may say of those studies, as
Bernard speaks of certain actions, Quas non natura, sed usus virtutes facit,
nam ex se indifferentes esse noscuntur: Tuum autem est, aut abutendo,
autconfundendo facere vitia, aut been ordinateque utendo, virtutes. It lies in
us either by well using or abusing them, to make them, either noisome or
profitable to divinity. And therefore as many things as are written and spoken
against the abuse of them, so many things are urged even by the same fathers
for the good use and study of them. And the same Argument may be used against
every Art and profession, which be it never so good, there are they that will
apply it to a false end.

Now for what St. Paul speaks against Philosophy, it is not to be understood
simply and absolutely, but with a restriction to that vain deceit through
philosophy, which (as the text speaks) is after the rudiments of the world,
and not after Christ: when as men ascribe to humane reason a supremacy over
things supernatural to examine the truth of them, and will so misapply their
philosophy, as to believe noe Conclusions in divinity, but what can be
demonstrated thence.

Nor does Solomon reject knowledge, but comparatively, in respect of heavenly
wisdom when the former is not made subservient to the latter.

Now as to the objection against Rhetoric, those that use it affectedly and
unseasonably I cannot defend; but those that employ it to inform the
understanding, or to work on the affections, or to quicken the attention, or
to help the memory, or some other way to please the Auditory for their good
unto edification; who can disapprove of? A sermon before a learned auditory
ought to be in a more accurate and elaborate dress, and secundum artem (as
they say). I confess Divinity is so grave a subject that it cannot admit of
querpes, and jests, and punns (as they call them) they are abominable in a
sermon; for it must not like a young she gallant be light and garish in her
dress, yet as a grave matron always decent in her attire, upon a fit occasion
may wear jewels, and be adorned with more costly ornaments.

Furthermore, as to another objection, viz, That reason should be subjected to
faith, and not the Holy Ghost be limited by Philosophical bounds: Who questions
it? For we place not Philosophy in opposition to divinity, but make it
subordinate. We intend only, it should make way for divinity and other
professions, not impose upon us any thing in the study of them. Or else, let it
instruct us how to treat of things, but not meddle with the things to be
treated of. But say some again: Divine mysteries suit not with the rules of
Logic: and there are many things, especially in Peripateticall philosophy that
are contradictory to Divinity. I answer. Things above reason don't take away
reason, but rather perfect it, and raise it to higher matters by faith. Now if
we meet with any thing in philosophy, that yields not to the certainty of
faith, we must impute it artificibus, non arti: which Art is to be formed to
his rule that is the rise of all good. In short, the mistakes and errors of
Philosophers are not precepts or rules in Philosophy. And Philosophy neither
denies nor opposes those matters of which it treats not, but grants them to be
of a higher speculation. I hope no body lays Tertullians or Cyprians errors on
divinity; nor Galens or Paracelsus's on Physic. And so, such idle objectors
cannot find in this any praetext for their idleness, who being not able to
arrive to knowledge, are resolved to carpe at, and declame against it.

Now to proceed. As the Plough-share only turns up the ground, but the other
parts of the Plough are necessary, and cause it to be done with greater
facility; So I confess, it is the holy scripture only, that turns up the
fallow ground of our hearts, but the Arts and Philosophy help much to apply it
more readily. And howsoever a wooden key may serve to open a door once or
twice, as well as a key of gold ('it is a Fathers similitude) yet there is not
only more beauty, but more profit also, and longer continuance in the golden
key. And he is rich enough that has wedges of Sylver and Gold; but he has more
use of his money who has it ready coined. For in gold, and in Divinity not only
good matter, but good form is also required to make it go current. We cannot
say of the Scripture, Ornari res ipsa nequit contenta doceri. For the very
Treasures of Egypt were turned to adorn the temple of the Lord. And so not only
rules of Rhetoric and Logic, (but as Austin says) Si quid Philosophi been
senserunt, ab iis tanquam in^ustis possessoribus, in usum nostrum est vind
candum. Hereupon the ancient fathers, to add more credit to these arts, said
the Philosophers were not the true owners of them, but usurpt the possession of
them, having taken them out of the Scripture. For Austin, Tertullian, Euscbius,
and Cassiodore do affirm, that all Rhetoricians, Logicians, and Philosophers
have taken all their knowledge and faculties out of the holy book. Hereupon
Crinitus says, (...), what else is Plato but Moses speaking in the Grecian
language? And Hermippus says, Pythagoram multa e Mose hausisse: and Orige^,
how that in Paul's writings there are (...), and Hiatus etc. And I take it for a
Paradox, but it is common in the mouth of every Jew, Omnium artium, omnis
scientiae, divinae and humans, integram cognitionem in quinque libris Mosaicae
legis contineri, dissimulatam autem and occultam literis.

And so I hope by this time, I have evinc't the truth of the affertion, to all
that are reasonable viz. That it is necessary a minister or Preacher should be
skilled in Humane Learning.

Now from what has been proved, may be deduced these Confectaries:

1. That Universities and Schools of learning are lawfully instituted, being
instrumental for breeding up of wise, learned, and Godly Ministers.

2. That the taking of degrees in the Arts, and Sciences (as evidencies of our
knowledge) is necessary before we be admitted to preach.

3. That no illiterate, ignorant person, should take upon him the office of a
Minister.

4. That our University statutes aiming only at this, to enforce the study of
humane learning, in subordination to divinity are grounded upon a right
bottom, to wit, Scripture precept, and therefore to swear the observancy of
them, is lawful.

5. That since Formalities are but for distinction sake of degrees in learning,
and this tends to a further service of God in the Church, we may conclude they
are innocent circumstances, and not to be utterly rejected.

6. Lastly. To put down Universities, or Nurseries of learning, is contrary to
Gods holy will, for whose service they were erected, and so ought to be
continued.

Having now ended the Position, as to the argumentative part, I shall take upon
me from hence to admonish two sorts of Persons:

1. All such as are ripe in learning, and fit to be employed as workmen for the
harvest of souls: That they do not retain and hold back to themselves, that
which they have received to bestow, and pour out upon others. He that is
inwardy full of virtue, and adorned with the gifts of knowledge and utterance
holds back, and retains from his neighbor his right, if either through fear,
or slothfullness, or indiscreet base conceit of his gifts, he tie up in
unprofitable silence, that good word, which might profit many to the salvation
of their souls. Whereby he not only refuses to submit himself to that charge
of St. Paul, who adjured Timothy and in him all ministers, before God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge both the quick and the dead at his
appearing, and in his kingdom, to preach the word, to be instant in season and
out of season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine;
2 Timothy 4. but voluntarily they do incur the curse which is spoken of in the
Proverbs: He that withholdeth Corn the people shall curse him. 11.26. Upon
which words one says that to withhold Corn, is Praedicationis verba apud se
retinere; In populis talis maledicetur, quia in solius culpa silentii, pro
multis quae corrigere potuit, damnatur. And St. Paul speaks in plain terms
without any Allegory, Vae mihi si non Evangelizavero.

But notwithstanding this adjuration, notwithstanding this danger how many are
there, that bury their Gifts and Talents, which were given them to the use and
profit of others? How many clouds are there sufficiently full of waters to
moysten our dry and stony earth, which will hardly part with a morning and
evening dew, with a drop or two of moisture to comfort dry Souls, or soften
Stony hearts.

It Is to little use, to have learning, and not to use it: recondita doctrina,
ut in vagina gladius, nisi educatur, nihil prodest. It Is said in Isaiah: How
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good tidings,
that publishes peace, that brings good tidings, of good, that publishes
salvation, that says unto Lion, Thy Lord reigns? Beautiful upon the
mountatres are the feet of the minister. But of what Minister I pray? Of him
that brings good tidings, that publishes peace etc.

And what means the Prophet hereby? but that there should be an instancy, an
assiduity in the work of the Gospel, the use and exercise of that learned
tongue, which the Holy Chost has given unto the ministers to the benefit and
salvation of others.

2. All such as are not yet arrived to the perfection of knowledge required in
a minister That they would not be too hasty to pour out to others, before they
have sufficiently and abundantly received in for themselves. For this is to go
to Plow with the first born Bullock, and to shear the first born sheep, which
is contrary to the Law of God Deuteronomy. 15. This is a fault greatly to be
complained of, and here greatly, and especially to be prevented by good counsel.

I write not this, as though any age were too forward or immature for the grace
of God. For we know in this University (with thanks to God, be it confessed to
the honor of this place) there are a great number of young men, that do supra
senes intelligere, moribus antiquare dies, provenire tempora meritis, and quod
aetatis deest compensare virtutibus: whose youth (as St. Paul speaks of
Timothy) let no man despise, for better are young men of good towardness, then
they that are old, ignorant, and foolish.

We know Samuel was an excellent young man, who as soon as ever he heard the Lord
call, answered. Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears: And Jeremiah was
sanctified before he was born, and when he would have excused himself by his
youth and ignorance, the Lord placed him over Kingdoms, and over Nations: And
the Lord stirred up the spirit of young Daniel, to convince the wicked Judges,
and to deliver the innocent: And it is said in the Book of Wisdom, Wisdom is
the gray hair, and an undefiled life the old age.

Now notwithstanding these particular Examples, it is not amiss still to urge
this general rule, That we should not be too hasty to enter upon the Ministry.
For where there is a very young man, for searning and discretion an old man, it
is the singular work of God, which others should rather admire, then think to
imitate. Much is required in a Minister, and having but little learning with
themselves, how can such offer to teach other: (...), It is an easy and a
decent thing for him that has learned, to teach others, but a most foolish
thing to teach, before thou have learned sufficiently thy self. Let not such
then that are not arrived to a competency of knowledge, be too forward in this
Exercise: There is (says Solomon) a time to be silent, and a time to speak;
first with silence to learn, afterward to speak with knowledge.

That was excellent counsel Bernard gave to a young man of his time, Si sapis
(says he) Concham te exhibebis, non Canalem: If thou be wise, choose rather
to be a Cistern, then a Channel or a Pipe: The Pipe or Channel no sooner
receives is water, but pours it our again; but a Cistern parts with nothing,
till it be full, and then, if any thing do superabound, communicates it to
others, without any loss to its own self: He is a fool, (says Solomon) that
pours out his Spirits, all his Learning and knowledge at once. Truly, it were
to be wished, that there were more of these Cisterns, and fewer of the Pipes in
o^r Churches, whilst they now venture to make Sermons, before they have
Learned to declame in the Schools, making that their beginning that should be
their end; like those forward Youngsters, of whom Pliny the second complains in
his times, that they came into the Courts, and would begin to plead at first
dash, In causis Centumviralibus: When as beforetimes, ne nobilissimis quidem
adolescentibus locus erat, nisi aliquo Consulare producente, for, Summa
veneratione pulcherrimum opus celebratur. Hereupon it was, that the Emperor
Justinian, and the ancient Fathers of the Church of Rome, were forced to ordain
leges annals for the Ministry, and not to admit any one, ad ordinationem, or
ad beneficium, before he came to the age of 35 years. I will add only that
(somewhat like what Sereca writes of some attaining unto Wisdom) That many
would prove excellent Divines, if they were not persuaded they were so already.

This by way of Admonition: A word or two more by way of Direction, How
Ministers should use their Learning: And that,

1. Seasonably and discreetly: Either when the matter they treat of, or the
Auditory to whom they Preach to, do rationally call for it. As to the former,
men are blameable, that stuff up a Sermon continually with distinctions out of
Philosophy, and Quotations out of several Authors, to tell the World they are
men well read. As to the latter, they are not without fault, that without
respect Preach alike to all Congregations; whereas Milk is for Babes, Meat for
strong Men. Preach so in the Country, as to win the will. Preach so in the
University, as to convince the understanding; there Doctrine that is practical,
here speculative is more proper.

2. To a right end: And that,

1. Without a fruitless ostentation of parts, to gain glory and applause; for
this is a base and an unworthy end.

2. Not to poison the Judgments, or pervert the Consciences of men, for this
is a cursed and pernicious end. Preachers must have a care, that is, Scholars,
those that are learned Divines, must have a care they make not their depraved
Reason a Canvaster of the Creed, or place Learning on the ^ench, to examine and
judge of the mysterious Truths of Religion. They must not let the Handmaid be
Mistress, Leah must not be in Rachels place, nor the Peripaton above the
S^nctuary. The Arts and Sciences are as ground-colours, upon which the Gold of
Divinity is to be laid. And learning to a holy man is as a golden Ring unto the
Gem, as the most learned Dr. Reynolds makes the similitude.

And thus much concerning this subject, for my own satisfaction, the times
wherein welive, putting me upon it. I hope no man of Learning will be offended
with me for it; and for others, I matter not. It was wont, at the least, to be
tolerable, to praise Arts and Arts-men at Athens. If in this our University it
be otherwise, for my part, I say, with Picus Mirandula, Si turpe est bonas
literas colere, malle^ hanc culpa^ agnoscere, quam deprecari: If it be a fault
to study Hum^nity. I wish I could acknowledge it: I profess I will never repent
of it. If any If any man there be in Oxford of another Opinion, I judge him
not; and yet it were not amiss to tell him, what has been the judgment of
other men heretofore, apply it as he sees cause. When Honorius the third,
Bishop of Rome, did forbid Priests and Clergymen, the study and knowledge of
the Civil and Canon Law; they that lived in that time, said, he dealt like the
Fox, who endeavoring in vain to reach Grapes from a high Vine, at last
dispraised them, and despised them, affirming them to be but sharp and harsh
meat: The Moral I meddle not with. And an ancient Father speaking in
commendation of liberal Sciences, which some dispraised, drawing their Argument
from the abuse of them, says of them, No Learning is to be despised, for as
much as all Science is de genere bonorum. But we should rather account those
that contemn it, to be rustic and barbarous persons, that would willingly have
all aslike ignorant as themselves: So that their ignorance lying hid in the
multitude, may not easily be found out and censured by others.

I hope these sayings cannot be applied to any in an University: For it were
pity, that Learning should find any such discouragement there, being already
out of heart, though the base entertainment it finds abroad. For these studies
are delicati flosculi, which favor, like a kind and gentle air, makes flourish
and grow; but reviling and undervaluing, like some Enchantment, makes them
presently draw in their head and wither.

To conclude all by way of parenesis: In regard of this, as well as the glory
of God: let every one that intends the ministry, first seek the knowledge of
God, and to know Jesus Christ and him crucified. And as in order to this only
great end, encourage one another to the study of learning, and whatsoever may
serve for the building and edification of Gods Church. That they that have
little and few Gifts and talents may not envy those that have many and great:
nor they that have many despise those that have few. But let all with one
consent seek to attain to this Gift, this excellent gift of a learned tongue,
to that end and purpose, as we read in Isaiah, even to Minister a word in
season to those that are weary.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books printed for, and to besold by Richard Davis at his shop
near Oriell College in Oxford.
A Paraphrase, and Annotations upon the whole Book of Psalms, by Hen. Hammond.
D.D. in folio.

-- A Paraphrase, and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Test. in folio:
the second Ed.

-- The Practical Catechism, with all other his English Treatises, in two
volumes in 4o

-- Dissertationes quatuor, quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and
Primaeva Antiquitate adstruntur, contra sententiam Blondelli and aliorum, 4o.

-- A review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on the New Testament, 8o.

-- Some prositable directions both for Priest and People, in two Sermons, 8o.

-- A Collection of several Replies and vindications. Published of late most
of them in defense of the Church of Engl. in 4. volumes, 4o.

-- The Dispatcher dispach't, in Answer to a Roman Catholick's book,
entitulated, Schism dispatched 4o new.

-- A Letter of Resolution to six Queries, 12o.

-- Of Schism. A defense of the Church of England against the exceptions to
the Romanists. 12o.

-- Of Fundamentals in a Nation referring to Practice. 12o.

-- Paraenesis, or a seasonable exhortation to all true sons of the Church of
England, 12o.

A view of the Threats and Punishments recorded in Scripture, Alphabetically
composed, with some brief Observations upon several Texts, by Zach. Bogan of
C.C.C. in Oxon. 8o.

-- The Mirth of a Christian Life, and the sorrows of a wicked Life, 8o

Fides Apostolic^, or, A discourse asserting the received Authors and
Authority of the Apostles Creed: together with the Grounds and Ends of the
Composing thereof by the Apostles, the sufficiency thereof for the Rule of
Faith etc. With a double Appendix, 1. Touching the Athanasian. 2. The Nicene
Creed: by George Ashwell, B. D. 8o.

Ailmeri M^sae Sacrae, seu Jonas, Jeremiae Threni, and Daniel Graece redditi
carmine, 8o

Ad Grammaticen ordinariam supplementa quaedam. Editio 2. multis auctior. 8o.

A Guide to the Holy City, or Directions and Helps to an Holy life, by John
Reading B.D. 4o Theses quadragesimales Philosophiae Novae, in Scholis ^xoni^
Publicis, a Carolo Potter. 12o.

Contemplationes Metaphysicae, Authore Georgio Rits^heli Bohemo, 8o

Aditus ad^ og^cam, Authore Samuele Smith, 8o

I lementa Log. Arthore Edw. B^erewood, 12o.

^ohan. Buridani Quaestiones in octo Libros Politico^um Aristorelis, 4o.

Robert. Baronii Philosophia Theologiae Ancillans, Edit. nova. 12o.

Rob. Baronii Metaphysica. ^dit. nova, 12o.

The hurt of sedition, by S. John Cheek, 4o.

The Christian Race, a Sermon on Heb. 12.1. by Tho. Barton, 4o.

A Sermon on 2d of Tim. c. 3. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. by Will. Chillingworth, 4o.

A funeral Ser^on Phil. 1.23. by Joh. Millet, 4o.

A funeral Sermon on 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. by Tho. Hauskins 8o.

A Nomenclator of such Tracts and Sermons as have been printed or translated
into English upon any place or book of the Scripture, now to be had in the
Public Libr. in Oxf. by Jo. Vernevill. 12o

The Vaulting-Master, or the Art of Vaulting illustrated with 16 brass sigures,
by Will. Sto^ks 4o.

Ramus Olivae, Concio habita ad Clerum in Templo Pe^tae Mariae Oxon, 8o. Junii
pro-incho^ndo Te^mino. A Joh. Wall, T.D. and Col. Aedis Christi Praebendario. 8o

A brief Treatise touching the preservation of the Eyesight, by Walter ^aley,
sometimes Fellow of N. ^oll. Regius Professor in Physic, and Physitianto Queen
^lizabeth. 8o.

Essaies and Observations, wherein many of the humors and diseases of the Age
are discovered and characterized, by a student in Theology 8o.

Port a Mosis, ^ive Dissertationes aliquot a R. Mose Maimonide. Nunc primum
Arabice prout ab ipso Authore conscriptae sunt, and Latin editae. Una cum
Appendice Notarum Miscellanea, opera and studio Edvardi Pocockii, Linguae Hebr:
and Arab: in Acad Oxon. Professoris 4o.

Idea Trigonometriae Demonstratae. Item Praelectio de Cometis. Er Inquisitio in
Bullialdi Astronomiae Philolaicae Fundamenta, Authore Setho Wardo, in Acad.
Oxon. Astronomiae Professore Saviliano. 4o.

-- In Thomae Hobbii Philosophiam exercitatio Epistolica, 8o.

Delphi Phaenicizantes, etc. Authore ^dm. Dickinsono, Med. Doc. and Mertonen^s
Coll. Socio, in 8o.

Logicae Artis Compendium, Authore Rob. Sanderson, Coll. Lincoln. in alma
Oxoniensi quondam Socio, and in Eadem Academia Sac^ae Theol. poste^ Professore
Regio. Edit. 5a. 12o.

A Paraph. on Habakkuk, by Dr. Stoaks. 4o.

A Christian Legacy, viz. 1. A preparation for Death, etc. 2. A Consolation
against Death, etc.
by Edward Hyde, D. D. 12o.

Christ and his Church: or Christianity explained, under 7. Evangelical and
Ecclesiastical Heads: With a Justification of the Church of Engl. according to
the true principles of Christian Religion, and Christian Communion. 4o. 1658.

-- A Christian Vindication of Truth against Error, concerning 7 Controversies;
most between the Church of England, and the Romanists, in 12o new.

Ric. Gardener Herefordensis, Specimen Oratorium. 12o.

The City Match. 4o. both long since. The Amarous War. 4o. both long since.
written by J.M. St. of Chapter Chapter Oxon.

Ovid's Invective against Ibis, translated into Erglish Verse, and the
Histories therein briefly explained, with Natural, Moral, Poetical, Political,
Mathematical, and Theological Applications: by Jo: Jones, Teacher of a private
School in Hereford. 8o.

Two Assize Sermons, Preached at Reading and Abingdon in Berks: with two others
preached at St. Mary's in Oxford, by Jo: Hinckley, Minister of the Gospel at
Colsehill in Berks. 12o

The Devil of Mascon, or a true Relation of what an Unclean Spirit did and said
at Mascon in Burgundy, attested by several persons of Eminency, both for
Learning and Piety, the third Edition. 8o.

Burgersdicii Metaphysica. 12o.

Directions for a godly life: especially for communicating at the Lords Table,
by H. Tozer (...) the sixth Edition. 12o.

Hen: Savilii Oration coram Regina Elizabetha Oxoniae habita, etc. 4o.

Juelli Apologia Eccleliae Anglican: Graecolat: 8o.

Enchiridion Botanicum: Or a complete Herbal, containing the sum of what has
been hitherto published, either by ancient or modern Authors, both Galenical
and Chemical, touching Trees, Shrubs, Plants, Fruits, Flowers, etc. in an
Alphabetical order, in which are distinguished all that are in the Physic
Garden in Oxford, showing their Place, Time, Names, Kinds, Temperature,
Virtues, Use, Dose, Danger, and Antidotes, etc. by To: Lovell, St: of Ch: Ch:
Oxon. in 12o.

The Circles of Proportion, and the Horizontal Instrument, etc. both invented,
and the uses of both written in Latin, by W. ^ughtred, Aetonensis. Translated
into Erglish, and set forth for the public benefit, by W.F. And now by the
Authors consent revised, corrected, and freed from all mistakes in the former
Edition: And also much amplified and explained, by ^. H. Gent. with brass
Figures. 8o. New.

The Natural Man's inability to attain a sufficient knowledge of In-dwelling
Sin, in three Sermons. Preached at St. Mary's in Oxon, by Henry Hurst M. A. and
Fellow of Merton College. 8o.

Exercitationes duae. Prima de Hysterica Passione: secunda de affectione
Hypochondriaca. Authore Nathaniele Highmoro, Artium and Medicinae Doctore 8o.

FINIS.

