THE ENCOURAGEMENT AND REWARD OF CHRISTIAN CHARITY Set forth in a SERMON
Preached in the Chapel at the ROLLS: October 9th. 1659.

By RAPHAEL THROCKMORTON, Late Archdeacon of Lincoln.

Custos es tuarum, non Dominus, facultatum.

S. Ambros. cap. 14. lib. de Naboth. LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait, and are
to be sold near the Little North-Door of S. Paul's Church. 1659.

The 16th. Chapter according to the Evangelist S. Luke, the 9th. verse. Make to
your selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they
may receive you into everlasting Habitation.


UNder each one of those three similitudes of the lost Sheep, the lost Groate,
and the Prodigal child, concentred all together in the former Chapter, is a
tacit Implication of Gods mercy toward man; and here in this Parable of the
Unjust Steward, especially in the epilogue, is a downright Explication of what
shall be, in fine, the blessed effect of Man's Charity toward God, in his
distressed members.

But not to beguile time, and your attention with quaintness either of
Preamble, or Division, this Text is, as 'twere, a Bill of Exchange, sent from
one Country to another, the return whereof is Treasure for Trash, Celestial
Manna for the Meat that perishes, for temporal Riches, Eternal Friends; One
only whereof will be better to you, at a dead lift, than all your Pelf, and
Mammon of unrighteousness.

That then this Paraenesis of the Master to his Disciples may prove
prophylacticall unto you, even a Sovereign Receipt, of wholesome remedy for the
saving of your souls, I say unto you therefore, Make to your selves friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, They may receive you into
everlasting habitations.

In which words, without violence, I may observe, three general parts. A
Prescription of the matter, (...); What: Make to your selves friends. A
Description of the manner, (...), How? Of the Mammon of unrighteousness. A
Conscription of the end, (...); why? That when ye fail, they may receive you
into everlasting habitations.


Which reward, if you mark it, is notably advanced by three remarkable
Circumstances.

The first whereof is taken from the Tempestivitie, or seasonableness of the
time of its collating, and that is when Ye shall fail.

The second from the Dignity of the persons thus requiting, They, to wit, the
Angels of God, by his appointment, nay, upon your Beadsmens prayers, even God
himself shall receive you.

The third from the excellency of the places of your reception, which are also
set forth in a sequel of three.

By their Property, Habitations. Plurality, not one, but many. Perpetuity,
Everlasting.


This is the Order by which I shall proceed, and these be the parts, through
all which I shall now pass, and that with as much shortness, and plainness, as
the weight, and number of them shall admit: Only the same hand vouchsafe the
success, which does the opportunity.

And that I may punctually go on, I will touch first, where. I first should,
with the prescription of the Matter, (...)

1 Gener.
Make to your selves friends.

Make to your selves friends; And that is good Policy, for we have many
enemies, but especially three, which are ever in combination either to infest,
or undermine our National, Personal, and eternal Peace.

The World Flesh Devil
with Infection Defection Interfection
Tria Cerberus extulit ora. Maro


Those accursed Camelions turn themselves into all shapes, that they may
insinuate under some; and as the Polypus, to compass his prey, carries a
resemblance of that rock, near which he lies, so that triple-headed- Cerberus,
those old malignant enemies of mankind prepare, and apply there melled baits to
all your humors, tempers, inclinations.

Look about Ye then, and make you friends; A point verily of so great
importance, as that our Savior here presses it in the word (...) the first
Aorist among the Greeks, a Tense which signifies the Time perfectly past, to
show it is high time we had begun, and already set our selves about the
performance of this Duty, to make our selves friends.

There is, indeed says that Divine Heathen, Seneca.
ad amicitiam ferens quaedam naturalis irritatio, a certain kind of natural
proclivitie in every individual man, and woman to make themselves friends; but
irresistible is the Suadae of sound experience, whilst we may communicate our
joys without envy, our secrets without discovery, into the bosom of our
friend; and there also disburthen our complaints, in these sad and heavy
times, not without some helpful, and compassionate sympathy. And so ye may
read, Act. 12.20. that, for the nourishment of their Country the Tyrians, and
Sidonians had a care, the Court being then in fashion, to make Blastus, King
Herod's Chamberlain, there friend.

But friends, now adays, are like hot water, which when cold-weather comes
does soonest freeze.

Terence.
Like Cuckoes all summer, they may sing a scurvey note, pulchre, been, recte,
but gone they are, sure enough, before Autumn, or the Fall.

Ovid.
Accipiet nullas sordida turris aves.

Nay, as Vermin do an house on fire, so will some friends leave thee in thy
greatest need, though rank't among even thy chiefest, and choicest companions;
inter primas, vel secundas admissiones, as the Philosopher phraseth it.

But against such familiars, and trencher-friends, King David passionately, and
pathetically complains, saying, It was not an open enemy, that dishonored
me, and reproached me, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14.
and magnified himself against me, but it was thou, who did eat of my
bread, thou my guide, thou my companion, (...) and even thou mine own familiar
friend.

Caesar to Brutus.
Make ye therefore such friends, as the Lord Jesus here insinuates, who will
never be wanting to you in their presence, nor scanting in their consolations.

And least ye should mistake in the manner thereof, my next Generality
describes how,

2 Gener.
Of the Mammon of unrighteousness.

The word Mammon properly is a Syrian word, and good Syriack for the God of
Riches; and Christ first of all brought it in among the Greeks, and passes it
here in the Dorick Idiome, (...), for what wealth, or goods soever we possess.

Luc. 16.11.
As concerning the Adjunct of unrighteousness, in that there is a most ordinary
Hebraisme; for otherwise, it were much more congruous to say the unrighteous
Mammon, than the Mammon of unrighteousness.

But to take the words together, as they ly before us, the Mammon of
unrighteousness in plain English sounds no more, then the vain inconstant,
transitory, false and deceitful riches, which we here enjoy.

And yet, for all those epithites of derogation, Riches, doubtless in
themselves are not evil, but the blessing of God, as Solomon affirms, Pro.
10.22.

Ne quidem putentur summa bona, dantur and malis, Aug. 70. Epist. ad
bonifacium. Luc. 16.19.
sed ne putentur omnino mala, dantur and bonis.

Riches indeed that they may not be misinterpreted to be the chief good, are
given to the bad, as to the purpled Epicure; but least they should be taken
absolutely for bad, they are given to the good, as to faithful Abraham, Genesis
13.2.
who was very rich in cattle, and in silver, and in gold; and to holy Job, who
for his many Camells, and oxen, Job. 1.3.
and sheep, was the only substantial Grandee of the East.

Bona est pecunia in crumena, si non sit peccatum in conscientia; and we should
no more find fault with Riches (...) simply, and abstractively considered, than
we do with pure, and insophisticated wine, before it be put into a fusty
vessel; but yet, to keep close to the words of my Text, Riches may be called
the Mammon of unrighteousness, in a five-fold respect.

As namely because they may be 1. Unrighteously gotten. 2. Unrighteously kept.
3. Unrighteously spent. 4. Unrighteously trusted to.


5. Because they deal unrighteously with us in every point; as, by Gods
blessing, ye shall hear anon.

For the first; Riches may be unrighteously gotten, 1 Samuel 2.13.16. Hab. 1.15.
either by our Predecessors, or our selves; and that either by Hop^nies hook,
that is by force, or by Habbakucks net, that is by fraud; in both which cases,
whether thou be an unrighteous heir, Hos. 12.2.7.
or an heir of the unrighteous, thou shall consume as the fat of lambs; for
the Lord has a controversy with thee, and will blast the Mammon of so much
unrighteously.

Secondly, Riches may be unrighteously kept, by their Owners, Eccles. 5.13.
to their harm, and this is one of those evils, which the Preacher said he saw
under the sun.

Ber. in red. mor.
Datur enim Mammon ad necessitatis fratrum impendia, vos vero pauperibus
tenaces admodum non impertitis.

The Lord has furnished many of ye with full Tables, and overflowing-cups, that
ye may let fall some crumbs of comfort for poor Lazarus, and leave behind ye a
little meat, and drink offering, for such as mourn in Sion; but the pure
Mammonist will not untwist his Cable, Luc. 16.21,
but his very Dogs take leave to be more merciful, then he (...) should be
(...) visui, Sr. Fra. Bacon.
and usui both; and he was a fine Courtier, who said, Money is like Muck, not
good, unles't be spread; but where the sculptura is the Scriptura, the Bills
the Bible, the Penny the Pater noster, the coin the Creed, such unrighteously
hold fast all, and administer nothing to the necessities of the Saints, either
of fectu, by subvention, or affectu, by compassion.

They may perhaps afford a little Benevolence, but no Beneficence, Scripture
enough against begging, yet no bread against famishing; bid a hungry and naked
brother, or sister, Jam. 2.15, 16.
Go, and be filled, and be warmed, and yet suffer them to starve for want
either of food, or fire, like St. James his Zelots, Jam. 2.15, 16.

But the Preacher again has set a fatal mark upon such a man, Eccles. 5.14.
and his Mammon both, saying, such Riches shall peish by evil travail, and the
man begets a son, and there nothing in his hand, nothing, but perhaps a
pitch-fork, instead of the Fathers rake.

But thirdly, Riches may be unrighteously spent, to the drowning of our souls
in many noisome lusts, and their tempting of us daily to so much
unrighteousness.

Vitiis and Divitiis sound alike in Latin, and in English, ye know, wealth and
wickedness are near of kine.

Nimia bonorum copia ingens malorum occasio; Plenty of goods does many times
occasion plenty of evils.

Goodness may last till good come, but dition of state does commonly alter the
condition of the person.

Tiberius was a good subject, but a very bad Emperor. Tacitus.


How many had been good, had they not been great? Ask the Elder Brother, and He
will tell thee; Luke 15.12, 13.
as for the Younger, the Scripture solveth that question, where so soon as ever
that Youngster had received his portion, he turned Prodigal. Divitiae veniunt,
Relligioque fugit.

Fourthly, Psalm. 49.6. Joh. 31.24.
Riches may be called the Mammon of unrighteousness, because we unrighteously
put our trust in them, saying to the Gold thou art my hope, and to the fine
wedge, thou art my confidence.

A livelesse piece of earth is our Master, yea our God, which we shrine in our
coffers, and to which we sacrifice our hearts like that moath-eaten Miser in
the Poet, kneeling down before the shrine of his glistring Deity, Indormis
inhiatque and tanquam parcere sacris
Cogitur, and pictis tanquam gaudere tabellis.
Horace.


But Mammon is a base, and beggarly spirit, and so was fitly placed at the
Apostles feet; nimirum sic oportuit, Acts 4. and the last. Royard. 1 Timothy 6.17.
Pro. 11.28.
nam calcandae sunt divitiae, says a Postiller. He is to be rather trampled on
with our heels, then attended with our hearts, and no handsome Rival to stand
in competition for our confidence with the Living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy; and he that trusts in uncertain Riches shall fall.

Fifthly and lastly, Riches deal unrighteously with us in in every point; for
they requite our labor in their purchase with fear in their possession, and
with grief in their loss.

Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam,
Majorumque fames.
Horace.
There is indeed a sort of inestimable Riches, wherein there is no
unrighteousness at all, I mean the riches of Grace and Glory, Luc. 16.11.
and they are styled by Christ (...) the only true Riches: but all riches else,
for the four considerable grounds, on which I have now insisted, may be called
The Mammon of unrighteousness.

Whereof to make your selves friends is to make provision for your selves by so
using the fading wealth, wherewith ye are entrusted in this world, that when
those transitory comforts forsake you, ye may be received into Heaven.

Ga. 2.10 Job. 29.15.
Now then, to enucleate somewhat hence for your selves, by way of application;
Remember the poor; be eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame. And because, in
some cases, God Almighty does accept a mite for a million, do thy best to
satisfy the afflicted soul, Nehem. 8.10.
and send portions to them, for whom nothing is prepared.

But remember all this while, that the streams of thy Charity must be derived
from a pure fountain; these friends in my Text will nor be made thine by ill
gotten goods, by Hophnies hook, or Habbakucks net, by force or fraud, by shark
or legerdemain, by nick and froth, by five and a reach, by false weights and
balances, by scant measures, whether of capacity or application, Mica. 6.10.
which are abominable before God.

Buxtorf. de Abbreu.
The alms box among the Jews, in the Temples outer Court, was called in the
Hebrew tongue (...) Kupha Schel Tsedaka, that is the Chest of Justice, and that
one word (...), Tsadaka, signifies Alms and Justice both, to intimate, no
doubt, that the matter of our Alms must be goods which are justly gotten.

If then thou can say ex animo, with gray headed Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.3.
I have wronged no man, I have oppressed no man, I have defrauded no man, I
have received no bribes; I have taken no man's Ox, no man's Ass, no man's horse;
but here am I, O Lord, with a blessing in my hand, of that which is justly
mine, of that which thou have blessed upon the sweating of my brow, or the
working of my brain; and now, Lord, in all humility, and thankfulness I return
it unto thee; by these poor, and blind creatures of thine own substitution,
whom thou have appointed to be ever in the world, for the exercise of my
Charity.

And if thus ye fail not to remember them now, remember how God will remember
you for it, in your latter end; which if ye should forget, and remember no
longer, then whilst ye are sermon-warme, the next part of my Text will remember
you of it.

The Conscription of the end, by way of Remuneration, 3 Gener.
or Reward, When ye fail, ye shall not fail of friends to receive ye into
everlasting habitations.

In which Epiphonema or close of all, the recompense of your charity is highly
extolled by three remarkable circumstances, as was laid out in the division of
my Text.

The first whereof is taken from the tempestivity, or seasonableness of the
time of it is collating, which is,

When ye shall fail.

Wealth is like a Wild-Foul, 1 Circ. Prove. 23.5.
and riches have Wings; yet do they not so quickly fail the Stewards, as the
Stewards, fail themselves.

Divesue prisco natus ab Inacho,
Quid interest? An infirma de gente!
Moreris, Victima nil misecantis Orci.
Were thou Mammons Eldest son, sole heir to all the Userers in the World, yet
death will not fail to strike thy Vessel, because it has silken sails, and is
ballac't with refined Aure; even the Mitted, and the crowned, and the Turban'd
head must one day fail, as well as he, who may not put on his hat, or has not
a hat to put on at all.

It was an ancient custom among the Romans, that a Mason should salute the
Emperor, Livie.
on the very day of his Coronation, with his lap full of Stones, and bid Caesar
choose what sort of them he pleased should be prepared, and polish't for his
Sepulcher.

It fares with us mortals as with flowers, and some flies, which grow up and
seed and die.

By virtue of that unrepealable statute, Heb. 9.27. come a time there must for
our (...), a time (...) when we shall be in the Eclipse, and fail out of this
present life; fail of health, and fail of strength, and fail of light, and fail
of breath, and fail of honors, and fail of lands, Psalm. 88.18.
and goods, and wives, and children, and friends, and neighbors, and all our
acquaintance stand afar off.

But notwithstanding all those failings your charity fails you not, that is a
grace indeed, as of the loveliest countenance, so of the longest continuance,
and will bear you company, as the shadow does the body, and never be beaten
off, but follow you, Apoc. 14.13.
says a voice from heaven, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, for
their works follow them.

And then, as for Bajazet to change his Seraglio for a Cage was a kind of
strappado to his humane Soul; as for Valerian to become a footstool to his
proud foe, might challenge the tribute of a bleeding eye, so then, I say, for
the merciful minded man to meet with majesty in misery, with consolation in
desolation, with high erection in deep dejection, with such a confection, and
receipt as this, in time of his defection, is an exuberant guerdon, an
unparalled retribution and should therefore dispose our ways to the
attainment of everlasting salvation, by making our selves friends of the Mammon
of unrighteousness, that is, by works of mercy, against the time when we shall
fail.

And farther I carry not this first compensation of your beneficence, deduced
plainly from the Tempestivity, or seasonableness of the time of it is collating,
that is, when ye shall fail.

I hasten now to the second circumstance, which magnifies the reward of your
Christian Charity, from the dignity of the persons thus requiting.

They may receive you; and who they are, 2 Circ.
I shall expound with all convenient brevity, and go on.

The word (...) here is impersonally set without a nominative case, and denotes
them not, tells us not what manner of persons these receivers are, whether God,
good Angels, or good works.

So that, after the manner of Scripture-speaking, they may receive you, is no
more, then ye maybe received, that is, your works of charity, through Gods
acceptance, and promise to reward them, may prepare as 'twere for you a resting
place in heaven.

But because the passive (...) is actively translated in all our English
Testaments, please ye hear how the Fathers descant on the words, and what
Paraphrase they make upon this pronoune They.

Ambrose in Lucam.
And first they are the holy Angels, of whom thus sweetly sang that
Nightingaile of France, I mean our Josuah Sylvester in his Du Bartas.

The sacred Tutors of the Saints, the Guard
Of Gods elect, the Pursuivants prepared
To execute the counsails of the Highest.
Saint Paul states the matter by way of question, Are not the Angels
ministering Spirits, sent forth for their good, who shall be heirs of salvation?
Heb. 1.14.


Psalm. 91.10, 11, 12.
The Prophet David positively thus, there shall no evil befall thee, nor any
plague come nigh thy dwelling, for God shall give his Angels charge over thee,
to keep thee in all thy ways; nay, to bear the up.

Luc. 15.10.
That feathered Hierarchy, which clap their wings at the conversion of a
sinner, does carefully attend us from our very cradles to our graves, and
thence take and carry the Bleemesmarie man into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22,
23, 25.
but leave the unmercifull to be tormented in the flames of Hell.

That then the King of Heaven imploys here on earth his Pages of Honor, and
Princes of his Court, disposes his Angels, those glorious Heralds, that when
ye fail, they may receive you, the Dignity of the persons does hugely improve
the recompense of the reward.

To wave the opinion Bonaventure in this point, Saint Augustine in the next
place conjectures these Receivers are not the poor in spirit, but the poor in
purse, and that they, who have been your clients in this, shall be your patrons
in a better world.

But that interpretation must be figuratively understood, because to receive
you at your last gasp is in the power of Jesus Christ alone; and therefore your
alms men cannot be called the Receivers properly, but by his allowance and
concession; and so an Alms being asked of you by them in the name, and
bestowed by you upon them for the sake of Christ, he is pleased by a Figure
called Metalepsis to attribute that to such as take it, which is only his own
peculiar prerogative.

The original (...) is indeed no more, then to propose and praise one, says
Demosthenes, that he may be required by a better man, which is the very case
that lies before us; and so the poor man's prayers for his Benefactors, being
the intercession of Gods own Spirit, Romans 8.26.
must needs become powerful with the God of spirits, who, the good ye do to
others, will take as done to him, and for that himself receive you, Matt. 25 34.
and bid you take possession of his Kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world.

And thus much for the smoothing of this knotty circumstance.

3 Circ.
The last thing which amplifies this exceeding great reward is drawn from the
excellency of the places of your reception, deciphred by their property,
plurality, and perpetuity, wherein your patience will shorten my way, as my
care shall shorten a way to your patience.

And first for their property.

Habitations.

Gen 19.2.
Not Diversories; for Pilgrims, and strangers, and wayfaring men are wont to
turn in thither, for a snap, or nap, and be gone; or for a night at most, and
then pack away.

Again, not Tabernacles, for they are only for a short pitch in Rephidim, and
removable at pleasure.

Exo. 17.1.
Once more, not houses, for they will scarce outlast a lease of three lives, or
21 Years; but Habitations, that is Mansions, standing Houses, places for settled
residence; not for progress, but abode, not for motion, but for rest; Apocae.
14.13.
we are here in a kind of restless Euripus, but there we shall rest from all
our labors.

The Prophet Isaiah calls them sure dwellings of quiet rest. Isai. 32.18.


And surely if the unjust steward shall have (...), that is Houses to receive
him, as he cunningly made his bargain, we may without Logic, or any Sophistry,
by an Enthememe infer, Luke 16.4.
that the merciful Steward shall enjoy (...) here, these habitations in my
Text to comfort him.

That Greek word indeed does not signify Habitations, with bare walls only,
Zen.
and nothing else, but durabilities of ministrelsie, and joy; nay, (...) is a
banquet, as Zenephon uses it, and whether this receiving be the glory of the
soul alone, before the Resurrection, (for (...) and (...) I utterly deny) or
the soul and body both together glorified after the Resurrection, (which I
steadfastly believe) under both those notions we may truly say with the sweet
singer of Israel, David.
In thy presence, Lord, is the fullness of joy, Ps. 16. and the last.

Some of you have already seen, more or less, the magnificence of earthly
Princes, in their buildings, furnitures, and Feasts; Open now awhile the eyes
of your contemplation, and look a little further into these habitations.

The platform is ready, and drawn to the life, Apoca. 21. from the tenth
verse, to the end of that chapter; for there is one greater then Apelles
himself.

There ye may see a apiece city, the walls of Jasper, the foundation
garnished with all manner of precious stones; twelve gates of twelve pearls,
the Houses, and streets of pure gold; a Crystal river runs through the
midst of it, and upon the banks of it grows the Tree of life, ever green,
ever fruitful, and the very leaves conduce to the healing of the Nations.

And this for the eye; the ear shall be filled with the melody of Angels, the
taste satisfied with the food of Angels.

Nobile perpetua caput amplexante corona. And so much for the property of these
Habitations.

As concerning the plurality, which is my next part, not one but many, Joh.
14.2.
habitations in the plural number; In my Fathers House, says Christ; are many
mansions, and consequently room enough to receive out of every kindred, Apo.
5.9.11.
and people, and tongue, and nation, thousands of thousands, and ten thousand
times ten thousand.

I have seen the Portraicture of the Macedonian Monarch, Alexander.
upon the terrestrial Globe, peering to the Antipodes, with this discontented
Motto over his head, Uni non sufficit orbis.

One world is not enough for one man; but no scanting, and so complaining will
there be in Heaven, as in this narrow Orb, for want of elbow-room. Omnipotens
Dominus, omnipatensque Domus.

As one star differs from another in glory, so I am sure, shall be the
Resurrection of the Dead, and yet every Saint shall there enjoy a full measure
of heavenly bliss, 1 Cor. 15 41, 42.
from the beatificall vision, which fills all in all.

And therefore, I beseech you, take no thought, Mat. 20.20, 21.
with those ambitious sons of Zebedee, who shall sit highest in Gods Kingdom,
trouble not your selves now, about the manner of your entertainment then; Put
on only as the Elect of God, bowels of mercy, make your selves these fast
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, who when you fail, will not fail you,
but wait for the time, till your change shall come, and then receive, and
conduct you into some one, or other of these Many Habitations.

Where once, ye shall not be, as in these tumultuous times, thrust out of your
Houses ever and anon, but after that possession there will be session, Virg.
-- Vestra inquam munera vobis certa manent, there once, I say, ye shall never
be removed, for they are everlasting, there perpetuity, and my last particular.

Habitations Everlasting. 2 Cor. 5.1.
(...) here is a word of sempiternity, and shrin's a durance throughout all
generations; and if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, (...) says St. Paul, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens.

Lucullus the Roman had his change of sumptuous, and stately Piles, and if
Plutarch say true, his Aestivall rooms, and receipts for delight, excuded out of
rocks in the vast Ocean; but such was their crasiness, that both those, and
these held him to repairs, and put him to building ever and anon.

Jenojakin King of Judah had coenacula, ventosa, and perflabilia, Jer. 22.15.
Amos. 3. and the last.
his Summer Parlours, and cooling Galleries, seeled with Cedar, and painted
with Vermillion; But I will smite the Winter House, with the Summer House,
says the Lord, and the Houses of Ivory shall perish, and the great houses have
an end. We have verily, nothing here below, but corrupts, takes soil, and
fades away; one man's inheritance is presently gone by another man's purchase;
but if it last awhile, it may be confiscate for some offenses, or escheated for
want of Heirs, or sequestered for delinquency, or quite brought to nothing by
unthriftiness, or by the immediate judgment of Heaven upon the children of
disobedience.

1 Pet. 7.4.
But these habitations mentioned in my Text are in no danger of any the least
either alteration, or decay, but incorrupt, and shall hold the Being,
undefiled, and shall hold the Assay, never fade, but continue in their prime,
for they are everlasting. Nec reticeri, nec recitari, nec supprimi, nec exprimi
possunt; No tongue can tell, no heart conceive the bound, and end, for there is
neither bound nor end of these habitations everlasting.

Deu. 15.7, 8, 10.
Now then, that your flesh may come to such honor, as to be received at length
into Habitations everlasting, obey that hypotheticall motion of the Spirit, if
there be among you a poor man within any of your gates, wherein the Lord your
God has blessed you, ye shall not harden your hearts, nor shut your hands, but
open them wide, and lend, nay give what is sufficient for his need.

Berco. in red. mor.
Duplicatum erit filiis justi, quod justus dedit filiis Dei; and therefore let
us ardere charitatis zelo, that we may splendere sanctitatis velo, and gaudere
Deitatis coelo in sempiterno saeculorum saeclo.

I conclude all with that one short Apostrophe to the rich Steward, and charge
him from God, 1 Timothy 6.18.
that he become Rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate; wherein he cannot deliberate long for objects, unless it be more
for multitude then want; Lazarus lies at every door.

And let no Steward else, though bankrupt for estate, think himself unconcerned
in his portion of Scripture, for every present soul, in one capacity or other,
is an (...) or Steward of some goods of God; Magistrates are his Stewards of
the Commonwealth, Ministers are his Stewards of the Church, Masters of their
private Families, and each one is a Steward of the privy closet of his
Conscience. And therefore let us all in our several places, lay sure hold upon
well doing, that we may have comfort in well dying, and when we fail, be
crowned with the reward of these habitations everlasting, through thy great
mercy, O most blessed Lord God, who do live, and govern all things, world
without end. Amen.

FINIS.

