Rare and Excellent RECEIPTS. Experienced, and Taught By Mrs. Mary Tillinghast.
And now Printed for the Use of her Scholars only.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1690.

I. How to make Paste for all Pies to Rise.
TO every Peck of Flouer, take two Pound of Butter; the Liquor must boil, then
put in your Butter; and when it is all melted, wet your Paste, but not too
stiff.

II. How to make cold Paste.
To every Peck of Flouer, take six Pound of Butter, brake your Butter in small
bits; and put it into your Flouer; then wet it with cold Water, but not too
stiff.

This Paste is good for all Pasties, or made Dishes, or Florendines.

III. How to make Paste for Custards.
You must boil your Liquor, then wet your Paste, not lithe but stiff; there
must be no Butter in it. This Paste is good for Custards, and all Cotes,
Feathers, and Esses.

IV. How to make Puff-Paste.
To every peck of Flouer, take Eight pound of good sweet Butter, Sitteen Eggs,
take away half the Yelks; first break into your Flouer, one quarter of your
Butter into small pieces, as you do for the cold Paste, then break in so many
Eggs as the quantity of Flouer, which you wet, will require; break them into a
Porringer, and beat them a little; then put some Water to them, and put it into
the Flouer, and wet it into a pretty stiff Paste; then roll it into a leaf of
Paste about a quarter of an Inch thick; then stick it all over with bits of
Butter, and double it up in five or six Leaves; then roll it out again about
half an Inch thick; then double it up again, laying Butter all over it as at
first; and so do till all your Butter be laid on the Paste; it must never be
molded nor kneaded; every time you roll it out, and lay the Butter on, you
must strew Flouer lightly on the Butter, before you double it up, and upon the
board, and over the top; for it must neither stick to the board, nor
Rowling-pin.

This Paste is good for all Florendines, Cheese-cakes, made Dishes, or for
Sweet-meat-Tarts.

V. How to make Sugar-asse
To every peck of Flouer, you must take four pound of Butter, two pound of
Sugar; the Butter must be rubbed into the flower, so fine till it seems like
grated Bread; then you must beat your Sugar, and sift it through a fine Sieve;
then rub it into the Flouer very well, and make it up into a stiff Paste with
boiled Liquor.

This Paste is good for all sorts of Cheese-cakes or Tarts, which are made of
Sweetmeats, Rasberies, Currants, or Apricocks.

VI. How to make Paste-Royal.
To every peck of Flouer you must have six pound of Butter, broke in small bits
into the Flouer, and sixteen Eggs, taking away half the whites; then take one
pound of Sugar sinely beaten and sifted, and mix it with the Flouer and Butter,
and make a hole in the middle of the Flower; then brake in the Eggs, wet the
Paste with cold Cream, a little Sack, and a little Rose Water.

This Paste is good for all Florendines, or made Dishes, which are sweet.

VII. How to make Venison, Beef, or Mutton Pasty.
Take a hanch or side of Venison and bone it, then take off the outtermost tuff
Skin; then take it, and lay it in form for a Pasty; then lay the side that you
took the skin from, downwards to the board; then slash it cross and cross with
your Knife, then season it with two Ounces of Pepper, and a quarter of a Pound
of Salt, and two Nutmegs grated; then you must have four Pound of Beef Suet
shred fine, and take one half of it, season it lightly with the seasoning, and
sprinkle a little water on it; then beat it with the Rowling-pin till it be all
in a broad thin Cake; then lay the Suet which you have beat, on the Paste; then
then lay on the Venison with that side downwards which is seasoned, then season
the top of your Venison lightly: then order the other part of the Suet as you
did the former, and lay it upon the top of the meat and close the Pasty.

VIII. How to order the Bones.
Then take the Bones, and brake them very well, season them high, and put them
in a Pan, with a pint of fair Water, and a pound of Snet shred fine; if the
Pasty be small, half a pint of Water is enough, and half a pound of Butter.

If you make your Pasty of Beef, a Surline is the best; if of Mutton, then a
Shoulder or two Breasts is the best. A Venison, or a Beef Pasty, will take six
hours baking.

IX. How to make a Lamb, Mutton or Veal Pasty.
Take a hind-quarter of Lamb, and bone it; then lay it in form for your Pasty
all of an evenness; then take an Ounce of Pepper, one Nutmeg grated, and as
much Salt as two Ounces. If your Lamb be small, you must take so much the less
seasoning. For a Veal-Pasty, a Breast is the best Joint, and the same Seasoning
as for the Lamb; only before you lay on the Butter, lay three or four blades of
large Mace; your Veal must be bon'd, as well as your Lamb; for each of these
Pastes, you must have two pound of Butter. If it be Mutton, then you must have
three pound of Butter, or three pound of Beef Suet, shred small, and beat with
a little Water with a Rowling-pin; Four hours is enough to soak any of these
Pasties.

X. How to bake the Bones.
Break the Bones of your Meat; season them well; put to them half a pint of
Water, and half a pound of Butter; put them in a Pan, and cover them close with
a Paper, or a piece of course Paste, and set them in with the Pasty; and when
the Pasty comes out of the Oven, pour in the Liquor which comes from the Bones.

XI. How to make a Lamb-Pye.
Take a quarter of Lamb, either fore or hind-quarter, it mattereth not which;
cut it into small pieces, then feason it with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmegs,
according to your Pallet; and lay on the Meat a blade or two of large Mace;
then lay on some scalded close Lettice, or scalded Spinnage in lumps; then put
in some scalded Goosberries, or raw Barberries on the top of all; then lay a
pound and half of Butter, and close the Pie. Three hours will bake it,

XII. How to make a Lere for this Pie.
Take half a pint of Vergise, and a quarter of a pound of Butter, make the
Vergise boil, then stir in the Butter, then take the Yelks of two Eggs, and put
it into the Pie, when it comes out of the Oven, before it goes to Table. If it
be to eat cold, then put in no Lere.

XIII. How to make a Lamb Pie sweet.
Take a Fore-quarter of Lamb and cut it into small pieces; season it with
Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Sugar, and a little Salt; then lay a lair of Butter at the
bottom, and lay on the Meat; then (...) on some Suckets of Lettice, and ^^^kets
of Lemon, some preserv^^ Grapes and Barberies, some Chestnuts scalded, and some
Yelks of hard Eggs; lay on one pound of Butter, then close the Pie. Two hours
will bake it. If it be a Veal-Pie, instead of the Sweetmeats, put in Currants.

XIV. How to make a Caudle for this Pie.
Take a pint of White Wind and make it boil; then brew in half a pound of
Butter, the Yelks of three Eggs, and as much Sugar as will make it pleasant to
your taste, not too sweet. Thus you may season a Veal Pie, if you please; only
into the Caudle squeeze the Juice of two Oranges.

XV. How to make Mince Pyes.
To every pound of Meat, take two pound of Beef suet, Two pound of Currants,
and a quarter of an ounce of Cinnamon, one Nutmeg, a little beaten Mace, some
beaten Cloves, a little Sack and Rose Water, two large Pippins, some Orange and
Lemon Peel cut very thin, and shred very small, a few beaten Carraway-seeds, if
you love them, the Juice of half a Lemon squeezed into this quantity of meat;
for Sugar, sweeten it to your relish; then mix all these together, and fill
your Pie. The best meat for Pies, is Neats-Tongues, or a Leg of Veal; you may
make them of a Leg of Mutton, if you please; the meat must be parboyl'd, if you
do not spend it presently; but if it be for present use, you may do it raw, and
the Pies will be the better.

XVI. How to make a Pigeon-Pye
Take a dozen of Pigeons, and break all their Bones with a Rowling-pin, then
truss them; as for seasoning, take an Ounce of Pepper, and one latge Nutmeg
grated, and two ounces of Salt, if you love it high seasoned, or else not so
much; mix the seasoning together, then take for every Pidgeon a piece of Butter
as big as a Wall-nut, and dip in the Seasoning, and put it in the Pigeons
Belly; then take the rest of the Seasoning, and season the Pigeons with it;
then lay a thin laying of Butter at the bottom of the Pie, and lay in the
Pigeons with their Breasts downwards; then lay on some large Mace, and some
slices of Bacon, if you love it; but if the Pie be to be eat cold, there must
be no Bacon: Then lay Butter all over the Pigeons pretty thick; two pound of
Butter is enough for this Pie.

XVII. How to make a Chicken-Pye sweet.
Take half a dozen of Chickens, and break all their Bones with a Rowling-pin,
then truss them; or else you may cut the Chickens into quarters, which is most
proper for a sweet Pie; then for the Seasoning, take half an Ounce of beaten
Cinnamon, one large Nutmeg grated, half a Pound of Sugar, and a little Salt;
then season your Chickens with it, and put them into the Pie; then lay on some
Suckets of Lettice, and some Suckets of Lemons, some slices of raw Lemons, and
some preserved Barbreries, a Pound of Butter, the Marrow of two Bones; then
close the Pie: Two hours baking is enough for this Pie.

XVIII. How to make a Caudle for this Pie.
Take a Pint of White Wind, and a little Vergise, and make it boil; then brew
it with a good piece of Butter, and the Yelks of four Eggs; sweeten it with
Sugar to your taste, but not too sweet; when the Pie is baked, put it into the
Pie before it goes to the Table; and shake it, when it is in the Pie.

XIX. How to make an Artichoak-Pie.
Take your Artichoaks, and boil them as you do for to eat, pull off the leaves
from the bottom; then take the Leaves, and with a Knife take the Meat from the
Leaves, and lay it in the form of a bottom; then season the bottoms, and what
you took from the Leaves, with Cinnamon, Nutmegs, a little beaten Ginger, a
lit^^^ Salt and Sugar; then butter the bottom of your Pie, then lay on the
Artichoaks, and on them some preserved Barberries, preserved Goosberies, and
preserved Cherries; some candid Lemon, and Orange-peel cut in thin slices, and
some Marrow. To six Artichoaks, you must have the Marrow of two large Bones, a
lair of Butter all over the Pie; a Pound of Butter is enough, besides the
Marrow for this Pie. Close it, and put it into the Oven; an hour and an half
will be enough to bake it.

XX. How to make a Caudle for it.
Take half a pint of white Wine, half a pint of Sack, make it boil; then brew
in a good piece of Butter, the Yelks of three Eggs; and when the Pie is baked,
put in the Caudle, and shake it well in the Pie, then send it to the Table.

XXI. How to make a Potato or Secret-Pye.
First boil your Roots, and take the skin from them; then season them with
Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Sugar, and a little Salt, not two sweet, because the Roots
are sweet, then butter the bottom of your Pie; then lay on the Potato's or
Secrets; then lay on some Preserves of Cherries, Goosberries, Grapes,
Barberies, White Bullice, Corrants; all these must be preserved; some candid
Citron cut in thin slices, and lay all over the other Preserves; the Marrow of
2 large Bones, is enough for three pound of any of these Roots, then lay a
pound of good sweet Butter over all, and close the Pie: an hour and a half will
bake it.

You must make the same Caudle for this Pie, as you did for the Artichoak-Pie,
only squeeze in the juice of a good large Lemon in the Caudle: before you put
it into the Pie,

XXII. How to make a Lombard-Pie.
Take Lamb or Veal, and shred it very small, to every pound of meat, a pound of
Beef Suet shred small, a little sweet Marjoram, Thyme, and Winter-Savory slipped
and shred very small, a little Lemon peel shred fine, To the quantity of four
pound of the meat, you must put the Crum of a penny Loaf grated, a Pound and a
half of Currants, half a Pound of Sugar. To season it, you must have two
Nutmegs, a little beaten Cloves and Mace, a little Cinnamon, and a little Salt,
no more Salt then will take away the flashiness, and make it relishable; then
mix them well together, then have some juice of Spinnage and color it green;
then make it up into Balls as big as an Egg, and fill the Pie with one lair of
the Balls; then you must put in some preservs, as Cherries, Barberies, Grapes,
Suckets of Lettice. Suckets of Lemon, Candied Orange and Cittron Peal, Ringua
Roots; then lay a lair of Marrow all over the Pie with some-bits of Butter;
Close the Pie, and bake it. An hour and an half will bake it. Before you close
it, and before the marrow be laid, lay on some slices of Lemon.

XXIII. How to make a Caudle for a Lombard Pie.
Take half a pint of Sack; and as much White Wind, and a quarter of a Pint of
Verjuice; set them on the Fire and let them boil; then brew them with a quarter
of a pound of sweet Butter, the Yelks of three Eggs; and put these in the Pie
when it comes out of the Oven; and shake it into the Pie, before you send it to
the Table.

XXIV. How to make Cheese-Cakes
Take a quart of the Curd of new Milk, when the Whey is draind well from it,
and beat it well in a Stone or Wooden Mortar, with half a pound of good sweet
Butter; then you must have for the Seasoning, a large Nutmeg grated, and beaten
Cinnamon; as much as the quantity of the Nutmegs; half a pint of good thick
Cream, eight Eggs, take a way half the whites, a little Sack, and a little
Rose Water, or Orange-flower-Water, a little Ambergris dissolved in a little
Sack; then take half a pound of fine Sugar beaten very fine, and scerst; half a
pound of Corrants is enough for this quantity, mix all these very well
together, and fill your Cheese-cakes: half an hour will bake them; the Oven
must be no hotter than for White Bread.

Puff-Paste is best for the Cheese-Cakes; but if you raise them, then it must
be Sugar-Paste.

XXV. How to make an Eele-Pie.
Take the Eeles (being flaid) and cut them in pieces, about four inches long;
then season them with Pepper and Salt, and a little grated Nutmeg; season them
not too high: Half an Ounce of Pepper is enough for six Eeles (if they be not
very large) and half a good Nutmeg; but if they be large, then this Seasoning
is but for four: lay some Butter at the bottom of your Pie, then lay in the
Eeles; and upon the Eeles lay on three or four blades of large Mace, then lay
Butter all over your Pie, a pound and half is enough for this Pie.

Sometime for change, season them not so high, then put in half a pound of
Corrants: if you please, you may put in as many Raisins of the Sun. This Pie
will ask two hours baking.

XXVI. How to make a Gose-Gib let Pie.
Take four pair of Giblets, and break all the Bones with a Rowling-pin: Then
for the seasoning, you must have an ounce of Pepper, a Nutmeg grated, or cut
small; two ounces of Salt, two pound of Butter in the Pie. This seasoning will
serve a Mutton or Veal-Pie; only in the Mutton, you need not put but one pound
of Butter.

XXVII. How to make a Chicken Pie
Take your Chickens, and break all the Bones with the Rowling-pin; then season
them with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg grated, that is, to six Chickens, an ounce
of Pepper, one large Nutmeg, half a dozen blades of large Mace, two pound of
Butter. Lay in your Meat; and upon the Chicken lay Meat. and upon the Chicken
lay the Mace, then lay the Butter all over it and close it, This Pie will ask
two hours baking.

After this manner you may season a Pidgeon Pie. This seasoning is enough for a
dozen of Pigeons.

XXVIII. How to Season a Goose or Turkey Pie.
Take two Ounces of Pepper half an Ounce of Nutmegs, a little beaten Cloves and
Mace, four Ounces of Salt. Bone your Turkey; then Season it within and without
with the Seasoning: Then have a piece of fat fresh Pork, and Season as the
Turkey; and put it in the Belly of the Turkey; or you may bake it without, if
you please. If you put Pork in it, then three pound of Butter is enough for it;
but if not, then you must put in four pound.

If you do not Bone your Goose, then you must brake all the Bones of it: Then
Season it, as you do the Turkey. This Seasoning is enough, if you put in a
couple of Rabbets with your Goose, and three pound of Butter. When either of
these Pies be baked, when they have been out of the Oven a little while, then
you must put in two pound of Clarefy'd Butter.

XXIX. How to Clarefy Butter.
Take your Butter and set it on a gentle Fire, and let it melt by degrees,
without stirring it; when it is all melted, and ready to boil, then take it off
from the Fire, and let it stand a while to settle; then skim off the top, and
pour it into the Pie.

So you must Clarify your Butter to fill up all sorts of Pies that you keep
Cold.

XXX. How to make a Batalia Pie.
Take Chickens that be very young, or else young Pigeons; season them with
Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg, season them pretty high; then lay in your Pigeons or
Chickens cut in quarters, with their Bones broke: Then lay in some whole Larks,
some Sassages, some blades of large Mace, some Balls of Forced Meat, colored
green with Juice of Spinnage, some pickled Oysters, or Stewed, which you
please; some picked Barberies, some slices of Lemon: Then lay pieces of Marrow
all up and down the Pie; then lay on a pound of Butter all over the Pie; then
close it, and bake it: It will ask two hours baking.

XXXI. How to make Chewits to set all round it.
Make them of Lombard-Meat, put Marrow a top of it: when they be baked, liquor
them with the same Candle, as you make for a Lombard-Pie, but put no sweet
Meats in your Chewits, only season your Marrow with Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Sugar.

XXXII. How to make a Leer for the Batalia-Pie.
Take half a pint of Mutton-gravy, two spoonfuls of Oyster-liquor, half a pint
of White Wind: then set it on the fire, and make it boil, then put to it the
Juice of two Oranges, and a good piece of Butter, the yelks of two Eggs, being
well beat, put in the Pie, when it comes out of the Oven.

XXXIII. How to make a Chadron Pie.
Take a Calves-Chadron, and parboile it; then when it is cold, shred it very
small; then shred a pound of Suet very fine; then season it with half an ounce
of Cinnamon, and two Nutmegs, and a little beaten Cloves and Mace, a little
shred Lemon and Orange-peel, four good Pippins shred small, a little Rose
water, and half a pint of Sack, if it be a large Chadron; if not a quarter of a
pint will be enough; and a pound and a half of Currants: mix all these
together, with a quarter of a pound of Sugar, and a little Salt; then fill your
Pies or Florendine with this Meat.

This Florendine must be baked in Puff-paste or cold Paste.

XXXIV. How to make Custards.
Take two quarts of Cream or Milk, and twelve Eggs, take away half the Whites,
put half a pound of Sugar; beat your Eggs very well, then mix it well together;
then strain it, and fill your Custards: the Cream or the Milk you must boil
with a Blade or two of Cinnamon and large Mace; and to two quarts of Cream, put
fourteen Eggs: Then fill your Coffins with it, they being first dried in the
Oven.

XXXV. How to make a Mutton Pie after the French Fashon.
Take some of a Leg of Mutton, mince it small; to every pound of Meat, half a
pound of Bief-suet mine'd small, two good Nutmegs, a little Pepper, and a
little beaten Cloves and Mace, a pound of Currants; to every pound of Meat, a
few sweet Herbs shred small, as sweet Marjoram, and Thyme, and Winter Savory;
the yelks of six Eggs; mix all these well together, with as much Salt as will
make it savory; when it is well mixed, make it up in Balls, as big as a
Turkey-Egg, then put some Butter on the bottom of your Pie, then lay on the
Balls; then lay on some blades of large Mace on the Balls; then lay on some
more Butter, close it, and bake it.

XXXVI. How to make a Lere for it.
Take half a pint of white Wine, with one Lemon squeezed in it, and the yelks
of three Eggs, and brew it well together; then put it in the Pie, when it is
baked.

XXXVII. How to make a Herring Pie.
Take your Herrings, and cut off their Heads and Tails; then cut them three
times on every side; then season them with Pepper and Salt: put in good store
of Butter, that is, to eight or ten Herrings a pound of Butter, then close it,
and bake it.

XXXVIII. Another way to make a Herring Pie.
Take the Herrings, and season them as the other; then have some old Onions,
and cut them in slices, and lay them all over the Herrings, lay the Butter over
the Onions, then close it, and bake it.

XXXIX. Or this way.
Do not season them so high as the other, but cut them after the same manner,
and put a little grated Nutmeg in it: then lay all over the Herrings some
Raisins and Currants, then lay a Laying of Butter.

XL. How to make a Carp or Tench Pie.
Take either of these Fish, and scrape off all the Scales, then cut them across
on the side, then season them with Pepper and Salt, and a little beaten Cloves
and Mace, then lay in some Butter in the bottom of the Pie, then lay in the
Fish, then lay on some pickled Barberies, some flices of Lemon, a slice or two
of an Onion, then lay some blades of large Mace, then lay on a Laying of
Butter: If this Pie be large, you must put two pound of Butter, then close it,
and bake it, two hours is enough to bake it

XLI. How to make a Hare Pie.
Take the Hare, and cut it to pieces, then season it with an ounce of Pepper,
and two Ounces of Salt, one large Nutmeg, a little beaten Cloves and Mace;
brake all the Bones very well with a Rolling pin; then lay the Hare in the Pie;
lay some slices of fat Bacon on the Hare, if you love it, else none: You must
put two pound of Butter in this Pie. This Pie will ask four hours baking.

Or this.
Bone the Hare, and beat the Flesh very well in a Mortar with some fat Bacon,
or Beef suet; then season it as you do the other, work the Seasoning very well
into it with your hand: you must beat it till it is in a perfect Paste: then
sill your Pie, and lay on two pound of Butter: This will ask as much baking as
the former.

XLIII. How to make a Rabbet-Pie.
Take a couple of Rabbets, and break all the Bones; then season them with
Pepper and Salt, and Nutmeg 3 then take a pound of Butter, and lay on the
Rabbets, then close your Pie: This Pie will ask two hours baking.

XLIV: Or thus.
Take your Rabbets, and break the Bones, and season them with Pepper and Salt,
but no Nutmeg: lay on the Rabbets a good deal of pict'd Parsley; then lay on a
good quantity of Butter, and close it.

XLV. Or this way.
Season the Rabbets, as before, and lay good store of slie'd Onions, and a good
quantity of Butter.

XLVI. How to make Patte Pann pass for Carts.
Take half a quarter of a Peck of fine Flouer, three quarters of a Pound of
Butter, and rub it into your Flouer; put in a quarter of a pound of Sugar; then
beat Two Eggs, with a little water, and wet your Paste with it, but take Care
you wet it not too much.

FINIS.

