Six Several TREATISES

1 The Promises made and fulfilled in Christ. 2 Absolute Promises made to
sinners, as sinners. 3 The Life of Faith; and in particular, In Justification.
Sanctification, and Expectation.
4 The Saints Anchor rightly cast. 5 Christ's New Command. 6 Of Offenses.
By the late worthy and faithful Servant of Jesus Christ John Tillinghast.

Published by his own Notes.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Livewell Chapman at the Crown in
Popes-head-Alley. 1657.

To the Reader,
IT is a matter of Lamentation to those who are left behind, that so many Sons
of Sion are transplanted to eternity, whose Counsels, Prayers, Experiences --
might have been very useful (if the Lord had seen it good to continue them on
earth) toward the directing, helping, and comforting, may weak, doubting, and
despondent souls in their journey toward Heaven. And amongst others in our
day, the death of that gracious; and sweet-spirited man, Mr. Tillinghast,
deserves much to be lamented. But there it matter of rejoicing in the midst
of our mourning for the Saints; in that, death brings them to the possession
of those Promises, which before they were but heirs under age unto. As Christ
said to his Disciples, John 14.28. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because
I said, I go unto the Father, for my Father is greater than I. So, if we
rightly loved the Saints, we would rejoice when they go unto the Father, for
then they receive the End of their Faith, and then they enjoy the chiefest
object of their hope, even eternal life.

And it is our great mercy, who still remain, that although the Author of the
ensuing Treatises, was plucked away like a blossom in the prime, yet he has
left us so many useful Instructions about the Promises, the life of Faith, and
hope, etc. that it may be said of him, by these, he being dead, yet speaks.
We forfeited all our mercies in the first Adam by sin, and could never have
attained unto grounded hopes of grace, or glory; if the Lord had not vouchsafed
to enter into Covenant with us, in, and for the sake of Christ, the second
Adam. But now there are given unto all that are in Christ, 2 Pet. 1.4.
exceeding great and precious promises, that by these they might be partakers
of the Divine nature.

Promises are divine Engagements, wherein (as with reverence we may speak it)
the Lord does pawn his own faithfulness for a security to our says and hope.

Oh what matter of admiration is here! that the God of glory should condescend
so far as to come under Engagements to poor, sinful, and unworthy creatures?
and still there is more matter of astonishment, if it be considered, what
glorious things are put under Promise to the Saints, even God himself, Heb.
8.10. This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after
those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their mind, and write
them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, etc.

Christian, what would thou have more? is not God thy all in all? is there
not enough in God to answer all thy desires, to satisfy all thy longings, to
supply all thy wants? behold, thou have him in the Promise, he has made over
himself to thee in the way of a Covenant, he has engaged himself to be thy
God. If the Lord had promised only earthly enjoyments, health, wealth, though
it had been in great abundance, and mountains of gold, and heaps of Pearls,
etc. yet it had been nothing in comparison of this, to say, I will be thy God.

Thou art rich indeed, who art in Christ, all the Promises are thine, and so
God thine, and therefore all thine. Thou may in all straits, exigencies and
necessities, go to God in the way of the Promise, for the improvement of any of
his Attributes, that thou stand really in need of the use of, for they are
all engaged for thy advantage. When Satan uses his policy against thee, then
thou may say, Lord, thou have promised to be my God, and so thy Wisdom is
engaged for me; O! let me find that improved, for the defeating my subtle
enemy in his enterprises.

When thou art assaulted with strong temptations, which thou art no way able to
withstand, or haste some great difficulty in the way to hinder thee in coming
up to any duty, or to obstruct thee in the exercise of any grace, as faith,
patience, humility, etc. Then thou may say, Lord, thou have promised to be
my God, and so thy Power is mine. O now let it be improved for my help and
assistance against these difficulties which are too strong for me to overcome:
and so for all other Attributes of God, thou may in all times of need claim
an interest in, and by the Promise plead a laying of them out for thy good.

I am persuaded that many of the fears, doubts, disquiets, etc. of many
Christians, about their eternal conditions, and their great distances from
assurance, take their rise hence, because they do not clearly understand, or
are not thoroughly persuaded, that the way of Gods making over himself unto
souls, is the way of a Promise; that a Covenant is that whereby the Lord gives
us hold of himself in this life, and whereby he gives us assurance of all the
blessings which are to be enjoyed in another, and a better life. Were they
heartily and explicitly convinced, that the enjoyments of God which they are to
look for here, must be by Faith, and so through the glass of a Promise, then
they might find that they have had many such enjoyments of God, which they
have overlooked.

The great temptation of this age is, to look more to a life of sense and
feeling, than to a life of Faith, to look more to a Christ within, than (in the
way of a Promise) to a Christ without. Many will own none as enjoyments of God,
but inward feeling of supports, quickenings, enlargements, consolations, etc.
It is no longer than they enjoy these, that they think they enjoy God; whereas
they ought to let out their hearts in the way of a Promise to God, through
Christ for such mercies, when they are under the deepest sense of the want of
them; and there are as real enjoyments of God in such outgoings of the heart
to God, as in those sensible incommings of joy and comfort, etc. For, the life
of Faith consists in such an outgoing of the whole heart in the way of a
Promise, Christ-ward; hence Faith is called a coming to Christ, John 6.35. He
that [commeth to mee] shall never hunger; this is expressed by believing in the
latter end of the verse [hee that believes on me shall never thirst.] So that
Faith is the motion of the whole heart Christ-ward; Faith does not consist so
properly in believing that Christ is thine, or that thy sin is pardoned -- as,
in the letting out thy heart to Christ in the way of the New Covenant, for his
righteousness, and the remission of thy sin, etc. And if this were duly
considered, souls would never in their lowest, saddest, and most deserted
conditions, be shy of believing; for who can question at any time whether they
may thus let out their hearts to Christ, or no? and yet the doing this, is
believing, yea the properest act of Faith consiseth therein; and if at any time
a soul be enabled by grace to this, then it has a sweet enjoyment of God and
Christ in the Promise, though sensible quickenings, etc. be wanting, for no
act of Faith can be without an enjoyment of God.

If thou be enabled with thy whole heart, to take hold of Gods Wisdom, and
Power, etc. in a Promise, thou dest as really enjoy God, so long as thy soul
sticks close to him there, whilst the sensible improvements of those divine
Artributes, ars denied thee, as thou do afterward, when these are granted.
And the same may be said for any promised Mercy, if the heart be thoroughly
drawn out Christ-ward in the way of the Promise for it, in its proper season,
as when that mercy is suitable to the present condition, etc. there is as real
an enjoyment of God in such a waiting for it, as in the after fruition of it;
for there is the life of Faith before it is afforded, and Faith cannot be
without a fruition of God. The Proper time of Abraham's acting Faith for Isaac,
was before Isaac was given, Romans 4.19. And being nor weak in Faith, he
considered not his own body, now dead -- verse. 20. He staggered not at the
Promise of God, through unbeleef, but was strong in Faith, -- So that
enjoyments of God by Faith, may be as well before, as when a promised mercy is
afforded. I do not speak against looking for sensible feelings of Christ's
presence within, in enlargements, and quickenings, etc. but against judging
these the only enjoyments of God, and against looking more for these, than for
outgoings of heart to Christ by Faith; whereas the best way to attain more of
these, is to act Faith on the Christ of God, who is without us, in the way of a
Promise for them. The Lord would take care of Christians comforts, if they were
more careful to own his faithfulness in his Promise.

And if you would be successful in any of your dealings with the Promises,
then be sure that your souls do clasp hold of Christ therewith, for all the
Promises in him are yea, and in him Amen.

And seeing the faithfulness of God is engaged for the accomplishment of all
Promises. Oh what sweet encouragement does this afford, to exercise hope on
him, for all those mercies which are promised, and which we are yet without!

Christians are exceedingly backward to the exercise of this grace of Hope,
which might be of admirable use to them; and most averse to exercise it about
eternal life, which is the highest and chiefest object of it.

Some hope, not only for temporal, but also for spiritual mercies; necessary in
some conditions they are exercised in, as under deadness of heart, they hope
for quickenings; under streightnings, they hope for inlargements; under
witherings, they hope for flourishings of grace; but where is the soul that is
hoping for the glory of God? Romans 5.2. A hoping for Heaven, and the life to
come? it is the casting hope within the vail that renders it of use as a
Soul-anchor, that secureth against the storms of affliction, and temptation
which are met withal in this World.

A great reason of the sinking of many under these, is, because they cast away
their anchor (the hope of eternal life) when the tempest rises highest, and
when they have most need of it. It is very sad to observe, that carnal men are
so high in their Hopes for heaven, who have no grounds for hoping; and on the
other hand, that Christians are so low in their hopes, who have such firm
grounds for them.

There is 1 A hope of desire. 2 A hope of Assurance, or Confidence.

Christians, you may sometimes be under such doubts, and questionings about
your conditions, as you may not be able to conclude with a hope of confidence,
and Assurance, that you shall enjoy God to all eternity.

But a Hope of Desire after the enjoyment of God as the chiefest good, as
reckoning nothing such a matter of Hope, as a full fruition of him, and Jesus
Christ to all eternity, this Hope of Desire under the saddest desertion you may
keep up, and sin if you do not, Cant 3. v. 1, 2. Cant. 5.6. The Spouse sought
her beloved, when he had withdrawn himself. As under the hidings of Christ's
face, the saints may have a Hope of Desire to see his face again on earth, so
as well may they then long to see him face to face in heaven.

The Saints should say, when will the bridge-groom of our souls come? when
shall we have full fellowship with him? when shall we have full embraces in
his arms? when shall we enjoy the Promised everlasting rest? when shall we
have a full freedom from all sin, and suffering? thus Paul had a Hope of
Desire to be dissolved that he might be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. and Romans
8.23. we groan within our selves; that implies a weariness of the present
Condition, but the inducement was the hope of Glory; (waiting for the adoption,
the redemption of our body) but where is the soul that is under a weariness of
its present Condition, not barely to be freed from burdens and afflictions, but
out of a want of heavenly glory, and a full communion with Jesus Christ, O
Christians! you can never want a ground thus to hope, and therefore put on your
Helmet, the Hope of Salvation, cast forth the Anchor, and that within the Vail,
that your Lord may find you looking for the blessed Hope of his coming.

We shall add no more but this, that the Lord, graciously granted us the
privilege to be ear witnesses, that diverse of the Sermons in these Treatises,
for the substance of them (giving allowance to such defects of the Emanuensis,
which cannot but be expected ordinarily) were Preached by that Servant of
Christ Mr. Tillinghast, and others are, as they were found in his own
handwriting; Some Sermons are wanting, but could not be gained; yet these
being so useful, we were unwilling the World should be without them; so
desiring that the blessing of Christ may accompany these labors, We remain

10 Month 24th day 1656. Thy Servants for Jesus sake. Samuel Petto. John
Manning.


The Contents.
The Promises made and fulfilled in Christ, from 2 Cor. 1.20.
The Text opened, from page 1. to page 3. Doct. That all the Promises of God
made to sinners in Jesus Christ, shall most certainly be fulfilled and
accomplished. ibid. That all the Promises of God run in Christ, or are made to
us in Christ. ibid. The Promises distinguished into absolute and conditional. 1
Absolute Promises. p. 4 2 Conditional Promises. ibid.
Pro. 1 That all the Promises of God, whether those that are absolute, or such
as are conditional, they do all run in Christ, or are made to us in Christ. p.
5 1 That it is so. p. 6 2 Six Reasons, Why it is so, from p. 8. to 14 3 The
Use. 1 That the first work of the soul, is to come to Christ. ibid. 2 How
miserable is the condition of all those that stand off from the Lord Jesus
Christ; this showed in several particulars: from p. 15, to 20 3 Then how
blessed is their condition, who are married to the Lord Jesus Christ. ibid. 4
Of Examination in several particulars, p. 23 5 Of Exhortation. p. 24

Quest. How may a soul know that its evidence is true? Answered in three
particulars. p. 24, 25 6 Use, To those that are without Christ, to come to
Christ. p. 26, to 30 Twelve Objections answered, from p. 30, to 41. Pro. 2 That
all the Promises of God made to sinners in Jesus Christ, shall certainly and
assuredly be fulfilled and accomplished. p. 41 The Proposition proved from the
great Obligations lying upon God the Father, and Jesus Christ, to see to it,
that the Promises be fulfilled. Five Engagements that lie upon Jesus Christ to
see them fulfilled; from p. 42, to 44 Seven Engagements lying upon God the
Father, to see the Promises fulfilled, from p. 44, to 46 Four other
particulars, to prove the certainty of fulfilling the Promise. p. 47 Nine
Objections answered, from p. 48, to 54 Quest. How may I come to know when the
Promise is near fulfilling; answered, p. 54 Quest. What does the consideration
hereof afford us, as matter of comfort? answered, ibid. Quest. What may we
learn hence, as our duty? answered in six particulars. p. 55, to 58
2 Absolute Promises made to sinners, as sinners, from Isaiah 57.17, 18, 19,
verses.
Doct. THat the Promises of Grace, or the free Promises of the Gospel, are made
to sinners, or to persons as sinners, under the notion of sinners. p. 59 The
Doctrine explained and opened, p. 60, to 63 The truth of the Doctrine proved. p.
63 Four Reasons of the point, from p. 64, to 69 Five Objections answered, from
p. 69, to 77 Use 1 Hence we may see the mistake of many persons, who look upon
the Gospel, and all the Promises thereof as made to Saints, whereas they are to
sinners. p. 77 Use 2 Then here is ground of encouragement to the vilest of
sinners, to come to the Promise. p. 79 Use 3 Then how exceedingly just and
great will the condemnation of those sinners be, who reject these Promises of
grace? p. 81 Four Aggravations of such sinners sins. p. 83, to 85 Use 4 Of
comfort to poor souls. p. 85 Sixteen Objections answered. p. 86, to 89
3 The life of Faith, from 2 Cor. 5.7.
THe Text opened. p. 89 Doct. That the life of Faith is the proper life of
Saints in this world. The Doctrine proved. p. 90 to 92 Quest. 1 What it is to
live by Faith? answer, that it is for a soul constantly, quietly, and orderly,
to rest upon the Promise and Power of God, for the obtaining of all good,
expected, or hoped for, the removing, or turning to good, all evil present, or
feared. This description is branched out into these particulars. 1 The Act it
self with the manner of acting. p. 93, to 99 2 The ground of Faith. p. 100, to
107 3 The extent of this living by Faith. p. 108, 109
Quest. 2 What are the pincipal differences betwixt the life of Faith, and the
life of sense? answered in eight particulars. p. 110 to 121 Quest. 3 Wherein is
the life of Faith to be exercised? Answered. p. 122 Quest. 4 What are the
things themselves whereabout Faith is to be exercised? Answered p. 121, to 125
Quest. How does Faith act, as touching any of those things? p. 125, to 127
Quest. How does Faith act in Justification? Answered in six particulars. p.
128, to 144 Quest. Wherein does lie the advantage of the soul, that lives by
Faith in Justification, above another that concludes his Justification from
sense, from what he sees or feels? Answered. p. 145, to 152 Quest. What is
it that hinders a soul from living by Faith in Justification? Answered. p.
153 to 155 2 That a Christians Sanctification is to be carried on, in a way of
Faith, or believing. p. 156 Quest. 1 Wherein is Faith to be exercised in our
Sanctification? Answered. p. 157 Quest. 2 How does Faith act, or put forth it
self in this business of Sanctification? Answered. 1 As to our Mortification.
p. 158, to 160 2 As to our Vivification. p. 161
Quest. 3 Why is a Christian to live by Faith for Sanctification? Answered. p.
162, 163 Quest. What is the difference between that Sanctification which
arises from an enlightened conscience, and that which arises from Faith or
believing? Answered in five particulars. p. 164, to 169 3 The life of Faith in
Expectation. p. 170 1 What those things are that Christians waits for, or
expects by Faith? 1 The fulfilling of the Promises. p. 171 2 The return of his
Prayers. p. 172 3 The return of Gods Countenance. p. 173 4 The Churches
Deliverance. p. 174 5 The ruin of Gods enemies. p. 175 6 The Lords second
coming. ibid.
2 How the life of Faith acts in this business of a Christians expectation. p.
176, to 180 3 The Reasons, why a soul is to expect mercy in away of Faith? p.
181 4 What waiting is that, which comes from Faith? Answered in several
particulars. p. 182, 183
Several considerations to move us to wait upon God in Faith. p. 184, to 191
Quest. But when is the set time, then I could wait for it, if I knew but that?
Answered. p. 192 Quest. How shall I come to wait upon God in a way of Faith?
Answered. p. 193, to 195
4 The Saints Anchor rightly cast, from Hebrews 6.10.
The coherence. p, 197, 198 The Text divided. p. 199 1 A Description of a
Christians hope; What this hope is? It is a patient and an assured expectation
of the accomplishment of the Promises of God; this is opened and proved. p.
199, to 203 How hope is resembled to an Anchor in four particulars. p. 204, 205
The Excellency of this Anchor above other, ibid. 2 The Properties of this hope;
sure and steadfast, and that in these respects, p. 205, 206 3 The place where
this Anchor is cast, that is within the vail. ibid. 1 What it the meaning of
this phrase within the vail? p. 206, 207 2 What is that within the vail, that a
Christians hope can found upon? this is answered in several particulars. p.
208, to 213 3 Why Christians hope must be sixed within the vail? ibid.
Use This truth does call upon many souls to remove their Anchors. 1 Such as
rest in Morality. ibid. 2 Such as cast their Anchor in the outward Court of
Profession. p. 214 3 Such as cast their Anchor in the Sanctuary, in the outward
visible Church. ibid.
Several things by way of Motives, to provoke and encourage souls to cast their
Anchor of Hope within the vail. p. 218, to 226
5 Christ's New Commandment, from John 13.34.
THe words opened. p. 227, 228 Doct. It is the command, (one of that great
commands of Jesus Christ) that Saints should love one anther. p. 229 1 Why
Saints should love one another; nine reasons given for it p. 230, to 233 2 How
Saints may have their hearts brought up to the practice of this duty of love. 1
Love Saints as they are Saints. p. 133, 134 Several considerations to set this
truth home upon our hearts. p. 235, 236 Four directions to bring our hearts up
to the practice of this duty. p. 237, 238.
2 Love, though thou art not loved. ibid Four considerations to move us to it.
p. 239, 240
3 Account thy self least of Saints, and judge every one better than thy self.
ibid. Three considerations to move us to this. p. 241, 242
4 Get a heart taken up with spiritual things. ibid. 5 Walk wisely. p. 243, to
245 6 Look not so much upon what is evil, as upon what is good in thy Brother.
p. 246 7 Put not an evil construction upon that, which may have a good put upon
it. ibid. 8 Get forbearing spirits. p. 247, 248 9 Consider, all are but men, p.
259 10 Acquaint your selves with one another spirits more. ibid. 250 11
Improve one another gifts and graces more. p. 251 12 Take as little notice as
possible may be of injuries. p. 252 Objections answered. p. 252, to 255 The
Use. ibid.
6 Of Offenses, Matthew 18.7
THe words opened. p. 257 The Observation; Offenses, they are a real and heavy
judgment upon the World, or the woe of Offenses, it falls upon the World. p.
258 1 What an Offense is? showed. p. 259 2 That there is an aptness in the
world to be offended; as appears by five particulars. p. 260 3 That Offenses
are a real and heavy judgment upon the world, as appears by six particulars.
p. 260, to 265 4 Why Offenses fall as a real and heavy judgment upon the
world; four reasons given of it. p. 266, to 268 5 How may we know when the
world is justly offended? Answered in three particulars. p. 269, to 272
Use 1 Then, all things considered, the world has little cause to rejoice, and
make themselves merry with the falls and offenses of the godly. p. 273 Quest.
How may I escape this woe? Answered. p. 274 Use 2 O then, let all the people of
God take heed how they offend the world. p. 275 Quest. What shall I do? how
shall I walk, that I may not fall and offend the world? Answered in nine
particulars. p. 275, to 277 An Objection answered. ibid.
Matthew 11.6.
Offense is twofold; either Offense taken, or Offense given, what they are? p.
279 Of either of these, there is an Offense good, and bad. ibid. 1 A good
Offense given; what that is in four particulars. p. 280 2 A bad Offense given;
what that is in three particulars. ibid. 281
Offense taken, likewise is good, and bad. 1 A good Offense taken, what that
is, in two particulars ibid. 2 A bad Offense taken, what that is; in five
particulars. p. 282
Case 1 How far am I to have respect unto that Offense, which another does, or
will take? Answered. p. 283 Quest. How may we know when the rise of an Offense
is from wilfulness only, or from weakness and wilfulness together? answered in
eight particulars, ibid. 284 Case 2 What is to be done, when the case is such,
that I must offend on the one hand, or the other? or thus, when the case is
such, that I stand between two parties, contrary to each other, and must offend
the one of them, whom am I in this case to choose to offend? answered. p. 285,
286, 287
Romae Ruina Finalis, Anno Dom. 1666. Mundique finis sub quadragessimum quintum
post Annum; Or, A Treatise, wherein is clearly demonstrated, that the Pope is
Antichrist, and that Babylon, the City of Rome shall be utterly destroyed, and
laid in ashes, in the year, 1666. And that the Turk will shortly after be
destroyed by fire from Heaven; presently after which, will be the second
coming of Christ, and general Resurrection, etc. Sold by John Sherly at the
Pelican in Little-Brittain, and by Sam. Thompson at the white Horse in Paul's
Church yard, and Livewell Chapman at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley.

Reader,
SEveral Errata's may have escaped the Press, which thou art desired to have
an eye to, some few I thought good to note, being a little too gross to let
pass without a mark.

Page 189 line 5, and 6. leave out, and a great time; line 23 read of the
waters of life freely; line 32 read unto any time; line 33 read then we were
undone.

The Promises made, and fulfilled, in Christ.
2 Corinthians. 1. verse. 20. For all the Promises of God in him are yea, and in
him, Amen.


THe Holy Ghost tells us, Hebr. 6.17, 18. That God willing more abundantly to
show unto the heirs of Promises the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it
by an Oath, that by two immutable things, wherein it was impossible that God
should lie, we might have strong consolation.

Answerable hereunto our Text presents us with two immutable things, as the
sure and certain foundation of all our inward support, and Christian
consolation;

The first is the Promises of God, which are immutable, yea, and Amen.

The second is the Son of God, Jesus Christ, in whom these Promises are, who
also is immmutable, yesterday, and to day, and for ever the same, as Heb. 13.8.

The words are an Universal Proposition, wherein we have,

1 A subject, the Promises of God, to which is added a note or Universality,
ALL the Promises of God.

2 Something Predicated of this subject, and that is,

1 That all these Promise of God are in Christ, IN HIM, IN HIM, twice used,
that is in Christ, whom the Apostle had spoken of, verse. 19. the Son of God,
Jesus Christ, who was preached: -- in him, denotes the same person here as
there, and there it is expressly spoken of Christ; Christ's Person is the
Storehouse of all the blessed Promises of God. If we would partake of any
Promise, we must look to Christ for it.

2 That all the Promises of God are true and faithful, and shall most certainly
upon this account, because they are in Christ, be fulfilled. This the Apostle
shows, in saying that the Promises in Christ are yea, and Amen; that is to say,
they are true, faithful, constant, immutable, unalterable, shall most certainly
be accomplished; for as yea and nay, in the eightteenth verse being joined
together, do signify as much as inconstant, mutable, variable, uncertain, etc.
Our words toward you was not yea and nay; that is, the Doctrine in which we, my
self, Silvanus and Timotheus preached amongst you, it was not an uncertain
doubtful Doctrine, a Doctrine which we sometimes call truth, and sometimes
error, which we preach up one day, and preach down the next; no, but in him
was yea; that is, the Doctrine of Christ which we preached amongst you, it was
yea; that is, a true, faithful, immutable, unalterable Doctrine, that which we
do, and ever shall own for truth; so that when the Apostle says, The Promises
of God are yea, it is in effect to say, they are true and faithful, etc. Amen
likewise signifies as much as yea, it being an adverbial speech, signifying the
truth and certainty of the thing which we speak of; hence Revel. 3.14. to show
the truth and faithfulness of Christ, he is called the Amen.

Now whereas the Holy Ghost uses two words of like signification, it serves to
strengthen our faith the more in the assurance of this, that the Promises of
Christ are true and faithful, and shall certainly be fulfilled; as much as if
he should speak it over and over, the Promises of God in Christ are true and
faithful, yea verily they are true and faithful.

The words thus opened, shut up themselves again in this general Proposition,
viz.

Doct. That all the Promises of God, made to sinners in Jesus Christ, shall
most certainly be fulfilled and accomplished.

This general does branch forth it self again unto these particulars, viz.

1 That all the Promises of God run in Christ, or are made to us in Christ. 2
That all the Promises of God, made to us in Christ, shall most certainly be
fulfilled.
Propos. 1. That all the Promises of God run in Christ, or are made to us in
Christ. This in the general may be made to appear from that known distinction
of the Promises, which ranks them into Absolute and Conditional promises of
grace, or unto grace; both which run i^ Christ, are made to us in Christ, only
i^ Christ.

1 Absolute promises, such wherein God requires nothing of the creature, but
gives al^ freely, they run all in Christ, and are made to u^ in him, and the
good things promised in them are conveyed to us through him, and n^ other.

Of this sort are all those promises of the New Covenant, wherein God promises
pardon of sin to us, to make us his children; promises his Spirit, sanctifying
grace, obedience persevering grace, heaven, etc. all these ar^ made to us in
Christ, who therefore is calle^ the Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 8.6*
Chap. 12.24. Messenger of the Covenant, Man 3.1. Prince of the Covenant, Dan.
11.22. H^^ blood is called, The blood of the Covenant, Zach* 9.11. Heb. 10.29.
Chap. 13.20.

Yea he is called, The Covenant it self, Isa. 42.6^ Chap. 49 8. to show that
all absolute promises such as are the promises of the New Covenan^ they run all
in Christ, who is the Messenge^ Prince, Mediator of this Covenant, yea the
Covenant it self; so that there is not any one absolute promise in all the Book
of God, but (...) hangs upon Christ, it runs in him, is made (...) sinners in
him, fulfilled for him, etc.

2 Sort of Promises are such as are Conditi^nal, or promises unto grace,
wherein God promises such and such good things to his chi^dren being so and so
qualified: Now all these promises as well as the other that are absolute, are
made to sinners in Christ, who is as I may so say, the first qualified person.
For, look as the first Adam being a public person, and the common stock, and
root of all mankind, did by his fall or disobedience, draw all the threatenings
of the just and holy Law of God upon himself first, and then by way of natural
conveyance did derive them unto all his posterity after him, because standing
for them as a common person in their room, and they coming forth of his loins;
Even so in like manner, the Lord Jesus Christ our second Adam, being a common
person as the first Adam was, and the stock or root of all his seed, he by
standing and fulfilling the Law of God (which the first Adam brake) did draw
all the good things promised therein unto himself first, and then by way of
spiritual and supernatural conveyance, derives them unto all those which are
his seed. So that there is not one promise of the Law of God, but it centers it
self, as I may so say, in Jesus Christ, who has fulfilled this Law of God, and
from him is given forth both that grace to which the promise is made, and also
that good thing whatsoever it be, which is promised to that grace.

By this in the general, we may see how that all the promises of God, whether
those that are absolute, or whether such as are conditional, they do all run in
Christ, and are made to us in Christ.

Having thus in general cleared up this truth, I shall come now more
particularly to show you,

1 The truth of this, that it is so.

2 Some reasons why it is so.

3 Shall apply it.

In order to the clearing of the thing that it is so, I shall premise this,
viz. That those several promises of grace, glory, etc. good things here and
hereafter, which the Father has made to Christ, they are not made to him for
himself, he in this respect having no need of them, or that the Father should
make promises of such things to him, he having a proper right in, and unto all
these things, by virtue of his co-equallity with the Father, yea enjoying and
possessing of them; and therefore has no need in respect of himself, that
these things should be given to him by promise, which are his by proper right,
but they are made to him respectively, as he is our Surety, and common person,
occupying our room, and standing in our stead, who of our selves, had no right
to any of these things, no nor Christ neither, though he had a personal right
as coeternal, and coequal with the Father, yet as he stood for us, and in
our stead, had no right but what he has by promise.

Now then, if this can be cleared, that all the promises of God are made to
Christ, taking this for granted which we have premised, and which in it self
is also clear, that they are made to Christ not for himself, who had no need to
have these things given to him by promise; but for us, whose Surety he is, and
common person, then will the result be clearly and evidently what we have
laid down and asser^ed,

That all the promises of God made unto us, are made unto us in Christ.

The thing therefore to be cleared is, That all the promises are made to
Christ, which being cleared, the other follows, That they are made to us in
Christ.

To clear this, I shall begin with the first promise that ever was made to
mankind since the fall, viz. That promise made to Adam, Genesis 3.15. which as it
is the first promise which ever fallen man heard of, so it is the grand promise
(as I may so say) that upon which all the other promises hang, and have their
dependence, and therefore look how this promise runs, to whom this is made, we
may conclude (this being the grand leading Promise) that all the other go in
the same way, run to the same person.

Now if you read the words, you shall see it clear, that the promise is
primarily made, not to Adam but to the Seed of the woman, i.e. Christ, The Seed
of the woman shall -- God does not make a promise to Adam, that he shall break
the Serpents head; but the promise runs first to the Seed of the Woman, that is
Christ, that he should do it, and to Adam through the Seed of the Woman, i.e.
Christ.

And further, if we come downward to Abraham's time, and look to the renewal of
the promise with him, we shall find that it still runs to Christ, and is made
to him, Genesis 22.18. The promise is made to Abraham's Seed, now that is expressly
meant of Christ, as appears, Gal. 3.16.

Yea further, this is clear from the Levitical types and shadows, which as they
were shadows, so may I say, they were promises of good things to come,
representing things to the spiritual eye, as done already, and enjoyed already.
Now what did they all point out to us, but only Christ?

All the Sacrifices, Oblation, etc. of the Law did point out Christ, and did
all center in him the great Sacrifice.

Only there is this difference betwixt Types and Promises, the Type is
terminated, and has its end in the Antitype, so soon as the thing typified or
shadowed comes, the type or shadow, cease any longer to be; but not so the
promise; for although the good thing promised be performed, yet the promise
remains still, so that in case a poor creature have had such a mercy, and lost
it again, yet he may go to the Promise again and again for it.

I might further illustrate this from some Titles given to Christ in Scripture,
as of a Husband, an Heir, he is the Heir of all things, therefore made to him
as the primary Heir, therefore all come by a Mediator, Christ is the Way,
therefore no coming down of promises but in Christ; but I pass this over.

Quest. Why is it so?

Answ. Because God would hereby convince the creature that the is fallen. Whilst
Adam stood, al promises and mercies, did immediately come from God to man
without the intervening of a Mediator, or middle person; but now man being
fallen, God will not make him so much as one promise of a mercy, nor bestow one
mercy upon him, but through another; that so the creature may come to see that
he is fallen from his first station, and is not now in that station that once
he was.

2 Because God would hereby convince the creature of that absolute necessity
that he has of Christ, and closing with Christ: Why? Because all the promises
are made in Christ, and therefore without some close with Christ, the creature
cannot assure himself of any of those good things held forth in the promise to
be his. Thou can not enjoy a promise without a Christ, a promised mercy
without a Christ, no special, spiritual privilege, but promised to Christ. So
that the necessity does hereby appear, though thou might attain much of
morality, yet thou can not hence attain to interest in any peculiar promise
without Christ. So that if thou have not Christ, thou can not call God
Father, nor can not say thy sins are forgiven, As many as received him, to
them he gave power to be called the Sons of God, Job. 1.12. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1.7.

3 Because God would have us to pitch our faith upon the person of his Son, and
not barely upon the promise; and therefore he has so ordered things in his
divine wisdom, that the promises should all hold on Christ, and be Yea and
Amen in him. Had God made promises to souls, and these promises not made to
them in Christ, we should sit down and take up our rest short of Jesus Christ,
we should pitch upon the promise, and rest there, never looking any further,
nor so much as once eying Christ himself; but now God has linked all his
Promises to his Son, yea stored them up in him, that so our faith might look
further than to the bare Promise, to the person of Christ, in whom all these
Promises are, and so take up our rest in Christ himself, not in the Promise.
Hence Christ himself is the great Promise, God first promises him, and all the
other Promises are ours by virtue of our right to, and interest in him first.
All good things are given, first by giving Christ; there is a Christ first, and
entertaining of that Christ, how shall he not with him give us all things? Romans
8.32. As to instance in the Promises God has made of pardon and forgiveness,
these Promises are not (as one says) as the pardons of a Prince, which merely
contain an expression of his Royal word for pardoning, so as we in seeking of
it do rest upon, and have to do only with his Word and Seal, which we have to
show for it; but Gods promises of pardon are made in his Son, and are as if a
Prince should offer pardon to a Traitor upon Marriage with his Child, whom in
and with that pardon he offers in such a relation; so as all that would have
pardon must first seek out for his Child. So we, would we have pardon, we must
first look out to Gods Son, whom he freely offers in Marriage to us first, and
so then after solemnization of Marriage between Christ and our Souls, the
promises of forgiveness, and all other promises are ours; for having first a
right to the Person of him who is sole Heir of the Promises, we have a right
to, and an interest in all those Promises he is Heir of.

As when a man Marries a Woman, his Marriage to her gives him a right and title
to all her estate; so our Marriage to Christ himself, is that which gives us
right and title to all those precious Promises that are in him, and all the
good things promised in them.

4 Therefore has God made all his Promises in Christ, that so the Person of
his Son might be in more esteem with us. Hence it follows, that a soul married
and united to Christ, has by virtue of this Marriage-union, and the relation
he stands in to Christ, a right and title to every Promise in the Book of God,
and he may boldly go and lay claim to the same, as his own and proper right,
by virtue of the interest he has in Christ as a Husband, in whom are all the
Promises. If he meet with a promise of forgiveness of sin, as that Isaiah 43.
verse. 25. he may go to it, and lay claim to it, and challenge it as his, and
say, the Promise of forgiveness of sins it is mine, it belongs to me, my sins
are done away, for it is in Christ and I have chosen him for my Husband. If he
meet with a promise of Sanctification, as that Ezekiel. 36. verse. 26, 27. he may
challenge it as his, and say, this is mine, and I shall be Satisfied, God will
give me a new heart, etc. So if he meet with a promise of Teaching, as that,
Joh. 14.26. But the comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things. So when he meets with a promise
of strengthening and supporting grace, in a day of temptation, he may lay
claim to it, as that, 2 Cor. 12 9. My grace in sufficient for thee. So when he
meets with a promise of having sin mortified in him, as that, Romans 6.14. Sin
shall not have dominion over you. So when he meets with a promise of life and
quickening, as that, Joh. 14.19. Because I live, ye shall live also. Of
Fruitfulness, as that, Psalm. 92.14. They shall still bring forth fruit in old
age, they shall be fat and flourishing. So when he meets with a promise of
Perseverance, as that, Jerem. 32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me. So, when with a promise of having his Prayers
answered, as we have many, he may challenge it. Thus a soul married to Christ,
can come and challenge, lay claim to every Promise, as a Wife can challenge
the Goods of her Husband as hers, she having a propriety in them, which another
Woman who does not stand in such a relation to such a person cannot.

5 Because God would have his Son Christ to be all in all; Gods design is to
advance his Son, and make him all in all, not only in himself, but to us, that
we might look upon him as all in all, and account him our all in all; and
therefore all the Promises God has made to us, are made unto us in him, so as
that whatsoever we seek for, we might find it in Christ, and acknowledge him
(as he is) all in all. Therefore all the promises of our Justification, pardon
of Sin, etc. are in him, that Christ might be all in all in that. The promises
of the giving of grace are all in him, that Christ might be all in all in that.
The promises of increasing of Grace in him, that Christ might be all in all in
that. The promises of acceptance of our duties in him, that he might be all
in all in that. The promises of assistance to, and in duty in him, that he
might be all in all in that. The promises of Perseverance here, of Glory
hereafter, are all in him, that Christ might be all in all, both in respect of
our being kept here, and blessed hereafter. If the promises of Mercies we
receive were made out of Christ, we should look on Mercies, and not
acknowledge our selves beholding to Christ. If we have peace, it is from him;
comfort, it is from him; it wisdom, it is from him; if light, it is from him,
who is the Light of the World, that we might acknowledge Christ in all.

6 Because God would make his Promises so, as that his Children might not he
deprived of the benefit of them. God once made a promise to man in himself, and
he lost it, and was deprived of the good and benefit of it. God therefore ever
since will have his Promises run in another, and a surer Channel, that so his
Children may not deprive themselves, or be deprived of the benefit of them; and
therefore the Apostle in the Text says, That all the Promises of God, are yea,
and Amen, i. e, true, faithful, immutable, shall be fulfilled, and that upon
this very account of their being in Christ; in him they are yea, in him, Amen;
as if he should say, There could be no certainty of the Promises were they
not in him. Adam once had promises for himself and his Seed and of lost them,
but the Promises are in him, and therefore upon this account they are true and
faithful shall be accomphished; the Heirs of Promise shall not fail, or come
short of the things promised to them.

Use 1. Are these things so, that all the Promises are made to us in Christ,
then hence I may learn, that my first work is to come to Christ; I say, the
very first work of the Soul is to come to Christ. Why? because I can have no
right or title to any one mercy, but by coming to him, yea until I am come to
him, for it is my close with Christ that gives me right and title to all.

Coming to Christ, or believing, is the great and only qualification that gives
a man right and title to the great Promise of forgiveness, yea and to all other
Promises.

Hence when I read in Scripture of such and such Graces that God has promised
to give, as he promised to give Repentance, Humiliation, Obedience, etc. I am
first of all as a poor Sinner, yea even whilst I want these things, to go to
Christ immediately, and not to think to get these things first, and after that
to go to Christ, because the promises of these things are made to me only in
Christ, and coming to Christ is that which gives me right and title to the
Promises that hold these forth; yea no spiritual good thing can be in me, or
enjoyed by me, let me toil ever so much, till I come to Christ, for all
spiritual good comes in by virtue of the Promise, all which is in Christ, and
given forth to souls in the way of coming and no other. This informs us how
to look on all those Scriptures wherein Promises are made to Duties or Graces,
or made conditionally to something in us; they are made primarily to Christ,
and then to works and qualifications as in Christ. So, when Promises are made
to Repentance, Humility, and Self-denial, they are made to Repentance in
Christ, humility in Christ, to hungring and thirsting after Christ, as they are
wrought by Christ, Without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. It is God that
works in us, it is not in man that works.

So that these qualifications being urged, other Scriptures urge that they
cannot be without Christ, and so we come to reconcile them, and make these
Scriptures agree. Whenever we annexe promises to such works and qualifications,
when we enjoin promises out of Christ, we put men upon an impossibility.

Ob. But this does destroy Works and Qualifications?

Answ. We desire to see works and qualifications, let these be urged before
the soul takes the comfort of coming, but not before coming to Christ. Before
the soul can say Christ is mine, it is to see these. A soul walking in looseness
and profaneness, cannot so conclude, before a soul can say Christ is mine,
there are these. But a poor soul ought to come to Christ first, and this makes
the golden Rule good, all Scripture be for Christ, and do testify of him,
Joh. 5.39.

Use 2. Then how miserable is the condition of all those that stand off from
the Lord Jesus Christ. Thou sinner which do stand off from Christ, so long as
thou do thus, thou can not of right claim or challenge any one promise in
all the Book of God, and how sad a condition is this for a poor soul to be in,
wherein he cannot lay claim to one promise.

1 It is the greatest comfort and support to a gracious heart when he is under
afflictions, temptations, etc. that he has a stock and storehouse of
promises to go unto; if he fall into sin, he has a promise of forgiveness to
run unto; if he be under temptation, he has a promise of support; if he
be weak, he has a promise of strength, if dead, he has a promise of life;
if ignorant, he has a promise of teaching; if perplexed with fears of falling
away, he has a promise of perseverance to run unto, in every condition he
has one promise or other to comfort him, relieve him, stay, support, stablish
him.

But now on the contrary, the condition of that soul that stands out against
Christ, is of all most sad, most deplorable, most to be lamented, most
dreadful; why? because in whatsoever condition he is in, he has no promise
that he can have recourse unto; it he sin, he has no promise of pardon, so
long as he stands off from Christ. If he be in prosperity, he has no promise
that God will keep him in that condition. If he be in adversity, he has no
promise that God will relieve, comfort, support him in that condition. If he be
tempted, he has no promise that God will deliver him out of, or preserve him
in that condition. If he pray, he has no promise that God will hear him. If he
stand in need of any mercy, spiritual or temporal, he has no promise that God
will give it.

How woeful is the condition of such persons? no tongue can express it, nor
heart conceive it.

2 That soul which has a right to the promise, and the promise going along
with him, has the presence of God, and the protection of God going along with,
for Gods presence and protection go, where his promise goes. When Israel went
out of Egypt toward Canaan, they had the promise going with them, and as the
promise of God went, so they were guarded, the Angel of God went with them, one
while was before them, another while behind them, to guard them wheresoever
danger was approaching. So a poor soul which has a right to the promise, in
every condition has Angels guarding of him, and God with him; whereas that
soul which has no right to the promise, which is the condition of all that
stand off from Christ, they are lest, as God says of Ephraim when he was gone
from God, Like a Lamb in a large place. A Lamb in a large place is in danger
every hour to be rent in pieces with Dogs and Wolves, etc. So the soul without
the promise, is every moment in danger of perishing.

3 That soul which has the promise, has God his friend, for God is a friend
where his promise goes, Abraham had the promise, and God was Abraham's friend:
But now that soul which has not the promise, God is an enemy to that soul.

4 That soul which has the promise, all things work together for his good,
health, sickness, riches, poverty, want, abundance, all work for his good;
there is a combination together of all things to serve that man, and to work
him good. That soul which has not the promise, all things work together for
his evil; if rich, riches hurt him; if poor, poverty hurts him; if well, and in
prosperity, that undoes him; if sick and in adversity, that undoes him too;
there is a combination of all things to work his ruin.

5 That soul which has the promise, all the creatures are his friends; for God
makes a league with the creature in the behalf of all those that are in league
and covenant with himself, as Hos. 2.18. And in that day will I make a Covenant
for them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with
the creeping things of the ground; and I will break the bow, and the sword, and
the battle out of the earth, and will make them to lie down safely. But that
soul which has not the promise, all the creatures are his enemies, all are
banded against him. When he goes abroad amongst the creatures, he goes
amongst so many mortal enemies, yea let but God give the word of command, and
say to the army of his creatures fall on, fall on upon that sinner, and
presently if he eat, his meat will choke him; if he breathe, the air will
poison him; if he walk in the streets, the houses will fall upon him; if he
goes abroad in the fields, the beasts will tear him, and devour him; wherever
he goes, wherever he is, whatsoever he does, he is in continual danger.

6 That soul which has the promise, the Law has nothing to do with him; it
cannot curse him, or condemn him, for he is not under the Law any longer, but
he is under Grace, Romans 6.14.

But that soul which has not the promise, the Law has to do with him, the Law
curses him, he is under a continual curse: When he eats, and drinks, and
sleeps, the Law curses him; when he is walking abroad, talking with his
neighbors about his ordinary employments, the Law curses him; when he
prays, and cries out of his sins, etc. yet still the Law curses him; for,
there is nothing can remove the curse of the Law but the promise, and that he
has no right or title unto.

7 Finally, that soul which has the Promise all in God is on his side, and
laid out for him; the Justice of God is on his side, and Mercy on his side, the
Truth of God makes for him, the Power of God, the Wisdom of God are laid out
for him; but that soul which has not the Promise, all in God is against him,
all the Divine Attributes are his Enemies, and act against him. The Justice of
God, that is against him, that cries Damn the sinner; the Mercy of God is
against him, and says Mercy, Justice do what thou will with that Sinner, I
will not speak a word for him, for he has nothing to do with me. The Truth of
God that is against him, that speaks not a word of peace or comfort to him.

The Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, these act against him too.

How miserable then is the estate of that man or woman that stands out against
Jesus Christ, he has nothing to do with the Promise, and wanting the Promise,
how woeful his condition is, you have a little heard.

Use 3. Then how blessed is their condition who are married to the Lord Jesus,
why all the Promises are theirs. Having Christ for thy Husband, thou have this
as a Jointure with him, all the Promises of God in him made over unto thee. So
that is there any good thing in Heaven or Earth that God has by Covenant and
Promise given his people? all this is thine. All good things in this life given
by promise, they are thine; glory hereafter given by promise? it is thine. Is
Justification given by Promise, it is thine; is Sanctification? it is thine.
Look whatsoever it is which is the gift of promise, it is thine, for the
promise it self is thine, all the promises thine, Christ being thine, and
therefore all it gives, is thine. The Cabinet being thine, the Jewels are
thine, the Field being thine, the Treasure is thine; thou may feed upon all,
cloth thy self with all the rich and good things which the promise brings.

If a poor beggar-woman that has not a penny, or foot of land, should marry a
Nobleman that has great coffers of gold and silver, large possessions, she may
now go about from one coffer to another, and say, all this is mine, all this
silver is mine, all this gold is mine; and she may ride from one Manor to
another, and say all this land is mine, and all these trees are mine; why they
are all my Husbands, and I have a propriety in him; and so a propriety in them.
So a poor soul that is married to Christ, he may read over every promise, and
say, this is mine, he may look heaven and earth over and say all is mine, all
that is good in either is mine, for all is the estate and inheritance of my
Husband Christ, and I have a propriety in him, and so in all.

There is never a poor Scullion, nor a Drudge, nor a Chimny-sweeper, but if
his, or her soul be married to Christ, he may go about, and look the world
over, and he may read the Book of God, and look heaven over, and say all is
mine, for all these things are given by promise, and the promise is mine,
Christ in whom all the promises are, being mine. Saints do too little think of
this, what they are as they are in Christ, and married to him, were our hearts
ever full of such actual thoughts and considerations, I am married to Christ, I
am united to him, and therefore all the promises are mine, all the good things
promised here, and hereafter, are mine, they would not go about as they do,
moping and mumping, and dreaming all their days, neither rejoicing in their
inheritance, nor acting for their heavenly Husband.

O Saints, take a view of the blessedness of your condition! look it over in
the height, and depth, and length, and breadth of it, be proud of it, so as
to vex the Devil, and shame, and provoke the world. Look upon your selves as
you are, and esteem your selves as you are.

Do not go about whining and whuling, and say, O I have nothing, none is so
poor as I; you shame and disgrace your Husband, has Christ married you, and
has he such a great estate, is he so transcendently rich in promises, and
what has he given you nothing? You would make Christ an ill husband. Well may
sinners be shie and afraid to be married to Christ, when Saints by their
carriage, their whining and whuling, and complaining, speak so ill of him.

Yea whether you speak as you should do, whether there be any truth or reason
in that you say, let wise men judge.

If a man that has many vast possessions of land, and chests of money, and
shops, and warehouses full of rich commodities, should say to his neighbor, I
have nothing, I am afraid I shall starve, or come to the Parish ere long, would
not they count him mad? So when a Saint which has a Magazine of promises,
multitudes of precious promises, the meanest of which is of more worth and
value than a kingdom, shall whine, and say, I have nothing; I know not what to
do, or how to live. --

Obj. Aye, but will some poor soul say, Indeed were I sure that all these
promises were mine, I would not say so, but al as that is my burden, I fear
there are none of them mine; they indeed whose these promises are, are rich,
and such may rejoice, and so could I were these mine, but my affliction is, I
fear they are not mine.

Answ. To thee poor soul I say, Roll thy self on Christ, come to him, and all
are thine. Coming to Christ (as I said before) is that which gives a man right
and title to all the promises; for, by coming to Christ, thou are married to
Christ, by marriage to Christ all the promises are thine. Do not therefore
stand querying, Are they mine? Are they mine? and run to this grace, and look
to the other qualification, to make it out, whether they are thine or no; no, but
say to thy soul, Coming is that which makes all mine; Coming makes Christ mine,
and in him all the promises mine; whether they are mine or no as yet, I will
not stand now upon that, however I know (suppose the worst that they are not
mine) what will make them so, and that is coming; I will therefore now venture
upon Christ, if I have never come to him yet, I will now begin; and then I know
if Christ receive me a poor sinner, as he has promised that he will ( For
him that comes to me, says he, I will in no wise cast out) that all these
shall streightway be mine, and I shall be rich, as rich as any, being now by
coming married to Christ, made one with him, and so enriched with the goods and
substance of my husband Christ.

Use. 4. Of Examination, for the creature to look if it has interest in
Christ, if thou have, then the promises are thine. That soul that has interest
in Christ.

1 Prizeth Christ as its head, and looks upon the absence of Christ as worst
of all: It has enough if it has seen the face of Christ, all is nothing if
his face be hid. O let it go through hell it self, nothing goes so near to the
soul, as to loose the presence of Christ.

2 It desires to be under the Government of Christ, by the Spirit of Christ,
it desires to follow the teachings of Christ's Spirit.

3 It longs for the appearance of Christ, Tit. 2.13. where as the world
cannot endure it.

A poor creature may be under temptation and not find these things, but at
one time or other, he may find these; some longings, when will Christ come?

Use 5. Of Exhortation to all that have Christ, clear up your interest in
Christ, and the more comfort will you take in the promises. Now for the
clearing up the souls interest in Christ.

1 Study the knowledge of the grace of God more: The more inward feeling
knowledge there is of the Grace of God, the more thou shall have thy interest
in Christ cleared up.

2 Labor for a believing frame, Faith is the evidence of things not seen, Heb.
11.1. After ye believed, ye were sealed, Ephesians. 1. v. 13.

3 Labor to distinguish between true and false evidences.

Quest. How may a soul know that its evidence is true?

Answ. 1. If thy evidence for life and salvation does transform, change, and
renew the soul: The heart, that before it had an evidence, was exceedingly
proud, now is wonderfully humble; now it finds corruption dying. The soul
that before was dead to any duty, now it acts, duty is pleasant, a privilege.

Now at that time it is humbled, and admiring God, and cries out, What shall I
say? What shall I do? O what shall such and such corruptions lodge within me?
When there is a purging the soul, then the evidence is true.

2 If thy evidence, when it is lost, be out of thy power to recover it again,
when it is enjoyed, out of thy power to keep it: When it comes in at first by
an Almighty power, throwing down all before it, and thouloosest it, and can
not regain it, it is a sign, it is no evidence of thy own making, for if it
were of thy own making, thou might get it up again. Nor it is no evidence of
the Devils making, to humble the soul, to make God all, to make the soul more
watchful.

If thou would clear up thy interest in Christ, then entertain nothing that
may go against that interest; Some things do darken it, as,

1 Groundless fears and surmises, give not way to such fears, for the further
off you will be from God, they drive you from God.

2 Giving way to reason against thy faith; Some souls will dispute out the case
to the utmost; not to me, and not to me, and so stand reasoning out faith. It
is faith whereby thou must see thy interest, if thou blindest the eye, how
shall thou see?

I speak not to loose livers.

3 Vnstedfastness in the doctrine of Christ. As a man's principles are, so is
his faith; if his principles be uncertain, so is his faith; If his knowledge
be too and fro, he is not settled: Do not change opinions as men do fashions;
I mean in the principles of grace, foundation truths, of the Righteousness of
Christ, Justification, etc. for if thou do, thou shakest all; for thy
evidence being from thence, this being taken away thou fallest.

Use 6. To all that are without Christ: Are these things so, that all the
promises are made to us in Christ, then Come to Christ: How should the
consideration of this provoke every poor beggared soul, now to make a close
with Jesus Christ. Thou poor soul, which if thou were to dye to morrow, have
never a promise to run to, to take comfort in, to bear thy poor dying soul
upon; O come to Christ, and all shall be thine, for all the promises are his,
they are all in him, and by having him thou shall have all.

O souls, did you but know the worth of Christ in this respect, I mean
considering this, that all the promises are stored up in him, you would not go
quietly out of this place, you would not sleep one night more, without hearts
breathing after Christ, and rolling your selves on him.

Says Christ to the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4.10. If thou knew the gift of
God, and who it is that says to thee, give me to drink, thou would have
asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. So say I, poor soul,
if thou did but know the gift of God, Jesus Christ, if thou did but know
the worth of Christ; If thou did but know what precious promises, what
multitudes of them, and what transcendent worth is in every one, the meanest of
them, are in Christ, thy heart would not contain without breathing, thy tongue
would not be silent any longer without asking the Father to give thee this
Christ.

O how many poor souls, now here, which did they but know the worth of one
promise, would now cry out to God, O Christ, Christ, Christ, Lord give this
Christ to me, and to me. Were the worth of promises known, then the worth of
Christ, in whom all the promises are, would be better known.

Put case, man, woman, thou were sure thou should dye to morrow, and had
now all the sins that ever thou have committed from thy cradle to this day,
lying upon thee, and burdening of thee, and thy conscience tormenting thee for
them, and thou were at hell gate, and hell fire ready to receive thee, and
swallow thee up for ever, what then in thy account would a promise of pardon
and remission of sins, a promise of heaven and eternal life be worth? What?
Why all that I have in the world, says the man, yea a whole world, ten
thousand worlds, were there so many, or had I so many.

But it may be some of you are so blockish and senseless and regardless of
things of this nature, that by this that I have said (you are so little
acquainted with such things) you would not know the worth of a promise,
therefore to speak in a more familiar way, and to show you the worth of a
promise a little from things you do know.

Put the case, now man, or woman, thou were condemned to dye some cruel death,
full of the greatest tortures that can be imagined, such a death as some
Histories tell us one Ravillac which traitorously murdered the King of France
was put to, who had first one of his hands cut off, then the other, then was
carried to the place of execution, where he had the flesh of his body plucked
off with burning red hot pincers, and then incisions and holes were made into
the fleshy parts of his body, and there they poured in scalding melted lead,
and so kept him alive some days torturing of him in this, and a more cruel
manner, till in the end he dyed. Now suppose thou were condemned to dye such a
death as this was, and this were to be executed upon thee to morrow, if so be
the Prince should come to thee overnight, and give thee a promise of pardon,
that he would pardon thee, and save thee from this cruel death, what think
thou (suppose the case were so) in thy account, would such a promise be worth?
O I am persuaded if the case were so, thou would not know how thy heart
would be so extraordinarily taken, to speak the worth of it; the very hearing
of a word of pardon at such a time would so overcome thee, as that thou
would be ready to dye for joy.

And poor soul, know it, that such a promise as this, is but a poor promise,
not worth the being called a promise, in respect of the promises of God in
Christ; the meanest, the least of which are far greater, and of more invaluable
worth than hundreds of such as this.

This is only a promise of temporal life, and of deliverance from a temporal
punishment, which may last three or four days; but the promises of Christ, are
promises of an eternal life, and of deliverance from eternal torments; and if
one of these promises of Christ are of so great, and of such invaluable worth,
then what is Christ himself, in whom all the promises are, in whom there are
innumerable promises of such great value, every one of which, sinner, shall be
thine, Christ being thine.

O sinners, sinners, did you know but the worth of a promise, and so the worth
of Christ, your hearts would presently fall in love with him, and you would run
about as the Spouse in the Canticles (who having lost her beloved, and knowing
well by good experience the worth of him) did till she had found him, she runs
about the streets seeking of him; she meets one, and asks him, Can you tell
me of my Beloved? No; away she goes and runs to another, Can you tell me of
my Beloved? No; So you should have men and women now do, if they did but
apprehend what a promise were worth, you should have them go home, and the man
would not be at quiet to eat his dinner, or go to bed at night? but he would
run to such an honest man his neighbor, and say, O good neighbor, I was told
to day what unspeakable worth the promises are of, and how that all these are
to be had in Christ, Can you tell me how I may come to have this Christ mine,
that so all these may be mine; and if he could not answer him satisfactorily,
he would run to the next honest man his neighbor, and ask him after the same
manner; Ah were the worth of Promises known, you should have many a poor man
here that has a godly wife, or a godly child that knows Christ (though it may
be he has little cared for them) now go home, and the husband would say, Ah
wife, I heard the worth of promises, and that all these are in Christ, could
thou tell me somewhat of Christ now? And the father or mother would say, Ah
son! ah daughter (indeed I have not loved thee as I should, but child) I heard
the worth of Promises, and that all these are in Christ, could thou tell me
somewhat of Christ now? And if poor sinners would do thus, how many godly wives
hearts would leap to hear this, coming from their carnal husbands, and godly
children, to hear this from their carnal parents.

Sinners, O close with Christ, then all the Promises shall be yours.

Some of you are Mariners and going out to Sea, and now suppose (as such
things have befallen others) your ship should sink under you, or be cast away
by stress of weather, as soon as you are in the Ocean, what would a promise
then, a pardon of sin, of God being your God, be worth?

Some of you are Soldiers, and though you are here, yet you do not know how
soon you may be called out to meet your enemies in the field, and suppose
there, thou that now drinkest, and art merry, should be shot through, or run
through, and lie wallowing in thy blood, and gasping for breath, what then would
a promise of the forgiveness of thy sins, of heaven, everlasting life, be
worth? O come to Christ.

Object. 1. My sins are so great, I dare not come.

Answ. 1. Greatness of sin should not keep thee from Christ, who came to save
the greatest sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I
am chief.

2 Thy greatest sin, is not to come to Christ. Unbeleef is the greatest sin
under the Gospel. Mark. 16. v. 14. Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as
they sat at meat, and upbraided them with their unbeleef and hardness of heart,
because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen. Luke 24.
v. 25. Then he said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that
the Prophets have spoken. Romans 11. v. 20. Well, because of unbeleef they were
broken off -- If it were under the Law, then much more under the Gospel; but so
it was. Psalm. 78. v. 18. to 23. And they tempted God in their heart, by asking
meat for their lust, yea they spoke against God, they said, Can God furnish a
table in the wilderness? v. 20. Behold he smote the rock that the waters
gushed out, and the streams overflowed, Can he give bread also? Can he
provide flesh for his people? v. 21. Therefore the Lord heard this, and was
wroth, so a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up against
Israel. v. 22. Because they [beleeved not] in God, and [trusted not] in his
salvation. Heb. 3.19. They could not enter in, because of unbeleef.

The sentence of damnation in the Gospel is pronounced against sinners, not as
sinners, but unbeleevers. Mark. 16. v. 16. He that believes, and is baptized
shall be saved, he that believes not, shall be damned. Joh. 3.18. He that
believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of
the only begotten Son of God. verse. 19. This is the condemnation that light is
come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light. verse. 36. He
that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him. 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth.

3 Saints of former ages have made this a ground of encouragement, not of
discouragement. Psalm. 25.11. For thy names sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity
[for it is great.]

4 All manner of sin, the greatest is pardonable. Mark. 3. v. 28. Verily I say
unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies,
wherewithsoever they shall blaspheme, but he that shall blaspheme against the
Holy Ghost, has never forgiveness.

5 Gods design in the last age, is to declare the exceeding riches of Grace.
Ephesians. 2.7. That in the ages to come, he might show the exceeding riches of his
grace, in his kindness toward us, through Jesus Christ.

This is shown in pardoning great sinners.

Object. 2. But had I a broken heart I could come, mine is as a flint, I dare
not.

Answ. Either it is in thy power to get this, or out of thy power; the former
none will grant, if the latter, then come to Christ for it. The way to have thy
heart broken, is, to come to Christ. Goats blood dissolveth the Adamant, which
the hammer cannot break; so the blood of Christ dissolveth the Adamantine
heart. Zach. 12.10. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son. Ezekiel. 16. last. That
thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more,
because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou have
done, says the Lord God.

Object. 3. But I shall presume in coming to Christ.

Answ. 1. Not so long as thou expectest all, not for thy merit, but his mercies
sake.

2 Not so long as thou have no resolution to have Christ* and hold any sin.

Object. 4. But I have been an enemy to him, an opposer, scoffer at his ways
and people.

Answ. It is sad to oppose, but consider,

1 That all that ever have been reconciled, have had enmity in their natures to
Christ, and his ways, which has not hindered their reconciliation, Ephesians. 2. v.
1, 2, 3, 4. Col. 1.21. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in
your mind by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled.

2 That there are many souls now in heaven, who have acted forth their enmity
in as high a way as thou have done; what say you to Paul, and others?

Object* 5. But Christ does not belong to me.

Answ. 1. Thou should not hearken to an objection which tends to drive thee
from Christ, when he commands to come to him.

2 If God gives thee a heart to come, then is the matter out of doubt, Christ
belongs to thee, for believing gives thee a right, Gal. 3.22. That the promise
by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.

3 Whether Christ belong to thee, or no, its better to cast thy self upon him,
and dye in obedience, than to run from him, and dye in disobedience.

4 Whatsoever makes against faith is assuredly from the Devil, and not to be
believed, this does so.

Object. 6. But I am not elected.

Answ. 1. Election is a secret, secrets belong to God, I am not to question
Gods secret will, whether or no I am elected, but to obey his revealed will,
which commands to believe.

2 The way to know election being a secret, is, not to question the same, but
believe in hope, against hope, Heb. 11.1. Now faith is the substance of things
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.

3 Upon this ground thou shall never believe, for if thou can not know thine
election but by believing, and wilt not believe till thou know thou art
elected, thou shall never believe.

4 By this thou wrongest Gods intention in revealing it, who never revealed it
to keep souls from coming to Christ, but to strengthen their faith, being come.

5 Thou hereby set one part of Gods will against another, that which
discovers election, against that which requires believing.

6 Thy questioning thou art not elected, proves not the thing, if any thing,
the contrary, because Satan the father of lies tells thee so.

Object. 7. But I have no power to come to Christ.

Ans. Seek a power of God, see a Promise for encouragement, Isa. 40.29, 30, 31.
He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increases
strength, verse. 30. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men
shall utterly fall, verse. 31. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew
their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and
not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint.

Obj. 8. But I have not a heart to seek?

Ans. Have no tongue neither? seek though with thy lips, God may give a heart
whilst thou art speaking, Hos. 14.1, 2 Take words and turn to the Lord, say
unto him, take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously.

Obj. 9. But alas, I have a long time sought a power and find none, which has
made me weary, and to give over seeking.

Ans. 1. God is a free Agent, and therefore will not be limited to time, or
ways in working, but will work when and how he pleases; and likewise an
infinite being, and therefore a Creature may not comprehend him in time, which
destroys his infiniteness, but leave him all time to work in his own. It was
Isreal's fault to limit God, Psalm. 78.41. Yea they turned back and tempted God,
and limited the holy one of Israel.

2 Thou have not sought perhaps in faith, therefore not found what thou seek
for, Jam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss; Israel sought
righteousness yet obtained not; why? Romans 9.31, 32, with Chap. 11.7. Israel
which followed after the Law of righteousness, has not attained to the Law of
righteousness, verse. 32. Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith -- So
--

3 Will thou say, because thou have not, thou never shall, this conclusion
follows not.

4 God works all for the glory of his grace, which as yet may be more magnified
in denying than giving; when a soul can live no longer without a mercy, it
comes with a welcome, and grace is exalted; hence God often seems to deny a
mercy, not because he will not give, but because the extremity is not so
great, as may stand with the advancement of his grace in giving, Isa. 30.18.
And therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you, and
therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you, Isa, 33.10. Now
will I rise, says the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self,
Isa. 63.12, 13, 14, Where is he that put his holy Spirit within him? that led
them by the right hand of Moses, with his glorious arm, dividing the water
before them, to make himself an everlasting name, verse. 13. That led them
through the deep as an horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble?
verse. 14. As a beast goes down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused
him to rest; so did thou lead thy people, to make thy self a glorious name.

5 The longer a thing has been sought, the more sweet, and satisfying when
found: long seeking will make Christ sweeter, Mercy sweeter.

6 Thou faintest, and art weary, see what God says to one in this condition,
Isa. 40.28. to the end: Have thou not known? have thou not heard, that the
everlasting God, the Lord the Creator of the ends of the earth, faints not,
neither is weary? There is no searching of his understanding.

7 Add to thy seeking, waiting; if inferiors wait on Superiors, much more
should creatures on the Creator; seeking, shows want and desire, this may have
self-love in it; waiting, shows subjection to God, and submission to his will,
this is true Self-denial, to such, a blessing is pronounced, Isa. 30.18.
Blessed are all they that wait for him.

Object. 10. But I am filled with fears (as I think none) that I am a rejected
person, a castaway, and therefore in vain to come.

Answ. This arises only from Isreal's mistake, Isa. 40.27. My way is hid from
the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God. Yet see her folly, verse.
28, 29, etc. Have thou not known. --

Yea Sion from the same mistake says as much, yet false, Isa. 49.14, 15, 16.
But Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me.
verse. 15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the Son of her womb? yea they may forget, yet will not I forget
thee. verse. 16. Behold I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls
are continually before me.

It can be nothing but sin, can make thee think thus; See what God says to it,
Jer. 51.5. For Israel has not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the Lord
of hosts, though their land was filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel.

Object. 11. But I have been with Christ, and since am a notorious backslider,
and dare not come again.

Answ. Though it has been thy sin to run from him, yet now it is thy duty to
come again to him; thou have not been so ready to run away, but he is as ready
to receive thee. Consider but one example of God to Israel, Jer. 2.3. both
Chapters.

1 Their backslidings were many, Jer. 3.22. I will heal your [backslidings.]

2 They were backsliders in diverse and sundry ways, Jer. 3.1. Thou have played
the harlot with many lovers.

3 Their backslidings in world and deed, were as foul, and great as could be.
Jor. 3.5. Thou have spoken and done evil things as thou could.

4 They had been backsliders for a long time, verse. 25. We have sinned against
the Lord our God, we and our fathers from our youth, even unto this day, and
have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God.

5 Backslidings open and public, verse. 6. Have thou not seen that which
backsliding Israel has done? she is gone up upon every high mountain, and
under every green tree, and there has played the harlot.

They had before them examples of others going in such paths, with Gods anger
against them, yet took no warning, verse. 7, 8. And I saw when for all the
causes whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery, I had put her away, and
given her a bill of divorce, yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but
went and played the harlot also.

7 Against resolutions and promises, Jer. 2.20. For of old time I have broken
thy yoke, and burst thy bands, and thou saidest I will not transgress, when
upon every high hill, and under every green tree thou wandrest, playing the
harlot.

8 Against corrections, Jer. 2.30. In vain have I smitten your children, they
received no correction.

9 Against Entreaties, Chap. 3.7. And I said after she had done all these
things, turn thou unto me, but she returned not.

10 Wilfully, Chap. 2. v. 31.25. But thou saidest there is no hope, no, for I
have loved strangers, and after them will I go.

11 They justified themselves in their doings, Chap. 2.35. Yet thou say,
because I am innocent, surely this anger shall turn from me, behold I will
plead with thee, because thou say, I have not finned.

Yet these backsliders are wooed again, and again, to return, Jer. 3.1. Thou
have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return again to me, says the
Lord, v. 4. Will thou not from this time cry unto me. My Father, thou art the
guide of my youth? And verse. 7. I said after she had done all these things,
turn thou unto me, verse. 12. Go and proclaim these words toward the North,
and say, Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, verse. 14. Turn, O
backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you, verse. 22.
Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings; Behold we
come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God.

Object. 12. But I fear I am but an hypocrite.

Answ Come that thou may be sincere: Christ calls at the door of Laodicea,
yet a formal, hypocritical Church; yea God spreads forth his hands to such,
Jsa 65.2. compared with 5. I have spread out my hands all the day unto a
rebellious people, which walks in a way that was not good, after their own
thoughts, verse. 5. Which say stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am
holier than thou, these are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the
day. What now poot soul have thou to object, but that thou may come to
Christ, and cast thy self into his arms and bosom?

O Come, Come, Come, behold everlasting arms open to receive thee. Come,
profane person, formalist, here is heaven and salvation, to be had freely, if
you have hearts to take it, all for a nothing-creature: O Come, Drunkard will thou lie and roll like a Swine in thy drunkenness, and not come to Christ, and
have a heaven? Swearer, will thou rend Gods name, and reject a heaven? Unclean
person, will thou prize thy lusts above a Christ, a heaven? O no, no, Fie for
shame.

Come likewise poor doubting soul, cast thy self into Christ's arms, he will
not cast thee out: Take Hesters resolution, If I perish, I perish, I will
perish in doing my duty, and going in to the King: If I dye, I dye, however I
will dye doing my duty, and hanging upon Jesus Christ; say to thine own soul,
as once the Lepers who sat in the gate of Samaria, said one to another, a
King. 7.4. If we say we will enter into the City, then the famine is in the
City, and we shall dye there, and if we sit still here, we dye also; now
therefore come and let us fall into the host of the Syrians, if they save us
alive, we shall live, and if they kill us, we shall but dye. So say, If I
stand where I am, I dye, if I return to old courses, I dye likewise; what then?
I will venture on Christ, if he save me alive, I live, if he kill me, I can
but dye. Amen.

Proposit. 2 That all the promises of God made to sinners in Jesus Christ,
shall certainly and assuredly be fufilled and accomplished.

Its cleared 1 King. 8. v. 56. Blessed be the Lord, that has given rest unto
his people Israel, according to all that he promised, there has not failed one
word of all his good promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses his
servant.

God made a promise to Moses of giving rest, etc. to the people of Israel, this
promise God was punctual to a word in the fulfilling of it: And this was a
promise of the Law made to Moses the Lawgiver on the behalf of that people:
Now if God were so punctual in fulfilling the promises of the Law, which were
made to Moses, and given into his hand for that people, that he would not fail
in a tittle; how much more punctual (think you) will he be, in fulfill those
promises which are made to Christ, and given into his hand of the Saints, such
as all the promises of Law and Gospel now are to the people of God.

Now for the fuller clearing of this truth, both that it is, and must be so, I
shall lay before you some Demonstrative grounds, which may serve to strengthen
and confirm our faith in this great point, That all the promises made in
Christ, shall most certainly be fulfilled, and accomplished.

Demonstrat. 1. From the Text, They are in Christ.

2 From the great obligations lying upon God the Father and Jesus Christ to see
to it, that the promises be fulfilled.

Engagement 1. Promises cost Christ dear before he had them; though they are a
gift to us, yet Christ paid for them. The first Adam had the promises for
nothing, but he by his fall squandring away the promises, none of his seed
could ever have been partakers of any of them, had not Christ the second Adam
stepped in, and by paying a price to his Father Justice redeemed the promises
again.

Now the price was no less than his own life, and the promises having cost
Christ so dear, this obliges him to look to it, that they be fulfilled.

Engagem. 2. Christ cannot put the promises to other use; For, for himself he
has no need of them; the evil Angels, and good too, God did in a manner except
them from having benefit by them, when he willed his Son to take man's nature
upon him rather than theirs.

Now adding this to the former, that the promise cost Christ so dear, and can
be put to no other use than to be fulfilled to his people, this may give us
good assurance, both of the great engagement that lies upon Christ to do it,
and also that it shall be done; For if a man has bought a thing dear, and
there is but one use it can be put to, he will not fail of that.

Engage. 3. The promises are now in Christ's hand. Christ takes it ill from men,
if they have a talent in their hands, and do not improve it, as in the Parable
of the Sloathful servant. Now Christ having so great a talent in his hand as
the rich treasure of the promises, which talent, as it may be improved much
for the glory of God, and the good of his people, so can it not be improved
any way but by fulfilling them, and in case Christ see them not fulfilled, the
talent lies by in his hand useless, which cannot but engage Christ to see to it
that the promises be fulfilled; this the Apostle seems to hint at in the
Text, when he says, All are in him, i.e. they are in Christ's hand, in his
keeping, and therefore says he, They are Yea, and Amen, i.e. true, certain,
immutable, shall most certainly be fulfilled, Christ will not suffer such a
Talent to be in his hand, and not improve it.

Engage. 4. The promises are not only in the hand of Christ, but Christ has
received them of his Father for this end, that he should give them forth to
sinners.

God gave them into Christ's hand, upon this condition, that he should not keep
them himself, not let them lie by useless, but give then forth to poor sinners,
as Act. 2.33. Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having
received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this
which ye now see and hear.

Engage. 5. Christ by promise is engaged to see them fulfilled. A man's promise
lays an engagement and an obligation upon him; Christ has promised to see them
accomplished. He gives us his promise upon his Fathers promise, that the
promises shall be fulfilled, Luke 24.49. And behold, I send the promise of my
Father upon you. God the Father had promised to send the Spirit, here Christ
adds his promise to it, as to say, Has my Father promised the Spirit, why I do
promise it shall be made good, for I will send him.

Now poor soul, do thou doubt whether the Promises shall be fulfilled, why
consider a little what engagement lies upon Christ, to see to the fulfilling of
them.

2 I may demonstrate the truth from those great ties and engagements that lie
upon God the Father, to see to it, that the Promises be fulfilled. As there
are great engagements lie upon Christ, so upon the Father also.

Engage 1. The declaration God has made of his own name engages him to it,
Exodus 34.6. God has declared this to be a part of his Name, that the is
abundant in goodness and truth, and how can this be, should he not fulfill
his promise?

Engage. 2. Gods faithfulness engages him to it, Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast
the profession of our faith without wavering, for he is faithful that promised.

This was the ground of Sarahs believing, God promised, and though much might
be said in reason against the thing, yet judging him faithful she believes,
Heb. 11.11. Through faith Sarah her self received strength to conceive seed,
and was delivered of a Child when she was past age, because she judged him
faithful who had promised. Hence Balaam reasons, God is not as man, therefore
cannot lie, or be unfaithful.

Engage. 3. Gods promise it is a part of his Covenant: what is the Covenant of
Grace, but a bundle of precious Promises? now God will not break his Covenant in
any part of it. See for this, Isa. 54.10. For the mountains shall depart, and
the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall
the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee.
God speaks high language --

Engage. 4. God has added his Oath to his Promise, Heb. 6.17. wherein God
willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise, the immutability of
his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath. As an Oath confirms another in the
certainty of the thing he swears to, and therefore says the Apostle, An Oath
is for confirmation, verse. 16. so does it lay upon another an engagement to do,
what the has sworn to, and indeed the great engagement that an Oath lays upon
the party swearing, is that whereby the other is confirmed. Now, God has for
the strengthening of our faith, added his Oath to his Promises; God (as with
reverence I may say) should break his Oath, and forswear himself, if he should
not see to it, that the Promises be fulfilled.

Engage. 5. God has pawned and morgaged Heaven and Earth upon it, the Covenant
of the day and night, that he will not break his promise, Jerem. 31. verse. 34,
35, 36, 37. But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the House of
Israel; after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward
paris -- verse. 35. Thus says the Lord, which gives the Sun for a light to the
day, and the courses of the Moon, and of the Stars for a light to the night,
which breaks the Sea when the waves thereof roar: his name is the Lord of
Hosts, verse. 36. If these Ordinances depart out of my sight, says the Lord,
then shall the seed of Israel cease from being a Nation before me for ever,
verse. 37. Thus says the Lord, if the Heavens can be measured, or the
foundations of the Earth be searched out beneath, then will I cast off all the
seed of Israel, for all that they have done, says the Lord. God before had
made many precious Promises to Israel, now lest any should doubt of the
fulfilling of them, God here lays Heaven and Earth to pawn upon it; so Chap.
33. ver. 25, 26. the same with the former.

Engage. 6. God expects we should fulfill our promises to him, and therefore
by the rule of equity he himself will do the same, Deuteronomy. 23.23. That which is
gone out of thy lips thou shall keep and perform, as thou have vowed it
willingly unto the Lord thy God, for thou have spoken it with thy mouth.

Engage. 7. God takes breach of promise exceeding ill in man, and therefore
himself will not do it, Nehem. 5.13.

To all that has been said, let me add a word or two more,

1 The Saints venture upon the Promises, and so should be deceived in their
hopes, if they were not fulfilled. 2 They are the Saints inheritance, Saints
are heirs of promise, Heb. 4.1. and 6.17. God willing more abundantly to show
unto the Heirs of promise -- Saints should be deprived of their inheritance,
should not the Promises be fulfilled. 3 Saints should sustain injury by it,
should they not be fulfilled. 4 The experience of all Ages show us, that God
has ever fulfilled his promise; God made a promise to the Fathers that Christ
should come, this he fulfilled when Christ came, Act. 13.32, 33. And we
declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the
Fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us their Children, in that he has
raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee.
God made a promise to Noah, that the Earth should not be drowned -- this
though the world has stood four thousand years since, yet God has never
broken.

God made a promise to Abraham, that at the end of four hundred and thirty
years, his Seed should come out from amongst those that afflicted them, with
great substance, Genesis 15.13, 14. This God punctually fulfilled to a day, Evod.
12 verse. 41. And it came to pass at the end of four hundred and thirty years,
even the self same day, it came to pass, that all the Hosts of the Lord went
out from the Land of Egypt.

God made a promise to Joseph, that he should rule over his Brethren,

God made a promise to David of the Kingdom,

God made a promise to Israel, that at the end of seventy years Captivity in
Babylon they should be delivered, and these Promises he fulfilled.

God made a promise to his people of the Spirit, Joel. 2. Zach. 12.10. and
chap. 2. the same in 14, 15, 16. Chap. of John, and this God makes good, Acts 2.

Obj. 1. O but will some poor soul say, True, God has made such a promise, but
me thinks I see so many, and so great difficulties, and discouragements in the
way of Gods fulfilling the same, that I cannot think ever God will fulfill it.

Ans. 1 Are the difficulties or discouragements greater than those Abraham met
with? he had a promise of a Son,

1 He waits twenty five years after the promise was made, as will appear if you
compare Genesis 12.4. with chap. 21.5. Abraham was seventy and five years old when
he departed out of Haran, where he had the promise, Genesis 12.2. and he was an
hundred years old when his Son Isaac was born unto him, Genesis 21, 5. was not
this a great discouragement? might not Abraham have said every year, sure the
Promise will never come? --

2 He waits so long till his own body was dead, and Sarahs womb; the means by
which the promise should be brought about, there was a death upon it, so as
that in a Natural way there was no hope, and therefore he is said to believe
in hope against hope, Romans 4.18. did not this much heighten the
discouragements, and make difficulty greater? might not Abraham say, well, now
I see there is no hope?

3 After God had given him a Son, yet God commands him to offer him up.

Did not this make difficulty the greater? Abraham might say, This Son of mine
is the only Son in whom the Promise is to be fulfilled, and God commands me to
offer him up.

Now notwithstanding all these, Abraham believes; before he had a Son, he
believed that God who had promised was able to perform it; and after, when God
bids him sacrifice his Son, God still was able.

2 Gods remembrance of his promise makes him to work wonderously over the head
of all difficulties, Psalm. 105.42. compared with the former verses, For he
remembered his holy promise.

3 Is any thing too hard for the Lord?

Obj. 2. O but I have sinned exceedingly against God, since such and such a
Promise has been made unto me?

Ans. Yet God remembers his promise, Psalm. 106.45. compared with former verses;
And he remembered for them his Covenant -- yet ver. 34. They did not destroy the
Nations concerning whom the Lord commanded them, verse. 35. But were mingled
among the Heathen, and learned their works, verse. 43. They provoked him with
their counsel; and yet God remembered his Covenant, v. 45 and as he remembers
his promise, so he will fulfill it.

Christ before his death gave his Disciples a promise of the Spirit; after this
they deal more unkindly with him than ever, Peter denies him, some sleep when
he was in the midst of his agony, all forsake him and fly, and yet Christ
fulfills his promise to them.

How exceedingly did Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat King of Judah, make Judah
to sin? 2 King. 8 18. He walked in the way of the Kings of Israel, as did the
house of Ahab, for the daughter of Ahab was his wife, and he did evil in the
sight of the Lord.

Yet for all this, because God had made a promise to David, that he should
always have a light, he will not therefore destroy Judah, as verse. 19. yet
the Lord would not destroy Judah for David his servants sake, as he promised
to give him always a light, and to his children.

Gods Covenant, Isa. 54.9. is said to be like the waters of Noah; when God had
brought a flood upon the world in Noah's time, God swear to Noah he would not
drown the carth, as you may read, Genesis 8.21. For the imagination of man's heart
is evil from his youth, -- it should be rendered, Although the imagination. --

Such is Gods Covenant and Promise that he will not break it, although the
heart of man be evil.

Again, thou have sinned, what is thy sin, but a breach of the Law? Now the
Promise was before the Law, and therefore thy breach of the Law cannot disanul
the Promise, Gal. 3. v. 15, 16, 17. And this I say, that the Covenant that was
confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and thirty
years after cannot disanul, that it should make the Promise of none effect.

Object. 3. But I am a poor unworthy creature.

Answ. The Promise is a gift, Gal. 3.22. That the promise by faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to them that believe.

Object. 4. But had I something of that God has promised, in way of pawn or
pledge, I then could believe.

Answ. Abraham had nothing but a bare promise, and yet he believes, Act. 7.5.
And he gave him none inheritance in it, not so much as to set his foot on, yet
he promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed
after him, when as yet he had no child. We should believe God upon his bare
promise, as the Samaritans believed Christ, because of his own word, Joh. 4.41.
And many more believed, because of his own word.

Object. 5. O but I have waited so long for the promise, and yet it comes not,
I see it not fulfilled, that my soul faints, I begin to be without hope that
ever it will be fulfilled.

Answ. Have thou waited longer then Abraham? Abraham had a promise of a Son,
but waited twenty five years, as bath been showed, have thou waited yet twenty
five years, or half that time.

Object. 6. But I find much unbeleef in my heart about it, I cannot believe
the fulfilling of the promise, and therefore undoubtedly though God could
fulfill it, yet my unbeleef will hinder.

Ans. 1. Can thy unbeleef hinder what God would do? then is thy sin greater
than the power of God.

2 Have thou such a promise made to thee? then assure thy self thy unbeleef
shall never hinder it, 2 Timothy 2.12, 13. If we believe not, yet he abides
faithful, he cannot deny himself, Rome. 3.3. What if some did not believe,
shall their unbeleef make the faith of God, without effect? God forbid.

Was there not much unbeleef in David concerning the promise God had made to
him touching the Kingdom, when he said, I shall now perish one day by the
hand of Saul? 1 Samuel 27.1. Yet God made it good.

So in Zacharias, Luke 1. when he said, Whereby shall I know this? for I am an
old man, and my wife well stricken in years, v. 18, 19. yet God fulfilled it.

3 Put case thou can not believe God will perform it, believe but thus much,
God is able, and it shall be fulfilled. So Abraham did in two as difficult
cases as thine, and by this faith in the power of God obtained the promise in
both, Romans 4.21. And being fully persuaded that what he had promised, he was
able also to perform, Heb. 11.19. Accounting that God was able to raise him (
i.e. Isaac) up even from the dead.

Object. 7. But God does seem apparently to cast me off.

Answ. God cast off the Jews, and yet he calls them again upon this very
account of his love and promise, Romans 11.27. For this is my Covenant unto them,
wh^^ I shall take away their sins.

Object. 8. But I have broken covenant and promise with God, and therefore God
he will break his with me.

Answ. The good things God has promised do not come upon the account of our
Covenant, Ezekiel. 16.61. Then thou shall remember thy ways and be ashamed, when
thou shall receive thy sisters, thine elder, and thy younger, and I will give
them unto thee for daughters [but not by thy Covenant.]

Object. 9. But some soul will say, I do not question whether God will fulfill
his promise, or no, but here is my doubt, I question whether he will fulfill
it to me, such a one as I am.

Answ. 1. Thou ought not to make such a question.

1 Because such a question tends directly to keep thee off from believing,
which is that God commands.

2 Because God has no where said, It does not belong to thee, and where God
does not exclude, thou ought not to exclude thy self.

3 Because such a question is first started in thee by the Devil whom thou
ought not to hearken unto; for it cannot be of God, because he every where
calls souls to believing, and therefore does not put in questions to keep men
from it.

4 Because it is such a question as thou can no way be satisfied in, but
only by ceasing to make it, and closing with the promise.

5 Because we no where find in Scripture that ever any of the Saints made
such questions, or if by reason of any distemper at any time did speak somewhat
like it, yet they are afterward either blamed, or do blame themselves for it.

Answ. 2. Thy very believing of it makes it thine, Gal. 3.22. That the promise
by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. Hene Heb. 11.33.
Saints are said by faith to have obtained promises.

Quest. How may I come to know when the Promise is near fulfilling?

Answ. 1. Extraordinary pressures lying upon thee, is a sign the promise is
near, Exodus 2.24. And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his Covenant
with Abraham, and with Isaac, and with Jacob: and God looked upon the children
of Israel, and God had respect unto them. When the pressures of Israel were so
great, that they sigh and groan under their burden, then God remembers his
Covenant. So Chap. 6.5.

2 Extraordinary deadness, is also a sign the promise is near. Then was the
promise nearest fulfilling to Abraham, when in a natural way his body was dead,
and Sarahs womb dead.

3 Extraordinary growth, Act. 7.17. But when the time of the promise drew nigh,
which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt.

Quest. what does the consideration hereof afford us as matter of comfort?

Answ. There is comfort in this, That our believing the prom^^e shall not be
in vain. Thou shall not be ashamed of thy faith, thy hoping, trusting, staying
upon God, Acts 13.23.32. And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the
promise which was made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us
their Children.

Q. What may we learn hence as our duty?

A. 1. Learn not to charge God foolishly; my meaning is, not to charge God with
breaking of promise,

There is a proneness, or aptness in the Saints themselves, to charge God with
breach of promise, Psalm. 77.8. Does his promise fail for evermore? And to do it
is a very great and provoking evil, Numb. 14.34. After the number of the days
in which ye searched the Land, even forty days (each day for a year) shall ye
bear your iniquities, even forty years, and ye shall know my breach of promise.

Q. But when do we charge God with breach of promise?

Ans. 1. When because the promise tarries a great while, we therefore conclude
it will never come, Psalm. 77.8. Does his promise fail for evermore?

2 When consulting with carnal reason we come to question whether the thing
can be, or how it can be, Numb. 11. verse. 18. to 21. You have wept in the ears
of the Lord, saying, who shall give us flesh to eat? for it was well with us in
Egypt, therefore the Lord will give you flesh, and you shall eat even a whole
month, until it come out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you,
because that ye have despised the Lord which is among you, and have wept
before him, saying, why came we forth out of Egypt?

3 When the lying of great difficulties before us make us to fly back, and run
from the Promise, Numb. 14. verse, 2, 3, 4. the Children of Israel had the
Promise going with them to Canaan, but hearing of the strength of the men, and
Cities of that Land, etc. they will back again into Egypt, and so indeed do
run from the Promise, and this, verse. 34. God calls a charging him with breach
of Promise.

2 Wait for the fulfilling of the promise, Acts 1.4. Wait for the promise of
the Father, which (says Christ) ye have heard of me; and that with patience,
Heb. 6.15. After he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise.

3 Take notice of Gods fulfilling of his promises, when he does fulfill them.
So Solomon did, 1 King. 8. verse. 15. And he said, blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, which spoke with his mouth unto David my Father, and has with his hand
fulfilled it; and verse, 20. And the Lord has performed his word that he spoke,
and I am risen up in the room of David my Father, and sit on the Throne of
Israel, as the Lord promised, verse. 24. verse. 56. Blessed be the Lord that has
given rest unto his people Israel, according to all that he promised, there
has not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by the
hand of Moses his Servant, four times over in this one speech of his, he takes
notice of this.

Although the Promise was made some hundreds of years before, yet he does not
forget it at the time of fulfilling.

So David did, 2 Samuel 7.28. And now O Lord God, thou art that God, and thy
words be true, and thou have promised this goodness unto thy Servant; write a
mark, such a day, in such a place God fulfilled his promise.

4 When thou art in streights, urge God with his promise, Psalm 119.49.
Remember the word unto thy Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope.

So Jehoshaphat did, 2 Chronicles. 20.9. So Jacob did, Genesis 32. verse. 9, 10, 11, 12.
And Jacob said, O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father Isaac, the
Lord, which said unto me, return unto thy Country, and to thy kindred, and I
will deal well with thee? verse. 11. Deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my
Brother, from the hand of Esau, for I fear him, verse. 12. And thou said, I
will surely do thee good, and make thy Seed as the sand of the Sea, which
cannot be numbered for multitude.

5 When thou art in the dark, bless God that thou have a Word, or Promise to
trust in, and rely upon; you may see this in David, Psalm 56.4. Mine enemies
would daily swallow me up, verse, 2. and verse. 4. In God I will praise his word,
in God I have put my trust, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me, verse.
10. In God will I praise his Word, in the Lord will I praise his Word. David
was in streights, and had nothing to trust to, and three times over he
praises God for his Word.

6 Bless God whenever thou have had a promise fulfilled, 1 King. 8.56.
Blessed be the Lord that has given rest unto his people Israel, according to
all that he promised; which that thou may do, pray for the fulfilling of
Promises before they be fulfilled, 2 Chronicles. 1.9. Now O Lord God, let thy
promise unto David my Father be established, etc. Compare this with 1 King. 8.
verse. 15, 16 And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which spoke with
his mouth unto David my Father, and has with his hand fulfilled it, saying,
Since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no
City out of all the Tribes of Israel to build an house, that my Name might be
therein, but I chose David to be over my people Israel. He that prays for the
fulfilling of a Promise before it comes, will bless God when it comes.

Absolute Promises made to Sinners as Sinners.
Isaiah 57. Verse.17, 18, 19. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth,
and smote him: I hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of
his heart.

I have seen his ways and will heal him; I will lead him also, and restore
comforts unto him, and to his mourners.

I create the fruit of the lips, Peace, peace, to him that is afar off, and to
him that is near, says the Lord, and I will heal him.


I Shall not spin out time about the coherence of these three Verses with the
former, or in explication of them, only give you a lesson from them in
general, which is this,

Doctr. That the promises of grace, or the free promises of the Gospel, are
made to Sinners, or to persons as Sinners, under the notion of Sinners.

I shall first clear my meaning in this Proposition, and then show how it
arises from these words taken together in the lump.

To explain my own sense and meaning, take these two things,

1 That I speak not of Promises in general, but only of the absolute promises,
or promises of grace: Concerning conditional promises is another question; that
which I affirm is this, That all absolute promises are made to sinners, or to
persons under that notion. 2 That when I use the term [ as Sinners] my meaning
is no more than this, To persons whilst they are yet without any precedaneous
work or qualification, the promise is made.
How this arises from the words will appear, if we consider two things.

1 The Promises laid down in the words, which are four, and all promises of
Grace belonging to the Covenant of Grace. 1 I will heal him, verse. 18. What
healing? Why, only a healing of the backsliding nature that is in us, this is
a promise of the Covenant of grace, Jer. 32. v. 38. and 40. compared, And they
shall be my people, and I will be their God. verse. 40. And I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do
them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart
from me. 2 I will lead them. What is that but the teaching and direction of the
Spine, promised in the Covenant of grace? Jer. 31.34. And they shall teach no
more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord,
for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto to the greatest of them,
says the Lord. 3 I will restore comfort to him. This spiritual comfort is laid
down as the very substance of the Gospel, the maine thing aimed at in the New
Covenant, Isa. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God, speak
ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned; -- And therefore this too is a New
Covenant promise. 4 A promise or creating peace to them that are afar off, and
nigh, verse. 19. This is the very work of the Gospel, as Ephesians. 2.17. and
therefore this promise must needs relate to the New Covenant, and so be a
promise of Grace.
2 Consider the Qualifications of the persons to whom these promises are made,
even then when they are made, qualified they are, but how, with sin enough, and
too much, though not too much for Grace to mount over; Sinners they were in
grain, and this is all their qualification.
1 Their sin, it was in it self exceeding great and heinous, as is expressed in
these words, The iniquity of his covetousness. Not only covetousness of it
self, an iniquity, but an iniquity (as we may say) there was of this iniquity.
It is a phrase somewhat like that, Romans 7.17. Sinful sin. It was enough for the
Apostle to call Sin, Sin, but that he might speak of the evil of it in the
highest and most transcendent way, he calls it Sinful sin; so it was enough
here for the Prophet to have called Covetousness by its own name, Covetousness,
but to show the height and transcendency of this wickedness of theirs, he
calls it, Iniquity of covetousness.

But 2. Though then evil were great, yet it may be they were ready to be
reformed upon the least appearance of Gods displeasure against such ways and
practices; No, I was wroth* smote them, says God, and what followed, he went
on frowardly, was so far from being made better, that like a froward stubborn
child, grew the worse for Gods correcting of him Aye but,

3 Though he did thus a while, yet it may be in the end he saw his evil,
and did turn to God; No, says God, I have seen his ways, as to say, Poor
creature, he sees not his misery, he takes no notice of his ways, but runs
on frowardly and foolishly; well says God, I have seen his ways, I see of
what a crooked disposition he is, how froward and stubborn, he will not so
much as once bend or bow under all my corrections, but bears himself up in
ways of opposition against me, well says God, I will notwithstanding all
this, heal him etc.

Object. But it seems there was some qualification in him by verse.18. for God
says, He will restore comfort to his mourners.

Answ. No, for here is nothing at all spoken of his mourning, but of others
mourning for him he mourns not at all, but goes on frowardly, in the way of
his heart, but others seeing him, and loving him better than he does himself,
and seeing whither his ways and courses tend, which he takes no notice of,
mourn for him. As when a gracious Father has a child that will swagger and
swear, and there is no reclaiming of him, he, viz. the son, goes merrily and
jollity on in his way, and will be drunk and roar, and what not, he sees not
the evil or danger of the way he is in, neither does he mourn for it, but
his gracious Father loving him better than he does himself, and knowing the
evil of the way, he mourns and sheds many a tear, and gives many a groan
because of him: Now when God comes to reclaim such a sinner, he does not only
comfort him, but such as have mourned for him.

In the carrying this on, I shall show,

First, The truth of it, that it is so:

Secondly Some reasons, why it must needs be so.

Thirdly, Answer an Objection or two.

Fourthly, Apply it.

1 Concerning the first, that it is so, take only a parallel place or two with
this of the Text, as Isaiah 43.12, 23, 24, 25. compared together, But thou have
not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou have been weary of me, O Israel. verse.
23. Thou have not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt offerings, neither
have thou honored me with thy sacrifices: I have not caused thee to serve with
an offering, nor wearied thee with incense, verse. 24. Thou have bought me no
sweet cane with money, neither have thou filled me with the fat of thy
sacrifices, but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me
with thine iniquities. verse. 25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy
tran^gressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. Here God
considers his people in as sinful a condition both for sins of omission and
commission, as a people could be in, and yet thus considered, he makes a
free, precious promise of grace, of the richest grace, viz. forgiveness of sins
(the great New Covenant promise) unto them.

So Psalm. 25.8. Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach
[Sinners] in the way.

The promise of teaching (another New Covenant promise) is made to Sinners.

Object. But in the next verse it is said, He will teach the meek; so that it
seems meekness is the condition of this promise of teaching.

Answ. There is a twofold teaching of the ways of God, a first or beginning
teaching, and a further teaching, or a teaching as to conversion, and a
teaching as to building up. Now the first is promised to sinners, and persons
under that notion, and meekness, is not the condition, but the fruit of it; a
soul is first taught aright to know God, and thereby made meek. The latter,
meekness may be the condition of, in some sense, for the more meek and humble
any man is, the more is he taught of God; but when I call it a condition, it
is not a condition to be wrought by my self, but such a condition as is freely
given to the soul in its embracing of the free promise; for by laying hold of
that word which promises teaching to men as sinners, I am made meek and
humble, this qualification being now wrought in me, God (to the soul thus
qualified) now promises more and further teaching.

2 Why it must needs be so.

Reason 1. Because the Covenant of Grace it self in the first making of it, in
the continual promulgation of it, and in the application thereof, has all
along respect to persons as sinners, and therefore surely all the promises
thereof must be made to persons under that notion. When Jesus Christ first
struck hands with the Father, and entered into Covenant for man, man was then
considered as a sinner, one that had broken Covenant with God, and was now
liable to the censure of Justice, or else what need had there been of a
Sureties entering Bond in man's behalf. Look upon the Promulgation of this
Covenant all along, and it is to man under the notion of being a sinner. In the
very first Promulgation thereof to Adam, what was there in him Antecedent, or
preparatory, save only his Sin? Genesis 3.

In the first clear preaching thereof by Christ and his Apostles to the Nation
of the Jews, was it not preached to them as Sinners? Read Christ's Commission to
the Seventy, Luke 10.5: First say peace, that this peace is Gospel peace is
clear, because they which reject it, reject the Kingdom of God, ver. 11. the
persons to whom this is to be preached, they are the unworthy as well as the
worthy, for they were to preach this to all where they came, ver. 5. yea they
are called Wolves, which marks them out to be Sinners of the worst sort of all,
as verse. 3. Behold, I send you forth as Lambs among Wolves. The order of the
delivery of this is in the first place.

Out of all which I observe, that the preaching, or promulgation of the Gospel,
or Covenant of Grace is to persons, as sinners, for if so be the persons the
Seventy were sent out amongst, were sinners, and if so be the first thing they
were to preach to them, were Gospel peace, then must it of necessity be to them
as sinners, without we should conceive, that wheresoever the Gospel comes, the
Spirit of God goes before, and works upon men's hearts, making them of Sinners
no sinners, and that before ever a word is spoken to them, which granted, we
have no need of the Word, you may throw away your Bibles, the Spirit does work
without them.

In the first preaching thereof to the Gentiles, it was to persons as sinners,
as Mark last, 15. it was to be preached to all rational Creatures, and under
what consideration could this be preached to all and every man, but this of
being sinners, for none will say that all to whom the Gospel came were
righteous and qualified persons, and yet it was to be preached to all.

So that at three remarkable times as ever the World saw, viz. at the first
preaching of the Gospel to the World, the first clear preaching thereof to the
Nation of the Jews, and the first preaching thereof to the Gentiles, the Gospel
or Covenant of Grace was ever preached to persons as sinners; as in the
Promulgation, so it the Application, is it not to persons as sinners* We have
an express place for this, Ezekiel. 16 verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. And when I passed by
thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee, when thou
wast in thy blood, live; yea I sail unto thee when thou wast in thy blood live
-- ver. 8. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time was
the time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness,
yea I swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord
God, and thou becamest mine. verse. 9. Then I washed thee with water -- Here we
may read of the Application of this New Covenant to the Creature, and all the
benefits thereof, as our effectual Vocation, our Justification, Sanctification,
Adoption, etc. and in what state or condition is the Creature when all this is
applied to it, why see verse. 6. polluted in its blood, Thou wast in thy blood,
in thy blood, in thy blood, and then (says God) I said unto thee, live; and
that time when thou wast in thy blood was the time of love --

Now this I say, if it be so that the Covenant of Grace in the first making of
it, in the continual promulgation of it, in the application of it to the
Creature, be still to persons as sinners; then surely all the Promises of Grace
(wherein the whole, or substance of this new Covenant lies) must likewise be
to persons under that notion.

Reas. 2. Because sinners as they are sinners, are the fittest objects of Grace
and Mercy. A man in misery, whilst he is in it (whether he be sensible, or not
sensible thereof) is the fittest object of mercy; when he is come out of it, he
is not so fit an object of mercy as before, whilst he was in it. So a Sinner
as he is a sinner, whilst he is going on in ways of sin, is the fittest and
most proper object for mercy to lay hold of; and hence the Promises of Grace
are made to persons under that notion.

Reas. 3. Because otherwise they could not be grace; grace bestowed upon one
that has metited the same, is not grace, Romans 11.6. And if by grace, then it
is no more of works, otherwise grace in no more grace; but if it be of works,
then it is no more grace, otherwise work is no more work.

If a man should say to another, you have done thus and thus for me, and
therefore I promise to do thus for you, this were not grace; but to say, you
have done what you can against me, and yet I promise to do thus for you, this
is grace indeed: so here, contraries destroy each other.

To be free, and to be upon condition, are so directly contrary, each to other,
that they can never stand; let the condition be never so mean, or little, yet
it destroys grace. If a man condition with another to give him a hundred pound
by the year, for that which is not worth two pence, yet so long as lice gives
what he gives upon condition, its no longer a free gift, although the thing he
receives be of no value in comparison of that which he gives.

Obj. But if God give the condition, it may be Grace notwithstanding, as if I
promise another a thing upon condition of so much money, and give him as much
money at I require of him, then is the thing of grace though upon condition,
because I give him the condition.

Answ. Grant it to be so, yet then it will follow, that seeing Christ gives
the condition, I must first come to him as a poor sinner under that notion, who
as yet has not the condition, that I may have the same, and so I must come to
Christ first of all; and seeing I cannot come to him but in the Promise, I must
therefore also lay hold of the Promise, before I have the condition. Yea
further, seeing that Jesus Christ gives no Spiritual mercy but by virtue of
some promise; it will therefore follow hence that the promise is made to me
before ever I have the Condition; the Condition being a fruit of the Promise,
and not the Promise a fruit of the Condition, and so consequently the promise
of Grace notwithstanding all, is made to me, as I am a sinner.

Reas. 4. Because God would give no just reason to any to exempt themselves
from laying hold of the grace of God. Now should God make promises to persons
as they are thus qualified, there would be just ground for many poor souls to
exempt themselves; as for instance, Should I promise a man to do him such a
courtesy would he give me so much money, or do such a piece of work for me, a
poor man now which has not so much money to give, or a lame man, weak, sickly
men, who are not able to do such a piece of service, might justly exempt
themselves; so, should God promise upon a condition, those that want the
condition might exempt themselves.

3 For objections, they are many, some drawn from Scripture, and some from
Reason, I shall briefly speak to the principal of either.

Obj. 1. This is contrary to the preaching of John the Baptist, Matthew. 3.2. yea
of Christ himself, as Chap. 4.17. who both preach repentance first. Repent, for
the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Ans. Though in order of words Repentance is first, yet not in the order of
matter, for the reason of a thing is before the thing it self; now what is the
reason why they should Repent? why, because the Kingdom of heaven is at hand;
What is the meaning of that? why the Grace of God, or the Kingdom of Grace;
peace with God, free and full remission of sins is coming toward you (for the
preaching of peace and remission of sins is called the Kingdom of God, Luke
10.5. compared with verse. 9.11. Say, peace be to this house -- ver. 9. Say unto
them, the Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. And preaching of the Gospel is
called preaching of the Kingdom of God, Act. 20, 25. Among I whom I have gone
preaching the Kingdom of God --) therefore Repent; so that we have first the
declaration of the Gospel, Free Grace, full remission of sins by Christ
proclaimed, and from such considerations they are to Repent; so that the Gospel
comes first before the word of Repentance, and therefore it is to them as they
are Sinners, for it finds them such.

Obj. 2. But in Matthew. 11. verse. 28. Christ bids such as are weary and heavy
laden to come to him; therefore men must first be weary, and heavy laden
before they come to Christ, or the Promise, and therefore it is not made to
them as sinners.

Ans. 1. When Christ bids those that are weary and heavy laden come to him,
does it therefore follow he excludes all others? I grant such are to come, and
such are most backward and afraid to come, and therefore called; but does it
follow therefore that no other must come* and that these, and only these are
called? If a Prince send forth Proclamation to a company of Traitors to come in
and he will pardon them; and because he knows that there are some few among
them that are so sensible of what they have done, and brought themselves into
by their rebellion, that they will never come upon this general Proclamation,
but for fear will run away; he therefore sends particularly to these by name,
you and you, who dare not come for fear of being hanged, come I will pardon
you, and you; does it therefore follow because these have a call (as it were by
name) therefore now all the rest who have a general call are excluded? So here
-- but,

2 This feign would I know, what is the state and condition that souls are then
in when they are thus weary and heavy laden? Are they in the state and
condition of Sinners or not, righteous or unrighteous persons? one they must
be. If you say they are not Sinners, but righteous persons, then I ask how
came they thus? is it by their being weary and heavy laden barely, or is it by
their applying of the Promise? if it be by their being weary and heavy laden,
then what need you press them to come to Christ for Justification, when as they
have the same already by this their qualification. If it be by applying the
Promise, on having it applied to them, then it will follow, that
notwithstanding this their qualification, that they are Sinners, and so remain
until they apply the Promise; or have it applied to them; so that the Promise,
though we should say it is made to them as such, yet of necessity it must be
made to them as Sinners still, i.e. persons in a stare of sin and misery, for
until the Promise is applied unto them, though they are such, yet they are in
no other or better condition than sinners.

Obj. 3. But faith it the condition of the Promise, and the Apostle tells us,
Galat. 3.22. that the promise is given to those that believe; now a person
believing is not a Sinner, therefore not to persons as such.

Ans. 1. Faith is not the condition of the Promise, but it is the fruit of the
Promise; if it be the condition, I ask then, whether or no is it a condition to
be wrought by us of ourselves, or does God give it us?

It it be to be wrought by our selves, then is the Promise of Grace worse, and
harder than the Covenant of Works; for though it were required of Adam to do
and live, yet he had then a power of doing, but so have not we now of
believing.

Yea, no more was required of him than what was put into his nature, for the
Covenant of Works was written in his nature, but so is not faith in ours, nay,
that faith with which we go to the Promise for Justification never was in our
natures, for Adam had not this in innocence, neither was it necessary lie
should have it till after the fall.

If it be given us of God (as these Scriptures prove, viz. Ephesians. 2.8. For by
grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift
of God, Phil. 1.29,) then it is given by virtue of some Promise, for God gives
nothing but by virtue of some promise, which promise can be no other but the
free promise, the promise of grace, and therefore the promise of grace is made
to us still as sinners, and faith it self is but a fruit thereof.

2 As for that place Gal. 3.22. That the promise which is by faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to those that believe.

I answer, Believing is not the condition, but a designation of the persons to
whom the Promise is given, i.e. to believers, or a declaration of the way in
which the promise is given, i.e. in a way of believing.

Object. 4. But if the promises of grace are made to persons as sinners, then
to all sinners, for that which belongs to any as such, belongs to all as such.

Answ. When I say it is made to Sinners as Sinners, the [as] is not to be
understood as noting a causality, i. e. that their being Sinners is the cause
why the Promise is made to them, for were it so, then the promise of grace
being only an effect of such a cause, should extend to one as well as another,
where there is the same cause to produce it, and so it should by necessary
consequence reach all and every man, all being Sinners; but we are to
understand it only as a designation of the present state and condition that
those persons are in, to whom the promise is made, they are for the present in
a state of sin and misery, though not this their condition, but the free love
of God, and the riches of his mercy to poor souls in such a condition, is the
cause why the promise of grace is made to them, and so it follows not, that it
is made to every man.

As for example, If a man dye, and give a hundred pound a year for the use or
the poor, and put such a clause as this is in his Will, I will have only such
poor as have nothing in the world to live upon, but are forced to beg, to
partake of this my charity. Does it hence follow, that he gives this hundred
pound yearly to all the poor which beg all the world over? Not so, it shows
that it is given to such as are in the state of beggars; but it follows not,
that all those all the world over, who are in that state have a right hereto.

So likewise, suppose a thousand persons were condemned, some for Treason, and
some for other misdemeanors, the Prince or Judge sends a pardon amongst them to
be given forth to many of them, and therein is such a clause, that none shall
have benefit by it, but such persons as were traitors against him, and
condemned for treason, it does not therefore follow, that every one which was
condemned for treason, should have the benefit of the pardon: No, it only
shows that persons under that condemnation are the subjects of it, but it does
not follow, all shall enjoy it, because there may be more persons condemned for
that offense then the pardon does extend unto, but those to whom it does
extend, are persons under such a condemnation.

So, when we say the Tromises of Grace are made to persons as Sinners, i. e. as
they are in such a state and condition, it does not now follow that they are
made to all sinners; no, but it only shows that they are persons in such a
state and condition which only shall have benefit by the promise of Grace.

Object. 5. But thus to tender the Promises of Grace to persons as they are
sinners, is the only way to make men presume and to harden them in their sins.

Answ. 1. Not so, The grace of God teaches a quire contrary lesson, Tit 2. v.
11, 12. For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all men,
teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world. Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have
dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleause our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

2 I grant, some from the preaching of free Grace, take occasion to presume,
yet is not the fault in the grace of God, nor preaching thereof, but in
themselves, and the naughtiness of their hearts. As when a Magistrate proclaims
pardon freely to a company of persons in actual rebellion, if they from the
grace and clemency of the Magistrate, shall take occasion to persist, or others
to rise up in rebellion, the fault is not in the Magistrate, or his so doing,
but in them, it is in him an act of grace and clemency, it is their wickedness
does abuse it: So in this case.

3 Jesus Christ is set up as welt to be a stumbling stone, and a rock of
offense to some, as to be salvation to others. God has laid Christ in Sion for
these two great ends, 1 Pet. 2. v. 6, 7, 8. Behold I lay in Sion a chief corner
stone, elect, precious, and he that believes on him shall not be confounded
Unto you therefore which believe he is precious, but unto them which be
disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head
of the corner, and a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even to them
which stumble at the word. Rom 9.33. Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling stone, a
rock of offense. Wheresoever the Gospel is preached, there are two great
designs on foot together, the greatest that ever were in world, viz. of the
eternal salvation, or condemnation of poor sinners. The one glorified Justice,
the other Mercy; what if some hearing the word of grace, do presume, it may be
God may have a secret design that some in hearing the grace of God, should
presume and stumble at that to their eternal condemnation, which had they in
love and sincerity embraced, would have been to their everlasting salvation.
The presumptions therefore of some men, should not hinder the declaration of
the grace of God.

4 So long as a man in holding forth the grace of God, does really aim at the
bringing in, and building up of souls (knowing no better way to effect it than
preaching of grace) abhorring from his heart the thought thereof that any
should abuse this grace, and turn it into wantonness, if any do, he is free
from the guilt of their sin, and the danger will fall on their heads.

5 The primary care of a Gospel Minister should be to give children bread, if
they cannot have it, but dogs will be snatching, shall children be starved?

6 If the grace of God should not be held forth until wicked men will not
abuse it, it must not whilst such are in the world, for so long they will.

7 We are not so much to look at the consequence of an action, as whether the
action it self be according to the will, appointment, or institution of the
Lord Jesus Christ: Ill consequences oftentimes may, and do follow the best
practices, as the bringing of some notorious Traitor, or Murderer to his trial?
may occasion others to rise up in rebellion in his behalf, yet does not this
make the act it self evil, nay it is very good, and the neglect or omission of
it would be evil.

8 If because sin takes occasion by the doctrine of grace, it must not be
preached, then must not men preach the Law neither, because sin takes occasion
from that also, Romans 7.8. Sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in
me all manner of concupiscence. Upon this ground therefore neither Law nor
Gospel must be preached.

Use 1. Hence we may see the mistake of many persons who look upon the Gospel,
and all the promises thereof as made to Saints, whereas they are to sinners; A
sinner, quatenus a sinner, is the proper object of the grace of the Gospel. Now
looking on it thus, there are these inconveniences follow.

1 They never come, whilst they walk by such principles, to any stedfastness in
the faith; for whilst they can look upon themselves as Saints, they think grace
is theirs, and the promise theirs; but when the contrary, then they conclude
they have no part in grace, no right to the promise, thus they are to and fro,
Saints to day, to morrow Hypocrites, to day in Gods favor, to morrow out, like
a loose bone, sometimes in joint, sometimes out.

2 They enjoy but little of the Spirit of Adoption, which is a sweet child-like
frame, which makes a man come running to God, and cry, Abba Father. Now they
enjoy but little of this, being in continual doubts whether or no they may call
God Father, when they cannot see themselves Saints, they are afraid to do it,
and when they can, they speak it but faintly, as fearing they may be deceived,
God is not their Father.

3 They do God but little service, whilst they can see themselves Saints, they
pray, etc. but when they cannot, they are sullen and mopish, and will do little
or nothing for God.

4 They know not how to bear afflictions, for let but an affliction come, and
they have not faith to believe themselves Saints, and then presently they cry
out, This is out or wrath; now God meets with me for such and such sins, the
affliction will undo me, etc.

5 Their very comforts and assurance, are but seeds of doubting afterward. For
will the soul say, If I may conclude my self the child of God, when I see my
self a Saint, can pray, etc. then when I cannot see my self a Saint, but the
contrary, why should I not conclude the contrary, yea ought I not so to do?

6 They are led back to an Old Testament faith. It was very usual with the
Saints of the Old Testament, to conclude their condition to be good or bad,
accordingly as they found themselves to be thus and thus qualified or not, as
will appear if you look into many places in the Psalms: And hence it is that
we read of so little faith (excepting some eminent ones) and so much fear and
doubting in Old Testament Saints. Now when Saints conclude their condition in
such a way, though they live in Gospel times, yet do they go back to the Old
Testament, and have an Old Testament faith.

Use 2. Then here is ground of encouragement to the vilest of sinners, to come
to the Promise. Thou poor soul, which have been a Drunkard, a Sot, a Swine, an
Adulterer Blasphemer of the holy name of God, ten, twenty, thirty, forty years,
what say thou to this free Grace? What have thou to object, why thou will
not receive it, why, art thou not a sinner, and is not all this to sinners?
Why, why then will thou be a Sot, and go to hell at the last, when heaven and
salvation is to be had, if thou will but come to the promise? O you great
Sinners, think I beseech you, when you are at your cups, with your Queans,
your oaths in your mouths. O does God make promises of Grace to me, does he
proclaim heaven, life, salvation to me, and shall I be such a wretch* and such
a villain as to go on in my sin, be drunk, and swagger, and swear, and whore,
and what not? No no, out upon these courses and practices, I will never more,
since the Father is so loving, and Jesus Christ so willing to do me good, walk
as I have done.

I dare say the serious consideration hereof, would make your hearts more to
hate and abominate such ways and practices, and bring you sooner to leave
them, than all the terrors of hell, will, or can do. When a poor soul shall
reason the case with himself thus, What, have I been a rebel against the good
God, these ten, twenty, thirty, forty years, and is he so gracious,
notwithstanding all, to proclaim life and salvation to me, what to me? O then
shall I still be a wretch, and sin against this gracious God, and trample
under foot all his love? No, fie for shame!

Object. O but you will say, Indeed now whilst you are speaking, my heart is
inclinable to what you say, and I have now a good mind to leave off my former
courses and practices, but alas I have not power to do it.

Ans. Come to Christ in the promise, and he will give thee a power, he can,
and will overcome thy corruptions, it thou waitest on him. Thou poor soul
look upon it now as a hard and difficult thing, to forsake such and such
courses as are (according to the Proverb) bred in the bone, and thou all thy
life time have been accustomed too; but Christ can make this thou look upon
as hard, and even impossible, easy to thee. Many a soul at his first
conversion, has looked upon it as a hard and even impossible thing to forgo
such and such sins and lusts, which in his natural condition were his
Dalilahs, and his heart was addicted unto, and has verily thought he should
never do it, who yet afterward has found it easier by far than he imagined,
yea so easy he has stood in admiration thereat, when God has once turned his
heart, he has found as much, yea more pleasure in the ways and service of
God, than ever he sound in his old courses.

For when God puts a new nature into the soul, then all things go another way;
now there are new principles, new apprehensions, new motives, and all the
wheels of the soul run another way; when there was nothing but an old nature,
then all things ran sin-ward, and hell-ward, but now God having put a new
nature in, there are new motions, and all run holiness-ward, and heavenward.

O therefore pray to God to change your hearts, and you shall see how easy
that will be, which now you suppose so hard, and how pleasant and wondrously
sweet those ways of godliness will be, which now are so grievous.

Use 3 Is it so, that the promises of Grace are made to persons as Sinners,
then (I am loath to speak it) how exceedingly just and great will the
condemnation of all those sinners be, which reject these promises of Grace.

1 How just will the condemnation of such persons be? you that hear all this,
and yet go on in your old ways, you are drunkards, and will be so still,
swearers, adulterers, Sabbath Breakers, scoffers and will be so still* how just
will your condemnation be? I will appeal to your own hearts and consciences,
what think you of it? It God makes promises to sinners, promise Life, Salvation
freely to sinners, though as vile sinners as any breathing in the World, and
notwithstanding all, you will be drunk, swear, etc. will it not be just you
should be damned, speak sinner, speak out sinner, what does thy heart and
Conscience judge of this? Will it not be just (...) God send thee to Hell to
morrow, should thou do thus?

If the Magistrate should send forth a general Pardon to Traitors in rebellion,
and they notwithstanding all, should persist, would it not be a most just thing
that never a man of them so doing should be spared, but every one should be
hanged, drawn and quartered, what say you? So in this case, I have read of a
godly man, who being in the presence of a professed Atheist, which believed
neither God nor Devil, Heaven nor Hell, and opening before him the glad tidings
of the Gospel, and the riches of Gods Free Grace to poor Sinners, the worst of
Sinners; in conclusion plainly asked him, What think you (O man) will it not
be just you should be damned, if you reject all this grace and love, if you
will not believe this, yes (says the poor Atheist) I confess, should I not
believe and receive this, I deserve to be damned without mercy. Poor Sinners, I
have now opened to you the riches of Gods Grace in his free promises made to
Sinners, let me now put this question to every one of you; What think you,
would it not be just you should be damned, if you hear all this, and reject it
all? what think thou soul, what think thou? speak Sinner, will it not be
just?

2 As just, so also how great will your Condemnation be, if you hear and reject
all this?

Hence says Christ, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, Tire
and Sidon, in the Day of Judgment then for Corazin, Bethsaida Capernaum; they
had heard of the glad tidings of the Gospel, and yet went on in their sins, but
the other not. Every Sin has a proper weight of its own, but to sin after the
Declaration of Gods Free Grace to the Sinner, this doubles, trebles the weight
of every sin; for a man to be a Drunkard, etc. is a grievous thing, this alone
will damn him, such shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. verse. 9,
10. but to continue a Drunkard, Swearer, etc. after he has heard the Gospel,
and the Proclamation of glad tidings to poor sinners, this doubles, trebles the
weight of his Sin, sin now is twice, thrice as heavy as before. It is an
offense deserving death to begin a rebellion, but after a gracious Pardon
proclaimed, to persist in it, doubles, trebles the offense. So here.

I shall show you some aggravations of such Sinners sins.

I you sin against more light than others do; Many poor souls there are which
dwell in Turkey, and India, yea, and in many places where they never yet heard
of the Gospel in England too, which are Drunkards, etc. And alas, poor souls,
they are to be pitied they know no better, and therefore do no better, they
never had the Gospel (which it may be if they had, they would prize it, and
bless God for it but poor souls, they remain in gross ignorance, and therefore
do thus; but now you have heard the Gospel, it you shall therefore go home and
betake you again to your Cups, and Cans, and Queans, and Oaths, etc. you will
sin against more light, this you have heard will rise up in Judgment against
you and condemn you, Job. 3.19. And this is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light. It will leave
you inexcusable, Joh. 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had
not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin, Heb. 2.3. How shall we
escape, if we neglect so great salvation?

4 You sin against more contradiction of your own Conscience; the more light,
the more contradiction of Conscience, the more will Conscience tell you of your
sins, and fly in your faces for them.

They poor souls have not so much inward contradiction, because their
Consciences are not so much enlightened.

You which have heard this, cannot go home and follow your sins, but your
Consciences will fly in your faces when you do it, and put you upon a wrack.

O will Conscience say, thou vile Creature, did thou not hear the other day,
that the Lord made premises of grace to the worst of Sinners, and was willing
to give life and salvation to the worst of Sinners; and wretch that thou art,
art thou swilling in thy sins and lusts again, and do trample Heaven under
foot, what do thou think will become of thee?

3 You sin against more Love and Mercy; to sin against love and mercy is the
highest aggravation, one of them, that can be of sinning. Now you have
abundance of love spread before you, which they poor souls that dwell in
Turkey, and India, and Ireland, and Northumberland, and Cumberland, know
nothing of, nor it may be never heard of.

4 You sin more wilfully; you which hear all this grace, and yet go on in your
old profane courses, there is more of will in your sins than in others. If a
man should have a Servant, and he bids him do a thing, and charges him to do
it, or he would turn him out of his Service, and he should say, he would not do
it, bid him do it himself, here now is will; but if this man should come to
this Servant, and say, I pray do this, let me prevail with you, and entreat you
to do it, and I will promise you that I will make you my Son and Heir, and you
shall be no longer looked upon, or accounted a Servant, but shall for ever be
as an only Son to me; if he should still say, No, I am resolved, say what you
please, I will not do it, but I will go on doing of that I am at present about;
here now were more will. So let me say, should God come to a poor Sinner, and
say, Do this, believe on my Son, and I will promise you that I will make you my
Son and Heir; if that Sinner will not do it, here is much of will in this.

Use 4. Of comfort to poor souls; Is it so that the promises of Grace are made
to Sinners as sinners? then see what abundance of comfort this one
consideration yields; this rightly understood is such a bottom of comfort as
no principle like it, for it will at once answer all the Objections of Satan,
and Carnal fears of thine own heart.

Obj. 1. O says the Devil, and thine own heart thou art not so holy as others,
can not pray with that life, etc. that others can?

Ans. But may the poor soul say, True Satan, yet I am but a Sinner, and the
Promises are made to sinners; were the Promises only to Saints, then woe would
be to me did I want these things, but they are to sinners, and yet I am but a
sinner, and though I cannot go to the Promise as a Saint, yet I will go as
Sinner; and thus I may go, for they are made to sinners.

Obj. 2. But thou art not humbled and broken?

Ans. But still I am but a sinner, and promises are made to sinners; I confess
I am not so broken and humbled a sinner as I would be, but yet I am but a
sinner, and so the proper object of the grace of the promise still; I will
therefore go to the Promise, that I may be a broken sinner, an humbled sinner.

Obj. 3 But thou have been a sinner a great while, ten, twenty, thirty, forty,
fifty years.

Ans. Aye, but Satan, still I am but a Sinner, and the promises are made to
sinners; I do acknowledge I am an old sinner, and have been a sinner a great
while, and I heartily wish that I had not been so long, I will now go to the
Promise, that I may be a sinner no longer.

Obj, 4. O but thou have sinned against light?

Ans. Yet but a sinner, and the promises are made to sinners; though I have
sinned in the Light, whereas others have in the Dark, and so my sins are far
greater, and worse, yet I am but a sinner, and the Promises are to such.

Object. 5. O but thou have sinned against mercy also.

Ans. True, Satan, yet I am but a sinner, and the promises are made to sinners.
I have abused Gods mercies, and it grieves my heart I have been such a wretch,
but yet I am but a sinner.

Object. 6. But thou art one who have not so much as a breathing, or desire
after that which is good, alive in thee.

Ans. Yet, but a sinner.

Object 7. But thou art one who art weary of that which is good.

Ans. Yet, but a sinner.

Object. 8. But thou have had more desires and breathings formerly, than now
thou have.

Ans. Yet, but a sinner.

Object. 9, But though thou art in this miserable condition, thou art not
troubled for it.

Ans. But yet I am but a sinner.

Object. 10. But thou have been a backslider, and fallen into the same sin not
once or twice, but thirty, forty times.

Ans. This Satan, I acknowledge too, but what then? Backsliders are but
sinners, and the promise is made to sinners. Though my backslidings are such as
I cannot come to God as a Son, yet I will come as a Sinner, who may in time be
his Son, though I cannot at present call him Father, yet I will come to him as
a Sinner, who may in time call him Father.

Object. 11. But thou have made many vows and promises, and resolutions, and
broken them all.

Ans. This, O Satan, is true, yet but a sinner, and promises are made to
sinners.

Object. 12. But thou have had many motions from the Spirit of God to forsake
thy sins, and come to God which thou have slighted.

Ans. Yet but a sinner, and promises are made to such.

Object. 13. But thou have been an open opposer of the ways and people of God,
thou have been a and j^erer a scoffe^ at goodness.

Ans. Yet I am but a sinner, though my opposings were never so great (for which
I ever desire to be humbled, and to lie low before God, that I should be such
a wretch,) yet can they made me but a sinner, and the promises are made to such.

Object. 14. But thou have sinned presumptuously.

Ans. Yet but a sinner still, and the promises are made to sinners. Indeed were
I to come to God as the least of Saints, I should not dare to come, but however
I can come to God as a sinner, and though as the greatest, yet but a sinner
still.

Object. 15. But thou have been a great neglecter of good, as well as a
committer of evil.

Ans. Yet but a sinner, and promises are made to sinners.

Object. 16. But thou art an Hypocrite.

Ans. This Satan is worst of all, if true, yet however I am but a sinner, for
an hypocrite is but a sinner, and the promises are made to such, I will
therefore come to the promise that now I may be sincere. Thus by holding this
principle, thou shall more easily, speedily, effectually an^wer Satan, than any
other way.

The Life of Faith.
2 Cor. 5.7. For we walk by Faith, not by Sight.


THe Text, although included in a Parenthesis, yet has it relation to the
foregoing verse, being a reason of the latter part thereof, Knowing this, etc.

As if the Apostle should say, This is the reason why we believe that whilst we
are here at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord, because the present
life that now we live, is a life of Faith; Now this we know, and are sure of,
that were we present with the Lord, we should live by sight, see him as he
is, in the beauty and perfection of his glory; but this being wanted here, we
conclude, That whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord.

The words are a brief description of a Christians life here, and hereafter,
here by Faith, hereafter by Sight.

WE WALK; the term of walking in this Text is of equal extent with that of
living, Romans 1.17. The just shall live by faith, Gal. 2.20. And the life which
I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God. I grant indeed
in strict propriety of speech it is of larger extent, because a man may live
which does not walk, walking denotes not only life, but life in exercise; but
when these terms are applied to Faith, as walking by faith, living by faith,
they are of equal extent, because the life of faith consists in exercise, which
is a man's walking by faith: If a man do not walk by faith, i.e. carry faith
along with him throughout all that he does or suffers, doing and suffering by
faith, he does not live by faith; for thus to do is properly to live by faith,
and take this away, you take away the life of faith, though a man may have the
habit of faith in him, yet does he not live by faith, unless faith be active,
carrying him out either in doing or suffering for God, which when it does, as
he lives, so likewise he walks by faith.

Doct. 1. The life of Faith, is the proper life of Saints in this world.

2 The proper life of Saints in the world to come, is a life of Sight.

Of the first, viz.

Doctr. That the life of faith, is the proper life of Saints in this world.

It was even in the times of the Old Testament, Abraham lived by Faith. See
that notable place, Romans 4.17. to 22. who against hope believed in hope, that
he might become the Father of many Nations. verse. 19. And being not weak in
faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred
years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs womb, verse. 20. He staggered not
at the promise of God through unbeleef, but was strong in faith, giving glory
to God. verse. 21. And being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was
able also to perform.

Here the Holy Ghost makes a Divine Comment upon the famous story of Abraham's
believing, and sets forth that life of faith which was in that holy man; who
against hope -- when nothing was left for Abraham to build hope upon in a way
of sense, but all things were at that pass that they made against his hope, and
endeavored to destroy it, yet then Abraham believed. God comes to Abraham when
that he was now about a hundred years old, and his Wife Sarah near as many, and
promises him a Son by his wife Sarah, and that in his seed should all Nations
be blessed; well might Abraham now say, God has promised me a Son, and that in
my seed shall all Nations be blessed. How shall this word ever be? I am now a
hundred years old, my body is dead to the begetting of Children, my wife Sarah
near as many, her womb is dead to the conceiving of Children, how shall this
promise be brought about?

But says the Text, Abraham considered not these things, (here was the life of
faith) he did not suffer his mind to run on these things, he did not ponder
them in a way of reason and sense, but against hope, believed in hope, kept up
his hope in a way of pure believing, when all things to sense seemed to destroy
his hope, and so was strong in faith giving glory to God.

Hebr. 11. the Apostle reckons up throughout the Chapter many of the Worthies
of the Old Testament, Abel, Enoch, Noah, etc. recording their good Works, and
attributing all to their faith; by faith they did thus and thus, Abel offered,
Enoch was translated, etc. the Old Testament mentions only the bare work in
many of these, the Spirit of God in the New looks further into the nature of
them, not only the matter done, but the manner of doing; it records, they were
Gospel work, and done from faith, though wrought in Old Testament times, so
that the Saints of the Old Testament did live by faith; yea Habbakkuk, Chap.
2.4, says expressly, that the life of Saints, or justified persons, it is a
life of faith; so that this was the proper life of Saints in Old Testament
times. Come to the New, we shall see still it is; if in the Old, when the
Covenant of Grace by which this life of faith is begotten, and cherished, was
more dark, and lay wrapped up in Types and shadows, then much more is it in the
New, wherein the Covenant of Grace is clearly revealed, and Gospel Truths
unvayled. Hence in the New Testament we have three times for Habbakkuks once,
that golden sentence, The just shall live by faith; as Romans 1.17. Galat. 3.11.
Heb. 10.38. And Paul (whose example take for all the rest, to show what every
one should do) verifies this in his life and practice, Gal. 2.20. And the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God.

In the carrying on of which I shall show;

1 What it is to live by faith.

2 What are the principal differences betwixt the life of faith, and the life
of sense, or a souls living by faith; and by sense.

3 Wherein this life of faith is to be exercised?

4 The preciousness and excellency of this life of faith.

Quest. 1. What is it to live by faith?

Ans. I shall only describe it to you, and that with shunning of curiosity as
much as may be, and so it is.

For a soul constantly, quietly, and orderly, to rest upon the Promise and
Power of God, for the obtaining of all good expected or hoped for, the removing
or turning to good, all evil present or feared. In which description, are these
things considerable.

1 Here is the act it self, with the manner of acting, which the soul that
lives by faith puts forth; it is an act of rest, and reliance, and that
constantly, quietly, and orderly.

For the act it self, the nature of it, it is not an act of assurance, but an
act of reliance, recumbence, dependence, or adherence; the act of assurance is
not so properly faith as sense, for when my soul is assured, I do see and
behold the love of God, and my own salvation, and I do feel the same within me,
and this is sense.

Indeed I grant it, that the soul which lives by faith has oftentimes
assurance, and more constantly than another, he puts forth more acts of
assurance than a weaker believer does which lives by sense, yet are not these
the differencing acts, which do discover him to live by faith rather than
another.

Thomas put forth an act of assurance, when Joh. 20.28. he cries out, My Lord,
and my God, yet by our Saviors own testimony, verse. 29. he lives by sense,
Because thou have seen, thou have believed; as if he should say, Thomas thou
art such a believer, as do live more by sense, than by faith, thou beleevest,
but it is because thou see, thy faith can go no further than thy sight, but
blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. As to say, A
Christian life there is, whereby a soul, though he see nothing, feel nothing,
yet believes, and this is the blessed life, and those the most blessed which
live this kind of life. Christ here puts believers into two ranks, the first
are those who though they believe, yet live by sense, grounding their faith
upon something seen; the second are those who believe and live by faith,
grounding faith upon things not seen. Thomas is a believer of the first rank,
who lived by sense, and yet had assurance, so that the act of assurance, is not
the distinguishing act, betwixt that soul which lives by sense, and he which
lives by faith: Yea more, a weak believer, or a believer at first conversion
may, and it is usual for such to have acts of assurance, God coming in
sometimes in a word, or an ordinance, persuading, and covincing their souls of
it, that he is their Father, and Heaven is theirs, yet do not such live by
faith, for so soon as this fit or rapture is over (though whilst it was upon
them they would have affirmed it against all the Devils in Hell) they call into
question, and begin to unsay whatsoever before they said.

Yea further (as I said before) these acts of assurance, though it be by
believing, I come up to them, yet are they more properly sense than faith, for
when I have assurance, I cannot so well be said to hope for, believe, etc. as
I may in some sort to see, enjoy, and possess, and therefore though the soul
often puts forth such acts which lives by faith, yet are not these they whereby
it lives by faith; nay more properly he lives by faith when these are wanting,
for then, and only then, I put forth pure acts of faith, when I have no sense
at all.

The act of assurance which goes along with that of adherence, is not the act
whereby the soul lives by faith, but rather a fruit or consequence of its
living by faith, it lives by faith in adhering to the promise which is the
first act of faith, and then from this its adherence (as a fruit thereof) there
is an assurance of Gods love maintained in the soul.

So that it is clear, that the act it self, which is put forth in our living by
faith, is not an act of assurance, whereby I am assured of the love of God,
etc. but an act of adherence or reliance, whereby though I see or feel nothing
at all in me why I should conclude God loves me, yet finding that God has
made promises to sinners, such as I am, and knowing no just or sufficient
ground, why I should exclude my self, I adhere to the word and promise of God.

Now for the manner of acting, it is,

1 Constantly, The soul which lives by faith, does not for a fit and away,
rest, and rely on the promise, but constantly. By constantly I do not mean,
that he does so rest upon the promise, and adhere thereto as that he never at
no time or in no case starts aside.

Abraham himself did not so cleave to the promise, but once or twice he did a
little step aside, so a soul which has attained the life of faith, and lives
the same, may at some times, and in some particular case step aside, and act
too much in a way of sense.

But by constantly, I mean thus, That in the general course of his life and
actions, he is carried on by faith, and acts in a way of faith, setting aside
now and then some particular acts, and the whole of his life and actions, is
guided by faith.

Or if you please, you may restrain it to the morer part, though sometimes, and
often he acts sense, yet mostly he is in believing, and so takes this
denomination of living by faith from the greater part, because he does more
live by faith, than by sense.

So that by constantly I do not understand every particular individual act, but
the general course of a man's life (when once he comes to live this life) or
the morer part of his actings are in a way of faith.

Now hereby he is distinguished from all such as rest and rely upon the
promise, for a fit only and away.

Some there are who will adhere to the promise for a fit whilst they find
themselves so and so qualified, or have such and such experiences,
manifestations of the love, goodness, power of God, etc. So long as these
remain, they adhere to the promise, but so soon as these are a little decayed,
or the sense of them withdrawn, they are off the hinges, and cannot adhere to
the Promise any longer; so that it is but now and then, rarely, when and whilst
affections are up, that these rest on the Promise, they are five times more off
than on; they live ten days in unbelief, for one of faith.

Some others will adhere it may be, (though they find none of these) to the
Promise for a little moment, and then they look that the thing for which they
cleave to this promise should instantly be theirs, but finding the contrary*
they faint, and give over adhering; both these are hereby distinguished from
living by faith.

2 Quietly, i. e. It rests upon the Promises without murmuring or repining,
though the thing promised be delayed, and every day it is looking for, and
desiring the coming thereof; O when will it come! yet it is quiet, it does not
speak evil of God, nor of the Promise, though it thinks long every day to have
the Promise fulfilled, yet does it not think it too long, though the fulfilling
thereof be delayed for a good time, but contents it self herewith, I have a
promise, though when, or how I shall have it fulfilled I know not, when God
will give this, do this, or how, I know not, only here I have a promise, this I
adhere to.

Yea, sometimes the soul may say, Whither God will give this to me, I do not
certainly know, only here is a promise, and I have no reason to think the
contrary, and therefore I will wait upon him, let him do what seems him good,
Lament. 3.26. It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the
salvation of the Lord.

This Habakkuks Vision teaches us, chap. 2.4. Behold his soul which is lifted
up is not upright in him, hut the just shall live by his faith. He whose heart
is lifted up, swollen with pride, and impatience, cannot bear Gods delay, but
the life of faith teaches quietness under this.

Now this distinguishes living by faith, from that impatient waiting of many
souls, accompanied with murmuring and repining, if the promise be delayed,
which was the fault of that wicked King, 2 King. 6, 33. And he said, behold,
this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer?

Of Rachel, though a godly woman, Genesis 30.1. When Rachel saw that she bare
Jacob no Children, Rachel envied her sister, and said unto Jacob, Give me
children, or else I dye. And of Israel, for forty years together whilst they
were in the Wilderness, if they wanted any thing, Bread, Flesh, Water,
presently they murmured, which murmuring of theirs is described wherein it lay,
Psalm. 78. verse. 17. to 23. They tempted God in their hearts, by asking meat for
their lust; yea they spoke against God, they said, can God furnish a table in
the Wilderness? -- verse. 21. therefore the Lord heard this and was wroth --
verse. 22. Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his Salvation.
And we are bid beware of it, 1 Cor. 10. verse. 1, 2, etc.

3. Orderly, it rests and relies on Gods Promise in Gods way, using means,
those means which he has appointed it should wait in the use of, as Hearing,
Reading, Prayer, Meditation, Christian Society, etc. Isaac had a promise he
should have seed, and yet seeks God for his wife, wait, but wait orderly.

The Spouse in Canticles, Chapters third and fifth, when her Beloved twice had
withdrawn himself, and was gone, she waits for him, but in an orderly way, she
does not lie still sleeping, and slugging upon her bed, and say, Well, my
beloved is gone for the present, but he will come again, but up she gets her,
and about the streets she goes, and enquires of every one she meets with, Saw
you him whom my soul loves? she runs to the Watchmen. O! saw you him whom my
soul loves? from them to the Daughters of Jerusalem, O! saw you him whom my
soul loves? thus she waits, yet is active, using means.

Now, this distinguishes living by faith.

1 From a careless waiting and resting upon the promise, as to say, Well, God
has promised such a thing, it matters not what I do, God will fulfill his own
promise, and so neglects and throws away all means and Ordinances; this is not
living by faith, but a carnal, presumptuous, and secure frame of spirit.

2 From a disorderly, waiting, a waiting upon God for a mercy, but a going out
of Gods way to obtain it, by following some way of my own or another
invention, which is not Gods; Saul was twice in this, and it cost him dear,
once when he offered a Burnt-offering, 1 Samuel 13. and when he went to the Witch
of Endor, 1 Samuel 28. As in living by faith I must rest on the promise, so in
Gods way, or my resting is nothing.

2 The second thing in living by faith is, the ground of faith; A man stands as
he has his footing, so faith.

I shall here show in order to the other.

1 What is not the ground of faith.

2 What is.

Q. What is not the ground of faith?

A. 1. Not duties. Some believe that God loves them because of such and such
things done by them, this is not the ground of faith in living by faith.

2 Not affections. Some others, though they will not ground faith upon a bare
duty done, yet if they have had affections therein, they will ground their
faith upon those, or these and the duty put together. Many a poor soul thinks
this duty is accepted, this prayer shall be answered; ask the reason, they can
give no other, but their hearts have been warmed, affections up therein, they
wept much, etc. and sure such a duty cannot but speed, and hence poor souls
when they find (as mostly it proves so) their great expectations of this duty
come to just nothing, they are ready to cast off not only their hope but duty,
and every thing else; the reason of all being this, they go upon a false and
mutable ground, and therefore are so mutable in their opinions of themselves,
and what they do. This is not the ground, the soul which lives by faith goes
upon, nay a soul will never live by faith (but believe one day, and call in
question the next) till he is got off this ground.

3 Not Graces: Some do not make duties the ground of their faith, and knowing
the deceitfulness of affections, are shie of them also, who yet upon sight, or
discerning of the graces of the Spirit in themselves, will believe: If they
find in themselves a sweet heavenly frame of Spirit, an humble frame of heart,
hearts full of love to the brethren, etc. they will then believe, and make
these things a ground of their faith; but whilst they do thus, sure enough they
never live by faith, for how ordinary a thing is it to see these to day, or in
one duty, and to have them out of sight to morrow, or in another.

It may be to day I have a sweet heavenly spiritual frame of heart, but if I
ground my faith upon this, perhaps to morrow I shall be as cold, and carnal,
as now I am spiritual, and where then will my faith be? to day my heart is
humble, to morrow as proud as now humble; to day I can love my brother, let him
do what he will with me or against me, I can forget all, and pass by all, to
morrow I cannot do thus, but my heart will be full of wrath, grudging and
revenge against him, if I ground my faith on these things, where will it be
when these are wanting, yea when instead of finding them, I find the contrary?
These things may encourage faith, whilst it is acting, but I must make none of
these, neither Duties, Affections, or Graces, nor any thing within me, or done
by me the ground thereof.

Quest. What is the ground of faith, in living by faith?

Answ. Two things are laid down in Scripture as the ground of our faith, viz.
The promise of God, and Gods power to perform the same; both which together
make up a full and complete ground for the faith of the believing soul.

1 The promise of God, the word of promise is the word of faith, or that which
our faith first pitcheth upon in living by faith* Faith must have a word, or it
is not able to keep up. Now the word or promise that faith pitcheth upon in
inabling of the soul to live by faith, is,

1 The naked or bare promise, or, (to speak better) the Promise nakedly
considered, without any thing of ours joined with it.

If I would live by faith, I must do thus, whenever I would act faith, set by
all my duties, affections, graces, and go to the naked Promise, as though I had
never performed duty in my life, had not any affection to any thing good, nor
one dram of grace in me.

As Abraham (as Luther says) when he went up the Mount, left the Servants, and
Asses at the foot, and carried only Isaac the Son of the Promise with him; So
when any would go up to God by faith, we must leave all our righteousness
beneath, and carry only the promise up with us; for whilst I join any thing of
my own with the promise, making the promise, as it has this of my own joined
with it, the ground of my faith, so soon as ever I find a want of these things,
and have them not to carry, I faulter in believing.

Therefore in living by faith, it ought to be the special care of every
Christian to keep to the bare and naked promise, looking to it that he do not
join any thing with the promise, which to do, as it is a great evil in it
self, so has it this evil attending of it, it throws down faith, and hinders
the soul from living by faith.

2 The free or unconditional promise. There are in the Book of God, two sorts
of Promises.

1 Some Absolute, and without condition, made to the worst of sinners, as such.
2 Some Conditional, made to the Saints duties, and the graces of the Spirit in
them.
Now, in living by faith, I am not to make these latter sort of promises the
ground of faith, because the conditions required in them, being in me but weak
and imperfect, and at sometimes only discernable, faith cannot take hold of
them at all times as it ought to do, to the end I might live thereby.

The former sort of promises then, viz. those which are Absolute, and without
condition, such as are all the promises of the New Covenant to us, are the
promises which I must make the ground of faith, in living by faith, I mean
those promises which are made to sinners as such, these are they I must ground
my faith upon, for these faith may always take hold of, but of the other but
sometimes only, because only sometimes the conditions and qualifications
required in them, are discernable in the soul, though there be always
sufficient ground for my faith in the promise made to sinners, yet not in that
which is made to Saints. I can see and acknowledge my self a sinner always,
and under that notion come to the promise, but so I cannot a Saint.

2 The power of God to perform the same is another part of the ground of faith:
If any ask why I join this* viz. The power or ability of God, together with the
promise in the ground of faith. I answer,

1 Because the Saints in former ages in acting faith, and living by it, have
always had a special eye unto, and been much upheld by the power of God.

We have two notable acts of Abraham's faith, mentioned by the Holy Ghost in
the New Testament, the first is that we spoke of before, Romans 4. which was an
act of faith Abraham put forth in reference to a Son, which God had promised
him he should have by his wife Sarah, in his and Sarahs old age, when now in
reason they were past hope of having any, his own body being dead, and Sarahs
womb dead, and this was before, or about the time of the conception of Isaac,
Genesis 17.15, 16, 17.

The other was an act of faith Abraham put sorth in reference to Gods
fulfilling of this his promise in Isaac, at that time when the promise seemed
to be dying, God commanding Abraham to offer up Isaac the Son of the promise,
which we have recorded, Genesis 22. and repea^ed Heb. 11.17, 18, 19.

Now in either of these, we find Abraham's faith did ground not only on the
promise, but power of God also, Romans 4.21. And being fully persw^ded that what
he had promised, he was able also to perform, Heb. 11.19. Accounting that God
was able to raise him up, even from the dead.

So Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him against that day.

And the three Children, Dan. 3.17. Our God whom we serve is able to deliver
us from the burning fiery furnace.

2 Because I find not only Saints grounding their faith on the power of God,
but the Holy Ghost oftentimes laying down the power of God, as a great ground
of the faith and comfort of Gods people, as Ephesians. 3.20. when the Apostle had put
up many spiritual petitions in the behalf of the Ephesians, he concludes, Now
to him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think
according to the power that works in us: Pitching their faith for the
obtaining of these things on the ability of God.

So Heb. 7.25. He is able to save, -- the ability of Christ to save, is laid
down as a ground for our faith in coming to him; the last words of the verse,
He ever lives to make intercession, are but the reason of the ability, Jude
v. 24. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling. Saints are comforted
against fear of falling away because God is able to keep from falling, and Romans
14.4. assured that they shall stand, because God is able to make them stand,
and Romans 11.23. The Apostle speaking of the conversion of the Jews, lays down
this as a ground for us to believe they shall be grafted in again, because God
is able to graft them in again.

3 Because I find distrust of the ability of God is in Scripture branded for
unbeleef, and that of the highest nature, Psalm. 78. v. 19, 20, 21, 22. They
said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? Can he give bread also? Can
he provide flesh for his people? Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wroth,
verse. 22. Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation.

4 Because the promise alone without a consideration of the power of God to
perform the same, is not a sufficient ground for faith.

If a man should promise me a thousand pound, I must consider his ability, as
well as his promise, before I can upon good ground believe that ever I shall
have so much of him, for if he be not able he cannot give it, and so his
promise is nothing.

So, though I have a promise for such and such a mercy, yet if I do not
consider Gods ability to perform this promise, as well as the promise, there
will not be a ground sufficient to make me believe: For what if the heart
object, as once Israel did; True, here is a promise, but can God perform what
he promises? if the soul say, Yea he is able, then the power of God presently
comes into consideration, and I have that as well as the promise for the ground
of my faith; if the soul cannot believe this, That God is able, then the
promise alone will not persuade it, neither indeed can it, and so it is not
ground sufficient to cause it to believe for the mercy. So that both these,
viz. the promise of God, and Gods power to perform the same, must go together
to make up the ground of faith.

When I would act faith, I must first go to the promise, and there behold and
consider what God has freely promised to such a poor miserable creature as I
am, and work this upon my heart, that this word of God is a truth; when I have
done so, I am to endeavor to bring up my heart to believe the power of God,
viz. That God is able and All-sufficient to fulfill this promise, whatsoever
seems to be in the way, or to hinder the same.

Now although we are ready to think, that this is a very casie thing to believe
the power of God, and that we have no doubt at all thereabouts, yet assuredly
it is a most hard and difficult thing, and I am persuaded that the greatest
part of our unbeleef springs from hence, a distrust or questioning of the power
of God.

I have known one as confident as another that he did believe the power of
God, and could not think otherwise, who yet, when he came to follow up his
doubts to the first head, found it far otherwise, that the greater part of them
did arise hence.

I have many times thought the question has been only thus, Will God do this
for me, change this heart, kill this corruption, etc? and could I be
satisfied in this, I have thought all my doubts would be over, but when I have
endeavored to search to the bottom, I have found the state of the question to
be much altered, and heard a secret whispering there, Can God do such a thing?
Can this cursed heart of mine be changed? Is it possible that such and such
corruptions that I have been so long contending with, and used all means
against, and are yet as strong and lively as ever, should ever be subdued?

Hence comes our unbeleef for a great part of it, therefore would we live by
faith, as we must keep to the true ground which is the promise of God, and his
power to perform it, so likewise to the full ground, i.e. we must act faith in
both, viz. the promise and power of God.

And me thinks when I ponder upon this, that the power of God, as well as the
promise is the ground of our faith; I do not at all wonder why there is so much
unbeleef, and so little of the life of faith in most of us, because there is an
opinion in all our hearts, that it is a very easy thing to believe the power
of God (as if we had such abundance of faith, that that which ever has been,
and was from Abraham's time to Paul's, the highest and most noble act of faith
(as if we read Scripture we shall find this of believing the power of God
ever was and has been) were easiest to us; as if that which declared Abraham
strong in faith, were now a thing common) and from taking it for granted we do
the thing, we take no pains with our hearts hereabouts. And therefore it is no
wonder we lie in unbeleef so much as we do, whilst we slightly pass over,
and carelessly neglect one of the principal grounds of faith.

3 The third thing in our description of living by faith is, the extent of this
living by faith, it extends it self to all good, expected or hoped for; to all
evils present or feared, whether relating to the life present, or that which is
to come.

The natural way for the obtaining of mercies, preventing of judgments, its to
run to our own righteousness, our amending and doing; but now the Christians
way is the exercise of this life of faith, I obtain all good by faith. I
prevent, or remove all evil by faith. Romans 9.31, 32. But Israel which followed
after the Law of righteousness, has not attained to the Law of righteousness;
Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of
the Law. The Jews found a want of righteousness, the Law that the Lord gave
them by Moses convinced them of much sin and unrighteousness, they see
themselves sinners, the Law terrifies them conscience gripes them what now do
they do? Why see, v. 32. presently they run to the Law, that bids them amend
their ways, do thus and thus, this they do, and yet as far from obtaining what
they want, or removing their fears as ever, because they sought not in a way of
faith.

The Gentiles likewise, they have the same wants and ground of fear the Jews
had; What do they? Why this they do, They hear a message, a glorious message of
one Jesus Christ, which was crucified at Jerusalem, through whose death poor
sinners believing in him should obtain righteousness and salvation; hereupon
they presently disclaiming any worthiness in themselves, or any thing they
could do, fly to Jesus Christ by faith, and so obtain righteousness, verse. 30.
The Gentiles which followed not after righteousness, have attained to
righteousness, even the righteousness, which is of faith.

They get their great want supplied, their conscience truly pacified, and all
this by faith?

Thus much of this third thing in the general, in the particulars, it falls to
be handled in that question, wherein the life of faith is to be exercised?

Quest. 2. What are the principal differences betwixt the life of Faith, and
the life of Sense?

There is a great deal of difference between these two lives, though both of
them be found in the Saints. And what differences we speak of, are not for
the discovery of a man's condition, whether he be gracious or ungracious; but
only the thing in hand is, to discover whether we live by faith, or sense?
Both these lives are incident to Saints, therefore if thou find thou do
not live by faith, do not conclude thou art a reprobate, a hypocrite, thou
may be a gracious soul, and yet live by sense.

Ans. 1. The life of faith does ever ground on something without; the life of
sense does ever ground on something within; either his own desires, or
affections; or some other thing; but the life of faith is begotten and
nourished by something without, as the word of God, the promise of God: Look
what Jesus Christ says to his Disciples, that is the continual language of
faith; Jesus Christ said, Joh. 14 19. Because I live, ye shall live also: Not
because you have good desires, good affections, but because Christ lives, this
is the language of faith, because the word of God lives, the Covenant of God
lives, therefore I shall live also. Not because something in me lives, not
because my affections lives, not because my obedience lives, but because Jesus
Christ lives, the Word of God, the Promises of God live, therefore I shall
live also. Sense ever draws conclusions from something within; it looks at
these two things, either the actings of the regenerate, or unregenerate part,
from the acting of the one, concludes the condition good; from the acting of
the other, concludes the condition bad.

Faith observes the acting of these, as well as sense, but draws conclusions
from neither. The Apostle Romans 7. sets forth the acting of the regenerate
and unregenerate part, What I do, I allow not, what I hate, that do I. -- He
sets before him the actings of both the old and new man, the one wills to
do good, and hates to do evil, the one delights in the Law of God,
consents to the Law of God, that it is good, yea serves the Law of God, the
other serves the Law of sin, that carries captive, makes him cry, O wretched
man that I am, that is, being captived by the body of death; but Paul when he
comes to draw Conclusions of his condition, does not fix his eye upon any of
these, does not say, Blessed be God though corruption be in me, I have a will
to do good, though sin be in me, yet blessed be God I hate it, though I cannot
obey the Law of God as I should, yet my mind consents, therefore there is no
condemnation, he does not say so; neither does he say, though there be some
good desires in me, That good I would, I do not, and that evil I would not,
that do I; I am carnal, sold under sin, therefore I am a reprobate, therefore
there is condemnation. No, but the Aposte Paul when he comes to make up the
Conclusion, he takes his eye off both, and pitched it upon something without,
i.e. Jesus Christ, v. 25. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord; Pitching
his eye upon Christ he can conclude, Romans 8.1. There is therefore no
condemnation to those that are in Christ -- He saw the actings of the Old and
New man, but takes his eye off both, and fixes it upon Christ, and then
concludes. So faith ever groundeth upon something without.

2 Cor. 12.17. Where he speaks of his buffeting by the Messenger of Satan,
and his praying against it, and a gracious answer he received from God, even
in that thing; here was good and bad; here was bad, a thorn in the flesh
troubling Paul; here was good, Paul praying against it, yea Paul receiving a
special remarkable answer from God in prayer. Observe, Paul concludes neither
from the one, nor the other; he does not say, I have a thorn in the flesh, I
am a wretched man, there is no hope of such a one as I, buffeted with such a
corruption. He does not say, though sin rage I have a praying heart, yea I have
received a gracious answer, therefore I comfort my self, I am the Child of
God. No, Paul when he comes to conclude, he does not conclude from his praying
hard, nor the bare giving in of the answer; but the substance of the answer
given in, that was that which carried Paul out of himself to lay hold upon the
grace of God, and strength of Christ; most gladly therefore will I glory in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. He does not say, I will
glory that I have a praying heart, an answer from God; no, in the power of God.
His faith pitcheth upon something without, whereas those that live by sense, go
quite contrary.

Differ. 2. The life of sense does look much to means for the obtaining every
Mercy; the life of faith looks above, and beyond means. When God told Moses
that he would feed the people of Israel with flesh, not for a day, but for a
whole month, Moses though he lived by faith, yet in that particular, acting
too much by sense, said, What Lord, shall all the Flocks and Herds be slain?
Numb. 11.21. the people are six hundred thousand footmen, and thou have said,
I will give them flesh? --

Moses looks upon means; how shall they be fed, shall we kill all the Flocks,
have all the Fishes of the Sea gathered together? Moses eye was upon means,
Gods was not so.

So* when Jesus Christ told his Disciples he would feed the multitude, they
presently query, Where shall we have bread? what, five thousand souls, and we
have but five Loaves, where shall we have bread? they look presently at means.
So a soul that is living by sense, is looking at means, if he has means he can
believe, if not he cannot.

O had I my liberty as once I had! opportunity as once, I could believe, if
not, he cannot believe.

The life of sense grounds much upon means, but the life of faith believes
above means. Abraham, it is said he believed when his body was dead and Sarahs
womb dead, the means dead. Habakkuk speaking of faith, speaks of believing
when the vision is hidden, when there is nothing to be seen of means, nothing
in the eye of sense, Hab. 2. and chap. 3.17, 18. Although the Figtree blossom
not, yet will I rejoice in the Lord.

Here is the life of faith, joy in God, in the want of means, yet will I
rejoice in the Lord.

Differ. 3. Thirdly, the life of faith, the more opposition it meets with,
the stronger it grows; but the life of sense, the more opposition it meets
with, the weaker it grows.

The Woman of Canaan comes to Christ, and meets with one repulse after
another, yet her faith grows, is strengthened; O woman, great is thy faith. A
soul that lives by faith, he believes for certain that he shall have such
a mercy, when opposition comes, he runs to the Promise, the Lord has
promised, here is a difficulty come in the way, and this is like to be a mercy
indeed, the Lord will try me before I have it.

But now, a soul that lives by sense, the more difficulty he meets with the
weaker his faith grows, as a soul that lives by faith encounters
difficulties, and runs them down, so a soul that lives by sense, every
difficulty encounters him, and runs him down. When Peter walked upon the water,
the Winds arise and grows boisterous, and his faith sinketh, and he sinketh
too; when there comes some difficulty between the Promise and the Soul, that
the soul cannot get through it, or look over it, then it fails, it cannot go
on.

Differ. 4. The life of faith makes a soul put his acceptance in the
acceptance of Christ; the life of sense makes it put its acceptance much in
affections; if it comes to a duty, as prayer, if the heart and affections be
up, the heart goes away cheerly and comforted; but if they be down, the heart
goes away sadly dejected, now it is not accepted. A soul that lives by sense
raises up his faith by his affections; but a soul that lives by faith, lays
his acceptance upon the Lord Jesus Christ. He says this, I know Jesus Christ
is accepted with the Father, and this I know, all the acceptance any Son or
Daughter of Adam has with God, it is by Jesus Christ. Now says the soul, I
have no worthiness, nothing at all, this I do, I close with this Jesus. I
believe on him, I lay hold on his righteousness, with this will I go into the
Fathers presence, from this I believe I am accepted. If I have acceptance I
believe I am accepted, not because of these, but for Christ, when I have none,
I believe I am accepted because of Jesus Christ, His acceptance is mine, Ephesians.
1.6. He has made us accepted in his beloved.

So for the acceptance of our duties, Jesus Christ believed for me, he had a
faith for Justification, though not a justification through faith. So I believe
my prayer is accepted, because Christ prays for me. intercedeth for me. I
believe my thankfulness is accepted, because Jesus Christ has been thankful
for me, I believe my obedience is accepted, because Jesus Christ has
performed obedience for me. I believe my humiliation is accepted, because the
Lord Jesus Christ was humbled and broken for me. So he puts the acceptance
of his person, performance, and all, in the acceptance of Jesus Christ.

Differen. 5. The life of faith keeps up his obedience, when his comfort goes
down, the life of sense throws down a man's obedience, together with his
comforts; though the soul wants comfort, the manifestations of the love of
God, yet notwithstanding it does not flag in its obedience, there is still a
sweet stream of love and obedience, though the stream of his comforts does not
flow as once it did.

There is a stream of obedience, though there is not that stream once there
was of comfort.

This you may see in the holy man Job, God frowns upon him, fights against him
as an enemy, the Devil he tempts him to cast off all his hopes in God, his
wife tempts him to cast off all hope, Do thou still retain thine integrity?
His friends might and main, endeavor to prove him to be an hypocrite, here was
a sad condition, yet the good man bears up his confidence against them all, Job
13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. As if he should say, it is
my duty to trust in God; the Lord frowns upon me, fights against me, and
indeed my comforts are gone, time was I had much; well, it is my duty to trust
in God, let God do what he please, frown if he will, take away my comforts if
he will, yea let him kill me if he please, though he kill me, yet will I
trust in him. So David, Psalm. 119.82, 83. My soul faints for thy salvation,
but I hope in thy word, my eyes fail for thy word, saying, When will thou
comfort me? for I am become like a bottle in the smoke, yet do I not forget
thy statutes. David looked for comfort long, so long that his soul even failed,
O when, O when? So long, as a bottle in the smoke is parched, and dried; I have
been so long without comfort, that my soul is dry and parched, and yet for all
this, Lord, that comfort do not come, yet I mind my duty, I keep to my duty, I
do not forget thy Statutes. So a soul that lives by faith, let former comforts
be gone, former manifestations and enjoyments be gone, yet the soul will
mind his duty. Let the Lord frown if he please, nay let the Lord leave me as
a bottle in the smoke, Yet (says the soul) will I trust in him, and not forget
his Statutes, yet will I mind my duty, go on in duty. But a soul that lives by
sense, if his comforts be gone, his obedience will be gone too; you shall
find it thus with them, if they find much comfort, then they can pray and
hear, indeed that soul goes cheerfully and merrily on: O but let his comfort
be gone, and then he is like a sullen child, he will do little or nothing
for his Father, the soul will stand still, so it is with the soul that lives by
sense.

Differen. 6. The life of sense believes only so far, as it has reason to
believe, the life of faith believes above reason.

If there be some ground in reason to believe such a thing, then it believes,
if not, it cannot. When the Israelites were in the wilderness, they could not
believe, because there was no ground to reasor, to believe that they should
have bread and flesh, when in the Wilderness, but they questioned the Power of
God, Can he give bread also? So that Noble man, 2 King 7.1, 2. because he
could see no ground or reason why there should be such a great plenty, says
he. If God would make windows in heaven, could this be? A soul that lives by
sense will believe only so far as he has reason; nay, he will not believe
always so far as he has reason to believe. I am persuaded there would be a
great deal of faith many times, when there is a great deal of unbeleef, if they
would believe so far as they might have some reason for it. As for example,

A poor soul casts away the Promise, and says, This Promise belongs not to
me, I have nothing to do with Jesus Christ, and yet it can confess that Christ
has made it to poor sinners; now reason says, Take it, because it is made to
poor sinners. O but not to all! O but so long as it is made to poor sinners,
and thou can see no certain ground to conclude thou art none of them, why
should thou refuse? Reason says, Why not thou?

But now a soul that lives by faith, that lives above reason, when it can see
nothing in reason to believe. What was there in reason for Abraham to ground
his faith upon, when he was an hundred years old, that he should have a
child? And the three Children when going to the fiery furnace, to say, Our God
will deliver us? Faith out-mounts Reason.

Faith will apprehend safety, and deliverance, where reason can apprehend
nothing but ruin. A soul that lives by faith believes himself to be a Son of
God, and justified, when many times if one comes to him, and asks, why he
believes? He is able to give no other reason but this, because he does
believe: because God has enabled him to believe the promise is to him; and
says the soul, I find in some measure through the grace of God I am able to
believe, to hang upon it.

Differen. 7. The life of faith reasons it self in all its reasonings to God,
the life of sense reasons it self from God: There is no greater difference
between a man that lives by faith and sense, than in the reasonings. Take a
soul that lives by faith, lay what premises you will before him, yet he will
draw up arguments to draw himself to God. Tell him his sins are great, O then
mercy will be great in pardoning them; Pardon my sins, for they are great,
Psalm. 25.11. Tell him afflictions are upon him for his sins, if so, then God is
a Father; I do not say, Every one that is afflicted, God is a Father to, but I
tell you how one that lives by faith, will reason himself to God by it, and
turn the Devils weapons upon himself. If corrected, then a child; so the
Apostle reasons, If you endure chastisement, God deals with you as with
Sons, Heb. 12.7. He makes it an argument to reason himself to God. Whatever
you can set before him, he will reason himself to God by it.

Tell it, that it has no righteousness of its own, O then I have the more need
to go to Christ.

But a soul that lives by sense, lay never such comforts, precious truths
before him, that another soul would reason himself Heavenward from, yet he
will reason himself Hell-ward by them. Lay never so much of the unsearchable
riches of Christ before him, yet he will from all, reason himself from God.

Differen. 8. The life of sense makes a man principally industrious in the
matters of his own comfort and salvation, but the life of faith principally in
Gods glory. Take a soul that lives by sense, the great Query is, What shall I
do to be saved? to attain Jesus Christ, pardon of sin, assurance of pardon?
They are good Questions, I wish all had them. But such a soul does not find
much time for acting for God, because all his time is taken up in acting for
himself: how shall I do for pardon, to get the love of God? This is usual in
new beginners, and others, so long as they live by sense as Peter's Converts,
and the Jailer.

But a soul that lives by faith, is chiefly industrious for Gods glory: this
we may see in the Apostle Paul, though he was not careless of his salvation,
yet he does seem to overlook it, set it by, 2 Timothy 1, 11, 12. Whereunto I am
appointed a Preacher, and an Apostle, and a Teacher of the Gentiles, for the
which cause I also suffer these things, nevertheless I am not ashamed, for I
know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him against that day. As if he had said, I am so taken up
with the work of God, of conversion and building up poor souls, that I run all
hazards, suffer all things for the Elects sake.

O but will some say, Paul, what will you do for your self, for your own soul?
Will you leave that at six and sevens? O no, I would no have you think so,
this I do, I commit that to God; I say, Lord do thou take the care of the
salvation of a poor creature, Lord I commit that to thee, and trust that with
thee, I desire to do thy work.

Romans 9. v. 1, 2, etc. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also
bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness and
continual sorrow in my heart; for I could wish that my self were accursed from
Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh. How exceedingly is
he carried out after the conversion of the Jews, and it will be a glorious
time, Paul was so desirous of it, that God might have much glory, that he
seems to forget himself. If the Jews be called, the whole world shall be
filled with the glory of God; and I did not care what became of me, though I
were accursed. And that the Apostle means as he said, that he did prefer the
glory of God (which he saw should have much advantage by the conversion of the
Jews) before his own salvation, the Apostle averreth it with many circumstances
[I say the truth, and lie not, my conscience bearing me witness.] Surely he
comes to utter some strange thing, that few will credit, therefore he says,
I speak the truth, which clearly argues that the Apostle was to speak some
strange thing, that they that should read or hear, would hardly believe it was
true. So a soul that lives by faith, is principally industrious about the
glory of God. I do not speak it as that I have attained, but that the Saints,
as Paul, had attained.

I come now to the next Question.

Quest. 3. Wherein is this life of Faith to be exercised?

Answ. In handling of this I shall show,

1 The things themselves whereabouts faith is to be exercised.

2 How faith (in those persons that live by faith) acts, or what faith does in
either of these.

Quest. 1. What are the things themselves whereabouts faith is to be exercised?

Ans. Concerning this, I told you in general, that this living by faith,
extends it self as far and wide, as our necessities, wants, fears, or doubts,
stretch themselves, to all good expected and hoped for, to all evil present or
feared, for the procuring of the one, and the averting, or removing of the
other; in so large a field should I gather up all particulars, I might tire my
self and you. I shall therefore draw things into as narrow a compass as
conveniently I can.

This phrase of living by faith; I do not find in all the Scripture to be
used but five times, once in the Old Testament, as Han. 2.4. and four times in
the New, viz. Romans 1.17. Gal. 2.20. Chap. 3.11. Heb. 10.38. Now in these five
places it is taken (as it seems to me) four several ways.

1 As it relates to a Christians Justification, Romans 1.17. For therein is the
righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, The just
shall live by faith. The great scope of the eleven first Chapters is, to prove
Justification by faith in Christ, against those that did hold Justification by
works of the Law? he lays down his position in this cause, and brings in
this, The just shall live by faith.

And he does oppose Justification by Faith, to Justification by the Law, Gal.
3.11. But that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is
evident, For the just shall live by faith.

2. As it relates to a Christians Sanctification, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified
with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the
life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who
loved me, and gave himself for me. Though the main argument here is
Justification, yet this living by faith, is in respect of Sanctification
chiefly at least, which I think the scope of the place yields; for Paul having
verse. 19. laid down this as an argument why a believer cannot be justified by
the Law, because he is dead to it, that he might give a reason of this
likewise, why a believer is dead to the Law, or must needs be so, he glides off
from the main argument of Justification into this of Sanctification, as by the
by, [that I might live to God] What is that? Why, perform obedience now to God,
or bring forth fruit to God, as Romans 7. v. 4, 5, 6. Wherefore my Brethren, ye
also are become dead to the Law, by the body of Christ, that ye should be
married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should
bring forth fruit unto God.

Which argument being now digressed into, he prosecutes in the next verse,
wherein as is clear, he goes on to speak of Sanctification, for he speaks of
Christ's living in him, which is not our Justification that is by Christ without
us, and so his living by faith is to be understood in respect of that, viz.
Sanctification, which in the former verse, and beginning of this, he was
speaking of.

3 As it relates to a Christians Expectation, or waiting; So Habak. 2.4. For
the Vision is yet for an appointed time; but at the end it shall speak, and
not lie: Though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not
tarry; Behold his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him; But the just
shall live by his faith. Speaking of the Vision delayed, he says, The just
shall live by faith, i.e. expect the coming thereof, and wait for it in a way
of believing.

4 As it relates to a Christians perseverance. So Heb. 10.38. Now the just
shall live by faith, but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure
in him. Which words, if you compare them with the foregoing verse, seem to be
of the same sense with them in Habakkuk, to be spoken of a life of
expectation, verse. 37. For yet a little while and he that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry; Now the just shall live by Faith. -- But compared
with the following words, in this, and the next verse, they concern
perseverance, because in this verse drawing back is set in opposition to living
by faith; and again, verse. 39. But we are not of them who draw back unto
perdition, but of them that believe, to the saving of the soul. Believing is
set in opposition to drawing back.

In these places we have a fourfold life.

1 Of Justification. 2 Of Sanctification. 3 Expectation. 4 Perseverance. In
every of which we are to live by faith; or we are to live by faith for these
four things in an especial manner, viz. Justification, Sanctification,
Expectation, and Perseverance.
Quest. 2. How does faith act, or what is it that faith does (in those persons
which live by faith) as touching either of these things?

Answ. In order to which I shall premise this word; That I shall not go about
to prescribe any one way or order that the Spirit of God (while it enables a
soul to live by faith in either of these) walks in, or works in, so as to tie
up all Saints to that way or manner of working, which experience teaches to be
dangerous, and to administer matter of stumbling to poor souls; for as the
Wisdom of God in his Word is manifold, so the workings of the Spirit of God
in the hearts of the faithful, through which they are enabled to live by faith,
are manifold and various, though in the substance all agreeing.

As in our Justification, so in all the rest, one is enabled to live by faith
herein, from such a principle, another from such a principle; yea the same
person looking upon himself at sundry times, shall find that one while his
faith springs from one principle or consideration, another while from another.

As for example, perhaps to day I believe my Justification, and go on believing
it for a week or a month together, from such a consideration as this, viz. God
has made a Covenant with me in his Son, and this is unchangeable, as not made
upon condition of my obedience, so no^ broken by my disobedience; and hence I
believe I am justified.

Another while perhaps this principle is not so lively and vigorous as to keep
up my faith, but then another does it, as this, God justifies the ungodly, now
says the soul, though I cannot say I am a Saint, yet this I can say, I am an
ungodly one, well. God justifies the ungodly, this is a precious truth, I own
it, I cleave to it, I am an ungodly one, a Sinner, I believe God justifies me.
When this has kept up faith a while, then it may be the life and vigor of
this goes off the heart too; and then come another, as this, The righteousness
of Jesus Christ, by which poor sinners are justified, is a perfect complete
righteousness; this righteousness is given to those that believe, to such he
becomes the Lord their righteousness. I am a poor Sinner, of my own I have no
righteousness, this I do, I cleave to his righteousness, which is persect, and
able fully to justify my poor soul; and I do in some measure believe that I
have a share in this righteousness, it is mine, and that I am thereby justified
in the sight of God.

These Principles (with many others) though diverse in themselves, yet do they
sweetly agree in the maine, all leading the soul to something without for
justification.

And truly, this premisal is very necessary and material, for how ordinary is
it with poor souls, if so be their faith has been carried out from such a
principle, and they hear another in relating his experience has been carried
out from another, to question the truth of their own, at least to have some
jealousies about it, yea some poor souls are sometimes ready to stagger, when
they look upon themselves, and consider the last month, or the last year, I
had much strength and ability to believe from such a consideration, now do I
not find that at all inabling me, but the faith I had is from another, how
comes this to pass? Why am I so inconstant in my faith? true or not? for (my
brethren) we are prone and ready to think when from any one principle or
consideration, our faith is kept up, that that should do it ever, which is our
weakness and ignorance, to show us which may be one reason why God deals in
this way with us, as another to make us see his manifold workings, in every of
which he is glorious, and therefore in none to be despised, and also to make
us have a higher esteem of every truth, not to slight any jot of the Gospel;
and lastly, which is the thing premised, to teach us that we should not tie up
God to any one way or manner of working, saying, here he goes, in this way he
works, and in no other. This being premised, I come to the question, to show
how faith acts (in such as live by faith) or what it does in either of these.

The life of Faith in Justification.
Quest. 1. How does Faith act in Justification? or what does faith in that
business, in those persons who live by it?

Ans. 1. Faith (in all those persons who live by it) it gives the soul a clear
and convincing sight of the emptiness, and nothingness of all its own
righteousness in this great business of our Justification: faith; whenever it
makes after Justification, it presently sets up such a light in the soul, that
the poor soul is made to see, that all its own righteousness, whither inherent,
or of works, contribute, nothing at all to its Justification; so that if it
have not some other righteousness to justify, it must go for ever unjustified,
notwithstanding all this; though whilst it did not live by faith for
justification, it was prone to eye much its own righteousness, and attribute a
great deal even in the matter of justification to it, so much as that when it
saw it, it would straightway conclude its justification, and when not, the
contrary; yet now having obtained to live by faith, there is wrought in the
soul such a wonderful convincement of the nothingness of this, which once it
made such an account of, as that it sees, though it could be as righteous as
ever man in the world was, yea as Adam in the state of innocence was; though it
should have all the righteousness of the old Adam, yet would not this make it
righteous as to justification, unless also it has another and better
righteousness. It sees that the righteousness of Abraham, David, Paul, and
Peter, and all the righteous men that ever were in the world, though all were
its own, would not make it one whit more righteous or just before God, than the
vilest sinner in the world, but that it must perish and go to Hell for ever
with all this righteousness, if it has no other: so that whilst it makes after
Justification, it goes wholly upon another score, saying, Lord, if there be
not some other way found out to make this poor miserable soul eternally
blessed, than the way of its own righteousness, it is undone for ever, and must
unavoydably lie under Divine wrath, and the stroke of Justice for ever; Lord,
had I all the working righteousness of men and Angels, yet were it not for
another righteousness, I should not dare with all this to come unto thee, or to
have a thought that because of this thou should justify me; for, though
this in it self be good, yet now I am clearly convinced that its all nothing,
as to the obtaining of my Justification; thus wonderfully does the life of
faith unrobe a man of his own righteousness, so as that he never dares go into
the presence of God for Justification until he has put this garment off; but
as the Priest, when he was to go into the Holy of Holies, did lay aside those
Garments which he usually wore, and put on other; so this soul, whenever it
comes into the presence of God, it lays aside every garment of its own
righteousness, which it wears in this world, and puts on the royal robe of
Christ's Righteousness. This we may see in the holy man David, Psalm. 16.2. O my
Soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord; my goodness extends not
to thee. No sooner does he act faith in God as his God, but presently says
he, My goodness extends not to thee; as to say, Lord, thou art my God, thou
have justified me, and this my soul says, yea I believe it; O but says he,
this is not for my goodness, it comes not at all into this business, far be
it from me, that I should think so* my goodness extends not to thee; I see
Lord (says David) my goodness is nothing, as to thee; true, it may be useful
to the Saints on earth; O but it brings thee nothing, neither is that it which
has brought this thing about, that thou art my God. So likewise Gods Church,
Isa. 64.6. and 8. when she is going to put forth an act of faith in God, as her
God, she lays by all her own righteousness, looking on it as nothing, worse
than nothing, verse. 6. We are all an unclean thing, and all our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags -- and verse. 8. But now, O Lord, thou art
our Father -- As to say, Thou O Lord have loved me, justified me, this I
believe, for thou art my Father, but this my Justification, or this love of
thine toward me, is not for my righteousness, no, that is all an unclean
thing, and filthy rags, and instead of Justification, I can expect nothing but
Damnation from the same.

2 Faith, it ever presents the soul with a perfect, complete, and
all-sufficient righteousness, which is to be had in another for its
Justification: Faith unrobes the soul of its own righteousness, and then it
says, O thou poor naked soul, which walk without a Garment, and have no
righteousness of thy own to cover thy nakedness, come thou hither, for I have
glad tidings to tell thee; behold a perfect and everlasting righteousness, the
Son of God, Jesus Christ casting the spotless mantle of his righteousness over
thee; thou art naked, but O my soul behold a robe, an everlasting robe of
perfect righteousness; put it on, go boldly to thy Father with it; though thou
art black, yet this will make thee comely; though thou art poor, yet this will
make thee rich; though thou art deformed, this will make thee beautiful, all
fair, there shall be no spot in thee. Now as faith unrobes the soul of its own
righteousness, so does it bring down this to the soul of the poor Sinner; which
being brought down, and the soul clothed therewith, it takes it in its hand,
and goes up to the Father with it, and says the soul, Lord, a time there was,
that I was unrighteous, and then I was afraid to come unto thee, and good
reason I had to fear; but now I come unto thee, and though I am still as vile a
Sinner as any man in the world, yet am I as just before thee as any Saint in
heaven; though I have nothing of my own to boast of before thee, except it be
my shame and nakedness, yet have I that of another, wherein I boast and glory,
and herein will I glory, though of my self I will not glory, but of mine
infirmities.

This righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is neither the righteousness of
works, nor our inherent righteousness, but another distinct from, and above all
these, a foreign righteousness, ^or a righteousness without us, is that alone
which the soul which lives by faith for Justification, bears all upon in this
business.

It counts not it self one whit the more righteous, or justified because it
has done much for God, nor one whit the less because it has done little; but
it bears all its Justification upon this, that it is righteous in the
righteousness of Jesus Christ; it lays the whole weight of this great business
upon the shoulders of Christ, It sees and knows that God the Father has laid
the whole stress of the business there, that he has not appointed any other
righteousness, neither of men or Angels to the work, and therefore says the
soul, though I had all the righteousness of all the Saints on earth, and Angels
in Heaven, to bring to God for my Justification, yet would all this never
justfie me, because the Father has not appointed, that either the
righteousness of men or Angels should do it; and yet though I have in a manner
nothing of these, as little creature active righteousness as any, yet do I in
some measure believe that I am justified, because I have another and better
righteousness which through Grace I have been enabled by faith to lay hold of,
even that righteousness of God, or that righteousness of Jesus Christ, which
God the Father has ordained and appointed to be my everlasting Righteousness
and Justification.

The more you and I live by faith, the more shall we daily come up to this, to
lay the whole strength of our Justification upon this righteousness without us,
not reckoning our selves to be one whit the more righteous, when we have done
a great deal of good, nor one whit the less when we have fallen into sin;
though my heart has been more carried out for God in this duty, then I was in
a hundred before, yet now to go to God, and say, for all this I am not one jot
the more righteous as to my Justification; that is wholly by another
righteousness which this comes not at all into, it meddles not with, but is a
stander by, and when I have fallen foulely into sin, then to go to God, and
say, Lord, I am as vile a sinner as any in the world, I have walked as like a
wretch as ever creature did, and yet for all this, I am not one jot less
righteous as to my Justification, that is still by another righteousness, which
my good reaches not, my evil hinders not. This we may see in Paul, 1 Cor. 4.4.
I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. As to say, O ye
Corinthians, I have preached the Gospel among you, and I have whatsoever you
judge or think of me, the testimony of my Conscience, that I have labored to
do it in all simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by
manifestation of the truth, making it my design to approve my self to every
man's Conscience in the sight of God; yet for all this, though I have
endeavored and obtained mercy of the Lord, in my work to be faithful, am I
not thereby justified? I do not put this upon the account of my Justification,
So Romans 7. when the Apostle had at large discoursed as of the good, so also of
the great mass of iniquity that was in him, whereby he was captivated, and made
to serve sin, yet he presently triumphs, Chap. 8.1. There is therefore now no
condemnation to them that are in Christ -- as if he should say, Though I find
an unregenerate part, as lively and powerful in me, as any other does, or I
think can do, yet am I not hereby condemned, this does not at all hinder my
Justification; no, I thank God for Jesus Christ, that is all in him, the
business of that lies upon his righteousness, though I had ten times more sin
then I have, to contend with, to mourn and be humbled for, yet could it not
prejudice my Justification, that is only by the righteousness of Christ, and
blessed be God Christ is mine, his righteousness mine, there is therefore now
no condemnation. --

3 Faith leads the soul out unto, and constantly keeps it to the word of
promise, where the righteousness of Christ is held forth to poor Sinners, for
the obta ning and holding of it. Faith ever loves to have its hold-fast in its
hand, because it knows that the better the thing is which it holds, if once it
lets go its hold-fast, the more eager and watchful the Devil is, to snatch it
from it. Now this thing of the righteousness of Christ, it is Faiths Jewel, the
promise as by it, it first gets hold of this precious Jewel, so is it its
hold-fast by which it keeps this Jewel from being plucked away by Satan,
therefore does faith lead the soul out unto Christ, keep him close to the word
of promise continually, says Faith, as you love the comfort of your
Justification through the righteousness of Christ, so hold to the Promise, keep
to the Promise, let go the Promise but a moment, your adversary will snatch
your Jewel out of your sight. Faith, it takes a poor soul by the hand, and
carries him out to the Promise, says ^olt behold, here is a promise, see what
is in it; why an everlasting righteousness for my Justification here, an
eternal Salvation hereafter; take hold of it therefore O my soul, take hold of
it; is there not a blessing in it? yea, is there not that in it, which will
make thee blessed for ever? keep hold of it therefore O my soul, keep hold of
it, Romans 10. verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. The Apostle speaking of the righteousness of
Christ, which faith has hold of, says thus, Say not in thy heart who shall
ascend into heaven, that is, to bring Christ down from above? or who shall
descend into the deep, that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead? but
what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thine heart;
that is, the word of faith which we preach, i.e. do not think you must go up to
heaven to fetch it, that there is no getting it except you climb thither;
neither say, Who shall descend, i. e. that it is in the Grave, I must go
thither for it, go hang or drown my self if I will have it; but what says it,
The Word is nigh thee; What word? why of Faith, and the Promise, i. e. the
promise of faith in Jesus Christ, which is preached to poor sinners in this;
this righteousness is contained here, you may lay hold of it, by holding of
this thou must keep it; thou need not poor Sinner, if thou would have all
thy sins pardoned, be a justified soul, and blessed for ever, climb up to
heaven by thy own good works, and righteousness for it, nor run down to hell in
despair, thinking thou may as soon find it there as any where else; no, no,
poor soul, what says it, The word is n^gh thee; Heaven is nigh. Justification,
Salvation is nigh thee, it is in Gods word of faith which thou hear
preached, that free promise which brings thee tidings of an everlasting
righteousness; lay hold of this, thou art blessed for ever; keep hold of this,
and thou shall see thy self a justified person, and an Heir of Heaven for ever.
And who me thinks hearing this, would not have thoughts of a Heaven; thou poor
soul sit all the week long at thy Cups, and with thy Queans, and art scared
from having any thoughts of Heaven, or obtaining of Jesus Christ, and life
eternal through him, because thou think if ever thou do it? thou must
make a Ladder of good works and climb up to Heaven, and thus thou know not
how to do, but it is a Hell to thee to have thoughts of it; or if not so, yet
thou think thou must run mad for a while at least, the thoughts whereof
terrify thee as much on the other side; whereas poor soul thou art mistaken,
the righteousness of Christ by which souls are righteousness of Christ by which
souls are justified and saved, needs neither of these for the obtaining of it;
thou need not go up to Heaven, nor down to Hell to get it, thou need not
stand howling, and crying and moping a month together to get a Heaven; no, but
come to the Promise and all is thine; but I tell thee not, that when this is
done thou shall swagger and swear, and be drunk and roar, as before thou did;
no, but a new nature shall be put into thee, and God whom now thou art afraid
of, as a Judge to hang thee, thou shall come running unto, and throw thy self
into his arms, as into the arms of a loving Father, and that work, as prayer,
hearing, which thou art now in prison whilst thou art about, thou shall account
this glorious liberty.

4 Faith it begets and keeps up a secret persuasion in that soul which lives
thereby, that either the righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is declared in
the promise already, for certain is, or if not, may be mine: As faith leads
the soul out unto, and holds it close to the promise, where Christ's
righteousness is held forth, so there is something which faith in its acting
does, to bring the soul unto, and constantly to hold it to the promise; for it
is not an easy thing to bring a poor soul which sees nothingness and emptiness
in it self, and all its own righteousness, to close with the promise of
Christ's righteousness, and to hold the soul to the same, in such sort, as it
shall not swerve or start aside, stagger or reel from that promise, in this
great business of its Justification.

Now that which faith does, for the bringing of the soul unto, and holding it
close to the promise, is, the begetting and maintaining in the soul a certain,
secret and inward persuasion, which is twofold; Either,

1 Such as has an assuring act of faith joined with it, and may be called,
Faith of assurance, which though it be not that wherein the life of faith does
properly consist, yet it oftentimes accompanyeth living by faith, and is more
constantly found in that soul which lives by faith, than it is in another which
does not live by faith; which is a persuasion that that righteousness of
Christ which is revealed in the promise for the justification of sinners, is
certainly mine applied to me, and that through the same I am already
justified, and shall never come into condemnation; and therefore I come and
take hold of the promise, and keep to it, as that which is my continual
evidence against sin, and Satan, that I am justified, and shall never come into
condemnation, so that the soul comes to the promise, and says, This promise is
mine, the treasure in it is mine, the Jewel of Christ's righteousness that it
brings, is mine; and in this confidence it triumphs over death, hell, sin, the
devil, and all the enemies of its Justification and Salvation.

This persuasion we find in the Apostle Paul, upon which he grounds his
glorious triumph, Romans 8. verse. 33. to the end; Daring all his enemies, and all
the enemies of the Elect of God, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that
dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who
also makes intercession for us, who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
Shall tribulation or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword?

All comes from this persuasion, verse. 38. For I am persuaded that neither
death nor life -- shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

And (as I said before) though this persuasion that I am certainly just and
righteous before God, in the righteousness of Christ, be not that proper act
whereby I live by faith, yet the more I attain to of this life of faith, the
greater and more constant will this persuasion be; for, the stronger faith
grows in any soul, the more full assurance does it bring, though yet that
assurance is not the act whereby it lives by faith, but a fruit thereof; yea,
in those souls who have attained to a higher degree of the life of faith, as
Paul and others in those times had, the actings of faith do more appear in the
act of Assurance, and less in the acts of bare Adherence, so that such do not
so much say, the Righteousness of Christ it may be mine, and therefore I
cleave to the promise which brings the same, as thus, it is certainly mine; I
am certainly justified, and therefore I hold to the promise, and that which is
the ground of this my assurance* and my evidence to prove the same, against all
the charges of the Law, Sin, Satan, or any of the enemies of my Salvation: Or,

2 Such a persuasion as has an adhering act of faith joined with it, and may
be called faith of adherence, which is a persuasion of this, that the
righteousness of Christ which the promise declares for the justificotion of
sinners, though I cannot for the present certainly say it is mine, yet it may
be mine, and I may be justified, and therefore I go to the promise, and hold
to the promise, where this is to be had; this persuasion is properly the life
of Faith considered in it self; the other is the life of Faith, and its fruit
both in the soul together; and though every soul which lives by faith, has not
the other, i.e. a persuasion that Christ's righteousness is certainly its own;
yet every soul which lives by faith, so far as it lives by faith, has this,
that possibly it may be mine, so far at least as that it dares not conclude
the contrary, as the Ninevites, Jona 3. v. 8, 9. Repent from such a
consideration, Who can tell if God will turn and repent? And as Job offered
sacrifice for this children, from an, It may be my Sons have sinned; And the
four Lepers ventured into the host of Assyria, from an, It may be they will
save us alive; So a poor soul which lives by faith, goes to the promise, and
takes hold thereof, and though it cannot say this is certainly mine, or shall
certainly be mine, yet it says. It may be mine, however I will not conclude
the contrary.

5 Faith in the point of Justification causes the soul that lives by it, to
shun all disputes either with the Devil, or a man's own carnal reason, as to the
question whether it be justified, or no: Satan comes and lays heavy charges
upon the soul, thou art such a sinner, have so often been proud, unbeleeving,
worldly minded, so many sins thou have committed against the love and free
grace of God, against thy own light and conscience, so many duties thou have
neglected, so many been formal, hypocritical in, and therefore thou art not
justified; Carnal reason that comes in, and says its Amen to the Devils
arguments; says Carnal reason the Promises are true, I know them to be so,
and therefore surely the conclusion must be thus, I am no child of God, I am
an unjustified person; Faith now that comes forth, and encounters the furious
charge of both these raging Lions, who would at once swallow up the peace and
happiness of the poor soul; and says Faith, you enemies, Satan, and my own
reason, if from all your charges, you had concluded against my Sanctification,
reason would that I should bear with you; but if the question be about my
Justification, I will be no disputer in that matter, because it is not for me
to meddle with that business, or to take the work out of another hands who is
entrusted with it. I grant I am as vile as you have made me, and viler too,
yet were I ten times viler than I am yet would not all this touch my
Justification; because that is wholly without me, and in the hands of another,
so as that no good or evil within me, or done by me comes at that; Yea, O
ye my enemies says the soul, you are much beside the question which fain you
would affirm, and prove, when from these charges you would assail my
Justification; for Sanctification, and Justification are two things, and all
you charge me with, in your premises, is some defect in the matter of
Sanctification, and in the conclusion you run into Justification, which is to
raise another question; and therefore (says the soul) had you concluded thus,
thou art not sanctified, I would freely without dispute have concluded with
you, for this I do acknowledge that I am a poor sinner, a wretched man in my
self, often captivated with a body of death; I am not indeed so sanctified as I
should be, but I see something in my self, which I desire to mourn for, and to
walk humbly under^^ and which I see daily need to go to my Father about, which
also I do, beseeching him, and waiting upon him for the healing this filthy
puddle of my nature, but because of this, that I am not justified, that I will
not conclude; neither are you my enemies, until you have proved that there is
a defect or want of righteousness in Christ as in me, till you have proved,
that there is not righteousness enough in Christ, upon whom my justification
lies, as it is my duty, I shall still desire, notwithstanding all my
weaknesses, and imperfections to believe my Justification.

Sixthly, and lastly, Faith looks strictly and narrowly to the conscience:
Conscience is the strong hold and castle of the soul, whilst that is quiet and
free from tumults, the whole man is at peace, let there be a tumult there, and
the whole man is at war and put into distraction, therefore faith in the
business of Justification, makes the soul to use all diligence of secure that
hold out of the hands of the enemy, by securing which, the whole man injoyes
peace; and truly this looking too, and securing of conscience is a business of
greatest concernment, in living by faith for justification; For the Devil and
Sin, do the soul more mischief when these get into conscience, than they do, or
can do any where else.

Now there are three ways by which Faith secures Conscience.

1 By putting a strong garrison into Conscience and keeping it there: This
strong Garrison is the Righteousness of Christ, which faith brings into
conscience, and keeps there: Faith knows that nothing else can defend
conscience, when Sin and Satan storm it, but Christ Righteousness. Hence 1
Pet. 3.21. we are said to have the answer of a good conscience toward God by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; for the Resurrection being the time wherein
Christ did appear in all his Righteousness, and show forth himself as one that
had now fulfilled all Righteousness, and upon the very same account was now
risen from the dead, when he had been acting the last part of that sad Tragedy
as to himself, but glorious work of Righteousness, as to us, is put for the
whole Righteousness of Christ both active and passive, and so it is as if the
Apostle should say, The Righteousness of Jesus Christ being put into our
Consciences, is that whereby they are secured and kept peaceable, so that
instead of tumults and insurrections in conscience, our consciences are in
peace, instead of accusing us, we have the answer of a good conscience toward
God.

2 By clearing the conscience of all those enemies who formerly have done, or
do disturb the peace thereof: As faith brings a strong garrison into
conscience, so it ejects all malignants or disturbers of consciences peace;
these are those dead works, Heb 9.14. which creep into conscience, i. e. the
guilt of all sin, whether of omission or commission, which get into conscience
and disturb its peace. Now faith garrisoning conscience with Christ's
righteousness, ejects all these; the first thing this garrison does, being
entered, is the clensing of the place where it is, from all such as are enemies
to the peace of it.

Whatsoever guilt of sin, past, or present, which lies in the conscience, and
wrangles, all is cast out, the Righteousness of Christ being made governor of
conscience, and the conscience injoyes abundance of peace; whereas before it
had not quiet an hour in a day, many times for a month together, now it is full
of peace; Sin which before lay gnawing and tormenting it, is now cast out, and
everlasting righteousness comes in the room thereof, whereby the soul
possesses abundance of inward peace passing all understanding. O says the
soul, I never knew what a calm was till now, that I had the righteousness of
Christ set up in my conscience. I have been oftentimes tossed too and fro, and
my soul near upon shipwreck, but now thanks be to God, I enjoy a blessed
calm, I never knew what a calm of conscience was till now, Therefore my heart
rejoices, my tongue is glad, etc.

3 By keeping a constant guard at the gates of conscience, that so these
enemies being cast out, may not re-enter; Faith knowing of how great
concernment it is, keeps a guard day and night at the gate of conscience, so as
that, when any of the ejected enemies would re-enter, presently they are under
examination, Who is here? Who are ye? Who are you for? Why, I am such a one;
Then stand, Stand off, come not here, this is the Garrison Christ's
righteousness, and here is strict command no such must enter, Act. 24.16. Paul
makes it his exercise to keep conscience clear, though he could not but fail
in his duty toward God and man both, yet he exercises himself to keep his
conscience clear, to keep it void of offense, that though offenses were
committed, yet that the guilt of them might not get in there. And thus much for
the first thing, how Faith acts, or what it does in persons living thereby, in
our Justification.

Quest. 2. Wherein does lie the advantage of that soul that lives by faith in
Justification, above another that concludes his Justification from sense, from
what he sees and feels?

Ans. 1. He has an advantage in respect of the ground upon which he holds
his Justification; when we hold a thing upon good ground, if of worth, the
greater advantage we have.

The soul that lives by sense, holds his Justification upon a ground within
him, it is experience, sensible workings, that is his ground.

But a soul that lives by faith, holds his Justification upon a ground
without him, the Promise and Covenant of God, this is a better ground.

1 In regard of the clearness of the ground, it is such a ground, as does more
clearly represent the thing, than any other thing can. I may more clearly see
and behold my justification in the Promise, than in any experience whatever.
That soul that grounds upon sense, there is a veil many times upon his
justification, because there is a veil many times upon his experience; upon
Moses face there was a veil: So when the ground of our justification runs in a
legal way, upon sense, there will be a veil upon the Justification, for the
face of Moses is veiled.

A man that has a veil upon his face, you see his face but darkly, if you see
it at all, you see it with a great deal of uncertain knowledge; but now that
soul that grounds his Justification upon the promise, that man sees his
Justification as a man sees another face to face, i. e. he sees clearly, and
speedily.

Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's day, and saw it, he saw it clearly; now how
did Abraham see the day of Christ? He had many experiences, he did not see the
day of Christ through these, but through the Promise, for says the Scripture,
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness; he saw
through the promise.

2 It is a sure ground; it is good to be upon sure ground, even in smaller
things than this upon which a man's eternal Salvation does hang. As a man's
Justification is a thing of such moment, therefore we had need to be upon sure
ground. Now that soul which holds his Justification from any thing within, does
not hold it upon a sure ground; it may be he has experience to day, and its
gone the next day; sometimes it is present, sometimes absent; but the promise
is a sure ground; Why, because that remains.

The soul that holds its Justification upon any thing within, will at one
time or other let go his hold of Justification; but that soul that holds it
upon the promise without, will hold it when the other lets it go.

3 It is a ground more easily come by; our experiences it is hard to keep them
when we have them; so, hard to regain them when lost.

Hard to get an humble frame of heart, but harder to regain when lost; but the
promise is more easy, though it have no experience for the present, yet a poor
soul may take his Bible, and go to the promise of God, and lay hold of that.

Obj. But you will say, it is as hard to lay hold of the promise, as to get up
experiences?

Ans. We grant it is so; but the promise is the ground, it is not our laying
hold.

4 Its a ground that has a great deal less deceit in it; when a man grounds
upon any thing within, there is a great deal of deceit; as the Spirit of God
has his true Gold, so the Devil has his gilded Counters, therefore possibly I
may miss, and take the Devils gilded Counters for the Spirits gold; but in the
promise there is not that deceit, that is a ground that a soul shall not be
deceived by. So there is advantage in respect of the ground.

2 That soul that lives by faith in Justification, has an advantage in this
respect, in that the soul has its justification more constantly in its sight
than another has; another sees it now and then, but he beholds it more
constantly. And,

1 By having our justification more constantly in our sight, we are free from
abundance of those doubts and fears that other poor souls are continually
hurried about withal about their justification: take a poor soul that lives
by sense, and he is in continual fears about this Justification, continually
tossed too and fro; one while he thinks, surely I am not that justified
person, if I were, there would not be so many sins stirring: another thinks,
surely I am not justified, for I have rejected Christ so many time* before, and
had so many heart-warmings in his Word, and all gone, so that he is continually
in a Labyrinth of fears and doubts, that he cannot wind himself out of, about
his Justification.

But a poor soul that has his Justification in his sight, is freed from
abundance of these fears, is not tossed too and fro, but beholds his
justification grounded on the rock without him.

Though he finds not that within that he has found, and breathes after,
yet says the poor soul, my Justification is by a righteousness without, though
I prize the workings of the Spirit of God within, above any thing this world
can afford; and though I find a want of these, yet I will not conclude I am
not justified, because justification is all without; I may be justified, yea I
believe I am, though I find not these workings so lively and stirring, as time
has been they have; so he is free from fears in the business of his
justification.

2 The constant holding our Justification in our sight, makes the soul take
all the dealings of God in good part, put a good construction upon all Gods
dealings, whereas another who is dark in justification, he can take no dealing
in good part at the hand of God. A soul that beholds his justification, can,
as long as that is clear, behold the love of God in Christ toward it, it can
put a good construction upon all. Let God give a mercy, he will say, that it is
out of love; let God take away a mercy, he will say, that is out of love. Let
God smile, he sees his love; let God frown, through his frown he believes his
love. Let God put him into a prosperous condition, he sees love; let him put
him into an afflicted, adverse condition, he can believe God is his God.

But take a poor soul that is dark in that, let him give a mercy, he says, O,
I am afraid it is in Judgment; let him take away a mercy, this is in
judgment, I have abused it. Let God smile, he is afraid to own it, lest he
be deceived; let God put him into prosperity, he thinks that will ruin him,
into affliction, he thinks that is to destroy him.

3 The constant beholding our Justification, does carry out a soul with a sweet
Son-like frame of Spirit, in all its actings toward God: Take a soul that is
dark in its justification, there will not be childe-like actings, but slavish
actings: a spirit of bondage, servile actings: But take a soul that has his
justification in his eye, and there will be sweet Son-like actings, when he
goes to duty, he goes with the spirit of a Son: I see Hell is gone, Heaven
is given, and does not perform duty to avoid the one, or procure the other, but
does all as to a Father, because God has taken Hell away, and given Heaven,
and is my Father, therefore I go about the work of God. When it mourns for
sin, it does not mourn for fear it should be Damned, but because it has
sinned against a Father: I do not say it is so with a Saint at all times; but
when a soul beholds its justification, so it is.

4 This constant beholding our justification does dis-inamour and wean the
heart from worldly things; our hearts are never so weaned from the Creature, as
when we see through justification our interest in the Creator. When the poor
soul comes to see the great God of Heaven and Earth is my Father, and I have a
glorious inheritance provided above in Heaven for me; then it says, Why should
I dote upon Creatures? As a Princes Son is estranged from the company of other
Children; why? I am the Princes Son, they are companions below me, this makes
him leave other Boys, and not play with them; so a Princes Son will not go and
hoard up Counters, why? I am a Princes Son: so a poor soul when it beholds
its justification is estranged from the world, upon this consideration; I am a
Son of God, a Child of God, have an interest in Heaven, a glorious inheritance
there, and this weaneth the heart from the world. The beholding our actual
justification begets such actual considerations as these.

5 It armeth us against all Satan's temptations; it puts the soul into such a
condition as it can grapple with Satan, when he comes to assault it with his
fiery darts; let the Devil shoot never so many fiery darts, yet so he has his
justification in his eye, it will keep off all, and therefore it is called a
Shield. They used a Shield to repel Arrows from the party; Faith is our shield
to repel the darts of Satan, and beat them back again so this is another
advantage.

3 That soul that lives by faith in justification, is delivered from the great
evil other souls run into, of adding to, or detracting from his justification:
it is a great evil incident to the Saints, they look upon themselves as more or
less justified, accordingly as they are more or less holy, and their works more
or less spiritual. I do not say but that we should endeavor after holiness,
and spirituality to the utmost; but not to make our justification less or more,
as these things are less or more.

1 Because it puts our justification as a stock into our own hands, that by our
care and diligence we might augment, or by carelessness and negligence might
diminish it: whereas our justification is a stock the Saints have, but it is in
the hands of their Suerty, which though they are, and ought to use all
Christian care and diligence, yet by all their care and diligence, there is not
one dram added to their justification. Though they are to take heed of all
carelessness, and remisness, and avoid them, yet though they should fail, there
is not one whit, not one dram taken away from their justification by all.
Justification is as the Childs Portion in the Executors hands; the Child has
some spending-money, but his Portion is in the hands of the Executor. So is our
justification, that is a stock in the hands of our Executor; the Saints have
something in themselves, and they spend much of that, but they would spend
their justification too, if the stock were in their own hand: but it is in the
hands of their Suerty, Executor, and they cannot spend that; he will not let
them have that, so that, that cannot be spent. Now when we look upon our
justification as that which may be added to, or detracted from, we do not look
upon it as in the hands of our Suerty, but in our own hands, and that is a
great evil.

2 It is a great evil, because it makes our Justification like our
Sanctification, in part: for that which is perfect can have nothing added to
it, or taken from it; if any thing could be added to it, then it was not
perfect before; perfection does neither admit of addition or diminution. Now
our Justification is perfect, by one offering he has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. them the Father has set apart, he has
perfected for ever.

Now if I should be more justified at one time than at another, then
Justification were not perfect.

3 It makes justifying grace to depend upon Creature actings; for if I am more
justified when I do more, and less when I do less; then my actings have
influence into my justification, and so justification depends upon Creature
actings, and so if of works; then it is no more of grace.

4 It is a great evil, because it does much dishonor Christ; it speaks the
righteousness of Christ insufficient for our justification; if the
righteousness of Christ be sufficient to justification, then all I can do
cannot help it forward. If it need any thing of ours, then it is not sufficient
of it self, I speak this to show the great evil of adding to, or detracting
from justification; which how usual it is to look upon our selves more
justified at one time than another, experience teaches; as if there were a
flaw in our justification, so soon as there is a flaw or slip in our
conversation. I shall come now to speak a few words to the third thing.

Quest. 3. What is it that hinders the soul from living by faith in
justification?

Ans. 1. Our being ignorant of the nature of that dispensation we are under,
through grace; ignorance of the nature of Gospel Dispensations, therefore it is
we live so little by faith. The Gospel is an administration of Grace, there is
nothing in the Gospel but grace, pure grace, all in the Gospel is grace from
first to last. Now we being ignorant of this Gospel Dispensation, we are led
by the Principles of old Adam within us, to look upon the Gospel as a Covenant
of works, or at least as partly grace, and partly works, and when we look upon
it so, we think we cannot have justification by the Gospel, unless we bring
something with us, and this hinders living by faith, believing for
justification.

The principles of old Adam do so agree with the Covenant made on Sinai, that
we can seldom go out to God for justification, but are ready to look upon God
as standing upon Mount Sinai, and standing upon that Covenant, and then we see
an angry God, a terrible God, a God clothed with Thundrings and Lightnings,
and that makes us think we must bring something to God to pacify him, and so
we are hindered from living by faith in justification. Whereas a poor soul when
it comes to understand the nature of the Gospel, that there is nothing in it
but grace, but pure grace, then the soul can act faith for justification, and
go out to God for it, as a poor nothing-Creature, when it sees all is received
in a way of grace.

2 Fear we should presume if we should go to God for Justification as poor
nothing-creatures* O thinks the soul, If I should go to God as having nothing,
I should presume, this makes him afraid to go to the Promise: Whereas indeed
we do presume in not going.

If a great man promise a poor man a hundred pound, and tell him he shall have
it, if he come for it; if this poor man should be so mannerly as to say, I
will not go, if I had it I should be glad, but for such a poor man in my rags
to go to such a great man, I should presume, would it not be presumption for
him not to go?

So it is a great presumption for a poor sinner not to go to God for
justification by faith. Is it not high presumption to pull down that, God has
set up, and set up that, God has pulled down? When a superior Court sets up a
Law, for an inferior to repeal it; When the High Court of Parliament has
repealed a Law, for an inferior Court to go and enact that Law, were it not
presumption?

This is the Law God has set up, that all should have justification by grace,
that is repealed to have justification by works. When I shall go seek to be
justified by something within me, or done by me, I do go, and set up that
Law that God has abolished, and is not this high presumption?

3 The old Adam sticking close to us. When we speak of old Adam sticking
close, I do not so much mean, the Evil old Adam, as Good old Adam, Moral
righteousness which was in Adam.

That Liquor that is first put into a vessel, the vessel will hold the sent of
that longest: Now man was righteous before sinful; old Adam was made first
righteous, therefore it is more natural for a man to think to be saved by his
own righteousness, than to sin: Though to sin be natural, the other more
natural, for it is more rooted in nature than sin.

And it plainly appears that it is an easier thing to bring a man off from
any sin, than from the opinion of his own righteousness.

To bring a Drunkard from his drunkenness, a Swearer from his swearing, easier,
than from an opinion that his own righteousness should save him.

And it is clearly showed, many a man is brought off from his sin, that is
never brought off from his righteousness, therefore that sticks closer. And
this we may see if we look on the Scribes and Pharisees, and Publicans and
Harlots. The Scribes and Pharisees were those that stuck close to Good old
Adam, to walk exactly and righteously: The Publicans and Harlots, were those
that minded neither good, nor evil, but swimmed in all the evil of old Adam:
Now, when Christ came, they embraced and entered into Heaven, but the Scribes
and Pharisees, the righteous men, that were following the good of old Adam,
they reject Christ, and run headlong to Hell.

And this likewise is clear, if you look to the Jews and Gentiles in the
Apostles time. The Jews followed after good old Adam; The Gentiles they went on
in sinful old Adam: The Jews they rejected Christ, opposed Christ; The Gentiles
they come in and embrace Christ. So that the good of old Adam sticks more close
than sin; and there is many a man is come off from his sin, that will be damned
for his righteousness, trusting to that, neglecting Christ's Righteousness. The
Scribes and Pharisees were come off from sin, and the Jews did not live in
that unrighteous way. Publicans and Harlots did, yet these go headlong to
Hell, and the other embrace Christ.

This is that which hinders from living by faith in Justification.

The life of Faith in Sanctification.
I Come now to the Second, The life of Faith as it relates to a Christians
Sanctification: Justification and Sanctification are inseparable companions
where there is the one, there is the other in some measure, either habitually
or actually, Whom he justifies, he also glorifieth; Grace is Glory begun.

Now in this business of Sanctification we are to live by faith, and the
Proposition shall be this.

Propos. That a Christians Sanctification is to be carried on in a way of
faith, or believing.

Or, A Christian is to exercise faith in his Sanctification.

I shall show,

1 Wherein faith is to be exercised in our Sanctification.

2 How Faith acts.

3 Why we are to live by Faith in Sactification.

4 What is the difference between that Sanctification which arises from
natural conscience enlightened, and that which arises from faith and believing.

Quest. 1. Wherein is Faith to be exercised in our Sanctification?

Answ. Sanctification consists of two parts.

Mortification and Vivification.

Mortification is the destroying of the old man, Vivification is the quickening
of the new man.

By Mortification we are transplanted from the stock of the old man, by
Vivification we are transplanted into the new Adam.

1 Mortification consists of two branches. There is the mortification of the
outward and inward man.

Of the outward man, that is, of all those things that please the carnal
outward sense and appetite; and of the inward man, of all the faculties and
powers of the soul, will, and affections, Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your
members which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness; the mortification
of the outward man: And in verse. 8. Put off all these, anger, wrath, malice,
blasphemy. -- There is the mortification of the inward man.

2 For Vivification, that likewise lies in two things. There is the vivifying
of our Graces, and the quickening of our Duties, or our hearts to obedience. The
last comes from the former. Our Graces bring forth our Duties, and our Duties
are but the actings of our Graces.

So that the things we are to live by faith in, in our Sanctification, are the
mortification of all sin, whether in the outward or inward man, the
vivification or quickening of all Graces, and of our hearts to every duty.

Quest. 2. How does faith act or put forth it self in this business of
Sanctification?

Answ. Here according to the two parts, we shall proceed, and show how faith
acts in the business of Mortification and Vivification.

Quest. 1. How does faith act in the business of Mortification?

Ans. 1. Faith does discover to the soul, that the old man, the unregenerate,
and unmortified part that is in every one of us, was carried up by the Lord
Jesus upon the Cross, and there did receive a deadly wound.

And that Jesus Christ our Redeemer and second Adam did take upon him that
nature in which the first Adam fell, and so did give a mortal blow to the body
of sin and death, by suffering in that nature. Therefore the Apostle says,
Romans 8.3. What the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God
sending his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, for sin, condemned sin in the
flesh. Christ took the likeness of sinful flesh, and by death condemned sin in
the flesh, that is, did give a blow to sin in the flesh, in the humane nature
that he took upon him, therefore the Apostle says, Romans 6.6. That our old man
is crucified with him: Christ took it up upon the Cross with him, and gave it a
mortal wound.

Now faith does discover this to the soul, when the soul finds sin
struggling and striving within, then says Faith, this sin striving, is a part
of that body of death that is in the Saints; now, O my soul, look up upon the
Cross, and see that body of death dying, therefore, O my soul, go out against
it, and so faith encourages the soul to go out against sin.

2 As Faith shows the soul sin crucified with Christ, so it shows the soul,
that the design of the Lord Jesus, in giving a mortal blow to the old man, and
body of death upon the Cross, it was this, the weakening of the power of sin,
and the subduing of it in the Saints; that sin might be so dispowred, that it
might not reign nor rule in the Saints, but be continually in a declining
languishing condition; therefore it is said, Romans 6.6. Our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed: he does not say, It is
destroyed presently; Christ took it up upon the Cross, gave it a mortal wound,
that it might be destroyed, in order to the destruction, that having the power
broken, the Saints might the more easily get power over it. As an enemy that is
already wounded (though a Giant) is easily overcome; So though sin be strong
as a Giant, Jesus Christ has wounded sin, therefore his strength being taken
away, is the more easily subdued.

Faith shows the soul Christ, says Faith, What, did Christ give sin a mortal
wound that it might be destroyed? O then let not sin live, O then sin shall
not live in me!

3 Faith shows the soul, that there is a continual streaming forth of virtue
and efficacy from the Lord Jesus Christ, for the killing and subduing sin
within; Faith does as it were set open the Fountain of the Blood of Jesus
Christ, streaming out toward and upon it, for the healing of the Leprosy of
Sin, and this is that which faith lays hold upon, when it strugleth with sin.
Paul when he was contending with this Old man, when he cries out, O wretched
man that I am, Romans 7.24. presently he casts his eye upon Jesus Christ, and
says, I thank God -- Faith shows the soul the efficacy and virtue that is in
the Blood of Jesus Christ, for the killing sin.

4 Faith is much in calling out the soul to the promises of mortification; we
have a promise of mortification, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over
you, for you are not under the Law but under grace. The soul that lives by
faith, when it finds sin strong, it takes hold of the promise, and goes to
Christ, and says, Lord, thou have said sin shall not have dominion over me;
behold, here is such and such a corruption too hard for me, Lord, behold, here
is thy promise, look upon thy promise, remember thy promise, subdue my
corruption; it first goes to the promise, and armeth it self with strength in
the promise, and then comes and fights against sin; and that is the matter
we are so often foiled with sin, because we try to combat with sin before we
go to the promise. When a soul lives by faith for the subduing of sin, there is
first a going to the promise, and then it encounters with sin with success.

5 Lastly, Faith does beget and maintain in the soul a secret persuasion,
though for the present it is compassed about with a weight of infirmities, yet
God will support it under all, and in Gods time it shall be a conqueror over
all.

Though I be for the present molested with sin, yet a day will be, I shall be a
Conqueror, and all these my enemies shall be under my feet; I shall set my
feet upon the necks of all my sins one day, and this carries the soul
couragioussy out to fight against sin for the present.

Quest. 2. How does faith act in the business of vivification?

Ans. 1. Faith eyeth much the Resurrection of Christ, and makes the soul
labor much after knowing Jesus Christ in his Resurrection, Phil. 3.10. That I
may know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and Fellowship of his
Sufferings, being made conformable to his death. Here are the two great things
we are speaking of, for he is pressing after perfection of Grace, which
consists in these two, to have fellowship with Christ in his death, for
mortification, and to know Christ in his Resurrection, for vivification and
quickening.

As mortification comes by a dying Christ, so vivification comes by a living
Christ.

2 Faith that shows the soul how that in the Resurrection of Christ he was
raised up and quickened with Jesus Christ; Faith shows the soul, that in Jesus
Christ it is quickened already, as its common person: therefore the Apostle Paul
speaking of Jesus Christ as this common person, says, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Yo^ who
were dead in trespasses and sins he has quickened with Christ, and made to sit
together with him in heavenly places. Faith shows the soul how that in the
Resurrection of Christ, it did revive, and has quickening already. Says the
soul, though I am dead, my graces lie as though dead, affections dead, heart in
duty dead, yet I have quickening in Christ, I have a stock of life in Jesus
Christ, Coloss. 3.3. Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God;
though it do not for the present appear, it is hid with Christ.

3 Faith in this business of vivification, shows the soul that there is a
stream of virtue and efficacy comes from the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
quickening of it; and this is that Paul presses after, That I may know him, and
the power of his Resurrection. Phil. 3.10. That I may have the power of his
Resurrection raising and quickening of me. The Resurrection of Christ, though
but one act, yet has a continual stream of virtue flowing from it, for the
quickening of souls.

4 Faith takes hold of any word of promise in the book of God, that may be
any ground of encouragement to believe his quickening it, as that word of
Christ, Joh. 10.10. I am come that they might have life, and that they might
have it more abundantly.

See says Faith, Jesus Christ is come that I might have life; -- And because I
live, ye shall live also, Joh. 14.19. because there is life in Christ, shall I
live? then I will go to him for life.

Quest. 3. Why is a Christian to live by faith for Sanctification?

Answ. 1. Because our sanctification is altogether of grace; therefore the
Spirit by which we are sanctified, is said to be given of God; and the blood
of Jesus Christ (which has such an influence into Sanctification) that is of
Grace. It was of Grace that Christ shed his blood, of more grace that this
blood of Christ should be applied to thy soul, for the washing away of thy
sin. So Faith which is a help in our Sanctification, that is of Grace,
therefore Faith is said to be the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. And to you it is
given to believe.

Now if Sanctification be of Grace, we are to live by faith for it.

2 Because our Sanctification, as well as our Justification, is primarily in
the Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ is made Sanctification to us, 1 Cor. 1.30
and so we are to live by faith for it, for whatsoever is in the Lord Christ, I
am to partake of it by faith.

3 Because we have promises of Sanctification; What I have a promise for, I am
to live by faith for, because the promise is the ground of faith, but we have
promises of Sanctification, of MORTIFICATION, Sin shall not have dominion over
yon, Romans 6.14. of VIVIFICATION; because I live, ye shall live also, Joh.
14.19. therefore we are to live by faith in it.

4 Because we are to pray for Sanctification, and therefore we are to believe
for it.

What is my duty to pray for, I am to believe for, because Prayer must be in
faith. Every Petition I put up to God in Prayer, it is my duty (whether I do it
or no) to act faith in the thing desired. If I am to pray for it, I am to
believe for it. But I am to pray for it. Jesus Christ teaches us to pray for
it, when he himself prayed for our Sanctification.

Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth, and Jesus Christ teaches
it, in that Prayer we call the Lords Prayer, the three first Petitions
respecting in a great part our Sanctification, Hallowed be thy Name; It is as
much as that God would help us to honor and Sanctify his great Name.

Thy Kingdom come; It is as much as to pray that God would set up his
Spiritual Kingdom in our hearts, that we might be ruled and guided by his
Spirit, having all corruption mortified, and grace quickened.

Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven, This is as much as to pray,
that we poor creatures here on earth, might do the will of God so freely,
fully, and cheerfully, as the Saints in Heaven; So that we are to pray for
Sanctification, and then we are to believe for it, because our Prayer must be
in faith.

Quest. 4. What is the difference between that Sanctification which arises
from an enlightened conscience, and that Sanctification which arises from faith
or believing?

There is a Sanctification which arises from the mere dictates of the Law of
Nature, and that Sanctification the Heathen Moralists attained to a great deal
of: And there is a Jewish Sanctification, or Legal, and that is such a
Sanctification as is begotten by the terrors of the Law. But there is another
Sanctification, and that is a Gospel-Sanctification, that is such a
Sanctification as is wrought in the soul from the beholding the love of God in
Jesus Christ, such a Sanctification as is wrought from believing his
Justification.

Now there is a great difference between this Sanctification, and the other,
which arises only from an enlightened conscience, for both arise from an
enlightened conscience, the one from conscience being enlightened by Natures law,
the other from the written Law, but there is a great difference.

Answ. 1. That which arises from natural conscience is something of the more
gross part of Sanctification, but a piece, and does not take in any thing of
the finer part of Sanctification. A forsaking some sins that are outward and
gross, his conscience cannot but fly in his face, so that he shall not rest
quietly night nor day, such as Drunkenness, Adultery, and the like.

It is in respect of those duties that are more apparent, such as Prayer,
hearing the word, such, if a man should let alone, he should have no quiet,
nor peace in conscience.

But that Sanctification that comes from faith, that is in respect of the
inward, more secret evils of the soul; the secret rising of pride, unbeleef,
and passion, and so for more inward duties, that Sanctification teaches a man
to deny himself, to submit himself to Gods will, to be content with Gods
disposal.

2. That Sanctification which comes from an enlightened conscience only,
raises a man to be more self conceited; but that Sanctification that comes
from faith and believing, throws a man down in respect of all self-conceit,
it makes a man more mean and low in his own eyes: As the Scribes and
Pharisees, and Jews in our Saviors time, they had a great deal of this outward
holiness and Sanctification; but see how it puffed them up, how they stand upon
tip-toes, and crow over poor Harlots and Publicans, as not fit to come in the
company of such as they were.

But that which comes from faith, makes the soul more humble. What abundance
of Sanctification Paul had, he did press after perfection, did walk more like
one in heaven, than on earth, yet he could look upon himself as the least of
Saints, concerning acting for God, laboring in the work of God, he preached
the Gospel from Jerusalem to Illiricum labored more abundantly than they all,
yet how humble; Yet not I, but the grace of God in me; and so he says, in
nothing he came behind the chiefest Apostles, yet says, I am nothing. So
concerning uprightness of conversation, he walked before God in all good
conscience, knew nothing by himself, yet how humble, yet hereby am I not
justified, and not that I can do any thing of my self; yea, he says, he was
the chiefest of sinners, he sees it is not wrought by his own proper
industry, but by the grace of God, therefore he gives him all the glory.

3 That Sanctification which is wrought by natural conscience, is grievous and
irksome, because it is against the will, it is a forced holiness, he is
constrained to it. It is his will to sin, but conscience will not suffer him;
his will is to do nothing at all in the service of God, if he might go to
heaven but his conscience puts him in hell if he does nothing, and so it is
grievous to him.

But that Sanctification which is though faith, that is pleasant to the soul.
That that is natural is pleasant. God puts the New nature within, and then it
is in some measure natural to be holy, to avoid sin, to do the will of God:
Therefore see how differenly wicked men and godly men speak of the ways of
God, Job 21.14. Sec the language of wicked men, they say to God, Depart from
us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: Here is the language of
wicked men, they cannot help it for their lives, but they shall have some
knowledge of the ways of God, the Law of Nature teaches something of Gods
ways, and they have his word, and that tells something more. O say they,
Depart, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, we are troubled at the
knowledge of such things, it torments us, this is the language of wicked men.

Then again, Jer. 23. v. 33. we read of a generation of men that heard the word
of God, but it was so tedious, that they call it a Burden, they come to the
Prophet, and ask, What it the burden of the Lord? It was grown into a Proverb,
the ways of God were so tedious and irksome.

But now do but see how Godly men speak of the ways of God. See what David
says, Psalm. 19.7, 8, The Law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul, the
testimony of the Lord is sure making wise the simple, the Statutes of the Lord
are right, rejoicing the heart, verse. 9, 10. The judgments of the Lord are
righteous altogether, more to be desired than gold, than much fine gold,
sweeter than the honey and honey comb.

They do not cry, Depart, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, they do not
call them a burden. So Psalm. 119. verse. 72. The Law of thy mouth is better to
me than thousands of gold and silver, verse. 130. How sweet are thy words to my
taste, sweeter than honey. See how David speaks of the will of God; the wise
man tells us, Prove. 13.19. It is an abomination to fools to depart from
evil; It is an abomination to depart from sin, it is that he hates. The fool,
that is the wicked man: It may be he does depart from some sins, his
conscience makes him depart from some sin, fear of Hell, the terrors of the
Law, but it is an abomination; he may depart from it, but he hates it with
his very life, not sin, but the departing from sin; that he must part with his
drunkenness, the Drunkard would fain have his cups, and the Adulterer his
Queen, but his conscience so terrifieth him that he dares not have them, but
departs from them, but he hates the departing from them.

But see a godly man, it is his delight to part from them, Psalm. 119. verse.
143. Trouble and anguish have taken hold upon me, but thy Commandments are my
delight, verse. 47. I delight my self in thy Commandments which I have loved. A
hundred and twenty times in this Psalm, the Psalmist uses such phrases as
express his affection unto the ways of God, I delight in thy Law, I love thy
testimonies.

4 That Sanctification that arises from natural consc^ence, that is most, when
conscience is most unqu^et.

We read that Ahab humbled himself, but never but when his conscience was
troubled. But that Sanctification which arises from faith, is then most, when
the soul is most quiet.

If at any time the soul is least in duties of Sanctification, it is when the
conscience is most unquiet.

5 Lastly, That Sanctification that arises from natural conscience, makes a
man an enemy to all these that are truly and spiritually sanctified. Ishmael
the son of the Bondwoman, persecuteth the son of the Freewoman: So all the
stock of Ishmael, they that are sanctified with an outward Sanctification, will
persecute those that are truly sanctified. Therefore there were none such great
enemies to Christ as the Scribes and Pharisees that had outward Sanctification;
they were they that stirred up persecution, they were the great and worst
enemies to true Sanctification.

But that poor soul that is truly, spiritually sanctified, is a friend to all
those that are truly sanctified; they love them the more, the move
Sanctification they can see in them; the more of the Image of God, they can see
upon any souls, the more they love them.

The life of Faith in expectation.
1 Cor. 5.7. For we walk by faith, and not by sight.


THe observation that we are upon is this, That the life of Faith is the proper
life of Saints in this world.

We are speaking to this question, What those things are which a Christian is
to live by faith in?

I have told you, that the phrase of living by faith, is taken in Scripture in
respect of Justification, Sanctification, Expectation, and Perseverance; we
have spoken of the two former, now of the third, the life of Faith relating to
a Christians Expectation, a Christian is to live upon God in way of
expectation, to wait upon God, he is to expect much in way of faith. That we
are to live by faith in this respect, is clear from that testimony of Habakkuk,
in the second Chapter, and the third verse. For the vision is yet for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak -- at the fourth verse. But the
just shall live by his faith; by his faith, the time whilst the Vision is
delayed he lives by his faith, expecting much, while much is delayed, expecting
the fulfilling of the Promises, while it is delayed; all the time that much is
delayed, all that time of a Christian he is to live by faith; the Scripture
tells us, that Abraham believed God, he had a promise, and it was delayed year
after year, he looks for the promise, and for the performance thereof, and yet
delayed; Abraham looked for the mercy in way of faith, and the fulfilling of
the promise was made to him, but he must first wait for it.

In the handling of these things we shall show you,

1 What those things are that a Christian waits for, what those things are that
a Christian expects by faith.

2 How Faith acts the soul in this business of expectation.

3 Why we must live by faith in this respect,

4 What manner of waiting that is, that comes in believing.

And so apply it.

First, Those things that a Christian waits for, and expects, are many; but a
Christian does by says wait for something more especially, that he does expect
and wait for in a special manner: as,

1 The fulfilling of Promises; if the Lord has made a promise to the soul, or
it the soul has been made to wait upon a word of promise, now he waits upon
God beleevingly to see the accomplishment of this promise. David had a word of
promise from the Lord, and waits upon the Lord for the accomplishment of it,
Psalm. 119.49. ver. Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have
caused me to hope; he had a word, and grounds his hope upon it, waits upon God
for the fulfilling of it. So we read of Simeon, that just and holy man spoken
of in the second of Luke, verse. 26. he had a word that he should not dye until
he saw Jesus Christ in the Flesh, and he waited for the consolation of Israel;
he had a word and waited for it, at the 25. and 26. verses; -- A word was given
in to him, and it was revealed to him by the Spirit, that he should see Christ,
and he waited for the accomplishment of it; so a poor soul when it has any
promise given in by the Lord, or is enabled to take hold on any promise, and
meets with a promise suitable to its condition, a soul that lives by faith waits
upon God for the fulfilling of this promise.

2 Again, another thing that a soul waits for is, the return of his prayers;
Prayers are the great ventures of a Christian, according as a soul speeds or
not speeds in these, so he is either rich or poor; these being a Christians
great ventures he is waiting for their return, to see what comes home, and who
comes richly laden or not, this in Psalm 85.4, 5. ver. the Psalmist having
been earnestly praying to God, Turn us, O God of our salvation -- will thou be
angry with us for ever -- show us thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy
salvation; the Psalmist having been praying hard, he waits upon God for an
answer, at the eighth verse. I will hear what God the Lord will speak; he had
been praying, and looks up now for an answer; I will attend now for an answer,
for he will speak peace to his people, and to his Saints, I am sure I shall
have an answer of peace, and I will hear, I will stand waiting for an answer.
And so the Prophet Habbak. 1.2. How long shall I cry, and thou will not hear,
even cry out unto thee of violence, and thou will not save, art thou not from
everlasting, O Lord my God, mine holy one? etc. all the chapter is prayer; now
in the beginning of the second Chap. Habakkuk. stands upon the Watch Tower to
see if any answer comes, at the first verse. I will stand upon my watch, and
will watch to see what he will say unto me; he had been praying, and now he
would stand upon his watch tower. The watch towers are places in Cities, where
some stand to discry an enemies coming; so in the Kings, Jehu's coming was
discryed by a Watchman, in 2 King. 9.17. And there stood a Watch man on the
tower of Jezerel, and he spied the company of Jehu as he came; so Habakkuk
here, he had been at prayer, and he went up to his Watchtower to discry the
coming of an answer, and waits for the return of his prayer. A poor soul, that
is another thing he waits for, for the returns of prayer, such a soul says, I
have prayed, and I will wait for it, as a wise Merchant sends out a Venture,
takes care of it, and hearkens out for it, and when it comes home, he looks
for his gains, etc. So a Christian when he trafficks for Heaven, he does not
let it go and never minds it, but inquires after it, and looks for his gain,
and returns, and thus he does wait for the return of his prayer, that is the
second thing.

3 Again, another thing a soul waits for, is the return of Gods countenance; it
is not always Sunshine here below, sometimes Clouds does interpose to hinder
the Sun beams, and cause darkness and obscurity; so it is not always Sunshine
with a poor soul, sometimes Clouds get in between the countenance of God and a
poor soul, and hinders the comfort of a poor soul; and sometimes when it is so,
and it is not as it has been formerly, the soul waits then for the return of
his countenance, Psalm. 130.5, 6. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in
his word do I hope; my soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch for
the morning; he waits, and he waits, and waits more for God, than they that
watch for the morning. Where was he? why he was in the depths, as in a
dungeon, and could not see the light of Gods countenance; in a dark condition,
and there waits; and O when shall I see God again! and so likewise at another
time, when the countenance of God was hidden from him, and much dejected, in
Psalm, 42.5, 6, 7. O my soul, why art thou disquieted within me, trust in God --
who is the help of thy countenance and thy God; and he puts his soul in waiting
upon God, for I shall yet praise him, and behold him, who is the help of my
countenance, and my God.

4 Again, as for the return of Gods countenance, so he waits likew^se for the
Churches deliverance, that is another thing, when the Church is under any
trial, or affliction, in captivity, he waits for the deliverance of the Church:
thus in Habakkuk, The just shall live by his faith; when the people were in
Babilonish Captivity, they lived by says for the return of their Captivity, so
Gods people are called Watchmen in Isaiah, Isa. 62.6. I have set Watchmen upon
thy walls, O Jerusalem: What do they watch for? for the deliverance of Zion,
they wait for the prosperity of Gods people, and the deliverance of the Church
of God.

5 Another thing is, The ruin of Gods enemies, as they wait for the prosperity
of the Church of God, so for the ruin of Gods enemies, Zeph. 3.8. Therefore
wait ye upon me, says the Lord, that I may assemble the Nations, the
Kingdoms, to pour upon them my indignation, anger, jealousy. God has a
design to gather together his enemies to their ruin and destruction, Wait upon
me until I gather them together, and till they be destroyed.

6 Again, one more, The soul waits for the Lords second coming; that's a thing
the soul may wait for, Heb. 10.38. The just shall live by faith. Now look in
the former words, and he shall live by faith in the expectation of Christ's
second coming, verse. 37. He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. So
in Chap. 9. verse. 28. To them that look for him, he shall appear the second
time without sin unto salvation. What, a looking, waiting, and expectation for
Christ's second coming in the Spirit? Rev. the last Chap. v. 17. The Spirit and
the Bride says come; here is coming, waiting, longing, the Spirit cries come,
and the Bride cries come, the Spirit in the hearts of the people of God, cries
come, waiting for Christ's coming; yea, this is made a character of a Christian,
and a great work of the Gospel, to wait for Christ's coming, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9, 10.
They themselves show of us, what manner of entering in we had unto you, And to
wait for his Son from heaven. It is the character given of the Thessalonians, a
waiting for the coming of Jesus Christ, and a great Gospel-work to wait for
Christ's coming. Thus what it is that Christians wait, and expect for.

Secondly, How the life of faith acts, or how faith is helpful to a soul in
this business of a Christians Expectation and waiting.

First, Faith, or the life of faith, it ever seeks out some promise, upon which
it may ground an Expectation of that mercy that it waits for. I say, the life
of faith, it ever looks out some Promise, upon which it may ground an
expectation of that mercy it waits for. Faith it must have its word, and
therefore the soul that does by faith expect and wait for any mercy, it ever
looks out for a word and promise, goes ever to the word to see what ground it
has to stand upon, and to wait for such a mercy; the life of faith does turn
over the Bible, and looks out the promise, finds out the promise of that
mercy, never rests till it have a promise, and then it pitches its standard
upon the promise, and there it stands, and looks up to heaven, waiting for the
accomplishment of that promise. When Daniel did expect the Deliverance of the
people of Israel out of the Babylonish Captivity, he did ground it upon a
promise: The Prophet Jeremy had foretold it should continue seventy years, now
Daniel goes to the promise, and when they were expired, prays unto God for the
deliverance, and upon this word of promise seeks God, and believes it indeed,
and expects it from the promise.

Secondly, As Faith does cause a soul to seek out a promise, so having found
the promise, does not limit God to any time or way for the fulfilling of this
promise. Another soul that does not live by faith, if so be that he does wait
upon God at all, yet he will limit God, and tie up God to his own time and
way; Israel limited the holy One, Psalm. 78.41. and he that expects much in the
way of faith, that soul will not limit God to his time and way; if I have it
not to day, I can wait no longer; no, that soul will wait upon God, Gods time,
as David says Psalm. 31.15. My times are in thy hand: So says a soul, Times
and seasons of mercy are in thy hands, if I should have it now to day, I should
be glad, and rejoice, and bless the Lord for it; if thou do withhold it, My
times are in thy hands, yet I desire to wait; no reason that I should speak
against the Lord, and entertain hard thoughts of God, if thou withhold the
mercy, yet I will wait for it, Take thy own time, O Lord. Then it does not
limit God to any way of performance: A soul that expects mercy in way of faith,
it does not limit God to any way, so far as concerns Expectation, it is not the
way of faith to limit God to any way; An ungodly man will many times tie God to
ways; But a soul that does by faith expect a mercy, that soul leaves God to
his own way. We read of Moses once or twice, tying God up to his own way: When
the people were in great streights, Exodus 14, at the red Sea, 14, 15. verse. The
Lord shall sight for you, and yet shall hold your peace; And the Lord said unto
Moses, Wherefore cryest thou unto me? Speak unto the children of Israel, that
they go forward; Moses at the 13. verse goes and lays out a way, and that was
to stand still, and God would destroy their enemies: and that was not Gods way,
he goes to God, and cries unto him, that he would come with some immediate
hand, and destroy them from heaven; this was Moses way, and now Gods way was,
that they should go forward, and pass through the Sea, at the 16, verse. But
lift up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the Sea, and divide it, and
the Children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the Sea. Now
Moses bid them to stand still, but God bids them to go for ward, and so they
did, did not ty up God to his own way: And so at another time we find Moses
limiting of God, Numb. 11. for want of flesh, the Children of Israel murmured;
well says the Lord, Therefore the Lord will give you flesh, and ye shall eat,
ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten days,
nor twenty days, but even a whole month, 18, 19, 20 verse. And Moses said at
the 21. verse. The people amongst whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen,
and thou have said, I will give them flesh, that they may eat an whole month,
shall the flicks and herds be slain for them, to suffice them? or shall all the
fish of the sea be gathered together for them, to suffice them? Moses thought
of no way, unless their flocks were killed, or the fish of the sea to be
gathered together, and Moses thought this the way, and so prescribes God a way:
So a soul so far as it is waiting upon God and not in faith, it will prescribe
God a way; but a soul that does expect in faith for a mercy, it will not be
prescribing God a way. So Abraham he leaves God to his own way. God bids him
offer up his Son, he does not say, Why my Son, why, how will thy promise be
accomplished, and made good; art not thou faithful? Abraham leaves God to his
own way, and believed that God could find a way for the fulfilling of the
promise, and did not limit God to any way; a soul that lives by faith waits
upon God for the fulfilling of the promise, and does not limit the Lord to any
time, or way of his own.

Thirdly, The life of faith in our Expectation, as it does cause the soul to
look out to the promise, and having the promise, does not tie or limit the Lord
to his own time or way, for the accomplishment of it; so it does persuade the
soul, though it know not the time when, yet a time there is, wherein the
promise shall be fulfilled, and that mercy I wait for shall be given in. It does
persuade the soul that there is a time it shall be given in, the Lord has his
set time, in which he does fulfill his promise, and in which he does give in
his mercy to his people, a set time for the fulfilling of that promise to
Abraham, that his seed should inherit Canaan, Genesis 15.16. When the iniquity of
the Amorites should be full, in the fourth Generation. So God had a set time
when he would deliver the people out of the house of bondage, the land of
Egypt, at the set time it was, at the end of the four hundred and thirty years,
Exodus 12.41. And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty
years, even the self-same day, it came to pass, that all the hoasts of the
Lord, went out from the land of Egypt; so God had a set time wherein he sent
his Son Jesus Christ into the world, that time is called, The fullness of time,
Gal. 4.4. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of
a woman, made under the Law: A set time for that; And so likewise there was a
set time, when Christ suffered: God has a set time, even for an hour, Joh.
13.1. Now before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was
come, that he should depart out of this world, unto the Father; a set time,
even to an hour that God appointed Christ to dye, and therefore he said, that
they could not lay hands on him, because his hour was not come; and so a set
time to build up Sion, and to build up the Church, Psalm. 102.13. Thou shall
arise and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor her, yea the set time is
come: So God has a set time to perform what ever he has promised to his
people. Now says a soul that lives by faith, when that set time is come, I
shall have the mercy, and though the promise be delayed to day, to morrow,
etc. yet it persuades it self, that when the set time is come, it shall have
the mercy.

Fourthly, The life of faith, it causes the soul quietly to wait upon God
without murmuring, till the time, the set time does come: It makes the soul
quiet and patient till the set time does come; Job says, All the time of my
appointed time, I will wait, until my change come, an appointed time, there was
an appointed time, and he waits upon God till the time come; So of the Church
in the Canticles, its very clear for this; in Chap. 3. verse. 5. I charge you, O
ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hindes of the field, that
ye stir not up, nor awake my love until he please; There is a time wherein
it pleases Christ to come, a set time, before which he will not come, Stir
not up my love until he please, till the time is when he will come, no
stirring up by impatience, and the like, till he please.

So much for the second thing, How faith does put forth it self, or helps the
soul to wait upon God.

3 Why a soul is to expect mercy in the way of faith, or is to live believing
in his Expectation?

1 One reason is, because our expectation of mercy, it must always be grounded
upon a promise, or otherwise our expectation is nothing: In vain do we expect,
that which God has not promised to give, if it must be grounded upon a
promise always, then I must live by faith, even in my Expectation, because
without faith, there is no taking hold of the promise, neither can he close
with the promise, and in his expectation, he must take hold on the promise, or
else it is in vain.

Secondly, He must live by faith in his expectation, or else he will never
be able to hold out long in his expectation: Where there is not an acting of
faith, there the soul dies, that soul that does not wait upon God in a way of
faith, that soul dies, and cannot hold out long, and so t^res, and cannot wait
long; waiting is a long and hard work, faith is our strength, and if we have no
faith, we shall never be able to go through this hard work; a Horse that
wants mettle, will never be able to hold out; put him to hard service, he
will not hold out; Faith is the mettle of the soul, if we have no faith, we
cannot hold out in our waiting upon God.

3 Again, we must live by faith in our expectation, because otherwise though
the mercy should come in which we wait for, yet if it do come in, and not in a
way of faith, it will not be so sweet and comfortable to a soul. If it does
not come in, in a way of faith, its otherwise: Mercies believed for, are the
sweetest; Mercies that I have waited for in a way of faith, are the sweetest
mercies, which I have believed for.

Quest. 4. What waiting is that, which comes from faith?

Ans 1. That waiting is a patient waiting, opposed to murmuring and repining, I
waited patiently for the Lord, Psalm 40.1. and Psalm. 37.7. Rest in the Lord and
wait patiently for him.

2 It is an humble waiting, he is made humble by his waiting; it is only an
humble soul that will wait upon the Lord, that beleevingly will wait for God,
therefore it is said in Zach. 11. the poor of the flock waited upon God, at the
11. verse. The poor of the flock that waited upon me; It must be poor souls
that will wait upon God, a soul that is rich, and proud, and conceited that he
has something, will not wait upon God; indeed it is an humble waiting, that a
soul waits upon God in.

3 Again, It is a diligent and industrious waiting; not a careless waiting, but
a diligent waiting in his own way, and means, and Ordinances that God walks in,
and works in, where a soul will wait diligently upon God at the post of his
doors, Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting
at the posts of my doors, Prove. 8.34.

And then it is a Regular waiting; as diligent in waiting, in observing the
ways and Ordinances of God, so it is a regular waiting, and therefore called a
sitting still, Isa. 30.7. Their strength is to sit still, speaking concerning
those that would go down to Egypt for help, to strengthen themselves in the
strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt, and have not asked at
the mouth of God. The strength of Pharaoh shall be a shame to them, and their
trust in the shadow of Egypt, their confusion, but your strength is to sit
still; that is in respect of using other ways concerning your going down to
Egypt. Your strength is to sit still, for in waiting upon God, you are to be
active, but to sit still in respect of all those ways that are not of Gods
appointing; concerning this our waiting; it is to be orderly, in an orderly
way, or else help will be in vain and to no purpose.

5 Again, A waiting with an earnest expectation for him, my soul waited for the
Lord, more than they that watch for the morning, Psalm. 130.6. How does a soul
watch for the morning? a poor soul that is tired out, and has felt the pains
and afflictions of the night, and could not get a wink of sleep, now he waits
with great expectation for the morning, so a soul waits with great expectation,
and earnestly waits for God.

Why now is it so, that a Christian is to live by faith, even in respect of his
Expectation, we may see a necessity of this, in our Justification, not any
comfort of that without it, in our Sanctification and Expectation, we must
exercise faith in all.

That which I would speak is, to put us on to wait upon God in faith; let us in
all our waitings wait in faith, my poor soul has been waiting for such a
mercy, and for such a mercy, and it comes not; O wait in faith!

Take some few considerations for this.

1 It is better for a soul to be kept up by faith in a waiting frame for a
mercy, than it is for a soul, or would be for a soul, to enjoy that mercy
waited for; it is better, and many times a greater mercy to be kept up in a
waiting frame of heart for the mercy, than to enjoy that mercy waited for; if
you did enjoy it, you would rest upon the enjoyment, and so our life is turned
into a sensible life; and is it not better to live by faith than by sense, and
better to wait upon the Lord for the mercy, than to enjoy it?

2 Again, There is more of the Power of God put forth in your condition of
waiting than in the other; a great power p^t forth to support a poor soul to
wait upon the Lord, to wait upon him; what great power is put forth to enable
us to believe, Ephesians. 1.10. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
us ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power; power, and
great power, and exceeding greatness of power, and working of mighty power, to
enable a soul to believe, that is that power that inables a soul to hang and
wait upon God; and hence it is, that Paul does close with this, when that mercy
which he had been seeking of God for (that the Thorn in the flesh, and die
messenger of Satan might depart from him) was denied, he said he should have
more experience of the power of God, though I would gladly be out of it, so
long as God will be with me in it, and his strength made perfect in my
weakness; most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ might rest upon me, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. so in Isa. 40. ult. They
shall renew their strength, there is a continual communication of power to
enable a poor soul to wait, to the soul that waits upon God, and so it is
better, because it has more experience of the power of God.

3 Again, it is better then there is in enjoying, because there is more
exercise of grace than in the condition of enjoyment; the grace of enjoyment is
chiefly joy, but in waiting there is abundance of grace; faith exercised, and
humility, and patience, and contentment, and submission to the will of God, and
Self-denial exercised, if the Lord will not give it, it will deny it self,
there is a great deal of the exercise of grace in that condition, therefore you
cry out, O I have not such a mercy, and the exercise of such a grace as I would
have, I have not such strength against corruption, and such parts, and gifts,
and abilities, now may not this very condition, that by faith you wait upon God
in, be better to you than the condition that you would have, that condition you
wait upon God in, than that condition that you wait for, if you did enjoy it.

2 Again consider, if so be that by faith you do wait upon God for a mercy, you
shall assuredly in Gods time have the mercy you wait for, Isa. 44. those shall
not be ashamed that wait upon the Lord, verse. 23. They shall not be ashamed
that wait for me says the Lord, that wait for him; the Apostle Paul grants
this in Romans 10.11. Whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed; teaching
us, that our waiting must be in a way of faith; now a soul that waits upon God
in a way of faith shall not be ashamed; what is that? it is that he shall not
miss of what he waits for; as one that trusts in another, and makes a boast of
him, is ashamed of his trust if he fail. Now if a soul should trust in God,
and make a boast of God, God has promised, and if it should fail, and not be
given in, the soul should be ashamed; now he that waits upon God shall not be
ashamed; they that trust in Egypt, and Ethiopia shall be ashamed of it, but
God will not fail them that trust in him, They that wait upon the Lord shall
never be ashamed; what though it do not come in, in thy time, it will come in,
in Gods time, there is a waiting time, and a fulfilling time, a time to wait
upon God for the fulfilling of the Promise, and that waiting time goes before
the fulfilling time, in Habakkuk 2.3. For the vision in yet for an appointed
time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it,
because it will surely come, it will not tarry: a double tarrying, it will not
tarry, it does tarry, and though it does tarry, it will not tarry, all that
time a soul is to live by faith, waiting upon God, waiting for it, and in its
time it will surely come, and not tarry, when the fulfilling time is come it
will not tarry: So, have you been waiting upon God for such a mercy, and a
great time it is that you have waited for it, and it is not come; why this is
the waiting time, when the fulfilling time is come, it will come: you have been
waiting for strength against corruption, for the performance of such duties,
the exercise of this and the other grace; why though it tarry, it will not
tarry. As God will have thee to wait, all the waiting time, so he will come in
the fulfilling time. God is very exact, and punctual in observing the appointed
time, in fulfilling of his Promise; God will not lose a minute, when the time
is come he will come; in Exodus this is very clear, Exodus 12.41. And it came to
pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the self same day it
came to pass, that all the Hosts of the Lord went out of the land of Egypt:
now see how punctual God is, in the self same day. God takes notice of a day,
God will not lose a day, in four hundred and thirty years he will not lose a
day, so exact is he in observing his day and time; it is twice noted therefore
in the forty first verse, and fifty first verse, a thing very remarkable to
show us, that he will not lose one day. Has God set a time to bring a mercy to
thy soul in, God will not lose a day, but will bring it, though the time be
long: So, for the deliverance of the Children of Israel out of Babylon, when
the seventy years were expired, there was no holding of them any longer.

3 Again, consider thirdly, Thou can not by all thy impatience hasten the
coming of a mercy, not one hour before the appointed time; thou can not by
all thy impatience hasten a mercy not one hour sooner before the appointed
time; Israel in Egypt, they groaned and groaned, and they mourned, but this
did not bring them out any whit the sooner; mourn and repine as much as you
will, God will do it in his own time; and so when the Children of Israel were
in the Wilderness for their unbelief and murmuring, God set them a bound for
forty years, no entrance until forty years were out, now mercy comes in Gods
set time, and till that time come you must wait upon him, do not murmr and
repine, thou can not have it a moment before Gods time.

4 Fourthly confider, That the Lord does wait upon us to be gracious, and
therefore there is good reason to wait beleevingly upon God; does God wait to
give mercy, then I will wait, in believing that this mercy shall be given, Isa
30.18. Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you; wait
upon him, the Lord waits to be gracious, do you wait upon the Lord, Blessed
are all they that wait for him.

But then consider lastly, That so long as you do by faith wait upon God f^r a
mercy, though that mercy should never come, yet you are in Gods way: or if that
mercy should not come, yet you are in Gods way to be found there. It a man has
a Friend that he desires to speak with, and would speak with, he will go to the
place where he walks, if he comes here I shall have him, if he come not, here
I Will wait for him; if the mercy come I am in Gods way, it not come I desire it,
and whither it come or not come, if I never enjoy it, but if I perish without
it, better perishing in Gods way than out of Gods way. O says a soul, a poor
soul, I have been waiting a long time, and a great time, and yet he is not
come, and therefore I cannot wait, I have been waiting so long, and I can wait
no longer; it may be so, it may be you have been an expectant, and not in
faith, you have not waited in faith, and no wonder the mercy does not come.

But then, suppose you have been waiting upon God for a mercy in way of faith,
and it is not come?

1 Consider, Have thou not as good ground every whit to persist, and go on
waiting, as you had at the first to begin to wait upon God? What was the first
ground you waited upon God for? It was the promise; why the promise is as firm
as at the first, therefore you have as good ground as at the first; as to
instance in praying, Christ says, I will give to him that is athirst of the
fountain of waters freely; Christ promises to give to a thirsty soul, I have
been waiting upon him, and I do not find Christ coming in, the promise says, I
will give, is it not as good now as at the first? I will give, not this day, or
week; I will give, have thou not as good ground and hold-fast for thy faith as
at the first? this is one reason why the Lord made the promise in such terms,
without any time; if it were made upon any time, and if outslipt a moment, then
undone: but now the promise is not made to any time? because I should expect it
at all times, and a ground to wait upon; if you have it not to day, it is as
good to morrow, and if not to morrow, the next day, and the promise is as good
as before, and as good ground to wait as ever.

2 Consider further, The longer you have been waiting for a mercy, the more
sweet will that mercy be when it comes in; things long expected, when they come
are sweetest: A Friend long looked for is the welcomest, and a long looked for
mercy, the expected mercy long looked for, is the sweetest, Isa. 25.9. And it
shall be said in that day, lo this is our God, we have waited for him, and
he will save us; this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation; we have waited for him, O how sweet is God for his
coming in upon our waiting upon him! this made God sweet, because waited for,
never so sweet as now, O how sweet; and such a soul says, it was love indeed,
and wisdom, that I had it not sooner, it would not have been so sweet if I
had; I have waited for it, says the soul, therefore this makes it the sweeter
when it comes, it sweetens the mercy.

3 Then consider again, You have been waiting a long time and it is not come,
it may be soul you think the time long, and longer a great deal than it is,
because thou do measure the time by this our account; this is the fault, when
we wait for a thing, we measure the time of our waiting by our own account, and
we should do it by Gods account; that which with us is a long while, is but
little with God, Heb. 10. Yet a little while and he that shall come will come,
and will not tarry; a little while, and it is one thousand six hundred years a
go and upward; measure by his time, do not say, if I have waited a week, a
month, a year, three or four years, it is a long time; no, it is but a little
time, measure time by Gods account, and then you will say, it is but a little
time that I have been waiting for this mercy.

4 Consider further, Because it is not come, will you say it will never come,
that will not follow; if the Child should cry, and ask the Father for a new
Suit, and the Father should say, if it fit you you shall have it; will the
Child say, I shall never have it; or rather, my Father says, I shall have it
when it is fit for me: so here, when the mercy is fit for thee thou shall have
it, and do not say because it comes not yet, therefore it will never come.

5 Again consider, That there are of the people of God that have waited as
long, and longer for a mercy then you have done, and at last have had the
mercy; What will you say of Abraham, he had the promise of a seed, Genesis 12.2,
3. I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name
great, and thou shall be a blessing; and I will bless them that bless thee, and
curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall all families of the earth be
blessed: this promise, I say, was the great promise made to Abraham when he
was in his own Country; now he was but seventy and five years old, verse. 4. how
old was he when the promise was fulfilled, Chap. 21.5. And Abraham was an
hundred years old when his Son Isaac was born unto him; and he believed all
that time; and have thou believed, and waited twenty and five years for the
mercy? Abraham waited twenty and five years, and yet believed all that time;
and have you waited long? it may be not a year, not three years, not ten years,
and is that a great while? Abraham waited as long and longer, and yet had the
mercy at the end, so though you have been waiting a long while, yet wait
believing, wait still there have been those that have waited as long as you,
and have had the mercy.

Consider further, that there is a set time for the mercy, wait for it.

Quest. But when is the set time, then I could wait for it, if I knew but that?

Ans. That is only known to God, but sometimes some hints there are that we
may come to guess when the set time of the mercy is come; It shall he then,
when thy extremity is great, and thou can live no longer, and wait no longer,
that is the set time, Isa. 33.10. Now will I arise faith the Lord, now will I
be exalted, now will I lift up my self; now when they were brought to great
extremity, utmost extremity, verse. 9. you have been waiting, it may be you have
not been in utmost extremity; and it may be you can bear more, and art not in
such great extremities and darkness as God will give it in: when the extremity
is great, then is Gods time.

Secondly again, then is Gods time, when God shall be mostly exalted in giving
in the mercy, Isa. 33.10. Now will I be exalted; then is the time wherein God
will be exalted in giving the mercy, that is the time when God will give the
mercy, and so in that place, now will I arise, and now will I be (...) that is
the time when the soul shall exalt God, and so poor soul for answer, know the
time of this extremity, and when God should be most exalted is the time of the
expected mercy.

Quest. But how shall I come to wait upon God in way of faith?

Ans. First, Labor to work the promise much upon thy heart; What ever mercy it
is that you wait upon God for, there is a promise for it in the word of God, a
promise: Now labor to work the promise much upon thy heart; Have thou a hard
heart, and do thou wait for a broken heart? the Lord has promised to give a
broken and soft heart, now labor that promise much upon your heart, and
believe it, and this is that that will enable you to wait upon God; and so, is
your sin great? and you say, I have been a great sinner, and a notorious
sinner, why the Lord has promised to pardon sin, and that our iniquities he
will remember no more: and so art thou blind and ignorant of the truth of God?
why the promise is, that Christ is a light to the Gentiles, to open blind
eyes, and he promises to send the Comforter, to teach, and to guide you into
all truth, and they shall be all taught of God.

Labor to get the Promise upon thy heart; And art thou unfruitful? Do thou
bring forth little, or no fruit? And would you bring forth fruit, and be
fruitful? Get the promise of fruitfulness, Isa. 41.18. I will make the
wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water: I will plant in
the Wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah tree, and the Mirtle^ and the Oil tree.
So in Chap. 35.6, 7. For in the Wilderness shall waters break out, and streams
in the Desert, and the parched ground shall become a Pool, and the thirsty land
springs of water; In the habitation of Dragons, where each lay, shall be grass
with reeds and rushes.

Labor to work the promise home upon your heart: Do thou want strength to
perform duty? There is a promise that the Lords strength is made perfect in
weakness; Labor to work this promise home upon thy heart: And have thou lost
strength in departing from God, and art weakened and is strength gone? There is
a promise of renewing strength, Isa. 40.31. But they that wait upon the Lord,
shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they
shall run and not be weary, they shall walk, and not faint.

Now labor to work this upon thy heart, They that wait upon the Lord, shall
renew their strength, and so go out in the promise, and wait upon God; and so
what ever mercy it is, there is no mercy that thou can wait for, and expect,
but there is a promise for it in the Word of God.

Secondly, Do not advise too much with your own reason; If you would wait upon
God, do not advise too much with your own reason: Reason will beat you off from
waiting upon God; What you, waiting upon God, and have so many sins, and will
God regard such as you! So long you have waited, and no mercy come; and do
thou ever think to have any thing? Thus Carnal reason will beat us off from
waiting, do not hearken therefore unto reason.

If you will wait upon God, then beg the Spirit, spiritual work must be done
by the Spirit, and we cannot wait upon God without die Spirit: We through the
Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith, Gal. 5.5, 6. Go and beg
this Spirit of God, that is the great Gospel-promise: Now has God promised the
Spirit, and cannot you wait upon God, and live by faith without the Spirit?

Go home, and say, Lord, Lord I Give me thy Spirit, and spirituallize this thy
poor creature: Have I been a stranger to the Spirit, no wonder then that I
cannot wait upon God no more, therefore would you wait upon God in faith, Beg
his Spirit.

A Postscript.
REader, Thou art desired to take notice, That whereas here is wanting, The
life of Faith in Perseverance; And The Excellency of the life of Faith. That
neither the Notes of the Author, nor any person can yet be found (though much
pains has been taken herein, that has taken the remainder from his mouth) to
perfect this Subject; Yet because, the matters handled are so Excellent, and
Useful, we were unwilling the World should be without them.

The Saints Anchor Rightly cast: OR The Saints sure Anchor-hold.
Heb. 6.19. Which hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the vail.


IN the twelfth Verse of this Chapter, the Apostle exhorts Believers to be
followers of those who through faith, and patience inherit the Promises: This
exhortation, the Apostle inforceth in the 13, 14, and 15, Verses, from the
example of Abraham, to whom God having made a promise that he would bless and
multiply him, and confirmed the same by an oath; Abraham without questioning,
patiently waited for the accomplishing of it; and so after he had patiently
waited, he obtained the Promise; in the 16 verse, the Apostle urges the force
of this oath from the nature of a Civil oath, Men verily swear by the greater,
and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife: as if he should
say, If it be but a Civil oath between man and man, yet after an oath is past,
there is no more striving and contending, an oath confirms that party to whom
it is made, about the assurance of that for which it is made; so that he no
longer striveth, but patiently waits for the enjoyment of the thing, then how
much more (as if he should say) should this oath of God, confirm a believers
faith, and stir him up to patience, in the 17, and 18 verses (lest any should
conclude that this oath of God was made only to Abraham, and therefore they
had nothing at all to do with it, therefore) the Apostle shows this oath of
God, it was not made only to Abraham, but to all the heirs of promise, as well
as to Abraham, yea every believing soul might have as great and strong
consolation from the oath of God, even as Abraham, which heirs of promise, who
they are, he lays them down by their proper character, such as are fled for
refuge to lay hold of the hope set before them; as if he should say, The heirs
of promise, they are such who seeing no hope in themselves, nothing, that they
can ground hope upon, but see a blessed glorious hope without them, set before
them in the promises, they fly to the promises, and lay hold of that blessed
hope they see in the promises, when they can see no hope in themselves; and in
the 19 verse. the Apostle insists upon this hope, and comes to open it a little,
and to compare hope to an Anchor.

Which hope we have as an Anchor, that is, as an Anchor, it does fix the
ship, notwithstanding all storms and tempests, yet it fixes the ship, keeps it
immovable; So this Christian hope, notwithstanding all those trials, storms,
and temptations a poor soul meets withal, yet this Christian hope fixes the
soul, so that the soul is immovable.

Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and
which enters into that within the vail.

In the words three things are observable.

First, The description or discrimination of a Christians Anchor, that is hope.
Secondly, The properties of it, sure and steadfast. Thirdly, The place where a
Christian casts his Anchor, and that is within the vail.
First, We have here a description of a Christians Anchor, that is hope.

I shall show what this hope is:

Then show how it is resembled by an Anchor:

And show the excellency of this Anchor above any other.

First, What is hope.

It is a patient and an assured expectation of the accomplishment of the
promises of God: Hope (the business of hope) it is to expect, it is an
expectation; the thing hoped for, expected, it is the accomplishment of
promises, not of some promises, but of all promises; For look how far faith
goes in apprehending the promises, so far does hope in expecting: Now Faith
in apprehending the Promises, it looks to all the promises, it apprehends,
lays hold, not of one, but of all: As faith goes out to all the promises, so
hope, expects the fulfilling of all the promises; that is the difference
between faith and hope; faith is exercised about things present, about the
promises of God, as it has them in his eye; but hope looks to things future,
to the enjoyment, when shall it have that that is promised: Faith looks upon
the promise present, lays hold, but in comes hope, and looks for the promises
in future; hope maintains the soul alive in an expectation of that that is held
forth in the promise; but then this hope is a patient, and an assured
expectation.

1 It is a patient Expectation, makes the soul lie down patiently, and wait
upon God for the accomplishing of his promise, to wait Gods time, not to tie up
God to any time, Romans 8.25. If we hope for that we see not, then do we with
patience wait for it: So 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Remembering without ceasing your work of
faith, and labor of love, and patience of hope.

The poor Thessalonians now at this time under great and sore afflictions and
persecutions, under all those persecutions, they had their eye upon a Kingdom,
a glorious Kingdom, they one day should be made partaker of, 2 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5.
So we glory in you, in the Churches of God, for your patience and faith in all
your persecutions and tribulations, that ye endure, that ye may be counted
worthy of the Kingdom of God; they are under persecutions, but they had their
eye upon a Kingdom all this while, the possession of this Kingdom is
deferred, and that they have for the present to bear up their heads above
water, to keep themselves from sinking, it was only this hope, that one day
they should come to enjoy a Kingdom, and yet notwithstanding, this hope begets
patience, your patience of hope: The Thessalonians do not murmr, and say* Oh
when will this Kingdom come? What, shall we suffer to the worlds end? No, but
they hope, and are patient. So 1 Pet. 1.13. there we shall find hope and
sobriety joined together, Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober,
and hope to the end: What sobriety is this?

There is a twofold sobriety:

There is a sobriety opposite to intemperance in outward things, in meats,
drinks, and apparel.

But then there is a sobriety that is opposite to an immoderate desire of
spiritual and heavenly things; that is, when I do so desire spiritual things,
as the presence of God, fulfilling of promises, even everlasting life, that I
cannot content my self with the will of God to want these things so long as God
would have me, that the soul is impatient, murmures, and repines, because it is
delayed; this is an immoderate desire of spiritual and heavenly things, and
Christian sobriety stands in opposition to this immoderate desire, as well as
to intemperance; and so it is meant in this place, as if he should say, You do
expect great and glorious things to be enjoyed one day, and you have been
waiting and looking into the promises, the things are delayed; Well, says the
Apostle, Hope to the end, but be sober, join sobriety to hope; as if he
should say, Do not let your desire be so impetuous, as not to be content to
take them in Gods time; we should desire the things themselves, that we
should with as much vehemence as may be; but now the immoderation of desire,
it lies in respect of the time when, I desire so as not to content my self with
Gods time: Now says the Apostle, Be sober, do not tie up God to your time; Now
this sobriety, what is it but patience? It is patience joined with hope, Heb.
10.36. Receiving the promise, is the thing hope looks at, Now, faith the
Apostle, ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of Ged,
ye might receive the promise. Hope looks to receiving the promise; all the
time of a Christians life is a time wherein he is, or should be doing the
will of God, the end is the time of receiving the promises.

Now because a Christians desire is much carried out to receiving the promise,
and that is a great way off as we look upon them, therefore says the Apostle,
You have need of patience, that so your eager desires of receiving the promise
do not so over-set you, that you cannot go on cheerfully doing the will of God
that time God will have you: So it is many times, the desires of a Christian
after heaven, and eternal life, they are so carried out, O when shall I receive
the promise, come to rest in the bosom of the Father? That a Christian finds
it a difficult thing to keep his heart in order, so as to go quietly on, doing
the will of God, between this and that, and to stay, and be contented to do
that work God would have him do between this and heaven, therefore you have
need of patience, that so when hope is in expectation of the promise, our hope
may not so vehemently carry us out after receiving the promise, that you may
not be discontented at the time our Father will have us be here. So that is
one thing in Christian hope, it is a patient Expectation.

It is an assured Expectation; such an Expectation as has some measure of
assurance going with it, not a bare conjecture, but such as arises from faith,
a divine faith, therefore there is confidence going along with a Christian
hope; look how much faith apprehends the promise, so much does hope expect the
fulfilling of it. Therefore it is said in Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance of
things hoped for: Faith by embracing the promise, it holds in his hand the
substance of all those good things we expect hereafter.

Now because faith has not actual possession of them, therefore they are
hoped for, hope expects them, but faith is the substance, therefore this hope
is grounded upon faith, though it has them not, it does in a manner enjoy them
by embracing the promise; therefore hope springing from faith must be such a
hope as our faith is, faith is not a bare groundless conjecture, but a
certainty; so must our hope, Heb. 5.6. it is called the rejoicing of hope.

Now rejoicing does not arise from a bare fancy, and conjecture, but from some
measure of certainty; for a man to fancy he shall in joy a Kingdom, this does
not beget rejoicing, so it has assurance joined with it, as it is Heb. 6.11.
We desire that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope to the end; which argues, it is not a bare probability, but
there is something of certainty in Christian hope, yet this certainty of hope,
is according to the certainty of faith, if the certainty of faith be grounded
upon a general promise, and cannot be brought to a particular promise, such is
the certainty of hope; but if faith be grounded upon a particular promise,
such is the certainty of hope.

I come now to the next thing, to show how hope is resembled to an Anchor.

First, Hope lays hold out of sight; cast an Anchor, it fastens at the bottom
of the Sea out of our sight; so does hope, it fastens within the vail, there is
the place where a Christians hope pitcheth, beyond sight, within the vail.

Secondly, an Anchor though it fastens out of sight, yet it fastens on the
rock; cast an Anchor, if there be a rock, it fastens upon the rock; so a
Christians hope fastens upon the Rock Jesus Christ, a Christians hope is
fastened upon the Lord Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, an Anchor by fastening upon the rock fixes the ship, so that though
the waves swell and beat, yet the ship is fixed, so it is with a Christians
hope fastening upon the Lord Jesus Christ, it fastens the soul: Let temptations
and corruptions swell, if a poor soul have hope in Christ as his Christ, that
soul is fixed immovable, that hope it has of enjoying Christ, the promise of
heaven one day, this hope it is that fixes the soul, that it is not turned this
way and that, not driven this way, and that, as another that has no hope; Let
a tempest arise within or without, yet if it have an Anchor of hope, cast
within the vail, that it comes but to have some hope, can say, Jesus Christ is
mine, it is fixed immovable.

Lastly, An Anchor by fastening upon the rock, fixing the ship, the ship is
preserved from shipwreck; so is the soul: Another poor soul that has no
Christian hope, the storm arises, there is but a little blustering, and its
split upon the rock, if he ride it out one storm, another will come and split
him; but that soul that has cast Anchor upon Jesus Christ, shall be for ever
preserved.

Quest. You will say, Wherein is the Excellency of this Anchor of hope above
others?

Answ. One we have in the Text, All other Anchors they are cast downward, this
is cast upward; for it enters in to that within the vail, it goes upward, it is
cast within the veil: There is the place where this Anchor of hope is cast.

2 Consider the properties (which are in the Text) of this Anchor; It is a
sure, and a steadfast Anchor.

A sure, that is a safe Anchor, and the Anchor of hope when it rests upon this
rock, it never deceives, Hope makes not ashamed. And then it is,

A steadfast Anchor, It holds the soul steady, unmovable, and both these in
these three respects.

First, In respect of the strength of the Anchor, it is a strong Anchor;
another may be broken, and many times is, but the Anchor of hope, is such an
Anchor as can never be broken; a Christians hope is maintained by his faith,
and his faith and hope by Christ, though actings of faith and hope may cease
for a while, yet his hope can never be broken, there is faith and hope still
at the bottom, in a Christian.

2 In respect of the firmness of the Anchor-ground; For it is cast upon a rock,
therefore it is sure, will never break, never deceive.

3 In respect of the fastness of the Anchors hold: Another Anchor, though never
so strong and good a hold-fast, may let go his hold, but hope is such an Anchor
as never lets go its hold: who would not labor to have such an Anchor? When
the poor soul shall come into a tempest of temptations, to have such an Anchor,
as will never deceive it.

The third thing is the thing I shall speak to at this time, that is, The place
were this Anchor is cast, and that is, within the vail; the Anchor-ground of a
Saint is within the vail: Which hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the vail.

In the opening of it I shall show,

1 What is the meaning of this phrase of speech, Within the vail.

2 What notable Anchor-hold there is within the vail.

3 Why a Christians hope must be fixed within the vail?

And then the Application.

First, What is the meaning of this phrase, within the vail?

The words are spoken by an allusion to the Temple and Tabernacle of old: The
Temple of old had three parts in it; there was the outward Court, and the Holy
place, and the Holy of Holies: The outward Court, into that came all sorts of
persons, that is, all sorts of the Jews came into the outward Court.

Into the Holy place came those that did the service about holy things, the
Priests and Levites; into the Holy of Holies, entered only the High Priest
once a year with blood, These were typical.

The outward Court typified common Professors of all sorts, the holy place
wherein entered those that performed the service and worship of God, typified the
Church, Visible Worshippers.

The Holy of Holies typified Heaven. Now between the Holy place, and the most
Holy, was a vail, a precious hanging of blue Purple, and Scarlet, as you may
see in Exodus 26.31, 32. And the vail shall divide unto you between the Holy
place, and the most Holy.

Here was the use of the vail, it was to divide between the Holy place, and the
most Holy. Now within the vail, was the most Holy place, or Holy of Holies: Now
the Holy of Holies, that was a type of Heaven: And as you may see, if you look
into Heb. 9.24. Christ is not entered into the Holy places made with hands,
which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self.

The Holy place made with hands, into which the High Priest entered once a year,
typified Heaven, the figure of the true, which is Heaven it self, whither
Christ is gone. Now this Holy of Holies, that was the place that was within the
vail; for the holy place, and outward Court was without the vail: Now we shall
fee the meaning of within the vail; that is, A Christians hope is grounded upon
something out of this world, something in Heaven; For within the vail, was the
Holy of Holies, so that a Christians hope is grounded upon something that is
not in all this world, something in Heaven, within the veil; that is, a
Christian casts his Anchor of hope as far as Heaven, and fixes, and lays hold
upon something in Heaven, within the vail.

Quest. But you will say, What is that within the veil, that a Christians hope
can found upon?

Ans. O there is abundance within the vail, for a Christian to ground his hope
upon.

First, Within the vail there is the Lord Jesus Christ the Rock of Ages: As it
is in the verse following the Text, Whither the forerunner is for us entered,
even Jesus; so we have Jesus Christ within the vail, who is that only Rock,
upon which all our souls must anchor, that Rock is within the vail, is now in
Heaven. But then consider, Christ is within the vail,

First, as a Forerunner, Whither the Forerunner is for us entered; that is,
Christ is now entered into heaven as our Forerunner, as one that is gone before,
to make way for us into Heaven, one that is gone before to draw us into heaven
after him: And is not here great ground for a Christians hope to found upon,
that the Lord Christ the only Rock is in heaven, and gone as a Forerunner to
make way, to set open heaven gates for us; and as one that will draw in all his
Children after him? What ground is here for hope, that the Lord Jesus is in
Heaven, as my Forerunner, and therefore has made way for me, and therefore
will draw me after him: When hope pitches upon this, and eyes this Jesus as a
Forerunner, that is entered into Heaven, this strengthens the hope of a Saint.

Secondly, Jesus, as he is entered within the vail as a Forerunner, so as the
Great Sacrifice: The High Priest in the time of the Law when the Great
Sacrifice, the Annual Sacrifice, the yearly Sacrifice, the High Priest, as soon
as the Great Sacrifice was slain without, was to take the blood of that
Sacrifice, and carry it within the vail; Thus the body of Jesus, when slain,
was the Great Sacrifice, and Christ takes his own blood, and carries it into
the Holy of Holies; so that the Great Sacrifice is carried within the vail,
Heb. 9.12. Neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood he
entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us:
So Christ is entered as the Great Sacrifice, carrying the Great Sacrifice of his
blood thither, and that washes us from our sins Now is not here great ground
for hope? That the Lord Jesus Christ is gone into Heaven as the Great
Sacrifice, and the blood of that Great Sacrifice that purges away sin, is
within the vail, therefore all my hope of taking away sin is within the vail.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ is entered within the vail as the righteous one: So you
may see if you look into 1 John 2.1. My little children, If any man sin, we
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: Jesus Christ who
is the righteous, is now with the Father; and that is within the vail, Jesus
Christ as the Lord our righteousness is within the vail, not only the passive
righteousness of Christ's blood, but all the active righteousness of Christ, is
within the vail; the passive righteousness or Christ is that which justifies us
from death eternal; and the active righteousness of Christ, that justifies the
soul to life eternal, that is within the vail too, so that all that makes up
our Justification, is within the vail; Christ the righteous one having all
righteousness to cover poor souls, has perfectly satisfied the Law of God:
This Jesus Christ as the righteous one, is within the vail.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ the righteous one, our Advocate, is within the vail; If
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father; Jesus Christ as our Advocate
is within the vail; he lives to make Intercession for us, but where? there the
Lord Christ makes Intercession where he now is, and that is in heaven, Heb.
9.14. Christ is entered not into the holy place made with hands, but into heaven
it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us.

Now this Intercession of Christ is that whereby pardon of sin is given forth,
whereby all gifts and grace is given forth to us, that whereby strength against
all our sins is given forth; All this is within the vail: Jesus Christ as an
Advocate is within the vail to procure pardon of sin, grace and strength
against sin, and what ever we want, to have it supplied, all is within the
vail, and is not here great ground for hope to found upon? if thou want any
grace, strength against sin, still Jesus Christ as our Advocate must give it
forth, who is within the vail.

Lastly, Jesus Christ in all those relations that he stands in to his
Children, is within the vail.

Jesus Christ has all those Relations he stood in here to his people, he
stands in the same to his people, in Heaven, as a head, Col. 1.18. He is the
head of the body the Church. Jesus Christ was now in heaven, yet says the
Apostle, He is the head of the body the Church* And then Jesus Christ is a
Husband now within the vail, 2 Cor. 11.2. For I am jealous over you with a
godly jealousy, for I have espoused you to one Husband. Christ is our Husband,
though within the vail.

And Jesus Christ is our Brother, though within the vail, Joh. 20.17. the words
of Christ after his Resurrection to Mary, Go to my Brethren; he owns his, under
the title of Brethren after his Resurrection: Look what Jesus Christ was after
his Resurrection, that he is for ever; for there is no alteration in Christ
after his Resurrection, but Jesus Christ after his Resurrection is a Brother to
his Saints, and therefore is that for ever to his Saints: Jesus Christ in all
those relations he stands in them still to his Saints: And what an abundant
ground of hope is this, that we have one so near to us in Heaven within the
vail.

Secondly, The Covenant of Grace that is within the vail; The bottom of a
Christians hope that is within the vail; The old Mosaical Covenant that was
within the vail, Moses carried his Covenant within the tipical vail, Heb. 9.1,
2, 3, 4. The first Covenant had Ordinances of divine service, a worldly
Sanctuary, and after the second vail, the Tabernacle which is called the
Holiest of all, which had the golden Censer, and the Ark of the Covenant
overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had Manna, and
Aarons rod that budded, and the tables of the Covenant: The tables of the
Covenant, The old Mosaical Covenant was carried within the vail.

Now as Moses took his Covenant and carried it within the vail, so likewise
Jesus Christ, who is the Mediator of that New and better Covenant, he takes
that Cavenant, and carries it within the vail: So that all that ground of hope
that we have from the Covenant of Grace, which is the great bottom of a
Christians hope, all that is within the vail, for Jesus Christ (as Moses) took
his Covenant, and carried it within the vail.

Thirdly, All the promises of God are now within the vail, they are all
treasured and stored up within the Covenant, the Covenant is the grand Promise,
and all the promises are in this Covenant, now the Covenant being within the
vail, all the promises of God ( every promise of grace, I would lay hold upon,
and ground hope upon) are within the vail; so all the ground that can be for a
Christians hope is within the vail: There is a certain foundation, his hope is
carried into Heaven already, if pitched upon Christ our Forerunner, the
righteous one, the great Sacrifice, our Advocate, Christ in all his Relations,
the Covenant of Grace, the promises, it is pitched within the veil; For all
these are within the vail.

Thirdly, Why a Christians hope must be fixed within the vail.

Answ. 1. Because there is no safe anchoring place without the vail. All is
quicksands (as I may say) take all the world, it is full of quicksands, any
thing on this side Heaven is a quick-sand, who ever casts Anchor there, casts
Anchor upon a quick sand; the only rock that will hold, is within the vail;
therefore there is no Anchoring place but within the vail.

I shall make some use.

If it be so, That the only ground for a Christians Anchor to be fixed upon,
is within the vail.

Then this truth does call upon many souls to remove their Anchors: Remove your
Anchor of hope, or you are undone for ever: O there is many a soul grounds his
hope some where else; Remove your Anchor, else assuredly, you will perish for
ever; If your Anchor be cast without the vail.

First, Art thou such a one as rests in morallity? Some have cast their Anchor
in the common rode of morallity and Civillity; that is, is the hope thou have
for heaven grounded upon this? That thou art a Civil man, observest the
commands of God, walk honestly and justly amongst thy neighbors, doing no
body no hurt, and therefore thou hopest thou shall go to Heaven: Is thy hope
grounded upon any such thing as this? As sure as thou art here, thy hope is
grounded without the vail, and thou will suffer shipwreck: Oh remove thy
Anchor, this will never be an Anchor-hold, thou may hold a while, if there
come a little blast, thou may hold as an Anchor upon the quick sand, but
when the great storm comes, the tempest of death, thou will never hold it,
having not a firm rock, it is on the sands; if thou have grounded upon this
that thou art a Civil moral man, not so bad as others, others are worse, and do
not serve God so conscionably as thou do, and therefore thou hopest God will
save thee; O pluck up Anchor, cast a new, for assuredly this is below the vail,
it will never hold.

Secondly, Art thou such a one as have cast thy Anchor of hope not only in the
common rode of Civillity and Morallity, but in the outward Court of Profession?
thou art not only a Moral Civil man, but a great Professor, have taken up a
great profession, prays ever and anon, come and frequent meetings, or it may
be when thou come home, prays, read a Chapter, because thou will do
something answerably to thy Profession, and therefore thou hopest God will save
thee: O is thy hope grounded upon this? Then pull up Anchor too, this is not
within the vail, thou must weigh Anchor, for thou art yet short of Heaven,
below the vail, where a Saint casts, Anchor, all this is below the vail; when a
man rests in his Profession, praying, some good doings, thinks God should save
him for this, this is short of the vail.

Thirdly, Is the Anchor of thy hope cast in the Sanctuary, is it cast (I mean)
in the visible Church? Is all thy hope for Heaven grounded upon this that thou
art a Churchmember, and art in the Church, therefore thou hopest thou go to
Heaven? What a Churchmember go to Hell! I am a Churchmember, therefore I
shall go to Heaven: Is thy hope pitched upon this that thou art in the Church? O
pull up Anchor too, for thou art yet short of the vail, thou have not yet cast
Anchor within the vail; If thou ground thy hope upon this, hopest God will save
thee, be merciful to thee, though thou have many failings, yet because a
Church member, got into the Church, before, conscience troubled thee, but when
got in to the Church, thou art at rest, now I am well, now I am sure for
Heaven, settled, shall never fall, this is without the vail: For the Sanctuary,
or holy place, which was a type of the visible Church, that was not the Holy of
Holies, that was without the vail; So if thy hope for Heaven (Brethren and
Sisters here of the Church, look where your hope is pitched) if it be grounded
upon this, that I hope God will save me, because I am in the Church: O I tell
thee, that thou may be, and yet perish for ever; thou may have thy hope
grounded upon this, that thou art a Churchmember, and yet no hope at all
within the vail, but upon a sandy foundation, and when a storm comes, thou will
suffer shipwreck, if a Church suffer not shipwreck for thee; If this be the
ground of thy hope, O go home, labor to pull up Anchor, and cast thy Anchor
upon that within the vail. This is not enough to be in a Church-society, as
those of old might come into the place of worship, and yet never come within
the vail; so may thou, the Lord help us that we may look to this, that our
Anchor of hope be pitched within the vail, be grounded upon something there,
else it will not hold; it is not to walk in the Heathenish way of Morality, nor
Profession, nor holy place within the Sanctuary, it must be within the vail;
If thou art a moral man, not so bad as others; art thou one that has made a
profession of Christ, and done something answerable, or art come into a visible
Church, art a Churchmember, for the Lords sake, go home, pluck up Anchor,
pluck up such hopes by the roots, as you love your souls, as you love your
eternal souls, Pull up Anchor, or thou art undone for ever, thou will surely
suffer shipwreck, my life for thine, if thou go on, if thou Anchor here, if
thou pitch not within the vail, thou will suffer shipwreck one day, thou will
not hold when the storm comes; but if thou have cast Anchor upon Jesus Christ,
the Great Sacrifice, upon the blood of Jesus, the righteousness of Jesus; if
thy hope be grounded upon the Intercession of Jesus, the Covenant of Grace,
the Promises of God, this is that foundation of hope within the vail, that will
hold.

Therefore go home, labor to pluck up your salfe hopes, and say Lord, Lord!
Pitch, Pitch my Anchor of hope upon the blood of Jesus, upon the Covenant of
Grace, upon the Righteousness of Christ: J have all along hoped for Heaven
upon something without the vail; Lord, Lord, Come now, now, Pitch my Anchor
upon this, within the vail; the Blood of Christ, the Righteousness of Christ,
the Intercession of Christ, the Covenant of Grace, the Promises of God, such
things as these: ground thy hope for Heaven: If thou ground upon any other,
thou will perish for ever.

And O how many are there, that if I should ask, What is your hope built upon,
O, says one, I hope God will save me, I am not so bad as such and such, I do
not live in such sins, I pray sometimes, do some good Duties; I hope God
will save me, I am a Churchmember: Are your hopes grounded, pitched upon such
things as these? O you will perish, if your hopes continue here, if they be
not pitched within the vail, there is the only place where a Christians hope
is to Anchor; Nay, I am not to pitch my hope upon my Graces or Qualifications,
though they are good, and things desirable, to have as much grace as may be,
yet I must not pitch my hope upon this, that I find an humble heart, a heart
full of love to God, a broken heart, I must not Anchor my hope upon this,
because these are short of the veil.

I do not say this is such a foundation as the other, That a soul that
pitches upon, shall split his soul for ever, though God may save him, yet he
shall be split in respect of his peace, comfort, assurance, day after day: If
you ground your hope upon this, That you have an humble, broken heart; It may
be to day thou find an humble heart, but to morrow a proud heart: Where is
thy hope now? Thy comfort is split, if thou groundest thy hope upon this, that
thou have a broken heart, to weep in this duty, and the other, but thou find
a heart like a stone in another; where is thy comfort now? If thou groundest it
upon thy love to thy brother, it may be to day thou love him, to morrow thou
art full of wrath, though thy hope shall not perish for ever, though the
foundation be from God, though within us, from the Spirit of God, yet all the
comfort thou take from this, will be split, thou will be undone in thy
comfort for a time, therefore the only ground for our hope must be within the
vail; Let this then stir up every one to pitch their Anchor within the vail.

Art thou such a one as has thy Anchor yet to cast? That is one that has no
hope, not from any thing at all; or one that has some hope it may be from
Profession, Civility, or Church Membership. O labor now to pitch thy hope upon
something within the vail.

I will only show you a few things by way of motive from the consideration of
that glorious place within the vail, it would encourage any one to cast their
Anchor of hope there, there are so many gloious things to be enjoyed there.

First, Consider within the vail (that is in heaven) there is the blessed
presence of God to be seen for ever: There is the Beatifical vision, beholding
of God for ever and ever, it is within the vail; there is the beholding God as
a reconciled God for ever and ever, there they shall see God face to face,
behold all the glory of God, not a little, b^t fully, and perfectly.

Secondly, Within the vail there is full participation of God: A poor soul that
casts his hope within the vail, there he shall come to partake of God, of the
love of God; there he shall not have it by drops as now, but it shall come
streaming forth; we are here to pray that we may be filled with all the
fullness of God, there we shall have the answer of this prayer, in being filled
with all the fullness of God.

Thirdly, There is the society of all the blessed Saints and Angels: There is
society and enjoyment of all the Saints and Angels, all the Saints of God, they
shall see them within the vail; and what a blessed thing is it to have society
with all the blessed glorified Saints, and all the blessed Angels together?
There are all the Saints we knew here, all that are Saints we shall enjoy
them all together there, there we shall come to the General Assembly of the
spirits of just men made perfect.

Fourthly, There are many glorious Privileges, Freedoms, and Immunities
there, that are not to be enjoyed any where else.

1 There is freedom from sin, not only freedom from the power and dominion
of sin; O but there is freedom from the appearance of sin, thou shall be rid
of all thy corruptions, when thou go within the vail, shall shake them all
off, there is not one sin, nor corruption can be carried with thee thither;
the poor soul that has been buffeted and beaten under his corruption, and
cried out, I shall perish one day, when thou come within the vail, there
shall be freedom from all these; every one left behind, and thou shall go a
pure spotless soul, without any sin sticking to thee; O who would not go to
such a place, cast their Anchor there?

2 Within the vail there is freedom from all stings and torments of
conscience; There shall be peace, blessed peace, for ever and ever, and
nothing but peace shall the poor soul enjoy: Conscience within the vail, is
altogether a friend, sometimes here, conscience appears as an enemy, but there
conscience shall be a continual friend, everlastingly speak for thee, bear
witness for thee for ever: O how is a soul tormented with stings of
conscience many times? Take a poor carnal creature, how is he tormented with
stings of conscience? O! but if such a poor soul could pitch his Anchor
within the veil, he should find a great deal of the sting taken off here
for the present, and wholly at that day when he comes within the veil; There
is nothing but peace, peace, there.

3 There is freedom from all Accusations, and Temptations of Satan; when
within the veil, the Devil shall never accuse more, he cannot come there,
never tempt more. Now what violent Temptations are we under? One while tempted
to one sin, another while to another; but then we shall be free from all,
never tempted, to distrust the Grace of God more, never tempted to unbeleefe
more, never tempted to murmr against God more, never tempted to be proud
more, Temptations cease within the veil; Thou shall leave all that is evil on
this side the veil; never shall a poor soul meet with a Temptation there.

4 Within the veil is freedom from all persecution, and scoffs, and
reproaches: There shall be no cruel Cain, to kill his brother, no persecuting
Ishmael, no reproach of Saints there, but altogether blessing within the vail.

5 Within the veil shall be freedom from all afflictions and sorrows that
lie upon thee here: Here are Afflictions, Trials and Sorrows, while we are
here on this side the Veil; but when a poor soul comes within the Veil,
there shall be no more Sorrow, nor Crying, nor Weeping, nor any more pain.

If that be true in the New Jerusalem, much more true within the Veil, no
more affliction, trouble, nor grief of heart, all these things shall be left
on this sidethe Veil.

6 There shall be freedom from all Infirmities of Soul or Body, of Nature,
or Grace.

There are many Imperfections of Nature we have here, and many Imperfections
of Grace; O! but when we come within the Veil, there shall be no
Imperfection of Nature, nor of Grace, but all perfect; no Imperfection in the
Soul, nor in the body, the body shall be like the glorious body of Jesus
Christ, Phil. 3. last, and then the soul shall be perfect, as Heb. 12.23, To
the spirits of the just men made perfect; O then soul and body shall be treed
from all imperfection, And is not this a blessed place to cast Anchor in, where
are such blessed things to be enjoyed?

Seventhly, There shall be feedome from all subjection and superiority: There
shall be no subjection arising from any relation, as here; the wife not
subject to the Husband, servant to Master, children to Parents, inferiors to
Superiors, all shall be equal within the vail.

Eighthly, Then within the vail there shall be freedom from death it self,
then death shall be swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. There shall be no
more death there; A wicked man's death is an eternal death, because he is
without the vail, therefore an eternal death; but a Saints death who pitches
his Anchor of hope within the vail, that is an entrance into everlasting life,
as soon as his death has put him within the vail, then death is swallowed up,
there shall be no more death, death does but put him within the vail, into
eternal life; What glorious freedoms are within the Vail?

5 Again, within the vail there is a glorious inheritance to be enjoyed, a
Kingdom is prepared for all those that enter there, those that cast Anchor
there, before hand, have a Kingdom there ready for them against they come
there, and that is called the Inheritance of the Saints in light, a glorious
Inheritance, therefore our hope is called an Anchor, because the exercise of
the grace of hope is chiefly about our Inheritance; Faith is about the Promise,
our hope is about the Inheritance, and it is pitched upon the Inheritance
before hand: If you cast Anchor within the vail, you cast Anchor upon a
Kingdom, a glorious Inheritance, which when thou come there shall be thine,
a blessed glorious Inheritance, a Crown of glory: Henceforth is laid up for me
a Crown of glory, says Paul: O who would not cast Anchor there, that shall
Anchor upon a Kingdom? Who would cast Anchor without the vail, and be
contented one minute, when by casting Anchor within the vail, he shall have a
glorious Inheritance made his for ever?

6 Within the vail there is immediate feeding and teaching: Within the Mosaical
vail in Heb. 9.4. there was the golden Pot that had Manna, the Pot of Manna was
to show that immediate feeding, whereby the people Israel, were immediately fed
from God in the wilderness; This argues when we come within the vail, there
shall be immediate feeding from God, and he in the midst of the Throne shall
feed them; then they shall never have a hungry soul for God more, the soul
shall have its fill from Jesus Christ, there is immediate feeding, and it was
precious feeding, that Manna was sweet as honey; so shall the feeding within
the vail, be sweet precious feeding.

7 Within the vail there is extraordinary growth: It is the complaint of a
Christian here, O I grow but a little, I find little or no growth; O poor
soul, do thou grow but a little* cast Anchor within the Vail, and thou shall
find extraordinary growth within the Vail: There was Aarons Rod that budded in
one night, it budded and brought forth Almonds, and all in a night, here was
extraordinary growth, this Rod was within the Vail; When souls come within the
Vail, they shall not grow by little and little, and sometimes grow (as they
think) backward, but extraordinary growth.

8 Within the Veil is Stability: Within the Vail is the Covenant: Now the
Covenant is that upon which our strength is founded, for by Grace ye stand, by
the Covenant of Grace you stand; now the Covenant upon which our standing is
founded is within the Vail; you can never fall from that condition, who would
not cast Anchor within the Vail?

O be more in the exercise of this Grace of hope: It is one thing I have
observed, of all the three great Graces, Faith, Hope and Charity, we are least
in the exercise of the grace of Hope; we look to exercise Faith, to go out to
the Promises, and to exercise Charity, but Hope, which is the middle grace, we
are apt to neglect, if hope be not exercised in some measure, faith will be
dead, and charity dead; Now the work of hope is to look to the glorious
Inheritance; to the reward which one day we shall enjoy; be much in the
exercise of the grace of hope, look upon the reward, God would have us look to
it, has left one grace to be exercised about it, look at the mark of the
price of the high Calling; I do not say you should work altogether for it, but
look on it for encouragement, what a glorious Inheritance you shall possess one
day, after you have done the will of God here, for you shall receive the
Promise; and what is this Promise? the promise of an eternal Inheritance.

O how does this encourage a poor soul! it is but a little while, and I shall
receive the Promise, that glorious Inheritance: Exercise this Grace of Hope,
which lies in Expectation; let us not lay by our Hope, and think it enough to
exercise Faith and Love, and let Hope lie by that should help on both; It is
the Anchor that holds us fast, and makes us steady, it grasps the Inheritance
before hand, and holds us to it.

Labor that this Hope may be cast within the Vail, take heed it be not
pitched upon this, or the other thing, upon any thing without the Veil; But
let your Hope be grounded upon the Covenant of God, therefore hope, because
God has made a Covenant, therefore I lay hold upon this Covenant, because
Jesus Christ was given out to dye for poor sinners, his Blood was powered out
for ungodly ones; I come to him as a poor ungodly one, to him that justifies
the ungodly, therefore hope.

O ground thy hope upon Jesus Christ, therefore I hope, because the Lord has
been pleased to make free Promises of Grace to me, to blot out my sins for
his Names sake.

Do not ground your hope upon any thing besides (for that is to ground your
hope upon something without the Veil) and then such hope as this, cast within
the Veil, will make you blessed for ever.

The Lord give you, and I, to pitch our Anchors of Hope there.

Christ's New Commandment.
Joh. 13.34. A New Commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another.


THE words read unto you, are a part of (and indeed the very beginning of) that
sweet and heavenly Sermon which our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ made to his
Disciples, when he was taking his farewell of them to go to his Father.

Two things there are, which Jesus Christ seems now upon his departure to have
a deep sense of:

1 Lest his Disciples in the time of his absence, should be bereaved of their
inward peace and consolation; to prevent which, he lays them in, in this his
last Sermon, many sweet and precious soul-strengthning Cordials. 2 Lest through
their weakness (they being as yet but little children, as he terms them in the
foregoing verse, amongst whom wrangling and jarring is not only natural, but a
custom) should in the time of his absence fall at odds and variance within
themselves.
For prevention of which, he no sooner minds them of his departure, but he
lays a straight charge upon them, that as they did love him, or regard his
honor before men, they would be especially careful, that there might be no
division or want of affection among them when he should be gone: Which charge
of his, that it might sink deep into their memories, he gives it over and
over, as in our Text; and again, Chap. 15.12. and again verse. 17. Yea that they
might see how exceedingly his mind did run upon this, and how the fear of
their failing herein, did (as it were) stick in his heart, considering they
were as yet but little children, and therefore very liable to fall together by
the ears, he lays down this, as the first and great thing of all, that he
would have them to mind in his absence. A New Commandment -- (first Commands
(as in the Commands of the Moral Law) are greatest) as if he should say, Little
children, a little while I am with you, and then I am to leave you; and O it
fears me exceedingly! that no sooner shall I be gone, but you will be together
by the ears; and therefore, as the first thing of all, and one main thing that
I would have you always to remember, I beseech you, yea I command you, mind
this, to love one another. I am extremely afraid of the contrary, and therefore
I charge you, Love one another, Love one another. A NEW --

The only Query necessary for the explication of the words, is this, why the
Command of Love, is here called, A New Commandment, seeing it is ancient, as
ancient as the Law of God, the whole Law being comprehended in this word LOVE.

To omit the various reasons which are given of the thing, that which I
conceive to be most consonant to Truth, and most agreeable to
Scripture Language, is this, because This duty of love is more clearly
revealed, more fully discovered, and more frequently pressed in the New
Testament, than ever it was in the Old. Though it be certain, the Law in the
second Table thereof required love to the Brethren, yet did it not so clearly
and particularly reveal and press the same, as we have it revealed and
pressed under the Gospel. And thus in respect of more clear revelation, it may
be called, A New Commandment, as the Covenant of Grace, which from first, to
last, is one and the same, in respect of the more clear administration
thereof, is in Scripture called, A New Covenant.

Doct. It is the Command (one of the great Commands) of Jesus Christ, that
Saints should love one another.

None I suppose will question the truth of this, if they do, let them read
over the place fore-quoted, together with Heb. 13.1. and the Epistles of John,
where this is plentifully urged. One place for all may serve, 1 John 3, 23.
where the Apostle sums up the Gospel into two Great Commands, whereof, the
first is faith in the Son God, the second, is love to the Brethren.

In prosecution of this, I shall show,

1 What great ground and reason there is why Saints should love one another.

2 How Saints may have their hearts brought up to the practice of this duty, to
love one another.

3 Answer some Objections which lie in the way of many as obstacles and
impediments, whereby they are hindered from the exercise of this precious grace,
and so great and necessary a duty of love.

For the first, I may say, That there is all the reason in the world, why
Saints should love one another.

1 I shall begin with my Observation, and make that a reason of it self,
because it is the Command of Christ, That Saints should love one another.
Which, should I do no other but repeat over and over, you should see reason
enough for the thing. The Command of a Father, is enough with a dutiful Son;
The will of the Husband with a loving wife; And so the Command of Christ, had
we nothing else, should be sufficient with those who profess themselves to
be dutiful Christians.

2 To this Command of Christ, we have added his own example, which may be a
second reason why Saints should love one another, Christ bids us learn of him,
and be followers of him; how will you ever do this Christians? if you love not
one another as he has loved you all. This example of Christ, Christ himself
proposes to his Disciples to provoke them to love one another* Jo. 1^.12* This
is my Commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you. As if he
should say, I have loved you notwithstanding you are froward and waspish,
peevish, and unbeleeving creatures, consider this, and learn to extend the same
love to your brethren, that I have done to you.

3 Saints are in near relation one to another: How near? ( Abraham made this an
argument to Lot, why there should be no strife between them, We are Brethren)
Why as near as Brother, and Brother, for they are Brethren, as near as members
of the same body, for they are all one body: It is almost a wonder in Nature to
see members of the same body fighting one with another, to see the hands
beating of the feet, and the feet spurning and trampling of the hands; we
conclude when we see a man doing thus, that he is not himself, he has the
frenzy. So it is a wonder in it self (though in our days none) to see Saints
fighting one with another, one throwing cudgels at the other, and the other at
him; certainly were Saints themselves, they would not do it. When one member
wounds and bruiseth another, that member that does it because, it is of the
body, feels the smart as well as that to whom it is done. So when one Saint
wounds another, let him look to it: If he be a Saint indeed, and of the body,
he himself will one day or other (though perhaps at present he does not)
feel the smart and anguish of every blow and wound he has given his brother;
if he be not of the body, you know whether he will then, I need not tell you.

4 Saints are beholding one to another. Ingenuity teaches us to love those we
are beholding unto.

Now there is not a Saint, but he is beholding to other Saints, beholding to
them for their prayers, etc. O that such who make it their common practice to
rail upon, and revile their Brethren, would think of this. It may be there is
not a day thou risest, but thou fairest the better for that Saint, and those
Saints thou frownest upon, and speak evil of; perhaps he may have been
with his Father, putting up petitions for thee even at that instant wherein
thou art reproaching and casting dirt upon him; and O! will thou for shame
requite him thus for his love? If brotherly love be wanting, is there no
ingenuity neither? And how know thou, but it may be that, which if it be,
how ill do thou think will thy heavenly Father take this at thy hands?
Suppose a man had two Sons, and one of them should be praying and entreating,
of his Father to bestow such and such favors on his Brother, and the other
should at the very time, go railing against his brother and reproaching him
before his Fathers face; think with your selves, how ill would the Father take
this carriage of his, at his hands. So --

5 Love is debt, Romans 13.8. Owe no man any thing but this, to love one another,
for he that loves another, has fulfilled the Law. If he be not an honest man
that will not pay his debts, what shall we call them Saints that will not love
their brethren?

6 Saints have enemies enough. It is policy when a man has many enemies, to
make as many friends as may be, and not to make his friends his enemies; had
but the Saints policy, me thinks they should love one another.

7 Breach of love, is the breach of the whole Law, Romans 13.8, 9, 10. The
neglect of some duties break one Commandment, the neglect of others, another:
but the neglect of love breaks all. Judge then what a sinner he that will not
love his Brother, is.

8 Wicked men love one another. Is there any good to be learned from a bad man?
Yes, this the Saints themselves may learn to love one another, for so do they.

9 And lastly, There are many duties which lie in common between the Saints,
which they are bound to perform one to another; Which they can never do, if
love be wanting, as comforting, edifying, relieving, reprooving, etc.

2 How Saints may have their heart brought up to the practice of this duty of
Love.

1 Love Saints as they are Saints, I say, as they are Saints, not as they are
of this, or that party, for my opinion or against it, but as they are Saints,
thou will never love as thou should do, till thou love Saints as Saints,
as they have the Image of God upon them, Christ and the Spirit of Christ in
them, which is the only thing lovely in all, and for which all are to be
loved. I am not when I should exercise love, to ask the question concerning the
party to be loved, is he such a one or such a one, of this opinion, or that,
high, or low in the world, of little parts, or great parts, etc. No, but is he
a Saint, or not, a new creature, or not; Has he the Image of God upon him or
not? If so, let him be what he will for any of the other, I must love him,
and it is my duty to love him.

But alas, in our days, the question is, Is he such a one, or such a one,
then I will have nothing to do with him; what though he be a Saint? Men are
not so mad to say so, but their practice shows it. What a ridiculous thing
would it be, if a man should send his Son to a dear and intimate Friend of
his, and his Friend before ever he would admit him into his presence, or own
him to have society with him, should put out twenty foppish questions
concerning him, what is he? is he sickly, or well, a youth, or a man grown,
beautiful, or deformed? has he brown hair, or black? To ask is he my Friends
Son? were a beseeming question, but to stand asking and delaying upon the
other, would be extremely foolish, and that which might well make an A, B, C,
boy laugh at him. So etc. --

Would you love aright, love Saints as Saints, Do not say, Is he rich, or of
parts, I will love him? Is he for my opinion, I will love him, if not, let him
be as holy as he will, I will hate him, and revile, and speak evil of him;
No, no, Love all as Saints. Let me tell you, He that loves another, for
parts, loves him for something of the creature, for parts are such; he that
loves another for his opinion, loves him for himself, for he loves himself,
and his opinion in the man: But he that loves another, because he is a Saint,
and has the Image of God upon him, he loves him purely for Gods sake.

Now to set this truth upon our hearts, consider,

1 If ever thou would have God to own thy love, love Saints as Saints. God
will own no other love, though it go current on earth, it will not in Heaven.
Christ at the last day owns only that love shown to Saints at Saints, to the
least of Saints, Matthew. 25. Think you not that there were many at Christ's left
hand at this day, who had loved great Saints, etc. and yet Christ owns not
their love?

2 If ever thou would have the comfort of thy love, love Saints as Saints:
The Devil will find some flaw in thy love; let it run in what channel it will,
if not in this; he will say when thou would take comfort from thy love, that
thou did not love such a one because a Saint, but because he was of thy
opinion, or rich, or of great gifts, and parts.

3 If ever thou would love as God loves, love Saints as Saints. God loves
his people out of no other respect, but as they are Saints, as he sees his
image upon them. As a Father loves his child out of no other respect so much
as this, as he is his child, not so much because of his shape, or part, little
or great, a Boy or Girl, etc. So says a Father, This is my child, and
therefore I love him; says God, This is my child, he has my image upon him,
and therefore I love him: If thou would love as God loves, look at nothing
in the world so much in those whom thou love as whether they be Saints or
no. I had rather love a man, and hold communion with him, who differs in a
hundred things from me, if I see in him the Image of God, and the Spirit of a
Saint, than he that jumps with me in every tittle, if this be wanting, I had
rather love a man that can speak but ten words, and has in him the power of
what he speaks, and is humble withal, than he that can utter ten thousand
curious notions, and is proud, and self-conceited therewith, wanting the power
of them all; because so doing, I should love as God loves, and hold communion
as God holds communion.

4 If ever thou would love here, as thou shall love in Heaven hereafter,
love Saints as Saints, There are many souls, who if ever God bring them to
Heaven, will love their brethren in another guise way than now they do; then
they shall not fly one on the back of another, and one be ready to kick
another out of Heaven, saying, You are such a one, and the other him, and you
are such a one; No, then they shall be ashamed of such childish tricks, as a
grown man is ashamed to think of what tricks he played when he was a child,
how he scratched one brother, and because he was but a little crossed in his
will, laid another cross the pate.

No, then Saints shall love Saints, as Saints; Then shall one say, I love thee
because I see the Image of my Father in thee* and the Glory of my Father upon
thee; And then shall the other say, and I love thee for this, and nothing else.

Now from what has been said, of loving Saints as Saints, that you and I may
practice it; let us endeavor to have our hearts brought up to love these four
sorts of Saints, and so we shall love Saints as Saints.

1 Love little Saints. See Christ's care of little ones, Matthew. 28.18. how will
he take it at the hands of those who shall receive them, Verse. 5. How ill he
takes it from them who offend them, Verse 6. How careful he is, that they may
not be despised. Verse. 10. And how careful his Father is of their salvation.
Verse. 14. Yea Matthew. 25. When Christ passes sentence, he absolves, or
condemns men according as they behaved themselves toward the least of his
Saints, either in doing, or not doing for them. Verse. 40.45. Christ does not
say, In as much as you have done, or not done, thus and thus, for Sir such a
one, and Master such a one my servant; But in as much as you have done, or not
done thus or thus, to one of the least of these.

Saints that go in their Scarlet Coat, in their Silks, and Velvet, many will
love, but yet they love not Saints as Saints: Would thou love Saints as
Saints, labor to love Grace in the Gray Coat, Leather Coat, as much as in any
other.

2 Love Saints in their lowest condition. If thou have loved a Saint, when the
world and friends favored him, see thou love him as much when all these
frown upon him.

3 Love contrary minded Saints: It is nothing to love a man that will speak as
I speak, and do as I do.

4 Love offending Saints, I am to forgive him, and I can never heartily forgive
him, if I do not love him, Matthew. 18.21, 12. Peter thought seven times a great
matter, Christ bids him forgive his brother seventy times seven, to teach us
that many offenses should not break the band of love amongst Saints.

I shall conclude all concerning this, with that of the Apostle, Col. 3.10, 11.
where he tells us, that in the New creature, there is neither Greek, not Jew,
i.e. Men are not to be considered as of this Nation, or that, Circumcision, or
Uncircumeision, of this opinion, or that, these were so great contrary opinions
in those days, or as enjoying outward privileges, or wanting them, as
Circumcision was accounted a great privilege to those that had it. Barbarian,
Scythian, as they are rude, illiterate, or clownish persons, as the Barbarians,
Scythians, were a rude people: Bond, or Free, that is, a Master or servant, in
Authority, or out; But Christ is all, and in all, i.e. Christ is all we are to
look at, and it is Christ in all we are to look at, all are to be looked at as
they are in Christ, as Saints.

2 Love though thou are not loved. Thus Paul loved, 2 Cor. 12.15. There was
abundant love in Paul's heart to them, though little in theirs to him, Yea the
less in theirs, the more in his.

It is the practice of most, they will love only so far, and so long as they
see themselves beloved, and therefore upon any suspicion of theirs, that their
Brothers love declines toward them, theirs immediately cools toward him, and
that is an evil which both speaker and hearers, have too much their shares in;
whereas the contrary is our duty, who ever I look upon as a Saint, I should
love him, though he love not me, I should not only love him when he loves
me, honors me, speaks well of me, but when he does the contrary; that so
should his love quite dye toward me, yet mine might be as hot and lively
toward him as ever; now to do this, consider,

1 That I shall give an account not of my Brothers love to me, but of my love
to my Brother. Christ will not ask me, did your Brother love you? but did you
love your Brother? if he love not me, let him look to that, he shall answer
for that, but if I love not him, let me look to that, I shall answer for that;
if he will walk so, as to give his account with sadness, shall I do so too?
It is said, 1 John 4.17. That love gives us boldness in the day of Judgment,
how so? which will absolve or condemn, (as I said before) as men have behaved
themselves toward his Saints, in loving, or not loving them, and therefore
such as have been more full of love, shall more boldly appear at that day.

2 That my spiritual comfort lies not in my Brothers love to me, but in my
love to my Brother; What comfort were it, though all the men in the world
should love a Saint; if this were all, it were poor comfort. But now if I can
love a Saint, because it is my Fathers will I should, when yet he loves not
me; what comfort is here? when the heart can as'twere say, I love thee
Brother, because thou art a Saint, hate me as much as thou will, I care not
for it, for I am resolved to love thee, because thou art a Saint, whether thou will or no.

3 That the excellency of love lies in this, in loving my brother, when he
loves not me; to love when I am loved is no excellent love, this is only to do
as Publicans do, as wicked men may, there is no singular thing in this. Mat.
5.46, 47.

4 My love comes nearest to Gods love, when I love, but am not loved; God loved
us when he was not loved of us, before we loved him, 1 John 4.19. We love him
because he first loved us.

Now that we may do this, take this rule (for in truths of this nature we must
have precept upon precept, and line upon line, as the Prophet speaks) ever make
this the ground of thy love to thy brother, that thou art beloved of God, and
because thou art beloved of God, therefore thou will love thy brother; say
soul, when thy Brother hates thee, I am beloved of God, my Brother hates me,
but I am beloved of God, he speaks evil of me, but I am beloved of God, and
because I am beloved of God, and that God that loves me commands me to love my
brother, therefore I will love him, though he love not me. This John lays down
as the ground of our love to our brethren, 1 Epist. 4.11. If God so loved us,
we ought also to love one another.

3 Account thy self least of Saints, and judge every one better than thy self.
Thus did Paul, Ephesians. 3. and this rule Paul lays down to maintain love amongst
the Philippians, Let each one esteem others better than themselves, Phil. 2.3.
My Brethren, you know it (for it is an evil that at one time or other we shall
all of us find in our own hearts) that it I do but see a little more love
expressed to another than my self, I am presently ready to think that another
has all the love, and that I am not loved at all, and so am ready to hate both
the party that loves, and the party that is loved. Now, whence comes this but
only hence, I am of a proud and filthy Self-conceit, think my self better than
another, and that therefore I deserve more love than he, whereas did I account
every one better than my self, then when the case is thus, I should reason
thus: What though such a one be loved better than I? and such a Brother love
him better, yet is there no reason that I should be offended either with him
that loves, or him that is loved, because he that is loved is better than I,
and so deserves more love than me, I will not therefore be angry with my
Brother because he loves him better than I, nor envy him because he is so
loved, but I will ever honor love, and prize both the one and the other.

Now, that thou may come to look upon thy self as the least of Saints;
consider,

1 The opportunities and means thou have had above others: Say, yonder is a
poor Saint, suppose I have more than he, yet if I consider the opportunities
and means I have had, which he has wanted, in this respect I have less; I
have had the Word plentifully in the power and purity of it taught, been in
Church fellowship so many years, he poor soul has wanted all this, and yet how
lively is he? had he had my opportunities he would have been ten times better
than I.

2 The time thou have had: say, I have been ten, twenty, thirty, forty years in
Christ's School, and yet what a Sot am I, what a dead heart have I? yonder is
one but of yesterday, a year, two year old in grace, and yet how far is he
got, and fair on the way to get before me already.

3 The several ways God has taken to make thee grow; one while I have been
afflicted in my body, another while in my estate, I have lost such a ship, etc.
another while in my Children, such a Child lost, etc. yet after all, I am as
carnal as ever; O had God taken so many ways with such and such, there would
have been other fruit of it in them.

4 Rule. Get a heart taken up with Spiritual things; you shall seldom see a
Saint whose heart is taken up with Spirituals, to be of a wrangling or
quarrelsome spirit, but ordinarily those that are lowest in Spirituals, are
highest in strife and contention. A Spiritual heart has so many admirable
objects to employ its self and time about, that he finds no leisure to brawl
with, or to buffet his Brother; as, take a man that has his head taken up with
high things, a noble spirited man, let him pass the streets and one laughs at
him, another miscalls him, he takes no notice of it; but now, take a low
spirited man, and if they grin at him, he will grin at them; miscall him, he will
miscall them: this comes from the lowness and baseness of his spirit, so
here-hence comes our divisions, hence our strife. Christians are of low and
childish spirits, and we know it is a very ordinary thing for Children to
wrangle and fall together by the ears in their Fathers house, but grown men
wont do so. Would you maintain love? get your hearts exercised with spiritual
things: if thou art one who art of a wrangling and contentious spirit, it is a
sign thou have an idle heart, thou do little; as Boys whilst they are in the
School at their Books they will agree, but turn them out to play, though but half
an hour, they will be together by the ears: so here.

5 Walk wisely. A great part, or the greatest part of those differences which
are amongst Saint, arise from indiscretion. Indiscretion it is the mother of
strife and division. Had but we Spiritual wisdom, how to walk and behave our
selves toward each other, though there are many corruptions in our hearts,
which otherwise would divide us, yet this would prevent it: had we wisdom
there would be oneness of heart and affection, though there be difference in
judgment and opinion. And therefore it is not in vain, that Paul speaks so
much of wisdom, and presses believers on so much to walk wisely; Wisdom
would make up many a breach which folly opens. I have known Christians whose
principles in many things have differed one from another, and in some smaller
matters their practices too, who yet have walked through wisdom given to them,
with so much love and tenderness, and sweetness each to other, as none could
think by their carriage each to other, that there were the least difference
amongst them, so much love, tenderness, meekness, etc. as if there were no
difference at all: now would we have and maintain love? then walk wisely.

Walk wisely in admonitions and reproofs; if thou art one who may reprove
with more authority than another may, do not always stand upon it, and bring
thy authority along with thee when thou art to reprove. Sometimes, and in some
cases, a man may bring his authority along with him, as Paul bids Titus, chap.
2.15. Rebuke with all authority; that is, in case his authority is despised,
and in this sense I take it, Paul speaks so much of his own authority to the
Churches of Galatia, and rebukes them sharply for their backsliding, because
they through the secret and subtle insinuations of the false Apostles, were
brought in a great measure to despise Paul's authority; but always a man is not
to do so, see in what a mild and winning way Paul speaks to the Corinthians, 2
Cor. 10.1. he is loath to use his authority, and therefore in a mild way
beseeches them that he might overcome them that way, and not be put upon it
to use his authority. So again, Chap. 13.10. he gives this as a rule to the
Galatians, Chap. 6.1. so 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.

Again, if thou art (the case requiring it) to rebuke with sharpness, as Paul
tells the Corinthians, if he came and found them in such ways they were in, he
must use sharpness; then endeavor so to carry thy self that it may plainly
appear that thy sharpness, it is not the wrath of man, but a true zeal of God.
This we may see in Paul, 2 Corinthians 13.1, 2. verses, compared with 7, 8, 9.

Again, let it appear unto them, that thou have a heart as well sensible of
their evil, and to mourn over the same, as a tongue to reprove them for it; how
sensible Paul's spirit did use to be when he was to reprove, you may see, 2
Cor. 12.20.21.

Again, let it appear that thy design is not their trouble, or the destruction
of their peace, but their good, and Christian edification, 1 Cor. 12.19. and
chap. 13.10. though it is a hard thing to make a man sensible in reproving,
that his good, and nothing else is aimed at, yet if once that be attained,
then is the reproof likely to prove effectual.

Again, do not make reproof a common customary thing, to reprove a man for
every thing, and every trifle, this will hinder the fruit of it upon the heart
of him whom thou reprovest.

Again, reprove private offenses privately, public publicly; do not reprove
every private offense in public, that man which would thank thee for a reproof
in private, may speak evil of thee for thy reproof in public, yet if an
offense be public, it must be reproved publicly, 1 Timothy 5.20. Gal. 2.14.

Again, for the time forbear thy reproof, whilst a man by some present
distemper of passion, etc. is incapable to receive good thereby.

Walk wisely in respect of thy knowledge and practice in lesser matters; if
thou have more light in some things than thy brother has, and thou can not
practice thine own knowledge without offense to thy brother, forbear thy
practice, Romans 14.20, 21, 22. 1 Cor. 8.9. to the end, and Chap. 10.28, 29. yet
here take this caution, if it be not weakness which is the cause why thy
brother stumbles, but wilfulness, and obstinacy, then it is thy duty to
practice, Gal. 2.

6 Rule. Look not so much upon what is evil, as upon what is good in thy
brother. We are ready every one of us to look upon our Brothers worst side,
and that breeds dis-affection in one to another, but we should ever look upon
his best side, that would beget love and affection in one to the other; when I
see pride, or passion, or any corruption stirring in my brother, then I should
say, this is my brothers worst side, let me look upon him on the other side,
and there I shall see a hatred of these things, there I shall see him groaning
under these as his burden; I say, do not look so much upon the evil, as the
good that is in him: True, I see such and such failings and weaknesses in my
brother, O but though these things lie at the top, yet there is grace at the
bottom; there is pride at the top, but a heart that desires to be humble at
the bottom; unbelief, discontent, etc. at the top, but faith, and submission
to the will of God, at the bottom.

7 Put not an ill construction upon that which way have a good put upon it; it
is the nature of the Spider to suck poison, from that which the Be gathers
honey: now we should all imitate the Be, suck honey where it is to be had. If
I see an action of my brothers that may have a double construction put upon it,
a good and a bad, Charity it bids me to choose the best, and not to take the
worst; Charity (says the Apostle) believes all things, hops all things; it
believes, hops the best of all things. Thus should I do, ever put the best
construction I can upon the thing which may be doubtfully taken, for whilst I
put a good construction upon such a thing, I do well, because I follow the rule
of charity, whilst I do otherwise I do very evil, because I break that rule.

8 Get forbearing spirits; This the Apostle stirs up to, Ephesians. 4.2. With all
lowliness and meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in love.
The more Christian forbearance there is amongst Saints, the more love there
will be, what causes division more than this? if the division arise from
different principles, it is because I cannot forbear, my brother speaks
contrary to me, and I cannot forbear him, neither he me; it from practice,
hence likewise it grows, my brother injures me, speaks evil of me, I cannot
forbear him; I do so to him, and he cannot forbear me; were there but that
forbearance should be in any one, it would heal the difference of either side.
O Saints, would you love? forbear one another, forbear one another.

Obj. But such a one has injured me, and I have given him no cause?

Ans. Why then forbear him, thou will have the more comfort and peace in so
doing. Again, now thou art like a Christian in forbearing him, a man may from
natural light forbear another who has injured him, if he himself gave the
other cause to do so; but now, if thou can forbear another, who has injured
thee when thou have not given cause, this is to act like a Christian. Thus did
Christ, he gave no cause to any to revile him, or Crucify him, yet when they
did it, he forbear them, when he was reviled, he reviled not again -- 1 Pet.
2.23. Isa. 53.7. innocent as a Lamb, yet led to the slaughter, and opened not
his mouth.

Obj. But if it were once I could bear it, but it is often?

Ans. The oftener it is, the more noble spirit shall thou be of to forbear him;
a Child can forbear a thing a while, but a man can longer. Again, has not God
forborne thee often, when he might have poured his wrath upon thee, and when
thou have dealt as injuriously with him, as thy brother has with thee, and
wilt not thou forbear thy brother often? Say with thy self, O how long has God
forborne me!

Obj. But were it a small injury I could forbear, but it is a very great one?

Ans. Let me ask thee one question, Is it greater than ever thou did commit
against God? if so, then indeed it were much to forbear him; but if otherwise,
wilt not thou forbear him, as God thee? Again, the greater injury, the more
grace exercised in forbearing, and the more comfort in it.

Obj. But I were not a man if I should bear every thing and put up all, tread
on a worm and he will turn again?

Ans. Thus flesh and blood will reason, and thus Centiles reason; but it must
not be so amongst us. Hear the Exhortation of Paul, Romans 12.19, 20, 21. Dearly
beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is
written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. Therefore if thine
enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink. For in so doing, thou
shall heap coals of fire on his head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome
evil with good.

9 Consider all are but men. Thou see something in thy Brother which possibly
might provoke thee to with draw thy love from him, he sees something in thee,
which might provoke him to the same; now let each consider of my brother, why
my brother is but a man, and therefore he has his failings as other men have;
indeed, were he an Angel I might expect other actions, and other carriage, but
he is but a man, and I must look upon him as a man subject to failings as I my
self am. Yonder I see weaknesses, but they are the weaknesses of man, a poor
man --

10 Acquaint your selves with one another spirits more. Strangers have not
that affection the one to the other that intimate friends have; so whilst
Saints are strangers one to another, there will not be that love and communion
amongst them that there should be, and were they more acquainted with one
another spirits, would. Whilst the Disciples were unacquainted with Paul's
spirit, they were afraid to own him into their company, though he assayed to
join with them; but when by Barnabas his relation, they understood something of
his spirit, and the work of God thereupon, Paul and they sweetly closed: so
afterward, a long time the Apostles at Jerusalem were afraid to own Paul as
an Apostle, through some suspicion or doubt they had of him, but afterward
when through Conference, and communion one with another, they perceived the
grace that was given Paul, they then owned him, and gave him the right hand of
Fellowship, acknowledging him an Apostle as well as themselves; so that we see
what comes by acquainting our selves with one another spirits. Christians
which before stand aloof off the one from the other, and will not speak to each
other, may come when they know one another spirits, sweetly to close, and
embrace one another; yea many a Saint upon this, instead of falling foul upon
his brother, as before he did, now falls foul upon himself: What a filthy
wretch was I? my cursed heart would not close with my brother, but I was ever
full of suspicions, jealousies, surmisings, thinking and speaking the worst,
and now I see (blessed be God, I see it at last) that my brother is a true
Child of God, and there is more grace in him, for ought I know, than in my
self. O Saints, let us get acquaintance with one another spirits: I may know
Master such a one, and Mistress such a one well, for outward acquaintance, and
yet a stranger to his or her spirit; and assure your selves of this, that there
is nothing in the world will more beget and maintain love amongst you than
this, as I shall by being acquainted with my brothers spirit, see the grace of
God in him, which will much draw my heart ten times more, than any gifts or
parts which I behold outwardly can do; so likewise by near familiarity with
him, and acquaintance with his spirit, there will be twenty things, which
through my mis-interpretation of outward actings, or some such thing did hinder
love, and beget dis-affection in me, to my brother, prevented: as for instance,
Suppose I see my brother occasionally walking, and dis-coursing now and then
with a profane man, presently whilst I look barely upon the outward action, my
heart is ready to boil with strange jealousies. --

Now that we may get acquaintance with one another spirits:

1 Be much in communicating experiences, and the dealings of God with you, one
to another.

2 Be much in finding out, and knowing the reasons of thy brothers outward
actings; this will bring to much acquaintance with thy brothers spirit, and how
and in what manner it usually works.

11 Improve one another gifts and graces more; as, get acquaintance with one
another spirit, so improve them: Has God given thy brother a spirit of
prayer, improve it, get him much to pray for thee; has God given thy brother
more faith then thou have? improve it, desire him in thy wants and streights to
believe for thee; now in so doing love will be abundantly increased, thy
brothers love will work more toward thee, whilst he is improving of his grace
for thee; and thine to thy brother, whilst thou see that such and such
mercies thou have through thy brothers faith and prayer. This is a certain
rule, the more I do good to any in a spiritual way, the more I shall love him,
the more any receive good, will he love me. And I take it, this is one reason
why God bids us so much to pray one for another, that by improving one another
graces, we might have more love each to other.

12 Take as little notice as possible may be of injuries. Many times it may
be I take notice of a little matter, a trifle, and this sets my spirit a
boiling, and quenches my love to my brother, and my brother he sees me so
captious that I take snuff for every trifle, and this raises his spirits, and
incenseth them more against me. Therefore the best way to maintain love, is
not to take notice of injuries, no further then as I am bound to do, sometimes
it is my duty to do it, when as I see my brother in injuring me does highly
offend against God, then it is not my pride, but rather my self-denial to take
notice of it.

Thus much of the second thing, How Saints may have their hearts brought up to
the practice of this duty.

3 Is to answer some Objections which lie in the way to hinder it.

Object. But some will say, I know as well as you can tell me, that I should
love Saints, and so I do; but I do not think such and such to be Saints.

Ans. 1. Is he such a one, who in the judgment of other as godly as thy self
(and it may be more unprejudiced, and who both know him, and his conversation
as well, and it may be better than thou do) is accounted a Saint, and do
thou know nothing of him to evidence the contrary, which they do not; then
though this be not sufficient ground for thee to conclude him a Saint, yet so
much ground there is, that without breach of charity, thou can not conclude
the contrary. Let me tell you, that some of Gods people when they see ground
to question another sincerity, yet he professing himself to be a true Saint,
and other godly men so esteeming of him, if the ground be not very clear and
evident, when they shall come to pass any censure upon such a one, their hearts
will smite them, and they will reply upon themselves, why should I be
suspicious of such a one; this is my base corruption, he may for ought I know,
be ten times better than I, and more holy in Gods sight than I, etc.

2 Let me by way of answer farther tell thee, that it is not necessary thou
should certainly know him to be a Saint whom thou love; but it is a
ground sufficient for thee to love, if he appear to be so, and thou see
nothing expressly to the contrary. If I should only love those whom I certainly
know to be Saints, and should be or a censorious spirit, I might it may be
sometimes see cause to question, whether or no I should love any; and if others
should be diligent observers of my actions, and walk by this rule, might they
not sometimes it may be see ground, to question whether or no they ought not
to withdraw their love from me? would I be willing, they for every failing
they see in me should do so; Let me then take heed of doing that to others, I
would not have done to my self. Therefore I say it is enough for thee and me,
that those whom we love appear to be Saints, and we do not see clear and
evident ground to the contrary, though really they are not so. And does not
Christ intimate as much when he tells his Disciples, Whosoever shall give a
cup of cold water, in the name of a Disciple, Mat. 10.41, 42. Yea let me tell
you, that a true Christian has many times as much comfort in a deed done to
one as a Saint, though he should be none, he judging the best, as though he
were a Saint indeed; As for example, I give an Alms --

3 Take heed thou do not as many do, make this an object to color over some
corruption. Thou have a corruption in thy heart, will not let thee love such a
one, and to hate him, and satisfy thine own conscience, say he is not a
Saint.

4 What if he should be a Saint? What if God at the day of judgment should
own him as one; as one says of one abusing a Scripture; what if at the
judgment day this should not be the meaning of the Text? So what if this thy
interpretation of thy Brother, that he is an Hypocrite, should not be Gods?

2 Object. But he is not of my opinion.

Answ. Thou art in a miserable condition, if thou love thus: If thou have no
better evidence for Heaven than this love, such love will not evidence thou
love God, but thy self.

2 He differs from thee, how if his should be truth, and thine error; May not
such a thing be?

3 Have thou done thy duty in matter of practice to bring him out; if not, will thou blame him, because he goes from his duty in matter of opinion.

4 How if Christ should measure out to thee in the same way? Say soul, you love
only those that are of your opinion, you are not of mine, because you do not
love Saints as Saints, which is my mind should be done; therefore expect no
love from me.

3 Object. But he has so many corruption, I cannot love him.

Answ. God does love him notwithstanding.

2 Would thou be willing God should deal thus by thee?

3 If thou will not love till Saints be perfect, then thou will never love.

Use This reproves many; Consider,

1 How sad will it be to have Saints go, and tell God of their wrongs.

2 How will thou be ashamed when Christ shall vindicate his Saints.

3 What will thou do when Christ shall come, Mat. 24. last.

4 Christ takes all done to Saints, as to himself, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest
thou me.

5 It is a sign of a graceless heart, 1 John 2.9.11. He that says he is in
the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness, even until now. But he that
hates his brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not
whither he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes. Chap: 3.15.
Whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer, and ye know that no murderer has
eternal life abiding in him. Chap. 4.8.20. He that loves not, knows not
God, for God is love. If any man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is
a liar. For he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love
God, whom he has not seen?

Use. Love one another; Consider how the Apostle urges this, Ephesians. 4. beginning
and beg for it as one for life, Phil. 2. beginning.

Of Offenses.
Mat. 18.7. VVoe unto the world, because of offenses.


IN the words read we have,

First, a fearful woe coming upon the world, viz. the men of the world, such
persons as are without Christ, and God in the world. Woe unto the world.

Secondly, The inlet of this fearful woe unto the world, what that is which is
the original cause of the woe, or that opens the door to the woe to come in
upon the world, that is, OFFENSES. By offenses here, are not meant those Works
of Darkness which the men of the world commit, Drunkenness, Swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, Adultery, etc. which Sinners in the world roll in, these
bring a woe, but not the woe here spoken of; but by Offenses, here are
understood those offenses which others commit; but men of the world take up to
their hardening, so that the offense here which has the woe hanging upon it, is
offense taken, not barely offense given. Observe,

Doct. 1. Though just occasion may be given of offense, yet an offense may be
so taken, as that a man may undo himself, bring a woe upon himself in the very
taking of it.

Doct. 2. An offending person does not only damage himself, but does also
wonderfully damage others.

1 He damageth Christ's little ones, as verse. 6. and that principally by shaking
their faith; offenses are a shaking thing, they shake the faith of believers;
and therefore it is that Paul when he had declared the sad fall of Himaeneus
and Philetus, two that formerly had been of great note and eminency in the
Church, he knowing what a shaking thing this would be to the poor, to the
faith of Gods people, especially the weak, he straightway adds this, The
foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.18, 19. as to say, I know poor hearts,
this news that Himaeneus and Philetus, men of such eminency are fallen so
foulely will shake you, make yon ready to question all, and conclude, you shall
certainly perish one day it such fall; O but be not discouraged, for you,
though you are weak in your selves, yet you are of Gods foundation, and that
stands sure, etc.

2 The offending person damageth the world, and that with the greatest damage
that can be; what greater damage can a man do to another than to bring the
Wrath of God, yea a woe from God upon him, this he does, Woe be unto the world.

The observation that I have chosen out of these words to insist upon, is this,
viz.

Doct. Offenses, they are a real and a heavy judgment upon the world, or the
woe of offenses, it falls upon the world.

My intent here is not to handle the common place or scandal, or offense, my
Text having narrowed me up into too small a room for such a design, but only
to speak of offense, as the same has an influence upon the world, and the men
of the world, and that for the drawing down of woe and judgment upon them, and
so in the carrying on my Doctrine, I shall show,

1 What an offense is.

2 That there is an aptness in the world to be offended.

3 That offenses are a judgment, a real and heavy judgment upon the world.

4 Why do offenses fall as a judgment upon the world?

5 When do Christians justly offend the work?

First, What an offense is?

Ans. An offense is that by which another is stumbled, or which has in it a
tendency to stumble another, as that which he ought not, and it is sin in him
to be stumbled at; as at the ways, works, cause truths, promise, people of God;
when a thing or action does really stumble, or minister occasion of stumbling
to another, as touching these, or any of these, that may be called an offense.

Hence in Scripture, a stumbling stone, a rock of offense, are joined together
as synonimous expressions, whereof the one does but open the other, as Romans
9.32, 33. 1 Pet. 2.8.

Christ's poverty and meaneness was a stumbling block to the Jews in the way of
their receiving of him, and their fall upon this is called, a being offended,
Mat. 13.57.

The preaching of a Crucified Christ, and Salvation by such a one, was a great
stumbling block to that people, they could not believe that he that was
Crucified, and shamefully entreated at Jerusalem was their Messiah, for they
expected that their Messiah should be some great Potentate, and that it he did
dye (as is the opinion of some of the Jews he is to dye) yet that he should dye
a more glorious death; neither could they believe that Salvation was
attaineable by this Christ, therefore says the Apostle, We preach Christ
crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block; Christ in this low and suffering
condition, was a stumbling block; now it is observeable, that as Christ
crucified is called a stumbling block, so the Cross is called an offense, Gal.
5.11. the one explaining of the other, and opening the nature of the other
[then it the offense of the Cross ceased]

Secondly, That there is an aptness in the world to be offended appears,

1 They lie in wait for them, and therefore very apt so soon as ever offenses
arise, to take them up.

2 A small thing will offend them; that man is apt to be offended that a
little thing offends, who will be offended at that another easily passes over:
now a little, a very little thing will offend the world; what poor petty
offenses did the Scribes and Pharisees take up against Christ? one while they
are offended, because he cures diseased persons, another while, because
Publicans and Sinners came to hear him preach; another while, because his
Disciples passing through a Corn field plucked a few cars on the Sabbath;
another while, because when they went to meat they did not wash their hands,
certainly there must be an aptness to be offended, where such petty things
offend.

3 They will be offended at good; that man is surely apt to take offense that
will be offended at good, which all ought to love, none to be offended at, but
the world will; Christ preaches the Gospel, a good act, the world are offended
at that, raises Lazarus out of his Grave, a blessed and glorious act, offended
at that; Paul preached Justification, and Salvation by Grace alone, a holy
blessed doctrine, yet the world are offended at that.

4 If no offense be given they will make offenses rather than not be offended;
the Pharisees and Priests are offended at Christ, because he said destroy this
temple, and in three days I will raise it up, Joh. 2.19. yet it is clear, they
made this offense, for they knew his meaning well enough, and so soon as he was
dead they speak it out, This deceiver said, after three days I will rise
again, Mat. 27.63.

5 They will take up what may offend them, upon easy trust, never searching
the proof of it, Joh. 7.52. Search and look, for out of Galilee arises no
Prophet, only the report of the vulgar for this.

3 That offenses are a judgment, a real and heavy judgment upon the world;
there is a woe the world because of these, as appears in four or five things.

1 The beauty and glory of the ways, works, truths, people of God, are thus
veiled from the eyes of the world; offenses are as a scar upon the face, though
a face may have much beauty; yet if there be a scar or scars upon it, that
obscures the beauty to the eyes of the beholder, the ways and works of God have
abundance of beauty, but now offenses of the Saints are as scars upon the face
of Gods workings, ways, etc. by which the beauty of these is obscured to the
eyes of the world.

The Jews were offended at Christ, and the beauty and glory of all his works,
his preaching, walking, working Miracles, etc. was hidden to them.

2 By these, mis-apprehensions of the ways, truths, people of God, yea contrary
to those common convictions that sometimes they have had of these, are begotten
in them. The Scribes and Pharisees could not be without convictions sometimes,
and strong too, that Christ was that Son of God, that his works were wrought by
the power of God, or otherwise they could not have been guilty of that sin
against the Spirit, which Christ charge them with; but having drunk in an
offense, what strange thoughts have they of Christ, contrary to former thoughts
and convictions, they judge him who was faithfulness it self, to be a deluder,
a deceiver; who was holiness of self, to be a friend to, and Patronizer of
Publicans and Sinners; who was God himself, to be Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils; his Works, which were wrought by the Finger of God, to be Diabolical:
so wonderfully did an offense drunk in, upon every occasion work upon them.

In like manner, wicked men cannot but sometimes see a beauty in Gods ways, and
their consciences in spite of their hearts tells them, and will make them
sometimes confess that they are good ways, and the best ways; but now when an
offense lies before them, some palpable offense, by which an occasion of
stumbling is offered, how are their thoughts and apprehensions of Gods ways and
people altered, they look upon them as the worst ways in the world, the most
deceitful people in the world, etc. now what greater judgment can befall a man
than to be blinded in the things of God? it was the punishment of the Jews for
that horrid Sin of theirs in Crucifying the Lord of Life, Romans 11.25.

3 By these they bear, and fence off from themselves the blow of the Word, and
of their own Considences; if at any time the Word come close to a poor Sinner,
and Conscience charge him home with his profane and scandalous living, if he
can but say this to himself, Why are there not such and such of great
Professions that do as I do, live as I live, are as bad as I am? a man will
so shroud and shelter himself under this, that though the Word come ever so
close to him, and Conscience charge ever so home, ye neither shall reach him,
he lies in this opinion as in a Bulwark, and from it repells whatever assaults
are made upon him. Now, what a fearful judgment is it for a man to be
Word-proof, Sermon-proof, Conscience-proof, that neither the Word, nor his
Conscience can reach him, yet (as woeful and common experience teaches) thus it
befalls poor Sinners in the world through offenses; offenses falling upon their
hearts, makes their hearts so brawny and hard that nothing will pierce them.

4 By these they are emboldned to a neglect of, and an opposition unto those
very things whereupon their eternal Salvation depends. A neglect of Christ, and
an opposing heart to the things of Christ, is the general Disease of the World;
yet you shall observe it, where the Word is powerfully preached, and men sit
under it, there men guilty of such neglects, do often under the same meet with
gripes, and throbs, etc. and though they have an opposing heart in them, yet
from the convincement they have of the goodness of the ways of God which they
see, and hear discovered, and the badness of their own, they durst not for
their ears, break forth into open opposition; but now when offenses arise, then
they are emboldned to a neglect of the most concerning things, for now think
they, surely there is not that necessity of these and these things as we have
thought, and are made to believe; for were there, certainly such as follow
after them would never do thus and thus, or if the worst come, we shall speed
as well as they, and from such a conceit drunk in; now they are bold (who
before durst not) to scoff at, and oppose the things of Christ, and their own
salvation, now what a sad and heavy judgment is this, for a man or woman to
be made bold in neglecting Christ and salvation, bold in opposing the means of
Grace, that now he can do it without fear or remorse? this comes in upon the
world by Offenses.

5 By these they are confirmed and hardened in their own ways of sin. Nothing
does more confirm, and settle a man in his own way and opinion, whatsoever the
same be, than this, to set a man of a contrary way, or opinion, to come up to
his; Now, when the sinners of the world see the Saints of God coming up to
their ways, now they begin to think well of their own ways, which perhaps
before they were suspicious of, and to applaud them as the only ways; for say
they, Do you not see that such and such who would seem to walk in contrary
ways, yet come up to us? what need we doubt of our ways, or call them in
question, when as they themselves that speak against them, and would seem to
walk in contrary ways, yet come and walk in them? were not our ways good
ways, they would not. The profane Drunkard, when a man of profession will
come into the Alehouse, and there sit, and bowse and tipple it with him;
certainly says he, My way is a good way. Now what a fearful judgment is this
upon a man, when a man is in the high way to hell, and riding gallop thither,
and yet is confirmed in his way, that it is a good way, that all the world
cannot persuade him out of it.

6 And lastly, By these the world are brought to blaspheme the good and right
ways of God: as they are hereby confirmed in their own ways, so also they
come to blaspheme Gods wyes; for, laying the fault of those that walk in it
upon the way, they call Gods ways a deceitful way, a hypocritical way; a way
that makes those that walk in it, hypocrites and dissemblers; Thus the dust and
dirt that some men's corruptions who walk in Gods way raise, the world in a
blasphemous way retort the same upon the way of God. Therefore after David's
fall, Nathan comes to him, and tells him, That by this, he had given occasion
to the Enemies of God to blaspheme.

Now what a sore judgment is this upon a man, when he is arrived to that
height of impiety, as to throw the dirt and mire of men's corruptions in the
face of God himself, and upon his spotless ways, yet this, poor sinners are
brought to by Offenses.

Lay all together, and see what a heavy woeful judgment OFFENSES are upon the
world, well might Christ say, Woe to the world. It is said; Rev. 12.12. Woe to
the Inhabitants of the earth, for the Devil is come down unto you having great
wrath. So I may say when Offenses arise, Woe, Woe, to the men of the world, for
the Devil is come down among them, the Devil hands abroad Offenses, he makes
wonderful improvement of them, they are his weapons and poisoned arrows, etc.

4 But why do Offenses fall as a real and heavy judgment upon the world?

Reason 1. Because God would power out his wrath upon the obstinate sinners of
the world, all manner of ways: He makes the word a vial of wrath to them,
their mercies a vial of wrath to them, their afflictions a vial of wrath to
them, their own sins a vial of wrath to them, and that the wrath of God might
come upon them to the uttermost, and be powered upon them all manner of ways,
even the sins of his people a vial of wrath to them.

Reason 2. Because by these they might fill up the measure of their iniquity.
God has a measure of wrath filled up, running over to be powered upon the
ungodly of the world one day; and they have a measure of iniquity, which they
go on filling up here, and by how much this measure of iniquity is filled up,
by so much does the measure of wrath grow greater.

Now because sinners delight to be filling up this measure, therefore they
shall not want occasion, but even God himself (that so the measure of his wrath
may be filled to the brim) will lay occasion before them, by leaving his
people and permitting them to fall, that so the sinners of the world thereby
may be blinded, hardened, made more notoriously vile, and so have the measure of
their iniquity, filled up.

And therefore it is observable, Psalm. 11.6. that God rains snares first upon
the wicked, then fire and brimstone, and a horrible tempest. God has fire --
Aye, but first God will rain snares, the Drunkard, Adulterer, Swearer, shall
have such a thing laid as a snare before him, to harden him, make him more
vile, notorious, incorrigible in his sin.

O sinners, sinners, take heed that now whilst God is raining snares, you be
not taken in them, lest Gods fire and brimstone, and horrible tempest fall upon
your heads.

Reason 3. Because it is a matter of wonderful justice, and equity that when
Offenses do arise, they should fall as a real and heavy judgment upon the
world. Why? why because the world without any respect, to the dishonor that
God suffers by them, or the reproach of his Name and Cause -- Watch for
Offenses, wish for them, desire them, rejoice in them, publish and spread them;
and therefore it is a most just thing with God, that when they come, they
should fall as a judgment upon them rather than any; This is that they would
have, and therefore let them take them, and the Woe of them, Drunkard, Swearer,
formal Professor, thou would have Offenses arise, they are meat and drink to
thee. Lo says God, here they are, take them, and the Woe of them, for it is
thine, thou have longed to see them, here they are, thou shall have thy belly
full of them in the end.

Reason 4. Because God, as in all other things, so also in the very rise and
issue of Offenses, would put a manifest difference betwixt his own children,
and the men of the world: Offenses come to both, but not to both alike:
Offenses to the godly, they are as the rod of a Father for correction; to the
world as the rod of an Enemy for destruction. To the godly they bring honey in
the tail of them, to the world a poisonous deadly sting, a manifest difference;
To the one, they are seeming judgments, but real mercies, to the other, they
are seeming approbations of their ways and courses, but real judgments upon
their persons, soul and body, for ever, if God prevent not.

5 But if such a Woe come upon the world by Offenses, How may I come to know
(that so it may be prevented) when the world is justly offended, and so
offended as thereby in danger of this dreadful Woe?

Answ. 1. The world is justly offended when Professors by principles which they
hold or maintain, do put out the light of Nature; for the light of Nature, is a
light that the Heathens have Romans 2. and possibly a mere natural man that has
no work of grace upon his heart, nor savor of spiritual things, as spiritual,
may see those things that this light directs too, as clearly as Christians;
For, though wicked men are blind in spiritual things, and it may be do not do
what natural light teaches; yet are they not so blind, but they can see this,
they should do.

Now when Professors maintain principles contrary to this light, the world who
have the light, and see by it (and so far as they see, you must give them leave
to know) are justly offended, and can tell them to their teeth, their
principles are a lie, and themselves a company of liars and deceivers. As to
instance, Suppose a Professor has such a principle, that there is no God, but
only that God that is within, him; A wicked man, by the light of Nature, will
tell such a loose Professor, such an Atheist I should say, that his principle
is a lie, and he is a liar, for when he beholds the creatures, and things
that are made, the light of Nature dictates to him, that he could never make
it, and that therefore there must be an Almighty power by which these things
were made, are ordered and governed, etc.

Again, If a Professor maintain such a principle, that there is no need of
prayer, etc. worshipping God in such a way, the light of Nature will tell him
that it is a lie, for the light of Nature teaches this, That God is to be
worshipped, served, called upon.

Again, if a man, a professing man, one that seems to hold such a principle,
that I need make no conscience of any sin, or action whatsoever, I may be
drunk, or murder my neighbor, lie with his wife, the light of Nature will
teach such a one, that this principle is a damnable lie, and he is a liar, for
the light of Nature discovers these horrid works of darkness, and abominates
these.

Now when men by their principles, extinguish, and blot out the light of
Nature, then is the world justly offended.

Secondly, When Professors in their practices swerve from the rules of
morality. The moral Law was written in the heart of Adam before his fall, and
therefore it is written in the nature of every man: So that by this, men of the
world are able to pass a judgment upon moral acts, whether they be good or
bad; though wicked men cannot judge of the faith of the godly, nor of his works
as they are the fruit of his faith, yet they can judge of his morality, and of
his acts as they are moral acts.

Now when men of the world see Professors break the pales and bonds of
morality, and transgress these rules they are justly offended, and know, that
they do evil, though all the Professors in the world should say the contrary,
their profession weighs nothing with them, but is the greater offense to them
by how much the more they profess, when by this their Profession they think to
bear out themselves in the violation of those Laws, which are by nature
engraven in their hearts, and they know as well as themselves. As to give
instance, it is one of Natures Laws that a man should be just, honest, and
upright in his dealings betwixt man and man; Now when a Professor shall
shuffle, and equivocate, and say, and unsay, have no regard to truth; civil
equity or justice in words or deeds, the world is justly offended.

Again, Temperance is a Law of Nature, which though worldly men observe not in
their practice, yet they know intemperance is a sin; Now when a Professor will
sit by the hour together, and blowse it, the world is justly offended.

Again, Modesty is a Law of Nature; now when a Professor shall be either in
apparel, going, gestures, or speeches, so light as that there is an apparent
show of immodesty, the world is justly offended.

Thirdly, When Professors in their whole conversation are like to the world,
and singular only in profession; for observe it, when a man by his profession
gives it out, that he dislikes the ways of the world, and is a Subject in
another Kingdom, the world does now expect to see singular speeches, and
carriages, and actions in him, and that his walk should be according to that
which he would be accounted to be; now when the would sees this man, which
gives it out he is such a one, to shape his speeches, ways, courses, actions,
by the Laws and customs of their Kingdom, when he talks as they talk, and
walks as they walk, and acts as they act, is in all things as far as they can
discern, one with them, only in profession, and would be another from them,
they are justly offended, and count him, and such as he is, a company of
Impostors, and Deceivers; for though the world cannot judge of the Laws, and
Customs of the Kingdom of God, which these profess they relate unto, yet they
are so well skilled in the Laws, and Customs, and ways and Fashions of their
own Kingdom, that they can tell when a man walks with them, though they love
not savoury speech, and godly discourse, yet they judge by what these men
profess, that they should have such, though themselves will swear, and lie, and
rail, yet they think these should not do so, and though they count it no
great matter in themselves to Card and Dice, to Lie, and Cozen, and Cheat, and
be Drunk, and Whore, etc. yet they think it is in them; now I say, when the
world viewing professors, see them in their whole conversation like them, and
can see no difference at all, only they profess, and we do not, they are
offended, and that justly.

Use 1. Is it so, that there is a woe upon the world because of offenses? then
all things considered, the world has little cause to rejoice, and make
themselves merry with the falls and offenses of the godly; the falls of good
men are the Saints shame, but they are the worlds woe; thou call thy
companions together, O I can tell you story, have you not heard it? Such an
one, of so great profession, of such a way, has done thus and thus; but
hearken man, I Will tell thee a story, have thou not heard it? Christ when he was
here on earth cried out, Woe unto the world because of offenses; WOE to the
Scoffer and mocker because of offenses, for he shall be hardened by them; WOE to
the Drunkard, the Swearer, because of offenses; WOE to the formal Professor,
for he shall be lulled asleep in his formal way by them; O WOE, WOE to the
world because of offenses. The world is never nearer the WOE, than when they
think themselves furthest from it; when by the falls of Professors, they are
hardened in their way, and bless themselves in their wickedness, and think they
are right, then is the WOE dropping upon their heads: Have thou therefore been
such a one, or have thou a heart that delightest in it amongst thy Companions,
to make it a part of thy ribald talk, to lay open, enlarge, and laugh at the
miscarriages of godly men? O man, woman, quake and tremble now before the Lord,
least this dreadful woe fall upon thy head, WOE to the world.

Quest. First, put case I have been, am such a one, is there no way to escape
this woe, or if there be, how may I escape it?

Ans. 1. Get clear of the world; the WOE is upon the world, and so long as thou
art not clear of the world, thou can not be out of the reach of this WOE, it
will fall upon thee.

Secondly, Mourn for offenses, when thou see them arise: he that mourns for
offenses when they arise, shall not come under the WOE of offenses; those that
mourned for the abominations of Jerusalem, had a mark of deliverance set upon
them in the day of its desolation; those that mourn for offenses when they
arise, shall have a mark of deliverance set upon them, from the WOE of
offenses, when the same shall fall on the world.

Thirdly, Adjudge thy self for it, as if thou had done it; say, Lord, such a
one has fallen, but behold, here is the Traitor, here is the Malefactor, for
ought I know, my Drunkenness, my Scoffing, and Sabbath-breaking, may be the
cause, why such a one is left thus to fall, it may be to harden such a wretch
as I am, etc.

Fourthly, Get, and maintain honorable thoughts of Gods ways, though the
miscarriages of those that walk in them, may be many and very foul; the thing
which proves the undoing of poor sinners is this, they throw the dung of
Professors upon the ways of God, and by so doing, their hearts are every day
set more off from Gods ways, and more hardened in their own ways of sin, and
this draws the WOE upon them; would thou escape this WOE? then maintains
honorable thoughts of Gods ways.

Use 2. Is it so, that there is a woe unto the world because of offenses? O
then, let all the people of God take heed how they offend the world; if respect
to Gods glory, which is vaild by offenses, if respect up weak Saints, which are
shaken by offenses, if respect to our own peace and communion with God, which
is broke and lost by offenses, work nothing upon our hearts. O let this work,
we shall bring A WOE upon the world! undo the world, harden and damn poor
sinners in the world by offenses. Let mere pity to the eternal souls of poor
men and women in die world, which are like to be undone for ever, and to
suffer an everlasting shipwreck upon this rock, make our hearts ache, our souls
tremble, lest we should fall and offend them; O that poor souls may not roar
out hereafter! O I am undone, undone for ever, through that offense that I
received from such an one! O my heart was hardened against the Word, and all
means of grace whilst I lived, and I am now in Hell, and I dye, I dye for ever
through that offense, which my heart took up through the walking of such a one!

Q. But you will say, what shall I do, how shall I walk, that I may not fall
and offend the world?

Ans. 1. Be often in blessing God, that has kept thee from such falls unto this
day.

2 Censure and judge thy self, when thou see another fall; say, Lord, I might
have fallen, I have as justly deserved to be left of thee to my self as ever
any; such a one is fallen, but Lord, why not I? why was not I the man? why was
not I the woman? how comes it that I stand, what has kept me all this while?

3 Deal gently and tenderly with thy Brothers wound; do not cruelly and
mercilesly rake in it, lest God make a wound in thy sides, in thy conversation
for others to rake in, Gal. 6.1.

4 Hearken to the voice of offended conscience; an enlightened man ever first
offends himself, If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off. Conscience is first
offended, and if men did but hearken to the voice of conscience when that is
offended, and labor to nip the offending monster in the head, it would never
grow to that height as to be seen of others, and to offend them.

5 Walk with fear and trembling; be not high minded, but fear, is a needful
word in this case, he that creeps on the ground gets no falls, but he that will
soar in the air let him look to himself. You know what the Wise man says, A
haughty mind goes before a fall; when Peter had ceast fear, and had most pride
and carnal confidence, then was his fall.

6 Act faith much in the promises of perseverance; as, I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, Jerem: 32.40. and renew the
actings of faith in such promises, so often as thou see others fall.

7 Nourish no Dalilah in thy bosom; Sampson played with his Dalilah in private
a while, but at last his Dalilah brought him upon the open stage. So,

8 Do not, while thou bear thy self upon the grace of God, allow thy self in
the practice of any known evil: God will bear with much in his Children, rather
than he will shame them before the world, but he will never bear with that,
that I should make his Grace the Patron of my Sin, because he is free, and will
pardon me, and never damn me; therefore I should be more ventrous to wound
Christ, grieve his Spirit, dishonor his Name, shame his ways and people, than
otherwise I durst be.

9 And lastly, Play not upon the borders of any sin; The fly that plays about
the Candle; is at last burnt in it; the Child that will be ever playing upon
the pit side, at last drops into it. It is a dangerous thing, and that man or
woman is not far from some shameful fall, whose heart is come to that, that
they will go as near to sin as they can. The wise man knows, the further he
keeps out of the Lions reach the safer he is, and none but children and fools
will play with his paws.

Obj. But put case I have fallen, and offended the world, what shall I do? Is
there now no hopes for me, no remedy for such a disease?

Ans. Yes, all things are possible to him that believes, though this sin be a
mountain, faith will remove it. But would thou know what to do?

First, Humble thy self before God for this thy sin; labor to clear thy self
before him, that so though wicked men in Hell should accuse thee hereafter, yet
God may have cleared thee, before they accuse thee.

Secondly, Labor to make the fence strongest, where the gap has been broken;
if pride has cast thee down, beg above all things humility; if
earthly-mindedness, above all things heavenli-mindedness; if extravagancy in
words, above all things keep a watch.

Thirdly, Pray to God that others may be kept: Thou have been lavish of Gods
honor, and it is now too late to remedy that, labor now to fetch God in
honor, by endeavoring to prevent others from the like.

Fourthly, Take all well and thankfully, whatever shame, or loss God casts upon
thee for it.

Fifthly, Let thy words, as well as thy deeds, be a warning to others.

Sixthly, Labor now by all ways, to do all the good thou can to poor
sinners, thou have done them a mischief, it is too late to help that, only thou
art to mourn for it, and leave the issue with God; labor to make it up, by
doing others good.

Matthew. 11.6. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.


THe words, naturally hold forth these two things to us:

1 That there is an aptness and proneness, even in good men to be offended. 2
That it is a blessed thing, for a man or woman to get over this evil.
Either of these will afford us many necessary Questions; but I shall not
strictly tie up my self to either: but I have fixed upon this Scripture, to
speak somewhat to the subject of Offenses more in general, as it is a case of
Conscience.

OFFENSE is twofold, either offense given, or offense taken; Offense given,
is, when by somewhat trans-acted, done? or spoken, an occasion of stumbling,
and being offended, is laid before others: An offense taken, is, when at the
occasion of the offense, the other is offended.

Of either of these, there is an offense, good and bad.

1 There is a GOOD offense given, and a BAD offense given:

1 A GOOD offense given, is that offense which has no evil in it, in respect
of the Giver, though yet it proves an offense to some, and this is,

1 When by instructing of the weak in things necessary to be known, I do
offend the superstitious; Thus Christ offended the Pharisees, Matthew. 15.10, 11,
12. Hear and understand; not that which goes into the mouth defiles the man,
but that which comes out of the mouth, this defiles a man. Then came his
Disciples and said unto him, know thou that the Pharisees were offended
after they heard this saying?

2 When by maintaining of my Christian liberty against those who would infringe
it, I do offend the obstinate. Thus Paul, Gal. 2. the beginning.

3 When by the light of Christian Doctrine and conversation, I do offend the
world, by discovering and destroying their deeds of darkness: thus the Apostles
when they went forth with the Gospel, did in all places offend.

4 When by following of God in somewhat which I am really convinced is my
duty, yet dark to another, I do offend that other. Thus Peter by going unto
Cornelius's house.

2 A BAD offense given, is, when an offense has evil in it in respect of the
Giver, which is*

1 When by compliance with some that are Superstitious, I do endanger the
faith of such who are free from superstition, and not addicted to it. Thus
Peter, Gal. 2. by compliance with superstitious Jews, endangered the faith of
the Gentiles who were free from superstition. verse. 11. But when Peter was come
to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed, verse. 12.
For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles; but when
they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them which were of
the Circumcision -- verse. 14. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly,
according to the truth of the Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If
thou being a Jew, live after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews,
why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?

If I must offend, let me ever offend the superstitious, rather then by
offending, endanger those who are free.

2 When by an unadvised using my Christian liberty, I do offend the weak that
cannot bear it; thus rather then Paul would offend, he would eat no flesh, 1
Cor. 8.13. If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the
world stands, least I make my brother to offend.

3 When by extravagancy of words or actions, I do offend the world, and
stumble them at the ways of God.

Offense taken, is likewise twofold; A GOOD offense taken or BAD; a GOOD, is
that, which though in respect of the thing it self it may be evil, yet has no
evil in it, but is good in respect of the Taker; A BAD is that, which although
the thing it self may be good or evil, sometimes one, sometimes another, yet
is ever bad and evil in respect of the Taker.

1 A GOOD offense taken, is,

1 When I am offended at that whereat God is offended, the faith or salvation
of another endangered, merely because God is offended. This is that anger
without sin Paul speaks of, Ephesians. 4.26. thus Paul was offended at Peter,
Galat. 2. verse. 11.12.14. because he did not only sin against God, but also
endanger the faith and Salvation of weak Gentiles, by his Judaizing.

2 When I am offended at the love of a good man, when his love toward me is
carnal, and tends to hinder me in some work or design for God, which I have in
hand. Thus Christ was offended at Peter's love, Matthew. 16. verse. 22, 23. -- Be
it far from thee, Lord -- But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee
behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me, for thou savourest not the things
that be of God, etc.

2 A BAD offense taken, is,

1 When I am offended at the grace of God to others, because it casts some
disgrace upon my self. Thus Jonah took offense at Gods grace to Nineveh,
because he should be called a false Prophet.

2 When I am offended at the apparent works of God, because I am laid by, and
not I, but others used in the doing of them. Thus the Scribes and Pharisees did
take offense at Christ.

3 When through a careless neglect, I take up that as an offense, which by
industry and search of Scriptures, would be a strengthening to my faith. Thus
because the Messiah was to be of Bethlehem, and the house of David, the Jews
were offended at Christ, because he was of Galilee, and the house of Joseph (as
they thought) whereas by search in their Genealogy, they might, to their
confirming, have found him of Bethlehem, and David's house.

4 When I am offended at the sin committed, because of the person that commits
it.

5 When I am offended at the ways, and truths of God, because of the
miscarriages of some walking in those ways, professing those truths.

Case 1. How far am I to have respect to that offense which another does, or
will take?

Answ. There is a double rise of offense taken.

1 Sometimes from weakness only, and that either of Knowledge, or Grace.

2 Sometimes from wilfulness only, or weakness and wilfulnes mixed.

In the first, I am to have some respect to another offense; whether the rise
be from want of light, so Paul, in circumcising Titus had respect to the
offense, that otherwise the Jews would take, through want of light; or whether
it rises from weakness of grace, or from some violent, and apparent temptation
upon him at present.

In the latter, I am to slight it, as though there were no such thing.

Q. How may we know when the rise of an offense is from wilfulness only, or
from weakness and wilfulness together?

Ans. 1. When there is such a proneness to take offense, as that very thing
offends. This discovered the offense of the Scribes and Pharisees to be wilful,
because it was so common with them to be offended at Christ, that Christ can do
nothing, but they are offended at it; one while they are offended, because he
cured a man on the Sabbath day, another while because he did eat with Publicans
and Sinners, etc.

2 When small petty things offend, thus the wilful offended Pharisees are
offended, one while because Christ's Disciples plucked ears of Corn, another
while, because when they went to meat, they did not wash their hands, etc.

3 When offense is taken even at that which is good.

4 When the very same thing that is well approved of in some, in others offends.

5 When there is a management of the offense in a crafty way, so as to draw the
Party offended, into some snare; by this Paul discerned their offense to be a
wilful offense, Galath. 2. verse. 3, 4. But neither Titus who was with me, being
a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised, and that because of false Brethren
unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty, which we have
in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage.

6 When men will put such an interpretation upon a thing, as may either beget
or nourish an offense, when as yet they know how to put another interpretation
upon that thing.

7 When men will take up whatsoever may offend them, upon easy trust.

8 When men lie at a catch, for somewhat which may offend them.

In cases of this nature, I am not to regard the offense of others, but as
Christ says, Matthew. 15. v. 14. Let them alone, -- So let them be offended if
they will.

Case 2. What is to be done, when the Case is such, that I must offend on the
one hand or the other? or thus, when the Case is such that I stand between two
parties contrary to each other, and must offend the one of them, whom am I in
this Case to choose to offend?

Answ. This Case is the very same case that was Paul's, Gal. 2. he was cast
betwixt two sorts of men, and observe the persons too, godly on both hands. The
one were Jews who were scrupulous about Ceremonies, and particularly whether or
no it were lawful to eat meat with the Gentiles: The other were believing
Gentiles, who being through the preaching of Paul rightly grounded and settled
in the faith of the Gospel, had no such scruples among them.

Of these two, he must offend one, as the case lay thus. If with Peter, and
the rest he would not withdraw, he must of necessity offend the scrupulous
brethren come down from Judea: If on the other side he did, then by this act
he plainly foresaw he should endanger the faith of the Gentiles; hereby
causing them to think such Ceremonial observations were things necessary, and
so indeed compel the Gentiles, i. e. by such an example (as he says to
Peter) to live as did the Jews.

Now, What does Paul in this case?

Why notwithstanding the temptation was so great, that he saw of necessity
there was no avoiding of it, but that should he now comply a little, the Jews
would be in a manner irreconcileably offended; nay so much the more would they
be offended, and by so much the more must he look to pass under high
censures, by how much Peter the Pillar of the Church, he complies and
conforms; yea Barnabas, Paul's companion, he does too, verse. 13. and all the
rest; So that Paul, if he will not comply too, he must differ from all, and
run the censure of all.

But on the other side, Paul considers, that there were a company of poor
Gentiles to whom he had rightly preached the faith of Christ, from which
doctrine they had received the peace and comfort of the Holy Ghost; and he
considers further, that in case he should now comply with these Jews to win
them, he should thereby shake the faith and comfort of the other; these things
considered, he opposes himself to this compliance, and publicly reproves
Peter himself, that Pillar of the Church, and the head of the Compliers, verse.
11, 12, 14.

And indeed, the example clearly proves this; That a public compliance, to the
shaking, or endangering the faith or comfort of any, deserves a public reproof.

Now from this instance of Paul, I give in my answer to the case propounded,
thus. That when the case is such, that I must of necessity offend one party, I
am to choose to offend them, be they the strong, or be they the weak, whom I
cannot please without an endangering of the faith and comfort of some others,
in endeavoring to do it.

Now, by endangering the faith and comfort of others; I mean thus, When others
are settled and confirmed in such principles, whether they be in things of
Doctrine or Discipline, as I am persuaded are the truths of Christ, and such
truths too, as are of use and benefit to the people of God, by which they have
been enabled to walk more closely with God, been more strengthened to resist
temptation, and corruption, been made more useful to the edifying of one
another, have had their communion with God increased, etc.

When by a compliance with any other, to win them, I shall shake these in their
principles, I am then guilty or endangering the faith and comfort of others;
And when the case is such, I am bound, and it is a necessary duty to offend,
yea though it be all the world, rather than in the least, to endanger the
faith and comfort of any one soul.

This case I have opened, clearly shows, that the weak brother is not always
to be pleased, and the strong offended; for as it is clear from Paul, those
who made such scruples, were always the weak, yet here, rather than Paul will
endanger the faith of the strong, he will choose to offend the weak.

FINIS.

