A threefold Alphabet of Rules, concerning Christian-Practice: The first
Precept of each Letter concerning our Duty toward God, the second toward our
Neighbor, the third toward our selves.
A.
1. AWake with God in the Morning, and before all things, give him the first
Fruits and Calves of your Lips. First in confessing of sins: Secondly in
Petitioning of necessaries for Body and Soul: Thirdly, in thankfulness for
Mercies received, especially your late preservation, rest and protection of you
and yours. Josh. 24. 15. Psalm. 101. 2.

2. Account it not enough that your self fear God, unless you see all in your
charge do the same. Genesis 14, 14. and 18, 19.

3. Arm your self against whatsoever the day may bring forth, and upon all
occasions think upon your happy Redemption, with much thankfulness for so happy
a Conjunction of Justice and Mercy.

B.
1. Beware of occasions of Sin, and wisely inure your self in subduing the
least sin, that at least the greater may be foiled. 1 Samuel 10.16.

2. Believe all that God has spoken unto you out of his Word, but not all that
Man tells you, nor tell to another all that you hear, but only the Truth, and
that neither all, nor allways. Eccl. 3. 7. Luke 2. 29.

3. Before you take in hand any thing, Counsel with Gods word if it be lawful,
and then perform it with Prayer, that it may be as successful as lawful.

C.
1. Carefully set your self in Gods presence all the day long.

2. Carry your self unto all, as that the weak may be winned, the strong
comforted and the wicked ashamed. 1 Cor. 10. 32. Col. 4, 5.

3. Consider the dignity of your Soul, how beautiful it is to God and his
Angels, so long as you keep it unspotted, that so you may cleanse your heart
from the hrst motions of sinful thoughts, as Lust, Anger, Envy, Pride,
Ambition, Covetousness, Sullenness, and the rather because the least Sin
deserves Death. Mat. 15.18. Ephesians. 4.23.31. Ccl. 3.5.8.

D.
1. Daily, Morning and Evening at least, solemnly on your knees make Confession
and requests with thanksgiving unto the Lord: In the Morning think that day may
be your last day: and when you go to bed you know not whether you shall rise
again, unless it be to Judgment: It is safest therefore to use Prayer, as a Key
to open the Morning, and as a Bar or Lock to shut in the Evening.

2. Delight to do all the good to, and receive all the good you can from, Gods
Children. Gal. 6. 10.

3. Distrust not Gods Providence in any lawful undertaking, although you see
the means wanting, neither when you have them let them be relied on more than
God himself, but let him be prayed unto for the prosperous use of them. 1 Chronicles. 16. 9. 12. 1 Cor. 3. 5. and 3. 7.

E.
1. Exercise your mind in meditating often on the works of God, as his Creating
and Governing of the World, his prospering and punishing the wicked, his
blessing and correcting of his Children, his preparing unspeakable Joys for the
one, and unutterable torments for the other. But especially on the Sabbath,
add to these Meditations the Holy exercise of Prayer, Preaching, holy
conferences and the like. Jer. 12. 2. Hab. 2, 1. 2. Mat. 15. 31. Exodus 20. 8:

2. Esteem of every one better then your self, and the more you excel another,
be so much the more humble.

3. Examine your Thoughts well whether they tend, before you fulfill your own
Desires, if you find them unprofitable, curious, vain, or such as you cannot
yield a sufficient, reason to God or man for, kill them in the Shell, let them
not live or breath in you any longer. Romans 12. 16. Phil. 2.3. Romans 14.23. Prove.
6.14. Zach. 8. 17. Ps. 49.3.

F.
1. Eear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man.
Eccl. 12. 13.

2. Fly and avoid places and persons Infectious, Wanton, Idle, unthristy, and
bad Company which are to the Soul as poisoned and infected Air to the Body.
Prove. 5. 8. and 6. 17. 18.

3. Follow with faithfulness and diligence your own business in the lawful and
peculiar Calling wherein God has placed yon, only be careful in your Earthly
business to carry a Heavenly mind. Eccl. 1.13. Genesis 3.19. 2 These. 3. 6.

G.
1. Grow up daily in the practice of every Commandment, and in the Faith of
every promise of God, seeing God would have those that are planted in his House
thrive, and be fruitful in their old Age. He that is not best at last, may fear
whether ever he were good. 1 Cor. 10.32.

2. Give no offense to any man, whether within or without, for woe be to them by
whom offenses come. Romans 14. 13.

3. Grieve for nothing in the world so much as for your own sins, and in them,
for nothing so much as in offending so loving a God, and that not only in
committing of evil but in omitting of good. Romans 7. 8.

H.
1. Humble your self for your sins that the Lord may raise you up, for he that
judges himself aright, shall never be judged of the Lord. 1 Cor. 11. 31.

2. Honor all men in their places, but no man so much for his greatness as for
his goodness, and thus shall you immitate the Lord himself who accepts not
persons but in every Nation accepts him that fears him. Acts 10. 31.

3. Have special care to avoid the sins which you have found your self most
inclined unto, and which has in times past prevailed, for sin is loath to be
said nay.

I.
1. Justify Gods wisdom in all his proceedings concerning your self and others,
his Power in sustaining, his Providence in maintaining, his Justice in
punishing, his Love for correcting, his Bounty in promising, his Faithfulness
in performing, his Grace in giving, his Mercy in taking away, and in every
thing say from thy Heart blessed be the Name of the Lord.

2. In every Company do some good and receive some also, give no cause to be
ill spoken of, neither do any hurt by Speech, Silence, Countenance, or Example;
but in your praises be discreet, in admonishing brotherly, and wise in moving
and holding up profitable Discourse or Conference.

3. It is fearful to sin, but much more to lie in it, therefore register all
your sins daily, bewail them, pray for Pardon of them, and strength against
them, contemn no sin by counting it little, because Gods Law has condemned it,
and Christ has died for it. Psalm. 51. 3. Ephesians. 4. 26.

K.
1. Know God in Christ, which is Life everlasting, Kiss ye the Son of God, lest
he be angry, and know your self to be a Believer, and that Christ is in you,
and you in him. Job 17. 3, Psalm. 2. 12.

2. Keep as your Vows with God, so your lawful promises with men, for Faith and
Truth must kiss each other in Christian Conversation. Psalm. 15.4.

3. Keep out wandering and worldly thoughts, and unclean thoughts, as much as
possible, narrowly watching your heart, for such as you suffer that to be, such
will be your words, deeds and conversation, Prove. 4. 23.

L.
1. Love all things for Gods sake, and God only for his own; and look you make
him your Friend, whosoever be your Enemy for it, this you should do, if as an
obedient Child you live in the Eye of your Heavenly Father.

2. Look on the Lives of the Wicked to avoid them, of the Godly to imitate
them, upon the Life and Death of them both, as also your own not far off, to
make you loath this world and long after the Life to come. Luke 21. 34.

3. Let your Meat, Apparel, and Recreation be Lawful, needful and moderate.
Romans 13. 13.

M.
1. Make no mention of God, or any word or work of his, but with Fear and
Reverence, nor of any Man but with Love, and carefulness, using his Name as you
would have him to use yours. Deuteronomy. 28. 58. Mat. 7. 12.

2. Mark other men's profitting in Religion to provoke your self, their steps to
make your self more wary, their rising to be thankful to God for them.

3. Meditate often on the four last things Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell.

N.
1. Never make more show of Knowledge outwardly then inwardly you have in your
heart, which God sees, in which he desires Truth, nor please your self with
your anprofitableness, unfitness, unwillingness to good. Rom, 12. 21.

2. No man is owner but Steward of that which he has; you must therefore
impart of the Blessings you have, to those that stand in need; wisely,
heartily, and in due season.

3. Note your own special corruptions, whether they grow stronger or weaker,
and how your self can resist them, and if any assault you more strongly, pray,
and make the matter known to God, who has said sin shall not have Dominion
over you. 1 Cor. 11. 28. Romans 6. 14.

O.
1. Often speak to the praise of God, never of your self, because many words
want not sin, speak as few as you can, or rather none, then unprofitable. Prove.
17.27. and 10. 19.

2. Open not your Mouth to speak of other men's Infirmities, especially behind
them, nor before them without grief and sorrow. Jam. 1. 19. Psalm. 15. 3.

3. Of every idle word account must be given, and much more of every wicked
word, and therefore let your Speech tend to edification. 2 Timothy 2. 3. Mat. 18.
11. and 12. 36.

P.
1. praise the Lord for every new Benifit bestowed, and then by it promote his
Glory, the Churches good, and your own Salvation; esteeming of Graces given as
spurs to Godliness, and pledges of eternal Life. 1 These. 5. 18.

2. Prevent anger before it kindle, its wisdom to quench the first spark of
Fire before it begin to flame. Consider first the Original of Anger, being
Pride or self-love, secondly, the cursed Fruits, by giving place to the Devil;
thirdly Gods patience, fourthly Gods Image in your Brother, fifthly your own
weakness in the same kind, sixthly, the wrong is not remedied by Revenge, but
enlarged, nor the wrong doer, amended but imitated. Eccl. 7. 11. Prove. 14. 17.

3. Prepare your self for Death, and pull out his sting, by first bewailing
sins past. Secondly by turning to God in time to come. Thirdly by purposing a
new Life. None can die ill, that has care to live well. Persuade your self if
you live well, you shall do well; but if you die well, doubt not but you shall
do better. 1 Cor. 15. 16.

Q.
1. Quiet your heart and be still under the correcting hand of God: because 1.
He does it. 2. For the best. 3. He will moderate it. 4. Supply strength. 5.
Seasonably deliver out of it, Psalm. 39. 9.

2. Question not whether others should do you good, or you them first; it is
praise worthy to be first in well doing, and if you do good to your Enemies
your reward is with God, Mat. 5.36. Romans 12. 20.

3. Quench not the Spirit, nor suffer any godly motion arising in your heart to
pass away but feed it by Reading, Meditation, Prayer, and Practice, 1 These. 5.
19.

R.
1. Read something daily of Gods word for the increase of Knowledge, and add
unto Meditation and Prayer, for all time thus spent is well redeemed, Psalm. 12.
Deuteronomy. 6. 6.

2. Rejoice in the good you know by any other, praise God for it, pray for the
increase of it, but if you know any evil by any, mourn for it, and if you can
by Brotherly love and admonition amend it.

3. Reform your Ears, Eyes, Mouth, and Hands, from hearing, seeing, speaking or
performing, any wicked and vain thing, knowing that die you must but how soon
you know not, Job 31. 1. Ps. 119. 37.

S.
1. Stick to God as well in adversity as in prosperity: if you want necessaries
humble your self for them, if you have them be humble with them, and use them
well least you forfeit them, James 2. 2.

2. Seek reconciliation with your Neighbor, freely forgive those that have
offended you, and desire earnestly to be forgiven of all that have been
offended by you. Mat. 5. 23. Ps. 35. 14.

3. Study to approve both your heart to God, and your life to Gods Children in
your particular callings, and especially to such as to home God has joined
you, if as a Servant in obeying, if a Master in Ruling, if an Husband in
loving, if a Wife in reverencing, Mat. 23. 26. Jer. 7. 9. Ephesians. 5. 35. and 6. 5.
6.

T.
1. Take heed of performing Holy duties for fashion's sake, without feeling
profit, for this is Hyprocrisie, Heb. 3.22.

2. Thankfully require the good you get by any Man, either 1st by
acknowledgment. Or 2. by hearty affection. Or, 3. by Prayer, Isa.1. 11. Mat. 5.
8.

3. Think it the greatest work in the World to die well, because its a thing
that must but once be done, and if not well done then thou art for ever undone:
to die well you must inure your self to it before hand. 1. by dying to sin. 2.
leaving the World in affection, before it actually leavth you. 3. in your last
leaving of it, do it willingly, joyfully wheresoever, whenever or howsoever
God shall call you, Romans 12. 6. and 1.12.

V.
1. Vow to God and keep it, especially strive in performing the solemn Vow of
your Baptism, and the Covenant which you renew at the Lords Supper. Eccl. 5.34.
Ps. 116.14.

2. Varience and discord with Men will not stand with your Peace with God, if
you love God you will love Men also for God's Image or else for his
Commandments sake. Job. 1. 4. 20.

3. Use the world as not using it; That is not gained which is got with the
loss of the Soul. What will you pamper and prepare for your Body, that piece of
dirt, and neglect your immortal Soul, which must ever live either in endless
Joy or in an unquencherable Fire? Oh horrible Folly! 1 Cor. 7. 31. Mat. 16. 26.

W.
1. Wait upon the Lord and he will direct your way, become his Servant for this
is the way to attain your surest liberty, Ps. 3^. 34.

2. Weep with them that weep, and fellow-feell the afflictions of the Brethren
in the World; Christ in Heaven accounts the suffering of his Saints his own,
and we his Members on Earth must do the same. Religion and Mercy are well
matched by God, and by Man must not be divorced. Ps. 69. 9. Ezck. 9. 4. Jer.
13. 17.

3. Wish not a long life, so much as a good life: he has lived long who has
lived well. A short life in Grace settleth into the Everlasting life of Glory.

Sit Deo laus in secula seculorum. Amen.
N. N.

LONDON, Printed for John Kidgell at the Atlas in Cornhill, 1681.


