THE NULLITY Of the Prelatique Clergy, and Church of England Further discovered
In answer to the plain prevarication, or vain presumption of D. John Bramhall
in his Book, entitled The Consecration and succession of Protestant Bishops
justified, etc. AND That most true story of the first Protestant Bishops
Ordination at the Nagshead verified their fabulous Consecration at Lambeth
with the forgery of Masons Records clearly detected by N. N.

Non misi eos, and non precepi eis, neque locutus sum ad eos: visionem
mendacem, and divinationem, and fraudulentiam, and seductionem cordis sui,
prophetant vobis.

Jerem. 14.14. J sent them not, and I commanded them not, neither have I spoken
unto them; lying vision, and deceitful guilfulnes, and seduction of their
own heart they prophecy unto you.

Jerem. 14. v. 14. Printed at Antwerp, in the year M.DC.LIX.

THE PREFACE CONTAINING The State of the Controversy, and the Sum of the
Authors reasons produced in the Treatise of the nature of Catholic faith, and
Heresy; with some reflections upon D. Bramhalls impertinent digressions and
expressions.
I. IN the second Chapter of a book printed an. 1657. and entitled, A
Treatise of the Nature of Catholic faith, and Heresy: Was occasionaly proved
that the English Protestant Bishops were never validly, or in very deed
ordained. And albeit the proofs were so clear, as to make the nullity of their
Clergy, and consequently of their Church, manifest to the judgment of any
impartial disinteressed Reader; y yet I was content to press him no further
then to an vndemiable doubt, this being, sufficient for my purpose, because a
doubtful Clergy is to the effect i intended as good as no Clergy; for a
doubtful Clergy makes a doubtful Church, and a doubtful Church is no Church,
as giving no assurance to Christian faith. The arguments reduced to a brief
sum, were as follovveth.

II. First, the Catholic Doctors, as Stapleton, Harding, Bristouw, Reynolds,
etc. in their books printed, some but five, or six years, some not long
afther the pretended ordination of M. Parker of Canterbury, and his fellows,
(upon whose consecration confessedly depends the prelatique Clergy of
England) pressed these very persons frequently, and earnestly, to make good
their consecration, to show how, and by whom they received episcopal orders;
and yet none of them could clear this point, either by Registers, vvitnesses,
or any circumstances; much less ever mentioned the new Records, produced by M.
Mason fifty years after, of their consecration at Lambeth, by certain persons
pretended to be Bishops; which they, being in their wits, would never have
failed to have done, if there had bin any such thing.

III. Secondly, that these Records, vvher upon they wholy rely, are proved to
be forged, not only by their not appearing in so urgent necessity, but also by
the manifest incoherence of the Prelatique Authors that writ of the ordination
of the foresaid Parker, and his fellows, with reference to the said records;
disagreeing in the persons of the Consecrators, and in the time of their
consecration. Besides, the admiration of ancient, and learned persons at the
first appareance of these new found unheard of Registers, and the exception
made against them by Fitzherbert, an ancient and knovving man and namely those
who where permitted to have sight of them; but denied after to peruse them
with leisure, as they requested. Furthermore, if those Records were true,
how could it have bin objected, that the ordination was not only not
canonical, but not so much as legal, contrary to the very laws of the land;
whereas the Records make it so precise, and formal in this later point, that
there was no place of cavilling. Besides, the falsefying of Records is a thing
neither hard, nor unheard of, and easily presumed in those, that so grossly
corrupt Scripture, and Fathers, a crime both more abominable, and more
discoverable. Lastly, it is incredible, that John Stow should have concealed
such a solemn buisnesse, as Parkers consecration at Lambeth, hapening in is
own time, and having related the consecration of Cardinal Poole, Predecessor
to Parker, and making it the greatest part of his buisnesse, the choosing of
Mayors of London, the creation of Lords, and such kind of stuff suitable to
such a writer.

IV. Thirdly, that no man of conscience, or common sense can imagine, that the
Catholic Doctors of those times, who had such care of their salvation, as to
suffer so much as they did upon that account, should vvilfully damn their
souls, by obliging posterity upon misinformation, to reordaine those that had
bin validly, or dained before; for, it is a known Tenet wherein the Catholic
Moralists, though infinite in number in these later ages unanimously agree,
that we can not, without commiting a damnable sin, no more reordaine, then
rebaptise; and it is a practice well known, that as many of that Clergy as
after their conversion have received orders a among us, have bin ordained
absolutely, and without any condition, and consequently without any probability
of having received orders, I do not say canonically, but even validly.

V. Fourthly, that although the foresaid persons had bin against all
appearance, ordained by true Bishops, yet, to omit the uncertainty of the
matter; the form, or words used in the act of consecration, are at least, of a
doubtful sufficiency, and far from that certainty which is required in a
matter of so great consequence.

VI. Fifthly, by public Acts both in Q. Mary, and Queen Elisabeths Reign, it
is plainly discovered, that the pretended Consecrators of Parker, and his
fellows, were looked upon as in very deed no Bishops. For, in an article of
Queens Mary's, Acts and monum. page 1295.
cited by John Fox himself, is declared, that Edward the VI. his Clergy, were
not ordered in very deed. And even in the Reign of King Henry the 8. after his
schism, there was such neglect, and contempt of consecration, that heretics
without it, played the Bishops, as it appears in Ridley of London, and Latimer
of Worcester; who being burnt for heresy in Queen Mary's time, were degraded
only, as Priests, and not as Bishops; the Judge telling Ridley, as Fox
recounts, they were to degrade him only of Priesthood, for that they did not
take him for a Bishop Now Q Elisabeth supplying, as you shall see hereafter at
large, the inhability not only of the number, but even of the very State, and
Condition of the ordainors, does manifestly declare the defect not only in
formality, but reality, and withal her presumption to supply any thing by her
spiritual headship.

VII. Sixthly, Authors of credit have related, and persons of judgment, and
knowledge, have generaly believed, that the pretended Consecration was
performed at the Nagshead tavern in cheapside, in a manner so clearly
defective in the opinion now universally received amongst Prelatique
Protestants, that they are ashamed to hear of it, little regarding the
different Tenets of their Ancestors, who as much contemned Consecration, and
caracter, as they seem now to esteem them; and cared for no more, but for
some exterior show of a ceremony, to amuse the world, and raise them in the
vulgar opinion to the degree of Bishops. Amongst other proofs of this story,
was produced the credible, and public testemony of a person of honor, and
ingenuity, who declared to many persons of prime quality, that he perfectly
remembered a speech made by D. Morton called Bishop of Duresme in Parliament,
wherein he derived their Episcopal succession from the ordination at the
Nagshead. This small scrap D. Bramhall snatcheth up very greedily, as though it
were a matter of substance, and able to maintain their decaying Episcopacy. He
has obtainedof Morton to disavow the speech, and of six others of the same
calling, to say, they do not remember it, and withal a testimony of the
lords, who also confess they can not call to memory some antecede^t
circumstances of that speech and hereof makes flourishes, and triumphs, as if
forsooth, he had got the victory in the maine point; or as if upon a mistake
(if it were such) in so small, and inconsiderable a circumstance, depended the
matter, which is in hand. Have patience a while, you shall see how much you
have got by the bargain. You shall find there was more reason to believe it,
and publish it, then you are aware of; and that this stir you have made, and
was foreseen you would make, has raised the dust in your own eyes.

VIII. But I will first clearly, and briefly refute your exceptions against my
chief arguments, and contrary to your method, begin with, and insist upon
that which is most material. But I can not omit in a word, or two to put you in
mind of some of your many impertinent digressions, as far from the truth, as
from the purpose. You frame to your self two opponents, as if either the
argument, or you the adversary, required a concurrence of endeavors. You are
much mistaken, one hand was more then sufficient, and no more was employed.
Page 4.
You seem to be troubled upon a report of a foil you received, which I never
knew but by your book, and I wonder your long experience made you not reflect,
that such things might be maliciously told you, thereby to sharpen your passion
and pen. For my part, I never conceived you so forward, as to put your self
into any such danger. Page 5.
Methinks a man of your coat should not blame mingling the interest of
religion with matters of state, unless it be, that some other speaks here by
your pen; or that by a secret instinct you vnavvares utter the hidden mystery
of your protestant prelacy, which was introduced, and maintained in England,
not for religion, but reason of state. Some late passages you mention, I
suppose rather upon instigation of others, then your own inclination, however
it had bin more for your credit to have done it upon better information of the
truth and with more connection to the subject of your book; Page 4. in fine.
for my part, while I followed you wandering out of the way both of truth; and
method, about you do not know what imputed to me, I was in fear at every
step, to meet with the ridiculous story, Cardin. Bleho.
of an imaginary Cardinal laid to my charge; who has more affinity with a
matter of ordination, Page 4.
then the late Governor of the Lowcountries.

IX. You, are much bragging of the learning of your Prelatical English Clergy,
Page 144. and 216.
and will cope with our greatost Doctors, and fear not to make paralells,
and other such fond bravados; which obliges me to tell you against my will,
what you are not vvilling to hear. I would gladly knouvv, how many
Prelatiques have made known to others nations, that afther Haeresy came into
England, there remained any mark or footstep of Divinity, or Philosophy
Withaker, I grant, was not unskillful in matters of controversy and could
speak in a language understood by scholars of foreign countries, but he
speaks far from the principles of prelatique Protestancy, from that which is
called the Church of England. Was there ever any amongst you, that deserved to
carry the books after Alensis, Scotus, Bacon, Mediavilla, or Midleton, Ocham,
Holcot, Waldensis, and others, not to go out of our own Islands. It is no
wonder you burnt their books publicly in the Vniverfity to be rid of so
public reproachers of your ignorance. Some of late I grant, have contributed
much to the advancement of knowledge, each one in their kind, as Gilbert,
Verulam, Harvey; but these were laymen, and meddled not with any matter of
Divinity. What can you allege in point of learning amongst you, but that which
merely belongs to memory, and even that, patched up of rotten rags of corrupted
history, and small shreds of scattered collections, mingled, and mangled, turned
inside out, to make the ancient Fathers in a fevv obscure words, speak
contrary to what they have clearly delivered in whole homilies, and books. If
but in this part rather of reading then learning, rather memory then wit, you
had come to any degree of perfection, what need had there bin to have made so
much of Casaubon for impugning Baronius, and in a later ocasion of an other
stranger Salmasius? And when out of mere shame, one of yours was forced to
reply to him that answered Salmasius, you see what a piece of stuff was
woven, not only thredbare in point of learning, but stained with so many foul
Barbarismes, and Solecismes, that it is a pity to see, what a sport was made
of it by the adversary, and yet there is more reason to think, that many hads
concurred to it, then to the book you undertake to refute. I expect you should
attribute al those gross faults to Erratas of the printer, Page 175.
as you do the mistake of Bedford for Dover, and one month for an other, or
of the Transcriber, as Richard for John in another place, Page 89.
to reconcile the contradictions of your solemn consecration as Lambeth. And
yet forsooth these scrapers of rude indigested rubbish of incoherent historical
Notes, must be set forth in the false disguise of Doctors of Divinity, whom
this Epithete becomes as much, as a Bricklayer, or Davvber the name of an
Architect. I am sure S. Gregory Nazianzen amongst the Fathers, and Plato
amongst the Philosophers purchased the title of Devines at a higher rate, with
expense of their labor in higher matters.

X. And it is without doubt upon the diffidence of their learning that you
spread so broad your skill in Conge d'eslires, Premunires, Actuaries, Notaries,
Signet offices, Deane of the Arches, Court of Faculties, etc. Whervvith you
would blind ignorant Readers of your book to a persuasion of your misterious
knowledge, as either you, or your brethren are used to do in sermons, and
marginal notes, with scantlings of Greek, and Hebrew words. You shall find
that your Conge d'eslires and Actuaries will help little to clear your
Records from plain forgery and that you spill your skill to as little purpose,
as your Forefathers did their wine, or Metheglen, to get the Welsh Bishop to
ordain them in a Tavern.

XI. Now upon hopes to deprive your adversary of credible testimonies, you will
needs persuade him, that it is; against the art often polemique disputers, Page
221.
to cite Authors either dead, or unsworn, or of their own party. I pray you
M. Doctor, in S. Augustins Polemicks, how much of this precise caution do you
find? Tomo 6. and 7.
Do you think that all which Christian Authors relate against Turcks, Jews,
Gentiles; and Catholics against Arians, Macedonians, Manicheans, Eutychians,
Nestorians, claims no belief from a judicious impartial Reader? when they
produce witnesses dead or unsworn, or of their own party. Is there no
difference betvveene disputing in Schools, and pleading at the bar, Page 157.
between persuading a sober judicious Reader with the reality of reason, and
coherence of circumstances, and the stopping the mouth of a clamourous,
froward, litigious advocate with formalities of law; which you do most
indiscreetly press, being further of from bringing legal proofs then I, or any
man that writ of this subject. For my part I am so far of from peevish
jangling obstinacy, that I will not stick to believe an adversary, if I have
not special reason to mistrust his understanding, or honesty, or discover much
inconsequence, or find better evidence to the contrary. Before I have done,
you shall find why I question your Relators, and Records, and by ocasion of D.
Mortons testimony, the Reader, if he have but the light of reason not eclipsed
with passion, shall need neither school, nor law learning to see, how little
credit is to be given to protestant Ministers.

XII. Page 1. and 134. and passim.
You please your self much in a poetical fable of the Cretan Minotaure,
whereupon you make many glosses, and I shall make of it a glass for you to
represent to your eyes the beautiful figure of your Prelatique Clergy; the
cause of both was a very unlawful lust, in Henry the 8. King of England, and
Pasiphae Queen of Creete; the Minotaure was half beast, half man; and your
Clergy, half Zuinglian, half Catholic; both kept in a labyrinth, both fed
with innocent blood, and both at length destroyed by the sword.

XIII. You pretend to show wit in applying this fable to the relation of your
Clergys descent from the Nagshead, which you might better have called a tale of
a tun, then a tub, as more relating to a Tavern; unless it be, because your
Taverne-Prelates came at length to give place to Tubpreachers. This is only to
give you an Item, rather te show your self wary then witty; as being more
suitable to your age, and profitable to your cause. But I can not perceive how
you were either wary, or witty, in vpbraiding men of my coat with the ill
success of Princes that follow their counsel, after such, and so fresh an
example, which never happened since God created the world, by the counsel of
any Clergy but yours. You say it is pity I was not of his Council, I am sure
it is pity that ever any Prince, or state, should here after be led by the advice of your Clergy, unless they deserve the like success.

XIV. But this fond vindication of your forged Records must be decked with more
pedantical stuff of Poetical fables. The Nagshead true story you metamorphose
into an imaginary Chimera and M. Page 146.
Mason was the Bellerophon that destroyed this monster, this Posthumus brat
was the Minerva, or Issue of M. Neales brain, or some others who fathered this
rapping lie upon him. If a chimera be composed of contradictions, what can be
more chimerical, then your solemn consecration at Lambeth that contradicts not
only the constant tradition of wise and conscienable men, but the very
statutes of the Prince, the acts of Parliament, the doctriner of Protestants,
and even the Protestant Creed contrived in those times. This is no Minerva, no
issue of any brain but an abortive reeling Bacchus hatched far from the
brain, a Vulcan ridiculously halting at every step. Your Bellerophon with his
Pegasus, or poetical Nagshoofe has only opened a fountain of fictions when he
published his feigned Records, but the Nagshead head relation has made such a
breach in your Prelatic Church, that all your Heads put together will never
stop it.

XV. You are not content to make ostentation of your wit, but are pleased also
to show your judgment in taxing us of imprudence, because forsooth, with
indiscreete zeal we endeavor to make Proselites, Page 216.
and follow those birds with noise, and clamor, which we desire to catch.
Many sinners are so fast a sleep in their wickedness, and heresy, that they
will not hear ordinary admonitions; to such God commands his preachers, Isa.
58.1.
cry, and cease not, as a trumpet exalt thy voice, and tell my people their
wicked doings. But why you should compare your protestants to birds, I know
not, unless it be, because you have caged them up in ignorance, or frighted
them with skar-crowes of Idols, superstitions, superstructures from flocking to
the field of the true Church. Christ called his Apostles rather fishers the^
fowlers, and it is the practice of fishers to dash in the water thereby to
drive the fish to their nets, and I suppose you have observed no such veheme^cy
that surpasses the invectives of Christ against the Scribes and Pharisees
misleaders of the birds he desired to catch. But those he catches, he makes
them silent like fishes, not prating like parrats out of Scripture they know
not what, nor chattering togeter like different birds in a bush, every one in a
several note, as those do, who are caught, and taught by Protestant, not
fishers, but fowlers: unless it be in troubled waters. You would do well
hereafter to reflect before hand, that what you would say, have the ground of
common sense, before you work it, and trim it into quaint sentences which in
this particular you forgot; for the noise is not used (if any be used) to
fright away the game, but those that would make an injust prey of it, and
hinder it from falling into better hands.

XVI. Page 24.
You think I have forgotten Epictetus his rule, Remember to distrust. But you
vvil find me not much guilty of that forgetfulness, when you see how often I
put the Reader in mind, and upon what grounds, not to trust the allegations,
and attestations of Protestant Ministers. But that I should rather distrust the
perfect remembrance testified upon oath of a person, both of understanding, and
honor (that neither would for any interest forswear himself, nor could have
any interest in so doing) then a negative testimony of men not remembering
either upon absence, or inadvertence, or distance of time, I can not find
either in the text of Epictetus, nor in the commentary of your grammatical
Champion Salmasius any such rule. Had I taken for witness a man that takes
Religion upon interest, and makes it his profession to advance his own, and
other men's interest by cheating Policy, or foolish knavery, then you had done a
deed of Christian Charity by teaching me this lesson of your Stoical Philosophy.

CHAP. I.
My first and second reason defended against the Doctors objections.

1. TO the first argument, deduced from the authority of our Catholic
Doctors, charging in their printed books your first superintendents with
want of Episcopal consecration, some five or six years after you pretend it
was so solemnly performed at Lambeth, you give no other answer; Page 167.
but that you regard not their judgment, and authority, beause they give no
cause, or reason of their Knowledge. Ipray, Mr. Doctor, what greater cause of
Knowledge can there be of the not being of a visible, and publicque solemnity,
then the not being seen, or heard of by knovving parsons, who made it their
business to inquire after it, in the very same time, and place vvherin its
pretended to have bin acted? To say that D. Harding, Stapleton, Bristovv,
Reynolds, and others, should object in print against your protestant Bishops,
want of ordination, without inquiring, and examining whether they were
ordained or no, is in equivalent terms, to call them fools, and Knaves, Page
207.
hovvever averse you pretend to be from so unmanerly language; your attributing
the objections of these great Doctors to credulity, and prejudice, does rather
increase, then diminish the jury, for, you ought to know, that credulity
contradicted by public and obvious evidence; is of the grosser sort of
foolery, and prejudice that makes men slight such evidence, is the most
malicious knavery: neither of both can be laid to the charge of so learned, and
honest persons, as the foresaid Doctors, who would never press Parker, and his
fellows, to show the register, and how, and by whom, they received
Episcopal Orders, if there had bin in those days as public, and authentic
registers, as now ye pretend.

2. To this you say, that none of our Doctors did ever urge any such thing, as
required that ye should cite the registers, in prudence. And that the ^re was
no pressing to produce Registers. What the^? Do not men in a suite of law
produce what is for their manifest advantage of their own accord? I am sure
you bring many things, you think advantageous, which neither any person, nor
reason pressed you to do. But that they were pressed immediately after, you
may learn out of D. Harding.

We say likvvise to you M.r Ievvel, Confut. apol. fol. 57. and 59. edit an.
1566.
and to each of your companions, show us the register of your Bishops, etc.
Show us the letters of your orders. But order you have not: for, who could
give that to you of all these new Ministers, how soever else you call them,
which he has not himself Yet I must confess it was prudence in your first
Bishops, not to cite the registers, though D. Harding called for them; because
it was better, by their silence, to acknowledge, the want of registers, then to
prove themselves impostors, by producing them in a time, wherein their forgery
had bin discovered by thousands of witnesses incase they were forged then, and
not afterward, when ordination was grown into more credit. And as I commend
the prudent silence of your first Bishops, so I must condemn your silly answer
in averring, that the registers or records, were cited in print, Page 112.
and alleged by the Parliament in the public laws of the Kingdom, of
which our Doctors, that desired to see some evidence of Parkers consecration,
could plead no ignorance: whereas it is notorious that the act of Parliament 8.
Eliz. which as you pretend (but without any grovvnd, as shall be proved here
after) makes mention of the records of Parkers consecration at Lambeth, was
made at least a year after your Register was called for and our Doctors had
objected to your Bishops the nullity, and illegality, of their ordination; and
the book of the 70. Archbishops of Canterbury was printed 1572. seven years
after that D. Harding had called for the same Register, and Letters of their
Orders. Though he was a wise man, I hope he might plead ignorance of what then
was not as much as thought of, when he writ, nor indeed ever after by any,
but your self; who confounds the records of Kings, and Queens letters
patents, with the registers of the Archbishops of Canterbury.

3. Another reason against the pretended consecration of your first protestant
superintendents, was, the contradictions of your own Authors upon this
subject, disagreeing in the persons of the consecraters, and in the time of
their consecrations. These contradictions you call innocent mistakes, and
think to excuse them by the retractation of the Authors, who desired that they
might be corrected by Mr. Masons newfound registers, Page 176.177. and 178.
which you compare to the sun dial, whereby all clockes, and Clerks must be
regulated, when the sun shines out. It seems Mr Doctor, that the sun never
shined upon your church, until Mr Masons tecords were printed, for if it had,
Mr Goduin, Mr Sutcliffe, and Mr Butler, three of the most famous Clerks amongst
you, infallibly would have consulted the sundial; and their judgments, and
books concerning your consecrations, had not bin so different. How comes this
sun to be more then fifty years under a cloud, if it was not, that your new
registers might participate in some measure, of the old invisibility, of your
Church? Do you imagine, that learned, and sober men, would venture to write,
and publish to the world a matter of such importance, as the consecration of
your first Bishops, without consulting the registers thereof if any such had
bin exstant, or visible when they undertook the work? were they paradventure
ignorant of the place where this sun did shine? Or were they negligent in
setting their clocks to it? Nheiter can be presumed of so eminent persons as
you make them. But your comparison of Masons records to the sun, or sundial, is
very improper; for, if the suns motion were as irregular, as those registers
are incoherent, the sun would be as unfit for a measure of time, as those are
for a proof of truth. But if one should mistake for the sun a false Meteor,
called a Parhelion, and set his clock by the light of a cloud, he would guide
the town, as you do your Church: and men of understandingh would be as little
regulated by such a dial, or clock, as Fitzherbert was persuaded by Masons
registers at their first appearance, who suspected them of forgery by the
latenesse of their discovry as you may see in his book of D. Andrevvs
absurdities, falsities, lies, etc.

4. Page 158.
But you regard not Mr Fitzherherts suspicions at all. What are the suspicions
of a private stanger, to the well known credit of a public register? If you
Mr Doctor, had not bin a stranger to such pious and learned books as Policy
and Religion, and others composed by F. Fitzherbert, and had informed your
self how long he lived, you would not have spoken so strangely, and
ignorantly, of his Knowledge in his own countries affairs, nor so contemptibly
of his discovery, of Andrevvs absurdities. But you say his suspicions can
weigh no more then his roasons, that is, just nothing. Does it weigh nothing
in your judgment, that this register should be called for so frequently, and
earnestly in the beginning of Queen Elizbeths reign, when some evidence was
desired by the Catholic Doctors of your first Bishops consecration; and that
neither it self should be cited, nor any other authentical proof thereof
produced by Parker; Ievvel or any of the rest; and that after fifty years it
should appear, when none called for it, and they were dead, whom it most
imported, and the time of your Protestant Prelatique Church was more then half
expired? do you call this obscure, and forged scroll, a well known, and
public register? I am confident, that in any prudential balance, the
suspicion, and reasons of Fitzherbert will weigh more then your judgment; and
that every one who reads his discovery of Andrevvs absurdieies, will confess,
that he has laid him not only in the dust, (as you vainly brag Andrevvs has
done to our greatest Champions) but also has buried him in the dirt of his
own lies, Page 159.
the fittest monument for so notorious an Impostor. I shall in the end stir up
in the reader a curiosity te examine Andrews impostures by what I shall note
out of Morton and others.

V. Yet we need not any discoverer of yours but your self, you tell us that
the imprisoned Priests, Page 130.
and Jesuits vievved your register, turned it over and over, perused it as much
as they pleased, and in conclusion gave this sentence of it, that the book
was beyond exception. If they perused it as much as they pleased, why do you
achnowledge, that afterward they desired toperuse it more fully, and that
their request was not granted? What a silly excuse you bring for not permitting
them te see the register again, that forsooth such Records may not go out of
the presence of the Keeper? Why could not the Keeper go along with the
Records, or the Fathers come with their Keepers to the Registri? Ceertainely
there was less difficulty, then in F. Olcornes perusing the records, who was
furtherof as being prisoner in Worcester. Page 128.
Whom you make also an approve^r of the same records upon your own bare
assertion. And yet forsooth, Polemique writers must cite no witness of their
own party, though you be so bold as to cite your self. But it is more then
bouldnes to bring in My lord of Calcedon as confessing it, Page 129.
whereas he only lets it pass upon your word, not granting it so, as having
any knowledge of it from another hand, but in case it were so as you say, that
it makes not much to your purpose. But the truth is, the imprisoned Jesuits
did never allow your Records, as those yet living, and then living in England
(and at least in this matter belonging to their own people may know as much
as you, or My Lord of Calcedon) will testify. One as being on this side the sea,
I may name to you without danger, and stop your mouth always crying against
nameles witnesses. It is the R. F. Henry More now Rector of the Seminary of S.
Omers, whose word in any matter of fact will be taken, as soon as yours, even
by the persons of your own party, and sooner in this particular, as having
more reason to know it. What if M. Wadsvvorth say he read Paockers consecration
in the registers, does that make your registers good against so many signs of
forgery. Nay put the case he, and some few should have bin something moved at
the sight of them, it argues no more then their ignorance of the manifold
arguments I bring to convince them of falsood. As for your other witnesses I
must take them upon your word, which I have found so palpably fail in the
former, and shall take occasion in another chapter to examine them, and what
you say of them.

CHAP. II.
The fabulous Consecration at Lambeth, and the forgery of its records proved by
the Statute 8. Eliz. 1. and by the Queens letters patents, and Commission.

1. But if your Register be not forged, and all was so legally performed at
Lambeth, as it relates, why should our Doctors object to your first Bishops,
not only nullity, but also illegality of consecration, contrary to the
statutes, and laws of the land? Why did the Queen make good by act of
Parliament, 8. Eliz. 1.
not only the form of Ed. 6. ordination, But also all Acts, and things had,
made, or done by any person, or persons, in or about any consecration,
confirmation, or investing of any person, or persons elected to the office, or
dignity of Archbishops, or Bishops by virtue of the Queens letters patents, or
commission, sithence the beginning of her reign? If Parker and the rest had
bin consecrated according to the form of Edward 6. as your Records, and
Writers pretend, what need had there bin of this Act of Parliament? This is so
clear against your forged Registers, and feigned solemnity at Lambeth, that
you thought fit to omit in your answer to this objection, the words of the
statute; Page 146. and 147.
and only say, that I repeat, the words of apart of the statute, and thence
conclude, by which act appears, that not only King Edward's rite, but any
other used since the beginning of the Queens reign, upon her commission, was
enacted for good, and consequently that of the Nagshead might pass. Cujus
contrarium verum est. The contrary to what these Fathers infer, does follovv
necessarily from these words, which the Fathers cite. The words of the Act
are these, By virtue of the Queens letters patents, or Commission. I pray Mr
Doctor, have a better opinion of your Readers, then to think they are so mad,
as to be persuaded by you, that men should, cite only these words of a statute,
By virtue of the Queens letters patents, or Commission, to prove the nul^ity,
or illegality of your protestant consecra^ion. Is it the manner, I do not say
of Polenick, but even of honest Writers, to concea^e, and mangle the words
whereupon the Ad^ersary grounds the force of his argument.

2. But you are as unfortunate in citing these few words By virtue of the
Queens letters patents, or Commission, as your Reader must be unsatisfied of
your ingenuity, for concealing the others to which they relate. Page 88.
The Queens letters patents which you cite, declare expressly, that the reason
why by her supreme authority, she dispensed with all invalidities of the
persons condition, state, and faculty, and with all illegalities against the
Canons of the Church, and statutes of the land, was not her Majesty's
extraordinary care, least some circumstance in the political part might be
defective in some punctitilio of law as you pretend; Page 109.
but an extreme necessity; that is, the want of as much as one true Bishop, to
consecrate the rest; and therefore she dispensed not only with censures, Page 92.
and penalties, as the Pope does in his Bulls; but also with the condition, and
state o^ the Consecraters, who being only simple Priests, and noe Bishops, were
by the Queens commission, and supremacy, exalted, and enobled to confer
episcopal orders. The words of the Queens letters patents are. Supplentes
nihilominus suprema nostra authoritate regia, etc. Si quid aut in his quae
juxta mandatum nostrum per vos fient, aut in vobis, aut vestrum aliquo,
condition, statu, facultate, vestris, ad praemissa perficienda desit, aut
deerit eorum, quae penstatuta hujus Regni nostri, aut per leges Ecclesiasticas
in hac part requiruntur, aut necessaria sun^^ temporis ratione, and rerum
necessitate id postulante. In cujus rei, etc. Test Regina, etc.

3. This part of the Queens letters patent you translate into English thus,
Page 92.
supplying b^ our Souveraigne authority all defects either in the Executors of
this Commission, or any of them. Its strange you ever made mention of a
Commission so evidently contrary to your principles, and to the cause you
undertake to maintain, that you dare not translate it faithfully. But I vvil
supply your defect in this particular, Supplying by our Sovereign Royal
authority, etc. If any thing be, or shall be vvanting in these things which
ye are to do by our command, either in your selves, or in any of you, or in
your condition, state, faculty, which by the statute of this our Kingdom, or
by the laws of the Church are required, or necessary, the time, and necessity
of affairs exacting this, etc. You make this dispensation a superflous clause,
or at most a salve to help a latent impediment; but the Queen, and the
commission it self declare, that it was a necessary remedy to enable the
condition, and state of the consecraters, who were no Bishops.

4. Yet you are confident that the only ground of this monstruos dispensation,
Page 94. and 95.
was the same exception which Bishop Bonner did afterward make against the
legality of Horns consecration, which is all (say you) that Stapleton, or any
of your adversaires had to pretend, or except against the legality of the
ordination of the first protestant Bishops There is as little reason to doubt of
your confidence, as there is for you to be so confident. Did either B. Bonner,
D. Stapleton, or any other of your adversaries, mention that exception which
you father upon them? They were not so ignorant in the laws, and statutes of
England, as you would make them, and all other Writers besides your self. It
had bin, not only confidence, but impudence to object illegality of ordination
contrary to the laws of England, if your first Bishops had bin ordained
accordring to the laws, and form of Edward VI. and so solemnly at Lambeth,
as your forged Registers pretend. Bonners exception was, Counter. bl. fol. 7.
and 9. and fol. 301.
that Horn was no Bishop, and Stapletons words are. You (Horn) are without
any consecration at all of your Metropolitan, (Parker) himself poor man being
no Bishop neither. Is it not notarious that ye, and your Colleagues were not
ordained according to the prescript, I will not say of the Church, but even of
the very statuts? These words can have no relation to the doubt you move (but
our Authors never touched) concerning your book of ordination being, or not
being restored by Act of Parliament 1. Page 97.
Elizab. Therefore D. Stapletons words, and exceptions were against some other
illegality, to wit, your first Bishops merry ordination at the Nagshead, for no
other was ever pretended by your Authors, but either this, or that formal
ceremony at Lambeth; which if ever it had bin, D. Stapleton would not have bin
so impudent, as to object notorious illegality against your first
consecrations. Page 98.
But you say that his objection, and exception shows nothing but this, how
apt a drowning cause is to catch hold of every reed; By your leave M. Doctor,
it also shows, how apt a drunken cause is to catch hold of every cup; and
that your spiritual Forefathers had a plot to make the old Bishop of Landaf
half drunk, that at least in a pleasant humor he might lay hands on them;
therefore they invited him to a Tavern; Page 129. in ep. ad ami.
this is the reason Q. Mary's priests did give, why they met at the Nagshead,
as you may see in the answers to M. Watsvvorhts letters cited by your self.

5. Yet you desire your Reader to observe, Page 99. and 100.
that this dispensative clause neither had, nor can be construed to have any
reference to any consecration that was acted by Scory alone, as that silly
consecration at the Nagshead is supposed to have bin: and the same Dispensative
clause does not extend at all to any essential of ordination: nor to the Canons
of the universal Church; and that the Commissioners authorized by these letters
patents to confirm, and consecrate Parker, did make no use of this supplentes,
or dispensative power in the consecration, which is a purely spiritual Act,
and belongs merely to the Key of order. All this you desire the Reader to
observe with you, without giving him any reason, or ground for your
observation. Is it the manner of Polenick Writers to beg the controversy out of
mere civility? Readers must be persuaded by reason, and not desired by empty
words, to give their assent in controverted matters. You say that the
Commissioners, or Consecraters of Parker did make no use of the Queens
dispensative power in the consecration. But themselves say the contrary, (being
conscious of their own incapacity to consecrate Bishops, as being only simple
Priests, and never consecrated) and declare in their desinitive sentence, that
they will make use in the consecration, of the Queens dispensative power.
Their words are. See this definitive sentence in D. Bramhall page 101.
Therefore we the Queens Commissioners (Barlovv, Scory, etc) by consent of the
Lavviers that we have consulted, do confirm the foresaid election by the
supreme authority of the Queen, communicated unto us. Supplying also by the
said supreme authority whatsoever has him defective in this election: as also
is, or shall be vvanting in us, or any of us, in our condition, state, faculty,
to perfect these things which we are commanded te do. They were commanded
not only to confirm Parkers election, but also to perfect the work, and
consecrate him; and they say that they will do so, and do supply the defects
of their own state, and condition, (which could be no other, but the want of
episcopal consecration) by the Queens dispensative, and supreme authority. And
yet D. Bramhall does desire the Reader out of curtesy, te observe, and think
the contrary.

6. You talk much of your key of order, which was no other, then the key of a
celler, elevated by the Queens scepter, and spiritual authority, to be
efficient of your first Bishops consecration in a Tavern, which you most
ungratefully, Page 60. 121. 171. and 148.
and unwarily reject, when contrary to the statutes you affirm, that neither
she, nor the laws of England can make an ordination to be valid, or invalid,
because they can not change the institution of Christ, who determined for the
essential matter of ordination, imposition of hands. This is very true, but no
protestant doctrine in those times as being contrary to the 25. article of your
english Creed, which teaches, that Christ never appointed any visible sign for
Orders, and consequently it is no Sacrament. Therefore if imposition of hands be
a visible sign, it can not be (according to the symbol of the English Church)
the essential matter of ordination by Christ's institution. If you had uttered
in your primitive Church the Doctrine, which now you print, you had not only
fallen into a Praemunire, but also incurred the penalties of an Heretic for
being so obstinat against your new Creed, and the articles set down by your
first Apostles.

7. It is not to be wondered, that a man so ignorant of his Creed, should know
so little of the law as you do. Read I pray these words of the statute 8. Eliz.
1. referring to an other made the first year of her reign. And by the same
Act, and statute, there is also given to the Q. Highness, her heirs etc. full
power, and authority by letters patents under the great seal of England, from
time to time, to assign, name, and authorize such person, or persons, as she,
or they shall think meet, and convenient, to exercise, use, occupy, and
execute under her Highness, all manner of jurisdictions, privileges,
preheminences, and auihorities, in any wise toucking, or concerning any
spiritual, or Ecclesiastical power, or jurisdiction within this Realm, or
any other her H. Dominions or Countries. I beseech you M. Doctor, answer now
directly, and without tergiversation might not the Queen by her letters
patents, without any other ceremony, name and authorize, according to this Act
of Parliament, any Carrier, Carter, or Catchpol, to exercise, use, occupy, and
execute all manner of jurisdictions, preheminencies, and authorities, in any
wise touching, or concerning any spiritual, or ecclesiastical power. What is
episcopacy, or priesthood, but a spiritual, and ecclesiastical power? And what
is ordination, or consecration, but to exercise, use, or execute this spiritual
power, by conferring it upon others? Therefore according to the statuts of
England, the Queen, and her heirs, and successors, may make Priests, and
Bishops, without imposition of hands, or any other matter, or form, but their
letters patents under the great seal of England. Which though it be clear
enough by the very words of the statute to any one that understands English,
yet it is made most undeniably evident, by the Protestant Tenet of those days
requiring no more for Order then Election of Prince or people, which Tenet
appears in their writings, in their translations of Scripture, and in their
Creed, so that the Prince in England having assumed full power in point of
Election, could accordingly dispose, and dispense, at will in any thing
belonging to Order. And when any ceremony of consecration was used they cared
not what it was, so it might serve to amuse the vulgar, not yet invred to the
new Doctrine of Priests, and Bishops not consecrated.

8. This was the power assumed: let us now see their practice used. Kellison
survey page 373. and 374. edit, 1603.
They were enforced (says D Kellison) to make superintendents, and ministers
of our apostating Priests, such as Parker, Grindal, Sands, Horn etc. who
were thought paste sit to make such Ministers on, without any other moulding,
or knedding. And when they vvanted Apostatas, who were consecrated afther
the Catholic manner, they took laymen of their own, of which some were
base artificers; and without any other consecration, or ordination then the
Princes, or the Superintendents letters (who themselves were no Bishops) they
made them Ministers, and Bitshops with as fevv ceremonies, and less
solemnity, then they make their Aldermen, yea Constables, and Cryers of the
Market. Page 149.
And from this stock proceeds all the rabble of their Ministers, etc. D.
Stapleton, whom you call one of the most rational heads our Church had since
the separation, gives you this Catalogue of your first protestant Clergy.
Counterblast lib. 4. number. 481. printed an. 1567.
And vvherin I pray you rests a great part of your new Clergy, but in
butchers, cooks, catchpols, and cobblers, diers, and dawbers, fellons cayrring
their mark in their hand instead of a shaven crown, fishermen, gunners,
harpers, inkeepers, merchants. and mariners, netmakers, potters, potycaries,
and porters of Belingsgate, pinners, pedlers, ruffling, ruffins, sadlers,
sheermen, and sheaperds, tanners, tilers, tinkers, trumpeters, weavers,
wherymen, etc. If D. Stapleton was so rational a head as you are pleased to
acknowledge, you have but little reason to brag of the first heads, an^ members
of your schism, or separation; an^ much less to be angry with my lord
Brooks for applying his Coachman to the office of a protestant Preacher; Bram
Page 12.
who by his trade, (not to speak of his talent) might challenge an eminen^
place amongst your first Ministers, and without disgracing your Church, might
head thi^ rabble, that D. Stapleton has so particularly described. But speak
to the purpose M. Doctor: Do you persuade your self, that all these fellows
were ordained by impofition o^ episcopal hands, and with all that formality you
bring out of your Pontifical? no truly, they were only ordained by letters
patents, or so me paper of your first Bishopss, who practise^ the same style
with their Ministers, that the Queen did with themselves, and if sometimes
with ceremony, it was only for ceremony, not necessity, and consequently
with no more formality then might suffice to blind the ignorant.

And truly when I consider the Queens supreme, and spiritual authority,
confirmed by the statuts 1. and 8. Eliz. I do not wonder at this practice of
your primitive Church in ordaining any Post, or Carrier they met in the high
way, and that legally without any imposition of hands, or Ceremony. The statute
does warrant it by these words. 8. Eliz. 1.
And further for the avoiding of all ambiguities, and questions tha^ might be
objected against the lawful confirmations, ^nvesting, and consecrations of the
said Archbishops, and Bishops (that is Parker, and his fel^ows) her highness in
her letters patents, under the great seal of England, directed to any
Archbis^op, Bishops, or others, (mark the word, others, which comprehends
laymen, or simple Priests) for the confirming, investing, and consecrating of
any person elected to the office, or digni^y of any Archbishop, or Bishop, has
not only used such words, and sentences as were acustomed to be ^sed by the
late K. Henry, and K. Edward, her Majesty's father, and brother, in their like
letters ^atents, made for such causes: but also has used, and put in her
Majesty's said letters patents, diverse ^^her general words, and sentences,
whereby her H. ^y her supreme power, and authority, has dispen^ed with all
causes, or doubts of any imperfection, ^r disability, that can, or may in any
wise be obje^ted against the same as by her Majesty's said letters ^atents
remaining of record, more plainly will apcare, So that to all those, that
will well consider of the effect, and true intent of the said laws, and
^^atutes, and of the supreme, and absolute authori^^ of the Queens Highness, and
which she by her Majesty's said letters patents has used, and put in ^^e,
in, and about the making, and consecrating, of the said Archbishops, and
Bishops, it is, and ^ay be very evident, (D. Page 122.
Bramhall cites these last words without mentioning the former, of which their
sense depends) and apparent that (...) cause of scruple, ambiguity, or doubt,
can, or ^ay justly be objected against the said elections, confirmations, or
consecrations, or any other materia^ thing meet to be used, or had, in, or
about the same but that every thing requisite, and material for that purpose
(that is the Queens letters patents, and ample dispensation under the great
seal of England) has bin made, and done as precisely, and with as great a
care, and diligence, or rather more, as ever the like was done before her
Majesty's time, as the Records of her Majesty's said Father, and brothers time,
and also of her own time, will more plainly testify, and declare. This is a
clause indeed that takes a way all ocasion of Protestant scruples, and
doubts, not only of the invalidity, but also of the illegality of your
ordination at the Nagshead.

10. Yet because you would needs have the ordination performed at Lambeth, you
maintain that these last words, the Records of her Majesty's said Fathers, and
Brothers time, and also of her own time, will more plainly testify, and
declare, relate to your forged Registers. And to make good your assertion, you
falsify the text egregiously; for, you say, the statute speaks expressly of
the Records of elections, and confirmations, Page 115.
and consecrations, and this you put in a distinct caracter, as if they had bin
words of the very statute. Its strange, that where you lay to my charge,
falsifying of the text, your self should commit the crime so notoriously. In
all the statute you can not find any such words, Records of elections, and
confirmations, and Consecrations: but you will find expressly these words, as
by her Majesty's said letters patents remaining of record. more plainly will
appear. If that Gloss is accursed, which corrupts, and co^tradicteth the
text, what shall we say of yours? Read with attention the text, and you will
be convinced, that the Records of her Majesty's said Father, and Brothers time,
and also of her own time, relate not to any Records, or Registers of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, nor to the Records of elections, confirmations, and
consecrations; but to the Records of the Kings, and Queens letters patents;
for, the statute says: that every thing requisite, and material for the taking
away all causes of scruples, doubts, and ambiguities, that might be objected
against the said elections, and consecrations, and confirmations, or any other
material thing meet to be used, or had in, or about the same, had bin made,
and done, as precisely, or rather more, then ever before her Majesty's time, as
by the Records of her Majesty's said Father, and Brothers time, and also of her
own, will more plainly appear. The words, or rather more precisely, and
with more care, and diligence, can not relate to Parker, and his Camerades
consecration though we should grant, it was performed at Lambeth with a read
cloth on the floor, and tapestry on the east side; for, I hope, in Catholic
times they were as precise, diligent, and decent in consecrations, as in Q
Elizabeth's, (though they used not a read cloth upon a Sunday of Advent, as your
Register says ye did upon the 17. of December 1559.) especialy

(...) CHAP. III.
The Protestants Consecration at Lambeth is proved to be a fable, and their
Register to be forged, by their falsifications of Scripture, and by the 25. of
their 39. articles; and D. Bramhals arguments to maintain the contrary, are
retorted against himself.

1 NOt withstanding all this, the Doctor says, it is incredible that the
Registers of the first Protestant Bishops consecration should be forged. Page
106.
And why so M Doctor? Is it incredible that they who falsify Scripture, should
forge Records? And how notoriously your first Bishops have falsified
Scripture, is demonstrated by D. Gregory Martin in a learned book, entitled A
Discovery of the manifold corruptions, Page 201.
etc. You give four answers to this argument 1. you desire good words. And I
desire a better answer. 2. That Gregory Martin is an adversary, whose censure
you do not esteem a button. I desire you once more M. Doctor to answer, and
speak to the purpose. Though you do not weigh D. Martins censure, answer his
reasons, and the examples he brings: confute his book, and demonstrations.
Your third answer is, I hope none of us did ever attempt to purge S. Paul's
Epistles, because there were in them some things that sounded not well in point
of justification. I understand not to what, or to whom do you allude by this
answer. But I am sure, your Proto-Patriarche Luther to make good his
justification by faith alone in his Dutch translation inserted the word alone
into the very text, against all originals, or copies, or versions that ever had
bin seen before. Fourthly you answer. Rather then be accounted falsifiers of
Scripture, we are content to stand to the vulgar Latin in any controversy
betvveen them and us. Is this to solve an argument? Are your Protestant readers
satisfied with such stuff? stay sir, I must in the name of convincing logique
arrest your shifting Rhethorique. This was the argument. Those that have
grossly falsified Scripture, may easily be presumed to have falsified records,
especially when the records upon other circumstances are deeply suspected, but
the first has bin the frequent use of Euglish Protestant Ministers, ergo you
should have proved at least in some general terms, that your English
translations were not corrupted: you should have called them innocent mistakes,
or Erratas of the print, as Dover for Bedford, which you thought sufficient to
serve your turn at least in another occasion. If one were accused, and pressed
by sundry proofs to have killed his Brother, and it should be further urged,
that notwithstanding the crime was enormous, and not easily to be believed in
other persons, yet in him it might justly be presumed, by reason of the known
public evidences, whereby he had bin plainly convicted to have killed his
father. Must this be slipped over? Would this avail nothing? Can the artificial
Rhetorique of a slighting pretermission, so stupify the natural logique of
every one that is come to the use of reason, as not to see the force of this
conclusion? He has killed his father, what vvonder is it if he kill his
brother? They falsify Scripture what marvel if they forge records. Has your
custom of urging light conjectures against the Church of Rome so destroyed the
nature of reason in you, as not to feel your self, or to think that others
do not feel the weight of an argument a fortiore? Records are humane,
Scripture devine, Records are kept in a corner, Scripture exposed to the view of
all, Records have fevv copies, and kept by a few, and those of one faction. The
Christian world is full of Bibles. Is it not then less against conscience, of
easier contrivence, and further from danger of a shameful discovery, to forge
records, then to falsify Scripture. This is only to stop you a while from
posting with so much speed from this passage. In the end of the book I shall
detain you longer, and hold you faster, and put a rub to the sliding
eloquence you have learned in Holland If you vvil not, yet the Reader shall see
by what I shall lay clearly before his eyes, and shall remit to the judgment
of his own eyes, if he be pleased to view, and co^fer him self what I shall
set down of some, and direct him to seek of other Protestant Ministers, in
point of gross, wilful, malicious, and impudent falsifications of Scripture,
and Authors, whereby he will conclude with himself how far he shall think fit
to give credit hereafter to their sayings, or writings, and namely, and
particularly D. Morton called B. of Duresme, that Minister of simple truth, as
he called himself in those very books which seem to have bin dictated by the
father of lies, and now in his late testimony is not ashamed to speak thus.
Page 15.
I could never have made such a speech (mark the proof he adjoyneth) seeing I
have ever spoken according to my thoughts. He may very well have forgot what he
once spoke in Parliament seeing he has forgot what he has so often writ
against his thoughts, and clear knowledge in ^everal books. But of this man's
false writings hereafther, Page 107.
now I return to your false records, being you are resolved to convince all
those who gainsay them by six doughty arguments, which I hope to retortagainst
you, and by your own grounds prove the contrary of what you are confident to
maintain.

3. Your first argument is, that value, and respect which the laws of England
do give the Registers. The laws of England were so far from valuing, or
respecting these Registers, that they did not as much as cite, or mention them,
when Parker, and his Colleagues were pressed to show the letters of their
Orders, being accu^ed by our Catholic Doctors that they had ^ever bin
ordained. And the Parliament 8. Eliz. thought it more for the credit of their
protestant Church, and Clergy, to make them Bishops by a statute, then examine
the matter; which resolution had never bin taken, if any witnesses, or Records
of their consecration at Lambeth could have bin produced in the 8. year of Q.
Elizabeth's reign. But what marvel is it, that the laws of England should
not value your Records, when your first superintendents themselves never durst
send D. Harding, or any of the rest who desired it, an authentic Copy of
them out of your Registry? Or so muchas make mention of the original.

4. Your second argument is taken from the credit of the four public
Notaries, who did testify Parkers individual consecration at Lambeth, it being
observable that these four Notaries were the same who did draw Cardinal Pooles
consecration into Acts, and attest them. This proof, and observation weighs as
little, as four public Notaries conscience, and credit, who in Cardinal
Pooles time professed one faith, and in Parkers an other. Men that counterfeit
religions, will have no difficulty te counterfeit Registers, if they be
commanded, or inclined to do it; neither would their testimony, be of undoubted
credit in any place of the world, if contradicted by so many arguments, and
circumstances as your pretended consecration at Lambeth. But in case these
Notaries had bin persons beyond all exception, might not their hands be
counterfeited as well as the Register? What greater difficulty can there be in
one more then in the other? Its a silly argument that involves in it self the
same difficulty it ought to clear. Your third and fourth ground of the Queens
Commission, and of the Act of Parliament 8. Eliz. have bin ansvvered in the
former Chapter, and are evident proofs, that your Records are forged.

5. Page 115. and 116.
Your fifth ground is taken from a book you say was printed an. 1572. of the
lives of 70. succeeding Archbishops of Canterbury, vvherin the Author (that
was Archbishop Parker himself) having described the Confirmations, and
Consecrations of his fellows, he adds in the margent. These confirmations,
and consecrations do appear in the Registers. It seems you learnt from Parker
to cite your self as a witness for your felfe. Is this the manner of
Polemick Writers? But why did not Parker, or Ievvel, remit D. Harding to these
Registers, whereof M. Parker some seven years after made (if we believe you)
marginal notes; when he so earnestly called for them, Confut. Apolog. fol. 57.
and 59 edit. 1566.
show us your Registers, in the year 1566. Then was the time for Parker, and
the rest to cite them, and not in the year 1572. Yet D. Champney doubts
whether any such book was printed of your Archbishops as you pretend. Whether
it was, or no, it matters not, for the Registers cited in the margent by
Parker, mentions not any place, or form of their consecrations, and is as
indifferent for the Nagshead Tavern, as for the Chapel of Lamheth, as you may
see in the book called Antiquitates Britannia edit. 1605. into which this
forged Register was foisted, being a mere novelty, and therefore contrary to
the drift, and title of the book, without connection to what goes before, or
follows after.

6. But how comes it to pass M. Doctor, that in this book, and Register, are
set down, as you say, the names of your Bishops, their Countries, their Arms
both of their sees and families, Page 164.
their respective ages, their universities, their degrees in Schools, with
the times (but not the place) of their several consecrations? How comes it to
pass I say, there should be room for all these things, and none at all for
Lambeth, which takes up no more then Ipsvvich, Parkers Country, or Cambridge,
his vniverfity? Is it more material to put in a Register, the place of a
Bishops nativity, or education, then the place where he received his caracter,
or consecration? Did he esteem more the degree of a Doctor, then the dignity
of a Bishop? I could not exact, nor expect from M. Parker, that he should
assure us in his Register, whether the Chapel of Lambeth was adorned with
tapestry on the east, or west side, as Mason does; but me thinks his Lordship
might have remembered on which side the Thames stands Lambeth, if it had bin
the place of his consecration.

7. Page 164.
It is hardly possible for the wit of man, says the Doctor, to contrive more
matter into a lesser room. My complaint is, that so much superflous matter was
thrust in, and that which imported most, (to wit the place of your first
Bishops consecration) omitted. I confess M. Doctor, you have as much reason to
commend in this case, Parkers wit for not mentioning Lambeth, as in an other
you had to commend Jewels prudence, for not answering Harding when he pressed
him to show the Registers of his Bishops, and their letters of Orders. For, if
M. Parker had but named Lambeth as the place of his consecration, the forgery
of his Records had bin as manifest to as many as then remembered the 17. of
December 1559. and never heard of any solemnity at Lambeth on that day: But
though I commend M. Parkers wit in concealing the place of his consecration,
yet I must condemn your judgment, good M. Bramhall, for citing a Register so
disadvantagious to your cause.

8. Your 6. and last ground destroys the five former, because it is taken from
the agreement, Page 116.
and concurrence of your civil Records with your ecclesiastical Registers.
There can not be greater disagreement, and opposition then there is between
the Queens commission, or letters patents, the Act of Parliament 8, Elizab.
and your Registers. These Registers suppose, and declare, there was no need of a
dispensation, the letters patents, and Act of Parliament declare, there was a
necessity to dispense with defects, and disabilities. Your Registers suppose
that the consecraters were true Bishops; The Queens Commission suppose they
were not, becanse she dispenses with defects of the consecraters state, and
condition, which defects could be no other, then want of episcopal
consecration. Your Registers suppose that four Bishops did consecrate; but the
Acts of Parliament do suppose, that one person might do it, and that one did
it, and therefore makes good whatsoever any person, or persons did about the
consecration of any Archbishop, and Bishop sithence the beginning of the Queens
reign. Your Registers suppose that Bishops must be consecrated by imposition
of hands; but the Acts of Parliament 1. and 8. Elizabeth. And also your 25.
article of the 39. suppose that Bishops are consecrated by election, or by the
Queens letters patents, or commission; and consequently might say that your
first Bishops were orderly consecrated, and according to the laws of the
land, though they had no imposition of hands; yet to take away all protestant
scruples, there was an ample power, and dispensation more particularly
expressed in the Queens commission to the consecrators, then ever was seen or
heard of before her Majesty's Reign. Many other disagreements might be set
down, but these may suffice to show, how impossible it is for you, or any
other, to reconcile plain contradictions by improbable fictions, or impostures.

CHAP IV.
The fabulous consecration at Lambeth, and the protestant Registers disproved
by John Stow; and by the Catholic Tenet of not reordaining, and by the
authority of our Writers.

1. I Produced John Stovves silence of your solemnity, and consecration at
Lambeth, as an argument, that never any such thing had bin, as your Registers
pretend. For, how could a man that made it his buisnesse to relate, and
describe the solemnities, and casualties of his time, especially hapening in,
and about London, conceal so notorious, and rare a solemnity, as the first
protestant consecration of an Archbishop of Canterbury? To this you answer in
rhyme, that my store is very lovv, Page 197.
when I am forced to produce John Stow. The rhyme is ptety, and in the Nagshead
Tavern may be sung to the tune of John Derry, or Down Derry, but it is time
without reason: for all the reason you give, is, that, John Stow scarce knew
what a consecration was. Notwithstanding his ignorance, you confess that he
writ in his Annals the consecration of Cardinal Poole, who was the immediate
Predecessor to Parker. Why did not he say so much at least of your first
protestant Archiepiscopal solemnity, as he did of the last Catholic, himself
being a protestant, and a great servant of M. Parkers? Its no marvel that he
involved in silence the story of the Nagshead, because he had rather his Annals
should be defective, then testify a truth that might prove dangerous to his
person, and was disadvantagious to his profession. But that he would not, if
with truth he could, grace his Church, friend, and Chronicle, with a narrative
of Parkers solemn consecration at Lambeth, is incredible. Though he was no
Divine, I hope he might write in his Annals, as learnedly as your Master
Mason, to wit that the Chapel of Lambeth on the 17. of December 1559. was
adorned with tapestry on the east side, the floor covered with a read cloth,
that there was great concourse of people, lords, and courtriers, and that
many grave persons received the communion with Parker. This much he might have
said of his own knowledge, or heard from the assistents, copied out of your
Registers, if they had bin then as public as you pretend, and he had believed
they were authentic. But after diligent search (says D. Champney) he found
the Nagshead story to he very true, D. Cha^pney edit. lat. page 501.
and declared so much to some of his friends that testified the same to D.
Champney, though they were as loath to be named, as some lords are, who heard
the pretended Bishop of Durham in the late Parliament make the speech laid to
his charge by the lord Audley.

2. To my third reason, to wit, that no man of conscience, or common sense, can
imagine, that the Catholic Doctors of these times, as Harding, Bristow,
Stapleton, and others, who had such care of their salvation as to suffer so
much as they did upon that account, should vvilfully damn their souls by
obliging posterity upon misinformation, to Reordaine your Ministers, if they
had bin validly ordained before; it being a known Tenet of Catholics, that
we can not without committing a damnable sin, no more Reordaine, then
rebaptise. To this reason I say, Page 202.
you answer, that if Reordination be damnable sacrilege, the authority of our
own Doctors may be a fit medium to convince our selves of sacrilege, not you
of the invalidity of your ordination. I am both sorry, and ashamed to find so
little substance in my Adversaries answer; Authority, which must be a fit medium
to persuade, supposes two things in the Author; knowledge, and honesty. If he
has these two qualityes, no rational man (though of a contrary religion) can
except against his relation, or testimony; for, his knowledge of the matter
that is treated, does free himself from the danger of being mistaken; and his
honesty, does assure others, that he will not misinforme them. Now M. Doctor,
can you object want of knowledge of your first Bishops consecrations, to
Harding, Stapleton, Reynolds, etc. They lived in that very time, and made it
their buisnesse to observe all your Clergyes proceedings; and though they had
not inquired after their ordination, they could not be ignorant of it, being so
rare, and notorious a solemnity, as your Registers pretend: notwithstanding
all this, they printed in those very times, that neither Parker, nor any of
your first Bishops were consecrated, not so much as according to the laws of
the kingdom. Want of honesty you can not object to men that suffered so much
for their conscience. How can you then assume their own authority, as a fit
medium to convince themselves of sacrilege? Is knowledge, and conscience a fit
argument to prove, that they who are endowed with them, have committed damnable
sins, and engaged posterity to do the same by Reordaining? If your Bishops
ordination had bin as little questioned, as our Doctors knowledge, and
integrity, you might with some color pretend, that your ordination is as fit a
medium to convince us of sacrilege, as our Doctors authority is, to demonstrate
the nullity of your ordination. But hitherto never any man but your self
excepted against Harding, Stapleton, or Bristovvs knowledge concerning your
Clergy, or against their conscience, and integrity, and your Orders have bin
continualy excepted against not only as invalid, but even illegal.

3. I know not to what purpose you cite the two Popes, if it be not to prove
Recordination is lawful: But you did ill to Father your ensuing words upon so
obvious an Author as Belarmine. Page 202.
I hope Stephen the sixth, and sergius the third, two Popes, were other manner
of men then your English Doctors, and did both pretend to examine the matter as
duly, and to be as averse from damnable sacrilege as you; yet they decreed
publicquely, and most unjustly, that all the holy orders received from
Formosus, were void; and compelled all those who had bin ordained by him, to be
reordained. All this you lay to Bellarmines charge de Romans Pontif. l. 4. cap.
12. whosoever reads him, must discover your little ingenuity; Bellarmins words
are. Respondeo Stephanum, and Sergium non edidisse aliquod decretum, quo
decernerent ordinatos ab Episcopo degradato, vel nominatim a Formoso tanquam
degradato, esse iterum ordinandos, sed solum de facto jussisse iterum eos
ordinari: quae jussio non ex ignorantia, aut haeresi, sed ex odio in Formosum
procedebat. Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 4. cap. 2. I answer that Stephen, and
Sergius did not publish any decree whereby they decreed that such as were
ordained by a Bishop degraded, or namely by Formosus as degraded, ought ^o be
reordained: but only that de facto commanded they should be ordained again.
Which command proceeded not from ignorance, or heresi, but from the hatred they
bore to Formosus. You see Belarmine himself denies, that Stephen, or Sergius
published any decree, and you affirm that Belarmine says they decreed
publicly that all the holy Orders received from Formosus were void. Belarmine
accuses those two Popes of passion, and to the same attributs their commands
of reordination: you endeavor to clear them from it, and make them appear men
of greater moderation then you judge in your conscience they were; not out of
any affection to the Sea Apostolic, but out of hatred to our Catholic Tenet
of not Reordaining; but you labor in vain; for these two Popes were of the
same judgment that we are, though passion made them practice what they knevv
to be unlawful. If you could prove that Harding, Stapleton, Bristovv, and the
rest generally were men so wicked, and desperately bent to damn their souls
to he revenged of your first Prelates, or that they held it safe in conscience
to reordaine Priests, and Bishops merely upon title that they had bin ordained
by heretics, or that grave Casuists in their time were of that opinion, then
your Reader might afford you attention, and think you said something worth the
answering. But you know too well the contrary.

CHAP. V.
That the Protestant form of ordaining Priests, and Bishops is of doubtful
sufficiency, and that it was composed by Zuinglians, who contemned Ordination
as a rag of Rome.

1. TO my fourth reason against the doubtful sufficiency of your Protestant
form, Page 223. and seq.
or words, used in the act of consecration of Bishops, and Priests, you
answer, that both these names, and functions, are sufficiently expressed by
being presented to the Archbishop, and producing the Kings letters patents by
the exhortation of the Consecraters, and by the litany that follows, and the
examination of him that is to be consecrated. This is new doctrine indeed, that
men should be ordained by litanies, exhortations, presentations, and
examinations. In our consecration of Bishops are comprehended also the words
that are uttered in the anointing of the Bishops head, and hands, Vngatur and
consecretur caput tuum caelesti benedictione in ordine Pontificiali: and you
see how clearly the episcopal Order is therein expressed: neither does our
Rituall call the Bishop elect, consecrated, until these words be pronounced.

2. I grant that Vasques, and some other Divines of late, say, that episcopal
Ordination is conferred by the words Receive the holy Ghost; but I never read
any of them that gives a clear solution to that argument, which you endeavor
to answer, by saying, that these words Receive the holy Ghost, must be
considered conjointly in a compounded sense with the litanies, etc. Whence it
follovveth, that the Sexton, or any other lay man who answers, Hear us o Lord
we beseech thee, has no small share in consecrating. But make the best of
Vasques his opinion, it is no more then probable, and therefore doubtful, and
consequently ought not to be relied upon in a matter that concerns the being,
or not being of a Church: in things of such importance, we ought to follovv the
securest way by adhering to undeniable principles. All you can say against us,
is that we use two forms both in priesthood, and episcopacy; but no Divine
can take exception against that, if he considers, that they are incomplete, and
make but one total form, without any danger of multiplicity of caracters, or
Reordination. But your form makes ye, at the most, but half Priests, or
Bishops; and that it self is as uncertain, as it is doubtful, whether the
caracter can be divided. If we use two either by one, or both all ocasion of
doubt is taken away.

3. Yet I must tell you for your comfort, and instruction, M. Doctor, that it
is not only a common, but tho most probable opinion, that Christ left to his
Church power, to make particular forms, both of priesthood, and episcopacy,
(himself only determining in general, that the words should be appliable to
the mysteries signified) without which forms, neither of these Orders can be
validly conferred. This is the best way to reconcile the Greek, and Latin
forms of ordination, and the ancient, and modern Rituals, though in every one
is expressed the particular function of a Priest, or a Bishop. Only yours
(because it was composed when Zuinglianisme prevailed in England) makes no
mention of either, in any form, or any thing like a form. But if you would be
pleased to read Morinus, a late Author de Ordinationibus sacris, who may
instruict both Polemick, and Scholastic writers in this matter, you will find
how dangerous it is for particular persons, or Churches to alter the present,
and approved use in the administration of the Sacrement of Order, or even to
resume the practice of ancient Rituals canonically abrogated, much more when
like malicious, or ignorant surgeons the Swinglian heretics cut away nerves,
and arteries, and the very substance under pretext of superflous excrescences.
You will find the danger of neglecting the usual matter, and form,
notwithstanding these terms were not so usual in all ancient times. Nor that
your recourse to the grecian practice although it were like yours (as it is
not) will secure you as it does them, and you will find the Greek and Latin
use much better reconciled by him then by vulgar Authors of your, or our
profession, even better then by Arcudius, who gave some light to schoolmen in
this particular. You will find the Roman Church to use the most assured way
that can be imagined, and never took away any thing that might give the least
scruple either for the change, or the power, or manner of changing. You will
find you have put a most satisfactory discourse conncerning the buisines of
Formosus Pope, and his succeeding enemies. To transcribe all this at large, ^s
neither useful to the ignorant, who will understand very little, nor needful
to the learned who may see the author, nor proper to this ^hort trectise which
without all this does evin^e the Nullity of your Clergy, and according to the
most favorable opinion, of any tolerable Devine makes your Ordinaion in a high
degree uncertain.

4. Page 232.
But you deny that Zuinglianisme prevailed in England in Edward the 6. time,
when the 12. or 7. learned men forsooth, in the law of God, and the land,
made your forms of Ordination. I hope you do not take us to be as ignorant in
the History of England, as one of your chief Doctors did a Gentlewoeman,
lately in Paris; when (hearing of her inclinations to Catholic religion) he
dissuaded her from it, by assuring her, that it was not the ancient faith of
England, nor ever professed in that Kingdom before Henry the 8. time. Do not
all impartial vvriters mention the Protector Seamours perfidiousnesse in
establishing Zvvinglianisme in England, during the minority of Edward the 6.
contrary to his promise, and engagement to Henry the 8.? Is it not notorious
that in the second Parliament of K. Edward. 6. Convers. of England part. 2.
page 607. and page 611.
begun the 4. of November 1548. (vvherin your book of common prayer, and
administration of Sacraments, being imposed by Zuinglian heretics chosen by
the Protector and his faction, was confirmed) there was a great contention,
whether the Kingdom should be Lutheran, or Zuinglian in religion; and that
after four months debate, the Zuinglians did overbeare the other side, by
some voices. And how Peter Martyr, and Bucer were inspired by the posts that
brought news of the Parliaments resolution from London, to teach publicly in
the Vnniversities, that Christ was not present in the Sacrament of the alter,
and that this is my body was no more then this is the sign of my body. Is it
not evident by John Fox (an Author of your own) his Acts, and Monuments, Part.
3. Convers. page 372. eait. 1604
that the far greater part of all your Protestant Saints, and Martyrs, were put
to death for denying the real presence, and not only transubstantiation? Do not
the books which our Catholic Doctors writ against your first superintendens
demonstrate, that these were of the same opinion with your Martyrs? But what
need we go farther then the 25. of your 39. articles, and translations of
Scripture, to prove your Zuinglian Tenet in matter of holy Orders? They who
thrust out of Scripture in the English versions, the words Priest, and Bishop,
(putting instead thereof Elder, and Superintendent) were not likely men to put
them, or express their function in your forms of ordination. But you say that
in the Preface ye maintain to all the world, that the three Orders of
Bishops, Priests, Page 232.
and Deacons, have bin ever from the beginning in the Church of Christ. Are men
ordained by your Preface? or because in your Preface it is maintained that the
Church of Christ had alvvayes the said Orders, does it follow that the English
Church in those times was the Church of Christ? Call them Svvinglians, call
them Lutherans, call them what you plaese, their Creed, their versions, their
writings, show they contemned Consecration, and were content with election, and
when they used some thing like consecration, it was to satisfy the people not
themselves. And that Whitaker, and Fulke, whom you cite page 233. never
admitted the necessity of consecrated Bishops, no the very state of the
question disputed in those times between our English sectaries, was not about
consecrated, or not consecrated Bishop but whether one Minister was to be
elected to Lord it over the rest. Most of the Ministers misliked it, but the
Prince approved it for reason of state, thereby to Keep the Clergy in awe and
to have so many mercenary Votes in the house of Lords.

5. At length you tell us that if your ancestors have pared away any thing out
of mistake from ordination, Page 235.
that is either prescribed, or practiced by the true Catholic Church, let it
be made appear evidently to you, and you are more ready to vvelcome it again
at the fore door then your Ancestors were to cast it out at the back door.
Errare possumus, haeretici esse nolumus. Your Church has so many times changed
its Tenets, and is so indifferent for any beneficial addition, or subtraction
of doctrine, that it seems to be composed of nothing but back doors, and
starting holes, whereby you cast out, and welcome in, whatsoever is grateful,
or not grateful to the humor of the Prince, or prevailing faction. Now seeing
it has bin made appear, that your Ancestors valued not episcopal
consecration, admitted no priesthood but baptism, and denied the real
presence; I hope you can not imagine, that these men would compose forms of
Ordination contrary to their own Tenets, and profession: or that a Zuinglian
Parliament would confirm your book of administration of Sacraments, and
rites, before they had well examined, whether it contained any thing contrary
to their own conscience, and reformation. And if they had bin Lutherans you
gain little, seeing Luther himselse in the places alleged in the next chapter
makes all Christians Priests by baptism.

6. But suppose it had not bin evident, but only probable, that your Ancestors
pared away some part of the essential form, or matter of Ordination; is it
part of your Case Theology, to contemn prudent doubts in a matter of fo great
importance, and of absolute necessity for the being of a Church? There is not a
more infallible mark of heresy, then to exact clear evidence for obscure
mysteries, or to contemn ancient public ceremonies, upon the warrant of a
modern private spirit, as you might have seen, (and ought to have refuted, if
you could) in the Treatise of Catholic faith, and heresy. But it seenes you
regard not what is thought of your Heresy, provided you may seem to maintain
your episcopacy: and that ye are content to undergo the infamy of sectaries,
so vee retain the titles of Lords, and Bishops. Page 234.
You say we have such an eye at your Order, and uniformity, that we can not
let your long cloakes, and surplises alone. As for uniformity ye never had
any; and your want of Orders makes us take notice of the superfluity of your
long cloakes, and surplisses. The old Protestant cut would become ye much
better, and I believe ye will return to it, and welcome it at the fore door
of your Church (alvvayes open for any advantage) if the puritan, or
presbyterian faction prevail.

CHAP. VI.
That the Pope did not confirm Edward 6. form of Ordination, and that all
sectaries admitted no priesthood, but baptism, and that in Henry the 8.
reign, and Edward the 6. men played the Bishops though never consecrated, and
so did Barlovv;

1. TO my first reason you answer nothing to the purpose, Page 63.
but only that King Edward's form of ordination was judged valid in Queen
Mary's days by all Catholics, and particularly by Cardinal Pole then
Apostolical legate in England, and by the then Pope Paul the 4 and by all the
Clergy, and Parliament of England. This you prove by Cardinal Poles
dispensation (which the Pope confirmed) to all those that were ordained,
Praetensa authoritate supremitatis Ecclefiae Anglicanae, pretending the
Authority of the English supremacy. I perceave by your other books you are
well versed in Foxes, Acts and monuments, and some what in the Dutch Centurists
with the story, and statutes of England, whence you gather what in passion
has bin done against the Popes authority upon certain abuses. The attention
to that, made you not reflect upon, this decree, or article (as Fox calls it)
of Q. Mary's, made by the consent of the Lords spiritual, and temporal. Fox
page 1295.
Item touching such persons as were heretofore promoted to any Orders, after
the new sort, and fashion of Orders; considering they were not ordered in
very deed, the Bishop of the Diocese, finding otherwise sufficiency, and
ability in these men, may supply that thing which vvanted in them before and
then according to his aiscretion, admit them to Minister. I hope this Article,
or Decree, made with the consent, and advise of Cardinal Poole, and of the
Lords spiritual, and temporal of England, does sufficiently declare, that his
Dispensation, and the Popes confirmation was intended, and extended only to
such, as had bin ordained after the ancient and Catholic manner in the time
of schism. Of others promoted to any Orders after the new fashion, and form
of Edward the 6. its declared, they were not ordered in very deed, and
therefore the Bishop ought to supply their want of ordination. And yet you are
so confident as to say, that the question in Q. Mary's days, was not about
the validity, or invalidity of your Orders, but about the legality, or
illegality of them. I pray you, not to be ordered in very deed, is it only an
illegality?

2. The ill success you had in recurring to King Edwards form, and Bishops,
does force you appeal to Henry the 8. times, wherein you imagine that neither
Barlow, nor any other durst play the Bishop, if not consecrated; because
forsooth, Henry the 8. was not a Baby to be ieasted withal. Page 186. We know
M, Doctor, that Henry the 8. was no Baby, but you also ought te have known,
that he was a man more led by passion, then by reason, or religion. After that
he perceived, how the Pope was resolved not to declare void his marriage with
Q. Chatharine of Spain, he did so persecute his adherents, and authority,
without regard to conscience, or even to his own statuts, that his principal
care was to countenance heretical Preachers, and principles, as far as they
concurred to maintain his headship of the Church to enrich him with the
spoils thereof, to vex, and endommage the Pope. Luther. tom. 2. de Min
Ecclesiae instituendis fol.- 368. and seq. and de abroganda missa privata to.
2. fol. 249. and in lib. de capt. Babylon. C. de ordine.

Peter Martyr in 1. Cor. 11. verse. 5.

Zuinglius tom 1. explanat. a. 17. fine.

D. Horn and the first protestant Bishops in the Harborough an. 1559 H. 2.
Three Co^vers of England part 2. page 570. and 571.


Now heretics generally in those days, did agree in this principle, that
there is no other priestshood in the law of grace, but baptism, and therefore
all Christians both men, and women, were Priests, and might preach, and
Ministers all Sacraments; though to avoid confusion, the exercise of Priestly
authority ought to be committed to some, either by election of the Magistrate,
or by the letters patents of the Prince. This doctrine they grounded upon 1.
Pet. 2. Apoc. 1. Christ made us all a holy nation, a royal priesthood, and
Priests to his father This principle was so suitable to Henry the 8. design of
making himselse supreme head of the Church in spiritual affairs, and of
possessing himselse of its temporalities, that he was well pleased to wink at
the practice of all heretics, who pretended to be Bishops, though they never
had bin consecrated: Archbishop Cranmer (to whom all such matters were
remitted) being himself a prime heretic, and in so great favor with the
King, that (romvvel before his fall said unto him, See Fox page 1694 and 1695.
(being accused of denying the real presence) My Lord of Canterbury you are
most happy of all men, for you may do, and speak what you list, and let all
men speak against you what they can, the King will never believe one word,
to your detriment, or hinderance, etc. There was no such danger of Premunires,
as D. Bramhall pretends; who would have us take his word against the evidences
cited in the margen, that only Anabaptists, Page 196.
and not Zvvinglians, rejected ordination.

3. They who forged Masons Register, thought fit to name among Parkers
Consecraters Barlovv, and Hodgkins both pretended Bishops in King Henry the 8.
reign, not doubting thereby to make it credible, that they both, and
consequently Parker, were validly consecrated, though Scory, and Coverdale,
(the two other pretended Confecraters) had never received (being made
protestant Bishops in King Edward's time) episcopal ordination. But this shift
availes them not; I produce two others, who were called Bishops in King Henry's
time, sat in Parliament, and took upon them to exercise all episcopal
functions with as great gravity, and solemnity, as Barlow; and yet they were
dedeclared by public sentence in Q Mary's time, to be no Bishops, nor validly
consecrated. These were Latimer, and Ridley, to whom D. Brooks Bishop of
Gloucester, in his last speech, before they were put to death for heresy, Fox
page 1604.
told; that they were to degrade them only of priesthood, because they were no
Bishops. To this you answer M. Doctor, that they who made no scruple to take
away their life's, would make none tot take away their Orders. You are quite
out. Cranmer was burnt for heresy, as well as Latimer, and Ridley; and yet they
made a scruple to take away his Orders, though they took away his life;
because they knew he had validly received orders, and therefore was degraded;
the same would have bin practiced with Latimer, and Ridley, if the omission of
degrading them, had not bin vvaranted by evidence, that they were never
validly consecrated.

4. We have often, says D. Bramhall, asked a reason of them, why the
Protestants should decline their own consecrations? They give us one, that
Barlovv, as most of the Clergy in England in those times, were Puritans, and
inclined to Zuinglianisme; therefore they contemned, and rejected Consecration,
as a rag of Rome, etc. This reason the Doctor solidly refutes, by saying, It is
a great boldness, Page 195.
to take the liberty to cast aspersions upon the Clergy of a whole Nation. If
it be a boldness to say, that your first Protestant Bishops contemned, and
rejected consecration, and that they were of the same opinion concerning it,
with Luther, Zuinglius, and other Reformers; themselves, and not I, are guilty
of the crime. Did not M. Horn, and the rest of your first Bishops, publish to
the world in print an. 1559. (the very same year of the pretended
consecration) their sense of Priesthood, and Priestly functions, in these
words. In the Habor an. 1559. Protest. Apology tr. 2. C. 2. sect. 10. subd. 7.
In this point we must use a certain moderation and not absolutely in every
wise debar women herein, etc. I pray you what more vehemence uses S. Paul
in forbiding women to preach, then in forbidding them to uncover their heads;
and yet you know in the best reformed Churches of Germany, all the maids be
bare headed. This your first Bishops tenet of admitting no other Priesthood but
baptism and consequently of allowing women to be Priests, was so well known,
that D. Harding objects it to Ievvel, Parker, and the rest, If ye allow not
every man, yea and every woman to be a Priest. Confut. Apol. fol. 60.
why drive ye not some of your fellows to recant, that so have preached?
Why allow ye the books of your new Evangelists, that so have written?

5. If this be not sufficient to excuse my boldness, and condemn the Doctors
mistake, let him read the 25 article of his Creed, which is this. Those five
commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Penance, Orders,
Matrimony, and extreme unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of the
Ghospel, being such as have grown partly of the corrupt follovving of the
Apostles, partly are states of life, allowed in the Scriptures, but yet have
not like nature of Sacraments with baptism, and the Lords supper, for that
they have not any visible sign, or ceremony ordained of God. It evidently
follovveth out of this article; that your first Bishops, who made, and
published it an 1562. were of opinion, that imposition of hands in ordination,
was not ordained by God; unless you will deny imposition of hands to be a
visible sign, and ceremony. How does this agree with your modern Prelatique
principles? does it not evince that Parker, and the rest condemned in their
judgment imposition of hands, and contemned it as an idle superstition of Rome?
The evidence that the world had of their not being consecrated, made them utter
so absurd doctrine, and impose it as an article of faith upon ignorant
Protestants. Whether they were Zvvinglians, Lutherans, Calvinists, or what you
please, their profession of faith shows what account they made of imposition
of hands, which is the buisines now in hand, and makes them Svvinglians, and
Puritans in this point.

6. Page 195.
Yet you would feign know how comes Barlovv to be taxed of Puritanisme?
because forsooth, you find him in his Robes, in his Rochet, in his Cope
officiating, ordaining, confirming. Or because Swinglius his first sermon was
in the 10. or 11. year of Henry the eight, and Barlow sat in Parliament in the
31. therefore Barlow could not be a Svvinglian. This is your learned discouse
out of Chronology. I must allow you more time to sum up your numbers, or to
save you a labor, tell you before hand that make, what account you please, you
will find that Luther himself begun the contempt of sacred Orders, though
Swinglius after insisted more upon it, and there was time enough for Barlovv
either to take it from Svvinglius, or at least from Luther, which is all one to
our present purpose. As for his ordaining others you will have much ado to
prove it, at least those you would have: for we have proved your Registers to
be forged; but if any such thing be attemted, you may conclude his presumption,
not his consecration, And for his Robes, Rochet, Cope and Cap, the spirit does
dispense with all puritans to wear them, when they are named Bishops. I hope
John Hooper, one of the purest brethren that England ever bred, had as tender a
conscience as William Barlovv; but when he was to be made Bishop of Gloucester,
Page 136.
he was feign (says Foxto agree to this condition, that some times in his
sermons, he should show himself aparalled as the other Bishops were. And yet
it is evident, that he was never consecrated, though Cranmer, and Ridley, who
were his enemies, forced him to wear a square Cap, and a linnend, Rochet, the
only caracter of a protestant Bishop. Though they vvanted the reality and truth
of consecration, yet they insisted upon this formality, and cloak of ambition,
in their sinister (as John Fox calls it) and unlucky contention.

7. And that you may see what little hazard your protestant Bishops did runn of
Promunires by such practices, Page 1456
John Fox tells you, how D. Ridley that worthy Bishop of London, called John
Bradford to take the degree of Deacon, according to the Order that then was in
the Church of England, (which was the form of Edward the 6.) but for that
this order was not without some such abuse, as to the which Bradford would
not consent, the Bishop then was content to Order him Deacon without any
abuse, even as he desired. After this Deaconship he was imediately without any
orders, made Prebend, and Preacher of S. Paul's, having never studied but one
year, and all his life before having bin a serving man to Sr. John Harington.
Do you imagine M. Doctor; that Barlowes Consecrater would not be as indulgent
to him, as Ridley was to Bradford? Or do you think that Ridley would not
venture as far for his own conscience, when he was to be consecrated, as he
did for that of his Deacon? There was no such rigor or danger of Premunires
in those days, as you endeavor to persuade your Reader: neither Henry the 8.
nor his Vicar General Cromwell, nor Archbishop Cranmer, nor sir Thomas Audley a
Lutheran, and Chancellor after Sir Thomas More, did think it was for their
purpose, to press any other ordination, or Consecration upon tender
consciences, but baptism; because by this principle the King had some color
for his spiritual headship, and for the temporalities of the Church; and the
three others by dissembling, and suspending the rigor of the laws with a
pretense of enriching the King, countenanced, and planted their own errors in
the Kingdom.

8. What wonder is it therefore, if the consecration of Protestant Bishops
should not appear in any Register but yours and Barlovvs in none at all seeing
it was against their principles, and practice, to be consecrated. But your
invisible Register has a property of making visible, what never had a being.
Page 185.
Yet by the help of those Records which are in the Court of faculties, I
should not despair (says the Doctor) of finding Barlovves consecration. I
must confess my ignorance of your Court of faculties, but like wise
acknowledge my experience of the faculties of your Court, and Church, in
finding things never thought of by any but your selves. But where trow you,
does the Doctor hope to find out Barlovvs consecration? I am confirmed, Page
191.
says he, in my former conjecture, that he was consecrated in Wales, which
Bishop Goodvin had much more reason to know exactly then we have. Yet Bishop
Geadvin speaking of Barlovv in three sundry places, viz as Bishops of S.
David's, Bath, and Wells, and Chishester says not a word of his co^secrationin
any of them, for of his being B. of S. Asaph there is no mention in the English
edition, much less of his being consecrated there, though you tell us that in
his Latin edition printed at London 1616. are these words, he was consecrated
22. Feb. 1535. From whence came this new knowledge? It is a preparation, and
disposition for a further forgery? Without doubt the next edition will say, he
was consecrated at S. David's or S. Asaph in Wales, and that indeed may confirm
your conjecture of the place, and my evidence of your Clergies practice of
forging Registers. But why you should hope, or conjecture that Barlows
consecration, after the effluxion of a hundred years, may be found in Wales, I
understand not, if it be not, that you are resolved, to imitate the example of
mean upstarts, who insert their families into welsh pedigrees. So ye, it
seems, intend to furnish your upstart Church, and Clergies want of Ordination,
with welsh Registers; as in an other occasion you indeavored to prove your
independency of Rome, by a welsh proverb. You are pleased to say (but without
any proof) that Barlows leases made in the sees of S. David's, Bath, and Wels,
were never questioned. We deny it. And prove our denial by the example of
Ridley, who being as much a Bishop in Henry the 8. time as Barlow, begged, as a
favor before his death, of Q. Mary, that the leases made by him in the sea of
London, might stand good. This you may read in your own John Fox where he
relates Ridleys martyr dome. What greater right I pray, could Barlow pretend
for the vaildity of his leases, then his brother Ridley, both of them being
pretended Bishops of Henry the 8. time? You are very unfortunate in all your
arguments, unless your intention be prevarication of your cause, to make your
self more looked after upon the title of deriving your Episcopacy from the
line of Irish Prelacy which thoug I can not say it had its beginning in a
Tavern as the English had: yet it wanted as much in the substance. Had there
bin true Bishops in Ireland who could have bin brouglt to lay hands on the new
Superintendents, the Queen might have saved her labor and credit of giving
such enormous dispe^sations as never were heard of. Besides I must ask you a
question in your ear. Were you Mr. Doctor made Priest in Ireland? you find an
occasion to thrust in your being Bishoped in Ireland, but I can not find you
speak of the other, and you know that no Priest, no Bishop. But although you
were, if matters little for your Irish descent is no better then the English,
nor any reason hitherto has bin produced to make it better.

CHAP. VII.
D. Bramhalls ten reasons against the Nagshead story refuted, and retorted
against Masons Records, and the fable of the first Protestant Bishops
Consecration at Lambeth.

1. WE are come at length to the Nagshead, M. Doctor, the place of your
florishes and triumphs; against this very true story, you produce ten reasons,
to make it incredible, which I will not only refute, but retort against your
Records, and feigned Consecration at Lambeth. Your first reason against the
Nagshead story, Page 31.
Is taken from the palpable contradictions of the Catholic Writers, who have
related this tale of a tub. Page 32.
Let us hear these palpable contradictions. The common opinion is, that Scory
a lone did consecrate them. But M. Constable, See Cha^pney edit. Lat. 1618.
page 502.
one of their principal Authors, supposes (thus you English me latet) that
Barlow might join with him in that; and Sanders, leaves it doubtful, Page 33.
when or where, or by whom they were ordained. You must have learned a peevish
wrangling logique, that makes you fall upon another as contradicting you, when
you affirming the thing to be so, he does not say no, but only me latet I do
not know. But you say that M. Wadsworth only does affirm that there was an
attempt to consecrate Parker. All others writers say the same. There was no
more then an attempt that Landaffe should consecrate Parker. I hope you do not
imagine, that we take Scoryes ridiculous ceremony with Parker, and the rest,
to be an episcopal consecration, it was no more then an absurd attempt. Here
is another contradiction of people that say the same thing in different words.

2. Seeing these contradictions are so far from being palpable, that they are
not intelligible, the Doctor brings others. Other say, Page 34.
there was more then an attempt, but they name none. Others name some, but they
accord not one with an other in naming them. Some say I ewel, Sands, Horn etc.
Others say Parker Grindall etc. Lastly others say, they were all ordained
there. Here we have a contradiction of some and others. Why do not you name
these others, and some? who are they? where met you with them? I have sought
our Authors that write of this matter, and find not those Some, or others
named or un named? Must I credit more your saying, then my own seeking?

Against your feigned consecration at Lambeth. I bring no contradictions of
others, or some. I name your Bishop Gooduin, D. Sudcliffe, and M. Butler, I
give you their names, and their words. And though you attribute their
contradictions to the Transscriber, or printer, the impartial Reader will
hardly believe that such Erratas should pass the pen, or the press, as
Bedford for Dover, John for Richard, one month for another, etc. And will
further reflect upon the difference of stories recorded, and related. In these,
both days, and months, or the names of persons are easily forgot, and some
diversity herein argues nocertainty of the fact. But what is alleged as taken
out of Records will be much suspected if the Relators differ in those
particularities which in records are alvvayes precisely specified.

3. Yoor second reason against the Nagshead story, Page 37. and 38.
is the latenesse of the Discovery of it to the world, after forty years were
passed. But this you refute your self by the story you tell us of Theophilus
Higgins, who was (as you say) converted to Catholic Religion by reflecting
upon the Nagshead consecration; Page 125. and 126.
and that M. Clerk, who had bin an Actuary in Cardinal Poles legative Court,
approved well of his caution; but vvithall wished, that what Catholics had
written concerning the Nagshead story, could be made good, etc. here you
confess that it was published by our vvriters, and that it came not only to
the ears, but the hearts of Protestants; and yet in other places of your book
you say it never once peeped into the light until K. James his reign, and that
it was only vvhispered in corners amongst Catholics. Page 46.
You have given the advantage of a story, I knevv not, which you are not used
to do when you defend (...) cause in good earnest.

4. But you appeal to my judgment whether it be credible, that this story
should be notoriously known to the world in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's
reign, and yet neither Stapleton, nor Harding, nor any one of all the Roman
Catholic Writers, should so much as mention it for forty years ensuing. I
appeal to your eyes M. Doctor, and desire you to read in your own Bishop
Goodvin, whose knowledge you so much esteem, Goodvin in edit. Londin. 1616.
page 218. and 219.
these words. The 17. of December 1559. is consecrated (Parker) according to
the rites received in our Church, etc. If you inquire of the place of this
consecration, it was no other but the accustemed, to wit, the Chapel of the
Archbishop at Lambeth, hovvever the most impudent Raylers Harding, Fitzsimons,
and others, give other relations; although Harding in some manner may be
pardoned, because he related things not before called in question by any,
though not believed by himself. For who in his wits would give credit to a
calomny so ridiculous, and so far from all probability. Is not this the
Nagshead Tavern consecration M. Doctor? Is not this the ridiculous story you
so much detest? Do you remember when D. Harding lived? Its no marvel you
should not know what our Authors writ concerning this subject, being so ill
versed in your own. You may see how particularly M. Constable, cited by D.
Champney, and your self, writ and described the whole story, Page 32.
in the beginning of Q Elizabeth's reign. D. Sanders had done the same, if
your first superintendents had not waved that consecration, and begged of the
Queen, and Parliament to make them Bishops, thinking it more for their honor
to be Parliament Bishops, then Tavern Bishops. If ye had stood in Sanders
time, upon succession, and ordination by imposition of hands, as you did in
King James his Reign, not only he, but all other Catholic Doctors, had
written as particularly the Nagshead story, as Holvvood, Fitzsimons Champney,
etc. But in Queen Elizabeth's time ye relied upon her letterspatents, or upon
the Act of Parliament 8. Elizab. 1. And therefore Harding in the name of all our
Doctors ob^ected to your first Bishops: If ye can prove no succession, Confut.
Apol. fol. 57.
then whereby hold ye? Will ye show us the letters patents of the Prince?
Though they have thus promoted you, yet be ye presumers, and thrusters in of
yourselves. Lands, Fol. 60.
and Mannours the Prince may give you, Priesthood, and Bishopric (or
Episcopacy) the Prince can not give you.

6. Apply I beseech you, M. Doctor, the latenesse of the discovery of your
feigned Consecration at Lambeth, and you will be convinced of the forgery of
your Registers. For the space of more then 50. years, not one word was spoken
of it amongst Catholics, or Protestants not with standing the urgent
necessity not a Syllable written of it in any History that could be seen,
until in the year 1605. it was thought fit to foist into Antiquitates
Britanniae a certain Register of Parkers, and his Colleagues consecration, but
named not Lambeth. At length about the year 1613. it was thought time to
publishin print the solemnity of Lambeth, at which all ancient and knowing men
were startled, and concluded, that it deserved no more credit, then if a French
man should now write, or show records that in the battle of Pavia, not Francis
the first, but Charles the fifth was taken prisoner, and his whole army
defeated. You have not any thing to say for your selves, but that the crime of
forging records which we lay to your charge, is a grievous crime; it is so
indeed, but very ordinary amongst heretics. Two epistles were foisted into
the fifth synod, one of Vigilius Pope, an other of Menas Patriarch of
Constantinople, which was detected in the 6. synod in the 12. and 14. action
upon reading over the Acts of the 5. Synod; for they found three whole
quaternions inserted by the heretics, and in them the two foresaid letters.
Pope Leo the great in his 38. epistle, ad Palaestinos, complains of the
Grecians, that they had corrupted his letter to Flavianus. And S. Gregory the
great avers that those of Constantinople had corrupted the synod of Calcedon,
Lib. 5. Epist. 14. ad Narsem.
and suspects they had done the same with the Council of Ephesus. And as for
that of Calcedon, it appears clearly the clause of the Bishop of
Constantinople having equal privileges with the Bishop of Rome, to have bin
falsely inserted; both because the fathers of the Council in their relation to
Leo the Pope, never ownd it, only said, we have confirmed the rule of the 150.
Fathers assembled at Constantinople, which ordained, that after your most holy
and Apostolic See, that of Constantinople should have the second place of
honor. And accordingly Evagrius reports this Canon, Lib 2. c. 4
it was decreed says he, that the Sea of new Rome, by reason she held the
second place after the ancient Rome, should have the primacy before the other
Sees. And Socrates testifies no more to have bin decreed in the Council of
Constantiple. Lib. 5. c. 8.
And Justinian the Emperor speaking of both these Councels, Novel. 131.
says, As the holy Pope of Rome is the first of all Prelates, so the
Archbishop of Constantinople, new Rome, should have the second place after the Sea Apostolic of old Rome, and be preferred before all other Sees. So you may
see M. Doctor, this grievous crime is no new thing, and no less possible, then
probable that your protestant forefathers were as well versed in falsifying
Registers, as the Grecians, and Arrians. But you need no information in this
matter. And for the information of others I shall upon occasion of Morton make
it appear how little conscience, and ashame your Ministers have in point of
wilful falsifications.

7. Your third reason against the Nags head Consecration you take from the
strictness of the english laws. But this has, bin answered in the 3.
Chapter, and the largeness of the Queens letters patents, and statutes in
favor of the Nagshead consecration, demonstrated.

8. Your fourth reason is, Page 47.
that there was no necessity to play this pageant. But in this you contradict
the Queens commission, and letters patents, as you may see in the said 2.
Chap. And besides D. Banewft bears witness against you in the answer he gave
to M Alabaster, that he boped, Page 138. and 140.
in case of necessity a Priest might ordain Bishops. You answer, I do not
believe a word of what is said of B. Bancroft, sub modo, as it is here set
down. For my part I believe the whole relateon is feined. Is this your polemick
manner of answering? If you desire to be satisfied of the substance, and manner
of this story, for as much of it as concerns me, that is the faithful
relation, you may find it in the Jesuits libraryes of Gant, Antwerp, ad
Brussels, in Holiwoods book, de investiganda Christi Ecclesia. Cap. 4. But if
you imagine that Father Holiwood did feign such a story, I must let you know,
that he was not only one of the most learned Doctors of his time, having taught
Divinity in some of the chiefest universities of Europ with great satisfaction,
and applause; but that he was esteemed by all who knew him, a man of eminent
virtue, and supernatural gifts. He foretold the future miseries of his Country
(Ireland) when it was most florisking; and assured that the posterity of the
ancient english Conquerours, inhabiting the English Pale, would be driven out
of their howses, and homes, though since the conquest they were never more
favored by the state, then when he told this to F. Robert Nugent, and others.
Being heir to a fair estate, and chief of a noble family, he renounced all
that his birth had given, and his hopes, or deserts might promise, to follow
Christ in a religious state of life. Now to say that this man feigned Bancrofts
answer, and printed such an imposture in Bancrofts life time, is no better then
a childish evasion, or such a Ministers confutation, as undertook to refute
Bellarmine, by saying, Bellarmine thou lie.

9. You are pleased also to call D. Sanders relation of the Irish Archbishops
refusal to consecrate your first Superintendents, a vain report, Page 50. and
51.
because forsooth the Archbishop wants a name, and the fable wants a
ground. His name was Richard Creagh Archbishop of Armach, Analect. sacr. Hiber.
edit. 1617.
who died many years afterward in the tower of London. You say that if
Consecraters had bin wanting in England, Ye might have seven out of Ireland,
and that your Irish protestant Consecration was never questioned. Its strange
that the Bishops of Ireland should comply so with your heresy, whereas it is
well known that three hundred persons of the whole nation could not be drawn
to it, Fitz. Simons in Britan. nomach.
either by fair, or foul means, since Henry the 8. Schism, until King
Charles his reign. Your Irish consecration is every jot as invalid as your
english, neither can you make it appear, that any Catholic Bishop ever
imposed hands (Macragh was never consecrated as his own friars testify) upon
your first protestant Superintendents of Ireland, who were all made Bishops, by
the Queens letters patents and with as little consecration as those of England.
Is it credible that if the Queen could have found in Ireland true Bishops that
could have bin brought to impose hands upon those that were to be ordained in
England, that she would have alleged such necessity as you have seen in the
2. Chapt. could not she have called for her own subjects? Rather then give
such a power as never was heard of supplying the want of the condition, and
state of the person, and adding such words as imply the sufficiency of one
person, and even a lay person. If she might have had several true Bishops out
of Ireland, would this have bin done? If they had consecrated Protestants in
Ireland, would they have refused the like in England? though you have no
ground to build upon your Irish succession yet I have ground enough in your
work to suspect, that you have willingly, and wittingly prevaricated in the
succession of your English Bishops, that they may be forced to recurre to your
Irish ordination. Truly in your book, you have given me so many advantages
against your cause, that I shall never accuse my self of rashness for this
suspicion of your plain prevarication, or at least it must have bin a most
vain presumption to think that with petty tricks of auvoiding rather, then
answering the force of arguments, and flourishing with your negative
testimonies about a speech of one man, you can maintain a cause upon so many,
and manifest titles defective. What if there had bin a mistake about Mortons
speech, is the prize vvonne on your side? Is the question stated upon that
circumstance? Your fifth reason is drawn from a principle of Rhetorique Cni
bono? or what advantage could such a consecration as that of the Nagshead
bring to the Consecraters, or the persons consecrated? I shall tell you what?
It served, seeing they could get no better, to raise a rumor that they had bin
consecrated, and thereby to delude the people which had not so soon fully
learned the new doctrine of those times, that election without consecration
was sufficient. This was all the superintendents cared for, who in their
opinions slighted consecration as a thing not necessary, as I have made appear
by the common Tenet of those days, by the statutes, and Acts, by the 25.
Article of their own Creed.

Your 6. and 7. Reasons taken from the diametricall opposition, which you
pretend is betvveen this Nagshead story, and all the Records of England, are
confuted, and retorted in the 3. Chap. And your 8. and 9. Reasons from the
statute 8. Elizab. and the Register in the lives of the 70. Archbishops of
Canterbury are also proved to be against yourselfe in the 2. and 3. Chapters.

CHAP. VIII.
The vvitnesses of the Nagshead story do exceed those of the fabulous
Consecration at Lambeth, both in number, and in authority; and the constant
tradition of the said story, does manifest the forgery of M. Masons Register.

1. YOur tenth reason M. Doctor, against the Nagshead story, is taken from all
sorts of Witnesses. You say M. Mason reckons up seven of your writers, Page
125.
who had justified the legality of your Ordinations, and cited your Registers
as authentic Records, before himself, whereof the first is Jewel. How false
this is, may be evident by Jewels answer to Harding, wherein he cites no
Registers, though his adversary called for them expressly, Confut. Apol. fol.
57. and 59. edit. an. 1566.
Show us your Registers. As for your other Writers, they cited no authentic
Registers, because they disagreed amongst themselves, and agree not with Masons
newfound Records, which alone you allow for authentic. As for Camdens
testimony it avails little both because he was not so bold as to put down a
thing so disadve^tagious to his Clergy and dangerous to himself as also
because you cite not his first edition, which should have bin cited; for
although I can not find it, yet I have found no small conjectures of knavery
used in his other editions, as there has bin with Stow, and others, this I am
assured of, that Cambden for fear of displeasing others lert out sundry
particulars well known to himself.

2. You produce some Catholics, not as witnesses of your consecration at
Lambeth, but as men convinced by protestant testimonies, and Registers. If this
be true, it only proves, that ye never wanted forgers, and that we have some
weak, and credulous brothers, which is but a very weak proof of your orders.
The first of these, is one M. Clerk, who was (you say) an Actuary in Cardinal
Poole his legative Court. This M. Clerk met with one M. Higgins, who had bin
made a Catholic by reflecting upon the Nagshead consecration, and M. Clerk
approved well of his caution, because in dubiis tutior pars sequenda, in
doubtful matters we must follow the securest: but withal he wished, that what
our Authors had written concerning that point, could be made good. For M.
Clerk said that he himself was present, when the advocate of the Arches, whom
the Queen sent to peruse the Register after the consecration, and to give her
an account whether it was performed Canonically, returned her this answer, that
he had perused the Register, and that no just exception could be made against
the Consecration; But (he said) something might have bin better, particularly
that Corverdale was not in his Rochet, but he assured her, that could make no
defect in the Consecration. This is your wise story, and your Author is one M.
Barwick, who had it from M. Higgins.

3. I will suppose at the present, that there is such a man in the world, as
this. M. Barwick, and that you do not feign this story, as you do that of F.
Oldcorne; but I must think it is no better then a fable, though I will not
make you the Author, because it has so many silly, and improbable
circumstances. First that the Queen should send to peruse the Register after
the consecration, to be informed whether it was performed Canonically. Her
Majesty without doubt spared that labor, because she might have as particular,
and a more unpartial relation from the Lords, and Courtiours that assisted (as
the Register says) at the consecration, then from the Records. And if she
doubted of the skill, or attention of her Courtiours, she might examine some of
the Doctors that were present. Secondly, your story makes the Queen a very
silly woman, that needed the assurance of the Advocate of the Arches, to settle
her conscience, in so intricate a case forsooth, as the want of a rochet in a
friar, at a Bishops consetration. Thirdly this story is proved to be feigned,
by the Queens letters patents and commission; wherein her Majesty declares, that
there was a necessity to dispense with Canons; how then could she doubt, and
send the Advocate of the Arches to give her an account, whether the
consecration was performed Canonically? A necessity of dispensing with the
Canons, is clear evidence that a consecration can not be Canonical; the Queen
declared this necessity in her letters patents before the consecration was
performed. Therefore she had clear evidence that it could not be canonical. How
then could she doubt of what was evident to herself? Or to what purpose should
she send the Advocate of the Arches to resolve her of a doubt, which she could
never entertain? This is evidence enough to prove, that your story, good M.
Doctor, is feigned. The only doubt remaining is, whether your self, or M.
Barwick feigned it, which I leave to your consideration. But suppose it had not
bin a fiction, all that can be concluded out of it, is, that M. Clerk
confessed the Nagshead story was doubtful, but so that the contrary wanted
assurance, and therefore approved of M. Higgins caution. What advantage can this
be to your cause, I do not understand; though every man does see the prejudice
it suffers by your stories, and pretended vindication, which is real and plain
prevarication. Would any men in earnest bring so weak testimonies in a matter
of so great importance? do you not make all the world see how little you have
to say to the point which is to make your succession undoubted?

4. Your other witness is one M. Heart, who was satisfied with Parkers
consecration, when he saw copies of your Register. You may cite many other
simple Catholics that would believe the same; but that only proves their
credulity, and cleeres not your Register from forgery. Yet this story we must
believe upon your word, wherein all they will have great difficulty, that read
in the 1. Chap. how falsely you accuse the Jesuits, and imprisoned Priests of
acknowledging that your Register was beyond exception. Neither you, nor any
other Writer of your Church, named a witresse for your fable of Lambeth, but
one, towit, Charles Howard earl of Notingham, Lord Admiral of England, whose
testimony M. Mason would not have valued at so high a rate, as to attribute his
long life to a particular providence of God reserving him for the Vindication
of your Clergy, unless he had bin in great want of others. But how does he
testify? Forsooth, he told it a friend, and this friend told it M. Mason, who
put it in print. First I must question you whether the Earl was alive, when M.
Mason printed his testimony. If he were, why did not M. Mason get a formal
attestation as you have done? J am sure yours have cost you more labor, and
done you less service then that would have cost, or served him. was he dead? I
see no more signs in this then in other occasions of Gods favorable
providence to your Church. Will the Earls saying to a namelesse friend that he
had bin at a banquet in Lambeth restore the credit of your Church deprived of
lawful Clergy upon so many titles as have bin alleged, and this man not
speacke of what he had heard, till the Author was speechless, and in his
grave? but the Earl told it to a friend. What friend? Why is his name
concealed, and his relation printed, if it be not, that he neither has name,
nor being? You do not believe that John Stow related the story of the Nagshead
to more then one friend because D. Champney does not name them; and you exact
from us to believe, that the Earl of Notingham related the story of Lambeth to
one friend, though you do not name him. Yet John Stowes friends had good
reasons, why they would not be named by D. Champney, when your Clergy was so
powerful and spiteful in England; but what reason could the Earl of
Notinghams friend have not to be named by M. Mason? Did he peradventure fear,
that your Clergy would persecute him for endeavoring to maintain their Orders
and credit? do you not see M. Doctor, how ill grounded a fable this is of your
first Bishops consecration at Lambeth, that you can not name for it one
witness allowable; I do not say, nor exact as you do, according to the
rigor of legal formality, but not so much as by the favor of ordinary
probability.

5. You will find on the other side the Nagshead story much more credible,
delivered to us by the tradition, and testimony of the most able persons of our
Religion, and Nation. He who gainsaies it, may upon the same score gainsay any
thing, that is beyond the reach of his memory, or depends upon the testimony of
others. What ground has any man to fix his belief upon, but a constant
tradition, and testimony, of honest, and knowing persons? Its now a century of
years since the Nagshead story happened; it has bin constantly related, and
credited by wise men, as a certain truth, ever since the year 1559. It was
never contradicted by any, until it was imagined by our adversaries, that
their new Registers might contest with our ancient tradition, and make the.
Nagshead story seem improbable, in the year 1613. of which no man doubted for
the space of 52. years before. But they were mistaken because evident truths,
though they relate absurd actions, can not, by any device or art, be made
improbable, until their evidence be blotted out of the memory of men. Time may
wear out writings, and all other monuments, but tradition will last as long as
men and time, it is a never decaying evidence, that makes any thing evidently
credible, which has not bin seasonably contradicted, when it might, and ought
to have bin done, especially if with much advantage, and little difficulty.

6. That there has bin these hundred years a constant tradition between
sober, and wise men, of the Nagshead story, can not be denied by our
Adversaries, unless they be resolved to say, that we Catholics have had no
sober, or learned men, since they left us. I hope the Catholic Bishops, and
Doctors of Q. Mary's time, were sober and wise men; they believed this story,
and recounted it to Persons, Fitzherbert, D. Kellison, Holiwood, D. Champney,
Fitzsimons etc. Persons believed it, and recounted it as a serious truth to
many, as is well known to F. Henry Silisdon, a man of known integrity, and
truth, yet living. Fitzherbert, and the rest above named, gave so much credit
to it, that they published it in print, as every one may see in their books.
Therefore this story is far from being improbable, but is rather evident, as
being supported by the credit, testemony, and tradition of most wise, and sober
Authors, however so improbable it may seem to sum, out of a Protestant
zeal, or want of knowledge. But your maine argument against the evidence of
this story, is, that all our Catholics seem to have it only from M. Neale.
Who told this to D. Bluet? Page 132.
Neale. Who told this to Haberley? Neale. Who told it to the rest of the
prisoners at Wisbich? Neale. Only Neale. By your leave M. Doctor, you forget
yourselfe, for, in an other place o^ your book, Page 32.
you acknowledge, that M. Constable writ the story, and he is one of our
principal Authors; but he says in his relation, (written when this story
happened) that is was a thing without doubt, because not only M. Neale, but
other Catholics integerrimae fidei, of most entire credit, were eyewitnesses
of Scorys ridiculous manner of consecrating Parker, and the rest in the
Nagshead Tavern. Yet suppose that M. Neale had bin the only eyewitness of
this action, I see nothing that follows more clearly from such a supposition,
then this conclusion. Ergo M. Neale must needs have bin a person of very great
ing enuity, and integrity. Be pleased to turn, and frame your interrogations
thus. Who believed M. Neale? D. Watson Bishop of Lincoln. Who believed M.
Neale? D. Bluet. Who believed M. Neale? D. Haberley. Who believed M. Neale? All
the learned, and virtuous Priests, prisoners for their conscience at Wisbich.
Who believed M. Neale? All the Catholics of England. The conclusion is. Ergo
M. Neale was a man that deserved great credit, otherwise you must condemn the
greatest heads amongst Cathoques, for believing so odd a story, without any
credible authority. M. Neale had bin a professor in the University of Oxford,
and forfeited his chair, and livelihood, for not taking the oath of supremacy:
It is incredible that he would feign such a story as that of the Nagshead, and
thereby engage the Catholic Church to practice Reordination against our known
Tenets, and his own conscience, and by such a relation, declare himself to be
not only a virulent backbiter, but an impudent Impostor.

7. But now I must prove, that the Nagshead story is more then probable, not
only for the quality of the persons reporting; and believing it, but also by
the very circumstances, or rather exigences of the time If you look upon the
Church of England, as it was in the late Kings reign, it will seem improbable
that men should choose a Tavern for an episcopal consecration: but if we
consider the straight passages through which the said Church was forced to
march in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign by reason of the notorius want
it had of Bishops; it will not appear strange unto us, that the first
protestant superintendents should go to a Tavern with intention to supply
there the want of their Church, it being well known in those days, that
neither Scory, nor Hadgkins, nor Coverdale, were consecrated Bishops. And
though they had the Keys of the Churches at their command, they had not the
Key of Order, nor the command of the true Bishops hands, or tongues; therefore
it was plotted, that old Landaffe should be inveigled to give them a meeting in
a Tavern, where with good words, and good cups they hoped to bring the old man
to a good humor. But God gave him grace to abstain from a second scandal,
though himself had taken the oath of supremacy yet in his judgment he was a
Catholic, and more sensible of B. Bonners excomunication ready to be
fulminated against him, then D. Bramhall would have his Reader believe. Now, if
we will add to this necessity the principles, and inclinations of the persons
that were to be ordained Bishops, we shall find there was nothing in the
circumstances of the Tavern consecration which makes it incredible; for, the
persons were of the opinion then a la Mode, condemning consecration as a point
not necessary for Ecclestical power, though not te be refused for public
satisfaction, and seeing no better could be had, they thought it more expedient
to have something presently, which they might give out for Consecration, then
to expect longer for their benefices, which was the buisnes they were about,
and sought with all care, and speed to bring about.

8. I must return once more to M. Neale, and complain of your railing M.
Doctor, against a learned, and honest man. You call him a spy, brainsick
fool, etc. and despise his testimony, because he was not sworn; the credit
which as wise men as you, did give him, is an argument that he was no fool,
and that he could well distinguish a Consecration dinner from an ordination;
such a mistake does not much misbecome a Protestant Courtier, as the Earl of
Noting ham was; but it can not be believed of such a Priest, and a Lector of
the University of Oxford, as M. Neale. I remember when you took upon you in
Bruges to confirm some eminent persons of the English Court, many of the
Courtiours were starled at so unusual a ceremony, as your confirmation seemed
to them, and were solicitous to know what it meant. Why should not the Earl of
Notingham be as ignorant of a Protestant consecration, as the Courtiers of
Bruges were of your ceremonious confirmation? Especially seeing confirmation
should be given to all, and therefore frequent, Fitz. Simons in Britan. Page 317.
where as Consecration of Bishops happens seldom.

9, To M. Neale, and other Catholics eye vvitnesses of your Nagshead
consecration, cited by M. Constable, may be added the testimony of all the
Puritans. who say, that the profane Order, and Ordination of Protestant Bishops
in England, Demonstrat. disciplina cap. 8.. 1. and 2. page 43.
had its beginning, and progress in a corner not in a congregation. I hope the
Archiopiscopal Chapel of Lambeth is no corner; these words must allude to the
Nagshead Tavern (for no other place is heard of but these two) and do prove
that your Registers deserve no credit, but that they were forged in a corner.
To the Puritans I will aggregate all your English Clergy in the beginning of K.
James his reign, when Holiwood printed, how D. Alabaster asked of M. Brancroft
pretended Bishop of London, how his first Superintendents Parker, etc. were
consecrated? he answered, that he hoped, in case of necessity a Priest might
ordain Bishops. This answer demonstrats the truth of the Nagshead story, and
the forgery of your Records: because all your Clergy did acquiesce to Brancroft
answer, not one of them had a word to oppose against F. Holivvoods book, and
by their silence proved themselves our witnesses. Qui tacet consentire videtur.

10. Now M. Doctor, that we have produced the grounds, circumstances, and
witnesses of the Nagshead story, and of your solemn consecration at Lambeth,
let us compare one with the other, that the Reader may judge, which of both
ought to be credited. Our story of the Nagshead, is grounded upon a constant
tradition of a hundred years, between wise and sober persons; which tradition
can not be counterfeited, because no human industry can reach, or spread so
far, as to speak the same thing by so different mouths, and interest, as
there are amongst our witnesses, Catholics, Puritans, and Protestants. But
the ground of your protestant consecration at Lambeth, comes far short of
what ye intend to prove by it; for, your ground is your Register, which
appeared not (being called for near a hundred years ago) until the year
1613. And besides, it might be as easily counterfeited, as any other writing by
one, or few hands without the concurrence, or conspiracy of so many hands,
heads, and opposite interests, as would have bin necessary for the
counterfeiting of one Tradition. So that as to the grounds of both stories,
ours is the more credible.

11. As for circumstances, which must relate to the place, time, and persons,
there is no doubt that our story has the advantage. The place of your
pretended consecration (Lambeth) was never named (even in your Hanovv
Register) until 1613. Our story named the Nagshead Tavern from the beginning.
As for the persons, their conscience, and religion; we have also the better;
for you have seen how little in those days your religion valued Ordination,
and your first Bishops conscience could make no scruple, to act, and receive in
a Tavern, what they judged to be no act of religion. As for the danger of
Premunires, or other penalties, they could not fear any; having in their
commission an ample dispensation to do what they pleased against the Statutes,
and Canons, as has bin demonstrated in the 2. Chap. And finaly the last
circumstance, which is of time, and persons, does so divide the relations of
your writers, who speak of this consecration at Lambeth, that their
contradictions are a sufficient proof of your forged records, because
relations drawn out of true records can not vary in the names, and number of
persons, in the month, or day, which of course are expressed with great
exactnes. You can find no such contradictions in the Nagshead story.

12. But now let us reflect upon the number, and quality of the witnesses. Ours
are not only M. Neale, but others of most entire credit, spectators of the
Nagthead Consecration, as M. Constable writ in their own life times, near a
hundred years ago; but ye never named any eyewitness but one, the Earl of
Notingham, either dead when he was cited, or if alive in a manner, and less
credible then if he had bin dead. Our eye witnesses related the story of the
Nagshead to D. Watson Bishop of Lincolns, D. Bluet, D. Haberley, M. Constable,
John Stow, to the Priests prisoners at Wisbich, etc. but your one witness
never related the story of Lambeth to any that had a name, but only is said by
M. Mason, to have told it to a namelesse friend. Our witnesses published the
story of the Nagshead in the very beginning as soon as it happened; but your
Witness never published that of Lambeth, but told it privately to a friend, as
if forsooth, it had bin a secret, or a prejudice to his Church. The testimony
of our witnesses agrees with the principles of your reformation, with the 25.
article of your religion, with your translations of scripture, with the
statuts, 1. and 8. Eliz. 1. and with the confession of Bancroft, and the tacit
consent of all your ancient Clergy of England; and with the public testimony
of all the Puritans in print, the testimony of your one Witness, and Records,
are irreconcilable with the foresaid evidences. Now judge M. Doctor, who
deserves most credit, one young gallant (in case the earl ever should have said
what Mason pretends) invited to a banquet, or many knowing men, eyewitnesses of
the fact? An ancient, and constant tradition of learned, and honest men,
agreeable to your own principles of religion, to the confession of your own
Doctors, ad to the statuts of the land; or a newfound Register, never cited,
nor produced (though earnestly called for) until the season, and occasion was
past; diametricaly opposite to your own articles of faith, and to the
principles of your Church, and to the evidence of your statuts. I hope that
neither you, nor any other, will be so obstinate, as hereafter to prefer the
relation of an obscure scrole, hidden for the space of 52. years, (the best,
and greatest part of the age of your protestant Church) be fore the clear, and
public tradition of so many eminent persons that related, and credited the
Nagshead story. But in case that you, or any other of your communion, should
not be persuaded by so evident reasons to a truth so credible, I must attribute
your blind obstinacy to a most refined heresy, which not only depraves the
will, and obscures the understanding, but also deprives men of common sense,
and makes them walk, and wander in darkness applauding, and extolling with as
great zeal, and as little discretion, their invisible Records, as your
protestant forefathers did their invisible Church.

13. And now M. Doctor, I believe you will pity the late Kings misfortune, and
wish that he had guien way to the Parliament, to pull down parliament Bishops,
who had neither human, nor divine right to temporal benefices, or spiritual
offices. Page 238.
Though it be no pity that I was not of his Council, its great pity that he
was not better informed of your Orders; had he bin pleased to advise, in time
upon this subject, your superficial formality had never bin able, to root out
his posterity, of their well grounded right to three Kindomes. And truly if the
Jesuits Colleges had no more right to the plate of their Churches, and
revenues, then ye have to your bishoprics, and benefices, I would not cry
out with Ploiden (as you imagine) the case is altered; Page 239.
but would persuade them to restitution, and exhort you to the same, if this
charitable office had not bin prevented by Divine justice, depriving your
Clergy of what they so wrong fully possessed. Yet notwithstanding your
miserable condition, you are pleased to say, that ye are our fear, and hate.
We love your persons, hate your errors, wonder at your obstinacy, pardon your
former cruelties, and present contumelies, pity your misery, and much more
your blindness the cause of your misery: neither envy your talents, nor fear
your power, but continually pray to the Father of mercies, that he may
vouchsafe to enlighten your Clergy, and by them open the eyes of others misled
by their errors.

CHAP. IX.
My Lord Audleys testification upon oath of Mortons acknowledging the Nagshead
ordination in Parliament. The reason of believing, and publishing the said
testification, which upon due examination is much preferred before all others
alleged against it.

1. I Am confirmed in my Lord Audleys evidence of D. Mortons speech granting
the Nagshead ordination by the very ground you offer to him, and propose to
others, to make credible a mistake: For, if my Lord had not bin well assured
that there is none, he would have willingly laid hold of your courtesy, and of
the speech, and person of the pretended Bishop of Lincoln, who, (as you say)
did once mention the fable of the Nagshead in a speech in Parliament, Page 26.
but with as much detestation of it, as your ancestors used to name the Devil.
Why might not the mistake both of the person, and of the drift, or scope of his
speech, be the occasion of this relation? To this interrogation my Lord Audley
himself will give you an answer. But give me leave to ask of you, upon what
occasion could Lincoln mention your Nagshead consecration in a speech in
Parliament which might not as well have moved Durham to speak of the same?
Once you grant speeches of this subject in the upper house, you can hardly free
D. Morton from having a share in them.

2. Page 27.
But the greatest mistake of all others was (says the Doctor) to publish such
a notorious untruth to the world, so temerariously without better advise. I
confess that though I never doubted of the truth of my Lord Audleys relation,
yet I did foresee that D. Morton would protest against it, and deny the story,
as you do D. Bancrofts, concerning the same subject of the Nagshead. But it is
a great mistake in you to think, that this story of my Lord Audleyes was
published temerariously, and without consideration and design. For, it was
considered that either ye would deny it, or grant it. If ye granted D.
Mortons speech, I had my intent. If ye denied it, and produced authentic
certificats, and testimonies to disprove what was laid to his charge, your own
certificats, and authentic testimonies, would be clear evidences of the truth
of the Nagshead story, though tkey should vindicate D. Morton. For, if the
Nagshead story had not bin notoriously true, and evident in the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth's reign, why did not your predecessors produce then authentic
Records, or at least such Certificats, as you now do, of your pretended
solemnity at Lambeth, when some evidence was desired of your first Bishops to
clear their consecrations, and the very Registers so earnestly called for? Why
did not some of your Clergy of those days accuse D. Harding (as you do me) of
calumny, rashness, temerarious credulity etc. For publishing, and objecting
the Nagshead story? That ye were vpbraided by him for that ridiculous
consecration, you may see in your Bishop Goodvins catalogue, whose words I
cited. Why did they not make the like noise when the puritans told them of the
beginning of their Ordination in a corner, not in a Congregation. Are you more
zealous for the honor of one D. Morton, then your former Bishops were for their
own credit, and the being of their whole Church? If they had not wanted
matter, how could they want mind, or means to procure, and publish such
testimonies of the Lords recorded to be present at the solemnity of Lambeth, as
you have got of nine other Lords, members of the late Parliament? could they
find no testimonies to stop the Puritans clamor? The truth is, the Nagshead
story was too well known in those days to be called in question; and not only
then, but even in the beginning of King James his reign, when F. Sacrobosc.
Lib. de investiganda Christi Ecclesia. Cap. 4. edit. 1603.
Holiwood objected it in print an. 1603. to all your protestant Clergy, and
confirmed it by the testimony and confession of D. Bancroft then living, being
actualy in place of Bishop of London. Yet no certificats appeared to contradict
the story, or Bancrofs acknowledgment, none to convince the Puritans objection
What reason could there be of this silence, and patience, but clear evidence
of what you now so confidently deny? so that you see M. Doctor, how this stir
which you have made about Mortons vindication, does prove the truth of your
Nagshead Consecration, and that your certificats to disprove my Lord Audleys
testimony, reflect upon more then you did design, or desire, and totaly
destroy the plea of your forged Registers. But let us hear what he says for
himself in his own words.

Having seen a book entitled the Consecration, and Succession of Protestant
Bishops, etc. and particularly perused that Chapter called the Vindication of
the Bishop of Durham I find my self (reflecting of some expressions therein,
and the Bishop of Derry author) obliged to say something as concerned, and so
have desired place here for a few linies. Who the Author of the treatise of
Catholic faith, etc. fixes on to prove his allegations touching the Bishop
of Durhams speech, I know not, for he told me of it before ever I spoke to him,
but sure I am, if it be looked after he may have sufficient testimony to
satisfy half a douzen juries; but that which stirs me to speak in this matter,
is, a note I have at the request of the Bishop of Derry given him under my
hand, wherein, I say in substance the same with the Author touching the Bishop
of Durhams speech, as for the book against Episcopacy, which was the ground of
the discourse, my note only avers it was brought into the house, but said not
by whom, nor who was the author, in truth I wondered much to find that the
Bishop of Durham does deny this speech, for I can not remember that ever I
heard of, or read the story of the Nagshead, till that day in Parliament of my
Lord of Durham; then I heard it from him, and this I say, as I shall answer
it before the judgment seat of God Allmighty. And I do not remember that ever
I heard the Bishop of Lincoln, or any other Bishop before, or since mention
the Nagshead, or touch that story: if I had, and not named him, my Lord of
Durham might have just reason to complain, but my Lord of Derry will not
believe that I (for I can not but take it to my self) do, or ever did know the
Bishop of Durham, so well as to swear this was the man. If his Lordship had
bin an English Bishop, an frequented Parliaments, he would have omitted this.
Not to multiply words. I can assure his Lordsp, I could as well, and surely
have sworen this is the man, the Bishop of Durham, as his Lordship could of Sir
George Ratclif when he lived. Besides, his person, and place of the Bishops
bench is too eminent to be mistaken. An other expression of my Lord of Derry
is, I do not take my self to be so exact Analyser of a discourse, as to be able
to take my oath, what was the true scope of it. Here likevvyse I must beg his
Lordships pardon. I know no such defect in my self, for there is not any thing
more easy then to comprehend the true cope of a short a plain Historical
discourse as this was; to conclude, as to the Bishop of Durhams denial, I hope
that confessing him self now of the age of 95. years, it will be held no
crime to say, or improbable, to believe that one of that grear age, may at
least forget, what he spoke so many years since. For the two cerficats of
the other Lords, that of the temporal says little to my Lord of Derryes
purpose, neither with an indifferent judgment can that of the spiritual work
much. For my part, I do not say, that any, or all their Lordships, whose names
are put to the certificats in the book, were in the House at this time, or if
any of them were, that they took notice of what my Lord of Durham spoke, for
many discourses are made in Parlaments, and little notice taken of them, neither
had I, of this, but that it was to me a new thing. The Clarque of the
Parliament is all so brought in to certify, though as to my note his pains
might have bin spared, for I do not mention a book presented, and
consequently none to be recorded, and as for speeches, I do assure his
Lordship, in the authority of an old Parliament man, that it is not the office
of the Clarque to record them (his work would be too great) till it be a
result or conclusion, and then he writes them down as Orders, Ordinances, etc.
of Parliament. I will end this short, and faithful defense, which I have bin
here necessitated to make for my self with many thanks to my Lord of Derry for
his charity, and opinion of my ingenuity: and seeing his Lordships inclination
in this matter is to absolve me from a malicious lie, I will absolve my self
as to the mistakes either in the person, or matter, assuring his Lordship, and
all the world there is none.

3. Though this relation, and testimony given by my Lord Audley does not only
clear me from casting any aspertion upon D. Monton, but also makes the whole
speech laid to his charge, sufficiently credible, (one positive witness with
such circumstances proving more then many negative, and it being more probable,
that D. Morton, or any other in the Parliament, should forget, then my Lord
Audley feign such a story, without any possible design or profit) yet I must
vindicate my self from the note of credulity, rashness, overmuch confidence,
and formal calumly fixed upon me by D. Bramhall, for believing my Lord, Audley,
and publishing his relation. Is it credulity or rashness, good M. Doctor, to
believe a person of honor, Page 26.
and of so great ingenuity, as you confess my Lord Audley to be and no man of
honor can deny in a matter, whereof he had as clear evidence, and has as
perfect memory, as is possible for any man to have of any object, by the acts
of his senses, and understanding. He protests before God and man, that he
never heard any thing of the Nagshead consecration till then, and that the
novelty of the story, made him very attentive; that he remembers the individual
circumstances of the place where D. Morton stood, his posture, and all other
actions, wherewith he accompanied his speech: and that after D. Morton had
finished the same, he asked a Lord of known reputation and wisdom, whether
the first protestant Bishops had bin ordained in a Tavern? and that he
answered, the story of the Nagshead was very true.

4. Now M. Doctor, I beseech you to consider, how impossible it is, that he
should be mistaken, having such assurance of his attention, and of the evidence
of his senses, and understanding? Want of memory (the only thing is, or can be
objected to make room for a mistake in this matter) may occasion doubts, and
perplexities; but not cause such positive assurances, and clear evidences as
my Lord Audley to this hour retains. If it be once granted, that men of
judgment may be mistaken in the evidence they swear to have of their own
perfect remembrance, and understanding, concerning an object clearly acted
before their eyes, and distinctly convejed into their ears, and particularly
reflected upon, and immediately discoursed upon, you may persuade all the
world, that whatsoever they have seen, heard, and understood, are but dreams,
and mistakes, occasioned by want of memory. for to impute so much dulnes, and
ignorance to my Lord of Audley, that he could not comprehend the scope of a
speculation so abstracted, so sublime, so Metaphysical, as Mortons, saying his
forefathers were made Bishops in a Tarverne: this were enough to degrade a
Doctor of Divinity, and dispend your episcopal pen from its endless, and sensles
function of scribbling, if you held these titles upon science, conscience, or
common sense. This is to charge both the Relator, and Reader with plain
stupidity. Must men be made out of their wits, because they bear witness
against your Clergy? Or can you hope that any man in his wits will heed what
you write, when you care so little what the Readers judge of you, and your
writings?

5. But here comes a full tide of testimonies, to bring him of the sand he
stuck himself in. Ni ne Peers have bin so vexed with your importunity, that
they have condescended to yield you some succor in so urgent necessity. Page 23.
We do hereby testify, and declare that to the best of our present knowledge,
and remembrance, no such book against Bishops as is there mentioned was
presented to the house of Peers in that Parliament, and consequently that no
such speech as is there pretended was, or could bo made by him, or any other
against it. Jam far from calling in question the ingenuity of these honorable
persons, or imputing unto them the want of incapacity to comprehend the scope
of what Morton then said, or of any thing he ever could have said, if it had
any scope; but I must call your judgment in question for thinking that what you
have got will serve your turn. If it do not its not their fault in giving
what you asked, but yours in asking you knew not what. The question is, whether
Morton acknowledged in parliament the Nagshead merry meeting; but whether it
were upon occasion of a book publicly presented, or privately delivered,
whether dedicated to the parliament, or distributed amongst the members of
Parliament, whether in this man, or that man's name, whether Lord, or not Lord,
what imports it to the matter in hand? There are none of these Lords, will
deny, or doubt, but that many by-speeches have bin made by Bishops in
Parliament upon lesser occasions, then these J rehearsed, and perhaps some with
no occasion, and also to no purpose at all, unles the rest have bin more
careful in speaking then you in printing. Page 10.
You confess a book to have bin dedicated to the Parliament against
Episcopacy, and the book to have bin writ by a Lord; you confess to have
heard that the B. Page 26.
of Lincoln did once mention the fable of the Nagshead in a speech in
Parliament, and you will not deny, but that Durham for his many writings, and
great age might have bin as fit, and forward to talk as another, and if you
look but upon the text of the testimony, you have begged, you find not a word
that argues, or intimats his not having avowed the Nagshead ordination. They
only say they remember no such book, to wit with all the circumstances
mentioned, and consequently no speech against it. They may remember a speech
upon occasion of a book, wherein Durham took harbor in the Nagshead Tarverne,
and yet say with truth they do not remember that speech, or any other to have
bin made against such a book signed with all those individual particularities.
And further there might have bin such a speech, and such a book, and such
circumstances: and yet they might have forgot them all, or in part, after so
many years; but I need not this, for they do not deny to remember the speech,
nor the book, nor any circumstance belonging to the point, we dispute. And I
mark their attestation to be couched in terms so precise, and cautious, as
both to content you, who presume to make any thing serve your purpose, and yet
neither to contradict, nor wholly conceal the truth. For, those that with so
careful attention tied their attestation so fast to the circumstantial part of
the buisnes, knew full well that the attentive Reader would thereby perceave
they could have said more of the substance, if they had not bin by themselves,
or by others persuaded that it was not convenient to publish all they
remembered. But your adding the Clark of the Parliaments testimony is a mere
childish simplicity, what says he? I do not find any such book presented, nor
any entery of any such speech made by B. Morton. Will you make men believe that
every speech is entered, or that if just such a book was not formally
presented, that the speech was not made upon occasion of a book, or that a
book in good English may not be said to be presented, although it be not
delivered in such solemnity, as requires the putting it upon record? It is much
want that brought you down to such beggarly shifts, to go from door to door
begging attestations about an inconsiderable circumstance, and make so poor,
and pitiful use of what you have scraped together. You forget to beg the
favor of your adversary to let you talk disparatas in this desperate case, and
beg pardon of your Reader for abusing his patience, and presuming that he is
void of common sense, and no less reason you have to beg pardon of your
partners for your want of ability, or Perhaps fidelity in the defense of the
common cause. If you were a lawyer by profession, as you profess here much
skill to little purpose in law matters, I believe after such pleading as this,
you would get few clients, and small fees.

6. Put the case your Brother Durham had bin accused of treason, and you were
allowed to plead for him (which equity in other countries is not denied) now
there coms in a witness whose ingenuity you grant, and no man can deny, he takes
upon his oath, as he hopes to be saved, that he heard the said Durham upon
occasion of a sedicious pamphlet, make a speech to the people, wherein he
exhorted them to deliver up a town to the enemy; that he knows the man
accused as well as you knew Sir George Ratcliffe; that he remembers clearly
the very place, and posture, wherein he made the speech, and further more that
the speech was so unexpected, that it made him in a particular manner
attentive, that immediately after, he discoursed upon it with an other, to
inform himself better of the ground of that speech, and all this he protests
over, and over agine in all occasions offered, as he is to answer in the day of
judgment. Put the case further he should say that he thinks the pamphlet was
writ by such a man, or given in such a man's name, and that it was presented by
one, that made a leg as he gave it, and delivered it with his right hand; but
of these petty circumstances he gives no assurance under his hand, as being
things he made no very particular account of, or reflection upon. Now enters M.
Bramhall the lawyer puffed up with presumption that he can talk all the world
out of their wits, and senses, First bragging, and vapouring, and threatening
no less then convincing demonstrations, then vpbraiding his adversary with
credulity, temerity for taking notice of such a testimony, and forewarning him
with a most passionate zeal of his credit, hereafter to turn stoic with
Epictetus, and learn to distrust, and having wearied himself, and others with
these Preambular impertinences, and disposed all by his presumption, and
passion not to believe a word he shall say, atlength he coms close to the
point, and tells the judge, that the witness does not take himself for so exact
Analyser of a discourse, as to understand what is meant by these words, to
deliver a town to the enemy, and if this be not sufficient to clear the
matter, he produces a writing wherein some persons say noe more, but that they
do not remember after 17. or 18. years such a Pamphlet, that is writ by such
a man, and delivered with that ceremony, and in such a man's name, and
consequently no speech to have bin made against it, as is pretended, and that
it was not in such manner presented, as those are, which are noted in public
Registers, but as to the effect of the speech not so much as a negative
testimony, not so much as a word signifying it to be not remembered, but rather
the contrary: otherwise they had spoken home to the substance, and not confined
their oblivion within a few circumstances, and those nothing conducing to what
is in question. But if the said lawyer should not so much as prove that the
witnesses produced by him were present at the foresaid speech, nor give any
reason, or conjecture why they said nothing toward the denial of the speech it
self, in case they had bin present, but only of their having forgot certain
accidental superflous particularities, not regarded, or formally avouched by
the contrary witness; nor allege any Law, Custom, president, or argument, why
such a negative testimony of the not remembrance of inconsiderable
circumstances should prevail against the plain, clear, positive, undoubted
remembrance of a witness beyond all exce^tion: and further should press his
adversary ever, and an on to legal proofs, and admit of no others, and yet
himself insist chiefly upon a proof against the law of all nations that have
law, to wit upon the denial of the person arraigned, and others equally
concerned; if, I say, a Lawyer should plead in this manner, would any judge, or
any man of judgment clear the Delinquent of treason, or the Advocate of
treacherous prevarication, or ignorant presumption upon so frivolous, and idle
discourse.

7. And yet this is your case, M. Doctor, this, I say, or worse then this; for
besides your illegal plea of producing Morton as a witness in his own cause
opposing a negative testimony against a positive; and that of the circumstance,
this of substance, and his fellow Superintendents as much concerned in this
matter as himself, who, if this story be confessed, have no more character, or
order, then a Brovvnist Minister, or Tubpreacher, yet there is a special
exception against the person of Morton, as having bin often, and evidently
convicted of most plain wilful, un excusable lies, and impostures in his
several writings concerning Religion, which shameful abominable practice he
has used when he was less concerned, then in this present occasion. Whether I
speak with reason, or passion the Reader will shortly judge of himself, and
with all what exception may be taken against his Colleagues. I shall give
neither him, or you any names though provoked by both, he calls me an impudent
libeller, you call M. Neale a brainesicke fool. I know you are both as well
versed in Civility, as Divinity, and need not to take you for my Masters, or
Paternes. But I shall teach the Reader to frame a right notion of you, and your
tribe, and remit the giving you names to his discretion.

As to the Noblemen you cited, I have examined their attestation with that
regard, as neither to give offense to them, nor advantage to you, nor prejudice
to the truth. To whom I make bold to present this humble petition that they
will be pleased in their wisdom to consider the difference betwixt these two
consequences, which without any artificial Logique is easily discerned.

8. The first. I remember clearly, and distinctly to have heard such a speech,
which the attention to it, the admiration of it, the reflection upon it has
deeply imprinted in my memory, therefore I may securely say, and swear such a
speech y have heard. The second. I do not remember after 17. or 18. years
certain occasional circumstances of such a speech, or perhaps not the speech
it self, because I might have bin absent, or not attentive to it, or made little
account of it. Therefore another man's perfect remembrance is not to be credited.
Although the Roman Senator Hortensius is renowned for his prodigious memory,
yet I could never hear any thing of him which might give occasion to think
that if he had forget something belonging to a speech made in the senate 17.
years before, that his oblivion would have bin thought sufficient to void the
evidence of it drawn from the solemn oath, and perfect remonstrance of a
lawful witness. And albeit Mithridates could give account of every soldiers
name in his army, yet if one had bin proved by the oath of a person of honor
to have served him in his wars, can any man imagine the King would have
disavowed his service, because after 17 years he, or some others had forgot
his name? Not many years since there appeared a dim Comet observed by fevv,
yet I could never find any that has perused their ohservations so mad, as to
call it in question, because he or some others can not call to memory the sight
of it, notwithstanding a perfect remembrance they might have had of their being
abroad that very night it is said to have bin seen by others.

9. But you M. Doctor, advance not so far as to evince the presence of your
witnesses, much less their special attention, reflection, admiration, or the
like, which are the fundations of a lasting memory, for my witness does not
mention the day. Wherefore it was a work not only of supererogation, but
superfluity, that your superintending Brethren should put in their attestation,
that they sat in the Parliament begun at Wesminster the 3. day of November.
1640. without giving some sign of their sitting, or standing in Parliament the
time of the speech. Yet Mortons attestation is not only superflous, but
ridiculous. A man that has bin publickely, manifestly, and frequently
convicted of most wilful, and most impudent lies in his writings, is grown
so forgetful not only of what he spoke, but of what any man in his wits ought
to speak, that he delivers himself in these terms. I could never have made
such a speech as is there pretended (and the proof it excellent) seeing y have
ever spoken according to my thoughts, and always believed that fable of the
Nagshead consecration to have proceeded from the father of lies. A deaf man
might as well say, he heard it with his heels, as that Morton should say he
spoke according to his thoughts, when he thought it convenient to speak
otherwise. And no less ridiculous industry was used in procuring a public
Notary, and five witnesses to make men believe that the attestation is truly
his own, not falsely fathered upon him, for no body doubted but he would give a
most ample testimony for himself, and his cause, but no man that knows him by
his writings will give credit to any thing he says in behalf of religion.
Persuade the old man that you have found a new trick to make better use of of
the Nagshead consecration, then that of Lambeth, you shall have him, with
double number of witnesses avow the speech, he has disavowed. For is it
credible he fears a fevv private men's silent censure, who has hardened his
face against the public reproach of as many scholars as read books of
controversy? But I shall present him, and his fellows to your eyes, in their
own glass, that you may know them better by sight then by hearsay.

AN APPENDIX.
Of the wilful, and shameful falsifications, and falsities of Protestant
Ministers.

I require no gentle, and courteous, nor so much as unpartial, and unpassionate
readers, I am content with any partiality, or passion, provided that it do not
wholly deprive them of the use of their eyes, and reason. I give but a
scantling, and that in have, and out of such books I had at hand, and what I
found with little seeking. I am so assured by my own experience of the plenty
of this kind of ware, promiscuously to be found in the prime Protestant
writers, particularly in the English Nation, that I fear no other reproach, but
of my sparing pains in collecting no greater heaps of this abominable filth,
to cause thereby a wholesome, though noysom detestation of that Religion, which is
vpheld by so unchristian, unhuman, Diabolical Policy. I begin with Morton.

In a virulent, and calumnious pamphlet entitled. A discovery of Romish
doctrinein case of conspiracy, and rebellion page 4. he alleges as an ancient
decree out of Gracian. Causa 15. qu. 6. c. 40. Si juravi me soluturum alicui
pecuniam qui excommunicatur, non teneor ei solvere: first it is no decree
either of Pope, or Council, but only words of the gloss; secondly it is an
objection, not the resolution of the gloss, for it resolves that he is bound
to pay, and proves it by diverse laws, and reasons.

In his treatise called a confutation of the Popes supremacy, as supreme head
of rebellion page 2. He affirms that in the old testament the Jesuits are
forced to allow that the king was supreme head of the Church in spiritual
affairs, and ordering Priests, and for proof cites Salmeran. d. 12. in ep.
Pauli in gen.. sed contra. Where he does not only clearly hold, but largly
prove the quite contrary, and solves the objections, and further ads that in
case it had bin so in the old, it does not follow that it is so in the new.

In his reply, and full satisfaction concerning the charge against Protestants
for rebellion etc. page 3. he imputes to Vasques, that he holds a man may be
an heretic though he be not obstinate, whereas in the very disputation
mentioned; Vasques guieth this definition of heresy, commonly received.
Haeresis nihil est aliud, Disp. 126. c. 3.
quam error in rebus fidei cum partinacia, and it is impossible that Morton
should have bin ignorant of this notion of heresy, so frequently taught, and
generally received, and by Vasques expressly.

In the same book page 38. Morton feigneth that diverse Catholic authors hold
that Popes cannot possibly be heretics as Popes, now for the conclusion, and
consequently cannot be deposed, among these, he brings Bellarmin, and Gratian,
though Bellarmin directly teach that the Pope may be an heretic, and thereupon
deposed by the Church, or rather is ipso facto deposed, and may be so declared
by the Church, and cites the very canon of Gracian, saying haereticum Papam
posse judicari, express habetur Can. si Papa did. 40. Morton cites Azor for
the same l. 5. c. 14. and Valentia analy: l. 8. c. 3. and Salmeron. Came. in
Galat: 2. d. 24. and Canus de locis l. 6. cap. 8. and Stapleton doctrine. l. 6.
initio. And Costerus de Pontif. in Ench. c. 3. and yet all these in the very
places teach plainly, and flatly the very contrary. And further he is not
ashamed to ad that these authors confirm their doctrine by the universal
consent of Romish Devines, and Canonists for the space of 100. years, whereas
they boath teach the contrary, to wit, that the Pope may be heretic, and
deposed, and innumerable others of that age, true it is that God neither has,
nor will permit, that any Pope, though heretic in his private opinion should
by public decree ex cathedra define any heresy, neither, for any thing we
know out of history well examined, can it be convinced that any Pope hitherto
has bin an heretic in his private persuasion, albeit in this point there be
different opinions, which nothing at all belong to the present purpose.

But I must invite the reader, at least for a pleasant entertainment, if no
higher motive can induce him, to peruse Mortons discourse against
Aequivocation, and confer it with the answer contained in a book entitled A
treatise tending to Mitigation, it will be no small sport, I do not say, to
catch him napping in ignorant mistakes, but to hear rapping loud lies one
after an other, in that very book where he detesteth Aequivocation, and
professes a most religious precisenes in point of truth. For example, he
cites Azor. l. 11. instit. cap. 4. quite contrary to this meaning, patching
words to geather, that were spoken seperatly, and to an other end, and falsely
translateth in to English that very text of Azor. which himself cites in the
margen. The words in latin are, Si venit ex loco aliquo peste minime infecto,
qui falso habetur pro infecto. Which Morton turns thus into English, if he com
from a place infected. But truly translated make the case wholly different, and
are these, if he came from a place not infected, which falsely is held to be
infected. But he is not only content to be convicted of inexcusable falsehood
by men that study moralists, but even by schoolboys, that read Tullies offices,
in his 90. page he does so grossly pervert the sense, change the words, and
distroy the whole drift of Tullies discourse l. 3. offic.. Regulus and. sed si,
that it is a wonder to see what impudensy grows from a custom of lying. These
are but a few examples of the many detected by the aforesaid Treatise of
Mitigation, and an other called A quiet, and sober reckoning with Thomas Morton
by the reading whereof, and conferring each particular with the books cited
every one may in a short time, and no great trouble judge by his eyes whether I
have reason to except against such a witness in his own cause, and what reason
there is to follow so wilfully, and wickedly blind leaders.

But I cannot but wonder at one circumstance, that after Morton had gained
reputation by this practice, he was promoted to the title and profits of a
Bishopric, purchasing by a new kind of fimony, not with buying, but with
lyeing, a rich benefice. I Bellarmin, or Perron could have bin convicted of
this false, and base proceeding either before, or after their Cardinals caps,
what a noise would have bin, when we hear such a clamor, upon that which is
not proved, but only pretended to be a credulous mistake? Yet when I consider
John Foxes Acts, and Monuments, the very Magazin of no less malicious, then
ridiculous lies, to have got so honorable a place in Protestant Churches, and
that not by vulgar simplicity, but by public authority, not by connivence, or
negligence, but upon design, and by command: when I see this abomination has
stood so long in the holy place, I wonder no more at Mortons promotion, nor at
whole Nations deceaved by Mahomets Alcoran. If I should insist upon the number
of those, that by command, or concurrence are guilty of the falsehood of Foxes
book, I should accuse many more, then I am by this present occasion obliged;
but the Ministers I cannot excuse upon any title, for although they be of mean
learning, and no extraordinary reading, yet the falsities are so numerous, and
obvious, that it is impossible but many should have fallen under the
observation of most. And by the book of the three Conversions of England, and
the Examen of Foxes Calender, which have bin printed almost threescore years
since; and have come to the hands of many Protestant Ministers, this Foxes
foul work has bin so plainly discovered, that those, who have seen it, if
they had least zeal, or love, or care of truth, ought to have informed their
Brethren, and not to have permitted any Christian Religion to be longer
profaned with so public a slander, and shame of Christianity. Should a
renegate Captive tell his master, that the sect amongst Christians, which he
had bin taught, was maintained by such false, and shamfull practices, he would
easily gain Credit of a true Proselite turned Turk upon conscience, and not
convenience. I need not set down Foxes impostures, for you shall see them in
the forsaid books so gross, and thick set one by another, that it will be
harder to make a way through them, then find the way to them. I will pass my
word the Author does him no wrong, and the reader upon his own examination
will take my word in an other occasion.

But to return to Morton now with a white Rochet on his back, but with as
little ingenuity, and candor of mind as before. The imposition of those
unhallowed hands has not imprinted the least mark of grace in his soul, or
shame in his forehead. In the grand imposture writ by him then B. of Cov. and
Lichf. page 85. edit. 2. he sets down a large, and lying description of the
Inquisitions cruelty, and adds, So your Author. And who do you think is this
Author, but Cornellius Agrippa a Magitian, as himself confesses of himself?
And where does he write what here is alleged against us? In a book condemned
by our Church. Not a word of these circumstances; but only that he is our
Author, to make the Reader believe he is one we have no reason to except
against. You had better take him to your self: for his black art is of the
same color with yours, and taught by one master, who esteems you the better
scholar, having done more mischief with your false juggling, then Agrippa with
his conjuring. Now page 388. the same juggling trick over again. Mark the
ensuing words. Else why is it that your own Thuanus speaking of this separation
(Viz of Luther) said that some in those days laid the fault upon the Pope Leo?
More fully your Cassander, an Author selected in those days by the King of the
Romans, as the chiefest divine of his. And page 385. He calls Thuanus our noble
Historian. Who knows nothing of Thuanus but by this man's relation, would take
him to be, not only a sound unsusspected Catholic, but of special regard
amongst us: whereas both our common opinion, and his own Annals prove him a
Hugonot. But besides falsely reporting him for a Catholic, he is plainly
falsified in these very places alleged. In the first he speaks not of Luthers
separation, but of the election of Prelates in France; and in the 2. where he
speaks of benefices, Morton makes him speak of Indulgences, in both places
evidently against his clear words, which read as they stand in Thuanus have
not the least shadow of ambiguity. But the making Cassander ours, and our
chiefest Devine being listed in our Index of forfidden books amongst the
Heretics of the first rank, and his own writings accusing him, not only of
the general heresies of these times, but of others also particular to himself,
is not only a shamles, but senseles imposture. It is a labor too loathsome to
dig any longer in this filthy dunghill of corruptions. And it is a madness in any
man that already knows Morton by his notoriously impudent lying books, or
before he take knowledge of him upon this admonition to give the lest credit to
any thing he shall say, write, sign, or swear concerning Religion, as being
convicted by his own writings to have lost all remorse of conscience, all
fear of reproach from men, or punishment from God. Did he believe there is a
God who has prepared a Hell of torments for those, who maintain a division in
the Church by so many wilful impostures, and seriously intended to prevent the
scourge of his heavy hand, could he stand gazing upon his grave at so nigh a
distance without repenting, or can he truly repent without recanting. Be not
amazed that he remains without feeling, for, no Pharaos, no Anthiochus pride,
and cruelty does so harden the heart of a Reprobate as a long custom of
denving, and belying the known truth, which Morton has done for many years.
For, albeit his blindness were so great as not to see the manifest truth of our
Religion, yet impossible it is, he should not see the false calumnies, false
translations, and false allegations he brings against our Authors, whom he
has read with his own eyes. Let any man mark his manner of perverting them,
he shall clearly perceave that it could not be so done without having seen
the very places, and read them at leisure.

But this has bin the continual practice of defenders of heresy in all ages,
and in this last age, and in English writers, and in the most eminent of them
most conspicuous. Let the reader, who desirs to be satisfied in this point,
procure, as he may easily, the forenamed treatise tending to mitigation, where
in the 12. chap. he shall find the prime Protestant writers in the beginning of
Q. Eliz. reign, and in the first place Jewel called B. of Salisb. guilty of
most enormous, unexcusable untruths. He shall hear this impudent Minister
braging, and braving that we cannot allege one Author, one Doctor, one
sentence, no not two lines in behalf of any one of the 28. articles he
attributes to us, wherein are contained the real presence, private Mass,
images, the Popes primacy, offering up of Christ in sacrifice, common prayer in
a strange language etc. Whether we have sufficient authority for these Tenets
is not the present question; but whether we cannot find one ancient Doctor, or
two lines in favor of any one often them. He shall hear him cite S. Austin as
allowing marriage after vows made of chastity in his book de Bono viduitatis
the drift of which book being wholly, and plainly to the contrary. He shall
hear him cry down another S. Austin the Apostle of Engl. not only against the
authority of ancient History, but even against the confession of John Foxes
Acts, and Monuments. He shall hear so much, that he will not need to go
further to Seek Harding, and others, who have at large discovered the false
luster of this counterfeit Jewel, this precious stone laid in the fundation of
the English Babylon. He shall find the like false dealing of Casshill, Clarke,
and Perkins. As for John Fox the Reader after a short taste of his knavery is
remitted to the third part of the three conversions of Engl. where in one chap.
are set down severally above a hundred and twenty wilful lies, uttered by
Fox in less then three leaves of his Acts, and Monuments, and those such, as
no ways may be excused, either by ignorance, or error; but must needs proceed
from voluntary fraud, and malice, himself knowing that it was false, which he
related. I omit what is further alleged of malicious fraud in the writings of
Sir Francis Hastings, and Sir Edoard Cook, but a word I must ad of Sir Philip
Plessis Mornay a frenchman, to show that it is not a national inclination of
the English, but of any nation infected with heresy to maintain heretical
errors with voluntary falsehood. The french Jansenists of late make good my
assertion, and this french Calvinist will make it better. In a book of his
full of authorities against the Mass, he was charged by Peron, then B. of
Eureux, after Cardinal, with five hundred wilful falsifications, and upon
suite made to Henry the fourth by the said Peron it came to a public trial in
presence of the King of France, and great part of his Nobility on the 4. of May
1600. Of these five hundred were exhibited threescore to Plessis to take his
choice for the first days trial, who took nineteen of those, which he
thought himself best able to excuse. Now the straitnes of time permitting only
nine to be examined, he was both by his own Protestant Judges, and the
Catholic Judges on the other side condemned of falsification, and untrue
dealing in all nine, after he had bin permitted to say what he could in his
defense. And Peron further pressed him to return to the like trial of the rest
of the five hundred, but Plessis could not be brought to it. This public
trial is largely related, and defended in the end of the first tome of the 3.
part of the three Conversions of England, and appears in the Kings own letter
in print, as also by the public Acts set forth by the approbation of the said
King and his counsel.

If I should proceed on with the unchristian, and vnhuman proceeding of our
English Ministers in their shamfull calumniations, and falsifications, it would
be an endless work. I shall remit the reader to a book entitled a search made
into matters of Religion by Francis Walsingham Deacon of the Protestant Church
before his change to the Catholic, where he may find such foul dealing of so
many English Protestant Ministers, Bell, Doves, Jewel, Sutclif etc. that with
conferring the praces by his own industry he will never need to inform
himself more by the relations of others. Let him but read the Discussion of D.
Barlows answer together with the supleme^t, and adjoynder, he shall know the
lying spirit of Barlow, Reynolds, Dunnes, and Andrews, and this man's not only
falfities, but follies in his answer to Card. Bellarmines Apollogy. Infelix
puer, atque impar Achilli. I cannot conceave what excuse a Protestant that has
any sense of Religion can allege why he should not endeavor to rectify his
judgment upon so easy conditions. The books are not hard to be got, the places
are easy to be found, and examined; there is no more exacted of him, but to
believe what he sees. And in case he be a Protestant of the modern prelatique
fashion, who by an indifferency to any Religion whereunto the Apostles short
Creed admitted by Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutichians, Pelagians, may
be applied, has little, or no regard of any Religion at all; yet to satisfy
himself in point of curiosity, or Policy concerning Religion, methinks he
should be desirous to try by his own experience whether men by facing about
with inconstancy of enterchanging opinions, and facing it out with impudency of
manifest lies, and calumnies may build, and uphold an imaginary Church in the
fancies of ignorant, and careless peeple. I can assure him that he shall
discover in the practice of Protestant writers more admirable effects of
knavery, then in the precepts and presidents of his only admired, and adored
Apostle Machiavel. He will prefer English men in this point of wit, which he
esteems the highest, before the Italians; for Machiavel, the sole Italian, he
admires could never make such resolutions in Italy, although it was the mark
he aimed at, as English Ministers have made in England. Unless it were not the
want of wit in the Minister, but the too much wit of the scholars. Perhaps
Machiavel durst not presume to find peeple in his country apt to believe, that
of a number of Popes for many ages could be forged one monstrous man called
Antichrist. He could not imagine that Italians would kill one another in good
earnest, upon hopes to destroy this imaginary Monster: nor that Tinkers, and
Cobblers brains could be so far past mending, that they would be cast into the
fire in defense of the fond inventions of a fewlewd, and lying Apostatas: or
that the folly of these brainsike Idiots would serve for a testimony to men in
their wits. Machiavel had read as much history, as John Fox, or his Dutch
Masters the Magdeburgeans, and could have made Acts, and Monuments with as
many falsities, and fewer follies; yet he had a better conceit of his Nation,
then to hope that such a book should be placed in Churches by public
authority, and stand so long by the shamles malice of some, and careless
stupidity of others. He knew his countrymen had seen many pieces of ancient
Architecture, that they would not be easily persuaded to pray with security in
a Chapel supported by such a pillar. They had heard so much of the Bulls
sacrificed to Jupiter Capitolinus, that it would be hard to make them believe
that the praying before the Picture of Christ was in effect the old Idolatry of
the Romans. The Crosses, and Images they had seen in the grots of the ancient
Martyrs, freed them from the suspicion of superstitious Novelty. Machiavel knew
better then Ministers the vices, and abuses of the Roman Clergy, and desired no
less to decry, and destroy it; yet he was far from expecting, that Carters,
and Catchpols, Porters, and Pedlers would be heard with patience in Italy prate
Nonsense out of pulpits, and take upon them to reform, and pull down Pope
and Prelates; and much less that the successors of these should be respected
as priests merely by their wearing long coats without any evidence produced of
their vocation, consecration, and Jurisdiction, besides what they received from
a woeman dispensing with the very State, and condition of the Consecraters
beyond all that has bin practiced, or pretended by the Vicar of Christ. He
could not suspect that wary and jealous Italians would confess their hidden
sins to men who had no other key of power, nor lock of Secrecy, but of a
Woemans making. Machiavel could have forged a new Bible with false
translations, and knew fullwell that destruction is caused by Division, and no
better way to divide Religion in to innumerable sects then to make every man's
fond faney the Judge of a falsified Rule of Religion, he had got what he sought
and by contrary senses of Gods word had abolished all sense of God, and
goodness, had he thought that Italian Bibles would do what the English have
done, but being by office a Secretary, he was afraid to be proved a notorious
falsary. He knew that by abusing scripture as our English translaters have done
both he and all those, who should conspire with him would forfeit their credit,
and become infamous after so many, so gross, so palpable discoveryes of their
false dealing. I shall note a few, and direct the Reader for many more to be
found in Gregory Martins discovery of the manifold corruptions of holy
scriptures by the Heretics of our days, especially the English Sectaries.

In the Bible of the year 1562. closse upon the time of the pretended solemn,
and Canonical Consecration at Lambeth by imposition of hands, and other things
requisite they make the Scripture speak in those terms Act. 14. v. 23. When
they had ordained Elders by Election in every Congregation, and the same words
are kept saving the Change of Congregation into Church in the Bible 1628. upon
this place I have two things to note first the wresting of the word Chirotonia
from the Ecclesiastical to the profane sense of election by stretching forth
the hand according to the use of the Atheniens, and against the interpretation
of S Hierome, who in cap. 58. Isai. interprets Chirotonia, Clericorum
ordinatio, not Electio; and against S. Paul 1. Tim. 5. v. 22. where speaking of
ordination he says, lay hands suddenly on noe man. The second, that both in
those first times, and also in these later they declared by their version of
Scripture their opinion concerning orders by election, and not by consecration,
which includes imposition of hands. Now you shall see how the Scripture is made
to speak to the tune of the Princes humor, notwithstanding they preach so
loud that all men, both Kings, and Popes must be put in tune by the sound of
the letter. During King Edward the sixth his reign, the only translation of
this place 1. Petr. 2. v. 13. which in the original Greek is submit yourselves
unto every humane creature for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
excelling, or, etc. was then submit your selves unto all manner ordinauce of
man whether it be to the King, as into the chief head, or, etc. But under Q.
Eliz. who, as Cambden in her lise relates, would not be called head of the
Church, but supreme gouvernor, To the King as having pre-eminence Bible 1577.
and To the King as superior Bible 1579. But in King James his time, who pressed
much the oath of supremacy. To the King as supreme Bibles 1012. 1618. Do you
not see these fawning Parasites make sport with the Scripture to please their
Princes?

Whilst liberty was cried down where they should have put he gave them power
(exusian) to be made the sons of God. Io. 2. v. 12. they place Prerogative.
Bible 1558. but now since liberty is come into credit, they have restored the
word Power Bible 1628. Is this to follow Scripture, or rather force Scripture
to follow themselves? But to be sure their wives may follovv them, they make S.
Paul vvandring about the world like a German Soldier with his wife behind
him. 1. Cor. 9. v. 5. Have not we power to lead about a wife being a sister
Bible 1580. and this remains unchanged even in the Bible 1628. and is like to
remain till Ministers be weary of their wives. Notwithslanding S. Paul a little
before c. 7. v. 8. sufficiently gives to be understood, he was not married.
Notwithstanding S. Hiorome interprets it, and S. Austin proves it to be, not
wife, but woeman, and the Greek fathers most expressly. Notwithslanding,
these very Bibles a little before c. 7. v. 1. translate woeman, not wife upon
the same Greek word, and without any article, or particle of difference
betwixt the same word in both places, saving that it was not for their purpose
to make S. Paul say it were good for aman not to touch a wife. Notwithslanding
that all who know Spanish, Portugues, Italian, French, Hebrew, High, or Low
dutch, in which languages the same word no less then in Greek signifies both
woeman, and wife, are not ignorant that wheresoever there is no more
determinative signs then in the text of S. Paul it is generally understood for
a woeman, not wife. And this their lewd humor makes them have such a spite
against the ever Virgin Mother of God. They could translate (Helcomenos) full
of sores Luc. 16. v. 20. speaking of Lazarus, but (Kecharitomene) Luc. 1. v.
28. must not be full of grace, but freely beloved Bible 1628. because it was
spoken of the Virgin Mother, and in the margen is put received into favor, as
if the Greek word were capable of many senses but by no means, of that sense
which might signify that the mother of God being a Virgin should befull of
grace. So much she has lost in the opinion of these lewd fellows upon the
prerogative of her Virginity.

After their fraud occasioned by a false pretense of ambiguity, they fall upon
down right falsity. Where both the Greek and Latin have 1. Cor. 11. v. 27.
Who so ever shall eato this bread, or drink the cup They put, and instead of
(or) Bible 628. to persuade the ignorant that Catholics gainesay the
Scripture in not giving always the communion under both kinds. But it is no
marvel they sold change or into and when Beza had changed as into signifies
and the German heretics solum for soli to make David say, I have nothing else
but sinned, in lieu of, To thee alone I have sinned. Ps. 51. And Luther added
the word alone to faith, and said it should stand in spite of all that opposed
it. But what are these changes to the making whole books Apocryphal because
prejudicial to their errors. The Machabees thrust out upon account of
Purgatory, Ecclesiasticus of liberty, Toby of the assistance of Angels. For, as
to their having bin questioned, it is a vain excuse, seeing the Apocalypse, no
less questioned, is held for good because it serves the Ministers to fool the
people with the horns of the beast planted on the Popes head which would
become their own much better. But it is ridiculous to see these petty
Grammarians so Critical in the Etymological sense that Baptism must be
washing, Priest, Elder, Beelzebub, Lord of afly, Catholic Universal, and yet
Paradosis must not be traditions 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 15. but instructions Bible
1628. or ordinances, preachings, institutions, or any thing, but what it should
be; yet where mention is made of reprehensible traditions, you shall be sure to
have this word to English the same Paradosis as Matt. 15, v. 2. and 3. of the
same Bible. Nay you shall have Traditions where the Greek word is neither
Paradosis, nor any thing like: for; Col. 2. v 20. by (Tidogmatizesthe) any one
that knows the Greek language, is rather put in mind of Decrees, Doctrines;
or opinions, then Traditions; but to make them odious they are left where any
thing is spoken to their commendation, although the original Greek deliver
them in their proper word, and here they are thrust in by head and shoulders,
where the Greek has a word very different, and this not only in the old
Bible 1579. are you led with traditions? but in a later 1628. are you burdened
with Traditions? The Greek having no word proper to Traditions, much less to
burdening. I wonder the translater of this late Bible was not ashamed here as
in another place for 2. Cor. 6. v. 16. he puts, as he ought, what agreement
has the Temple of God with Idols, not daring to be so impudent, as to follow
the Bible 1567. How agrees the Temple of God with images, being a thing known
that, ever the Jews Temples wanted not images. Much more of this kind, and even
more shameful profanation you may see M. Bramhall in Gregory Martin, whose
authority, though you slight, yet you ought not to slight the manifold, and
manifest examples he brings. Perhaps the authority of your Brethren the
Puritans, whom you now, and then find occasion to flatter in your books, will
be of more weight with you, or at least with others. In a petition directed to
her most excellent Majesty, etc. page they speak in these terms. Our
translation of the Psalms comprised in the book of common prayer does in
addition, subtraction, and alteration differ from the truth of the Hebrew in
two thous and places at least. And M. Carliele a Protestant, in his book that
Christ descended into Hell, says of the English translaters, that they have
depraved the sense, obscured the truth, deceaved the ignorant.

Now Sir I hope you will be pleased, or forced to take notice of the argument
which before you passed by vvinking, as if it were unworthy to be regarded.
Ministers falsify Scriptures, no wonder if they forge records. They are so
deprived of conscience, and shame, that they conspire to maintain their
religion with John Foxes most false, and foolish stories, with most impudent
falsifications of Scripture, of ancient, and modern Authors, which any man
that will take the least pains may evidently see to be wilful,
unconscionable, inexcusable; therefore no marvel if they give false
attestations of a matter not extant in writing, and which may after so long a
time have bin forgot by some, and remembered by others, who are not pressed to
testify their remembrance as being a thing needles to the cause, and dangerous
to their persons. You thought that as one man's yawning makes others yavvne, so
your winking at this argument, would make others wink, and not mark the force
of it. You hoped to persuade the Reader that you might as lawfully reject my
Authors, as I yours. As if there were no difference bewixt men of true, and
false dealing. Let any man judge that is acquainted with Stapleton, Belarmine,
Parsons, Peron, show in any of them such foul, and wilful cheating, as
manifestly appears in Jewel, Morton, Andrews Barlow, and generally in the rest
of the prime Protestant Ministers, or if he be not acquainted with our writers,
let him but pervse the aforesaid Walsinghams search into Religion, or the
Quiet, and sober reckoning with M. Thomas Morton, where he shall find
Protestants never more false, then in their imputation of falsood to our
Authors. In whom I could never discover any wilful corruption in defense of
our Religion against heretics, and the Author of the Treatise tending to
Mitigation, a man well versed in the writings, of both sides, has c. 12. page
489. long since challenged Morton to bring forth any Catholic Authors
whatsoever that wrote against Protestants since these heresies began, that has
bin taken in this impiety, I mean that has set down in print any such
falsity, as can not be excused either by iguorance, oversight, negligence,
error of print, translation, diversity of editions, or the like; but that it
must needs be presumed that he knew the untruth, and yet would set it forth: of
this kind, I say, let him show but one example among all Catholic writers of
our time, and I will in my conscience greatly mistrust, and discredit the
Author, whether it be another or my self. But if he show me two or three in
any writer of this kind I shall never be able to believe him more. Thus he.
Certainly, if we were given to this practice, it would have bin discovered in
the innumerable citations of Bellarmine, or of the Author of the Protestants
Apology who has collected the sayings, of all Protestant vvriters, he could
possibly find. We have used fair dealing in the edition of Scripture, we
follow, as having bin in use many ages in the Church before these
Controversies, and therefore not fraudalently chosen, much less falsely
changed to favor our doctrine, which D Covel Protestant in his answer to M.
John Burges page 94. confesses to have bin used in the Church a thous and three
hundred years ago; where he prefers it before others, and page 91. prefers
amongst English translations, that which comes nearest it. Which is highly
commended by Beza in his Annot. in c. 2 Luc. v. 1. and by Molinaeus the famous
french Calvinist, is more esteemed then the translation of Erasmus, Bucer,
Bullinger, Tigurines, and of Calvin himself, and all others.

To conclude, what Protestant so ever will not take the pains to confer the
doctrines, and Doctors of both parties, but will take M. Bramhals empty words
for found arguments, his pretermissions for solutions, his prevarication, or
presumption for a serious, and solid defension, his Rhetorical Tropes for
rational answers, his negative attestations about a small accessory, for a
positive Vindication of the principal charge made against his Clergy, scraps of
History, for Christian Theology, a deceitful appearance of long coats, and
surplesses, for a sufficient evidence of Priestly character, to such a one, I
say, that he neither deserves a more faithful champion to rescue him in his
dangers, nor a more skillful Devine to resolve him in his doubts, nor a more
lawful Priest to absolve him from his sins.

FINIS.

