THE PERFECT AMBASSADOVR TREATING OF The Antiquity, Priveledges, and behavior
of Men belonging to that Function.

By F. T. Esquire.



LONDON, Printed for John Colbeck at the Phoenix near the little North-door of
S. Paul's Church. 1652

To the Right Honorable, his singular good Lord, WILLIAM Lord COBHAM, Lord
Warden of the Cinque. Ports, FRANCIS THYNN wishes perpetual health, further
increa^e of honor, and good success in all his Honorable Attempts.
ALthough my very good Lord, neither according to my honest desire, nor your
honorable desert (which worthily may challenge from me a far more dutiful
service than my attendance upon you into Flanders) I could not in person, as I
did in good will, be present in the same Journey (where I both might have
reaped profit, and your Lordship been fully ascertained of my good mind toward
you, for that I protest unto you remaining in this out-nook of the little world
(where London news is somewhat scant, and the Princes affairs very seldom
known) I had no intelligence of your so honorable place of Embassy in this
year of Christ 1578. until two days after your departure. The which bred some
corsey of a Melancholy conceit in me, by reason of my foolish negligence that
would no oftener direct my Letters to crave intelligence from London. And by
reason of the unkind forgetfulness of my kindred and friends remaining there,
who would not vouchsafe so much courtesy in a matter so much desired by me,
and of so small a trouble to them, as to direct their Letters to me thereof.
Wherefore sorrowing for that which is past, that I could not as the rest of my
kindred, and friends did, assume such enterprise upon me, and yet not only
rejoicing at your honorable entertainment, of the good success, of the wise
Dispatch, and of the orderly behavior, wherewith your Lordship was received
beyond the Seas; but also desirous by pen amongst the rest of your welwillers
at this your happy and desired return to congratulate your Lordship with the
tokens of my old vowed fidelity, as a sign of my hidden joy conceived of your
safe arrival, I have thought it my challenged duty to direct this tedious
Discourse unto you, containing as well the unfolding of my former griefs, As
laying open to your sight the rejoicing of my wellwilling heart. And for that
other occasion does not so fitly minister cause to me in other sort to present
my self unto you than by saying somewhat which may, and does concern
Ambassadors; Therefore as well for that the time is most apt for the man to
whom I write, having supplied such place, and for that it also puts me in
mind of your honorable courteous talk which you have often used unto me in
like matters, I will here in affairs of Embassy to an Ambassador present my
labors, the Ambassadors of their absent Master, and make discourse of things
belonging to Embassy. Wherein I will show the original, Privileges, the
Wisdom, the Valor, the quick wits, and other the behaviors of Ambassadors,
as examples for us in all respects to immitate: For as Seneca says in his
sixth Epistle, Longum iter est per praecepta, breve and efficax per exemplum,
of which kind of people, that is of Ambassadors, Legates, or Deputies,
Messengers of Princes, and of the Orators of Kings (For all these several
terms do include one Function exercised in diverse manners) because there are
sundry sorts somewhat different from the custom of our age, I will not only
entreat as they were in times past amongst the magnificent Romans in the
midst of their greatest glory; But I will also in like order collect, and
digest the usage and duty of them as they are now used, and put in office by
Princes, Kings, and Emperors, for the executing of their determined pleasure.
In which (my good Lord) if any thing shall be found, that for want of more
diligent search may seem faulty, consider that Bernardus non videt omnia. We
are no Gods, we can say no more than reasonable conj^cture or former Authority
may lead us unto. But if in the placing of the same in the apt sentences, or in
the sweet composition of style there appear default, impute the same to the
want of leisure, and to the rude hasty writing of him, who was never brought up
in any University, and I seek not fucum ver borum, so I may have ipsam
veritatem, and materiam solidam. And thus, this far of that; And so into my
purposed matter.

The Table.
CHAP. 1. fol. 1. OF the Name, or first Invention of Legates, or Ambassadors.
1. CHAP. 2. That other Naetions besides the Romans used Ambassadors. 6* CHAP.
3. What persons are meet to be Ambassadors. 13. CHAP. 4. What Laws and
Privileges were made and allowed for, and to Ambassadors. 34 CHAP. 5.
Apothegmes, or Wise, and pleasant Answers given, and made by and to
Ambassadors. 50 CHAP. 6. Of Amdassadours that dyed in their Embassy. 73 CHAP.
7. Of Ambassadors evilly entreated in their Embassy. 82 CHAP. 8. The
revengement of Cruelty used to Ambassadors against the Law of Nations. 117
CHAP. 9. Of Ambassadors evilly rewarded at their return into their Country.
130 CHAP. 10. Of traiterous Ambassadors toward their Masters, and Princes.
140 CHAP. 11. Of the foolish sayings, and doings of Ambassadors. 160 CHAP. 12.
Of Persons sent diverse times in Embassy. 176
The Application of certain Histories concerning Ambassadors and their
Functions, etc.
CHAP. 1. Of the Name, or first Invention of Legates, or Ambassadors.
THE name of Legate is taken diverse ways, being sometimes reputed for any kind
of Magistrate, or for any person that executes a^ office for, and under
another, especially in any other Country than his own, being substitute in the
place of his Superior. The which persons so appointed the ancient Romans did
call Legates, the Majesty of whom the Bishop of Rome presenting in his
Monarchical Government of the Church does at this present observe, having in
every Country subject to his Dominion, a Legate sometimes permanent, and
sometimes temporaneall called Legates a latere, as he were his assisting
Deputy, or his Deputy sent from his side. The Ro^an Legates lay their ^eads
together as Coun^ellours, and what so was ^eedfull to be done, it ^as
determined by their Counsel and agreement, and at the length establi^ed by the
judgment, and rule of the Legate.

Agesilaus amongst for^aign Nations, is found ^o have supplied the place ^f a
Legate, although he ^ere the greatest Com^ander of the wars, so much
accounted, and in ^uch great honor was his office deemed to be among them.

Wherein as there be many notable things besides that which he has uttered of
Legates (which most properly in this place are holden Deputies) as are the name
of the offices, and officeRs amongst the Romans, for there were the Lictors,
Q^estors, Praetors, Tribune, Consul, Emperor, and such like, whereof I mean
not at this time to entreat as well for avoiding tediousness, as for that they
are impertinent to this matter, and for that at some other time hereafter I
mean to take fitter time to discourse thereof to your Honor. So now I will
only say thus much ^ut of him concerning Legates. That he has not only
learnedly (though somewhat obscurely which (...) could not in better ^orme
reduce into our mother tongue) declared their original office, authority,
privilege, and recompensed honor, But also bewrayd the order, and manner of
their E^ection, Creation, Conti^uance, Tryumphs, Wisdom, and estimation
amongst the Romans, for ^e speaks nothing of other Nations, whereof I mean
here to say somewhat

CHAP. 2. That other Nations beside the Romans used Ambassadors.
IT was not only a thing peculiar to the Roman^ to observe this order i^
displacing, requiring, consenting to, or procuring the performance of any
thing. But the Jews also the most ancient an^ peculiar people of God with the
Egyptians, an^ Grecians, who were o^ far more Antiquity tha^ the Romans, are
read to have used the same, whereof I mean to produce some examples. And because
the best kind of persuasion, or chief rule whereby to square our life, either
in following Virtue, or avoiding the Vice, in confirming in Morality, or
instructing in Philosophy, is to be drawn from the examples of others;
therefore I will at this time only (since leisure serves not, with more Ample
Reasons, and profound Sentences to enlarge my proposition) set down the
Confirmation of the several matters ^elonging to Ambassadors by examples with
short abridgment thereof drawn out of many Histories, as if I had privately
noted them for my self, sufficiently confirming whatsoever I shall here utter
unto your Lordship, as requisite for an Ambassador to do, to receive, to
deliver, and to profess; wherefore in that order I will descend to this
matter, that other Nations besides the Romans used Ambassadors by intercourse
to dispatch the affairs of their Countries having to deal with other Princes.
And because (as I said) the Jews were a people ^ost ancient, I will therefore
begin with them, as men from whom all Government and Order, Learning,
Morality, Philosophy, and all other notable things have been derived, though
somewhat altered and corrupted by the evilnesse of other Nations, separating
themselves from the true people of God, and right use of his Religion. Phineas
the Priest, the Son of Eliazer, with ten Princes of the ten Tribes, was sent
Ambassador to the Israelites beyond Jordan; Zorobabel, Annanias, and
Mordocheus were appointed Legates of the Jews, and sent to Darius, King of
Persia, that they might accuse the Samaritans hindering the reedifying of the
Temple. Josephus, lib. 11. cap. 4. Eupolemus the Son of John, and Jason the
Son of Eliazer were from Judas Machabeus sent Ambassadors to the Romans to
join friendship with them. Machab. cap. 8.

And likewise as the Jews, so the Greeks, when come to Tenedos, they sent
Messengers to the Trojans for the delivery of Hellen, which were ^lisses, an
eloquent Orator, furnished with Copy of Speech, and Wisdom, and Menelaus, who
was brief, and pithy in Sentences, that the one by his Eloquence, the other by
the force of his Argument, might move the Trojans. In like sort Mirsus the
Son of Giges was sent by Orestes the Governor to Policrates, the most
fortunate Prince of the world, and King of the Samnites, to the end that he
might entice and entrap him by his Speech, and hope of gain to be received,
which he did effect accordingly (as teaches Hesiod. lib. 3. by which short
notes (it does shortly prove for shortness of time) That the Romans, the
Jews, and other Nations had the use of Embassies, and Ambassadors; wherefore
that being proved, it is now to be considered what persons are of sufficiency
to supply such place.

CRAP. 3. What persons are meet to be Ambassadors.
THE person who ought to dispatch these things must be (as is requisite in all
other causes of Government) learned, well born, free, no bondman, of good
credit in respect of his honesty, of good estimation in respect of his calling,
that he be no liar, vaunter, dissembler, or Traitor; But that he be wise,
valiant, circumspect, furnished with diverse Languages, eloquent, of quick
capacity, of ready deliverance, liberal, comely of person, tall of stature,
and briefly that he be adorned with all virtues required, or commendable, in a
good man, and unfurnished of any vice to blemish his credit, or that may win
him the Surname of a wicked man. First, that he must be learned (besides many
reasons that may be made for it) these examples following shall manifest. In so
much that it appears, that Princes did always choose forth the best learned
to dispatch their affairs. Amalarius Fortunatus, by Nation a German, a Monk of
Luxonia, a man very eloquent in the Greek, and Latin, and Archbishop of Trevers
for his learning, was the Legate of Charles the great, to Michael the Emperor
of Constantinople, to join and confirm amity, and peace with him, in the year
of Christ 813. So Iesse a learned Bishop, for that he had singular knowledge in
the Greek tongue, was made by Charles the Great, Legate to Irenee the Empress
of Constantinople, for to entreat of peace. Amionius, lib. 4. cap. 9. de
Francis. The which example, as witnesses Sigebertus, Achaius, King of Scots,
imitating, did send Rabanus Maurus (a Monk of Fulda) Ambassador to Charles King
of France. The which matter of their learning, I will knit up with one example
more of the King of Armenia, who by his Legates offering to marriage his
Daughter (being but 12. years old) to Michael Andronicus, the Son of Paleologus
the Emperor of Constantinople, did for his Ambassadors choose the most
learned men of that age, who were called Methochides, Theodorus, and Johannes
Glyces, whereof the one was Domesticus, and the other (as says Gregorius, lib.
6.) Dromologotheta, whom he did not so much choose to that place, because they
had great use, and experience of things, but because they did excel in
wisdom, in plentiful knowledge of Divine and Humane things, and in the
understanding of the Greek tongue. For they had need to be such persons, that
should supply a Legates place in a foreign Nation. Since they should be
instructed in many Languages, and should obtain the victory in all kinds of
disputations, as was Haido, or Hatto, Bishop of Basile, sent Ambassador in
811. by Charles the Great, to Constantinople, to make peace, who (as Aventinus,
lib. 4. testifies) wrote the Book entitled Itinerarium.

Thus having learning, and diverse Languages, yet he is not sufficient to play
the Ambassador, unless he be able in like sort Rhetorically by persuading
eloquence, in apt words, ready tongue, sweet voice, and speedy deliverance to
discharge his Message; For such is the force of words, as it often works
strange miracles; For besides that virtue which the Philosophers, the
Cabalists, the Divines, and the Magicians do place in pronouncing words, we
find eloquence to be of such force, that it moves unsensible creatures to be
reclaimed unto reason. And thereupon was Orpheus feigned by his Music to draw
trees, stones, mountains, and wild beasts after him, for that by his sweet
words he reduced the savage people to civility: the want of which utterance
gave Moses occasion to excuse himself before God, that he was unapt by reason
of his stammering (which he got, his mouth being burnt by eating hot coals,
when he was brought up in Pharaohs house, where being then but a boy, he threw
down the Crown from Pharaohs head, whereby the Divines prophesied that he
should destroy the King of Egypt) to be Gods Ambassador to the Egyptians for
the deliverie of the people of Israel; Wherefore to him God chose Aaron as his
Assistant, by his Eloquence to supply Moses his default, and to utter
whatsoever Moses should give him in command. Such an eloquent person was also
Carneades Cyramus, whose eloquence was so great, that he could easily in any
matter by the strength of his speech draw any man to his opinion. And therefore
he (Prince of the Academians) with Diogenes the Stoic, and Critolaus the
Peripatetick, being sent Ambassadors to Rome from the Athenians, brought his
Legatship in doubt amongst the Romans, Marcus Cato saying in the Senate, that
they should beware of that man who by his eloquence, and skill of utterance,
could obtain whatsoever he would desire. Volater: Lib. 4. Cap. 2. Anthropo. of
whom in like sort Quintilian does report Quintil. ^i. 2. cap. 1.
that in the hearing of Cato the Censor at Rome, he did with no less force the
day following argue against Justice than he had the day before defended it;
His singular eloquence being also remembered ^ellius, li. (...) cap. 14.
^initus, ^22. cap. ^de honest. ^scipl.
by Gellius, and Crinitus. Not unlike to whom was Cyneas Thessalus the hearer
of Demosthenes, and Legate of Pirrhus, who when he was sent to any City to
require Surrender thereof, would use this saying of Euripides; That neat, and
sweet words could do as much as threatening swords, of whom Pirrhus was wont to
say, that he had subdued more Cities by the Orations of Cyneas, than by the
hands of his Army; whom (as Plutarch says) the King had in great estimation,
using his help in his chiefest affairs. With no less commendation did
Scopelianus the Sophist obtain the request of his Embassy, for whereas
Domitian the Emperor had made Proclamation, that no Vines should be growing in
Asia, because the plenty thereof, by drunkenness might seem to move Sedition,
Scopelianus being sent to Rome, did by his eloquence not only bring so to
pass, that they might lawfully plant Vines, but also further ^elius, ^i. 20.
^ap. 11.
obtained that he should be Fined that would abstain from the setting, and
planting of the same. In which number of Eloquent Ambassadors, may take his
place, Eusta^hius Capadox, the Successor of Aedesius in his Country, who was of
such profound Eloquence (being the Disciple of Iambions the Chaldean) as being
sent to Supinus King of Persia did there so inchaunt the King by his speeches,
that casting away his Tyara (which was a kind of Crown or Imperial Cap foulded
with linen) the King would have changed his garment for the cloak of
Eustachius, which the Courtiers did forbid, saying that he was a Magician, and
wrote by a course of Witcherie, as teaches Eunapius. And so concluding this
matter, your Lordship may easily gather hereby how requisite it is for an
Ambassador to be eloquent in Speech, in delivering his Message. But to what
use shall all this serve, if he have not joined with these estimation, and
credit, and that he be of good account in his Country before he be sent? For
if he be not, both he, and his Embassy shall be despised and neglected. As
well appears in this one History done in our time. And because I will not in
this point be tedious unto ^our Honor. I will only show you here (omitting
which I could cite con^erning the same) one Hi^torie thereof, for a small thing
can give light to a ^ise man, and your Lord^hip by this one example shall
learn that others ^ave told in many. Which History is thus.

When in the year of our Lord (as tells Paulus Paulus Iovius, lib. 28.
^ovius) Charles the fifth, ^he Emperor (by Confe^eracie made with Cle^ent,
the seventh Bishop of ^ome against the Floren^ines, attempting to reduce those
of the house of Medices into their Country) did with continual Siege oppress
the City of Florence (such was the obstinacy of the Citizens favoring the
popular government) that great cruelty was showed to them, who did freely, and
truly say, that Peace was to be embraced: But at the length by Philip
Meliores, an honest young man in the Commonwealth, preaching often to the
Senate, and persuading to embrace Peace, the Fathers decreed that Ambassadors
should be dispatched to the Pope: yet such was the malignity of the hinderers,
that not they whom the waightiness ^f the cause did require, ^ut men otherwise
of small ^redit, and common Citizens were sent forth. Of whom one Aloysius
Sode^inus (who had not done a^y thing worthy any grave ^ffaires in ordering any
matter, other than that he was called a good housekeeper) was one and another
was Anderolus Ni^olinus, rather a continual, and diligent Merchant, than a
Senator, and the third was Robertus Bon^ius, whom by reason of his late near
alliance with Thomas Soderyne, who still labored against this Peace, made the
Embassi^ to be the more suspected. These men when they were arrived at Bononia,
the Pope (for that they were not of sufficient honor, and for that
sufficiency of industry, sincerity of mind and faith was not found in them)
did so contemn them, that he greatly laughed to see, that in place of worthy
Senators, they had out of Florence sent Merchants, and those not of the best
sort. And that which did most sound in derogation of their Legation was, for
that the Ministers of the Customs in Bononia had found in their Coffers for
Merchandise sake great store of gold thread to make and weave cloth-of-gold; the
which they then brought to avoid further charge of carriage for the same; which
foolish subtilty in so grave a matter, wrapped about with the filthiness of
gain, was the more to be jested at, Because when they had delivered their
Message, they had brought no further authority to confirm the Peace. Wherefore
Clement, and Caesar also, scorning them, and stomacking the covetousness and
unskill of the Merchants, did so upbraid them, that their pertinacie seemed
next unto madness, and they with open shame rejected, were sent home, etc.

Thus far Iovius translated in English. In which is to be seen, that the
baseness, foolishness, Covetousness, and want of experience, was the cause
that these Ambassadors were not only disdained, and their Petition rejected,
but that the poor Florentines were still oppressed with the said war. And thus
much hitherto, that an Ambassador should be learned, eloquent, and of good
calling.

Now for the other matters, as that they must be wise, and expert, etc. you
shall find plentiful examples thereof under the title of Ambassadors praised
for the wise dispatch, and worthy doing of their Legation, and under the title
of Apophthegmes, and wise answers of Legates; wherefore I here strain my quill
to other matters belonging to them, as follows.

CHAP. 4. What Laws, and privileges were made, and allowed for and to
Ambassadors.
ALthough this matter may best by a Civilian be discussed, for that the same is
most plentifully known unto them, and is a thing that I cannot well entreat of,
for that I have not acquainted my self with Justinians Writings, and Decrees:
yet so far-forth, as either in History, or other Authority, I have read, or
collected any thing thereof, I shall not refuse to say what I can, though not
so much as I would, though not so much as the matter could bear, and though not
so much as your Lordship might learn from others to your contentment, and my
desire; And therefore to say what I can, I affirm, That it is but reason (since
Ambassadors endanger their persons, consume their substance, travel their
wits, toil their bodies, serve their Country, and uphold their Prince) that
they should be Franchised with such liberties, as both might be safety for
themselves, and guerdon for their deserts; or else who would willingly
discharge that thing, the performance whereof shall not so much as defend his
life? But to leave proofs of reason, we will descend to the writings of
others who have treated thereof. And first for the order how Ambassadors were
received and used, Alexander ab Alexandro thus writes.

Apud Graecos nisi praeconibus ^ex. ab ^ex. lib. 5. (...). 3.
adhibitis, Legatos minime hostium fines ingredi decebat; neque Legationis
munere fungi quenquam, nisi prius infula aqua ab eisdem manus abluissent,
Iovique coronatis poculis propinassent. Hi tamen Legati qui cum patriis sacris,
O^ympum aut Pythiam missi erant, sacri: qui vero foed ra percutiebant quasi
pacis arbitri, and Interpretos (...) dicti sunt.

Which Alexander further speaking of the time when Ambassadors should be
received amongst the Romans, and in what language the Legates should speak,
says in this order.

Neque illud praetereundum, Alex. ab. Alex. l^. 4. cap. 21.
etc. Neither is it to be overpassed, that it is remembered, that to Legates,
and foreign Nations, admitted into the Senate, the Roman Consulls were not
accustomed to give any answers, but only in Latin, who being admitted after the
manner of the Fathers, the Senate gave them power of that they would have; but
the Greeks (by their Deputies appointed) did declare their minds, if any body
required any thing, as the Atrebates, and Belonaces did assemble their
Counsels by the sound of Trumpets. But if they would speak any thing in their
own Language to those (being admitted in the Senate) were Interpreters given,
by whom they did propound what was needful, and receive the agreement, and
answers of the Senate.

And although Molo the Rhetorician is first said to have declamed in Greek in
the Senate; yet so much did Tiberius hate the Greek tongue, that endeavoring
to speak (I well know not what in the Senate) in Greek, he first craved pardon
therefore.

And Claudius Caesar did raze out of the Table of the Judges, and sent away the
Governuur of a Province in Greece, for that he was ignorant in the Latin
tongue. Further, this custom grew in force amongst the Romans, that in the
month of February, styled the Calends of March (by Consuls appointed therefore)
the Senate did daily apply themselves to hear the requests of Ambassadors, and
complaints of their fellows, lest they should be deceived in the end by long
delay, and tedious expectation. Thus far he.

In which is worthily to be noted, that the Romans with great reason did use to
give answers to Legates in their Mother tongue, which was the Latin, and that
he which spoke in the Senate should have the Latin tongue. The which
observation if it were at this day used, it would judge most allowable, that
what Prince soever should by his Ambassadors request any thing of us, should
use our tongue, they standing in need of us. And so likewise when we are to
require of them things necessary for us, we to use their language, because the
truth of the matter should better be understood thereby than otherwise, upon
the ambiguitie of the word (not known of the Ambassador ignorant of our
tongue) might great contention rise. As did to Frederick Duke of Saxony, in
Sentence given against him by Charles the Fifth, in the Dutch tongue, where
Frederick understanding one word to signify absolution and pardon of life, was
by the same word condemned to death, that word having double signification.

Now what Privileges Aerodius ^itus Livi^s, Dec. 4. (...). 8. ^heatrum ^itae
hu^anae. ^ol. 14. (...). 5.
and Immunities are further to them belonging, Marcus Popilius Lenas being
dispatched Legate unto Antiochus Epiphanes Valor. Max. li. 6 cap. 6.
(who had besieged King Ptolomy, friend to the Romans) to will him that he
should abstain from molesting the Companions of the people of Rome, did
compass about Antiochus Livius, lib. 45. Valor. Max. Plinius.
(deferring answer) with a circle which he made with a wand, charging Anti
chus not to depart out of the same, till such time as he had delivered an
absolute answer, the which Antiochus fearing lest of his war where he does by
manifest error place C. Octavus for Popilius.

Nicholaus Damastenus being sent of Herod, King of the Jews (whose deeds he
wrote with more flattery than troth) Ambassador to Rome, to Augustus, did
pacify the Emperor offended with Herod for wars made against the Arabians;
And so wrought that Syllius Joseph. li. 6. cap. 17
the Legate of the Arabians was condemned. Agapetus the Roman was sent of
Theodorus king of the Goths to Justinian the Emperor to excuse the death of
Amalasuenta, where the Emperor being pacified, and he attempted by the
Emperor to follow the Heresy of Eutiches, by his constant denying thereof so
wrought, that in the end he enforced the Emperor to return to a sound opinion
of Catholic Religion.

Francis Dandalus the Volater. l^. 12. Anthrop.
Venetian Orator, being sent into France, to Clement the Pope to pacify him,
for that he was offended with the States of Venice for the receiving of
Feraria, when he had diverse times used many persuasions, and yet could not
remove the anger of the high Bishop, falling grovelling upon his hands and feet
(of his voluntary motion, not by compulsion as some affirm) with a Chain about
his neck, in the manner of a Dog, did prostrate himself at the feet of the
Bishop then at Dinner; At which strange sight the Pope being astonished, received
him into Ignatius, li. 6. cap. 2.
his favor, and forgave the injury of the Venetians.

Laurence Medices, Ambassador of the Florentines, sent to Naples to King
Ferdinando, when one of the Kings horses was brought forth on which Laurence
should ride together with the King (who came to meet him, not as a private
person) into the Castle, said, he should then need a horse, and not before,
when he had obtained Peace of such a King, whereby he might with quick speed
carry such message to his City, whose hope in this was not deceived, for
Ferdinand being allured with the inticement of his Speech, and courtesy (which
plainly seemed to represent a kingly Majesty) did so bind him unto him, that
of a bitter enemy he made him a dear friend to his Country, in such sort, that
he which made the war by the malice of this Laurence to the Florentines, did
also leave off the same by the words of the same person. Brutus, hist. Flor.
li. 7. When Clement the seventh Bishop of Rome, and Charles the Fifth, the
Emperor, had met at Bononia about diverse affairs, Francis Alvares the Legate
of Divide, commonly called Presto John, was King of the Abissine Aethiopians
(which do possess the middle part of Africa) being come to Bononia by the
conduct of the Ambassadors of John King of Portugal did in the Senate, in the
name of his King, promise faith and obedience ^to Clement, Polidor. de Inven.
lib. 4. M. 2.
Bishop of Rome, in the year of our Lord 1533. in the month of Pebruary. And
so with these examples I conclude this title, of such persons as have been
commended for the wise dispatch of their Embassy. After which I mean with like
examples more plentifully to utter many wise Answers given, and made by, and to
the Legates of other Provinces, in which their wit, and learning was notably
declared.

CHAP. 5. Apophthegmes, or wise, and pleasant Answers given, and made by, and
to Ambassadors.
Darius the King entering into Scythia, was driven to great need, and poverty;
Whereupon the Scythians sent Legates unto him with presents, which were, a
Bird, a Mouse, a Frog, and five Arrows, which Darius interpreted after his
mind, that thereby they did yield themselves, and the Country; By the Mouse,
understanding the Land; by the Frog, the Waters; by the Bird, their Horses; and
by the Arrows, their Bodies. But Gobrias did conjecture, that these presents
did speak to contrary effect. That unless the Byusomius, li. 3. cap. 30.
Persians did fly away as Birds, hide themselves in the Earth like Mise, leap
into the water like Frogs, they should be killed with those Arrows.

Polycartidas an Orator, being sent with others to certain Dukes, when it was
demanded of them, Whether their coming was private, or public, answered, That
if they obtained the effect of their Message, they came publicly, if not,
privately; which Speech did singularly manifest Plutarch in Lacon.
his good mind to his Country; For if his Legation succeeded to his mind* he
would give the glory to his Country, if otherwise he would not have the
reproach of repulse to pertain to the Commonwealth.

The Lacedaemonians sending but one Legate to King Demetrius, he greatly Brus.
li. 2. Sap 1.
stomacked the same, asking if one man were enough to come to him: Whereunto
the Legate answered, yea Sir, we deem it sufficient to send but one body to
one man, which words also Agis the Son of Achidanus used, being sent to
Philip of Macedon, when certain Lacons (a people of Greece inhabiting Sparta)
went Ambassadors to the Tyrant Lygdanus, who often deferred conference with
them, excusing himself, that he was somewhat sickly, they willed the
Messengers to return answer, That they gently Brus. li. 3. cap. 30.
came to talk, and not boysterously to wrestle with the King.

Ismenias, the Theban, and Pilopidas who was Victor in Leustrica, being sent
Messengers to King Artaxerxes, when they should have worshipped the King,
Ismenias (as it seemed) resused to do it, yet for that he would not by
disobedience utter any folly, he wisely excused it, for being commanded to
honor the King, he let fall his Ring at his foot to the ground, which he took
up again with a bowed Plutarch in Artaxerxe.
body, whereby it was judged that he then worshipped the King.

Ambassadors being sent from a besieged City to Alexander Magnus then in
India, did humbly present themselves to him, much marvelling to behold him in
Armor, without any kingly pomp. To the eldest of which Legates (whose name was
Acuphis) Alexander delivered a Cushion (brought for himself) which he willed
Acuphis to take and sit down near unto him, whose benignity, and humanity
Acuphis wondering at, and commending, demanded of him with what conditions he
would receive them into his friendship. To whom Alexander answered, With this
condition, That I make thee Prince of thy Country, and that thou send me an
hundred of the best, vertuousest, and chiefest men thou have; Whereunto Acuphis
smiling said; But I shall govern better as King, if I should rather send thee
an hundred of the worst, Plutarch. in Alexandro.
than the best.

Aximines made Legate to the same Alexander to pacify his anger vehemently
incensed against the Lampascens. Alexander as soon as he saw him, made oath
(thereby to cut off all occasion of hope of favor) that he would not
condescend to any of Aximines requests, although he was his Master; whereto
answered Aximines; Then I require this of thee O King, that thou will utterly
subvert the Country of Aximines this Master; By which wise policy Alexander
against his will did spare the Lampascens.

The Romans dispatched their Ambassadors into Bythinia, to assuage a
Domestical discord between Brusia the Father, and Nicomedes the Son, which
Legates were such as one had many scarres of wounds in his head, another was
diseased in his feet, the third was but of a slender wit, of whom M. Cato was
wont to jest, not unwisely, that the same Embassy lacked both head, feet, and
heart; Sab. li. 9. en. 5. ex Plut. Catone. Cornelius the Centurion, being
Legate in the Creation of the Consul Octavius, showing his Sword in the Court,
said, this shall perform it, if you will not. Volat. li. 23.

Genuinus when he was sent into Asia to Antonius Triumvir (overcome with the
love of Cleopatra) to move Antonius to endeavor himself to fall into Amity
with Octavius, being called to a Banquet by Antonius, and in the presence of
Cleopatra being commanded to deliver his Message, said (not respecting the
greatness of Antony, or presence of Cleopatra) the thing that I am enjoined to
tell to thee, is to be entreated with a sober man, and in another place than
where we now be. But howsoever I may seem to my self as a drunken person to
say a thing, yet I affirm, that all things shall succeed well unto thee, if thou will let Cleopatra depart into Egypt, freely thereby noting the drunkenness of
Antony, and his immoderate love to Cleopatra. Plut. in vita Antonii.

When a Sedition was raised between the Jews, and the Greeks dwelling at
Alexandria; three Legates of either part were chosen to be sent to Caius the
Emperor. Whereof Appion, Prince of the Legates for the Alexandrians, laid
many faults upon the Jews, one of which was this, that they did not prosecute
the Emperor with Divine honor. The chief one of the party of the Jews was
Philo, the brother of Alexander Alabarcha, and a skilful Philosopher, who
preparing to plead the cause of his Nation, was repulsed of Caesar, and
commanded to depart; The Emperor scarce for anger abstaining from doing him
injury; wherefore he being thus cast out with reproach amongst men, fled to the
assistance of God, and turning to the Jews his followers said, we must now be
of good comfort, for when Caius is offended with us, God shall work against him
for us.

Leo Bizantius, when he was sent Ambassador to Athens, entering into the
Assembly, to pacify a long sedition continuing amongst them, provoked
laughter to the people, for that he appeared so fat in body, being furnished
with a great paunch or belly; but he nothing moved therewith, yet knowing the
occasion of th^r jeasting, cried, Why do you laugh to see me thus gross?
Assure your selves, I have a wife far fatter than my self, and yet being
such, and so monsterous, a little bed can hold us being quiet together, but
being at square, and variance, the whole house is too little; and so went on by
this occasion with his Oration, inducing the people to concord, and quiet.
Philostratus.

Ambassadors being dispatched to Pirrhus, did come to redeem certain
prisoners, amongst the which Legates was Caius Fabritius, whose fame and name
was had in great estimation amongst the Romans, being a virtuous man in peace,
and a noble Soldier in war, but yet very poor, which Cineas declared unto
the King; Whereupon Pirrhus did privately use him very courteously, contending
with him to take reward of gold at his hands, not for any evil cause, but as
he said, as a pledge of friendship, and good entertainment; the which Fabritius
refusing, silence was made thereof for that time. The next day (to the end he
might fear Fabritius, who never before had seen an Elephant) Pirrhus commanded
the great beast, as they were in talking, to be brought, and set behind a
skreen, which was so done, then a sign being given, the skreen was removed, and
the Elephant lifting up his nostrill, did hang it over the head of Fabritius,
sounding up a sharp, and terrible noise, whereat Fabritius, by little and
little turning back, said to Pirrhus, neither thy gold yesterday, nor thy beast
to day can move me. After at supper, when talk was had of the Greeks, and of
the Philosophers, Cineas fell to naming of the Epicures, reciting what they
thought of the Gods, and of the Commonwealth, how they placed their chiefest
felicity in pleasure, how they avoided the government of the State as
troublesome, and hurtful to good life, and how the gods were removed from
rewarding, from anger, and from care, of, to, and over us, leading an idle
life, flowing with all pleasure. To whom yet thus speaking, Fabritius cried
out; O God, be these Precepts pleasant to Pirrhus, and the Samnites, whilst
they make war with us. Upon the which Pirrhus marvelling at the mind, and
gravitie of the man, did more earnestly study, by breaking off the wars, to
join friendship with the Romans, privately inviting Fabritius (if the Peace
were performed) to remain and live with him, offering that he should enjoy the
chiefest place amongst his friends, and Nobles. To whom Fabritius is said to
have answered in his ear. It will not be for thy profit O King, for those that
do now worship, and follow thee, if they had made trial of me, would wish me
king to thee. With which Pirrhus was no whit offended, nor took it with a
Tyrannical mind, but did declare to Fabritius friends, the noble disposition
of the man. To whose only credit he did commit the Captives, with this
condition, that if the Senate did deny Peace after their friends saluted, and
the Saturnals celebrated to the Gods, they should be sent back to him again,
who in like sort (the Festivals ended) according to the condition were returned
to Pirrhus, of whom as many as remained at home, the Senate put to execution.
Plutar. in Pirrho.

Two Legates (says Poggius) being sent from the Council of Constance to
Petrus Deluna, the false Pope, did (amongst other bitter chidings, and hard
speeches, which they used together upon the right, and title of
Pontificialitie, after that the Pope had said of himself, this is the Arc of
Noah, meaning that all the power of the Apostolic See remained with him)
answer, there were many beasts in the Ark of Noah, expressing thereby, that
there were many vices in him, the Pope, and many wicked men in the Church.

When Sfortia the great, being feared with the weapons, and awaites of Paulus
Ursinus, had departed from Rome, and placed his Company in Algido, there came
to him from the Pope a Legate (the Cardinal of St. Angel) being of the
family of Columna, and was well received into the City. To which Cardinal
amongst many speeches, when he had said, Shall Sfortia fear a Bear (alluding
to Ursinus, for Ursus in Latin, is a Bear in English) When he shall be in
most safety under a Pillar (meaning himself descended of Columna, which in
English signifies a Pillar) Sfortia suddenly answered, Shall not I seem mad
unto thee (O Father) if whilst in vain I crave aid of a dumb and deaf Pillar,
that great beast, fierce with tooth and ^ayle, making have oftentimes with the
pace of a lively man, shall not seem fearful unto me? not unpleasantly noting
the absence of the Columnians (who were far off) and lively depainting the wit
of Ursinus, with his present Iovius in vita mag. Sfortiae.
strength, which was at hand.

And so my good Lord I knit up this matter with many Ambassadors examples,
wherein is showed their wit, their government, their wise answers, their
gravitie, their magnanimity, policy, favor, and many other excellent things
required in an Ambassador. Of which former examples I shall not need to make
any Comment, or application to your Lordship, who by nature have a ready wit to
conceive, by experience a sound judgment to understand, and by study a heaped
knowledge to judge both my intent in writing them, their commendations in
speaking them, and my friend commodity in reading them. And so to other matter
concerning Legates to be confirmed by collected examples found in ancient and
learned Writers.

CRAP. 3. Ambassadors that dyed in their Embassy.
AS you have before heard what good things have been commended in Legates, and
Ambassadors, how they have been rewarded, honored, esteemed, preferred, what
privileges, what entertainment, and how many other good things have been
belonging unto them. So since there is nothing certain in this world, nothing
happy on every side, but that every commodity brings its discommoditie, these
men with all these good matters are subject to as many evils, misfortunes,
losses, and hindrances, as they seem to be adorned with many excellencies. And
therefore having already spoken of the first part, I will come to the later
part of this Proposition, and lay before your eyes their misfortunes, how some
have died by the way, some have been slain, some maimed, some blinded, and some
many other ways misused, as the malice of the doer, or the will of the
Commander gave in charge for the same; And therefore first to Ambassadors that
have been slain, and dyed in their Embassy.

The Athenians sent Demades the Orator as Legate to Antipater (for that Demades
seemed very expert in the Macedonian affairs) to require of Antipater, that as
at the beginning he had promised, so he would bring forth his aid out of
Munichia. Antipater at first seemed of good disposition toward Demades, but
after Perdicea being dead, and certain of the Kings Letters found amongst the
Kings writings in with Demades did exhort Perdicea, that he should speedily
pass into Europe against Antipater, the favor of Antipater was alyened from
Demades, so that he nourished privily cruelty against him, Wherefore Demades
with his Son Demea, (who with his Father was also Ambassador) urging the
performance of the promise, were both delivered to the Executioner. Diodo. li.
18.

Servius Sulpitius dying in his Legation, had a Statue erected to him, sitting
on horseback. Agapetus, the Roman, as before you heard, coming to the
Emperor to excuse the death of Amalasuenta died in his Embassy.

Porcopius Domatus Accioiolus (who wrote the Grammar, as I conjecture)
singularly learned in the Greek, and Latin tongue, being Ambassador from the
Florentines to Lewis the Eleventh (King of France) for to join in league
against Xistus the Fourth (Bishop of Rome) dyed before he was departed out of
the limits of Italy. In recompense whereof his Children had many privileges
granted, and great sums bestowed on them, with other money appointed by the
Magistrates to the bestowing of his Daughters in Marriage. In whose place
Guidontanius Vespatius was erected, Brutus li. 7. Histor. Florenc.

Claudius Marcellus, one of the three Ambassadors sent unto Massinissa into
Africa perished by shipwreck a little before the third Punicall wars, Livi.
li. 50. Volater. Livius, li. 17.

Iulianus Caesarius the Cardinal, and Ambassador with Udalislaus King of
Polonia, sent by Eugenius the Fourth (chief Bishop) against the Turks, was
slain. Volat. li. 22.

Bassarion (Cardinal of Nice, who wrote the History of the Greeks in the
beginning of the Popedom of Xistus) whilst he went into France, to conclude a
Peace between Lewis the King of France, and Charles Duke of Burgondie, as
meaning to sacrifice that for his last offer to God, being suspected of the one
part, and returning without doing any notable thing in the cause, with very
grief of mind, died at Ravena i^ his journey. Volat. li. 2* Anthrop.

The Senate of Venic^ did dispatch in Legatio^ to the King of Spain, Domick,
Frinisanus, and Anthony Boldus to procure (as there was truce taken for a time)
a continual amity between those Kings, and Charles the King of France, who
taking their journey, Antony being a man of singular eloquence, and profound
judgment, overtaken with sickness in the way, dyed at Genua. In recompense
whereof the State and Senate of Venice, gave to his Son Gabriel Boldns
spiritual livings at Patavia, after confirmed to the said Gabriel by Alexander
the Pope. Bemb. li. 4. Ven. Histor.

Thus these examples sufficing for the proof of this matter (although many
other might be vouched thereupon, as well out of our English Chronicles, as out
of other Authors) I will now, (since every man is subject to death, and it
forces not before God, whether he die an Ambassador or no) show what
injuries as well in life, as limb, with other disorders have been used unto
Legates, against Law, Reason, Equity, Friendship and Christianity.

CHAP. 7. Ambassadors evilly entreated in their Embassy.
IT is showed before in the privileges of Ambassadors, that their Immunitie
should be such as they ought not to be touched for any offense in their
Legation, no not for conspiracy against another Prince. Then since this was
the Law called Ius Gentium, which was (as touching Legates) called Divinum, for
that commonly they sought to maintain godly Peace. How much are those persons,
Kings, or others, to be blamed, that have offered violence to such men, which
of themselves do nothing, but execute the commandment of their Superiors? to
resist whom is punishable, as well before God, as before men; Disobedience
being such a vice as God abhors, Man punishes, Reason misliketh, and Law
condemns.

Wherefore as good Princes have been commended to their perpetual glory, for
the liberality, good using, and entertainment of Ambassadors: So evil Kings
to their continual shame are registered in remembrance for abusing, violating,
and offending such persons. And therefore under this Title, I will set down
both what Ambassadors have been injured, in what sort it was done, by whom,
for what cause, and to whose despite it has been practiced, as follows.

First, the Ambassadors of Darius, requiring in great words. Earth, and Water
to be given them, which amongst the Persians, was a token of yielding, or
subjection, were soon headlong thrown into Ditches, and some into deep Wells,
and Dungeons. Alexander ab Alexandro, li. 4. cap. 7.

Longius (the Legate of Trajane the Emperor) as he was talking, was
circumvented, and apprehended. Volat. li. 23. Anthrop.

John the Son of Edward being issued from the noble house of the Romans called
Columna, (which ancient family continues at this day, of which there did
flourish two hundred noble personages) and being Cardinal of St. Praxedis was
Ambassador in the expedition to Jerusalem which was in the year 1200. where
he did almost suffer Martyrdom, for he was of the barbarous Enemies included
between two posts ready to be cut in sunder, unless the Divine providence, and
his great constancy had not moved them to relent. Volat. li. 22. Anthrop.

Aurelius Scaurus (Legate from the Cymbries) the host being overthrown was
taken, who being called to the Council by them, did put them in fear lest they
should pass the Alps, and go into Italy, affirming that the Romans could not
be subdued, upon which he was killed by Belus, the fierce young King. Livius,
li. 67.

A. Gabinius the Legate, after many things prosperously done against the
Lucans, and many Towns overthrown, was slain at a siege. Livius, li. 76.

Henricus Dandalus (the Ambassador of the Venetians) for that he liberally
uttered certain things, had (against the Law of Nations) his eyes plucked out
by Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople.

Pantaleon, (the Tyrant of the Eleans) did geld certain Legates coming to him,
and enforced them to eat their own stones. Heraclides in Politiis.

The Egyptians joining battle with Cambyses (King of the Persians) in the end
took their flight without any order, to whom (being withdrawn into Memphis)
Cambyses sent an Herald, his Legate, being a Persian, in a ship of Mitelena.
They when they saw the ship arrived at Memphis, in whole troops coming out of
the City, broke the ship, and tore the men into small pieces, carrying them
into the Town. Herodot. li. 3.

In the second year of the Peloponesian war, the Lacedaemonians experiencing
all devises to overthrow the riches of Athens, sent Legates unto Artaxerxes
into Asia, which should require aid, and money to the use of the war, and
also should as they made their passage through Thracia, attempt Sitalces,
whether he would be withdrawn from the society of the Athenians, with which
Ambassadors was Aristius Corinthius, Trinagoras, Togeates, and Pollis Argivus
in his own name going to the King. These repairing into Asia, and passing the
Sea of Helespont, Sadocus, the Son of Sitalces (But, Herodotus makes
Sitalces the Son of Tereus Author of this deed) by the persuasion of the
Legates of Athens (by chance being then in Thracia) were overthrown, and sent
bound to Athens by Mymphiodorus Abderitas. The Legates thus brought into
Attica, were by public Decree slain, and cast into Wells and Ditches, and so
the Athenians revenged the death of their people, which were taken in the
beginning of the wars by the Lacedaemonians, and were slain, and cast out
unburied. Sabell. li. 7. en 3. ex Herodot.

When Pacorus the King of the Parthians had taken Jerusalem, contending
against Hercames, to bring the kingdom to Antigonus the Son of Aristobolus;
He persuaded Hyrcanus, that he with Phalesus the eldest Son to Antipater, and
brother to Herod, should go in Embassy to Barzapharnez, a noble man of
Parthia, into Galile. Hyrcanus obeyed, though Herod. diswaded him from it, and
so in the end was taken by Barzapharnez, and delivered to Antigonus, who cut
off the ears of Hyrcanus that he should thereafter be unapt for the high
Priesthood, upon the which Phasaetus knocking his head against a stone, was
author of his own death. Joseph. li. 14. cap. 24. and 25. Antiquitat.

The Fideni, being a Colonie, or people sprang from Rome, did revolt to Larte
Tollinius, King of Vrentines, by which occasion Legates were dispatched to
demand the cause of their new devise and Counsel, which Legates by the Precept
of Tolunnius were murdered, of which deed, there were which did absolve the
King, for that his Speech was misunderstood, the same being uttered in a
fortunate cast of the Dyce; But whether by error, or of purpose they were
slain, it was in question. They that came to the Fidenians were Caius
Fulcinius, Lullius, Tullius Sp. Nuntius, etc. Boscus to whom after their
slaughter Images were erected at Rome. Sabell. li. 5. en. 3.

The Tarentines by occasion setting upon the Roman men of war carried away
the same, having killed the Captain of the Fleet, with many other persons, by
reason whereof Legates were sent from Rome after the manner of the City to
demand restitution of their goods, whom the Tarentines (adding one mischief to
another) did violate against the Law of Nations. Afterward being urged of the
Romans by war, (when they found themselves not able to encounter the Roman
force, and would not for their natural pride have the war dissolved) they
called Pyrrhus into Italy. Sab. li. 8. en. 4.

The Illyrians having gotten a prey upon the Borderers of Italy, and robbing
their Merchants (being intercepted in the high Sea) great complaint was thereof
made to the Senate of Rome, whereupon they sent two of the Cornicans (a family
of Rome) to Teuca the Queen of the Illyrians (who succeeded in the kingdom,
after the death of Argronus, her Husband,) at what time she was besieging the
Isle of Issa, whether the Ambassadors came, to whom (uttering the complaint of
her sellows) she thus concluded, saying, That she would endeavor that no
injury should be publicly offered to the Romans, but to prohibit her people,
that they should not privately reap the fruit of the Seas, it was not the manner
of Kings, neither would she forbid it. Then one of the Legates (in years
youngest) stoutly (but out of time) replied, Because (said he) O Teuca the
Romans by custom do publicly revenge private injuries, we will by the
assistance of the Gods endeavor, that whether you will or no, this your kingly
custom shall be amended. With which bitter answer the Queen grew so offended
(as that Sex is most impatient in anger) that neglecting Ius Gentium, she sent
out certain which set upon the Ambassadors departed, and killed the the
younger, whose death being declared, the Romans raised a power, gathered a
Navy, and made Teuca tributarie with her Dominions in the revenge of the
Legates death. Sab. li. 9. en. 4. Borifrinus. li. 6. Decad. 1. who calls this
Queen by the name of Teutana.

At the beginning of the Jews wars, Agrippa the King of the Jews sent
Ambassadors to the seditious Jews within Jerusalem, such persons as were
best known unto the Jews, which were Borceus, and Phoebus, to move the people
to lay down their Armor, and be reconciled to the Romans, but the seditious
fearing lest the people would have gone to Agrippa, killed Phoebus before ever he
spoke, and Borceus being wounded hardly escaped. Joseph. li. 2. cap. 24. de
Bello Iudaior.

Iulianus Apostata (so called, for that he denied the Christian faith, being
Emperor) with unspeakable fury raging against the Christians, contrary to
all Law, and equity, did not at Calordan fear to murder Manuel Sabelles, and
Ismael, because they were Christians, and sent Ambassadors to him out of
Persia. Nicephorus, li. 10. cap. 11.

The Catholics remaining in the City of Constantinople, conceiving a certain
hope of the clemency of Valence the Emperor, sent 80 men of holy orders, as
Legates to him lying at Nichomedia. The chief whereof were Theodorus,
Curbaggus, and Thenedenus, who with the rest, together with their ships, he
commanded to be burned. Suidas.

John the Scribe, or Secretary, after the death of Honorius, did invade the
Empire, and required the dignity of the East Empire to be confirmed unto him.
But Theosodius casting his Legates in prison, and sending Captain Asparus with
his host, overcame the Tyrant, and Created Valentinian the Son of his Aunt
Placidia Emperor of the West. Paulus Diaconus.

Innocentius, Bishop of Rome (being ascertained of the injuries, wherewith John
Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople, was troubled beyond all humanity, by
Arcadius the Emperor) dispatched certain Ambassadors, (whose names for
brevitie I omit) unto the Emperor to Constantinople, who at their first
arrival into Greece, were traitorously received of the Tribune, suborned
thereunto by Eudoxia the Empress, the wife of Arcadius, who charged them with
many reports, and said that they came to disturb the Oriental Empire,
Wherefore diverse of them being cast into diverse prisons of the suburbs of
Constantinople, when they could not deliver the Letters they had unto any
others than the Emperor, Valerius (having broken one of his thumbs) did
forcibly take from them their Letters, and their money, who after offering them
3000. pieces of gold did tempt them to follow the part of Attichus the usurped
Bishop of Constantinople, but they pretending that they were admonished in
their sleep, not to consent thereto, did earnestly require liberty of return,
whereupon being put into an old ship which leaked, with many chincks, they were
exposed to the Sea, as to their utter destruction, who using very dangerous
Navigation, at the length hardly escaped in safety, and arrived at Lampsacum,
there changed their ship, and returned into the West. Nicephorus, li. 13. cap.
33. So zomenus, li. 8. cap. u^ ^imo.

Hormisda, Bishop o^ Rome, sent Aemiodius the Bishop, with Fortunatus
Venantius, and Vitalis, Le^ gates to Anastatius Emperor of Constantinople to
reduce him from He resie, but he laboring t^ destroy them, put them i^ a ship
without Sail, Mast^ or Oar, where they ha^ been drowned, had they not been
saved by the benignity of God, which Emperor willed them to redeliver this
Message unto the Pope, That i^ was the property of an Emperor to command
others, and not to obey the Popes Precepts: Whereupon Hormisda did curse him.
Nauclerus Volu. 2. geno. 18. and Henricus Erphordiensis.

Gregory the Seventh, otherwise called Hildebrand, Bishop of Rome, did cast
into prison (for the hatred he bore unto Caesar) the Legates of the Emperor
Hen. 4. sent to excuse the four Crimes laid against him by the Saxons, who yet
thus not contented, did miserably vex the Legates with famine, thirst, and
cold, and in the end leading them about the City, did drive them out of the
Town. Aventium li. 5. Annial. Boiors.

Chilperick King of France, when he had made Venice tributarie unto him, the
same City sending unto him a Bishop for an Ambassador upon certain causes
touching the State, being moved with extreme anger, against Law banished the
Bishop. Aimonius, li. 3. de gestis Francorum.

Emanuel, the Emperor of the Greeks (after that he found by report, that the
City of Venice was grievously infected with a plague) he made to be held a
brazen table red hot with fire before the eyes of Henry Dandalus the
Ambassador, amongst others; by which cruel fact he was almost blinded, and
ever after lost the force of his sight, being still purblinde. Sab. li. 5. en. 9.

John the Cardinal, being at Constantinople, and sent by Alexander the high
Bishop to Manuell (at the request of him, endeavoring to reduce the Greeks to
the Roman Church) was apprehended of Andronicus Corvenus (usurping the
Tyranny, Alexius being killed) and a dog tied unto him, whose tail was thrust
into his mouth, and so drawn through the City, was headlong cast into a ditch,
and then buried.

Cuspinianus Caesar Tregossus of Genua, and Antony Rivico of Spain, sent from
Francis the first (King of France) Legates to the Emperor of the Turks, when
they had sailed to Padua, to go to Venice, were taken of the Spaniards and
killed, wherewith the French King being offended, did cast into prison in Lions
in France, Gregory of Austria, the Bastard of Maximilian the Emperor, and
Bishop of Valentinia, and was the occasion that Laseus the Legate of Ferdinando
was apprehended by Solymon the Turk, and yet not thus contented, he pursued
this injury with extreme war. Sleydan. li. 14. and Paulus Iovius.

Achomates endeavoring by open violence (which he could no otherwise according
to his mind bring to pass) to execute the government of the Turks from his
Father Bajazet; His father gently sent Ambassadors to him either to revoke him
from his madness, or else to bid him war; But how much the more he did
earnestly (after the repulse taken) thirst after the Empire, by so much he
judged, that he should deal more sharp, and bitterly therein; And therefore
commanded the chief of the Legates (most boldly threatening extremity unto
him) to be strangled in his sight, and the rest before the evening to depart
the Camp. The which deed did most of all exasperate the choler of Baiazetes,
and alienate the mind of many men from him, because that he had cruelly against
all humanity, and Law, (without reverence to the person, or duty to his
Father) violated the Legates, coming to him to conclude and end the
controversy; Wherefore being declared an open enemy, his father being dead;
he was taken, and strangled of Silinius his brother. Sab. li. 4. ex Iovio.

Tomumbeius the last Sultan of the Egyptians being drawn out of Memphis by
Selymon Emperor of the Turks, fled into the furthest part of Egypt, to recover
his force, and power. Selinius sent unto him noble men, and such as governed
the Region, and with them certain Egyptians of great name which should persuade
Tomumbeius to lay down his Weapons, and at length to acknowledge the fortune of
victory, who further upon their faith should promise, That if he came in humble
sort, he should still retain the kingdom by the humanity and gift of the
Victor, which he could not any way defend by arms; But if he did proceed to
renew the war, and had forgotten his imbecilitie (the fortune of Battle
being judge) there should thereafter be left no place for him, either of life,
or dignity. These Legates (passing Nilus, and coming into Sarentica) were
killed before they were heard speak, by the mad, and barbarous cruelty of
certain Mamaluchs, which wicked and arrogant men did think to have done an
acceptable deed to Tomumbeius (looking for no such matter) if (to declare their
good wills, and minds abhorring peace) they had opened by that means all the
rage, and cruelty of their hearts. But that deed being so proud, and cruel,
took away all mercy, and patience from Selymon, who at length set an end to
the bloody war, and these beastly Mamaluchs. Sab. supl. li. 8. ex Iovio.

With which History I finish this Tragical discourse of injuries offered to
Ambassadors, as well of the Clergy, as of Temporal men, by Kings, Emperors,
Dukes, Bishops and other persons, both Ethnicks, Turks, and Christians, against
Law, and Justice, which does always will that these Ambassadors should be
courteously used. Contrary to which equity they were most cruelly handled; As
some being burnt, some having their eyes plucked out, some blinded by other
means, some slain, some maimed in their ears, some in their genitalls, some
strangled, some drowned, some left to the mercy of the raging Seas, and others
oppressed with famine, thirst, and cold. And because it is not reason, and
Justice does not permit that such cruel deeds should go unrevenged, as partly
is showed in some of these examples (whereof I could have produced many more,
but that I would avoid ostentation of seeming to have read, and noted many
things in traveling Histories) I will in one special title for that purpose
(wherein your Lordship may require more examples of Ambassadors disorderly
used) lay before your Lordships eyes the revenge of such despite done to
foreign Ambassadors.

CRAP. 8. The revengement of cruelty used. to Ambassodours against the Law of
Nature.
TOuching this matter you heard before out of Alexander ab Alexandro, how they
which offended Ambassadors, were delivered to the offended, and were sent for
the most part to the Country of such Legates, there to receive punishment
according to their deserts. Here I will collect in examples what revengement,
and other hatred has been used, and exercised by open wars to other Princes,
and Nations, for injuries done to their Ambassadors: for it is but reason,
that they who will misuse any by wrong against right, should with like violence
by Justice be rightly requited. And thus to the confirmation thereof by
examples.

When under the conduct of Magabizis (whom Darius had made ruler of Hellespont)
the Thracians were subdued of the Persians; the Persians sent Ambassadors into
Macedonia to require water, and earth, of Amyntas the King. Amyntas received
them with liberal hospitalities, and yielding himself to Darius, at the
length, through the request of the Persians (according to their custom) he
brought certain Concubines in to the Banquet to the Persians, whom when the
Persians had handled, and kissed, Alexander the Son of Amyntas taking the same
in disdain, sent his Father to bed, after the which, when free liberty was
given to the Persians to have carnal company with which of these women every
one would choose, Alexander sent forth those young dames to wash, and cleanse
themselves for more delicacie to content the Persians, and forthwith brought in
neat young men unbearded, clad in the same apparel, and privily weaponed with
daggers, with whom as soon as the Persians began to dally in amorous sort,
they drawing forth their weapons killed the Persians, which slaughter Alexander
did redeem partly for a great sum of money, and partly by giving his Sister
Gygia in marriage to Bubirus the Persian, who was one of the Inquisitors of the
murder. Herod. li. 4.

Thirty Legates of the Cratonians coming to the Siberites were all killed,
and unburied, cast before the walls of the City, to be devoured of wild
beasts; which deed was the beginning of all those evils to them, which the
Oracle did before signify; For all their noble men (a few days being between)
did seem to see the same monstrous act in the same manner, for they beheld Juno
coming into the Marketplace spewing forth her choler; In whose Chapel also
burst forth a fountain of blood, and yet with all this did not their arrogancy
cease, until they were wholly destroyed by the Cratonians. Athen. li. 12. cap.
6. Which History Heraclides Ponticus in libro de Iustitia, although in
substance of matter all one, yet in form, and names, does seem otherwise to
repeat.

King David sent Legates to Hanno the Son of Nalia, the King of the Ammonites
to comfort him of the death of his Father, with whom David had joined
friendship, and they had promised it should be confirmed. But Hanno taking the
Legates as Spies shaved half of their beards, and curtayling their garments by
the buttocks, did after in that manner send them away. With which injury David
being offended, willed the Legates to remain at Hiercunt until their hair was
again grown. And sending Ioab with an Army against the Ammonites, he
grievously afflicted them, and the Syrians (coming in their aid) with bitter
slaughter, wherewith the Syrians being further molested, there were to the
number of 40000 Horsemen killed at Helam by David himself, and the rest after
were made tributarie. 2 Reg. cap. 10.

The Arabians (having overcome Herod the King of the Jews by subtlety, and
Judah being miserably shaken with an earthquake) killed the Legates of the Jews
requiring Peace, but not long after they being again grieved by Herod with most
bitter slaughter, and in the en^ subdued, received worthy Joseph. li. 15. cap.
18. Antiqui^at.
punishment for their wicked act.

Certain persons of the Families of Tatius Sabinus (after the manner of
thieves, and robbers) entering the fields of the Laurentines, drove the beasts
from thence, and spoiled many people, whom they met; Whereupon Romulus (judging
the guilty worthy to be punished) sent Legates unto Tatius (with whom the
favor of his people did more prevail) than the Law of the Countries, insomuch
that he did not only deny the request of the Messengers, but as they were
departing, permitted them to be violated of his people, which punishment of the
offender, Tatius procured to himself, who a little while after (coming to
Lavinius, to the solemn Feast there holden) was by privy conspiracy in an
assault made upon him miserably slain by the kindred of them, who before were
violated of the Tatians. Theatrum. Vit. human. vol. 14. li. 5.

The Corinthians being under the government of Philip raised dissension against
him, and bore themselves so proudly against the Romans, that certain
Corinthians did presume to cast urine and other filth upon the Roman
Ambassador passing by the houses of the street, for which fact, and other like
offenses, they received revengement out of hand, for a great Army being sent
thither, Corinth was made Level with the ground by Lucius Muminius, Achaius,
and the rest of the Dominions, even to the parts of Macedonia fell to the Roman
government. Strabo. li. 8.

The Legate of the King of Persia sent to Aquisgrave to Charles the Great,
being very hardly received of the Frenchmen, complained t^ Charles, that the
authority of Legates was greate^ amongst the Persians, tha^ the French, upon
which to pacify the Persia^ King, to redeem such injury, as to revenge the
fact, Charles remove^ all the Magistrates, an^ Captains of every Province
through which they came, reduced them to a^ private estate, losing their
office; Amerced also the Bishops in a great mass^ of money, and provided that
the Legates with al^ care, duty, and piety should be conveyed to their
Countries. And yet deeming this not sufficient, he presented the King of Persia
with horses, Spanish Mules, and costly garments of the German fashion, and
noble dogs to hunt, which Germany brings forth excelling in swiftness, and
cruelty. Avent. li. 4. Annalium Boiorum.

And thus hitherto of the tragical murders following the injuries offered to
Ambassadors, which has been the overthrow of many States, and Conquest of
many Countries. For no greater villainy can be offered to any absent, than to
misuse his present Deputy, representing the Majesty of his King, and Master.

CHAP. 9. Ambassadors evilly rewarded at their return into their Countries.
AMongst the other mischiefs that hang over the heads of Ambassadors, besides
their charge, death by the way, misusing in their Legation, and bloody wars
that follow thereon; This also is not the least evil that accompanies them,
That at his return into his Country (when he hops for great reward,
honorable title, glorious receiving by the people, and credit with his Prince,
in recompense of his toyled body, his great expenses, his endangered life) that
he is not only deceived therein, but in place thereof receives either
imprisonment, the Princes displeasure, loss of life, confiscation of goods,
discredit in his Country, disdain of his equals, rebuke of his Superiors,
and evil report of his Inferiors, if in dispatch of his Legation, the event
falls not to his Princes mind, and his Countries benefit; And yet he doing
as much as wit by nature will give him leave, and judgment by experience has
taught him, is rather in my opinion to be pardoned for the overthwart success,
than to be punished for those defaults which himself cannot remedy; God
having dealt no more liberally with him in imparting great wit, learning, or
experience unto him: For in truth if his Legation be not well performed, the
lack is rather to be imputed to the Prince, that would not make better choice,
than to the subject that of force must obey, or else run into further
inconveniencie of his King, whose displeasure (says Solomon) is death. But
because my intent is not in any of these matters fully to say my mind, and to
utter what reasons I can produce to confirm any such thing depending on the
shoulders of Legates, but only to warrantize my assertion with authority of
examples; Therefore leaving all other ordinary proofs, I will descend to my
former course, and only will with one example or two for that I mean not to be
tedious, and intend but to give your Lordship a taste, that many other examples
might be vouched thereon) display sufficient authority in that point, In which
Ambassadors have been evilly rewarded at their return into their Country, as
follows.

Amasis the Legate, being sent of King Apris, to those people that were
revolted, afterward became King of the Revolters, upon the which there was
another Legate called Paterbenus sent to Amasis who returning without doing any
good in the matter, was cruelly handled of King Apris. Theatrum. Vol. 18. li. 4.

Alexander the Son of Amyntas, King of Macedonia, was (of Mordonius whom Xerxes
had left in Greece to subdue it) sent Ambassador to the Athenians, to conclude
a Peace between them, but he departed without bringing any thing to success,
whereupon he was afterward forbidden to come to Athens, and so banished the
Town. Herodot. li. 8.

In both which examples what cause was there, why either Paterbenus of Apris,
or Alexander of the Athenians should be so cruelly handled, doing what in them
lay? for when the obstinacy of the other party with whom they must confer,
is so much, that neither reason can move, eloquence persuade, gentle usage make
willing, or threatenings fear to yield unto their Ambassie, what shall the poor
Legates do? and if they bring not their message to effect, they shall be
sharply punished at their return, as either faithless to their Masters, or
partial to the enemy. For, me thinks, I hear some Sycophant flattering the
Prince, and maligning the Ambassador (either before his going for some private
grudge, or after his departure, for his open honor, in that he is advanced to
his place of Legation) and yet setting his own commodity thereby does say,
that if the matter come not to effect, it is by the negligence of the party
Ambassador, who if he carry not sufficient authority to conclude, or answer
all things done on the adverse part, may send home for a larger Commission, the
which if he do not, if thereby he might have brought it to conclusion, is to
be deemed as a traiterous person to his Prince, and Country, and therefore at
his return to be punished. The which thing if he do (as I would not excuse it,
where open, and not surmised negligence is found in the cause) I say he is
worthy therefore of double revenge at his home coming, and to receive torment
in place of liberality, reproach for credit, loss of life for advancement,
and dis-inheritance in recompense of his deserved reward. And here since now I
am fallen into the mention of treacherous Ambassadors, it shall not be
unfitting in this place to show what persons, to the shame of them, and of
their posterity, are registered in the everlasting Records of Traiterous
Ambassadors toward their Prince and Province.

CHAP. 10. Traiterous Ambassadors toward their Masters and Princes.
AS all injuries which tend to the subversion of a Commonwealth are to be
punished, because not one City, but a Province, not a part of the body, but
the whole body, not the King alone, but the subject is grieved thereby; so the
same wrong (being injustice) is not only to be avoided (by all good men) as
chief enemy to virtue, but also they are to be hated, and sharply punished,
which contrary to natural duty to the Prince, to equity, to his Country, to
good disposition toward himself, to virtue, to good men, and contrary to
Justice, to all men in matter of trust (wherein all truth is to be used) do
falsely, and injuriously betray their Children, their Parents, their Friends,
their King, their Country. And as in all men such treason is to be abhorred,
so especially in Ambassadors, who are the doors, and gates of the
Commonwealth, by which Peace, or War, quiet, or dissension, profit, or
disco^moditie are brought into the same. This vilde fault is most abhorred, and
worthy to be rewarded with death, a thing which in all ages, amongst all men,
in all places, and in all matters has been misliked, hated, condemned, and
revenged. Because no greater injury can any ways be offered, than that he
who is in credit, with the life, with the commodity, with the honor, with the
state of his Prince, or Country, with the benefit of his friend, or familiar,
should under the color of assured duty, and friendship, overthrow such State,
or person, as gives such fidelity unto him. But what spend I many words to
confirm a thing so manifestly known to be evil? I will not do it, but by
example set out such wicked persons, as have wrought against their own head, in
such a villainous sort, as the blott thereof will never be wiped away, which
examples (for he is happy that can beware by the harm of others) I have set
down as condemning that evil fact in them, and as a warning for others to
beware, which may fall into the like inconveniencie, if fear of God, discourse
of reason, duty to the Prince, love to his Country, and fidelity to his
friends and Allies, do not restrain the evil mind of men's natural inclination
always of it self by disposition bent to the worst, and ready to yield to his
basest part. The examples be these.

Labienus the Legate of Caesar, in France, having performed great exploits
under Caesar, at the length in the Civil wars traitorously fled from Caesar,
to Pompey, of whom does Lucan write; -- Dux fortis in armis Caesareis, Labienus
erat, nunc transfuga vilis.



The which History is more to be seen at large in Volater. li. 16. Urban. can.

Amasis (as you heard before) being the Legate of King Apris; who sent him to
the Egyptians, revolted from him, became most traitorously King of the
Revolters.

Ibancus falling from the part of Abexius Angelus Emperor of Constantinople,
did defend, and make strong with Castles the places adjoining to Mount Hemo,
for the reconciliation of which Ibancus to become again subject, the Emperor
did send an Ambassador Eunuch very familiar unto him, which should revoke, and
renew Conditions and Covenants between them, willing him also to put him in
mind of the Marriage of his Niece, but this wicked gelding, coming to Ibancus,
did not only not do any thing belonging to his Message, but with his presence
did rather confirm him in the continuance of his attempt, when he had rashly
spewed out unto him that the Greeks out of hand would invade him: And therefore
counselling him, that leaving the champion plains, he should for his and the
peoples better strength, and safety, commit himself to the mountains.
Nicelius, li. 3. de Imperio Alex.

Ariepertus, the Brother of Theudolinda created King of the Lumbards, when he
had reigned nine years, bequeathed the kingdom to Bertanus, and Godopertus his
Sons. The kingdom being divided, Bertanus placed his Imperial seat at Milan,
and Godopertus at Ticinum, after (dissension sprang between the two brothers)
Godopertus sent to Grinidaldus (Duke of Beneventa) a Legate, Garipaldus,
Captain, or Duke of Taureventinus, to request speedy aid against his brother,
in recompense whereof he promised his kinswoman in marriage; contrary to which
thing the traitorous Legate did persuade Grinidaldus ^o possess the kingdom
of L^mbardie, having now apt time therefore, the brothers being at wars
within themselves; Whereupon Grinivalde with a chosen Company went to Ticinum,
where being honorably received (because of his marriage, as was thought) into
the Kings Palace, did kill Godopertus, and enjoyed the kingdom. Bertarius which
was at Milan hearing thereof, for fear fled into Panonia, or Hungary, to
Cacanus King of the Araries, a people of Panonia, leaving behind Rodolinda his
wife, and Camipertus his Son, whom Grinivaldus sent to Benevenventa not long
after, which Domus Gariopaldus (the Legate) was in the Temple killed by the
Servant of Godopertus, who feared not to be murdered for the revenge of his
Masters injury. Bonsinius, li. 8. Deca. 1.

Edgarus, King of England, by sickness losing the Queen his wife Elfreda (on
whom he had gotten Edward his Son) at what time Fame had blown abroad, that
Horgerius, Duke of Cornwall, had a fair Daughter named Alfreda, he sent
Ethelwold his familiar companion, as his Ambassador, to see the beauty of the
Maid, and with his words, and in his name, to demand her in marriage, if her
beauty did answer the report. Ethelwold when he had seen the beauty of the
Maid, unmindfull of the Kings commandment, did earnestly desire to have her
for Wife, who returning to the King, said, That she was not such a person as
was convenient to be espoused to the King; but a little after, perceiving by
this device, that the Kings mind was changed from her love, he began with
little, and little, to work with the King to obtain license, that he might
take her by his consent; the which (the King having now despised her beauty)
did easily grant. Afterward the rumor of the beauty of Alfreda did more and
more increase, which moved the King, desirous to see her, to take occasion to
visit the Town of Ethelwold as he went in hunting. Ethelwold when he
understood that the King would come thither, discovering the whole matter to
his wife, prayed her (for the safety of them both) that she would attire her
self more carelessly, and show her self less beautiful (than she was
accustomed) to the young, and lusty King. But the woman forgetting matrimonial
love, and the Children born to Ethelwold, as richly attyred as she could, came
forth to meet the King, where (casting off all shame) she gave the occasion of
her Husbands destruction, for he was after slain, and the King shortly married
her, of whom he begat many Children. Than which deed nothing did more blemish
the fame of that worthy King Edgar, as well for that he had taken away the
Husband, as for that he had espoused the unchaste Wife. Polydor, li. 6.
Ranulphus, li. 6. cap. 11. Will'mus Malmes, li. 2. cap. 46.

Francis Sabarella the Cardinal (whose writings are highly commended, and
allowed, being holden in great authority amongst the Civil Lawyers) sent
Ambassador by John the 23. Bishop of Rome, unto the Council of Constance, to
excuse his fact, and keep him in the Popedom, was author and occasion of the
Popes utter overthrow, in hope that himself afterward by the consent of the
Council, should have supplied the place of Pope John: But being prevented by
death, he at one time did satisfy both his Tyrannical ambition, and
unchristian treachery. Garmibertus, li. 5. de vitis Pontificum.

And so with one History more delivered in Latin, as Guicchardine has
written it, I will set end to these traiterous, and unfaithful Ambassadors;
The which matter I have purposely delivered in Latin as the course of the
style leads word for word, and as the Author writ the same, for that not
reading the History in any other place, I could not so fitly set it forth, as
me thinks both such a matter, and the Authors meaning does require, And yet
loath to leave out a thing done in our remembrance, I thought best, rather so to
do, than utterly to defraud your Lordship thereof. The matter is this; Constans
fuit multorum opinio, Albertum Pium Carpensem, Galliae Regis Lodovici duodecimi
apud Iulium 2. Papam de controversia inter Pontificem, and Ferariae Ducem
Alfonsum Atestinum, and salinis Cerine, Comactii ^rta componenda, Legatum
legationis munere non bona fide functum, ut Pontificem Ferariensium Ducem
contetaret operam dedisse. Ad idque ardentissimo desiderio, in quo ad mortem
usque permansit impulsum, ut Alfonsus Ferariensi principatu spoliaretur. Quum
Hercules Alfonsi pater ante paucos annos a Gilberto Pio dimidiam Carpensem
ditionem accepisset, eique Saxuli castellum cum nonnullis aliis oppidis
permutationem dedisset. Albertus ne tandem (ut saepe necesse eum minus potentem
potentioris vicini cupiditate cedere) ei alteram partem, quae ad se spectaret,
concedere cogeretur, metuebat. Guicchard. li. 2.

With which Latin History concluding, and uttering what I have read
concerning such unfaithful Legates, who without better government may be drawn
into Treason, one of the most wicked evils, which by their own occasion, and
folly they may rashly fall into, I will finish up the enlarging of this
proposition concerning traiterous Ambassadors, with their manner of
treachery. And take upon me briefly in like order, with like manner of
examples to treat of one other mischief that follows such Ambassadors; For
as there is no Body but has its shadow, no Corn but has its chafe, no Wine
but has its lees, nor any man that at all times, in all places, in all
matters, and to all persons does show himself alike perfect wise: So since
these Legates hereafter may (as before time they have) by words, by writings,
by deeds, by gestures, show some folly in them (though otherwise perhaps not to
be discommended) I will now discourse of foolish Ambassadors to give light to
others, and to save them out of such condemned actions.

CHAP. 11. Of the foolish sayings, and doings of Ambassadors.
NOtwithstanding that it often happens to be counted a point of wisdom to
dissemble, and to utter great folly, yet in a Legate, in a matter of gravitie,
in the benefit of a Country, in the cause of a King, to show either folly in
the tongue, rashness in the hand, lightness in the gesture, clownishness in
action, or want of good government in ordering himself, is not simply a fault
in the Agent, which yet is not to be allowed, but also it stretches further,
and ministers occasion to condemn the Master, or Prince, for want of
judgment, that either he had not people out of whom, or else had not in him
to discern to whom he might have better committed such a weighty charge, a
thing not to be imagined of the head, and Governor of the Commonwealth, and
kingdom; Wherefore as you have before on the one side wise Ambassadors,
honored and commended for their singular and quick wits in answering, for
their worthy, and prudent dispatch of their Embassy in action. So on the other
side you shall now see, That they who do not advisedly consider the place
wherein, the person to whom, the matter whereof they are to use their speech,
do not only fall into many gross errors, which hurt themselves, injury their
Countries, and shame their Princes; But that they also thereby become a note,
and blot of Ignominy to be left behind them in their utter condemnation, and
the heavy reproach of their posterity, as is proved by these persons following,
vouched for that intent, whose children although they might be condemned, as
descended from Ambassadors, yet it is reproachful to have the folly, and evil
of their Ancestors to be spightfully objected unto them. And so to the matter.
The people of Florence sent an Orator or Ambassador to Jane Queen of Naples
(of life incontinent, and such a person as hanged her Husband, a gallant young
Prince, out of her Chamber window, for that he could not the night before
content her immoderate, and insatiable leacherie) called Francis, a certain
Lawyer by profession, but better learned in wearing the apparel of a
Civillian, than deeply seen in the judgment of Justinian; And yet more
unlearned indeed then he appeared in show. This man being called into the
Queens presence to perform his charge; when he had uttered with some good care
the effects of his Legation, was the next day commanded to return to the Court
to hear his answer: (In the mean time having intelligence, that the Queen loved
proper men, not disdaining such persons as were of excellent beauty) but when
according to commandment he was returned to Court, there after many things
spoken this way, and that way, about his Embassy unto the Queen, at length
more impudent than wise, more glorious than seemly, brake with the Queen, and
said, that he had far more secret matters to impart unto her. Whereupon the
gentle Queen desirous to satisfy his Legation in all convenient order, and
deeming the matters of great importance should be revealed unto her self,
courteously called him into a more secret place, where the fool, besides all
order, and civilitie, much flattering himself in the excellency of his
beauty, demanded of her society in the act of Venus. At which the wise Queen
nothing abashed, nor altered into any sudden passion, beholding the countenance
of the man, did only smiling ask whether the Florentines had given him the same
in commission also, and telling him that he were best to have authority
therefore, without further anger willed him to depart home. Poggius in facetiis.

Ariston the Tyrant of Athens, (besieged and subdued by L. Sylla, and being in
great poverty, and want of all things) did send two Legates, or Messengers
into the Camp to Sylla (but they with the minds of Tyrants, and not with an
humble, or gentle style applied to the present fortune beginning with the
praise of Theseus, and Eumolisuenta, together with the memory of things done
against the Medes, and other Nations by the Athenians, did gloriously, and
foolishly execute their Legation, by which they did not only not mitigate the
mind of the enemy, but made him far more offended than he was before, saying
that they were a people most happy, and therefore meet to carry back such
praises again, for he was sent to Athens by the City of Rome, not to be
instructed in learning, but utterly to overthrow the taken City of Athens,
which he did after perform. Sab. li. 9. en. 6. ex Plut. Sylla.

The Perusines sending Orators to Urbaim Bishop of Rome, (afflicted with
sickness) one of them without respect of the grief of the Pope, used a long,
and tedious Oration. The other who grieved at the folly of the first Speaker,
then being to mend all, fell into a far more offense to move anger in the
Bishop, saying, That it was given them in charge, that except they were
answered forthwith, they should repeat the same Oration again. At whose folly
the Bishop smiling, commanded them to be quickly dispatched. Poggius in
facetiis.

Franciscus Codelmerius a Cardinal, being with a Navy sent Legate against the
Turks, subduing Hellespont, by his folly, and ignorance, suffered the Turks to
pass out of that straight, and gave no warning to the Christians, wherein he
might, and did seem to be author (by his stupiditie) of that memorable, and
lamentable slaughter of the Christians at Varua. Garimbertus, li. 6. De vitis
Pontificum.

In the wars which were kept between Pope Gregory the Eleventh, and the
Florentines, a Legate of the Racavatenses being sent to Florence, gave them
thanks for the liberties restored, inveighing with many despightfull words
against the Bishop, and the Princes of the City, and the Ministers of the
Bishop, having no respect to Radolphus, Lord of the Camerines, who was then
Potimansis or chief Governor of Florence, for the Bishop. Whereupon Radolphus
demanded of the Ambassador of what faculty or Art he was, to whom he
answered, a Doctor of the Civil Law, then he asked how long he had applied
that study, the Legate said, more than ten years. O replied Radolphus, very
glad would I have been, that you had bestowed a year thereof to learn
discretion, and wisdom, judgeing him a simple fool, that in his presence
being one of the number, would so lavishly bluster out such heavy words
against the Princes and Rulers. Poggius.

The Venetians dispatched two young Legates ^o Frederick the third Emperor,
who being highly offended with their young years, forbade them to approach his
presence, yet at the length ^hey obtained this favor, that they were privately,
and without the order of the Custom of Ambassadors (which openly should
deliver their Message) brought to the Emperor, at what time, beyond all
humanity, or wisdom, out of the matter propounded they said that if all
wisdom and learning rested in a beard, and in white hairs, the Senate of
Venice had in place of them, to send to the Emperor two fair Barbara Goats,
with which proud answer, they confirmed the suspicion this Emperor conceived
of their folly. Aegidius Cororetus de dictis, and factis memor.

And here winding up the Clue of my raw thread, spun, and woven to make the
mournful garment for unfit Ambassadors to wear, that is, to cloth them with
reproach to posterity, for that they were foolish, Traitors, proud,
disdainful, unfit for so honorable a place, I will only now add to this
matter one title more, being a badge of their office, and so set end to this
unorderly discourse of matters belonging to Ambassadors, for both shortness
of time, and tediousness of the matter, and indigestion in the method, do
will me with speed (remembering Solomon's divine Speech, That in multiloquio non
deest peccatum) to draw to my journeys end, left my weary hand, and my tired
Pen, thinking to reach to a further place, do break their wind, and cast their
Master into the mire, whose end is then far worse than his hasty beginning.
And thus to the last title.

CRAP. 12. Of Persons sent diverse times in Embassy.
AS the end for every thing makes the same happy, or evil, as the Proverb is,
Bonus exitus omnia probat, so of a good beginning by grace, continued for
virtue, attempted with order, executed by good minds, performed of necessity,
there must ensue a good end, no less worthy such a beginning; For as the good
life is cause of a good and quiet death; So the mild, and godly death, declare
the former good life of the Person; And therefore since my beginning by intent
was good; the continuance for matter not unprofitable, for order not altogether
confused, and for the commodity that may ensue not to be rejected (since this
benefit comes thereby, that although it be not worthy the reading of your
honor, and although it bring no great learning to others, yet to me who
travel my wit and hand, my study and pen therewith, it brings advantage) I
hope a good end, and conclusion of matter will follow; For as the beginning of
this Treatise was in the commendation of the wise, learned, and worthy
Ambassadors; So with like end in praise of them, and their travel, I will
finish this simple Treatise; And for that there is nothing can beautify their
person, increase their honor, augment their substance, win love of their
Country, gain credit amongst strangers, favor of their Prince, and friendship
amongst all men, than oftentimes to supply the place of so weighty, and
honorable a charge; Therefore I will say somewhat of diverse persons, who
diverse times, to diverse Princes, and in diverse matters have won singular
commendations therefore, committing all other matters to silence, which I could
speak of them, and their office; Since these Messengers of Princes to Princes,
had their first original from the Angellicall Order of Archangells, who are
made the Ambassadors of God, to great Personages in great matters, either of
Revelation of the success of Kingdoms, as Gabriel was to Daniel, or of
opening some rare, and strange thing, as he was also to the Virgin of the
Conception of the Savior of our Souls, and Redeemer of us from our Sins; For
this is certain, that there is no order, or government in this world, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, but it is had from the pattern of the Celestial
Hierarchy; Since God Created the world, and appointed the government thereof
according to the Architype, chief pattern, or Ideall form of the same,
conceived in the divine mind, and ordered in the Celestial Hierarchy. But
enough of this, and perchance to some cavelling heads, (who as yet have not
tasted the sweet kernel of the hard Nut) too much to be discovered. And so
once again to my Ambassadors which diverse times have enjoyed that Function,
whereof I (although I might produce many good, and present examples) both of
our own Country, in our own remembrance, and living in our present days, As
of your Lordship, of whom for modesty I will forbear to speak, who have now
twice been Ambassador, And of Master Doctor Nicholas Wootton, who being
Counselor to four Princes, was also diverse times Ambassador, of Sir John
Mason likewise, and many other our Countrie-men: yet I will only here power out
of the small store of my Collections, such as in times past in foreign Nations
have enjoyed such high and honorable title.

Caius Lelius, Ambassador to Africa going into Spain, was Governor in the
expugnation of New Carthage, as Livie witnesses, who also being sent
Ambassador from Scipio to Syphaces for conclusion of friendship, did lead with
him certain Tribunes expert in the feats of Arms, under the form of Servants,
to the intent to descrie the manner of the Country, as writes Frontinus; in
which Legation he wisely wrought that Syphaces became friend to the Romans.
Volat. li. 16. Urb. Com.

Aegidius Carilla was sent from Innocent the sixth high Bishop to conclude the
matters of Italy, who being by birth a Spaniard, of the Nation of Carilla, was
so singular wise in the despatch of his affairs in the absence of the Bishop,
that he pacified the State of the Church at that time miserably vexed with many
and great tumults, which man also of Urban the sixth, being again sent into
Italy, brought under the obedience of Count Barnabas, molesting the quiet of
the Bishop; who likewise before of Urban the Fifth, was sent Legate into Italy.
Volat. li. 22. Anthropo.

Quintus Cicero, the brother of Marcus Tullis Cicero, the Legate of Caesar in
France, was the chief in 14. Embassies, Volat. 29.

Epiphanius the most holy Bishop did execute the office of many Legations for
Theodericus King of the Goths, and for many others, who always returned most
happy, in that every thing in those several causes succeeded well according to
his mind. Ennodius in ejus vita.

And so concluding this Title of such persons as have diverse times supplied the
office of an Ambassador with the number of four Foreign examples (thinking
the same number in Arithmetic to possess virtue) As all the Divines, both
Latins, Greeks, and Hebrews, as well Cabalists as others do fully agree, and
not without great reason most learnedly and Christianly do maintain against
unlearned and foolish opinions of such as do grossly judge such hidden
mysteries of numbers to be superstitious, contrary to Scripture, which voucheth
that God made the world, in weight, number, and measure, which three do
signify Music, Arithmetique and Geometry, of which number of Four, I refer
the Discourse to another more convenient time. I will in few words set end unto
this my unorderly, but well meaning Discourse of Ambassadors in a short
Epilogue by way of recapitulation knitting up the sum of all that which
before in those Examples have been so hudled up together in hotch-poch.

Wherefore first it ap^eareth that Ambassa^ours having their exam^le from
Heaven, and their original upon earth, were used in all Ages, ^n all matters,
amongst all men of sundry Nations, of the Jews, Gentiles, Greeks, Barbarians,
Latins, and other people.

Secondly, that he who in honor should furnish the place of such a person,
must be free born, no bondman, stout, and valiant, not dastard-like, or a
coward, that he must be learned, not ignorant, wise, not foolish, quick of wit,
not blockish and dull, faithful, no traitor, that he must be rewarded, not
suffered to consume his substance. That he must in his Embassy be well
entreated, not abused, murdered, or have any villainy, or injury permitted to
be done unto him, and that he must be of good calling, and estimation in his
Country before he be sent, not a Crafts-man, a Serving-man, a common Citizen,
a mean Priest, an Advocate, or a defamed person, either for Perjurie, Simonie,
Treachery, or any other kind of evil life. For if he be unfurnished with
these virtues, and garnished with these vices, he is not only not worthy to
supply the place of Embassy in a Foreign Nation, where he shall do his
Country good, his Prince honor, and himself good, and credit; But he rather
well deserves as a wicked, and hateful person to be banished into some other
Country, there to rid his Commonwealth of such an evil member, to become
opprobrious to other Nations, and in all places of the world to receive due
punishment for his evil deservings.

Thus having ended my Christmasse work done in the midst of my Christmasse
plays, as may appear by the Christmasly handling thereof, (...) after
Christmasse consecrate the same to your honorable acceptance, not as a thing
worthy your desert and judgment, but as a thing that answers my desire, and
good meaning. The which I beseech your Lordship to accept as lovingly from me,
as it is presented willingly by me unto you, with whom (as soon as by leisure
I might, and as by learning I was able, and as a body born out of time, but yet
thinking it better late than never) I deemed it my duty to congratulate your
return with some such poor gift, as the Relics of my spoiled Library in the
time of mine impoverishing, and unfortunate trouble, would yield me ability
to bestow.

And thus most humbly commending me to your Honorable liking, committing you
to the Almighties protection, dutifully take my leav^ this eighth of Ianuari
1578. at Longleate Yours
FINIS.

