Mr. Tillinghasts EIGHT LAST SERMONS.

I The Fifth Kingdom, or Kingdom of Christ, founded on the New Covenant; one
Sermon on Jer: 33.20, 21. II Signs of the Times; two Sermons on Matthew. 16.3. To
which is added six Signs, as they were in his Notes. III Christ the only
Foundation; one Sermon on 1 Cor. 3.11. With the prosecution of the point, as it
was in his Notes. IV The Promise of the Father; two Sermons on Act. 1.4. V The
evil of the Times; one Sermon on Mal. 3.16, 17. VI Look to your Aims and Ends;
one Sermon on Matthew. 11.7.
To which is added, The Idols abolished; being his Notes on Is. 2.18

Matthew. 3.2. Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. LONDON, Printed
by M. S. for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley, 1655.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe Lord, upon my frequent remembrance of the depth of the Riches both of his
Wisdom, Romans 12.33.
and of his Knowledge, has given me many and manifold occasions to break forth
in the words of the Apostles sudden exclamation, How unsearchable are his
Judgments! and his ways past finding out!

Yea, such has been the tenor of his dispensations (and of the Appearance of
some of them) of late years from out of those unsearchable depths, as may well
induce us in the midst of such musings, to cry out in the words of the Song of
the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, Rev.
16 3.
Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints: Who will not fear thee, Oh
Lord, and glorify thy Name?

But, Oh ye faithful followers of the Lamb! who shall be able to fathom, and to
measure the depth and height, the breadth and length of those judgments which
are yet to come upon the people, and the Princes of the earth? Woe, Woe, to the
worshippers and admirers of the Dragon, of the Beast, and the false Prophet,
how terrible will Jehovah be unto the little Horn (the last power which lifts
it self up, against the Saints of the most High) after the expiration of the
two and forty months?

How will this little Horn, which goars our sides, and pusheth us into corners,
roar, when the Judgment shall sit, and they (that is the Saints) shall take
away his Dominion, Dan. 7.26.
to consume, and to destroy it unto the end?

And with what consternation of mind will the proud Nimrods of the world, fly
before the Lamb, and his followers, when the mighty Hunters themselves shall be
hunted from Mountain to Hill by the little handful of those who ar redeemed
from the earth? And whitherwill ye rune for shelter, Oh ye Tyrants! Who shall
be your Lord Protector in the Day when Jehovahs fury shall be powered out like
fire? N^hum^. 6
And if the Rocks are thrown down by him, what will become of Reeds? If the
Sons of ancient Kings be hurried out of the world, to their own place, for
their oppressions and persecutions, for their contempt of God, his Word and his
Works? what will be the portion of the New Monarchical Tyrants, who are but of
yesterday, and have not had time to take root in the earth, neither shall ever
be able to confirm or establish their Domination?

But to contract, and call off my mind from expatiating upon this point; It
cannot but be confessed, That the sudden loss of so blessed an Instrument in
the hand of Christ, in such a juncture of time, may well be matter of
astonishment, or of great grief to those poor souls, who beginning to halt
betwixt two opinions, found present help and strength administered to their
feeble knees by his Ministry, and having also their eyes anointed with Gospel
Eye Salve for the discovery of the present, and other Truths: It was no marvel,
that they became so sensible of the usefulness of such an Interpreter in that
populous City, as the deceased Author of the ensuing Sermons.

And indeed, We Prisoners, your Brethren and Companions in Tribulation, and in
the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, could not refrain rejoicing with
you, for the hopes you had, that he should have been as an Arrow, or a polished
shaft in the hand of a mighty man (even the man Christ Jesus) in such a day as
this; But, as the heavens are higher than the earth, Isa. 55.9.
so are the Lords ways higher than our ways, and his thoughts than our
thoughts; We are taught to say, It is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3 18
let him do with us also, as seems good to him, for indeed, we are not our
own, 1 Cor 6.20
we are bought with a price; whether we live or dye, we are the Lords, Romans 14 8
and therefore we are obliged to glorify him in our bodies, and in our souls.

But to proceed to a brief Narrative of some particular passages and
circumstances which may be of use for the Christian Readers, who are far remote
from the City to know: It is to be remembered, That this Servant of the Lord,
had waited for some space of time ( viz. about a year of days) to understand
the mind of God, in reference to the work, which was upon his heart to do for
the Lord Jesus, at length perceiving his way to be plain before him, he came up
to the City of London, where it pleased the Lord to put a period to his days,
within a very short space after he was arrived: But how diligently he improved
his time and his talent, I need not declare, for its well known to thousands,
that he labored, as if it had been for his life, to promote that glorious
Cause (which was once the joy of the Saints, generally throughout the Nation,
although now it be almost forgotten by the most) and the concernments of Christ
and his people, in the midst of a generation of Revolters and Backsliders, from
the work of God in their day.

Three principal businesses he had upon his spirit to dispatch:

The first, was to speak his mind freely to the Great Man (as they call him)
which accordingly, after solemn seeking the face of the Lord with some
Brethren, he did, and did bear his Testimony to his face in the first place, in
the presence of diverse witnesses, in such a way of plaineness, and pity toward
him, who was guilty of such open Abominations, that undoubtedly it will be of
use hereafter to the stopping of the mouths of all Court-flatterers (who are
one of the worst sort of creeping Vermin in the world) purposing moreover to
proceed to an higher and more public Testimony, as God should give him a
spirit and opportunity thereunto.

In the next place, like another young Apollos, Act. 18.27, 28.
being come to the City, he helped them much, who had believed (the present
Truth) through Grace; for he mightily convinced many, and that publicly, that
the Kingdom of Christ, is not only a Spiritual Kingdom, but an outward
visible Kingdom (as his words are) that this is a branch of the New Covenant;
That this Kingdom shall very shortly begin to break in pieces, and consume all
these Kingdoms; Insomuch that the spirits of many precious ones were revived,
their minds enlightened; Insomuch, that methoughts I heard one Disciple, that
had been ready to faint and quail, saying to another Disciple, in Jonathans
language, See I pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I tasted
a little of this Honey; This word of the Lord (concerning the glorifying of his
Son in the sight of all Nations) is sweeter than the honey or the honey comb.

Oh dear hearts, you who heard a proof of Christ speaking in him; Tell me, Did
not your hearts wax warm, nay, did they not burn within you, while he spoke of
those things to you, and while he opened to you (in the demonstration of the
Spirit, and of power) those Scriptures, which do so nearly concern the King of
Saints, and his Cause at this day?

His next design was, to travel from Prison to Prison, where any of the
Servants of Christ were shut up, and accordingly made an entrance upon that
work, in coming to this Castle to visit us, as not being ashamed of the
testimony of the Lord, nor of us his Prisoners, 2 Timothy 11.8.
but appeared very willing to be partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel (of
the Kingdom) according to that measure of the power of God, which should be
given him, even to suffer bonds in the maintenance of that Cause, and glorious
Truth, which formerly had been owned, but is now rejected by the General, and
his Men of War; Insomuch, that he would in private discourse with some friends
declare, That a Prison was like to be his portion ere long. And no question, if
he had lived to have enlarged upon the signs of the times, and the Spirit of
God had come upon him with power, the Supreme single Person at his Headquarters
at White Hall, with the advice of his Cabinet Council, would after grave and
mature deliberation have found it very necessary, absolutely necessary to have
suspended and silenced such a Preacher, as neither knew how to hold his peace,
nor yet to pipe to the tune of the New Instrument, for we must know that this
New Monarchy is founded upon NECESSITY; Necessity is the Father and Mother;
Necessity and Policy are the Nurse and the Guardian of this young Government.
Alas, poor creature! it was born in a Consumption, and besides that, has had
many Convulsion fits, since it came into the world, insomuch that its Friends
and Physicians have had much ado to keep life in it at several critical hours,
since its Nativity: And beside we shall find that Maxim true, Nullum
violentium est perpetuum, violent Motions, will quickly work Commotions,
Confusions, and Destructions; Let none take offense at this Language, for I
cannot forbear vilifying the Kingdoms of the fourth Beast, when my thoughts
are upon the magnifying of the Kingdom, Power, and Glory of Jesus Christ our
Lord. Isa. 37.22.
And if the Virgin Daughter of Sion (without any disparagement to her holy
modesty) might, of old, be allowed by God himself, to despise the great King of
Assyria, and to laugh him to scorn, I know no reason to the contrary, but one
of the Lambs followers, may without breach of rule, in an holy triumph of
Faith, express contempt of the Kings of the Earth, who are all of them the
lovers of the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth.

But to return from this digression of Necessity; Both Friends and Foes may
easily conjecture, how warm an encouragement it would have been to all of us to
be refreshed with his company, in the several Prisons, where we, and our
Brethren, are shut up, if it had pleased the Lord to say Amen, and so have
given the word for the undertaking of his intended, spiritual, Summer-progress,
for we found him to be endued with such a Spirit, and to have so much
acquaintance with the Lord and his Word, concerning the present oppressed Truth
and Work, that undoubtedly the Glorious Cause wherein we are engaged, would
have been so much the more inquired after, and searched into, by many of the
Saints. But the Counsel of the Lord must stand.

By conference also with him here in my Prison-chamher, I understood how long
since, and upon what occasion, the Lord had taken him by the hand, and brought
him into his spacious Galleries to walk and take a prospect of that part of
Christ's Kingdom, and glory, which is now ready to be revealed in these last
times.

So that I now plainly discern this, in regard his day was to be so short, he
was thereupon spirited from the Lord to do much work in a little time; for
those Generation-works of his (his Books so called) together with his knowledge
of the times, are no question a special product of Providence in this season,
and may serve for the rouzing up and quickening of such as are upon their
watch, to look about them, that they may not be surprised.

And for the rendering unexcusable, that Generation of drousie Professors and
Apostate pretenders, which this Nation swarms with at this day.

Neither let it seem strange to thee (whosoever thou art that read this)
that the learned Rabbis, and the Orthodox Doctors of these times are so
exceeding dumb as to this point, for first, consider, It is not the highway to
Ecclesiastical promotions; it is impossible they should get or keep any great
Church Livings; if such Doctrine should be preached by them, or embraced by the
people, as these Fift-Kingdom-men desire and endeavor to leaven the land
withal. And then secondly, It is according to the tenor of Gods working in the
Generations before us; such mysteries use to be hidden (in their first
discoveries at least) from the wise and prudent, and were revealed unto Babes,
that so no flesh might glory in his presence.

Wherefore let no man find fault, that the Lord takes such unlikely Instruments
to break the Ice, to prepare the way, nor yet take offense at that diversity of
Opinions and Apprehensions which is and will be found for a little while, among
the Assertors of this Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom in the approaching, glorious
ministration of it.

It is true, such a thing is intimated and handled by this Author in his second
Sermon concerning the signs of the times, at the 52 page, etc. But this will
occasion the true children of the true light to search the Scriptures daily,
whether those things there discussed be so or no; I confess I have some hope to
be successful in reconciling the matter betwixt those good men, by
communicating ere long to public view, (if not prevented) what I apprehend to
be the mind of God in that particular. In the mean time I desire the Lords
little remnant (whom he has reserved to himself in this general Apostacy)
waiting for the breaking forth of the next dispensation, from under this dark
cloud, to entertain these Sermons, of this Disciple lately deceased (taken in
shorthand from his lips, and (because death prevented) not perused nor
perfected by himself) with that respect, which is due to the memory of such a
servant of Christ, whose praise (as we hear) is in all the Churches throughout
Norfolk and Suffolk, besides other places where he has traveled, teaching and
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Object. But many men, who favor not my righteous cause, will be apt to say,
This is strange, could there not be found another friend of the Authors more
acceptable among the people, and who should have recommended these his last
words and works unto them, with more advantage to the cause, etc. We know that
this man is a sinner; He is an evil doer, or else why is he in Prison?
undoubtedly he was not put there, neither is he kept there, for his good deeds;
It is much he should be made use of in such a work as this, for laudari a
laudato viro, illa, illa demum laus est, etc.

Answ. 1. I have, in some measure learned of Job, not to stand upon my terms
with the Lord, in point of innocence, I know it is so as you say, Job 9.2.
for how should a man be just before God? if he will contend with him, Verse. 15.
he cannot answer him one of a thousand. Though I were righteous, yet would I
not answer him, but would make my supplication to my Judge. 1 John 1.8.
And if I say I have no sin I deceive my self, and the truth is not in me.

Ans. 2. But as to men, I may plead my integrity with a good conscience, and
say with boldness, if things were examined from the bottom, from the beginning,
I make no question in the least, but I should be justified by the children of
Wisdom (I mean, not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world,
who are coming to naught, but the wisdom of God in a mystery) for they would
not judge according to outward appearance, but would judge righteous Judgment.
Their Judgment (like the Lords, Romans 2.2.) would, I am sure, be according to
truth, and not according to interest, as the manner of Machiavel and Achitophel
was.

And (which is also the Lords mercy, I am persuaded to all his imprisoned
servants now suffering for the good old cause) with me it is a very small
thing, that I should be either commended or condemned by the men of this old
evil world, 1 John 5.19 1 Cor. 5. 1 Pet. 4.5.
which lies in wickedness, for when we all come to give an account, to him who
is ready to judge the quick and the dead, as the Apostle speaks? such a
sentence will be pronounced, and such an exact distribution of Justice will be
made, that we are sure, our subtle, proud persecuters will be stripped naked and
bare of all their Swords, and Guns, their Gaolors, and their Catchpoles, and
besides all this, their Clergy, which stands them instead here, will not be
allowed them in that Court.

Answ. 3. It does not necessarily follow, that because I am a prisoner,
therefore I must be an evil doer, or a transgressor, for we know Joseph was a
prisoner, and Jeremy, and the Apostles were imprisoned, yet who will reckon
them with transgressors, that pretend to be Christ's Disciples? yea, Christ
himself was numbered among the greatest Malefactors of that time, wherefore,
let no man be rash to speak evil of persons and things which they have no
acquaintance with.

But to give the Reader a brief account, for the present, reserving a larger
Narrative to a fitter opportunity; I have been twice imprisoned by the Man,
whom the people call His Highness, and their Lord Protector.

The first time there was an Arbitrary Power exercised by him, in causing me to
be apprehended, for giving two general Observations, and nine particular
Characters of the Little Horn (mentioned in Daniel the seventh) that day
wherein he was proclaimed, as they say, this should have been preached the week
before, but by providence I was prevented. So that here could be no color for
imprisonment, considering I applied it to no person, for, as I told the people,
(and I spoke the truth) God had not revealed it to me as yet (but the day would
declare it) to whom properly to apply it.

And accordingly, when I was examined by him, as a Prisoner, in the Council
Chamber, concerning the application of those Characters, I told him what I had
spoken in the presence and hearing of hundreds concerning this matter, but
withal I then declared to him in the presence of his Creatures, That if the
Lord had revealed unto me, who it was that the Holy Ghost meant by that Little
Horn, I would have told the people, though I had died for it, when I had done:
And then I added these other words; -- But to deal plainly with you, my Lord,
and to tell you my very heart, the reason why I did not apply those Characters
unto you (at that time) was, because, I thought (or judged) that you would not
persecute the Saints. For indeed till then, I never knew or heard that he had
so done. But since that, what he has done, and now does, in this kind, let the
spiritual man, who best discerns the difference of things, give his judgment.
Hitherto, I know assuredly, that I was not in any fault, worthy of the least
reproof from man, much less of bonds.

Besides this, there was another material passage, which I declare with all
faithfulness: I perceived by his large Speech, that which he fixed upon, as
matter of Charge, was, that I was an Enemy to Government, and all my quarrel
was against Government. These were his very words, to which I chose to make my
defense at large, declaring first, my manner of education, as Paul did (for I
made his Apology my Pattern) and the manner of the Lords putting me into the
Ministry (1 Timothy 1.12.) And then in the next place, I showed him, how I had
indeed preached against Episcopal Government, and then against the Kings
Government, and that his Monarchy should be destroyed; Then I declared also
that I had indeed preached against the Presbyterian Government (as set up by
the Parliament) and against the Assembly, or new fashioned Synod, of Lords,
Commons, and Clergymen; And lastly, against the Parliament (but not against
that kind of Government which they declared for (for that I owned, so far as it
was a Government for the Commonwealth, and the public good.)

But withal, as I declared these things freely concerning my self, so I showed
him likewise from point to point, how He Himself had pulled down all these
Governments one after another. First, The Prelatical Government, next the
Kingly, then the Presbyteriall; after that, the long Parliament; so finishing
this part of my Defense; I looked him steadfastly in the face, without fear, and
said in these very words, So that, my Lord, I conclude, if I am against
Government, YOU are against Government; and if I have a Quarrel against
Government, YOU have a Quarrel against Government also.

The truth is, I have much mused upon this Charge of his, for of all the men in
the world, I admired (and do still wonder) with what face HE could find fault
with me, and with what conscience HE could accuse me, and impute this as a
crime worthy of close imprisonment; when he knew in his own soul, that he had
pulled down whatsoever I had preached down, from first to last (except his own
new Instrument which was not then published to the world) nevertheless to
close prison I must go.

And yet do not know any color of Reason or of Law for that usage, unto this
moment, neither is it possible I ever should, for that imprisonment was
contradictory to all principles of Reason, Justice, and Conscience. All that
can be said, is this, he presumed to give the Congregation to whom he was
preaching, several Characters of the Little Horn, upon that very day, when the
people cried (or should have cried, if they did not) God save His Highness,
taking the Lords name in vain, after the old mode in King Charles his days.

There has been also (I understand from very many friends, who come to visit
me in Prison) a great noise at Court (from whence it is spread up and down the
City and Country) that I sunk under him, when I was brought before him, and had
not a word to say for my self, and Mr. T. was persuaded I was convinced, and
would forbear to preach as formerly, etc. and this his said Secretary will
witness; this business is frequently repeated in my absence, being twenty
miles off in prison. I commend the Master and the Man, they would make the
Saints, my friends, believe strange things against me, when I am far enough out
of the hearing; But the Lord knows I never was conscious to my self of any
thing in that kind; neither did I give occasion for any man so to judge and
report, for the truth is this, I was not afraid either of his looks or his
threats in the least, from first to last; neither was I at all convinced (by
any thing that he said) that I have done any evil in the sight of the Lord, or
of man, in whatsoever I preached concerning the Little Horn (which (as I judge)
was the cause of mine Imprisonment on his part,) nevertheless, This I must
needs say, and it is truth; When I heard the General speak at such a rate
concerning IMPULSES (upon occasion of somewhat I had a little before touched
upon) magnifying the fruits of such Impulses, as came upon his own spirit, as
all excellent and glorious, I began to wonder, and thought it somewhat strange
to hear such language, savouring of self-exaltation; but when I heard him
vilify those Impulses which other Saints had experience of, judging their
Impulses to be from the Devil, condemning that spirit by which they spoke,
saying, We had forsaken the Head (Christ) and were under the Ministration of
evil Angels, etc. My Countenance (I verily believe) was very much changed,
because of that great trouble which fell upon my spirit in hearing such words,
bordering (as I then conceived) upon Blasphemy; Hereupon, casting my eyes up
toward the wall over against me, and shaking my head, with much grief of heart
to hear him, I considered in my self, whether I should reply to him concerning
those grievous expressions of his, or not, and even as I was resolving in the
negative, these words came into my mind (or were put into my mind) with power,
Answer him not a word, Answer him not a word. Whereupon when he had done
speaking, I kept silence, and did not return a word, that I can remember; from
this passage I am apt to think, they supposed I was convinced by what had been
spoken by him, and had nothing more to say for my self, and thereupon have
spread this untrue report, but they were, and are deceived in that matter.

But at the end of three days and an half, I was set free, not making any
promise, or yielding to any terms which were propounded to me: I supposed they
were not able to justify what they had done; (for This Imprisonment was
contrary to the Law of God, and of the Land, yea and contrary to his own Oath,
which he had solemnly taken, but five days before in the presence of many
witnesses) and so I have done for the present with my first Imprisonment.

As for the cause of this second Imprisonment: It is as far from my knowledge
as the former, unless it be for bearing my testimony publicly against the open
and notorious Abominations of the times; wherein the General and his Army are
so involved, together with the Parochial Churchmen, and the Lukewarm
Professors, that certainly there will overtake them a most sore visitation from
the Lord, which will destroy their Refuge of lies, and tear their Instruments
all to pieces; If this be to be vile, I will be more vile; If I must suffer
Persecution, Imprisonment, and reproach for this, the will of the Lord be done;
I am made more than a Conqueror through him who has loved me. Shall not I be
as bold to plead for the Lamb against the Beast, as they are to plead the cause
of Antichrist, against the Lord Jesus? God forbid!

I was indeed, after I was apprehended this second time, brought before a
Committee of the Council, as they called it, where they caused to be read in my
hearing some passages of a Sermon at Alhallows two days before, and would have
me to answer, whether I had spoken those things, which some of their Pursevants
or sneaking Spies had brought unto them. It put me in mind of the persecuting
Prelates, who laid snares to intray the Servants of God in their faithful
preachings to the people. I told them, I would neither affirm nor deny any
thing; but when they brought the Accusers, and the witnesses face to face, I
would give them an Answer, and so we parted. After four or five days, they
sent me to Winsor Castle, and here I have been nineteen Months and more, and
know not when I shall come to a Trial, they are a long time, methinks, in
preparing the charge against me, surely they are to seek it, for I was in
prison before their Law was published; And where there is no Law, there is no
transgression.

Now I would willingly know of such as reproach me as an evil doer (and
therefore I suffer justly) what is my transgression, and what is my sin? for if
I am an Offender (as Paul says) or have committed any thing worthy of death, I
refuse not to dye, or otherwise to be punished according to my demerits, in
case I have transgressed any Law of Righteousness whatsoever.

Wherefore I humbly conceive that mine Imprisonment, does not render me
incapable of writing to the Lords people, and therefore, these things not being
intended for any but the followers of the Lamb, I shall desire them not to
condemn me, before they find me manifestly convicted of those notorious evils,
which are reported against me.

And seeing the Lord has given me an opportunity to testify the truth, for
the Cause sake, wherein I suffer, and which the Author of these Sermons did own
to his death; I hope no inconvenience can arise from this brief Apology thus
briefly represented to the little Remnant of the Woman's Seed, who (in these
days of Hypocrisy and Apostasy) keep the Commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.

One word to my Fellow Prisoners, in this glorious Cause, from the Word of the
Lord; and it is a part of those glad tidings, which they, through Grace, may
be abundantly refreshed in the remembrance of, as I have been in this long
time of Oppression, THERE REMAINS A REST FOR THE PEOPLE OF GOD. A Sabbatisme,
so the Word is, an holy, solemn Rest; and it has reference, to the World to
come, even the state of the Saints in the Thousand years: This has been in all
Ages good news to so many, as being pilgrims and strangers for the Lords sake
in this present evil world, have been always hated, reproached, oppressed,
persecuted, tormented, slaughtered, by the four great cruel wild Beasts, Dan.
7. Oh what a voluminous Martyrology would that be, which can comprehend all the
cruelties, bloody Massacres, and despiteful dealings with the Saints of the
most High, which have been perpetrated upon this earth, since Cain slew his
brother Abel, which can exemplify in punctual narrations of truth, all the
Methods, Stratagems, Pretenses and Policies, which Persecutors, have, and will
make use of, for the suppressing of that spirit, which with boldness, does
justly contradict them, in their wickedness and Abominations. Its not a work
for a finite creature to undertake, none are sufficient Historiographers of
these things, but the Three, who bear Record in Heaven, where there is a Book
of Remembrance written for those which feared Jehovah, and thought upon his
Name in their Generations.

Blessed be the Name of the Lord our God, and our Father, how sweet is his
presence in a prison, to his suffering servants? Moses esteemed the reproaches
of Christ greater Riches than the treasures of Egypt. And we from the
overflowings of Divine Love, have such glorious Incombs, that we would not
exchange, the least of them, for all the gold and silver, which is coming from
the West Indies to the New Court. As the noble Marquess Galeacius Caracciolus,
when Golden Temptations were presented, Let their money perish with them, says
he, who account all the gold in the world worth one days communion with Jesus
Christ in the holy Spirit.

Dear Brethren in Bonds, for the Lords sake, How is it with you? Have you
cheerful lively spirits? Do you live in the sense of the love of God, shed
abroad in your hearts, by the holy Spirit which is given to you? Does your
faith grow exceedingly? Does your love and zeal abound more and more for the
Lord Jesus and his Interest? What ripeness, and readiness of spirit, soul and
body do you find, to arise, to come forth, and to march in the honorable
Expeditions of the Lamb against the Beast: Are you prepared to follow the Lord
fully? Oh let us (for I desire to be of that number) let us never give the Lord
rest, till he burn with fire, that Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the
Earth, together with all her Daughters, and until Jerusalem (the New Jerusalem)
be established the praise of all the Earth.

We cannot but wait and hope, till the Spirit cloth (...) (as it did Amazia, 1 Chronicles. 12.18. that we may speak, saying in a mystery, Thine are we, David, and
on thy side thou Root of Jessai, peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be unto
thine Helpers, for thy God helps thee.

And I make no Question but ^re it be long there will be a coming to our David
day by day, to help him until it become a great Host, like the Host of God,
and so to turn the Kingdom of Saul unto him (whose right it is) according to
the word of the Lord. For do the Kings of the Earth, at home, or abroad, think
of settling and establishment at this time of the day? Alas poor creatures,
their glass is almost run out! The God of Heaven is numbering their Kingdoms,
and finishing them; The God of Heaven is weighing the new and old Tyranical
Monarchies, and will find them too light; The God of Heaven will work Divisions
in their Kingdoms, and will give them all to his Son, and his Saints. It is
true, their ghostly Fathers, and their Court-Chaplines do put this evil day
afar off, and persuade their Majesty's, their Highnesses, and their
Excellencies, etc. that we are possessed with on evil spirit of Sedition and
Emnity against Government, but we dare say to our Father, who sees in secret,
and tryes the reins, that they Lie, and speak not the truth, for he knows, who
knows all things, that the desire of our souls, is, to be under the best
Government that ever was, or will be in the world.

We confess we groan to be delivered from that Bondage which we are in under
the Tyrants of the world we would not have the Beast, nor any of his Horns to
exercise such cruel domination over us, as in time past, because we had a
little reviving from our former yokes, by the outstretched Arm of the
Almighty, and it was sweet unto us, and we long for a full possession;
wherefore let us, oh let us believe (and the Lord increase our faith) that we
shall take them captives whose captives we are, and we shall rule over our
oppressors. We shall meet and magnify the Lord together, and those followers
of the Lamb who have prayed and wrestled in prayer for us, and for the present,
it will be of use to look into those good works, and comfortable words, which
this servant of the Lord (who lived and dyed in the testimony of this truth)
does spread before you, who purposed to visit you, and to encourage your
hearts, and to strengthen your hands in God, yea, and to be refreshed by you, I
mean, you who are removed far off, and thrust into holes, and corners, contrary
to All Rules of Righteousness. But though he purposed, Jehovah preverted, who
does all things according to the counsel of his own will, and it becomes us who
remain alive, and have, through grace, received a Kingdom which cannot be
shaken, to serve the Lord in our Generation acceptably, with reverence and
godly fear, for our God is a consuming fire. And now oh that those precious
truths handled by him, might through the blessing of the Almighty, become
spiritual nourishment to us in our captivity; The first Kingdom is founded upon
the New Covenant, Christ Jesus is the only foundation, etc.

It is good we shouldbe put in remembrance of these things, though we do know
them, and are through the rich supply of the spirit, in some measure
established in the present truth.

I might enlarge, but I shall not detain you, nor the other Readers any longer,
but recommend you and all those who worship not the Beast, nor his Image, who
will not receive his Mark in their Foreheads, or in their right hands, to the
special Protection and Benediction of him who sits upon the Throne, to whom,
and to the Lamb, who was and is worthy to take the Book, and to open the seals
thereof, be blessing, glory, and power for ever and ever, AMEN.

I am (Brethren, honored and beloved in the Lord) by the good hand of God upon
me,

Your Fellow Prisoner in the most glorious cause upon earth. CHR. FEAK.
From my Watchtower in Winsor Castle, this second day of the sixth month
1655.
Upon the Author, and these his posthume Papers.
NOw if I could set forth aright,
And give a view to clearer fight
Of that sweet grace, which in his Breast
Had taken up its quiet rest;
How would poor souls come in to him
Who framed his heart, and did begin
To beautify with rarest art
That inner man, his hidden part?
But here I fail; for suddenly
His light 'gan shine, and by and by
It was not his, nor ours, and we
Left in the dark, how can we see?
London, thou had him last, in thee
He came to die, and do thou see
What pearls of price he left behind?
O have them, have them still in mind,
His Books thou had before, and here
His Pulpit-Breathings, just so near
As broken pen could take them
From smiling lips that spoke them.
Go little Book, and give a taste
(To all that love thy Tillinghast)
Of sweetest Truths; And blessed let be
To Sions Sons, his Memory.
H. F.

A Funeral, or Elegiack Verse,
Breathed at our Friends Interment on his Hearse.
I t is the Father Will that now is done
O ur hopes (when set on Creatures) are soon gone,
H enceforth let us learn to set our hope in God,
N ote well this providence, and hear the Rod.
T he Lord can comfort us (as by our Brothers)
I n doubling his sweet Gospel Spirit on others,
L ike precious Faith, Light, Self-denial, Love,
L et Saints surviving seek for from above,
I oy 'twas to him to do his Masters Will,
N ow of his Masters Joy he has his fill.
G reat testimony to the Truth he bore,
H e minded Sion, till he spoke no more;
A nd spent himself in seeking to allure
S aints, that divided were, to peace, and sure
T o peace he is gone that ever shall endure.
R. D.

Errata.
PAge 2. line 20. for hold thus much, read, hold forth thus much, p. 4. l. 15.
r. wrapped, p. 7. l. 23. r. equivalent, p. 23. l. 17. r. Priest of the new
Covenant he is made with an oath, p. 72. l. 5. r. of the world, p. 115. l. 15.
r. this is not, etc. p. 13^. l. 5. r. could not be.

THE FIFTH KINGDOM OR Kingdom of Christ founded upon the New COVENANT.
JEREMIAH 33.20, 21. Thus says the Lord, If you can break my Covenant of the
day, and my Covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and night
in their season:

Then may also my Covenant be broken with David my servant, that he should not
have a son to reign upon his Throne, and with the Levites the Priests, my
Ministers.


THe three foregoing Chapters and this, they have a look unto the last times;
and they do more particularly relate unto the times, in which God will gather
together Israel and Judah, as in the 14 verse. Behold, the days come, says the
Lord, that I will perform that good thing which I have promised unto the house
of Israel, and to the house of Judah. I say, the Prophecy looks to the time
when the Lord will unite the ten Tribes, which are called the house of Israel,
and the two Tribes, which are called the house of Judah, and will perform all
those good things that he has promised to them, in that day, when they shall
again be united together. Now among the many blessed things the Lord has
promised unto his people in that day, this indeed is the chief and the great
mercy, God has promised A KINGDOM; for thus says the Lord, David shall never
want a man (in the 17 verse.) to sit upon the Throne of the house of Israel. We
have a kingdom promised unto the people of God, (a Throne) at this day; and
that is shadowed forth under the kingdom of David, David's kingdom was a Type
of Christ's kingdom; and indeed, whereas this kingdom here promised, is
shadowed forth by that of David, it does hold thus much, That the kingdom, is
not only a spiritual kingdom, but an outward visible kingdom; for such a
Throne and kingdom David's was. Now in the words that I read to you, the Lord
gives assurance unto his people, that he would make good this promise; and the
assurance that the Lord gives unto his people, is grounded on the Covenant made
with David and lest there should be any doubt about the Covenant made with
David, the certainty of it, the Lord tells us, that the Covenant made with
David was as certain as the Covenant of the day and night, If you can break my
Covenant of the day and my Covenant of the night, that there shall not be day
and night in their season, then may also my Covenant be broken with David my
servant. Why now the Covenant of the day and night has been unalterable, from
the first Creation unto this day, there has been day and night in their
season; why so says the Lord, my Covenant with David its an unalterable an
unchangeable Covenant, and upon this Covenant, this Throne and Kingdom I now
promise to you is founded.

Quest. If so be you ask, What that Covenant is that was made with David?

Answ. Its Answered; If we do but say it was an unchangeable Covenant, that
Covenant is the new Covenant, where its spoken of, its spoken of as an
Everlasting and an unalterable Covenant; and indeed this Covenant that the Lord
does here speak of, is no other but that new Covenant, as is clear from other
Scriptures, 2 Samuel: 23. David when he was ready to dye, in his last words he
does make this his Comfort, Although my house be not so with God, yet he has
made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure: for this
is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow. So
that the Covenant made with David, it was an Everlasting Covenant, it was a
sure Covenant, it was a Covenant that David had founded his very Salvation
upon, and therefore it could be no other but the new Covenant, the Covenant of
grace. And so likewise the Prophet Isai: 55.3 ver: he says there, I will make
an Everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercy's of David. The Covenant
of David it was an Everlasting Covenant. Now this Throne and kingdom, which is
here promised to the house of Israel, and to the house of Judah, and also to
all the seed of Abraham, as well the spiritual as the natural, the Gentills
as the Jews, which should in this day become one with them, its founded and
that upon the Covenant of David, and that is the Everlasting Covenant, the new
Covenant, the Covenant of grace; so that there ly's this truth before us;

That the kingdom (or visible kingdom) of Christ its founded in the new
Covenant, or, The doctrine of Christ's kingdom its a part or Branch of the new
Covenant. Something I shall speak as to the clearing of this, and then speak
a few words by way of Application.

As to the clearing of the Point, that it is so, that the kingdom of Christ
its rapt up in the new Covenant; the glorious and blessed Covenant of Grace,
has this lodged up in it, as one maine piece of it, namely, a visible
kingdom. This is clear if we do but look to the first striking up of the
Covenant betwixt the Father and the Son, between God and Christ in Eternity.
The new Covenant though it did come forth in Time (the promise of Eternal life
came forth in Time) yet the foundation of it was laid in Eternity; in hope of
Eternal life (says the Apostle) which God that cannot lie, promised before
the world began: so that the promise of Eternal life, that great blessing of
the new Covenant, the foundation of this Covenant it was laid in Eternity,
before the world began. Now if we do but look to the transactions past
between God and Christ in Eternity, at the striking up of this Covenant, we
shall find that this was one great branch, one great piece of the new
Covenant, namely, a visible kingdom; that Jesus Christ should have a kingdom,
and be king, and have all his enemies under him here, it was one great piece of
that Covenant that was made between God and Christ in Eternity. In the 49 of
Isaiah, (which Prophecy is applied by a worthy man unto the thing I am
speaking of, namely, the striking up of the Covenant between God and Christ in
Eternity, its clear the Prophecy does run upon Christ, and) in the two first
verses (as he conceives) The Lord Jesus is brought in, declaring how that his
father had called him, and what work his father had put into his hands for him
to do, and so he does ask what he should have for his labor, what wages he
should have for the doing his work? And in the third verse, the Lord comes and
he does offer to Jesus Christ, as his reward and wages, Israel, thou art my
servant O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. Now (as the said person
observes) Christ considering that these were but a handful, and that they would
many of them stand out against him, and oppose him, he thereupon complains, my
labor is in vain, and I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain: If
this be all my reward for my work in dying, if I should have no other reward
then Israel, truly then I should labor in vain: and yet notwithstanding Jesus
Christ is so willing to the work, that he undertakes it however, says he, my
work is of God, I will do that work, and I will even leave it to himself,
what reward he will give me. Now the Lord seeing Christ willing to take this
work upon him, he comes in the 6^h verse, and proffers more largely to him,
And he said, It is a light thing that thou should be my servant, to raise up
the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give
thee for a light to the Gentills, that thou may be my salvation, unto the end
of the earth. Here the Lord comes in and does proffer more largely and fully,
he opens his heart more fully to Christ: Indeed here is the very conclusion,
the result of all that did pass betwixt the Father and the Son; now observe
among those things that the Lord does promise to the Son, this is one, that he
shall have a kingdom, in the 7th verse; Thus says the Lord, the redeemer of
Israel, and his holy One, to him whom man despises, to him whom the Nation
abhors, to a servant of Rulers, Kings shall see and arise, Princes also
shall worship, because of the Lord, that is faithful, and the holy one of
Israel, and he shall choose thee. This is one great thing which was promised by
the Father to the Son, and that from Eternity, namely, a kingdom, that Christ
should have a kingdom, wherein Kings should worship him, wherein Princes
should fall down before him, and submit to him, so that these things are
spoken by the Prophet in Time, yet, as they were transacted betwixt the Father
and the Son, they were before time; and so the Lord had assurance of the
kingdom wherein Kings should fall down and worship him, and that in
Eternity. But more clearly, Isai. 53.10, 11, 12 ver: where we have likewise
the substance of the Covenant, that was betwixt God and Christ, the Father and
the Son, and the terms and conditions of either party; Jesus Christ for his
part he is content that God should bruise him, and to be greived, and that his
soul should become an offering for sin, and make Intercession for Sinners:
then the Father again he promises on his part, that Jesus Christ should see
his seed, that he should Justify many, and the like; but observe among other,
one special thing that the Father promises is, that Christ shall have a
Portion with the great, and shall divide the spoil with the strong; this of
all other is the great promise.

Quest. Now the Question may be, what are we to understand by Gods dividing to
Christ a portion with the great, and the spoil with the strong?

Answ. Why surely, these words they cannot be meant only of Christ's spiritual
triumph over his enemies, and Christ's spiritual reward; because these words
they are brought in as the reward the Father gives him for his suffering;
because he powered out his soul unto death, and was numbered with the
Transgressors, and bare the sins of many, therefore will I divide him a portion
with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; therefore it
cannot be a spiritual reward, and the reason is because the reward the Father
gives to the Son, must be Equivolent unto his suffering, for the Father would
not give unto his Son a reward that is short of his sufferings, this were to
look upon God as strait handed, (when Jesus Christ had done his work to give
a reward short of his work) therefore the reward must be as large as his
sufferings. Now look upon the sufferings of Christ, and they are of two sorts;
There was spiritual sufferings, and that in undergoing that bitter agony he
underwent in the garden, in encountering all the sore Temptations of Satan, and
all the frowns of his Father upon the Cross, here was abundance of
spiritual sufferings, and he had the sting and torment of our sins, his very
soul was powered out unto death with it.

But now Christ beside these, had outward sufferings, he was made a reproach,
and was buffetted, he was nailed to the Cross, and he was peirced. Now the
reward must be as large as his sufferings; if the reward were only a
spiritual reward, that would answer only the spiritual part of Christ's
sufferings, for so great was Christ's spiritual sufferings, that what ever he
receives from the Father in a spiritual way, is but a full and sufficient
reward for them: Now, what shall Jesus Christ have for all his outward
sufferings? why surely, he must have some reward for these also; there must be
something that must be given by the Father to the Son, as a reward of these,
therefore I take it, that these words they are mainely that part of the reward,
they do hold forth the outward part of the reward; God had told him before,
that he should see his seed, and that he should Justify many; I but now,
because Jesus Christ met with a great deal of suffering from the world too,
therefore says God, I will give him a portion among the great, and he shall
divide the spoil with the strong, because he was buffeted, and nailed to the
Cross, and peirced; therefore the Father will give him a portion among the
great, and he shall devide the spoil with the strong; therefore I will honor
him, and set him above the great, and above the strong; and this shall be the
reward of his sufferings, that the Father will give him a kingdom, and glory,
and that as a reward of his sufferings. Isai. 52.13, 14, 15 ver: Behold my
servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted, and extolled, and be very
high. As many were astonished at thee, (his vissage was so marred more then any
man, and his form more then the sons of men) so shall he sprinkle many
Nations, the Kings shall shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been
told them shall they see; and that which they had not heard, shall they
consider. My servant shall be exalted, and extolled, and be very high, who is
this Gods servant? why, Jesus Christ, he, whose vissage was more marred then
any man's, and his form than the sons of men, (to speak of Christ's suffering
day) in Christ's suffering day, his vissage was marred, and he was without
form, or comelines, that is, he had no beauty, men were astonished at him, to
look at him, seeing him so poor and so despised, that this should be the
Messiah and the Savior of the world; well, says God, though my Son has been
so debased, and so dishonored in the world, yet I will exalt him above the
great men of the world; and as the world have been astonished at him and despised
him, Kings shall shut their mouths at him, as much as to say, as men when in
the presence of a Prince or great man hold their tongues and are silent out of
respect and honor; so, Kings and Potentates shall be silent in his presence,
in the day of Christ's glory, though in Christ's suffering day, every one spoke
against him, called him deceiver and Beelzebub, and trampled upon him; O yet
there is a day, says God, wherein my Son shall be exalted and shall be very
high, and then the Kings shall shut their mouths at him, the great men of the
earth shall be dumb, they shall not dare to speak a word in the presence of
him, there shall be such a dread in the day of his Glory; and truly, this too
you shall see Phil: 2.6, 7, 8 verses, Because Christ when he was in the form
of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, was willing to be
vilified, and to be trod upon, was willing to be of no account, that he might
thereby glorify his father, and save sinners; therefore says the Lord, I will
highly exalt him; Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a
name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow: so
exalted, as every knee shall bow before him; we are not to understand this of
the Popish bowing of the knee at the name of Jesus, for such creatures are said
here to bow the knee, that have no knees; and then too, as well every tongue
shall confess him, as every knee bow to him: But the meaning is this, that as
Jesus Christ had been dishonored in the presence of men and Angels, so, a day
shall come, that Jesus Christ shall be so exalted by the Father, and that in
the presence of men and Angels, that all men and Angels, all creatures in
heaven and earth, and under the earth, they shall all bow to Christ, that is,
subject to him, worship before him, and every tongue shall acknowledge that
this Jesus that was crucified, and made a reproach at Jerusalem, that he was
the Lord Christ, the glory of God the Father, so that Jesus Christ is to have a
kingdom, wherein all his enemies are to be under his feet, subjected to him,
and this as the reward of his sufferings; This is the sum of that that hitherto
I have been speaking of, that it was a thing that was concluded upon between
God and Christ even in Eternity, when the first foundation of the Covenant of
Grace was laid, that the Lord Jesus Christ in recompense of what he was to do
here on earth, for the bringing about the salvation of sinners, shall in reward
of his work have a glorious kingdom given to him by his Father, so that this
kingdom of Christ, its founded in the new Covenant, in the very first striking
of it up betwixt the Father and the Son. But then

Secondly, Its clear if we look unto the Promulgation of it; the first
Promulgation of the new Covenant, was to man immediately upon the fall, so soon
as Adam was fallen, the Lord comes to him, and in the Lords first words of
promise to him, we have couched this thing, that we are speaking of, namely,
the kingdom of Christ; yea, it was one great part of it, that Christ should
have a visible kingdom: I take it that that promise that we have in Gen: 3.16.
The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head; that it does very
clearly hold forth this thing, as will appear if we do but consider, as,

Who is meant by the seed of the Woman, so likewise

What we are to understand by breaking the head of the Serpent.

Its not questioned but that the seed of the Woman is Jesus Christ, who was
borne of a woman in the Fathers due time.

Now about the breaking the head of the Serpent, is the Question; There may be
a question, Whether that the breaking of the Serpents head, were only a
spiritual victory and conquest, obtained by Christ over the Serpent and his
seed; or, whether there be not something further in it. Now indeed I conceive,
that though there is that in it, namely, Christ's spiritual victory and
conquest, yet there is more in it, viz. that this breaking the head of the
Serpent, does also hold forth an outward victory and an outward triumph, an
outward glorious conquest, that Christ and his, should have over the Serpent
and his seed. And the reason is this, That this punishment of the Serpent and
his seed its come upon them, as a recompense of what the Serpent and his
seed, have done or should do to the woman and her seed; to break the
Serpents head, its brought upon him as a punishment, as it were by the law of
Retaliation, like for like, he had been bruising, he had been doing all the
mischief he could, and God foresaw he would do all he could, therefore says
the Lord, the woman and her seed shall break the Serpents head, and his
seed; now this being so, look how the Serpent has bruised the heel of the
woman and her seed; in like manner, must the woman and her seed, break the
head of the Serpent and his seed; but now the Serpent has not only bruised
the heel of the woman and afflicted her seed in a spiritual way, by
spiritual Temptations, he has not done this only; but this Serpent has
afflicted the woman outwardly; the Serpent has been afflicting of the woman,
one while by causing of Rents and Divisions among the woman's seed; another
while, by raising up persecution against the woman and her seed; he has in an
outward way afflicted the woman and her seed, therefore there shall be a day
wherein Jesus Christ and the faithful of God, his faithful Children shall
break the head of the Serpent and his seed, in an outward way; there must be
such a day, because this comes in as a just recompense of what the Serpent had
done to them.

Now if we should but look whither or no there has been such a day at any
time as yet, truly we cannot find such a day, for if so be we should look
into former times, and run through the times of the old Testament, we shall
find that the whole time was (in a manner) the Serpents day: in the morning of
the old Testament, what blows does the Serpent give to the woman's seed, when
he held them in that sore bondage in Egypt; and in the evening of the old
Testament, what a fearful blow does he give again to the woman's seed, in
that great dispeircing of the Israel of God into all the quarters of the world?
Let us look into the morning and evening of the old Testament, and we shall
find that the Serpent had not his head broken, but he was an affliction to the
woman all that time: and though its true indeed, the middle of that day was
somewhat more calm and pleasant, the woman and her seed having some respite,
under some of the Judges and good Kings of Israel, and was able to bear up her
head against the Serpent, and now and then to give him a blow; yet it was not
like the breaking of his head, there was no such thing as the breaking of his
head; but now there shall a time come, wherein the Serpent shall have his head
broken, that is, he shall receive a more deadly blow from Jesus Christ, and
those that are his, then ever he has given to them; for its a greater thing to
have the head broken, than to have the heel bruised. And if we look to the
new Testament times, this has never been done yet; for the first three hundred
years, that great red Dragon, the Pagan Roman Empire, did persecute with most
bloody Rage, the woman and her seed, and was red with her blood, Rev: 12.3, 4.
and as soon as ever the Dragon, the Pagan Power was off the Stage, then comes
the Beast, and he follows that course the Dragon before him had done, of
persecuting the woman, for 1260 years, and she all that time is in the
wilderness, in sackcloth and ashes, which time is but now expiring, so that if
we look to the new Testament, even unto this day, its clear, that the Dragon
and the Beast, have afflicted the woman; therefore yet, the woman has not had
her day upon the Serpent, but there is a time wherein the woman must have a day
upon the Serpent to break his head; therefore there is such a kingdom wherein
the Saints of Jesus Christ shall crush all the enemies of Jesus Christ in the
world.

The whole time of the world is held forth by two great days; There is the day
of the seed of the Serpent, and there is the day of the seed of the woman.
First, the Serpents seed have the day, and that day all their work is to
afflict the woman, to persecute the Saints, but all that ever they can do is
but to bruise her heel, they cannot destroy her: I, but there is a day which
the woman, and the seed of the woman is to have; now that is after the Serpent
has had his day, and in that day the seed of the woman, breaks the head of
the Serpent, that is, gives a deadly blow unto the Serpent, and the seed of
the Serpent; that as the woman has been afflicted by the Serpent, so he shall
receive a deadly blow from her: so that in the first promise that was made to
man after he was fallen, truly there was this, the visible kingdom of Christ;
and we may say that this notion of the fifth Monarchy (as now its called) or of
the visible kingdom of Christ, truly its not a new fond notion, (though things
may be said to be new, in respect of discovery, and our looking into them, yet)
its as ancient as any truth in the whole word of God; in the very first promise
wherein was laid the foundation of our Salvation, there was laid the foundation
of Christ's kingdom: Gods glory and man's happiness go together, as the glory of
God ly's in our happiness, so the glory of Christ ly's in the glory of his
kingdom.

Again, let us look Thirdly, unto the new Covenant in the Renovation of it;
as in the first making of it, and in the first Promulgation of it to man, we
have this (as I have showed you) as one great branch of it the kingdom of
Christ; so look unto the Renovation of it, God did renew this Covenant again
and again, and in the renewing of it, he did always include this thing as a
maine branch of it, namely, Christ's visible kingdom. I do speak this the
more fully, because I take it here ly's a maine foundation for our faith in
this great thing that is controverted in this day, namely, the kingdom of
Christ; for we all look for salvation by the new Covenant, we all know the new
Covenant is an Everlasting thing, and what ever is in the new Covenant is like
it self, unchangeable and Everlasting, and if therefore the visible kingdom
be a piece or branch of that, then such a thing there must be. Now, I say, look
into the renewing of this Covenant and we shall find that there is likewise
this kingdom held forth: the new Covenant was twice more especially renewed,
or with two persons more eminently, namely, with Abraham, and with David.

The Covenant was renewed with Abraham, and therefore its oftentimes called the
new Covenant made with Abraham: Now if we look into that, we shall find the
great thing that was held forth in it, is this, of Christ's visible kingdom,
wherein Christ shall bare Rule over all his enemies, conquer all his enemies;
if we look unto this Covenant as renewed to Abraham, in the Galatians the
Apostle speaking of this promise apply's it to Christ; now look upon the
promises that were made to Abraham, and we shall find this truth, that there
was such a thing held forth as an outward visible kingdom, Gen: 22.16, 17, 18
ver: And said, by my self have I sworn, says the Lord, for because thou have
done this thing, and have not withheld thy son, thine only son; That in
blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the
stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy
seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the
Nations of the earth be blessed; because thou have obeyed my voice. Thy seed,
to Abraham, and his seed were the promises made, says the Apostle, He says
not, to seeds as of many, but unto seed, as of one, Christ; and that here it
must be understood not of seeds as many, but of the seed, as one, the seed,
Christ, is clear, because its said, thy seed shall possess the gate of his
Enemies, not the gate of their Enemies, which if it had been spoken of seeds as
many, it should have been, but its the gate of his Enemies, and shows that its
spoken of Christ; now that which is promised is, that Christ Abraham's seed
shall possess the gate of his Enemies; there shall be a day wherein Christ
shall possess the Gate of his Enemies.

Quest: What is the meaning of that?

Ans: Why truly the meaning is this, that a day shall come wherein Jesus Christ
shall have power over all his Enemies in the world, he shall have rule over his
Enemies, he that has been trodden upon in his members; we cannot say that he
has ruled over his Enemies yet, but a day shall come wherein he shall have an
absolute rule over his Enemies; which is expressed here by the Gate; as when a
Conqueror comes against a City or Castle, when he has once possessed the gate,
he has gotten the strength of it, and they are all under him, and at his
mercy; so there shall a day come; wherein Christ shall possess the gate of his
Enemies, they shall all be brought under him, in such a manner, as they shall
be all subject unto Jesus Christ and his. But now there has never been such a
day as yet, indeed the Enemies of Christ they have hitherto possessed his Gate,
if you look from the first day to this day, the Enemies of Christ have ever
been in his Gate, that is, they have been treading the Church underfoote, which
is most properly his Gate; But there is a day wherein Jesus Christ shall
possess their Gate, and tread them underfoote; therefore there is such a thing
as a visible kingdom held forth in this promise made to Abraham. Look but to
that promise made, Romans 4.13. where the Apostle speaks thus; For the promise to
Abraham, was not to Abraham, or to his seed through the Law, but through the
righteousness of faith. The promise to Abraham that he should be heir of the
world, was not to Abraham, or to his seed through the Law; there was a promise
expressly made to Abraham that he should be heir of the world, we do not find
this promise in Genesis, in so many words, therefore it seems to me, that the
Apostle does gather up the sum of all the promises made to Abraham, and he
does sum up all in this, God promises to Abraham that he should be heir of the
world. All the promises, that Abraham should be a father of many nations; all
nations should be blessed in him, his seed should possess the gate of his
Enemies; what is that now that is the great thing held forth in all those
promises? why, it was that he should be heir of the world; and the promise
therefore is of such a thing, and indeed it was the substance of them all, the
marrow of them, that Abraham should be a great and an absolute heir, and
should have all the world given to him.

Now let us consider this, its the promise of God, and he cannot lie; Abraham
himself never did possess the whole world, but was a stranger in it, dwelling
in Tents and Tabernacles, Heb. 11.9. And if we look to the natural seed of
Abraham, namely, the Jews, they never yet possessed more than that little spot
of land, the land of Canaan, and they have been cast out of that a long time;
and if we look unto the beleiving Gentills the spiritual seed, they have been
to this day persecuted in the world, its outcasts, the of-scouring of it, and
cannot in any sense be said to have been made possessors of the world, as an
heir (which is the Apostles word) is made a possessor of his Inheritance,
where he bears rule as a Lord, and all within the Compass of his Inheritance,
are to him in no other capacity but of servants and Tenants. Abraham was the
heir of it, but they never had the possession of it; yet there is a time
wherein they shall have the world, for God who made the world, and has given
it to whom he pleases, was pleased of his own good will to give it to Abraham:
indeed, what right had Abraham to the land of Canaan? but God who has right to
all, was pleased to give it to Abraham: why so here, Abraham's seed have the
world given them; there must be a time wherein the seed of Abraham shall
possess the world, as truly as the seed of Abraham did possess the land of
Canaan, which God gave to Abraham and his seed. Now, I say, this has not been,
and we cannot look upon this as if so be the fulfilling of this promise were
in giving them a part of it; for God promises the world, and therefore indeed
there is a time wherein Abraham and his seed are to be possessed of the world,
and if so be there were not, what were Abraham and his seed the better for the
promise, if so be they never possess it. And this promise is said to be made
to Abraham not through the Law, but through the righteousness of faith, and
that is upon the account of the new Covenant; for in the Romans its said, That
the righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wise, he does oppose the
old Covenant unto the righteousness of faith, so that by the righteousness of
faith we are here to understand, the new Covenant; and this promise made to
Abraham as the heir of the world, and that as of the righteousness of faith,
comes in upon the account of the new Covenant.

Let me add one notion more upon this Scripture, that this promise is made to
Abraham, that he should be heir of the world, the Lord he does give to Abraham
as a pledge, or as an earnest of this great promise, the land of Canaan, to him
and his seed: and now as Abraham while he was a stranger in the land of Canaan,
he had the land of Canaan given to him and his seed by God, and so had a true
right to it; so, Jesus Christ, though he is now a stranger in the world, little
known in the world; and the seed of Christ wander as strangers in the world,
yet they have a true right, and Christ has a true right unto this great
heiredome of the whole world, as true a right as Abraham had unto the land of
Canaan, when that idneeed he was but a stranger in it; and look as Abraham's
natural seed the Jews upon their coming out of Egypt, they were by God
possessed of that land, which God did give to Abraham, as a pledge or an
earnest of the great Inheritance; so likewise shall Abraham's seed both natural
and spiritual, Jew and Gentill, (for now they are both one, for the partition
wall is broken down) this seed of Abraham, when God shall set his hand the
second time, gathering together his people, Isai. 11.11. that is, when he shall
deliver his Children from the Antichristian Tyranny and bondage, and he shall
bring the Jews into their own land, in that day shall they as truly be possessed
of this great Inheritance of the whole world, as Abraham's natural seed when
they went out of Egypt were possessed of the land of Canaan; and to make this a
little out, first Abraham was made by God an heir of the whole world, and that
indeed is the great Inheritance that is here promised, the promise to Abraham
was as to an heir of the whole world. And secondly, Abraham was made an heir
of a lesser inheritance, and that was given by God to Abraham and his seed, to
live upon (as I may so say) until the appointed time came, that they should
possess the whole world; now one was the pledge of the other, and answerable
hereunto, Abraham's seed have two great Captivities, of which one was the Type
of the other. First, Abraham's seed was carried captive into Egypt, and in Gods
due time God brings them out, and when he had brought them out, God puts them
into that land that was the pledge of that great Inheritance; now after that,
they sin against God, and he delivers them into a greater and longer
Captivity; so likewise, Abraham's seed (who wonderously increased in the time
of their first Captivity in Egypt) in the time of this long Captivity do
wonderfully increase, for now the Gentills come in, and they are his seed; now
Abraham is made the father of many Nations; now Abraham's seed being increased
to a multitude of Nations as the promise is, God will bring them forth a second
time; and as he did upon the first bringing them forth, he gave them the land
which was the type of the promise, so at the second time of bringing them
forth, he will give them the whole world which he has promised to them.

Secondly, Look upon the Renewall of this Covenant with David; as the new
Covenant was renewed with Abraham, so likewise it was renewed with David; the
renewall of it with David we have if we look into the 89 Psalm: 3 and 4 ver: I
have made a Covenant with my Chosen; I have sworn unto David my servant. Thy
seed will I Establish for ever: and build up thy Throne to all Generations,
Selah, What this Covenant is, observe in the 4th verse, Thy seed will I
establish for ever; and build up thy Throne to all Generations, that is the
great thing, the great branch of the Covenant made with David, I will build up
thy Throne; but whose Throne is this, David's Throne as David? no, its not
David's Throne, but indeed Christ's, spoken of under David as a type of Christ as
King; and that is clear if you look into the 19 ver: Then thou spakest in
vision to thy holy one, and said, I have laid help upon one that is mighty:
I have exalted one chosen out of the People. This David here, its clear its
spoken of Jesus Christ, though David was the type of Christ, that mighty one:
and then again, its more clear in the 27 ver: Also I will make him my
firstborn: higher than the Kings of the earth. I will make him my
firstborn; Its Jesus Christ that is the Fathers firstborn, and its Jesus
Christ that is to be exalted higher than the Kings of the earth; David was
never exalted higher than the Kings of the earth, there have been Kings of the
earth, that have been higher as to outward glory than David was, but its Jesus
Christ that is exalted higher than the Kings of the earth. But

Quest: How does it appear that this is the new Covenant?

Ans: Why, it appepres from two things.

First, It appears from the unalterablenesse of it, in the 34 ver: My Covenant
will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. It was
such a Covenant that this kingdom was founded upon, that God would not break
nor alter, and therefore the new Covenant.

Secondly, Because there was an oath added to the Covenant, in the 35 ver: Once
have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. Here Is the oath of
God, Once have I sworn says God, do you think that I will be false to
David, Once have I sworn, and that, by my holiness, the highest thing God could
swear by. Now it must therefore be the new Covenant, because there is an oath
added to it; when the Lord made the old Covenant, there was no Oath went with
that, therefore the Apostle in the 7th of the Hebrews says, that the Priests
of the old Covenant were made without an Oath, but now the Priests of the new
Covenant they are made with an Oath, 20 and 21 ver: The Priesthood of the new
Covenant is confirmed by an Oath, what ever God does in the new Covenant there
goes an Oath with it; and so when Christ is made the high Priest of the new
Covenant, the Lord swears, what ever he does, I will do, what he does as a
Priest, I will ratify and confirm it, I will never repent me of it, there is
an oath; but now the Priests of the old Covenant are made without an Oath; and
because its confirmed by an Oath, its clear it was the new Covenant, the whole
new Covenant has an Oath goes with it, God willing to show unto the heirs of
promise the Immutability of his promise, he confirms it with an Oath, that by
two Immutable things, in which it was Impossible for God to lie, we might have
a strong Consolation, etc. So that its clear this is the new Covenant: I but
here is one promise has a special Oath to it, its worthy observation what
piece of the new Covenant the Lord especially swears to, and that is this
promise of Christ's kingdom, Once have I sworn by my holiness, that God will
not lie to David; and what is that that God swears to? its this, that his
seed shall endure for ever, and his Throne shall be as the Sun before him. Now
to this promise is added a special Oath, and its observable, that the Lord
speaks of Christ's kingdom several times in Scripture (there are four times
that the Lord speaks of this) and he does swear to it.

When he made this Promise to Abraham, that his seed (Christ) shall possess
the Gate of his Enemies, Genesis 22.16. By my self have I sworn, says he: when
he comes to make this promise to David, that Jesus Christ shall have a
kingdom, God swears again, Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not
lie unto David; His seed shall endure for ever; and his Throne as the Sun
before me. Again, if you look into Isai. 45.13. you have God swearing again
there, I have sworn by my self; the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, every
tongue shall swear Why, what is the meaning of that? why its the very same
with that in the Philippians, every knee shall bow to Christ, every tongue
shall confess that Christ is the Lord, it is the exalting and setting up
Christ Jesus as King: So, if we look into Isai. 54.9.11. Oh thou afflicted,
Tossed with Tempest, and not comforted; and in the 14 ver: In righteousness
shall thou be established, and thou shall be far from oppression; its a
description of Christ's kingdom, which he confirms by his oath in the 9^h ver:
speaking of this very time of the kingdom of Christ, For this is as the waters
of Noah unto me; for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more go
over the earth; so have I sworn, that I would not be wrath with thee, nor
rebuke thee; that is, he would not in that day be wrath with his people, so as
to put by the fulfilling this good word of his promise, I will make good this
piece of my Covenant.

Now if we consider it, surely there is something in it, that the Lord should
confirm all the new Covenant by an Oath, and should confirm one branch of it,
and that by an Oath, swearing by himself, and by his holiness, and by his
righteousness; and swearing that he would not lie; and swearing that it should
be as certain as the word to Noah, that the world should never be drowned
again. That the Lord should swear over and over to it, surely there is much
in it; now the Lord has done thus as to Christ's kingdom, what ever the world
say, the Lord has founded this upon the new Covenant, and he has confirmed
this new Covenant with an Oath, when the Lord saw what opposition there would
be in the world, and what distrust in his peoples hearts, lest any should doubt
of it, he comes over and over again with this particular branch of it with an
Oath, I have sworn, I have sworn, I have sworn, that my Son shall have a
kingdom. So that in the Covenant with David, there was the promise of the
kingdom of Christ.

Fourthly, Let us come to the work it self, where the work does begin to
rise in the world, and you shall see that it does begin to rise, and that upon
the account of the new Covenant. The work of Christ's kingdom, the glorious
beginning of it, it shall be about the time of the Jews coming in, and indeed
the coming in of the Jews shall be a very great advancement of this kingdom,
and where ever the Lord does speak of the coming in of the Jews, he does lay
it upon the foundation of this new Covenant; and indeed its a very great
argument to me, against those that think there is no such thing as the
kingdom of Christ, because God has so often laid it upon his new Covenant.
Look into the 26 of Leviticus, the Lord had spoken before of rejecting, and of
the casting of them off, 42 ver: he says when they should be cast off, then
will I remember my Covenant with Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac, and
also my Covenant with Abraham will I remember, and I will remember the Land.
This does not only look to the rejecting of the people of Israel for a time,
when they were carried Captive into Babylon, for that was a rejecting only of
part of the seed of Abraham, but it does look to their long Captivity, of all
the seed of Abraham, for these many hundred years, the Lord engages he will
restore them, and restore them upon the account of remembering his Covenant;
Then will I remember my Covenant with Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac,
and also my Covenant with Abraham, will I remember, and I will remember the
Land: and I will bring them back again, and I will gather them upon the
account of my Covenant, says God, Deuteronomy. 4.30, 31. In the 27 verse Moses had
been speaking, The Lord shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be
left few in number among the heathen, whither the Lord shall lead you; then he
tells them in the 30 verse, When thou art in tribulation, and all these things
are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy
God, and shall be obedient unto his voice: even in the latter days, mind the
expression, in the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shall
be obedient unto his voice, (for the Lord thy God is a merciful God) he will
not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the Covenant of thy fathers
which he swear unto them. When the Lord has cast them off, they shall be
gathered, and that upon the account of his Covenant; and so in the 54 of Isai.
that Chapter is a prophecy of the Conversion of the Jews, and of that glory
that shall follow thereupon, and the Lord does engage his Covenant for the
bringing of it about. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed,
but my kindness shall not depart from thee; neither shall the Covenant of my
peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee. So likewise in the 33
of Jere. the two last verses; Thus says the Lord, if my Covenant be not with
day and night, and if I have not appointed the Ordinances of heaven and earth:
then will I cast away the seed of Jacob, and David my servant, so that I will
not take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob: for I will cause their Captivity to return, and have mercy on them.
This is spoken of their last restoration, as I told you at first, and the Lord
does engage to restore them, and for that, he does engage his Covenant, if so
be that my Covenant be not firm, then says he may I cast away Jacob and
Israel my servant; but if you believe my Covenant, do not believe I will cast
them away; Exodus: 19. When the Lord had cast them off, in respect of the old
Covenant, he gathers them upon the account of the new Covenant, his Everlasting
Covenant. So likewise, Zach: 9.11. which Chapter is a prophecy that looks
into the last times, as is clear from the first verse, for it looks to the
time, wherein all the eyes of Israel shall be toward the Lord; so you have what
is spoken in the 9th ver: quoted by the Evangelist Matthew; Thy king comes
riding upon an Ass, and upon a Coalt, the foale of an Ass; its clear it
looks unto the last times: so, if you look into the 10 ver: And I will cut
off the Charret from Ephraim, and the Horse from Jerusalem: and the battle bow
shall be cut off; and he shall speak peace unto the Heathen, and his Dominion
shall be from Sea, even to Sea, and from the River, even to the ends of the
earth; it looks to the time of Christ's kingdom; now in that time God will
gather together the Jews, in the 11 ver: As for thee also, by the blood of the
Covenant, I have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the Pit, wherein is no water.
The Lord will gather them in that day, and that upon the account of the new
Covenant, by the blood of the Covenant they are gathered. And as the Apostle
Paul speaks of the conversion of the Jews, Romans 11. He speaking of the
natural seed that were broken off that we might be graffed in, and how that
they should be graffed in again; as he tells us in the 26 ver: For this is my
Covenant unto them; he lay's the foundation of all upon the Covenant; they
shall be gathered; why? its my Covenant with them. Now observe, this is a
glorious piece of the work, that that shall be the most excellent piece of the
work in the rise of Christ's kingdom, in the calling of the Jews, its this,
that it stands upon the new Covenant: The foot of Christ's kingdom is bottomed
upon the new Covenant, it was founded upon the new Covenant in Eternity; it
was lodged in the new Covenant in the first Promulgation of it to men; it was a
piece of the Covenant with Abraham and David; and when he tells us the work of
his kingdom shall rise, he tells us it shall arise upon the foot of the
Covenant: now lay all these together, and what can be more clear than this,
That the kingdom of Christ its a glorious piece of the new Covenant, its a
branch of the new Covenant, its such a piece (as I told you before) as the Lord
has been pleased (in an especial manner, which he has not done to any one
branch of the new Covenant besides it) to swear to, again, and again, and
again, and again, that it shall be.

If it be so, That let men or Satan do what they can, for the crushing, and
the keeping down such a thing, yet a day there is, when it will come forth,
and that in the spite of all the power of men and hell; for its a piece of Gods
Covenant, and its a piece God has sworn to, and if the God of Heaven be able
to make good his Oath, and perform his Covenant, and if he will not let his
new Covenant that he has spoken so highly of, his Everlasting Covenant, that
he has laid the salvation of all his Children upon, his own glory upon, if he
will not let that fall, he must bring this thing to pass; therefore let men
do what they can, or let Satan do what he can, yet when that all the Power of
Hell, and all the wisdom of men, when it has acted and put forth it self to
the utmost, for the hindering such a thing, that God who made this Covenant,
and who keeps Covenant, and has sworn he will not alter the thing that is
gone out of his lips, and sworn again and again, that he will make Christ
higher than the kings of the Earth, this God will bring forth such a thing, for
his Covenant is a sure Covenant, and an Everlasting Covenant, and therefore
indeed its not for us to struggle against the will of God, and the Covenant of
God; it good for us to wait upon God for his will in all things, so for this,
the time for Gods bringing forth the kingdom of his Son, but for men to
struggle against this truth, when God brings it forth, men may undo
themselves, because its striving against God, and one great branch of the new
Covenant.

Secondly, That the unworthines of the Saints, it cannot, it shall not hinder
or deprive them of this mercy: for new Covenant-mercy's they come riding over
the head of all things that stand in the way, new Covenant Grace is a
tryumphing Grace, its a Grace that rides in Triumph, what ever it meets with it
rides over, its such great Grace. Now this kingdom of Christ comes on upon the
account of the new Covenant, and its the grace of the new Covenant, that shall
usher this kingdom into the world; and as this grace will bring it through all
the oppositions of men and Hell, so will it even come over the sin and
unworthines of the Saints, if so be that it were upon the account of the old
Covenant, indeed we should have little hope, Gods people in this day would have
little hope. When I have many times in serious thoughts, looked over the
generation of the Saints, all parties, it has been a greater discouragement,
as touching the work, than all the powers of the world, for upon the account
of the old Covenant we are gone; to consider the unworthynes of the Saints, its
a harder thing to get over this, than to get over all other things, but
consider this is the ground of the work, the new Covenant; if this kingdom
were upon the old Covenant, I have oftentimes thought we should never have any
hope, that such a thing should rise up in the world, and though God might use
another Generation, yet this Generation must dye, because they have all broken
Covenant with God: yet now seeing its rising ground is upon the new Covenant,
though the people of God are exceeding unworthy, yet notwithstanding they may
have mercy; and that soul that is most unworthy, yet he may come to be
partaker of that blessedness of the new kingdom. When the Children of Israel
were going through the wilderness, and the Lord was dealing with them according
to the old Covenant, they murmured against God, and they all fell in the
wilderness; and so it would be with us in this day, if he dealt with us upon
the account of the old Covenant; but because God deals with us upon the
account of the new Covenant, as the people of God have cause to be humbled for
all their sins, yet consider this cannot hinder, but the Lord can yet, and
the Lord indeed I hope of his grace, will do glorious things for his Children,
notwithstanding all their unworthines, his grace shall come tryumphing over all
these. David's kingdom grew out of the new Covenant, therefore it was not the
unworthynes of him nor his followers that could hinder it from rising. If you
look upon Saul's kingdom, it seems to be glorious at first; but afterward,
because it was not founded on the new Covenant, it grew worse and worse; Saul
at first seemed to have much faith and self-denial, when the Lot fell upon
him, and they were commanded to bring him forth to crown him King, he hid
himself, that they were forced to enquire of the Lord to know where he was:
and when the Children of Belial said, How shall this man save us, they despised
him, and brought him no presents, but he held his peace, in the 1 Samuel: 9.27. he
seemed to be so patient and so humble, as if he took no notice of it: so in
the 1 Samuel: 11.12, 13. there you shall find, after they had gotten a great
victory over the Ammonites, and some of the people said unto Samuel, who is he
that said, shall Saul reign over us? bring the men that we may put them to
death: And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day; for to
day the Lord has wrought Salvation in Israel. As if Saul should have said, I
will never give way to passion and rage, why? the Lord has wrought glorious
Salvation in Israel this day, the Lord with his Salvation has been among us,
and by his mighty Salvation has delivered us; his heart seems to be
wonderfully taken with the deliverance: but afterward, look upon Saul's
kingdom, and its still waneing, and decaying more and more; and why? because
it was founded upon the old Covenant. But look upon David's kingdom, and you
shall see in the beginning of it, it did arise through many faylings and
infirmities, that were both in David himself, and his followers; David he runs
away from Saul, goes to Ahimelech the Priest, and tells a lie to get some
bread, and Goliahs sword; afterward he runs to Achish king of Gath, and fain's
himself mad: and when he had been invading the Country near unto him where
he dwelt (at Zicklag) and Achish asked him whether he had made his rode that
day, 1 Samuel: 27.10. David tells him a flat untruth, that they had been against
the South of Judah: At another time, he failed exceedingly, when in a way of
revengefull rage he would go against Naball, to cut him off and all his house,
for denying him provision; these were stairing offenses, men (no doubt) did
wonder what would become of David and his case, that was attended with so many
weaknesses and offenses; And look upon his followers, and see what a
rabble-rout he had at first, 1 Samuel: 22.1. When David was escaped to the Cave
Adullam, then, every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt,
and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him, and he
became a Captain over them; if one should seriously look upon David and his
followers, would be think there should any good come of it? many no doubt did
thus look upon David and his followers, and therefore expected no good to come
of his kingdom. I bring it to this end to show, that though men may have never
so many infirmities and weaknesses, yet if the work arise through the new
Covenant, it shall go on with a notwithstanding: David's kingdom was founded
upon the new Covenant, and therefore it was carried on, through all
difficulties and weaknesses; and Saul's kingdom arose only out of the Covenant
of works, and therefore (though it had a glorious beginning) it did wast away.
Therefore let not the hearts of Gods people faint or be discouraged, though
there are gross failings among the Saints, and in those too that desire to be
friends to David's kingdom, though there be much of passion and the infirmities
of men in them: Consider, Christ's visible kingdom in this world stands upon
the foundation of the new Covenant, it did help David to the kingdom, though
through many Infirmities. I speak not this, to Indulge any infirmities in Gods
Children, I desire that this glorious cause might be so managed, as it
deserves; yet suppose its managed with many infirmities, so that many stumble
at it, saying, Can this Monarchy ever prosper? Let such consider that this
glorious blessed cause is founded upon the new Covenant, and though men cannot
over-looke Infirmities, yet God will, and accomplish the thing notwithstanding
them for the new Covenants sake, I will be merciful to their sins, and
remember their Iniquities no more. Consider, when Jesus Christ rid to Jerusalem
as a King, he did not choose the most glorious Beast to ride upon, but he chose
that Beast that was most weak, contemptible and simple, so now the Lord he
chooses weak things to confound the strong, and foolish things to confound
the wise. We have a good cause, and we are upon a good ground, we are upon the
new Testament ground; and seeing its founded upon the new Covenant, the grace
of the Covenant will triumph over all the weaknesses and infirmities of the
Saints that labor to carry it on: the Lord makes use of the weaknesses of his
people sometimes, to make others blind, and to stumble, to be a rock of
offense, but when the work is done, all their weaknesses says the Lord shall
be forgotten; the Lord will come and swallow up all in the new Covenant: as
David's weaknesses, were a stumbling block to those that lived in his age, and
when the Lord had stumbled all in that age and generation, then he makes his
work to arise higher and higher, through the grace of the new Covenant: and so
it will be with the visible Kingdom of Jesus Christ, because its founded on
the new Covenant, which is a sure and an Everlasting Covenant; he has made
with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered and sure: the Lord has founded it so
sure, that all the Devils in Hell, and all the rage of men in the world,
cannot hinder it, Though my house, says David be not so with God, yet he has
made an Everlasting Covenant with me, which shall stand; though the Saints do
not grow in grace, yet this glorious work of Christ's kingdom, which is
founded upon the Everlasting Covenant, must go on: the House that is builded
upon the rock, though the winds blow, and floods arise, and beat upon the
House, it stands fast, because its built upon the rock; so, Christ's kingdom
it has a rocky foundation, its founded upon the Covenant of God, that is, an
Impregnable rock; its such a foundation that all the world cannot hurt, if any
come and strike at it, it will grind them to powder; this is a sweet
consideration, and should provoke us to look up to God, for the accomplishing
of this great mercy; and to look unto him for new mercy's, Gods people stand
for nothing concerning this kingdom, but God will make the world one day know,
it was a piece of the new Covenant. The unworthynes of the Saints shall not
hinder them of this mercy, for new Covenant Grace will ride Tryumphing over the
head of all the Infirmities of the people of God.

Thirdly, That it is not strange, or it ought not to be strange to us, if we
should see a death upon this work, if we should see this work struck dead,
when it may be it seems to be coming forth; for indeed its Gods way in
bringing forth mercy's of the new Covenant, to strike the mercy dead. Abraham
had two sons, the son of Hagar the old Covenant, and the son of Sarah the new
Covenant; there is no death comes upon Ishmael the old Covenant, but there comes
a death ( Abraham's body is dead, and Sarah's womb is dead) upon Isaac the new
Covenant, the new Covenant mercy is struck dead, so when the Lord will set up
his Son as King, he will do it upon the account of the new Covenant, therefore
we must expect this new covenant mercy to pass through death, so that God
strikes the new Covenant mercy dead, before he brings it forth. When the
Children of Israel came out of Egypt, they come out upon the account of the new
Covenant, God remembers his Covenant and sends Moses to them, thereupon they
are full of expectation of deliverance, but presently their burdens were
increased, and their oppression increased, and thereupon all is struck dead,
and they are further from deliverance than ever they were, and yet
notwithstanding when God had tried but a while their faith and patience, (for
that is the end of all his bringing deaths upon a work, to try our faith and
patience, but) so soon as ever that was tried, then the Lord brings them forth
by his glorious hand. So it was with David, God had promised him the kingdom,
yet there was a wonderful death came upon David's kingdom, David is made a
king, and some few come to him, and David had some faith, when Abiathar the
Priest came to him when he fled from Saul, says David, Abide with me, and thou
shall be safe, for with me there is safety, but when his kingdom is just ready
to come to him, there comes a great sentence of death upon the work, because
its a new Covenant work, all is struck dead, I shall certainly perish one day
by the hand of Saul, and I must leave the Country, says David, so its with all
new Covenant mercy's, that the Lord might try the faith of his Children, which
he will have tried, and that he might make the mercy the sweeter when it comes,
and that we might be more in crying to him: God strikes the work dead, that we
might exercise the more faith and prayer, therefore let us not be discouraged,
when we see a sentence of death upon it, it would be a great discouragement to
me, if there were not a Sentence of death upon it, I should believe then it
were a greater way off than it is; for if it be a new Covenant merry, there
must be a Sentence of Death put upon it. As in mercy's to a particular soul,
God will have the soul struck dead, before the Lord reveal the new Covenant
mercy to him, that the soul shall say, I can see nothing, I have nothing at
all; it can see no wisdom, no righteousness, nothing in it self, and when
all is struck dead, then the Lord comes with new Covenant mercy's to the
soul; so, when the Lord intends to set up his Sons kingdom in the earth, it
must first be wholly struck dead.

Fourthly, we should wait upon God patiently for the bringing of it forth:
New Covenant mercy's they are to be waited for: Abraham lost himself greatly
in murmuring, while he was waiting for the fulfilling of the new Covenant
promise, he cries out, I go Childlesse, he had a promise, and because he sees
it not fulfilled, he cry's, I go childlesse, and this Eleazar of Damascus, who
is Steward of my house, must be my heir: and what does this his repining bring
forth? why presently the very next thing we read, is Abraham and Sahah
distrusting God, lay their heads together, and upon advice, he goe's in Hagar,
(he turns into the old Covenant) and had fruit by her, and there Abraham rests
and settles himself some years; he goes and turns into the old Covenant by
an Impatient waiting for the new Covenant; we are not to wait as Idlers do
for help in a ditch, and cry God help us, but we are to wait as if we would
have it in by our very striving and struggling, yet notwithstanding there must
be a quiet waiting on God for his time, so it should be with us, for this new
Covenant mercy; wait for it patiently, be content with it in Gods own time,
when he will bring it forth, and the more our heart is brought to lie down
submissively before God, its a great argument that the mercy is so much the
nearer; the Lord does ordinarily in giving forth the mercy's of the new
Covenant (though there may be striving and struggling for a time, yet) he brings
the hearts of his Children to this, Lord when thou will, in thine own time; O
that God would bring all the hearts of his Children to this, that our hearts
might not be engaged by our own thoughts, but that we may be so free that God
may have his own time, that there may not be an Impatient spirit in waiting.

And is it a new Covenant mercy, this will be a sweet mercy when it comes, all
the new Covenant mercy's are sweet things; what ever the world think of
Christ's kingdom, when it comes it will be a sweet thing; that the Saints shall
have glory hereafter, does that hinder the spiritual enjoyment of God here?
so, the outward kingdom of Christ, what will that hinder the spiritual
enjoyment of Christ? But the Devil play's his game thus in the new Testament
Times, he made men to look for an outward kingdom only, when Christ was
about to set up a spiritual kingdom; and now that Christ would set up an
outward kingdom, says the Devil look only to the spiritual kingdom, as
if the ourward and spiritual kingdom could not stand together, as if the
glory of the body's and souls of the Saints could not stand together.

And then again, it will be a spiritual thing; though some may call it a
carnal and a low thing, yet it will be a spiritual thing: the Lord teach us
to wait upon him, to look up to him, to trust in him, to rely on him, for
there shall be a day of his kingdom; our work is to wait; seek, pray, and
wait in these day's; the Lord teach his people to go along with him; as the
little Children at his entrance into Jerusalem cried Hosanna, Hesanna; he rides
upon a poor mean creature, the foale of an Ass, and the Children follow him
crying Hosanna, Hosanna; so we should eye the Lord Jesus now in the meanest
appearances, and follow him crying Hosanna in the Highest, this we should do.

The Lord make us wait on him for his own Time, and that time is not far
off, I cannot think its far off; because many think it a great way off, its
an argument to me its near, for God comes upon his people when he finds not
faith on Earth, when Gods people say its far off, then its near; as, when
God sent Moses to tell the Children of Israel the Lord would deliver them, but
before deliverance, thesentence of death comes, and O say they to Moses and
Aaron, what have you brought us to? where is their faith now, expecting
deliverance at the hand of God? Now it was worse with them than before, and
their bondage is increased, and their deliverance was thought further off: O
but then was the Lords time, he Immediately brought it to pass; then was the
Lords time come, when their faith was gone. So when David stood up first upon
the account of his kingdom, says he, to Abiathar, Come with me and thou shall
be safe, I am sure God will give me the kingdom; though Saul be a Potent
Enemy, and mine Enemies many, yet I am sure God will give me the kingdom; but
yet, after that, when Saul pursued him that he was forced to fly out of one
Hole into another, Now, says he, shall I perish one day by the hand of Saul;
then, when he thought it thus far off, then the kingdom comes forth, the
hand of the Lord cutts off Saul, and the kingdom Immediately comes to David.
As when the Children of Israel came out of Babylon, they thought they should
have all things, then Jerusalem built, and the Temple, and all things; but when
they were about it, building the Temple, now a stop is put upon the work, and
they cry, The time is not for the Lords work yet, till that Haggai and Zachary
tells them, Now is the Time for building the Lords Temple: As it is with
private Christians in a doubting hour, Saints usually conclude, we are too
forward for that time; observe, Then is Gods time; they had faith at first, and
after their faith fayles from the work, and they said, it was not time; mark,
then was the time, the Lord sends Haggai to tell them, they lived in their
Ceiled Houses, and neglected Gods house, O now was the time when they thought
not of it; And just so, when Christ suffered on the Cross, We thought, say the
Disciples, this was he that should have delivered us, their hope was gone of
any deliverance by him, yet then was their Redemption at hand, their Redemption
comes forth Immediately, he finishes the work of Redemption at that time; so
that to have faith struck dead, is not an Evidence that the work stands a
great way off, but that its near and approaching: surely the Lord will come
forth in his Time, and he is not far from doing some great and glorious thing
in the world; Gods peoples faith is not grounded upon fancyes, but they see and
know that God is doing some glorious thing in the world, he is overturning
kingdoms, and setting up the kingdom of his Son; O that we could quietly
look up unto the Lord, and wait upon the Lord, Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with Trembling, kiss the Son lest he be angry ye great ones of the
Earth, lest his wrath be kindled; and you that follow the Lord, O do you
rejoice with fear, and serve him with Trembling; they that stand may fall; O
when was there such a falling as now shall be, when the Lord says, I will
arise to shake terribly the earth; no History can parallel such shakings as have
been in these last days, therefore we had need take heed lest we fall, and
look up to the Lord that we may stand: Indeed its a blessed truth, what ever
men may think of it, so sure as my hand is upon this Bible, so sure shall such
a thing come forth in due time; for as this is the true word of God, of a true
God that cannot lie, so certainly it shall come to pass.

I have only insisted on one particular, the kingdom as a Branch of the new
Covenant, but to speak of the kingdom as its held forth in the Word, would
take up a large time, for there is not any one truth has more to be said from
the Scripture for it, than this, of Christ's kingdom, for as the end of all is
Gods glory, so, this is that, concerns Christ's glory, there is a vane of it
running through the Scripture, from the first promise made to Abraham, to the
last spoken of in the Revelation. The Lord give us hearts to look up to him
for the accomplishing of it in his Time.

FINIS.
Signs of the Times.
MATTHEW 16.3. O ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, but can
ye not discern the signs of the Times?


THese words are spoken by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, unto a generation
of men, which came to him tempting him, desiring him to show them a sign from
heaven, in the first verse, The Pharisees also with the Sadduces, came, and
tempting, desired him that he would show them a sign from heaven. The
Pharisees and Sadduces they were in their Principles, contrary and opposite one
unto another, and yet they can either of them very well agree and comply
against Christ, and both join hands and heads in tempting our Lord; and their
Temptation it ly's in desiring a sign from heaven: our Lord Jesus he takes
occasion from this, to mind them of the signs of the times, Can ye not
discern the signs of the times? and lest that they should reply that these
signs were so dark that they could not be known, therefore our Lord labors
to convince them, and that from things that were of a more outward nature, you
say in the evening it will be fair weather, for the sky is red, and in the
morning it will be foul weather to day, for the sky is red and lowering, O ye
hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, but can ye not discern the
signs of the times? As if he should have said, what, are ye not as wise in
spiritual things as you are in Temporal? are you not as wise concerning the
signs of the times, as ye are in outward signs? ye can discern the face of
the sky, how is it that you are not so wise as to discern the signs of the
times?

I shall not spend much time about the words, in the words, there is this
Observation,

That the Times of the Lords more glorious appearance and manifestation of
himself, they are times that are marked out, they are such times as have
evident signs set upon them. This, the word of Christ does clearly hold
forth, Can ye not discern the signs of the times? As if he should have said,
the present time, its such a time as has signs set upon it, ye might see
signs if so be that ye were not blind; If so be that I should run through the
book of God, we should find this to be a truth.

First, There was a great and wonderful appearance of the power and majesty of
God, when the Lord was to deliver Israel out of Egypt, and that was a
remarkable time, a time that God had marked out, 430 years; At the end of 430
years, all the host of the Lord, its said, came out of the Land of Egypt.

Secondly, At the time of Isreal's coming out of Babylon; There was a glorious
appearance of God, in stirring up the heart of Cyrus, of a Heathen, to make him
so forward and ready of his own accord, to put on the work of God, of building
the Temple, and make Proclamation throughout all his Dominions, to the Jews,
to go up to Jerusalem to do this work; here was a great hand of God: now
this time was also marked out, seventy years Israel was to be in Babylon, and
then to come forth.

Thirdly, The time of our Lords first Coming, it was a time wherein there was a
glorious manifestation of God, God now manifests himself in the flesh, as the
Apostle tells us; now, what remarkable signs were set upon this time? there
were three remarkable signs set upon this time, by either of which this
Generation, might have known or discerned Jesus Christ to be the True Messiah.

First, There was at this time the departure of the Scepter from Judah,
Prophesied of by Jacob, as you may find, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come:
that is, until Christ come: so that whenever the Scepter was taken away from
Judah, they might then conclude, now will the Messiah come, now is he in the
world, whether we see him or no, yet he is come, for the Scepter was not to
depart till he was come: now its observable, that at this very time the Scepter
was taken away, for this Herod, that was now king in Judea, he was a stranger,
and not of the blood of the Jews, an Idumean; and he was the first stranger
that ever was King over the people of the Jews, for they had always some of
their own nation ruled them, but now there was a stranger swaying the Scepter
among them at this time; so that here was an Evident fulfilling of the sign of
the time; at this time the Scepter was gone, so they might well have concluded
the Messiah was come from Jacobs Prophecy, that Jesus was the Messiah, for he
comes at the very same time that the Scepter departed.

Secondly, There was another remarkable sign of the Time, and that was, The
Expiring or ending of Daniels seventy weeks, its foretold to Daniel that
seventy weeks should be the term of time unto the Messiah's appearance, Dan.
9.24. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy City, to
finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring in Everlasting righteousness, and
to seal up the vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most holy. Seventy
weeks was the determined time of Christ's coming; that is, from the time the
Angel here speaks these words, seventy weeks, or four hundred and ninety
years, reckoning so many days as there are in so many weeks, for that indeed
is the Holy-Ghosts way of account; now it was clear enough, that the seventy
weeks must be either expired, or very near expiring about that time; and
therefore that was another great sign of the Time, that the Lord Jesus came
and declared himself to be the Messiab, about that time that Daniel had
soretold the Messiah was to come forth.

Thirdly, There was another Evident sign of this time, and that was, Christ's
doing of those things that were foretold should be accomplished by the Messiah,
and that in the day of his appearance, as, Christ's opening the eyes of the
blind, the ears of the deaf, causing the lame to walk; in the 11th of Math:
The lame walk, the dumb speak, the dead are raised, the Lepers are cleansed,
and the poor receive the Gospel; Here were the signs of the Times. It was
foretold by the Prophets, that when the Messiah came, these things should be
done, now they saw these things done; Jesus Christ comes and does these very
works and miracles that they expected should be done by the Messiah, therefore
this was a very convincing sign of the Time, that Jesus Christ was the
Messiah, and therefore Jesus Christ labors to convince John by these signs of
the Times. But then

Fourthly, The time of Chirsts second coming, that shall be another time wherein
the Lord will most gloriously appear and manifest himself; now that time also
has most evident and remarkable signs set upon it, and that by the Lord and
his Word. If we look into the 24 of Matthew, we shall find many of the signs
of this day; I shall touch upon some few, in the 10 verse, Many shall be
offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another; there is one
sign of that time, many offended at the ways and people and truth of God,
hate one another, and betray one another. Again, Iniquity shall abound,
(verse. 12.) and the love of many shall wax cold; many shall fall away. Again,
in the 29 verse, in those times the Stars shall fall from heaven, an
Apostacy of such as shall be eminent leading men in the Churches of Christ, for
indeed stars in the Revelation are interpreted to be the Angels of the
Churches; now Immediately before that time, there shall be a great dropping of
Stars, of great leading eminent men in the Churches, they shall fall from
heaven, from their former walkings, and the truth, and ways, and cause of
Christ. Again, at that time, there shall be some shall smite their
fellow servants (at the latter end of this Chapter) and that under this
pretense, my Lord delay's his coming; clearly intimating, that Immediately
before his coming, some should smite and beat their fellow servants, why? why
indeed because they speak of the coming of their Lord as near, and the other
they say its a great way off, and that they make more have then is meet; they
eat and drink with the drunken, that is, have society with those that are
enemies to Christ, and his work. And then another sign of the time is, there
shall be a very great sleep upon the virgins, that is in the next Chapter, a
great sleep among professors, those that stand up for the ways and truth of
Christ. There are many other signs of this time, but I cannot run over all; so
that all the times of Gods more glorious appearance and manifestation of
himself, they are such times as the Lord has marked out, and set evident
signs upon them whereby they may be known.

And indeed God has done it to the end, that he might thereby strengthen the
faith of his Children; what strength was it to the faith of Daniel, when once
he came to find the signs of the times, when he came to find the time was
expiring, the time of the Jews captivity? why, this sets his faith on work,
and sets prayer on work, as you may see, Dan. 9.2 and 3 verses, I Daniel
understood by books the number of the years, whereof the word of the Lord
came to Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would accomplish 70 weeks in the
desolations of Jerusalem, and I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by
prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes. The seeing
and the knowing of this time, the 70 years were now expiring, set Daniels
faith on work, and makes him go and fall upon his knees before the Lord; this
was that that stirred up his faith, he saw the signs of the times, the time was
now expired or expiring, our deliverance is near says he, and therefore he
goes to seek the Lord by prayer and supplication, so that its that which is a
great strengthening of faith: and indeed our Savior seems to make this one of
his maine ends in laying down so many signs of the time of his second coming,
that his Children might have their faith strengthened in the truth when his
coming draw's near, therefore he says, when you shall see all these things,
know that its near even at the door, that is, when you shall see these signs
come to pass, know that its near, even at the door: and so likewise, in
another Evangelist, When you see these things come to pass, lift up your heads
with joy, for your redemption draw's nigh; as if he should have said, when you
see these signs fulfilled, then know that your redemption draw's nigh, let
this raise up your faith, let this increase your joy: as here, when in the
evening the sky is red, it does strengthen our reason, it does prognosticate
fair weather, and in the morning when its red and lowering, foul weather; so,
when the people of God see the signs of the times, they do prognosticate to
their faith, the event of the times; what God is doing, and what God will do
in the time, as the other those outward signs do prognosticate the event of
weather to our reason.

Again, that he might hereby leave his Enemies inexcusable; Christ makes this
a great aggravation of the sin of the Pharisees, that they had signs of the
times, O ye hypocrites, can ye not discern the signs of the times? as if he
should have said, ye have the signs of the times, by which if ye will not be
wilfully blind, ye cannot but understand something, if ye had not these signs
of the times, there might be some excuse and plea for you, O but you have the
signs of the times. Thus he does aggravate their sin, rendering them
inexcusable, the great works that Jesus Christ did when he was here on earth,
as his working of miracles, they were one of the signs of the times, and the
Lord Jesus Christ does endeavor to render them inexcusable, and that by his
works: and in the 15 of John 22 and 24 ver: If I had not come (says Christ)
and done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin,
but now they have no cloak for their sin. When they had such an evident and
remarkable sign of the time, as Jesus Christ's doing such glorious works among
them, that they might indeed say, we have the Messiah, when they rejected
Christ in the face of such a clear sign, it rendered them inexcusable: so,
when the signs of the times do point at such a work the Lord will have done,
that sign of the time, will render men inexcusable before the Lord that do
not do that work, that, by which the Lord Jesus Christ did silence the Scribes
and Pharisees, namely, the signs of the times, he will silence many with one
day; when men shall be excusing themselves, and saying; Lord we would have
served thee but we did not know thy work, he shall say, what, did ye not see
the signs of the times? did not my Prophets speak to you of the signs of the
times? did not my Prophets speak, did not my providence work, did you not
see the signs of the times? were not things public enough, and visible
enough? this will leave poor souls inexcusable, men may perish through not
observing the signs of the times. Do but a little consider this Generation of
men, they do profess much willingness to come to Christ, they desire a sign
from heaven, we would feign know that thou art the Messiah, could we but be
convinced of it; Oh (says Christ) ye hypocrites, can ye not discern the
signs of the times? he bids them presently look into the times; they perished
upon not observing the signs of the times; so the Jews, we would receive
Christ, if we had but a sign, the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek
wisdom, but they have the signs of the times, the Scepter is departed from
Judah, miracles are wrought by Christ, and they had also the sign of Jonas,
Christ is buried in the womb of the earth three days, and rose again, but
they did not observe the signs of the times; many men will be found in that
very case the Scribes and Pharisees were in, splitting upon this rock, not
minding and observing the signs of the times.

Quest: How comes it about, or what hinders men that they cannot see the signs
of the Times?

Answ: Several things hinder men, and blind them, that they see not the signs
of the times, though they be never so evident.

First, Their own Interest being exceedingly advanced, and set up very high in
their own hearts, and love to that above all other things whatsoever: men will
not see the signs of the times when ever they come forth, when their hearts
are set upon their Interest, for whenever the signs of the times come forth,
its a hundred to one if they do not run cross to that man's Interest, and if
so be men's hearts are set upon their Interests, then they will be blind and not
see the signs of the times. And indeed so it was with Pharaoh, there was a
great Interest that Pharaoh had, there was an Interest of gain and profit,
there was a wonderful deal of advantage came to him and his Nation by the
work of six hundred thousand men, all in slavery, working in brick, this his
own Interest blinds his eyes that he could not see the signs of that time,
that he had then: and it was this very thing that kept this generation of men
that they could not discern the signs of the times; what was it that made
them not discern Christ to be the Messiah? O, there was their own Interest,
they had all the honor, and all the credit, esteem and reputation, the people
cried them up as the only men, and now they saw if they should own Jesus
Christ, their honor was gone, and their Interest would be lost, and that
blinds them, that they could not see the signs of the Times: there is nothing
blinds a man so as his Interest does, if his heart be glued to his Interest,
and set upon it, I will have my Interest, let light be never so clear, and
signs be never so evident, a man that sets up his own Interest, he will never
discern nor take notice of the signs of the times; If there be any thing that
blinds men that they cannot fee the signs of the times at this day, I am
persuaded this is one thing, the Interests of men, of this sort of men, and the
other sort of men, they have an Interest that runs cross to that which is held
forth by the signs of the times, that ought to be done, if this be done (say
they) our Interest will down, this must down that I have so much set my heart
upon, therefore they will not own the signs of the times, this blinds men
that they cannot see the signs of the Times.

Secondly, When they have an Envy; there is a secret envy in the hearts of men
against this or the other person, or, this or the other party; if so be things
should come forth, as they are held forth in the signs of the times, they see
such and such men will be equal with them, or above them, and that they cannot
bare; this was very evident in this generation of men the Scribes and
Pharisees, they had a clear discerning that if so be they should have come and
owned things as they were held forth in the signs of the Times, and owned
Jesus Christ for the Messiah, the Lord Jesus must be set up above them; they
could not endure that the Lord Jesus should be set up above them, for they
envyed him in their hearts, they had drunk in a praejudice against him,
therefore could not endure that Christ should come and sit above them, and
hence they could not see the signs of the times; and indeed this was a thing
so visible, that Pilate, a Heathen, could discern it; he knew that for envy
they had delivered him, that what they did to Christ was from their envy more
than their zeal; so, men discern if things go on as they are pointed at in
the signs of the times, (they fear) those they envy will come to be equal
with them, and the like; if it were not for men's Interest, and men's envy, one
man at another, they could and would see more of the signs of the Times.

Thirdly, When that there is a heart in men that is gone, that is backslidden
and departed from the work of God in the time, that is that that does blind
men that they cannot see the signs of the times; and so indeed it was in this
Generation, our Lord says to them that they were a wicked and an adulterous
Generation, a wicked and an adulterous Generation seek after a sign, they
were a generation of men that were gone from the work of God, adulterated from
the work of God, they were so backslidden from it that now they had no heart,
they had no love to it; they had set their love upon others, and their hearts
were not upon God, and upon his glory, and upon his cause, and instead of
seeking the signs of the times, they seek after other signs, as it is with
backsliding hearts, they will endeavor all they can to shift off all
conviction; its said, they came to Christ tempting him and desiring him to show
them a sign from heaven; Wherein lay this Temptation? it lay as I conceive in
this, in that they came in a secret and subtle design, pretending they
desired much to be satisfied that he was the Messiah, and yet notwithstanding
they had a subtle design to shift off all conviction; for indeed the signs
of the times they were so manifest, they did staire so fully in the face of
this Generation, and they did make their consciences so bare and naked, that
they were many times troubled with Throbs and Check's, O this is the Messiah,
this is the Christ, so that now they come to still their consciences, in a
subtle way they labor to shift off all conviction; they say, Lord show us a
sign, as if they should say, Lord we would be willing to receive and own thee
as the Messiah, but condescend so far to us as to show us a sign; though
they had experience time after time, Christ would not condescend to them in
their flattering hypocritical way; they would say, the Messiah is meek and
humble, we will ask a sign, if he will not give it us, he is proud, he is not
the Christ, and this they thought would ease their consciences; for they had
strong co^^^ictions, though they labored to evade them; now Christ seeing they
came in this hypocritical way, he answers them, Can ye not see the signs of
the times? he caught them in their subtilty and hypocrisy, tempting of him,
therefore he presses the more upon them, Can ye not discern the signs of the
times? He takes the signs of the times and makes them lie more close upon
their Consciences: Christ would not yield to them to give them such a sign as
they would have, but puts them upon the signs of the times, to consider them;
and if Christ should have given them a new particular sign, they would not
have believed it, if they would not be convinced by the signs of the times: as
it is in the Parable of Abraham and Dives and Lazarus, in the 15 of Luke, They
have Moses and the Prophets (says he) if they will not believe them, so
neither will they believe if one should go from the dead to them. Christ goes
down into the grave and rises again after three days, there they had a new
sign, and yet they would not own this neither, but hire others to keep off
the knowledge of it from the world by telling of a lie. Now when light breaks
in upon men, to require a sign, that is, another light than the signs of the
times, its hypocrisy, to shift off the light that men have; therefore Christ
calls them an hypocritical Generation, whose hearts were not real to the work
and cause of God; when God clearly appears among us in his works, and in
sundry signs, then for men to call for other signs its provoking: Christ does
give them a sign, There shall be no sign given this evil and adulterous
Generation, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas; what sign was that? he gives
them such a sign, that they should never see the sign, till the work was
over; they could conclude nothing from it till it was too late; As Jonas was
three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the Son of man be
three days and three nights in the belly of the earth, they could gather
nothing from this sign till Christ was dead and risen again, and then the
work was over, and they had filled up the measure of their Iniquity; and so
they could gather nothing from this sign, till it was too late; therefore its
bad dallying with, and tempting of the Lord; Christ gives these persons a sign
for the hardening of them, a sign in Judgment, a sign that should not open
their eyes till it was too late, therefore take heed of shifting off the signs
of the times; take heed against clear signs, to shuffle off Gods work,
saying, I must have some other sign, or some extraordinary sign, God will not
be dallyed with in such things as these are.

The second Sermon.
MATTHEW 16.3. O ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, but can
ye not discern the signs of the Times?


SUrely its good for us to know the times, the signs and seasons of Gods
work, and this is that that is here held forth to us, and shall be the subject
of my present discourse, namely, The signs of the Times.

Quest: What are the signs of the Times?

Answ: Truly it was not in my thoughts till very lately, that it had been a
Question among any of the Children of God, Whether or no the work of the
present time, were the work of Christ's kingdom? I did conceive it to be one
great Article of our faith, that the work that God does call his Children to at
this day, (and he calls upon them from heaven to attend to) had been the work
of Christ's visible kingdom over the world; but there is a notion among good
and holy men worthy Instruments of Christ, that we are not to expect such a
thing as this fifth kingdom, until such time as our dear Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ shall come forth, and bring his kingdom with him; and indeed if
so, I must confess for my own part, I am very much in the dark what should
be the work of the present time; and what the work is, that the Saints and
people of God are called to, if the dispensations of God do not call to this,
and if the word of God does not lead them to this, if all does not lead us to
this, namely, To look upon the work of Christ's visible kingdom in the world.
Satan that is indeed the grand Enemy of the kingdom of our Lord Jesus, he
does labor (as you may have observed) might and maine, so long as he could,
wholly to obscure the notion it self of a visible kingdom, and indeed, to
hold the Saints and people of God, in such a belief, as that there was no such
thing at all as an outward kingdom, but it was a fancy and a dream of those
who ever they were that did expect it; and truly, it was none of the lest of
the subtilties of the Serpent, in setting abroach those principles of late
years among professors, that all things were to be taken spiritually; and so
indeed make them to allegorize the whole Scripture, knowing that could he once
bring them to this, he should thereby keep down the kingdom, which he did
clearly foresee was near approaching, and would rise in the world; but when
the Devil saw that his policy fayl'd him here, and that indeed there was such
a blessed light of this visible kingdom let forth into the world, that all
those mists that he raised could not darken the light of it, why truly (as I
have feared others do) he fly's to this retreat as to another hole, out of
which he might beat down the present work of the Generation, namely this, to
persuade the hearts of the Children of God, and to make us all be of a belief,
that there is no such thing that Saints should look for, or expect, or attend
unto, as a visible kingdom, until the day of Christ's appearance; and truly if
so be the Devil can but accomplish his end and design here, if he can but
bring us to the belief of such a thing as this, he does know full well, that
he shall as effectually oppose and strike dead the present work of the
generation, as ever he could have done if he had held the people of God in the
belief of the other thing, that there is no fifth kingdom at all; for what are
Saints called to, or can they do, unless it be only to pray and to believe,
which Saints of all ages and generations from the beginning of the world might
do? I say, what in this age are they in an especial manner called to, in
reference to Christ's kingdom, if so be there be not such a thing till Christ
appear? I desire to speak this soberly, because indeed I could not wave it.

I thought to have fallen directly upon the signs of the Times, and not to
have spoken any thing as to the thing it self, but truly all signs will be of
little use, if the thing it self be in doubt; therefore I saw a necessity that
something be spoken unto that; To clear therefore the conceptions of the
people of God in this, and that we may go upon as clear ground as may be, let
it be considered,

Asser: That the kingdom of Christ, his visible kingdom, or that thing called
the fifth Monarchy, its twofold, or it does consist of two parts, namely, the
kingdom of the Stone, and the kingdom of the Mountain.

The first of these I conceive to be as the evening time of that kingdom, to
wit, all that time that is to be, before the rising of the morning Star, the
sun of righteousness Jesus Christ; the last is the morning state of that
kingdom, that which succeedes the rising of the morning Star and Sun of
Righteousness.

The first of these, it is (as I may so say) the working kingdom of the
Saints, its that kingdom wherein Saints are by their Lord Employed to do some
notable service against his coming; which is, The breaking down the great
Image, the bringing down all his Enemies, that when he comes he may find them
his footstool, for he is to sit at the fathers right hand until all his
Enemies be made his footstool; therefore this kingdom of the Stone is the
working kingdom, the kingdom wherein the Saints are Employed in a glorious
work for Christ, to pluck down all, that Jesus Christ when he comes may have
his Enemies his footstool.

The other I call the kingdom of glory, wherein the Saints shall not so
properly work, but receive; they shall in that kingdom, the kingdom of the
Mountain, be glorified with Christ, and receive the reward of their works.

The first of these its a kingdom wherein plowshares are to be beaten into
swords; and if we consult the Prophets that speak of this time, we shall find
the command is, Beat your plowshares into swords, intimating that in the time
of this kingdom, there shall be wonderful use of swords, weapons of war.

But the Second, the kingdom of the Mountain, is a kingdom wherein swords
are to be beaten into plowshares, noting the wonderful peace of that kingdom,
that there shall be no need of, nor no use for swords in that kingdom of the
Mountain.

This twofold state of Christ's kingdom, we have resembled and set forth by a
double Type, David's kingdom was a Type of the first, Solomon's of the second;
David's kingdom was an eminent Type of the kingdom of the Stone, and therefore
it rose by the hand of God alone, in a wonderful way; a company of poor men
come to him, and all the world is against him; and the work is low at first,
it creepes up by little and little; and David's puts down all his Enemies round
about, as the Midianites, the Moabites, the Ammonites, the Philistims, etc. and
makes them all stoop to him at last: This was the warring kingdom, a kingdom
wherein there was blood. Solomon's kingdom, was a Type of the kingdom of the
Mountain, wherein was peace. Therefore the 72 Psalm, wherein is described the
glory of this kingdom, its entitled a Psalm for Solomon, so that Solomon's
kingdom was a Type of the second.

This distinction likewise is warranted, by that distinction that we find in
Daniel of his mystical numbers, look into the last of Daniel, and you shall
find two sorts of numbers, 1290 days, and 1335 days, Dan: 12.12, 13. And from
the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the Abomination that
makes desolate set up, there shall be 1290 day's: Blessed is he that waits,
and comes to the 1335 days. The first number 1290 days, points us to that
time where the kingdom of the Stone begins, as it is the Stone of Israel.
Observe that, for Daniel is now speaking of his own people, so its the Stone
of Israel, as Jacob calls it in his blessing of Joseph, there shall a blessed
Stone rise among the Jews; now as its the Stone of Israel, so the kingdom of
the Stone among the Jews, begins at the end of the 1290 days: The second
number, 1335 days, points at the time wherein the kingdom of the Mountain
begins, when the Stone shall have broken all, and become a great Mountain
filling the whole earth; This likewise Daniel holds forth in the 7 of Daniel,
where he does make a manifest distinction, puts a clear difference, betwixt
the time of the taking away of the Beast's or little Horn's Dominion, and the
time of the end, Wherein the kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the
kingdom under the whole heaven is given to the Saints, verse. 26. First, there
is the time wherein the Dominion begins to be taken away, then there is a day of
Consumption, and then there comes the end, and a turning of all worldly Powers
into the hands of the Saints, The kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of
the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints
of the most high; But I say, there is a beginning of this work where they take
away his Dominion, there begins the kingdom of the Stone; When the kingdom
and Dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, comes
into the hands of the Saints, there begins the kingdom of the Mountain. Now
this Truth I am speaking of, or this twofold consideration of the fifth
kingdom, indeed its a thing of so great concernment, that we cannot rightly
apply the notion of the fifth Monarchy without the knowledge of it; its not a
fancy or a dream, but truly I look upon it as being a maine and a
principal part of that faith once delivered to the Saints, as touching the
fifth kingdom; and the rather I speak of it, because I find diverse good men
writing of this fifth kingdom, wholly pass over the kingdom of the Stone, and
insist wholly upon the kingdom of the Mountain, as if the kingdom of the
Stone did not belong to the fifth Monarchy. Now that this kingdom of the Stone,
is a part, and a principal part of the fifth Monarchy, is clear and Evident,
from Dan: 2.44. And in the days of those kings shall the God of heaven set up
a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; and the kingdom shall not be left
to other people, but it shall break in pieces, and consume all these
kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. In the days of those kings shall the
God of heaven set up a kingdom. What is this Daniel calls a kingdom here, and
the God of heavens kingdom? its no other but the little Stone, Daniel had been
Interpreting all the parts of the great Image, and coming to interpret the
Stone (having not spoken of that yet) he calls it a kingdom, and a kingdom of
the God of heaven; therefore the Stone shall be a different kingdom from all
the kingdoms of this world, for its called the kingdom of the God of heaven,
in opposition to all the kingdoms of this world, of the great Image spoken of
before: and its such a kingdom as shall never be destroyed, nor left to other
people, but shall break in pieces and consume all the other kingdoms. Now
what is that breaking piece, but the Stone? now this Stone, this kingdom, is
called a kingdom that shall never be destroyed: now what is that that shall
never be destroyed by any Enemy, but the fifth Monarchy? therefore the kingdom
of the Stone must of necessity be considered as the fifth Monarchy, or as one
maine piece of it: And though this Stone fundamentally is Christ himself, yet
considered as smiting the great Image, it can be no other but Christ Mystical,
Christ in his Members; and the cutting out of this Stone cannot be meant, as
some would have it, of Christ's first Coming, for these Reasons.

First, Because the kingdom of the Stone it does arise in the days of the ten
Antichristian kings; and in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven
set up a kingdom. What kings are these? these kings are not the four
Monarchy's, for the kingdom of God was not set up in the time of those
Monarchy's, but in the fourth and last only; and here is spoken of kings in
the plural number, In the days of those kings shall the God of heaven set up
a kingdom; those kings therefore are the ten Antichristian kings, which are
set forth by ten toes, where the work begins, and the first stroke is
struck; and are called the ten Horns in another place; and in Dan: 7. those
ten Horns are interpreted ten kings, and in the time of those kings the Stone
is cut out, they are the ten Antichristian kings; and if so, the Stone cannot
be so early cut out, as the birth of Christ, for that was long before the ten
Antichristian kings had being or existence in the world, therefore the kingdom
of the Stone must be cut out later.

Secondly, Because Daniel does not see the Stone to smite, until such time as
he had had a view and representation of the great Image in all the parts of it
before him, he saw it all come forth and exist in its state, before the Stone
smites, therefore I conclude, that the cutting out of the Stone was not until
every part of it was come forth, and was in being in the world. But if so be we
conceive the cutting out of the Stone to be as high as Christ's coming; then was
the Stone cut out long before the last part of the great Image (the Iron and
the Clay) was in being; and if the Stone was cut out so long before, then did
the Stone lie still, and not do its work for many hundred years (surely it
should not lie still for so many hundred years, and not do the work it was
ordained to) for the very first stroke the Stone strikes, is upon the feet of
Iron and Clay, which it could do before they were in being.

Thirdly, Because Daniels smiting Stone that he speaks of in the second
Chapter, and Daniels Ancient of days sitting, that he speaks of in the 7
Chapter, they must of necessity be one and the same, they are contemporary, for
they do one and the same work, the very work that is done by the one, is
done by the other. The Stone smites the Toes of the fourth Monarchy, and
Daniels Ancient of days sitting, casts down the Thrones, and Judges, and
destroy's the fourth Beast, here is one and the same work, therefore they are
one and the same time, the Time of the cutting out of the Stone, is the same
with the time of the sitting of the Ancient of days. Now if they are the same
in time, the Stone cannot be cut out so high as Christ's first coming, for the
Ancient of days sitting, its clear its not till the ending time of the fourth
Monarchy; then comes the Ancient of days and sitts in Judgment, and casts
down and destroy's the Beast and not before; therefore the cutting out of the
Stone cannot be the first time, but at the close of the fourth Monarchy. And
seeing it is so, that the kingdom of the Stone is a part of the fifth kingdom
or Monarchy, and also seeing that the cutting out of this Stone, its not till
toward the latter end of the fourth kingdom or Monarchy, then it does follow,
that this fifth kingdom or Monarchy does begin as its the kingdom of the
Stone, at the latter end of the fourth Monarchy, and then of necessity it must
have a beginning as its the kingdom of the Stone, before Christ's appearance.

Now if it can be made appear, that that, with which the fifth kingdom does
begin, the work of the great Image, the overturning the Thrones of the kings,
is to be performed by the Saints, as chief Instruments in the mannagement of
it, then, it follows of necessity there must be such a thing, As the Civil
and Military Power to be in the hands of the Saints, and that before the day of
Christ's appearance, they must have this Power in their hands for the
performance of that work; and if so, then its not evil for the Saints and
people of God, to seek for it, to pray for it, to plead for it, for its to
come into their hands for the doing of their work before the day of Christ's
appearance. Now that this work with which the fifth kingdom does begin, is a
work to be performed by Saints, as the chief and principal Instruments in
the doing of it, is that that I would speak somewhat to at present. That there
is a wonderful glorious blessed work to be done by the Saints in the world
before the appearance of Jesus Christ. The

First Reason to make this good is, Because the work of breaking the great
Image, its done by the Stone cut out of the Mountain; its not done by
Mountains considered as Mountains, its not done by nations considered as
nations, kingdoms considered as kingdoms, for then it would be done by the
Mountain; but its done by a Stone cut out of the Mountain, by a people picked
by God himself out of the nations and kingdoms of this world, formed and
united together by God himself, which shall fall upon the great Image, and
break it to pieces, its these that do this work: and further, its cut out
without hands, Dan. 2.34. Thou saw till that a Stone was cut out without
hands: and again, if we look into verse: 45. For as much as thou saw that
the Stone was cut out of the Mountain without hands; its cut out without
hands, that is, without worldly Powers, it shall not be done by the power of
this world, but more Immediately by God; without hands, is, without the hands
of men; I say, its done by a Power cut out of the Mountain, therefore not by
the Mountain.

Quest: How does it appear that they shall be Saints, may not God take a
people out of the Mountain, and they not Saints?

Ans: I answer, Its clear, they shall for the chief, principal and leading
Instruments be Saints, and that upon this account, that they are called A
Stone: why are they called the Stone? but indeed in relation to the Lord Jesus
Christ king of Saints, whose name and title this is, who is called a Stone:
they are partakers of the name of Christ, to show that they shall also partake
of his nature; they shall have the Image of Christ upon them, therefore the
name of Christ is given to them. If the work were to be done by the kingdoms
of this world, by nations as nations, what agreement were there between Christ
and them? what agreement is there between Christ and a company of poor
Ignorant ungodly men? But there is a great agreement between those that shall
do this work and Christ, for therefore they have the name of Christ given to
them; and seeing it is so, it shall not be done by the body's of nations as
nations, but by a people cut out of the Mountain, out of the nations, by God
himself for the carrying on of this work.

Secondly, Its clear from Daniels vision that we have inthe 7 Chapter, whence
we may form this argument; Those very people that the little Horn does war
against, and prevail against, and does wear out all the time of his Dominion,
those very people are they that at the ending time of his Dominion, shall take
his kingdom and Dominion from him, but the first are Saints, therefore the
last: To make both good, look the 21 and 22 verses of the 7 of Daniel. I
beheld, and the same Horn made war with the Saints, and prevailed against
them until the Ancient of days came, and Judgment was given to the Saiats of
the most high: and the time came that the Saints possessed the kingdom. And
again, look into the 25, 26, and 27 verses, And he shall speak great words
against the most high, and shall wear out the Saints of the most high, and
think to change times and Laws; and they shall be given into his hand, until
a time and times and the deviding of time. But the Judgment shall sit, and
they shall take away his Dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the end.
And the kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the
whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high,
whose kingdom is an Everlasting kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and
obey him. So that observe, the very people that the little Horn warr's against
in the day of his reign, that very people at the ending time of his Dominion,
shall take his Dominion from him, but they are Saints; I say, Saints must be
considered under that notion, in taking the kingdom and Dominion of the little
Horn, as they are considered in the little Horns war against them; why, if
we consider that, in the time of the little Horns war against them, he does
not war against them as they are nations, but against Saints as Saints,
therefore when the ending time of his Dominion comes, Saints as Saints, (not
Saints as the body of nations, for there was never yet a nation made up of
Saints, but Saints as Saints) cul'd out, shall execute the vengeance of God
upon this little Horn, that has warred against them, and trodden them
underfoote so long.

Thirdly, That generation of men shall destroy the kingdom of the Beast in the
time when his kingdom is to be destoyed, that did bear witness against the
Beast for Christ, all the time his kingdom stood; this is grounded upon the
clear truth, of the 11 Chapter of the Revelation, which tells us that the
witnesses for 1260 days prophesied, in the end of this time they are killed by
the Beast, they rise up again, and rising up, they knock the Beast down, for
Immediately thereupon the tenth part of the City fell, and there was a great
earthquake, and there were slain of men seven thousand, and great fear fell
upon all the rest, and they gave glory to the God of heaven. This is done by
the rising witnesses, therefore that generation of men that have borne
Testimony against the Beast, in the time of the Beast's kingdom, that
generation of men when his time runs out, shall give the deadly stroke to the
Beast and his kingdom; but that generation of men that have borne their
witness, has not been in the world, it has not been the nations of the
earth, for all the world, says John, wondered after the Beast, and all the
Horns, and that with one mind, and with one consent, give up their power and
kingdom to the Beast; and therefore not the powers of the world, but they that
have borne witness against the Beast, all the time of his kingdom, and they
are the poor despised handful of Saints that have been in the world, that
have borne their testimony against the Beast, and therefore they are those, who
at the expiring time shall come forth and give the deadly Blow to the Beast.

Fourthly, The Angel that enlightens the earth with the glory of the truth of
the Lord, that is, that Angel or Instrument that shall ruin Babylon, Revel.
18.1. And after these things, I saw another Angel come down from heaven,
having great power, and the earth was enlightened with his glory. The Angel
that enlightens the earth with the glory of God, carry's on the work against
Babylon, but the earth has not been enlightened with the glory of God by the
generation of the world, but the world has been enlightened by the generation
of the faithful, that God has revealed his truth to, they have been the light
enlightening the world with the glory of Gods truth; and this Angel that
enlighteneth the earth, with the glory of God, he gives the deadly blow unto
the Beast; there where light comes forth, God will carry on the work by those
hands.

Fifthly, Those which have had a Bloody Cup filled to them by the Beast all the
time of his kingdom, those shall give forth a bloody Cup double to the Beast
when his kingdom does expire; that is grounded upon Revel: 18.6. Reward her
even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double, according to her works;
in the Cup which she has filled, fill to her double. Whence I reason thus,
the Generation of men that have had the bloody Cup filled to them by the Beast
all the time of his kingdom, they shall fill the bloody Cup to the Beast in
the ending time of his kingdom, for, reward her as she has rewarded you, and
give her blood to drink, give her double according to her works: But they
that have had blood from the Beast all the time of his kingdom, have not been
the nations of the earth as nations, for the Beast sits upon the nations, the
waters upon which the whore sits, are nations, and peoples, and multitudes, and
tongues. The Beast is strengthened by the nations that oppose the Saints, and
tread underfoote the holy City; but they have been the Saints that have had
the bloody Cup from the Beast, The Horn made war with the Saints, I saw the
woman drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus: Now they that have had the bloody Cup, shall give the bloody Cup, they
that have been thus dealt with by the Beast, shall thus deal with the Beast;
they are the Saints, and therefore the glorious work is carried on against the
Beast, (it shall be done) by Saints, as the leading Instruments. I shall speak
yet a little more to this, because many begin now to think, that this work
must be carried on thus and thus, by States and Kingdoms.

Sixthly, The work of God against Rome, shall be so managed, as there may be
singing of Hallelujah's in the Churches for the carrying of it on: this is
clear from Revel: 19.1. After these things, (that is, after the ruin of Rome,
spoken of in the foregoing Chapter) I heard a great voice of much people in
heaven, saying, Allelujah, Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the
Lordour God: here is singing of Hallelujah's upon the destruction of the Beast;
but now if this should be done only by the clattering of a company of nations,
falling upon the Beast and ruining him, what singing of Hallelujah's would
there be in the Churches for this? what would there be more in this, than in
the work of Cyrus destroying of Babylon, or in Alexanders destroying the Medes
and Persians Monarchy, or in the Romans destroying the Grecian Monarchy? for
that was a part of Gods decree as well as this; what should the people
therefore now sing Hallelujah's for, more than in those times? But because of
the difference of the Instruments; things now being done in a more holy
sanctified way, to a more pure end; and there shall be more of the Image of God
appear upon those that shall do this work now, and therefore they shall sing
Hallelujah's; otherwise, the work did not go beyond the work that had been
done before.

Seventhly, The Ruin of Rome, or of the Beast, it shall be so carried on, that
this work shall be a shadow of the glorious kingdom of Christ, of the
kingdom of the Mountain. The kingdom of the Stone, when it comes to smite
Rome, then shall be in it a resemblance (as it were) of the reign of Christ,
and the glory of the kingdom of the Mountain, therefore its said in the sixth
verse, And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice
of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluja: for
the Lord God Omnipotent reigns. There shall be so much of the Majesty of God,
of the power of God, of the purity of God, and so much of the Image of God upon
his Children, when that work is done, as that they shall now say, the Lord God
Omnipotent reigns; it could not be said, Hallelujah, the Lord God Omnipotent
reigns; if the work were done by a Company of carnal nations; and yet this
is before the end, before Christ's coming, for after this appearance, we have
the Bride making her self ready, and the kings of the earth come together to
destroy the Bride preparing for her husband, and then you have Christ coming
forth in his fury, destroying his Enemies and rescuing his Bride: But before
that day, there shall be such a glorious appearance in the world, and such
power in the hands of the People of God, that it shall be said when men look
upon it, the Lord God Omnipotent reigns, the Lord Jesus Christ who is king of
the world, and king of Saints reigns, therefore it shall be done by Saints as
leading Instruments.

Eighthly, Look through the old and new Testament, where ever we have a
description of the persons that shall do the glorious work of God at the last
day, and you shall ever find them described and characterized as Saints. I
shall give you but two or three places; one is, Zach: 9.13. When I have bent
Judah for me, filled the Bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy Sons, O Zion,
against thy Sons, O Greece, and made thee as th sword of a mighty man: mark!
Raised up thy Sons, O Zion, against thy Sons, O Greece; who are they that are
raised up against the Sons of Greece, that is, against the Turish power, as I
showed you formerly? they are the Sons of Zion, I will raise up thy Sons, O
Zion; whereas there was in all the foregoing Monarchy's, one earthly Power
raised up against another, when it comes to the very last time, God raises up
another manner of Power, I will raise up thy Sons, O Zion, against thy Sons, O
Greece. So if you look into Obadiah 18 and 21 verses; And the House of Jacob
shall be a fire, and the House of Joseph a flame, and the House of Esau for
stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and devour them, and there shall not
be any remaining of the House of Esau, for the Lord has spoken it. And
Saviors shall come upon Mount Zion to Judge the Mount of Esau, and the
kingdom shall be the Lords. Saviors shall got up on Mount Zion; who shall
they be? the House of Jacob, and the House of Joseph shall burn up the Mount
of Esau, they shall Judge the House of Esau, and then shall the kingdom be the
Lords; the universal kingdom of the Lord is not yet come in; but here comes
in the kingdom of the Stone, the House of Jacob shall be a fire, and the House
of Joseph a flame, they shall burn up all the works of the world; and
Saviors shall come up upon Mount Zion, and Judge the Mount of Esau: When all
his Enemies are brought down and become his footstool, then shall he come
forth and take the kingdom, and the kingdom shall be the Lords; Sit thou at
my right hand, uneill I make thine Enemies thy footstool, then the Lord shall
send the rod of thy strength out of Zion, rule thou in the midst of thine
Enemies, there is the coming forth of Christ when his Enemies by his Saints are
made his footstool. So likewise if you look into Micah, 4.11, 12. Now also
many nations are gathered against thee, that say, let her be defiled, and let
our eye look upon Zion; This gathering of the nations is not after Christ's
coming but before, and what then? Arise and Thresh, O daughter of Zion: for I
will make thine Horn Iron, and I will make thy Hoof's brass, and thou shall
beat in pieces many people, and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord,
and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth. Who shall arise and
thresh? arise and thresh O daughter of Zion; she shall have Horns of Iron and
Hoof's of brass, to beat all the Enemies of Christ into very chafe and dust,
as its said the great Image was ground to powder; why, its Zion, the poor
despised daughter of Zion, she that they stood looking upon and said, Let her
be defiled, let our eyes look upon Zion; they stood jeering at Zion, and says
God, Zion, I will make thee a trouble and a torment to them all; come up Zion,
and I will make thy Horns Iron, and thy Hoof's brass, and thou shall break
all the nations to pieces that now stand looking upon thee. And in another
place the Lord tells us, Jacob is his Battell-Axe, and weapons of war; so
says God, Jer. 51.20. For with thee will I break in pieces the nations, and
with thee will I destroy kingdoms. When he comes to work his great work in
the world, his faithful Children shall be his weapons to bring it to pass.
Come to the new Testament, and we shall see who God will make his Instruments
to carry on his work against the Beast, Revel. 15.2. And I saw as it were a
sea of glass, mingled with fire, and them that had gotten the victory over the
Beast, and over his Image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name,
stand on the sea of glass, having the Harps of God. And in the 6 verse, And
the seven Angels came out of the Temple, having the seven last plagues, clothed
in pure and white linen, and having their Breasts girded with golden girdles.
They shall be precious Instruments, they shall have much purity and Holiness,
and much of the Image of God upon them, and much of the beauty and riches of
Christ in them, that shall do this work; so, if we look into Revel: 14.
where, after the Beasts time is run out, (in the 13 Chapter, we have the Beast
tryumphing, and the Beast's time running out in 42 months, now after this) we
have another kind of persons, another party coming upon the stage, Revel:
14.1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 verses. And I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on the mount
Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers
name written in their foreheads. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice
of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of
harpers, harping with their harpes. And they sung as it it were a new song
before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders, and no man could
learn that song, but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were
redeemed from the earth. These are they which were not defiled with women, for
they are virgins: these are they which follow the Lamb withersoever he goes:
these were redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the
Lamb. And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before
the throne of God. What a generation of men come up upon the stage when the
Beast's 42 months are run out, for that had been spoken to in the foregoing
Chapter; when that time is run out, up comes the Lamb with his company, and
they are a company not like to the world, for, they have their fathers name
written in their foreheads, there is holiness in their foreheads, they are a
party in whose mouth there is no guile; they do not act in subtle polliticke
ways, as men do and have done. So that, I say, Consider those that shall
carry on this work, where ever we have them spoken of, in the old and new
Testament, they are still set forth as Saints, for the principalls and leaders
in this work. I have been somewhat large in this, for if we cannot find a
kinddome till Christ come, all the signs will be nothing, therefore I have
spoken the more to this; but it may be objected;

Object. That its the ten Horns that hate the whore, if you look into Revel:
17.16. the ten Horns are said to do it.

Ans: To that I answer, We must so interpret this, as not to set it against
the general current of Scripture. Now whereas, the ten Horns are said to hate
the whore, and make her desolate, and burn her with fire; the meaning is this,
that the ten Horns as being conquered to the Lamb, and the power of them being
gotten into the power of the Lamb, so shall the Horns be turned against the
whore; and indeed, this well agrees to the scope of the place, for its said in
the 14 verse, These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
them. There was war betwixt the Lamb and some of the Horns, (for we are not
here to understand all the ten Horns) and in this war, the Lamb becomes the
victor; and then the Horns which before did fight for the Beast, and support
the Beast, (when the power of the Horns comes into the hands of the Lamb) they
turn against the Beast; and indeed seeing its done by the Horns as conquered
to the Lamb, its clear that in that day, such of the Horns as shall do it,
shall be ruled by the Lamb; and if so, why then there shall be such a thing as
the kingdom of Christ, even in the Horns, when this is done: And truly, we
cannot see at present that yet this kingdom is in the Horns, that yet the
Horns are conquered to the Lamb, so that the Lamb reigns in the Horns; the
kingdom of the Lamb is a kingdom of Righteousness, a kingdom wherein there
shall be no injustice, oppression, and the like; we cannot see that there is
yet such a thing among the Horns, and though it is not yet, yet, when he comes
to take the kingdom, he will make the Horns other manner of Horns, and when
he comes to do it, he will do it speedily.

Object. But Christ's kingdom is not of this world, and therefore it cannot be
expected any such thing should be as the beginning of the kingdom of Christ,
till the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ himself.

Ans: Its worthy our Consideration, Who the person was, to whom that was
spoken, and the occasion those words were spoken by Christ: The person to whom
the words were spoken, was Pilate the Roman Governor; The occasion was, when
he was accused before Pilate, as an Enemy to Caesar, as one that would have
took Caesar's kingdom from him; Jesus Christ answers upon it; My kingdom is
not of this world, that is, of this Mornarchy, for the whole world at that time
was under the Roman Monarchy; There went forth a decree from Caesar, that all
the world should be taxed; for so indeed, the whole world, and Monarchy, are
terms Equivalent; so that, My kingdom is not of this world, that is, its not
of this Monarchy: It was a very good answer to that that was objected against
him, Caesar fears I will take the kingdom from him, no says Christ, my
kingdom is not of this world, its not to be in this Monarchy; I have a
kingdom but its not yet, I will not take Caesar's Crown off his head, I shall
have a kingdom hereafter, but Caesar needs not fear me now; this comes in
about Pilats querying with him about his being aching. There is such a thing
therefore, yet before the coming of Christ, as the setting up the kingdom of
Christ in the world, as the same shall be the kingdom of the Stone, breaking
in pieces and destroying all other kingdoms. And having thus spoken unto this,
I shall now come to speak of the signs of the Times, the signs that this
kingdom is nigh at hand, that Jesus Christ is near to his work; seeing there
is such a work to be done in the latter end of the fourth Monarchy, whether or
no is this work near at hand, or is it far off and remote?

I shall not speak any thing at all as to the Computation of the time from the
numbers left us in Scripture, though much may be learned from them, for
doubtless the Lord has not left us numbers to the end there should be no use
at all made of them, for there is nothing in the word of God but its of some
use; but that I shall not speak to, but proceed to show you some of the signs
of The Times.

First, The wonderful breaking forth of light as to this work; its very
observable, that when the work of God is to be carried on against the Beast,
there does forerun the work a glorious light; so, if you look into Revel: 14
6 and 7 verses, we have an Angel flying in the midst of Heaven, having the
Everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice fear
God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his Judgment is come; and what
then? why in the next verse there follows another Angel, saying, Babylon is
fallen, is fallen; an Angel goes forth and enlightens the earth, preaches and
declares it in the world, that now the hour of Gods Judgment is come, the
hour is come says he, and presently another Angel cries out, Babylon is
fallen, is fallen; the work of God comes on presently after the revealing of
light; Revel: 18.1, 2. The earth was enlightened with his glory; and then
presently verse 6. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her
double, according to her works; in the cup which she has filled, fill to her
double: and in the 8 verse, Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death,
and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire. Observe
first here is an Angel comes and enlightens the earth with the glory of God, the
earth that was before in darkness, and thought nothing of the ruin of Rome, and
Judging the Beast; the Lord lets in wonderful light into the world, and then
presently comes forth the work it self, the Lord does appear judging of the
Beast; Likewise, if you look to the final blow given to the Beast; Revel: 19.
you will see that it follows after light that does forerun it, 17 and 18
verses, And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun, and he cried with a loud voice,
saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, come, and gather
your selves together to the supper of the great God, that ye may eat the flesh
of kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the
flesh of Horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both
free and bond, both small and great. Here Is the last overthrow, the deadly blow
the Lord gives the Beast; and there foreruns it a wonderful light, an Angel
stands in the Sun, that is, in wonderful clear light; he stands, holding
forth and declaring the coming of that terrible day; and presently upon that
light, the work comes on. I say, this is a sign of the time, that the work
is at hand, The great discovery of light as to the work, the Lord brings forth.

And the Reasons why God will send forth light before his work, are;

First, Because he would not lead his Children to his work blindfold, but by
light. Antichrists followers, they follow in the dark, in the mist of Implicit
faith; but the Lambs followers; they are led by light. Practice without
principle has ever been the way of the Beast, but Principle as the rule of
practice is Christ's Method.

Secondly, Because a Saint, though the thing he do be good and the will of
God, yet can never have comfort in doing it, if it be not done from light. My
Comfort ly's in this that I know I follow the Lord; and this bore up Paul, when
Brethren Censured him, and others accounted him a mad man. Now observe, when
God let us forth a light, its in order to a work; thus, when God began with the
Papacy, to overturne their gross Idolatry's, God by Luther and some few others
brings forth light to discover these, and upon that discovery, they fall. So
afterward, when God went to Judge the Prelacy here in England, first he brings
forth light, and discovers them to be a piece of the Beast, and of the mystery
of Iniquity, and presently upon the coming forth of that light they fall; when
God sends light, he will bring forth the work suddenly.

Object. We have had light of this a great while, and pleaded for the kingdom
of Christ, and therefore this cannot be a sign.

Ans: To that I answer, We must consider there is a difference between the
breaking forth of light, as it is the light of some particular persons, and as
its the light in a more general way among many, then is the work coming
forth. John Hus and Jerome of Prague held forth Luthers light, before Luther,
and while it was but in the breasts of some few persons, it did no great matter
against the Beast's kingdom, but when it came to be general in the world,
then the Blow came, the kingdom of the Beast was destroyed by that light, so
much of it, as that light served to destroy. Whilst that light that opposed the
Antichristian Prelacy, was lodged up only in some few breasts, it produced
little, save only a witness against them; but when it began to be general,
it tossed them out of their seats. So I may say concerning this light, the
light of the kingdom of Christ, it has been in some few breasts a great
while, but it never began to be so general until now, that its run among the
Churches; Indeed never was there a Principle that did run so much among the
Churches of Christ, as this has done within these twelve months; since some
Eminent servants of Christ have been shut up, and thrust into holes, this light
has been increased and embraced among the Saints, so as never any light
encreas't more in such a little time, than this has done; and when light
begins to be so general, its an argument now the work draws on, it begins to
be hot as we say; and indeed the light grows so general that the persecuting
adversary who not long ago would not acknowledge any kingdom at all but the
spiritual, yet now they acknowledge such a thing as the fifth Monarchy in the
world, though they would set it far off, that it might not hurt them, and are
driven to confess, that, that very principle, for which Saints suffer at this
day, is in the substance of it a truth. Light is coming forth apace, and
blessed be the Lord that has been so merciful to his people at this day, that
the proud Adversary's of the truth and cause of God, shall one day be Judged
out of their own mouths, they themselves know that there is such a kingdom,
they have gotten some light into it, and they shall one day be Judged out of
their own mouths.

Secondly, Syons Children favoring of her stones and dust; the ground of this
we have in Psalm 102.13. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Syon: for the
time to favor her, yea, the set time is come. That this Psalm look's to
Christ's outward kingdom, the 15, 18, and 22 verses Evidence. But what sign
is there of it, that the set time is come? why in the 14 verse, When the Saints
of God take pleasure in the stones of Syon, and begin to favor the dust
thereof, then, the set time of building Syon is come.

Quest: What are we to understand by Stones and Dust?

Ans: Stones and dust are the beginnings of a Building; the first thing a man
does that will build a house, is to gather dust and stones and mortar, the
meaning is this, as if the Lord should say, when you shall see some such thing
visible in the world, as that there seems to be a prepation and provision for
the beginning of this glorious work of my kingdom, and when you see the
hearts of my people wonderfully taken with these preparations and beginnings,
and raised up to a very high expectation, then know that the set time to favor
Syon is come: and truly when was there ever in the world, if not at this day
something that did look as a preparation and provision for this glorious work
of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, gathering stones and dust together, cutting
off the heads of Princes, and pulling down Thrones; now the Children of Syon,
take pleasure in the stones, and they favor the dust of it.

Thirdly, A third sign of the time, The great reproach that is upon the
Remnant that expect this work. When Israel of old came out of Babylon, they
had a double work, they had a spiritual work, and a Civil work, the work
of the Temple, and the work of the City Jerusalem; and those who expected the
carrying on the Civil work of building the City Jerusalem, and the walls
thereof, they were made a wonderful reproach; Nehem: 1.3. And they said unto
me, The Remnant that are left of the Captivity there in the Province, are in
great affliction and reproach; the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and
the gates thereof are burnt with fire. Mark! the Remnant are in great
affliction; what Remnant? why, the Remnant that are left of the Captivity, the
Remnant that did expect the City Jerusalem should be built, they are become a
reproach; the work of building of the wall of Jerusalem is delayed, till the
Remnant do become a reproach: the people of God had their Temple done, they
were set upon building their City, for they were told by their Prophets, that
they should build their Temple and their City too, and now the people cry unto
them and laugh at them, where is your City? where is your Commonwealth that
you talk of? you would have the City built, and you would have a Commonwealth
set up, and a kingdom, but where is it? never such reproach comes upon
waiters, as when the work is ready to peep forth; then, at that time when
they were so reproached was the work ready to come forth; then Nehemiah is
brought on his knees, and spreads the thing before the Lord, in the fourth
verse, and the Commission for building the wall of Jerusalem was given forth
thereupon, even that very year.

Babylon litterall, was a type of the kingdom of Babylon mystical; their
Babylon was a type of our Babylon; and as it was then, so it is now, upon the
coming out of Babylon we have a double work, a work of the Temple, and a
work of the City; the Temple-worke is finished, and that is suffered to
stand; but now the Saints look for their Civil work, for their Commonwealth,
and that is become a reproach; for is not this the reproach at this day, these
are the fifth Monarchy-men, and where is now your fifth kingdom, your fifth
Monarchy? never was that grown to such a reproach this ten years; how have
they been reproached even by some who are now compelled to acknowledge a truth
in the principle? Now observe, when the work was reproached, then the work
went on; and as that was the time then for the carrying on of the work; why so
now, the work being reproached with us also, its a sign that this is the time
for the carrying on of the work now: And truly its worthy our observation,
How, after this work was come to be a reproach, it went on in a wonderful
way, the work of Jerusalem; Nehem: 6.16. So the wall was finished, in the 25
day of the month Elul, in 52 days. In 52 days! what a wonderful thing is
it, that the wall of such a City as Jerusalem was, should be built in 52
days, and that by so few hands? And this little handful were many of them
forced to take their swords in their hands. The Temple was abuilding a great
while, and they needed no swords to that work; but now they come to their
Citty-worke, they have their swords in their hands to defend themselves,
because there were many Enemies of that work; and yet notwithstanding all
their Enemies, and all the opposition, it was done as it were by a miracle in
52 days. So the work of the kingdom it shall come on apace, suddenly, in one
hour shall this work come on; in 52 days was Jerusalem walled
notwithstanding all the reproach which Immediately before was cast upon them.

Fourthly, A fourth sign is, The present doubting that is in many godly
spirits about this work, as being near; its a clear sign that the work is
at hand: Two or three years since, some expressed a great deal of faith about
this work, they preached it up, we shall go on wonderfully, we shall go on
to Rome, we shall pull down Tithes etc. But now their spirits are sunk, and
they say, its not yet time; this is so far from a discouragement, as that its a
great sign that the work is near; for this is a clear Rule, that when ever
Christ brings forth a work in the world, he will bring it forth so, as that he
shall not find faith on Earth; hence you have it, Luk: 18.8. Nevertheless,
when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on Earth? It has been the
usual way of God, even to strike dead the faith of his Children when the work
is at the birth, so, Exodus 5.20, 21. after the death upon the work there, and
their burdens are doubled, they meet Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as
they came forth from Pharaoh, and they said unto them, the Lord look upon you,
and Judge, because you have made our savor to be abhorred in the eyes of
Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hands to slay
us. Observe, the People that just before believed, and said, O the work is
come, and the day of our deliverance is at hand, in the end of the former
Chapter the text says, The people believed when they heard that the Lord had
visited the Children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction,
and they bowed their heads and worshipped: Though they believed in the former
Chapter that their deliverance was now at hand, yet they doubt in this Chapter;
as soon as ever the death comes upon the work, they murmur and doubt of it,
and blame Moses and Aaron, telling them they had made their savor to be
abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and of his servants, to put a sword in their
hands to slay us. So it was with David, when the work of his kingdom first
came forth, when he first set out against Saul, he had a great deal of
confidence at first, 1 Samuel: 22.22. David says to Abiathar, Abide thou with me,
fear not: for he that seeks my life seeks thy life; but with me thou shall
be in safety But observe, after this David lost his confidence, and came to
doubt of the going on of this work of his kingdom, in the 27 Chapter the
first verse, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul; he speaks quite
contrary to what he said before, yet now the work is near, the kingdom is
ready to rise: So when the Children of Israel were to come out of Babylon, and
a death came upon the work, they cried out, The time is not come, the time is
not come that the Lords house should be built; here they doubt as to the time,
their faith was down, yet then was the time at hand, and the work was carried
on in the second year of Darius. So likewise, look to Christ himself when he
was here, the Disciples a little before his death, they could say to him, Thou
art Christ the Son of the Living God, they had much of faith at first, but when
Christ is in the grave they loose their faith, We trusted that it was he that
should have redeemed Israel; their faith was gone, and yet their Redemption was
nearer than ever it was, and Christ's Resurrection at hand; so that while they
were Questioning and doubting, the time of Christ's rising approaches: So
abundance of good men, that formerly have kept to Allhallow's-meeting, and
Blackfryers-meeting, they have now of late withdrawn, and cry, the time is not
come, the time is not come, for the carrying on of the work of Christ's
kingdom, but this is so far from making us believe the time is not come, that
its a sign to us, that the time is at hand, when doubting comes after the
spirit of faith, for so it has been with the work of the Lord in all his
Dispensations.

Here follows six other Signs as they were found in his Notes.
Fifthly, A fifth sign, is, The wonderful spirit of prayer that is upon Gods
People; when the decree of release from Babylon was ready to issue forth, God
puts a wonderful spirit of prayer upon Daniel, Chapter the 9th, At the
beginning of thy Supplications the Commandment came forth, and I am come to
show thee: So Nehemiah had a great spirit of prayer given to him, when the time
came that the City Jerusalem should be built: And God has promised Immediately
before he builds Jerusalem, to give such a spirit of prayer; Isai 62.1.6. and 7
verses; For Zions sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake I will
not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the
salvation thereof as a lamp that burns. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night: Ye that make
mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he
establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. Now, when an
extraordinary spirit of prayer goes forth, its a clear evidence, the work is
at hand.

What a spirit of prayer was there up in the Bishops times? and what was the
effect of it? it brought their Ruin: Afterward, when Presbytery was like to
tread us down, as did the Bishops their predecessors, a great spirit of prayer
was in many, by this they are ruined: And truly I think I may say, there was
never a greater spirit of prayer up, than is at this day. And to encourage you
the more to it, I shall here put in two things.

First, Consider, That God gives his Children a larger Commission (if I may so
speak) when they are to pray against Babylon, than at other times. Isai.
45.11. Thus says the Lord, the Holy one of Israel, and his maker, Ask me of
things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command
ye me.

Secondly, That God will be more quick in answering; Isai 65.24. And it shall
come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and whiles they are yet
speaking, I will hear.

Sixthly, A sixth sign, is, The Helples condition Gods people at present are
in: Before God makes his Arm bare in saving, he brings his Children into that
straight, that they can see strength no were else, but in him: hence, those
that pray for Syons Restoration, Psalm 102. pray as destitute ones; and when
they are destitute, God answers them: Never until this day (since some
appearings of this work have been) have Gods people prayed as destitute ones:
we had A Parliament, An Army, A General that went along with us till of late,
but now Gods people are wholly destitute: and indeed, that they are brought
into this condition is a mercy, and an evidence the work is near, which we
might conclude to be farther off, were it not thus. A notable place we have,
Deuteronomy. 32.36. The Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
servants; when he sees that their Power is gone, and there is none shut up or
left. And indeed, this has ever been Gods way; Abraham cannot have his Mercy,
till he is in so destitute a condition, as that to an eye of Reason he is
without hope. David before the kingdom falls into his hands, must be so
destitute, as that he is forced to fly the land. The Helples condition of Gods
people is a clear sign the work is at hand.

Seventhly, A seventh sign, is, The Multiplication of the oppressed people;
who are the oppressed people, in a more especial manner at this day, but those
that appear for this truth? who are shut up in prisons and Holes, but they?
and yet notwithstanding what a multiplying of them is there under this
oppression. Its Steven's observation concerning Israel, Act. 7.17. That when
the time of the promise drew nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham, the People
grew and multiplied in Egypt. He makes the multiplication of the seed, a sign
of the Promise drawing nigh.

What a multiplication of this oppressed people, there is all the nation over,
since some have been in prison, is well known to many; many Churches and
Pastors of Churches, who (not twelve months since) were averse to this way,
do now own it, preach it; I speak what I know. Yea, I dare say, That if the
present Powers of this Nation, had set in counsel 12 months together, to
contrive a way to spread the notion of the fifth Monarchy, among the godly
throughout this Nation, they could not have thought upon a better, than the
casting of some Eminent leading Saints into Prison; for, there is nothing that
men as men, do more affect, than to look into that thing for which others
suffer; and specially Saints (who it may be would never else have minded the
notion) are very Inquisitive into the thing, which they see Brethren suffer
for, and hereby they attain light: thus God takes the wise in their own
Craftiness.

It was said in the Primitive times, The blood of Martyrs, seed of Churches.
Did not Queen Mary by her cruelty, make those who before were averse to it,
ready and willing to receive the Protestant Religion? Did not the Bishops loose
themselves this way? and by driving some few out of the Land, multiply the
number of the oppressed people within it.

Saints suffering for truth, are the loudest and most powerful Sermons of all
others. See what Paul says to this, Phil: 1.12, 13. But I would ye should
understand, Brethren, that the things which happened unto me, have fallen out
rather to the furtherance of the Gospel. So that my bonds in Christ are
manifest in all the Palace, and in all other places.

Eighthly, The Eight sign, is, The Defection and Apostasy of Eminent leading
men in the Churches, from their first light and Principles. Christ makes it one
sign of his second coming, the Starr's falling from Heaven, Math. 24.29. that
is, Eminent men, (as Pastors and others in the Churches) falling; and says
Christ, When you see this, know it is near, even at the door. When you see
Pastors and Officers of Churches, casting off the Churches, and running to
Colleges; when you see men that have pleaded and Apologized for the power of
Churches, in opposition to Lordlines over them; when you see these become
Tryers, and usurp Authority over all the Churches and people of Christ in the
Commonwealth, know that it is near, even at the door.

Ninthly, The ninth sign, is, The great dread that is upon the spirits of all
men (that are Enemies) of such a thing rising in the world, as a fifth Monarchy.
What a dread at the time of Isreal's coming out of Egypt, was upon the
Canaanites? and this dread is at the end of the forty years, we do not read
of such a dread at their first coming out; but when the work was just coming
forth, of their taking possession of the promised Land, then the fear and
dread falls upon them. Its observable, that from the time that David was
anointed king, a dread of him (though Saul had all the forts and strength of
the Nation) was upon the spirit of Saul.

And what a dread is there upon the spirits of those that oppose the work
(this kingdom) of Christ at this day? its visible enough, a dread already from
the Lord, is fallen upon them.

Tenthly, Gods wonderful withdrawing himself from such as oppose this truth
and work, in respect of those common graces and assistances, he has formerly
afforded them in other work. How did God withdraw from Saul, so soon as ever
David was anointed. Before, he could deny himself, and refuse a kingdom;
Afterward, before another shall come into his Throne, he will slay innocent
David, be it right or wrong, and all the Priests of God to boot. Before,
though he had cause, and was stirred up to it, he will by no means persecute;
afterward, though he had no just cause (all things considered) he puts the
Lords Priests to death Before, he was a very meek man in all his actings;
afterward, he acts like a Mad man.

And the very Reason is this, David's kingdom was now rising, and Saul being in
heart an Enemy to it, the Spirit of the Lord withdraws from him; and this
withdrawing was the Immediate forerunner of David's kingdom, the most Eminent
type of Christ's, pleaded for at this day

Now let us Consider, whether it be not thus at this day: let us look to men
that sit upon the Throne; and men that call themselves the Ministry; is it not
as evident as the Sun when it shines at noone day, that the Spirit of the Lord
is withdrawn from both? I say, in respect of those common gifts and
assistances, they have formerly had, whilst they stood in the cause of God.

Are there not men this day in England, that persecute Saints, for laying open
their evils and Apostacy's, who time was, would not persecute them themselves,
nor suffer others who would have done it, to do it? Are there not men, who
time was feared none, they had their faith as their best guard, who now are so
far from their former faith, that they are become Magor-mishabib, fear round
about?

Look to men who call themselves the Ministry; could not many, some years
since, preach often, with life and power; now its a great matter, (and truly
they are not able to do it) to preach once in a fortnight; and when they do
preach, that life they once had is so gone, that Christians that hear, had
they not the same names and faces, would not know them to be the men; once the
time was, that they were able to speak a seasonable word, whenever occasion
was offered, but truly now they are able to speak no more than they have
written in their paper, or got by heart, as the Schoolboyes do. Is it not
evident (I say) the Lord is withdrawn from them? This is a manifest sign the
work is at hand. When David's kingdom was rising, the Spirit of God departs
from Saul; and had not many Bishops in Queen Mary's days much life? and so
the Presbyters in the beginning of these times? But observe, when the work of
God began to rise against the one and the other, the Spirit of God went off
from them, and fell upon that party that bore witness against them.

FINIS.
Christ the only Foundation.
1 COR: 3.11. For other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ.


THe Time is but short, and therefore I shall wave speaking any thing touching
the context, or the explication of the words, there is no difficulty in them,
but there is a plain useful Truth, ly's plainly in the words which I shall
give you, That is, Doct: That the Lord Jesus Christ is the only foundation.

That I may the better open this truth to you, for your edification, I shall
cast those things which are in my thoughts into this Method; namely, To show,

First, What I mean by Christ's being a foundation?

Secondly, In what respect the Lord Jesus Christ may be called a foundation?

Thirdly, What Jesus Christ is the foundation of?

Fourthly, Who it is that lay's Jesus Christ as a foundation?

Fifthly, How the Lord Jesus Christ is laid as a foundation? And then

Sixthly and lastly, When Jesus Christ is laid as a foundation in the soul?

I shall give but a hint of the first.

1. Quest: What we are to understand by Christ's being a foundation?

Ans: We well know the foundation its the bottom of a building, that upon
which the weight and stresse of any building ly's: in every building there is
the structure it self, and the foundation; the structure it self, consists of
many parts oftentimes, first, second, third, and fourth lofts, and yet these
are so united and compact together, as that they make but one building, and
there is but one foundation: so, I may say, In the spiritual building, that
glorious blessed building of our salvation, its a building that consists of
many parts, there is the Eternal love of the Father, free pardon and remission
of sins, comfort, new obedience, and the like; and yet notwithstanding all
these, they are so compact, as that indeed all make up but one glorious blessed
building, and there is but one foundation to all, and that is Jesus Christ the
Lord of glory, Other foundation can no man lay: And as in building, the
foundation, its that which ly's at the bottom, so in this blessed building of
Salvation, Christ as a foundation ly's at the bottom of all; he ly's at the
bottom of the fathers love, and the fathers love built up upon him; he ly's at
the bottom of our Justification; he ly's at the bottom of all our Comforts;
he ly's at the bottom of all our obedience, and holiness; so that, we are to
understand, by Christ's being a foundation, his being laid at the bottom of all
that ever we have; not only at the bottom of our Justification, that, men
will easily acknowledge, but Christ is at the bottom of every dram of Comfort,
Christ at the bottom of every duty, Christ at the bottom of every affection,
Christ at the bottom of every grace, at the bottom of all we have, so he is
the foundation: that, what our souls would enjoy, be it comfort, be it
holiness, be it Justification, be it what it will, Christ lying at the bottom
of all, is Christ's being the foundation.

2. Quest: In what respect is Christ said to be a foundation?

Ans: I answer, first, Christ is a foundation in respect of the fathers having
laid him for a foundation; Behold I lay in Syon for a foundation, Isai. 28.16.
I lay in Syon, The father he lay's Jesus Christ as a foundation, God knows no
other foundation to erect that blessed and glorious building, that heavenly
structure of our Everlasting Salvation upon, but only Christ; that glorious
building of grace and glory, could stand upon no other bottom but Christ, and
therefore when the Lord comes to raise up this building, says he, I lay in
Syon for a foundation; for a foundation, I lay my Son as the foundation, as the
bottom of all; he is the foundation God the father has laid, the father knows
no other; if we would have that foundation for our souls that the father
judges to be the sure foundation, and would have our comfort built upon that,
it must be laid upon Jesus Christ, this is that foundation that the father has
laid.

Secondly, Jesus Christ may be called a foundation, in Respect to Gospel
Revelation, The Gospel reveals no other foundation but Christ: look over the
whole Gospel of God, from first to last, and you shall find no other Corner
Stone, no other bottom stone, but the Lord Jesus Christ only: Christ is the
corner stone (as the Apostle tells us) upon which, the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles is built; Ephesians: 2.20. And are built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner stone;
the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets its here by the Apostle called a
foundation, but its such a foundation, as has another foundation lying at the
bottom of that, Jesus Christ the Corner stone is laid at the bottom of this
foundation; Truth, its the foundation of our faith, but the Lord Jesus Christ
he is the foundation of truth, that foundation that truth stands upon, he is
still the bottom foundation.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ may be called a foundation, In respect of his own
meetnes and fitnes every way to be a foundation; Christ he is the most meet
and fit of all others to be a foundation.

First, He is a Stone, as the Prophet says, I will lay in Syon for a
foundation a stone; you know, if men go to lay a foundation, they do not go
and gather up dust and rubbish, that is no fit matter for a foundation, but
they go and gather up Stones and lay them for a foundation; so our Lord Jesus
Christ, he is a stone, I lay in Syon for a foundation a stone, so there is a
fitnes and meetnes in him for a foundation, he is most meet for a foundation.

Secondly, As he is a Stone, so, he is an Elect Choice Stone, he is a fit
chosen stone, and therefore he says, I lay in Syon for a foundation, a chief
corner stone, Elect and precious; he is a fit stone: Men pick out of their
best Stones for a foundation, so, he is a Stone picked out by God himself; when
the Lord was to lay the foundation of this blessed glorious building of our
Everlasting Happiness, God took a view (as I may so say) of men and Angels,
and he could not find such another Stone, so fit for a foundation as the Lord
Jesus Christ was, he is a fit Stone. But again,

Thirdly, The Lord Jesus Christ, He is a Rockie Stone; so he is called in
Scripture, the rock, the rock stone, 1 Cor: 10.4. And that rock was Christ,
and they that are offended at Christ, they are offended at the rock, Romans
9.33. He is a rock of offense; they that smite against Christ, smite against
the rock, and therefore are broken to pieces; And on whomsoever it shall fall,
it will grind them to powder, Math: 21.44. Now the rock stone is the greatest,
firmest and hardest Stone, and therefore the fittest for a foundation: And
Christ being a Rock, he is most fit for a foundation.

Fourthly, The Lord Jesus Christ, He is a Tried Stone; so says the Prophet, I
lay in Syon for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone; that is, a stone that
there has been proof made of every way, whether it would be fit for a
foundation or no; there is great difference between stones, there are some
stones, if you put them under the hammer, they will break to pieces, and there
are some, if you put them into the furnace, they will melt, or moulder; But our
Lord Jesus Christ, he is a tried stone, a stone that has been under the Hammer
of the worlds rage, and under the Hammer of Satan's Temptations, and under the
Hammer of our sins and corruptions; And he has been in the furn^ce of his
fathers wrath; and yet he is a solid stone still; he is a tried stone, and
therefore fit for a foundation; he has been so tried, that the Lord says of
him, he is a sure foundation; I am sure (says God) whatsoever is built upon my
Son shall stand; I am sure, what ever soul, what ever comfort, what ever
obedience, stands there, shall stand.

Fifthly, The Lord Jesus Christ he is a Precious Stone, 1 Pet: 2.6. Behold, I
lay in Syon for a foundation a stone, Elect and precious, he is not a common
stone, but a precious stone; and indeed in this respect too, he is very meet,
yea, most meet and fit of all others to be a foundation. There are two things
in Christ's being a precious stone, that do make him fit to be a foundation

First, Thereby there is an Answerablenes in the foundation to the building; if
a building be very rich, and made all of precious pearl, its fit there should
be some answerablenes in the foundation to the building; the new Jerusalem, its
said of it, it was of pure gold, and the foundation of the City was of all
manner of precious stones, there was an answerablenes in the foundation to the
building; so I may say, this blessed building of our Salvation, its indeed
builded, that is, made up all of precious pearl, there is the blessed pearl of
the fathers love, there is the blessed pearls of our Redemption, Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification; the whole is made up of precious pearl; look over
every piece and part of it, every thing that is in this building, its of
precious pearl: Now the building it self being made up all of pearl,
therefore the foundation must be some glorious thing, there must be an
answerablenes in the foundation; now therefore we have this precious Stone laid
in the bottom, which indeed does enrich the whole building, and add's to every
piece and parcel of it. And then Christ being a precious Corner Stone, he is
most meet for a foundation.

Secondly, In regard, That of all Stones, precious Stones are the most durable;
The Adamant or the Diamond, which of all stones is the most precious, of all
stones none so hard, it will break other things, and will not easily be
broken, and cut other things, and it self cannot without difficulty be cut;
Jesus Christ he is a durable foundation, therefore there is not such a
foundation in all the world.

Sixthly, Jesus Christ, He is a living Stone; 1 Pet. 2.4. To whom coming as
unto a living Stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and precious;
he is a living Stone, that is, he is such a stone as has life in it, and by
that life there is

First, A Cementing of the building to the foundation, and therefore a
transforming the building into the nature of the foundation: Now consider this,
and of all others Christ is the most fit for a foundation, for by this
Cementing the building to himself, this building becomes unmovable; though
the building be never so glorious, yet if it can be taken off the foundation,
what would become of the glory of the building? this is that that makes the
building such a blessed building, that it is so united to the foundation, that
there can be no removing of it off the foundation, if the powers of Hell come,
and all the powers in the world come, there can be no removing of the building
off the foundation, this is the blessed state of those souls in Christ; herein
is Jesus Christ most meet of all others for a foundation, because so far as
Christ is a foundation, he does unite the building to himself, fixes the
building upon himself, that there can be no removing of the building from off
the foundation.

Secondly, Christ, as he does by this life that is in him Cement the building
to himself, so he does transform the building into his own nature, by
sending up that life into the building that is in the foundation; hereby, the
soul being transformed into the Image and nature of Christ, it does preserve
the soul from rottennes and putrefaction; you know how it is with living
things, they do not dye, they do not rot and putrefie, but they are dead
things that rot and putrefie; why now the Lord Jesus Christ by conveying of
that life, that is in himself, and sending it up from himself into the
building, thereby the building is kept from rotting and putrefying: that soul,
that is in him, does not rot and putrify, but take any other soul in the
world, and he does rot and putrify at one time or other; if he does not stand
upon this foundation, all his comforts, all his enlargements will rot and
vanish away at sometime or other.

Seventhly, The Lord Jesus Christ, he is one Stone; its not said, I lay in Syon
for a fountain Stones, but, I lay in Syon a Stone, one Stone; now this add's
to the excellency of the foundation, if a foundation be of one stone, its a
great deal the stronger; Jesus Christ is one Stone, and so the most meet for
a foundation.

Fourthly, The Lord Jesus Christ is called a foundation, In respect of
beleivers being built upon him: all those that are of the fathers building (as
every true beleiver is) are builded upon this foundation; Truly there are a
great many in the world, that go to build up this building of Salvation, and
they attempt to build it themselves, now what man or woman goes to build
themselves, its with them, as its with little Children, they will go to
Imitate builders, get a little dirt and clay together to build a little house,
but they neglect, they never mind the foundation; so its with these souls,
they build themselves up, they build their Justification, and build their
Comfort, and build an obedience of their own, but they regard not the
foundation, if they can get something of Comfort, and conformity to duties,
and the like, they never look to the true foundation: I am afraid, that when
the Lord comes to shake the world, a great many will be found without a
soundation; but now all those that are of the fathers building, they are built
upon this foundation; the father he builds like a wise Master Builder, when he
comes to build a house, he takes special care about the foundation, that that
be laid firm and sure, for (says he) what will ye build if there be not a
foundation laid? so is it when the Lord comes to your souls, to build you, man
or woman, he looks to the foundation, I will lay their souls upon my Son
says God; when God takes a soul into his hands, the very first work that he
does, is, to lay the foundation, to see that Jesus Christ be laid as the
foundation in the soul: so that, Jesus Christ may be called a foundation, in
respect of the fathers building of all beleivers upon him as a foundation.

Lastly, Jesus Christ is called a foundation, In opposition to all other
foundations, to all false foundations: there are a multitude of false
foundations in the world, and in opposition to all the sandy and false
foundations that we lay, and that sometimes Satan lay's, and that are not of
the father's laying, Christ is the foundation.

First, Christ is a foundation, in opposition to those vain and empty hopes,
that some sinners have of amendment of life for the future: Truly, this cannot
properly be called a foundation, yet because there are a company of poor
sinners in the world, that go on in drunkenness, swearing, whoredom, and the
like, though they know themselves to be miserable and wretched, to be undone,
yet they hope they shall amend hereafter, they shall be better one day, and so
they take some kind of rest from this thought. A man that makes no conscience
of swearing, or cozening, or lying, or defrauding, when his conscience comes
and tells him, thou art a miserable wretch, he answers, I hope to be better
hereafter; now this man's foundation is, as if a man should go about to build a
house in the air; Christ is a foundation in opposition to these vain hopes.

Secondly, Christ is a foundation, in opposition to Pharisaicall righteousness
and holiness: some there are that come to have a righteousness, though not the
righteousness of God, but indeed a righteousness of their own, as the Apostle
says; they are not as other men are, they are not drunkards, nor swearers,
they serve God, and walk honestly, they will not cheat, and they make
conscience of their word, they will have but one word when you come to deal
with them, they will deal honestly and justly in all their ways; and
therefore surely say they, we are the Children of God, and are in a good
condition, and thus they lay a great deal of stresse and weight upon their
Pharisaicall righteousness and holiness. Thus it was with the Scribes and
Pharisees in Christ's time, O says he, I am not like that Publican, I am not so
and so, God I thank thee, I am not as other men be, I am a blessed man, a
happy man; I but yet he is a poor miserable Pharisee still, Jesus Christ
says, notwithstanding all this he was not Justified, Christ sends him away as
a poor miserable wretch, notwithstanding all his righteousness; Except
therefore (says Christ) your Righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: Christ
is a foundation in opposition to this foundation.

Thirdly, Christ is a foundation, in opposition to conviction of sin,
conviction of our natural state and condition: Some there are, that go
farther than the Pharisee, (who rest's in his own righteousness, far from being
convinced of sin) that come to see themselves lost and undone, and it may be
they come and gather up hope, they scrape up somewhat of comfort here, because
they find and feel themselves sinners, that therefore God will pardon them,
because they conclude themselves to be lost, therefore God will save them,
therefore they shall have heaven and Everlasting Salvation, they gather up
comfort here: but this is no other foundation than wicked Cain may have, says
he, I am a cast away, and my punishment is greater than I can bear; this is
not the foundation, Christ is the foundation in opposition to this conviction
of sin.

Fourthly, Christ is a foundation, in opposition to confession of sin to
others; that is that which some lay as a foundation of their comfort, when they
are oppress't and burdened, and afflicted with their sin, they run and tell it
to others, and will be open-hearted, and when they have so done they find
ease, and have much comfort, peace, and hope, and they build upon it, as a man
that is stomack-sicke, he casts up that which is at the top, and then he has
ease and is well. We find that Pharaoh himself when he was sick of his sin,
he could not be quiet, till he had cast up his sin to Moses, Exodus: 9.27. And
Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned
this time: the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. Nay, he was
so sick of his sin, that Moses must be brought in have to him, Exodus: 10.16.
Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in have, and he said, I have sinned
against the Lord your God, and against you: they must be brought Post to him,
that he might confess his sin, and ease himself, he was so troubled and so
afflicted: of these things there is a good and a holy use, but when men lay the
foundation of their comfort upon this confession of sin, and would draw comfort
from hence, and not from Christ, this is a false foundation, and Christ is a
laid as a foundation in opposition to this. Do but look how far Saul runs in
confessing his Iniquity, 1 Samuel: 26.21. Then said Saul, I have sinned, return,
my Son David, for I will no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious
in thine eyes this day; Behold, I have played the fool, and have erred
exceedingly. How does he confess his sin? with great indignation he calls
himself a very fool, and a wretch, I have played the fool, I have been a
wicked wretch in what I have done, and yet is but a Saul notwithstanding all
this: and Judas, when his heart ak't, he came and threw down the silver, and
says, I have sinned in betraying Innocent blood, he comes and cast's up his
sin, and yet but a poor miserable Judas, and he goes and hang's himself; this
is not the foundation, Christ is a foundation in opposition to this foundation.

Fifthly, Christ is a foundation, in opposition to our sorrow, mourning,
humiliation, fasting, prayers and Tears, and the like: Some will go farther
than a clear conviction of sin, and confessing of it to others, they will
sorrow, and mourn, and shed Tears, and the like; and they think because of
this, surely I am a child of God, and they lay no deeper foundation, they have
no other foundation but this, all their comfort, all their joy, and all their
hope is laid here, but this is a false foundath; 1 Kings 2.27. And it came to
pass when Ahab heard those words, that he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth
upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly. A king, and
yet how does he humble himself? Ahab throw's off his kingly Royal Robes, and
puts on Sackcloth and goes softly, yet you see what is said of Ahab, There was
none like unto Ahab, that sold himself to do wickedness: he did very
abominably in following Idols, and yet this wretched Ahab when the wrath of
God comes upon him, and the word of God falls upon his conscience, he will
throw off his Robes and Crown, and humble himself, and mourn; and yet but an
Ahab still: And so Saul, when his conscience was smitten he weeps; 1 Samuel:
24.16. And it came to pass when David had made an end of speaking these words
unto Saul, that Saul said, is this thy voice, my Son David, and Saul lift up
his voice, and wept: he weeps over his Son David, and yet persecutes his Son
David again, notwithstanding all this: And so Esau, he found no place for
repentance, though he sought it with Tears; there is a great deal of
difference betwixt Tears and Repentance, he sought repentance, and he sought
it with Tears, yet found no place for it: all these things when they come from
the right foundation are excellent, but otherwise they will stand men in no
stead at all. Jesus Christ is a foundation in opposition to this foundation.

Sixthly, Jesus Christ is the only foundation, in opposition to Resolutions,
Vows, and Covenants; that is that which many lay their foundation upon; truly,
these are ways which many honest hearts have run, they have trac't them
through, and there are false hearts too, that have run up with them in these
ways: when a soul is troubled, afflicted and burdened, he will resolve, vow,
and Covenant, I will never do so more, and after that, they have some ease and
are at quiet, and so long as they keep their Resolutions, Vows, and
Covenants, they are in a good condition as they conclude; so it was with Saul,
Return my Son David, I will seek thy hurt no more, I will no more persecute
David, I will no more walk on in these ways; but afterward he falls upon him
again and again, and David is forced to fly the land; these Vows,
Resolutions, and Covenants will not hold; now Christ is a foundation in
opposition to this, Christ is the only foundation.

Seventhly, Jesus Christ is a foundation, In opposition to Selfe-revenge: in
opposition to those Acts of revenge that men are ready to put fotth upon
themselves; its a thing that is very ordinary among Christians, (honest hearts
as well as others) and that through darkness in the new Testament Administration
of Jesus Christ, and the Covenant of grace, they go to revenge; they will be
revenged of themselves if they err in this way or that way; if they err or
exceed in Mirth, then they will go about mourning, if they have erred in the
use of the creatures, then they will not eat nor drink at all, and so they
will be revenged of themselves: herein they take too much content, and too much
comfort, and they are apt to think that because they revenge themselves thus,
God is pleased with them, and he will pardon them; Christ is the foundation in
opposition to this; is this the foundation, that my Justification, my Comfort,
my Joy, should lie upon, my self revenge? no, though a man should go never so
far in this way: do but consider what those in Micah would have done to
revenge themselves, Micah 6.6, 7 verses; Wherewith shall I come before the
Lord, and bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt
offerings, with Calves of a year old? will the lord be pleased with thousands
of Ram's, or with ten thousands of Rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn
for my Transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? As if they
should have said, will the Lord accept of any thing? let the Lord set me the
hardest task, I will do it, if it be to give the fruit of my body, or to give
away ^ll my estate, if I may have the pardon of my sin, I will do it; thus, I
say, a man may go a great way in a way of revenge, and yet truly this will be
sound nothing, it will be but a shadow, and a foundation that will soon shake
and fall, when a day of Trial comes.

Eighthly, Jesus Christ is a foundation, in opposition to our Reformation; many
there are that go higher than all this, many struggle in their Vows and
Resolutions, but never come to Reformation, but some there are, that come to
Reformation, they have gotten the power and the victory, as they say, over
their sins, and here they lay the foundation of their Comfort, for certain
says such a man, I am the child of God; but Christ is a foundation in
opposition to this; if we lay our foundation here we shall be deceived; this
Herod did, he reformed himself, and did many things, the word of John comes to
Herod's heart, and his heart is so troubled that he did many things; so that
there may be a reformation in very many things, and yet notwithstanding the
soul not upon a true foundation; there is a vast difference betwixt Cessation
^f sin, and Mortification of-sin, there may be a Cesation of sin, where there
is no Mortification of it, it may be the Devil he may let a soul alone, that
he may settle him the faster upon a false bottom; men cease from their
Iniquity they were addicted to when they were young, and they are apt to lay a
foundation upon this, and this may be, and yet not a true foundation laid, a
mere Cess^tion from sin, or an outward Reformation in respect of the acts of
sin, this may be, and yet the soul miserable: Jesus Christ he is a foundation
in opposition to this foundation.

Ninthly, Jesus Christ he is a foundation, in opposition to all outward
Privileges; there is a very great deal of confidence that men lay upon their
Privileges, O, says such one, I keep many day's of prayer, and I am of such
a Church, and says another I am Baptized, and says another I am so and so,
and they glory much in these outward Privileges; as the Jews did we are the
Church of God, we are Abraham's Children, we have the Oracles of God, can we be
amiss? but says Christ, ye are of your father the Devil, and the works of
your father ye will dee, notwithstanding all your boasting and glorying in your
outward Privileges: this not the foundation; Christ is the foundation in
opposition to this.

Tenthly, Jesus Christ is a foundation, in opposition t^ those good fitts that
semetimes a man or a woman is in unto a duty: I do not speak any thing to
shake any poor Saint, but would have every Saint have a bottom, while God is
shaking all Nations, and the foundations of the earth do shake: if the
foundation be upon a rock it will stand, therefore in this shaking day the
good Lord help us all to look to our foundation; Christ is a foundation in
opposition to those good fitts, that men are in to a duty: a man may be in a
good fit to a duty now and then, and when men find this, they are apt to rest
on it, and lay much weight upon it, and draw much comfort from it; now I say,
Christ is a foundation in opposition to this foundation: O what a good fit and
a good mood was Saul in sometimes! 1 Samuel: 10. he comes among the Prophets of
God, at the 9, 10, and 11 verses, he prophesies among the Prophets, here was a
good fit to a duty, 1 Samuel: 10.23. when he was going on in persecuting David, he
had a good fit, therefore Saul might say, well, I feel God working in my heart
what ever others judge of me, or censure me; Saul went on and prophesied before
Samuel, and lay down naked all that day, and all that night, even then when he
was going on persecuting of David; I bring this to show you, that this is no
foundation, it is a good thing, a sweet thing, to have a heart fit and disposed
to a duty, but when I will build upon this, this is no foundation, but Christ
is a foundation in opposition to this.

Eleventhly, Christ is a foundation, in opposition to flashes of Joy and
comfort that a soul may find, and sometimes does find, which yet are not upon
the true foundation: there may be a good disposition to a duty, so there may be
some flashes of Joy and comfort in the soul, in the duty, and men are apt to
make high co^clusions from these, and yet not upon the right foundation; as
Herod, he heard John, and did many things, and he heard him gladly, there could
not be but a Holy raising of heart and Joy when he heard him gladly, and yet
Herod cut off John's Head for all this: so the Stony ground has Joy in the
hearing of the word, they heard with Joy, and yet was false ground; in the
Stony ground there was Joy in hearing the word, and Joy in receiving the word,
O therefore look to your selves: sometimes when I hear a Sermon, my heart is
lifted up, it may be with the man more than with the word, or it may be with
the manner of speaking more than with the word, and so a soul may here lay a
foundation; there may be flashes of Joy in our duty's, and if we lay our
foundation here, we are under a very great mistake: in the 28 of Isaiah, those
hypocrites at the second verse, they did seek God daily, and delighted to know
Gods ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinances
of their God, they ask't of me the ordinances of Justice, they took delight in
approaching to God, yet notwithstanding this, the Lord bids the Prophet go and
pronounce his wrath against them; a man may have his heart raised it may be in
speaking the word of the Lord, and yet if he make this his foundation he is
upon a false bottom; Jesus Christ is a foundation in opposition to this
foundation.

Twelfthly, Jesus Christ is a foundation, in opposition to some high acts
wherein the soul puts forth seeming selfdeniall: 1 Samuel: 10. Saul shows great
selfedeniall, when the people come to choose him King, he hides himself; the
men of Belial despised him, and brought him no presents, but he held his peace;
he deny's himself, he takes no notice of their opposition and speaking against
him; and then afterward in the 11 Chapter, when the people said, who is he that
said, Shall Saul reign over us? bring the men that we may put them to death.
Saul said, there shall not a man be put to death this day; for to day the Lord
has wrought Salvation in Israel. He does not only deny his own spirit, but
the Temptation from others; and this was not only from a Politic ground, but
from a sudden work that was upon him at present, the Lord has wrought
salvation in Israel: a man may be carried out in some good particular acts to
deny himself, and thence conclude, I am a child of God, and so, happy; its
true, none can truly and rightly deny himself but a Saint, but there is the
same grace and work as a counterfeite wrought in a hypocrite, that is, in the
new Covenant, in the true Children of God; and if men lay their soundation upon
these things, they will be exceedingly mistaken; Jesus Christ is the only
foundation in opposition to these.

Thirteenthly, Jesus Christ is the foundation, in opposition to all holy aims;
its a most blessed thing when a man comes to duty's with holy aims, and holy
end's, yet if he will lay his foundation here, he may be deceived, its the
hardest thing in the world for a man to Judge of his ends and aims; Come,
says Jehu, and see my zeal for the Lord, he thought he had blessed ends and
aims, but laying his foundation here, what a false bottom had he? I do not
say, any hypocrite can aim rightly at the glory of God, but a man may aim at
Gods glory when it runs with his Interest, he may look asquint at it, when
Gods glory and his Interest ly's together, this deceived Jehu, he thought he
had eyed Gods glory, when he looked only at his own Interest, the settling
the kingdom upon himself and his Posterity, and so deceived himself; Jesus
Christ is a foundation in opposition to this foundation.

Fourteenthly, Jesus Christ is a foundation, in opposition to giving in of
particular words; its a great Trade that some drive, of giving in of particular
words; and what a wonderful confidence is oftentimes laid in this, in the
giving in of particular words? And truly, I do acknowledge the Lord does
oftentimes make it a sweet dispensation to his Children; when his Children are
in great straights, the Lord is pleased to come into their souls, and reward
them in this way, and yet notwithstanding we are under a very great mistake in
this, if the Lord be not our light and our guide: We may lay too much upon
this, as upon humiliation, or any other duty; some souls in distress, they
will open their Bibles, and it may be do light upon a place that does suite
their condition, they think this is a giving in of a word; I deny not but God
does sometimes speak a word in this way to his Children in great straights,
yet there is a great m^stake in this; the mistake ly's in this, when that we do
lay more upon the providence in the giving of the word, than upon the word it
self, when I believe not so much the word for it self, as for the providence;
the providence that I should open my book thus, and light upon such a word,
the providence that I should light upon such a word at such a time; when we eye
the providence giving in of the word, more than the word; now note, no
providence is the ground of our faith, therefore if I lay my faith more upon
the providence than upon the word, then shall I presently be mistaken even in
this way, which if I had a right understanding of, I may have use of, and
comfort in: let Christians observe, its ordinary with Christians when they are
weak and young, and when they begin to know the Lord, God does deal with them
as with little Children, he trains them up in such a way, and gives them in
particular words; but when souls will alway's go in this way, they may
quickly come to Tempt God, and they may come to such a pass, as not to care
for the word of God in the Scripture, unless it be given in in this way; here
we lay our foundation upon the giving in of a word, lay as much as you can upon
the word, but take heed of laying too much upon the providence; therefore
Christians when they are come to more light and experience, the Lord would not
have them to continue in this way, they must not stay till the word come to
them, but their faith must go out to the word; this way of God with Christians
is not the ordinary way when they come to a greater standing. I have a word,
says one, so given in, in such a remarkable way at such and such a time, and
thereupon he lays the foundation of his hope, if you lay too much upon this,
your faith will be but upon a providence, and this will not be a sure
foundation, there may be a great deceit in this, for Satan may give in a word
as well as the Lord, a soul may take in a word from Satan as well as from the
Lord himself; besides, a word may be given in of the Lord too, and yet this
not an evidence of our Eternal commition; therefore, when we conclude our
Eternal condition from the giving in of a word, we err in this, for this is
no foundation to it. Hagar had an Angel of God from Heaven speaking to her,
Thou God see me, says she, and have I also here looked after him that sees
me? yet she was an out-c^st and under the old Covenant; the Lord therefore
grant that we may not lay our foundation in these things, the word of God is a
good foundation, but if we lay it upon the giving in, upon the providence, its
a false foundation; yet I say, the Lord does often go in this way with his
own Children, very frequently, but here is the mistake, when we lay too much
upon the providence; you may have a word given in day after day, and yet be all
this while upon a false foundation: Jesus Christ is a foundation in opposition
to this foundation.

Fifteenthly, Jesus Christ is the only foundation, in opposition to acts of
beleiving; the act of beleiving is not the foundation, but Jesus Christ is the
foundation in opposition to this; many there are, which when they see
themselves cast, (as I may say) as to the righteousness of the law, when they
see that all the works of the Law, and the righteousness of the Law, will not
help them, but that life and blessedness is alone in Christ, in the Gospel; and
hear the Lord calling upon them to come and believe in Christ, they run to
Jesus Christ, and hang upon him in an outward way, and lay their foundation in
the act of beleiving; there is a faith of a man's own as well as a faith of
God's, there is a faith of the Law as well as a faith of the Gospel; many a man
has labored by his works, for righteousness and Justification, and when he
sees all his working will not bring him in righteousness and justification, then
he flies to faith, as that which will help him, and so he beleives in his own
strength, and rests upon the Act of beleiving; but its not the act of beleiving
that is our righteousness, its not the act of beleiving that is the foundation
of the soul: a poor soul may hang upon the outside of the Arc, as in the
days of Noah, men might have come and clung upon the outside of the Arc, and
yet have been cut off, except they had come into the Arc, that would not have
saved them, but they would have dropped off; so, when men by an outward act of
beleiving hang upon Jesus Christ, in an outward way, they may hang a while, but
at last they will drop off; when men make this a foundation, they are upon a
false foundation. See how far men have gone in beleiving, and yet it has come
to nothing, if you look into the 106 Psalm, the 11, 12 and 13 verses, we
read there of a generation of men, beleiving, its said, The waters covered
their Enemies: there was not one of them left. Then believed they his words,
they sang his Praise. They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his
Counsel: Here was beleiving, and such beleiving as caused them to sing, and
yet who are they? they are such, as forgot his works; such, as waited not for
his Counsel; such, as had leaneness sent into their souls; such, as lusted,
and contemned God, and envyed the Saints, Moses, and Aaron; such, as the breath
of the Lord came upon, and devoured them as wicked ones; and yet there was
beleiving, Then believed they his word: men will lay a great deal of faith
sometimes on Experiences and wonderful providence, why lay as much faith as
you can upon these, and all will fail when the day of Trial comes; men may
say God is our God, and we are the people of God, and he delivered us; The
waters covered their Enemies; there was not one of them left. What a wonderful
providence is this? and here they fall a singing to God, and yet Rebels and
Enemies to God, and cut off by God by and by: this is not the foundation
therefore, no, not the Act's of beleiving. If you look into Isai: 48.1, 2. we
read of a generation of men that did believe, and yet notwithstanding fell
short; Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel,
and are come forth out of the waters of Judah; which swear by the name of the
Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in Truth nor in
righteousness; for they call themselves of the holy City, and stay themselves
upon the God of Israel, the Lord of Hosts is his name. They made mention of the
Lord, and stayed themselves upon the God of Israel; what is that staying? Look
into the 26 of Isaiah, and you shall find its beleiving, in the third verse;
staying is beleiving: here are a generation of men that stayed themselves upon
the God of Israel, but not in truth nor in righteousness; it was not in Truth
nor in righteousness for all this: now, I say, its not the act of beleiving
that is the foundation, there is a false faith as well as other things,
therefore if men make this the foundation, the acts of beleiving, they may be
out too: Jesus Christ is the only foundation in opposition to this foundation.

Sixteenthly, Jesus Christ is the foundation, in opposition to conviction of
Righteousness: this is that which is indeed a higher and a farther step than all
that yet I have spoken of, for men may go all the way that we have gone, and
yet not be convinced of righteousness; as his work may be his righteousness,
so his faith may be his righteousness, he may go through all these things,
and yet not be convinced of righteousness; this is a high foundation, Christ is
the foundation in opposition to conviction of righteousness; When a poor soul
is wearied out of all, when he comes to see, that he is a poor miserable lost
soul, and that its not all his confession of sin, his mourning, his sorrow,
his Tears, his vows, his resolutions, his revenge upon himself, his
Reformation, no not his faith, its not any of all these things will help him,
nor that can help; that soul ly's crying, O Lord, I can do nothing, I cannot
pray, I cannot mourn, I cannot sh^d a tear for sin, I cannot believe, o that
thou would help me, and strengthen me to believe; now a soul is come to
this, to be convinced of righteousness, that it ly's before God, Lord here I am,
I am nothing, I can do nothing, I cannot do this or the other duty, I cannot
get up a desire, I cannot get up a groan, I am a poor miserable helpless
creature; and Lord if thou will trample upon me, Lord here I am, thou may;
and if thou have no pleasure in such a one as I am, here I lie tread upon me,
do what thou will, I know not what to do says the soul: now here is a soul
convinced of righteousness, so as its come to see, if I had all the righteousness
of men and Angels, all were nothing, though it were as righteous as Adam in
Innocence, all were nothing, if it were as righteous as Noah, Adam, Peter, all
were nothing, why this it is for a soul to come to be co^vinc't
ofrighteousnes. Now if in any thing that yet I have said, it is here, wherein a
true sincere heart goes beyond a hypocrite; a hypocrite will go with a true
child of God through all the other, does a true child of God confess and mourn
for his sin, and repent, and revenge himself, and reform, and has he joy and
delight in duty's, and does he deny himself, and has he good aims and ends,
has he particular words given in, has he put forth acts of faith, so does the
hypocrite all these things, though none of them in truth and in righteousness,
yet as to the outward act, he will go as far as the sincere heart, and it will
be hard to find out the one from the other, (the hardest thing in the world)
yet in this step of Conviction of righteousness, the child of God goes beyond
the other. When a poor soul comes to this, Lord I am here, I thought I had
abundance of things to rest in, I thought I was so rich in my prayers, and so
rich in my Tears, and so rich in my resolutions and vows, I had such good
fitts in duty's, I had such glorious comfort and Joy, but Lord I am brought to
this, I am nothing, here the child of God gets a step beyond the hypocrite,
for the hypocrite is never thoroughly convinced of righteousness, but when he is
convinced of one piece he goes on upon another, and when he is beaten off that
he creepes on upon another, and he is upon some foundation of his own, but now
when the Lord Jesus comes to take possession of a poor soul, he beats him
off all the pieces of his own righteousness: if he will rest upon his
confession of sin and mourning, he will beat him off there; and if he go
higher, to resolutions, vows and revenge, he beats him off there; and if
after this he rest upon his Reformation, Christ will go after him and beat
him off from piece to piece, till he has wholly conquered the soul to
himself, and brought him off of all those false grounds and quagmires that the
soul would have rested upon and perished, till he comes to this thorough
conviction of righteousness; when they come to great parts, gifts and abilities,
Christ beats them off of this, till they come to settle upon a right
foundation, or else they will drop off, if they come not up to the true
foundation: hence true and faithful hearts tremble and fear to see these
great ones fall; upon this account some assert falling away from grace, not
considering the distinction betwixt the old and new Covenant, and the different
truth's that flow from either, and not seeing how the same things in appearance
flow out of both roots; when they saw the fruit of the old Adam, they thought
it had been grace, and therefore conclude, they fell from grace; indeed they
fall from the grace they had in the first Covenant, (a man may loose all that)
but not the grace of the new Covenant, the soul that has it can never fall
from that grace, but that soul that is partaker of that grace shall stand for
ever; O therefore look that ye be rooted upon the new Covenant if you would
stand for ever, that you may be thoroughly convinced of all your own
righteousness as nothing.

And the Lord brings his people to this conviction many times, by letting them
fall by some Temptation or Corruption, and hereby they come to be be beaten off
from it: God lets out some Temptations or some Corruptions, and the soul
struggles and strives withal its resolutions and vows, and all its power, and
yet its beaten down and cannot stand, and then the soul says, verily there is
no hope for me, then the Lord brings it to this, now I see I have nothing, I
can do nothing, Lord thou might destroy me, and tread me underfoote, and if
thou will do it I will lie before thee, I have no hope, nor none to turn to;
thus the soul is convinced of righteousness, and till such time as the soul
is thus convinced of righteousness, it will never be able to stand, conviction
of righteousness is the removing the soul off all false foundation; the
foundation of his works, and the foundation of his faith too, as a work, and
the soul that has no foundation at all, but only looks to the Lord Jesus
Christ, O be thou my foundation. When the Lord has once brought the soul to
this, that he has no foundation in the world, (there is no sinner in the
world, but he has one foundation or other, he could not bear up else, now
when the Lord has brought him to this, that he has no foundation in the
world) Lord, says the convinced soul, I have no foundation in the world, I
hang between earth and heaven, if the Lord bring not Christ as a foundation to
me, I am undone, then is the Lord bringing in his Son Jesus Christ as a
foundation of the soul: O therefore let us look into our hearts, Professors,
Christians, Saints and Brethren, O how have our hearts been rooted? have we not
a foundation to stand upon of our own? truly the Lord will shake us out of all
our righteousness, whether wrought by the Law or Gospel, we may be in a
miserable condition: Jesus Christ is a foundation in opposition to all false
foundations.

Lastly, Jesus Christ is the foundation, in opposition to true grace it self:
This conviction of righteousness looks to all the blessed graces of the Spirit,
faith, repentance, and new obedience, and selfdeniall, all these things as they
flow from the holy Spirit, as they are wrought in us by the Spirit, grow up out
of the new Covenant, why of all these Christ is the bottom, Christ is the
foundation in opposition unto these, these are not the foundation: though grace
is the most blessed thing in the world, the most blessed thing of all, yet its
not the foundation of our souls, but the Lord Jesus only, must be the
foundation.

O that every soul would now look to Christ! O is Christ my foundation? (you
had need to look to your hearts, here is much preaching and much profession) it
may be I am glorious in the outward parts of obedience, and it may be in
Comfort too, O but is Christ my foundation, is Christ at the bottom of all my
comfort? It may be I perform a great many duty's, but is Christ at the bottom
of all my duties? O have I yet the Lord Jesus Christ as the foundation for my
soul to look unto? O Christians, if ever there was a day, now its a day to
look to your foundation, when the Lord is shaking heaven and earth, even
shaking the world, and shaking it to pieces; he will yet shake more than ever
he has shaken, till he has shaken out all the rotten professors that are not
founded upon himself; the good Lord make you to look to your foundation; what
a good thing is it to stand firm upon Christ? when heaven and earth, and all
the things of the world shall be shaken, yet we shall not be shaken being upon
the right foundation; the Lord build all your souls upon his Son; if you would
be upon this foundation, say good Lord do thou come and build, how long have I
been building, and how long have I been working, but good Lord come thou and
build, O that every one of you would but learn thus much, as to go home and
say to the Lord Jesus Christ, Lord come thou and build, good Lord take the
work out of my hands, and build thy self, I shall lay all beside the
foundation, but come and take the work out of my hand; and if God will come
and settle us upon his Son, as the foundation of all, then shall we have Joy
unspeakable and full of glory, then shall we Joy and glory in our God, then
shall we have that comfort and peace which passes all understanding, then
shall our souls have heaven begun here, that shall last to all eternity; O
the Lord build all upon this foundation, and let no poor soul here be
discouraged, those oftentimes that have least cause to be shaken are most
shaken, and the hypocrite that has most cause, is least shaken; poor troubled
souls, they are apt to be shaken when they hear these things, but art thou
convinced Soul, that thou have built upon a false foundation? do thou say
thou art undone for ever, that there is no hope for thee? no, rather say
blessed be the Lord I have seen my false bottom, now I come to the Lord, O
Lord do thou build me, O Lord do thou take my soul into thy hand; the Lord
do this for every poor soul here, that you may all who meet here together,
meet with the general Assembly of the firstborn, whose names are written in
heaven, and then shall you not count it in vain, that you have followed the
Lord, and laid the foundation not in your selves, but in the Son of God, which
the Lord Grant.

Here follows the Prosecution of the Point, as it was found in the Authors
Notes.
QVest: 3. What is Christ the foundation of?

Ans: 1. Of the Fathers Eternal Election. Election is built upon Christ, he is
the bottom stone thereof. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. According as he has chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame
before him in love: having predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by
Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. Christ is
the first of the Fathers Election (if I may so say) Isai. 42.1. Behold, my
servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my soul delights: and all others
are Elected in him. Hence, the Ap^stle concludes, that the foundation of God
stands sure; that is, Gods decree of Election cannot be overturned, it has
such a bottom Stone.

Secondly, Of the Covenant of Grace. The Covenant of Grace is the most blessed
thing in the world, its the Magazine of faith, Comfort and Holiness, a Saints
strong Tower of defense against all assaults. Now Christ is the foundation of
this glorious Covenant of grace; Hence, its said to be made with him, Psalm.
89.3. I have made a Covenant with my Chosen: He is called the Mediator of this
Covenant, Heb. 8.6. But now he has obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how
much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon
better promises; And Chapter 12.24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant; his blood is called the blood of the Covenant, Zach: 9.11. As for
thee also, by the blood of thy Covenant. Heb. 13.20. Now the God of peace, that
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the
sheep, through the blood of the Everlasting Covenant. Yea, he is called the
Covenant it self, Isai: 42.6. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and
will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the
people, for a light of the Gentills. Chapter 49.8. I will preserve thee, and
give thee for a Covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to
inherit the desolate heritages.

Thirdly, Of all the Promises of God; this follows upon the other, if of the
Covenant, then of the promises; every promise is built upon him. Hence observe
the promises still run to Christ, the first promise that ever was made runs to
Christ, the Woman's seed; the promises afterward given to Abraham, look to
Christ, Gal: 3.16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made; he
says not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed, which is
Christ. All the Leviticall Types and shadows, which were a representation of
things to come, did look to Christ, the great Sacrifice. Hence the Apostle
concludes all the promises of God, to be in him, and because in him to be firm
and Immutable. 2 Cor: 1.20. For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in
him Amen, unto the glory of God by us.

Fourthly, Of all a Saints special privileges; as,

First, Reconciliation; 2 Cor: 5.18, 19. And all things are of God, who has
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the Ministry of
Reconciliation; To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, not Imputing their Trespasses unto them; and has committed unto us
the word of Reconciliation. Rom: 5.10, 11. For if when we were Enemies, we were
Reconciled to God by the death of his Son: much mere being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life; and not only so, but we also Joy in God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the Atonement. Coll: 1.20, 21,
22. And (having made peace through the blood of his cross) by him to reconcile
all things unto himself, by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or
things in heaven. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your
mind by wicked works: yet now has he reconciled, In the body of his flesh,
through death, to present you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his
sight. Reconciliation is twofold. First, Reconciliation of God to man, that is
made, by giving Justice satisfaction. Secondly, Of man to God, this is done, by
reparation of man's nature; both these flow from Christ, and are founded upon
him; and therefore when Christ was peirced, water and blood came forth; blood
to satisfy divine Justice, water to cleanse and purify man's nature.

Secondly, Effectual vocation; Phil: 3.14. I press toward the Mark, for the
price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

Thirdly; Adoption. Ephesians: 1.5. Having predestined us unto the Adoption of
Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will. Joh: 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become
the Sons of God, even to them that believed on his name. Gal: 4.4, 5. But when
the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under
the Law, To redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the
Adoption of Sons.

Fourthly, Justification; Christ is the bottom Stone of it. Romans 3.21, 22. But
now the rightecousnes of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by
the Law and the Prophets; Even the righteousness of God which is by faith of
Jesus Christ unto all, and upon them that believe. Acts 13.39. And by him all
that believe are Justified from all things, from which ye could be Justified
by the Law of Moses. Isai. 45.25. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be
Justified, and shall glory. Jer. 23.6. In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely: and this is his name whereby he shall be called, The
Lord our Righteousness.

Fifthly, Sanctification; He is the bottom Stone of it: Hence he is said to be
Sanctification to us; 1 Cor: 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of
God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption. The parts of Sanctification are, Mortification, and Vivification;
and Christ is the foundation of both. First, of Mortification, Rom: 6.6.
Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. Gal: 2.20. I am
crucified with Christ. Secondly, of Vivification, Col: 3.3. For ye are dead,
and your life is hid with Christ in God. John 14.19 Because I live, ye shall
also live. Both together are mentioned, Rom: 6.5. For if we have been planted
together in the likeness of his death; we shall be also in the likeness of his
Resurrection. Phil: 3.10. That I may know him and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death.

Sixthly, Of all sanctified Gifts and Abilities. First, outward Abilities,
consider them as they are sanctified to a man, and not as bare gifts; as
wisdom, knowledge, etc. Col: 2.3. In whom are hid all the Treasures of wisdom
and knowledge. 1 Cor: 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is
made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.
Secondly, Inward Abilities, as strength to resist Satan's Temptations, our own
Corruptions. Phil: 4.13. I can d^e all things through Christ which
strengthens me. Isai. ^5.24. Surely, shall one say, In the Lord have I
righteousness and strength.

Seventhly, Of Duties and Performances; Christ is the foundation of all these:
when the people under the Law offered any Sacrifice, they were to bring it to
the Priest, it must go through his hand, or it could find no acceptance;
hence the office of the high Priest, is to offer Gifts and Sacrifices. Heb:
5.1. For every high Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices for Sins: So,
all our duty's and performances must be brought to Christ, and laid upon him,
he must offer them, he must procure the acceptance; that is, the strength by
which we perform them, it must be his, the acceptance we look for must be his.

Eighthly, Of our Comforts and Enjoyments; Christ is the bottom of all these;
what ever comforts we have, if they do not grow upon Christ as their Root,
they are nothing. Some plant comfort upon duties, some upon enlargement in
duties, some upon their affections, etc. but what ever comfort it is, that
Christ is not the bottom of, it will fade and wither.

Ninthly, Of Graces; Christ is the foundation of all these.

First, Christ is the foundation of our faith; faith has no other bottom to
stand upon, but a crucified Christ; there is a faith that is built upon
Experience, as that Psalm: 106.12, 13. Then believed they his words, they sang
his praise. They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his Counsel: but
this will not endure, it is fading

Secondly, Christ is the foundation of Repentance. Acts 5.31. Him has God
exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior; for to give
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. True repentance flows out of
the wounds of Christ. Zach: 12.10. And I will power upon the house of David,
and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of
supplications, and they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.

Thirdly, Christ is the foundation of all a Saints new obedience. There is a
legal and an Evangelicall obedience; A legal obedience may stand upon another
bottom; but Evangelicall obedience (which is that we call new obedience) is
all built upon Christ; Evangelicall obedience flows out of the new Covenant,
it being there promised, Ezekiel. 36.27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments, and d^^
them. And the whole new Covenant (as I have said) is founded upon Christ.

Quest: 4. Who lay's Christ as a foundation?

Answ: Not man himself by any act of his own, either his repentance, faith or
obedience, but God alone: The laying Christ as a foundation in the soul, is
solely Gods act, and not man's in the least.

First, Because if a man by any act of his could lay Christ as a foundation in
his soul, then should the principal and most material price in the whole
building of our Salvation, be of works: But now the building of our Salvation
is not of works but of Grace. Ephesians: 2.5, 8. Even when we were dead in sins,
has quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved) For by grace are
ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God.

Secondly, Because man's Repentance, bedience, yea, his faith (if it be true)
has Christ as its foundation; therefore cannot it lay Christ as a foundation,
seeing that Christ is the foundation of it, and therefore the laying of Christ
as a foundation is before it. And indeed its a common notion among Divines,
That a man in the first work is merely Passive, a^ a child when first
conceived and formed in the womb is merely passive, it does nothing; so its
with a Soul in the first work, it therefore does nothing in laying Christ as
a foundation, but Christ is first by the father laid as a foundation in the
soul, and then the soul Acts, it beleives, it repents, it obey's, etc. And
indeed, its a thing Impossible to conceive, that man by any act of his, either
his faith, repentance, obedience, etc. should lay Christ as a foundation,
seeing the creature is a finite thing, and all his acts are like himself
finite, but Christ is the Infinite God; now how can a finite hand or power
moove an Infinite thing? how can that which is finite bring down that which is
Infinite, and lay it as a foundation; the laying Christ therefore as a
foundation, is not the act of the creature, but of God only.

Quest: 5. But how does God lay Christ as a foundation?

Answ: 1. By razing all other foundations: one soul (as I said before) builds
upon his Legal convictions, mournings, humiliations; another upon his
resolutions, vows, Covenants, his acts of revenge upon himself, his
reformation, etc; Another, on his Joys, Comforts, his disposition of heart
that sometimes he finds to a duty, and his sincere aims (as he thinks)
therein; Another upon his particular words given in, sometimes to bear him up
under straits's, sometimes to encourage to his duty, and upon his faith in
these, etc. Now when God comes indeed to lay Christ as a foundation in any
soul, if a soul have such foundations. God will shake them all, yea raze them
to the ground: So that now the soul will see and say, my convictions,
mournings, humiliations, resolutions, vows, covenants, acts of selfe-revenge,
reformations are nothing, nothing as to evidence Gods love to my soul, I may
be miserable, perish, and be undone for ever, notwithstanding this; my
privileges, Church-ship, participation of ordinances, are nothing; I may be a
cast-out for ever, notwithstanding these my comforts, joys, good fits to duty,
good aims therein (as I think) are nothing, as to build any hope here, for I
may be deceived and gulled in all these, and perish eternally notwithstanding
these; my words given in in straights, when I have been going to some work,
and my faith laid upon these, are nothing as to assure me God is my father, I
may be under a mistake in all these. Now! is the soul stripped bare, and
naked, and become truly poor in spirit; for whereas before it thought it self
rich, and had many things, convictions, humiliations, vows, reformations,
comforts, joys, particular words, faith in these, which it could muster up, as
evidences of Gods love to it, now it sees it has nothing at all, it cannot
bring forth one thing, that can evidence to it, it is a child of God, or got
beyond the hypocrite. And now it lies, Lord a Christ or nothing, a naked Christ
or nothing; I have tried all foundations, and now they are nothing, they are
all shaken to pieces, razed to the ground. Thus the soul hang's (as 'twere)
betwixt Earth and heaven, or Hell and heaven rather, not knowing what will
become of him, but a little glimpse he has that Christ can save him yet, and
some inward groanings there are, O Christ or nothing, Christ now to be my
Comfort, my wisdom, my righteousness, my sanctification, etc or nothing.

Secondly, By making an Inward discovery to the soul, that all that which it
has sought to the Law for, is laid up in Christonely, and to be had from him*
Now the soul sees, that whereas before it ran to the Law, for conviction of
sin, repentance, obedience, faith, Comfort, etc. that all this is treasured up
richly in Jesus Christ, and it must have these things (if it will have the
true, and not be put off with counterfeit ware) from Jesus Christ only: now
the soul begins to look after a new conviction of sin, repentance, says,
obedience, Comfort, etc. And whereas it thought before that it had all these,
now, indeed it sees it had them not, what it had was only counterfeite ware,
the true ware being to be had only from Christ, out of his warehouse; now it
cry's Lord give me the wisdom of Christ, the sanctification of Christ, that
faith, that repentance, obedience, Comfort, that is in Christ, and flow's from
him: now begins Christ to be all, and there is nothing that has any credit
with the soul, but what is Christ's, it cares not for repentance, faith,
Comfort, etc. if it be not Christ's. But as before, it said I am nothing, my
convictions, humiliation, reformation, comfort, faith, etc. are nothing; now it
says otherwise, Christ is all, Christ is my wisdom, my righteousness, my
sanctification, my repentance, my faith, my Comfort, my obedience, my strength
to stand, etc. that is, I look for all these no where but in and from Christ.

Thirdly, By enabling the soul, to make a direct actual close with Christ for
all these. This is that coming which follows the drawing, hearing, learning of
the father; John 6.44, 45. No man can come to me, except the father which has
sent me, draw him: Every man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the
father, comes unto me. But note, that this latter is not so properly laying of
the foundation, for the foundation is laid in the two former, as the uniting of
the soul to the foundation, or the soddering of the soul and foundation,
Cementing them into one, in order to spiritual growth and fruitfulnes, for the
foundation Christ, being by the father planted in the soul, his wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, etc. being laid at the very bottom of all; it is
necessary that now to the end, that this wisdom, grace, holiness, etc. might
shoot up into the soul, and cause the glorious buddings forth of Gospel light,
grace, and holiness in it, that there should be a soddering of the soul and the
foundation; for as the tender graft partakes of the sap that is in the stock,
by such a union with the stock, as makes the graft and stock grow into one;
so the participation of that light, life, grace, Righteousness, Holiness, of
which (the blessed foundation) Christ is full, is conveyed into the soul, by
such a knitting of this foundation and the soul together, as makes them
inseparably one: now! flows up out of the foundation, that wisdom, grace,
Holiness, that is in it, into the soul, and the soul which before was emptied
of all, and had the sap of old Adam, (that wisdom, righteousness, holiness, etc.
which springs from old Adam) let out, has the new Adam sending up his living
sap into it, and now the souls faith, repentance, obedience, etc. are all such
as this new sap sends forth, that is, it is all grace of another kind, its
faith is of another kind to what before it had, its repentance and obedience is
of another kind, its comforts are of another kind. And this God brings all his
to, before ever they become fruitful in a Gospel way; for note here, it may be
the condition of a true child of God, as well as of the hypocrite, to build
too much upon these foundations, yea to be building years together upon them,
and that too, after true grace is wrought in his soul: Abraham was a true
beleiver, and yet goes in unto Hagar the old Covenant, and thirteen years
together his heart run's upon her fruit, and all his Expectations are from it;
But note this withal, that till God brings a belever to this, to make a more
direct and Immediate close with Christ, in the new Covenant, he will be barren
as to Gospel fruit: Abraham had no fruit from Sarah, till God had discovered to
him, that Hagar's fruit was not the fruit, but he must yet look for fruit from
Sarah; so, a true beleiver will be barren as to Gospel fruit, until he is
brought off from all other foundations, and made to close with Christ in the
new Covenant. And indeed I think I may say, that there never was a beleiver in
the world, but either before conversion or after, he has been brought under
the old Covenant, and there has been a building upon such foundations, for it
is natural to a soul under the old Covenant so to do.

Quest: 6. But when does God lay Christ as a foundation in the soul, is it in
the first work or change that is wrought upon a soul, or afterward?

Answ: There is a twofold work or change wrought upon many souls; I say many,
because every one does not pass under this double change.

First, Legal, which is a work or change wrought by the power of the Law, or
by the Ministry of the letter; for so the Apostle calls the Law, 2 Cor: 3.6.
Who also has made us able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter,
but of the Spirit; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. And I
do here expound the Law by the Ministry of the letter, to the end, we may not
look upon the Law, as containing only the matter of the ten Commandments,
and the promises and Threats annexed to these; but indeed, take the Law at
large for the sum of that truth revealed, either in the Scriptures of the old
or New Testament, which contains within it, Doctrines, Promises, Precepts,
Threats, etc. so far as this truth comes to a soul, and is received only as a
notion, as it is the letter, a voice of words, etc. so far it falls short of
being Gospel, which is a word of Power, the Power of God unto Salvation, a
Ministration of the Spirit and life, and is no other but the word of the Law,
that is, a bare word without Power, a killing letter to it: And whatsoever
work or change, is wrought by this word, as it comes to the soul only as an
enlightening notion, or directing letter, discovering to a man his duty, state,
etc. or as it comes as a threatening terrifying voice of words, driving the
soul to that it apprehends to be its duty, and making it for fear to seek
after a better state than it sees it self to be in, (for all this the word as
its a bare letter, or a voice of words may do) I say, all this work or change
is no other nor better than a legal work or change; for it is a work wrought
by the Ministry of the letter, by a voice of words, it is the light of the bare
letter, and the terror of the voice of words, that makes a man in his own
strength fall to working, and accordingly the work brought forth, or the
change produced hereby, seeing it is no other, but an act, a work, a change,
performed by the strength of nature, and not by the strength of the promise, it
can be no other, but a work of the flesh, a child of the Law (or old Covenant)
as was Ishmael, and not of the promise (or new Covenant) as was Isaac.

Secondly, There is an Evangelicall work o^ change, which is, that work which
is wrought upon the soul by the power of the Spirit in the word, cutting the
soul off from the dead stock of old Adam, and ingraffing it into the living
stock of the new Adam Jesus Christ; And the very foundation of the work or
change is marriage-union with Christ. The Spirit of God in the Word lays hold
of a poor soul by an Almighty power, and breaks it off from the old stock,
and in the same Instant ingraffs it into Christ; Now by the engraffing there is
a union, and from this union a communication to the soul of that new sap and
life that is in Christ, and by virtue of this a glorious work and change is
wrought in the soul, new fruit, new actions appear in it.

Now observe the Fathers laying Christ as a foundation is not in the first
work, which I call Legal, for a soul may have that work, as had Ahab, Judas,
Herod, Stony and Thorny ground, etc. and yet perish for ever, but so cannot any
that Christ is the foundation of, for if so, then could not Christ be a sure
foundation, as the Prophet calls him, Esaias 28.16. Therefore thus says the Lord
God, Behold, I lay in Syon for a foundation, a Stone, a tried stone, a precious
corner Stone, a sure foundation: But the laying of Christ as a foundation is in
this second work; And the beginning of this is our union, which is that thing
by which we are ingraffed into Christ, and so grow and bear fruit upon Christ,
as the stock or foundation; when a soul has this union, from that moment is
Christ his foundation, but not before; for what ever may be found in him, or
come from him before this union, be it sorrow for sin, Comfort, obedience, etc.
it has not Christ for a foundation; for how can Christ be a foundation to that
soul, or to any thing in that soul, that is not united to him? can we say
such a thing is a foundation to such a building, and yet the building be
separate from that thing, and standing upon something else? not so.

Quest: But the soul may say, If there be this double work, and change; and
Christ is the foundation only of the latter, How shall I know whether the
work upon me be Legal or Evangelical, that so, I may know whether Christ be my
foundation, yea or no?

Ans: This is a most difficult Question, and the farther I consider it, the
more does it beget matter of fear and trembling; and the rather because those
things which we ordinarily bring forth as evidences of the grace of God within
us will not manifest this difference, because there is not any one particular
work, affection, grace, that flows from the Gospel-worke upon a soul, but
that work which is only Legal, has the counterfeit of that work, grace,
affection, etc. not but that there is a real difference betwixt those fruits
of Sanctification that spring from the Law, and those that come from the Spirit
in the Gospel, but in regard the Legal work has the counterfeite of what
ever the other has, therefore the discerning of the true from the false and
counterfeite, is a most hard thing. For

First, Does the Gospel-worke cause sorrow for sin, so does the Legal too: The
Terrors of the old Covenant made Ahab mourn, Judas repent, etc. As the Gospel
work, may make the heart soft, dissolve it into tears, so may the Legal too,
dissolve the heart into tears, soften it greatly for a while.

Secondly, Does the Gospel work produce obedience, make a soul run to God
upon his knees daily, so may the Legal too. Isai. 58.2. Yet they seek me
daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and
forsook not the Ordinance of their God; They ask of me the ordinances of
Justice; they take delight in approaching to God. Ishmael was a praying child,
God heard the voice of the Lad. Secondly, for Reformation, Does the Gospel work
cause that? so may the Legal too; what did Herod? Thirdly, Does the Gospel
work produce grace? so may the Legal too, though not true grace, yet grace
like the true. First, repentance. See before. Secondly, for selfdeniall.
Ishmael showed a great example of selfdeniall. Genesis 25.9. And his sons Isaac
and Ishmael buried him in the Cave of Machpelah, etc. So Saul, 1 Samuel 11.12,
13. And the people said unto Samuel, who is he that said, shall Saul reign
over us? bring the men that we may put them to death. And Saul said, there
shall not a man be put to death this day. Thirdly, for delighting in holy
duties, in the ways and ordinances of God. Isai. 58.2. Yet they seek me
daily, and delight to know my ways, etc. Fourthly, for zeal for God, and his
ways, Paul before conversion was full of zeal; and the Jews, Rom: 10.2. For
I bear them record, that they have a zeal for God, but not according to
knowledge. Fifthly, for faith. Psalm. 106.12, 13, 14. Then believed they his
words, they sang his praise. They soon forgot his works, they waited not for
his Counsel: But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the
desert Isai 48.1, 2. Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the
name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah; which swear by
the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in Truth,
nor in Righteousness, for they call themselves of the holy City, and they stay
themselves upon the God of Israel, the Lord of Hosts is his name. For there is
a faith of the Law as well as of the Gospel, so long as a man can obey and
perform the condition, the Law will give him a faith.

Thirdly, Does the Gospel work bring a man into Relation to God and Christ? so
may the Legal too, into some kind of relation. Jer: 31.32. Not according to
the Covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day that I took them by
the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt, (which my Covenant they
brake, although I was an Husband unto them, says the Lord).

Fourthly, Does the Gospel work beget peace and Comfort? so may the Legal too;
for observe, so far as by the legal work, a faith may be begotten, and some
kind of relation held forth in that work, so far there will be peace and
comfort.

Fifthly, Does the Gospel work, make a man to abandon all his shelters in
himself, and fly for refuge to Jesus Christ, and the Covenant of grace? So
there may be something like that in the legal work also; for mark it, A
soul by the light of truth, being thoroughly convinced that all his duties,
obedience, his faith, Comfort, etc. that sprung from the Law is nothing, and
that Salvation is only to be had in the Covenant of grace, and a naked Christ
held forth therein, may hereupon quit his trust and reliance in these, and now
run in his own strength (as before he did to the Law, so now) to the Covenant
of grace, and to a naked Christ for refuge. I say, in his own strengtst still.
As a man when the flood was upon the earth, might have hung upon the outside of
Noah's Arc, and yet have perished, so a man may run thus far in his own
strength, and hang upon the outside of Christ (as it were) and yet perish. And
yet all this (though what a man runs to is the Gospel, yet) no more than a
Legal work, a work performed in a man's own strength, and not in the strength
of Christ; for note, as a true Gospel Saint does Evangelize the Law, that is,
he goes to the Law, labors to obey that in Gospel-strength, the strength of
Christ: So a Legalist may legalize the very Gospel, that is, take hold of
Christ the Covenant of grace, close with Gospel principles in his own strength.
When he is convinced he is a miserable sinner, and that his repentance, his
reformation, his comfort, his faith, etc. that springs from the Law cannot
redeem him, but his only remedy is in Christ and grace, he may run to that,
and hang upon Gospel notions and principles for help. Nay, he may not only
run to these but attain some fruit; hence

First, He may attain some kind of reformation, which it may be he could not
attain by the power of the Law. 2 Pet. 2.20. For if after they have escaped
the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end
is worse with them than the beginning. And Heb: 10.29. Of how much sorer
punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has treden underfoote
the Sen of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified an unholy thing, and b^th done despite unto the Spirit of grace. We
read of a sanctification that even hypocrites attain by the blood of the
Covenant, which is a wonderful thing for a reformation to be wrought through
the beamings of some Gospel light upon the soul.

Secondly, He may have some kind of taste of sweetness even in Christ himself.
Heb. 6.4. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy-Ghest. The
heavenly gift is Christ himself: John 6.32, 33. Then Jesus said unto them,
verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven, but
my father gives you the true bread from heaven, for the bread of God is he
which comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the world.

Thirdly, He may in a kind be made a partaker o^ the Spirit. Heb. 6.4. For it
is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost; that is, he may have
common light, and common assistance, which though it is not saving, yet it may
be such light and such assistance as may be from the Spirit, such as he has
not in himself, light into truth, beyond what he can attain merely by his
reason and a^^^ance in some duty, beyond what he has from his own strength:
therefore such falling away are said to do despite to the Spirit of grace.
Heb: 10.29. Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy,
who has trodden underfoote the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite
unto the Spirit of grace.

Fourthly, He may taste a sweetness in the word of Christ, so far as he may say,
O it is a good word. Heb. 6.5. And have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the world to come. So Mat. 13.20. But he that received the seed into
stony places, the same is he that hears the word, and anon with joy receives
it. The seed in Stony places hears the word, and with joy receives it. But
what word is this which makes the heart joy again? why the word of the
kingdom, ver 10. When any one hears the word of the kingdom, and
understands it not, then comes the wicked one, and catches away that which
was sown in his heart, this is he which received seed by the ways side, and
that is the Gospel word, not that of the law. Such an effect therefore may the
very Gospel word beget in men.

Fifthly, He may (as to flashes) at sometimes feel something of the joys that
are above; his heart may have some kind of sudden Ravishments with the Joys
of heaven, as though they were his: Heb: 6.5. And have tasted the good word of
God, and the powers of the world to come: all this may be in a man, who as yet
is without union with Christ, who as yet has no more work upon him than what
he has attained by his own strength; first running in his own strength to
the Law, and finding no help there, may then run in his own strength to the
Gospel, and then conceiving because now he is got off from the Law, and has
seen the emptines of all his legal trusts and rests, and has got some light
into Gospel truths, and hangs as he thinks upon Christ and the Covenant of
grace only, though yet all this his hanging is but an act of his own, a
hanging upon the outside of the Arc, he judges that though his condition was
bad before, yet now it must needs be good, and from this conception of himself
he is it may be helped somewhat to reform, finds sweetness in thoughts of
Christ, because he thinks he has now laid hold on him, and Christ must needs
be his; he has Joy in hearing Gospel truths, and feels at a fit as 'twere a
kind of heavenly Joys in himself, and yet for all this in old ^dam still, and
the fruit he bears (though it seem glorious) comes not from union with
Christ as the foundation of all, but from union with the old Stock, and hence
it comes to pass that in the end all the fruit drops, withers, rotts, goes to
decay.

Hence it is, seeing many that attain all these things fall away in the and,
that some so boldly stand for, and maintain falling away from ^race; for
indeed what can be more like grace than the aforesaid things? but yet their
Position is false, and arises from the not distinguishing of works Legal,
from works Gospel; what ever may be in man by virtue of a legal work, that
is, a work wrought in a man, either by legal Principles, or by legal
strength, working upon Gospel principles; all that, a man may fall from,
because all that may be, and the soul not upon the soundation, Christ, and
therefore the building may fall. What ever a man comes by, either by old
Covenant light, or by old Covenant strength, all that he may loose, for the old
Covenant is a fading thing; it is such a Covenant as may be broken, Heb: 8.9 Not
according to the Covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day when I
took them by the hand, to lead them out of the land of Egypt, because they
continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the Lord. And
though God by virtue of that Covenant stands in some kind of relation (as I
have said) to persons under it, yet such is the Tenor of that Covenant, that
if they do not keep Covenant, but rebel, God will cast them off, and not
regard them for all that, and therefore the Apostle, for those words in Jeremy,
although I was an Husband to them, reads, and I regarded them not.

Now so much seeming grace may be in a man by virtue of old Covenant light, or
old Covenant strength, acting upon Gospel light and principles; that it is the
most difficult thing in the world to distinguish it from true grace, therefore
so many that seemed to have true grace fall away, and then men when they see
it, and find Caveats in the word, to persons going far upon Gospel principles,
to take heed least they fall away. Conclude, men may fall away, which indeed is
false, for no soul truly in Christ, can ever fall, but persons may run thus
far, and yet still in the Stock of old Adam, and such may fall.

Hence also some conclude falsely free will, not distinguishing betwixt works
flowing from Legal light and strength, and that flow from Gospel light and
strength. To the first, man has a power, and by his own strength does all,
and because many go so far in that strength which they feel to be their
own, as that they think themselves to have true grace, and to be living
members of Christ, (which as indeed it is not so) hence they conclude man has
a power and a will in himself to receive Christ, which is not so; man has a
power to repent, obey, believe, in a legal way, and he has a power to lay
hold on Christ as tendered in the Covenant of grace, in such manner as a man
may be sa^d to hang on the outside of the Arc: but a power to receive Christ
in Truth, so as to be in him, this he has not; this is the free gift of God,
and no person in the world ever can, or shall thus receive Christ, but he only
to whom it is given.

Quest: But you will say, if a man by Legal Principles, and Legal strength, may
go thus far, wherein lies the difference betwixt the true Saint, and this
seeming Saint?

An: The maine and essential difference ly's here, in the root, the one and
the other grow's upon. The seeming Saint may have many glorious things, but the
root upon which all he has or does, stand's, is the old Adam; The true Saint
perhaps may have fewer and less glorious branches than the other, but the
root of what he has or does, is the new Adam. So that in a word, it is the
souls union with Christ as the root, the foundation of all that he has or
does, wherein ly's the very foundation of this difference; I say, all ly's
here, in our having or not having union with Christ.

Possibly there is many a gracious soul, that never in all his life time
attaines so much as what we have showed may be in the seeming Saint, and yet
for all that he stands for ever, and all the Power of Hell shall never be able
to shake him; and the other which has more glorious branches, will fall at one
time or other. The reason is, because the first, though the branches be the
less, and less glorious to outward appearance, yet having this true union
with Christ, grow's upon this sound root, that can never decay; the other
though the branches may be greater, yet stands upon a rotten Root. As you may
see two Trees, one has great Limbs and branches, and makes a great spreading,
and for the present is very green, only there is some rottennes at the root;
the other has but small branches, and is not outwardly half so glorious, but
has a firm sound root; Now of these two, the great Tree, though he make a
greater show and spreading of branches, yet because there is rottenness at the
root, he will not retain his greenness, but is in a decaying state, and in
time the leaves fall, the branches wither, and the whole tree dies; but the
lesser Tree, though he is not comparable to the other in bigness and multitude
of branches, nay, perhaps never comes to have so many spreading bough's, yet
because he is sound at root, he still grow's, retains his greenness, and his
fruit (unless in some winter seasons) and never rotts: So, therefore let no
poor soul think with himself, I cannot be sincere, because I have never yet
gone so far, as those have done and do that fall away; it may be soul, thou
never shall in thy life, and yet thy condition may be good, and thou shall
stand for ever, when the other shall rot and perish, if thou art upon the right
root, and that little thou have grow upon that root, that is, if thou have
union with Christ the new Adam, and thy branches spring thence. For here (I
say) in this union ly's the difference. Whence we may all learn, that of all
things in the world its most necessary that we mind this union; and if we would
know either the goodness of our state, or the worth of any thing we either do
or have, we must labor to find out what is the root of all, and whither or
no, what we have or do, spring from Christ as the root.

Quest. But how shall I know whether Christ be my root, and what I have and
do spring from him as the root?

Answ: The best Evidence that I am able to give is this; If Christ be thy
root, then will thou sensibly perceive that thou have nothing at all, no
wisdom, no strength, righteousness, holiness, etc. but what springs from the
root: if we could conceive such a thing as a Tree to have sense, we might also
conceive that the Tree would be really sensible of this, that it has no sap
nor moisture but what comes from the root, nor could it put forth branch,
leaf or fruit, were its root taken from it. So if Christ be the root, the
soul will be really sensible of this, nothing more, that I have no wisdom,
strength, etc. nothing, nothing in my self but what comes from Christ; it will
(I may say) as sensibly feel its strength, and all it has coming up from
Christ, as a Tree had it sense would feel the shooting up of the sap through
the body of it, into its boughs, branches and fruit.

But now because there may be a great deceit here, and our wicked hearts are
ready and willing to deceive themselves, therefore mind these two things.

First, That there is a difference betwixt the acknowledging Christ to be our
all, and the feeling of this. There is no Protestant but upon his principles
must confess it, but there are but few that feel it, and a man never comes to
feel it, till first he is brought to this, that he cannot feel strength,
holiness, etc in any thing in the world else, for so long as a man can feel
strength and help any where else, he does not feel Christ as his strength and
help, if he be convinced he is miserable, if he can but feel such a thing as
this in himself, I can repent, mourn, reform, etc. he rests there, and comes
not to feel Christ his strength; if he see an emptines in these things, if now
he can but feel a power to go and believe the promise, hang upon Christ in a
general way, he rests there, if he cannot feel this, but finds clearly that as
his repentance, yea his faith, is but a thing of his own and nothing, if now
he can but feel a power in himself to go and pray to God to give him the
true faith and repentance, it is a hundred to one if he rest not there. So long
as he feels any thing in himself, he feels not Christ as all. But now when
God brings a soul to feel Christ indeed as his root, he is made first as
really to feel as ever he felt any thing in the world that he has nothing,
feels that he has not one holy groan, cannot shed one true tear, cannot
believe, nay cannot in himself wait upon God that would give him faith, etc.
when he is thus and has no feeling in himself, then he feels sensibly a
flowing of wisdom, strength, holiness from another, so as that now he can say,
this strength, this holiness, etc. is verily none of my own, and I am nothing
notwithstanding it.

Secondly, There is a difference betwixt clinging to Christ, and thereby
getting some of his sap, as I may so say from him, and being united to Christ
as my very and only root. As for Instance, the Ivy you know clings to the
Oak, and thereby getts some of the sap, by which it is nourished in part, but
it has a root of its own, the root of the Oak is not it root. Now because
it wants the firm root of the Oak, and has but a weak root of its own,
thence it comes to pass, that notwithstanding it getts some moisture from the
Oak by clinging to the outside of it, and has some sap also from its own
root, yet it is very subject to wither and dies whilst the Oak lives. So it
may be with a Legal soul, as what has been already said makes appear, he
has a root of his own, the root of old Adam, but finding himself
notwithstanding this root to be but a withering branch, he may by that
strength that is given him from this root, cling to Christ the living Oak,
hang upon him in an outward way, as the Ivy hangs on the bark the outside of
the Oak, hereby he may get as well some sap from Christ whilst he thus hangs
upon him in an outward way, as may somewhat help to make him green, keeping
life in him for a time, as does the sap he has from his own root; and hereby
his life is partly from his own root, which affords him so much sap as gives
him strength to cling to this living Oak, and partly from that sap which by
clinging to Christ in an outward way he draw's from him. Yet because this soul
has not Christ for his root, but what nourishment he getts from him is only
in an outward way, by an outward cleaving to him, and clinging about him, to
which he is assisted and enabled by that strength that is afforded him from his
own root, the old Adar^. Hence it comes to pass, that at one time or other,
this cleaving soul which receives not his strength, life, nourishment from
Christ by virtue of a real union with Christ as his root, but by virtue of an
outward cleaving and sucking from Christ does dye and wither, therefore I say,
a difference there is betwixt clinging to Christ, and thereby sucking for a
time some sap from him, and union, clinging is not union, neither is the coming
of sap that way the same with that s^p that comes by virtue of the union of the
Tree; the sap the Ivy getts is forced from the Oak into it self by clinging
about it, and violent sucking, but now the sap that comes from the root into
the Tree, that ascends in a natural way. So where union is with Christ as the
root, the souls feels the sap its strength, holiness, etc. flowing into it
from Christ in a secret, yet wonderful natural way, so that it flow's into it
without the souls striving and struggling to force this sap to its self, but
it comes in a natural way, it flow's up secretly, and in a manner
indiscernably into it, the soul begins to feel it self full of sap, but
knows not how it was filled hardly, now this being come into it, then it
causes this soul to put forth daily new branches, leaves, buds, and fruit;
but where it is otherwise, though sap may be had from Christ, yet it is but a
forced thing, a thing extorted by outward clinging, and as the Ivy when its
own root does not afford it sufficient sap to make it cling to the Oaks,
dies; so this soul when its own strength, the strength received from old
Adam; by which it clings to Christ in an outward way shall fail it, that it
can cling no longer, it will dye and wither, notwithstanding for some time
whilst its own strength served it to cling close, it did receive a kind of
life and nourishment from him.

FINIS.
The Promise of the Father.
ACTS. 1.4. Wait for the Promise of the Father.

The whole verse runs thus;

And being Assembled together with them, commanded them that they should not
depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which says he,
you have heard of me.


WHat promise is this, which our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, when he is now
ascending into heaven, does give a strict and special command to his
Disciples, to look at, and wait for, calling and entitling it, The promise of
the Father? To that I answer, This promise is no other but the promise of the
holy Spirit; and that is clear from the following words, which says he, ye
have beard of me; This promise of the Father that they were now commanded to
wait for, it was that promise, that Christ had been minding them of sometime
before, Wait for the promise of the Father which ye have heard of me, which I
told you of, and minded you of before; now what was that promise that Christ
had been minding of his Children of again and again not long before this
time? If we look into John's Gospel we shall find, that the promise of the
Spirit Christ did again and again pitch the faith of his Disciples upon, and
that Immediately before his death, before he was taken from them. John 14.16,
17. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he
may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him; but ye know him, for he
dwells with you, and shall be in you. And ver: 26. But the Comforter, which
is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto
you. So again Chapter 15.26. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send
unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the
Father, he shall testify of me. So again, Chapter 16.7, 8, 9.10 verses,
Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away:
for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I
will send him unto you; and when he comes; he will reprove the world of sin,
and of righteousness, and of Judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on me,
of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more. Yea this
is clear, in the verse following our Text, For John truly baptized with water,
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, not many days hence. So that,
that great promise, which Christ had been minding his Children of a little
before, (which he points at here, which says he, ye have heard of me) it was
the promise of the Spirit; and it was not the Spirit in that special way of
working in glorious miracles, and interpreting of Tongues, and the like; but
indeed it was the promise of the Spirit in general; for he referr's to that
promise of the Spirit, which they had heard of him, which was as a Comforter,
as the leader and guider into all truth, as a Testifier of the Love of Christ
to the soul, as a bringer to remembrance of whatsoever Christ had said unto
them, as a glorifier of Jesus Christ in the hearts of his Children, he shall
glorify me; so that it looks to the promise of the Spirit in general, when
Christ says, its that ye have heard of me.

Quest: 1. But why does Christ call it, the promise of the Father, does not
Jesus Christ himself promise the Spirit? does not Christ say, I will send you
another Comforter? is it not the promise of Jesus Christ himself, as well as
of the Father? why does he then call it the promise of the Father?

Ans: (...). Because Christ himself as Mediator has the promise of the Spirit
from the Father. Isai: 42.1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in
whom my soul delights, I have put my Spirit upon him, etc. And its fulfilled
to Christ, Isai: 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me (says Christ) for he
has anointed me, to preach good Tidings, etc. Jesus Christ himself, as he
stood in our stead, doing our work, and acting in our nature, so he did
receive the promise of the Father himself, the Spirit; and therefore its
called the promise of the Father.

Secondly, In respect of the Antiquity of it. Because the Father had promised
it long before this time, so its the promise of the Father; Christ had promised
the Spirit to his but it was lately, and so it was a new promise, not many
days old, made but a little before his death: but the promise as it was the
Fathers promise, so it was ancient, made many hundred years before, though now
to be fulfilled, for the Time of the old Testament, was the time of the Fathers
administration, now in this time there were many promises of the Spirit to be
afterward fulfilled, as in Joel, 2.28. And it shall come to pass afterward
that I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your
danghters shall Prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men
shall see visions. Zach: 12.10. And I will power out upon the house of David,
and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of Grace and of
supplications, and they shall loo^e upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborne. And
therefore this promise as it was the Fathers so it was ancient, and for the
Antiquity of this promise, because it was most anciently the Fathers,
therefore it may be called the promise of the Father

Thirdly, It Is the promise of the Father, because of the times and seasons of
the giving out of this promise; for the times and seasons are in the hands of
the Father, so Christ tells his Disciples in this Chapter, But the Father has
kept them in his own power.

Fourthly, The maine reason is, That hereby Christ might strengthen and
confirm the faith of his Disciples and Children in waiting for this premise;
we have need of all that can be to strengthen our faith, and therefore Christ
calls it the promise of the Father; the Disciples might conceive, o is the
Father willing we should have the Spirit? we know how willing Christ is, he
has said he will send us a Comforter, we are sure we shall want nothing that
Christ can do for us, but is the Fathers heart as free to give out the Spirit,
when Christ comes to heaven will not the Father hinder it? Christ therefore
entitles it rather the promise of the Father than his own; as if he should
have said, do not think poor souls, that my Father is unwilling to give out
his Spirit, that he is an Enemy to your peace, comfort and Joy, or the coming
of the Spirit of grace; no, the Fathers heart is as full and as free, as you
can conceive mine to be, for its the promise of the Father.

Quest: 2. But why does Christ pitch the faith of his Disciples now at the time
of his ascension upon this promise, rather than upon any other? could he not
bid them as well to wait for some other promise as for this?

Ans: 1. Because there was no promise so suitable unto the state and condition,
that the people of Christ, the Disciples of Christ, his followers were now come
into, as this promise: no promise is so suitable to a poor soul in the time
of Christ's absence, as the promise of the Spirit; Christ had been personally
present with his Disciples some time, and he had comforted, cheered, warmed and
quickened them, and when his personal presence was to leave them, no promise
could be so sweet, comfortable, and acceptable to answer their condition, as
this promise of the Spirit, therefore Christ gives them this promise as most
suiting them; if any thing could hold them up against the rage of the world,
and the malice of the Devil now in his absence, it would be the promise of the
Father, therefore it was the most suitable promise.

Secondly, Because this promise, it was now in the very nicke of fulfilling;
The promise was ancient, but now the very time of fulfilling of it was at hand,
the time of giving out of more abundance of the Spirit was drawing on; now, its
the way of God with his Children, when the promise is upon the nick of
fulfilling then will God be putting on his Children in a more especial manner
to be waiting, and seeking, and looking up to him, even for the fulfilling of
that promise: Therefore when the seventy years Captivity in Babylon was run
out, then God stirred up the heart of Daniel, and he falls down before God and
prays, and urges the promise and beleives; when the time was even expired,
when God comes to give forth his promise, when the fulfilling time is come,
then God puts his people upon waiting for it: So afterward, when Jerusalem was
to be built, when the time of fulfilling was come, then the Lord wonderfully
stirr's up the heart of Nehemiah, and he falls down before the Lord, crying, O
that Jerusalem might be no more a City without walls: and indeed its a great
argument, (though not a demonstration to convince men, yet) its such an
argument as carry's much weight in it to the hearts of the Children of God,
when they are put on in a more special manner to wait upon God, for the
fulfilling of this or that particular promise, for the doing of this or that
particular work, though the times and seasons are many times hid to us, yet
they are in the Fathers power, and they are all known to him, and when they
draw nigh, God does usually make that work to run over the heart of his
Children, and sets them a praying, and seeking, and beleiving, and waiting for
that work; and it may be they can hardly tell how it comes to pass that they
are so put upon it, but it comes from a secret way of Gods dispensation toward
his Children, when God sees that the work is ripe, and the thing is hear at
hand, that it may come when his Children are in a waiting posture, he will
forerun it over the hearts of his Children ere he bring it visibly forth before
the world. But though this be a real truth, yet I do not take it to be the
special reason here, why Christ does put them to look for the fulfilling of
this promise, rather than any other, but the chief reason I take to be this;

Thirdly, Because the promise of the Spirit its the great promise, that the
Saints and peaple of God in the new Testament days are to have their eye fixed
upon, and are to be found waiting upon God continually for the giving of it
forth: its that great promise the Saints are to be looking up to the Father for
in the new Testament Times; under the old Testament the Saints had a great
bundle of promises, but there was one great and leading promise, that stood out
before all the other promises, and that was the coming of the Messiah, and unto
this promise all the Types, shadows, Ceremonies and services of the Law did
look, they ran into this promise; so the Saints and people of God in the times
of the new Testament, have a great and leading promise also, but this great
promise of the old Testament is no promise to them, for its accomplished,
Christ has come and dyed, and is risen again, and we look not for him to
come and dye any more, to satisfy his Fathers Justice; but now there is I say,
a great and leading promise in the new Testament, which the Saints fix their
eye upon above all other promises, and that is the promise of the Spirit; as
the Saints under the old Testament, looked cheifely to this promise of the
Messiah, O when will our Messiah come, when will the Redeemer come, when will
Christ come; why so, the Saints under the new Testament, have this as their
great expectatior, O when will the Spirit come, when will the Spirit come down
more into our hearts, O when shall we be more filled with the Spirit, and be
enabled to walk in the Spirit, and to live in the Spirit, and have all our
teaching from the Spirit, and all our strength and life and whatsoever we have
from the Spirit; this is that that the Saints should have their eye fixed upon
under the new Testament; and so the Observation at this time shall be this.

Obser: That the promise of the Spirit is the great New Testament promise; it is
the great promise that the Children of God in the times of the new Testament,
are to be looking up to God for the fulfilling and accomplishing of. In the
prosecution of which point, I shall follow this Method, (all moulds and methods
they are but things, wherein we are to seek the edification one of another).

First, I shall show you, That the promise of the Spirit is a great promise.

Secondly, That its the great New Testament ^romise.

Thirdly, Why the Lord held forth his Spirit to his Children as the great
promise? why he would have them look more upon that promise than upon any
other promise

Fourthly, I shall apply this blessed truth to our hearts.

First, The promise of the Spirit, it is a great promise, a very great promise:
so it is,

First, If we do consider, The thing promised, the gift given by virtue of
this promise: What can be a greater gift, than for God by promise to give
himself to a poor soul, for the Father and Son to give themselves to a poor
soul? Now the promise of the Spirit, it is the gift of God himself, the
promise of God himself, we have God giving himself by promise, the Father
giving himself, and the Son giving himself, for these three are one, where
the Spirit is given all are given, and where the Spirit comes and dwells,
there is the dwelling of the whose, the Father, Son, and Spirit, all the blessed
Trinity; now what a wonderful gift is here? is it not a great promise then?

Secondly, It Is a great promise, If we consider the Promise-Maker; we make
account of the promises of great men, this is a promise made by the greatest in
Heaven and earth, the Father and the Son are the greatest; My sheep (says
Christ) hear my voice, and I give unto them Eternal life, and none shall
pluck them out of my Fathers hand, and my Father (says he) is greater than I:
Here are the two greatest in heaven, the Father and the Son, and they make this
promise; the Spirit proceeds from both, as the gift of either; the Father
promises it, and therefore it is called in the Text, the promise of the Father,
the Son promises it, John 16.7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is
expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will
not come unto you: but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

Thirdly, It Is a great promise, If we look to the way or means of conveying
this promise to the soul: The greater and more difficult means a man must use
to fulfill some promise made to us, the greater and higher account we have of
his promise; the worth of a mercy may sometimes be measured by the means
through which it is brought about: Now do but look at the difficulty's this
promise comes thorough, It comes upon the account of Christ's Intercession for
it in heaven, I will pray the Father and he shall send you another Comforter;
before this promise can come forth in the fulness and glory of it, Christ must
strip himself of his glory, come down from heaven to earth, be made a
reproach, dye a cursed death, and after this go up to heaven again, and there
pray and plead, and all before this promise can be given forth; so that it is a
promise that comes through all Christ's doings, and sufferings, and
Intercessions, before it can be given out in the fulness and glory of it; I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter: It Is therefore a
great promise.

Fourthly, It Is a great promise, If we do but consider, The great things that
are laid up in this promise.

First, All our spiritual peace and comfort is laid up in this promise; all
that inward Joy and peace and comfort that a poor soul has, it is all lodged
up in this blessed promise; hence the Spirit is called the Comforter, because
all our comfort (if it be true) it comes from him; there is a Joy which men have
for a season (as that of the Stony ground) which men may have by the common
working's of the Spirit, but it is not that comfort and Joy which the Spirit
works in the hearts of the Saints, in a special way as the comforter; all the
true Joy and comfort that Saints have, they have it in and from this promise;
has a soul comfort in a way of sense, from the sencible feeling of the gifts
and graces and operations of the Spirit of God in his heart? This comfort (if
it be right) it comes from the Spirit, and so it is laid up in this promise;
It Is the Spirit of God that must come and work in us, and that must discover
his own workings in us, that must work our grace, and make us to feel our
grace, and make us to know that that which we feel, it is grace; for if the
Spirit of God do not come in and bear witness to what we feel, there will
be no true comfort, that we can have that way: have we comfort in a way of
faith, in hanging upon the general promise? A poor soul finds nothing, all
is dry and dead, and all comfort he had formerly in duty's and ordinances is
gone, now he looks up to the promise, and draw's in comfort from God
altogether in a way of faith when all is dead within; This comfort of faith is
also from the Spirit, for the Spirit of God enables us to act this faith, we
are not able of our selves to put forth the least act of faith, the soul
cannot when he wants sense put forth the least act of faith, but it is the
Spirit of God, the exceeding greatness of the power of the holy Spirit, that
comes and raises up the power of a poor soul, the Spirit of God comes when
the poor soul is quivering, and shaking, and trembling under Temptations, and
comforts, strengthen's, stay's, supports, refreshes, and establishes the heart
and the soul; so all the comfort, peace, joy, and consolation of the soul,
it is from the Spirit, it is all lodged up in this promise.

Secondly, All our spiritual light and teaching is from hence: it is the office
of the holy Spirit to be the teacher of the Saints, He shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance; he is the Saints Comforter,
and he is the Saints teacher, all our light and teaching, it is laid up in this
promise; there is a vast difference betwixt the knowledge men have in their
heads, which we call notion, and that knowledge which men have from the Spirit,
which the Apostle pray's for, and calls the Spirit of Wisdom and of
Revelation; if we have any true light, it is from the holy Spirit, as all
outward light by which we see natural things, it is from the Sun, and if the
Sun were out of the firmament there would be no light to see created things, so
the inward light by which we see things as they are spiritual things, all this
light is from the holy Spirit, and if the Spirit of God do but withdraw from
the heart, all it is light is but a heap of darkness; so, the light of the
people of God it is not in themselves, and their knowledge it is not in
themselves; sometimes men may beat out knowledge and light by their reason and
parts, I but there is another kind of light in the first of the Cor: the 24,
and this is from the holy Spirit of God; The Spirit of God it is the
enlightening principle. True reason it is the light of man, but its as real a
truth that the Spirit of God is the light of reason; therefore we have a speech
in Job; There Is a spirit in man, but the inspiration is of the Almighty, giving
him understanding; that is, there is a rational spirit in man, that can beat
things out in a rational way, that can discover and draw conclusions and
Inferences, and the like, but it must be the Inspiration of the Almighty that
must give him understanding; a man can have no true light, no true knowledge,
if there be not a light enlightening this light, if there be not the
Inspiration of the Almighty enlightening his understanding, if the spirit of
man be not guided by the Spirit of God; the Spirit of God enlightens the
natural spirit and the natural understanding of man, there is a spirit in man,
but the Inspiration is of the Almighty giving him understanding: we have as
much need of the light of the Spirit to understand spiritual things, as you
and I or any other have need of the light of reason, to teach and discover to
us natural things: If a man had not the light of reason, he were a natural
fool; and a man cannot make out natural things but by a natural light: so,
where the Spirit of God is wanting, though a man has never so much reason, yet
that man is a spiritual fool, and he cannot make out spiritual things
without the light of the holy Spirit; and it was upon this account the Apostle
Paul speaks so gloriously to the Corinthians, he went to preach the Gospel to
consound the wisdom of the wise, Where is the wise, and where is the Scribe,
and the disputer of this world? Who can understand the Gospel by the brave
wits, and quick apprehensions of the world, and the sharpest wits if they
could not reach these things, where is their wisdom? no says the Apostle,
this is another manner of wisdom than the world knows, For after that in the
wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, then it pleased God by the
foolishnes of preaching to save them that believe: The wise men of the world by
their own light, reason and parts, could never know God, God would have the
knowledge of himself come into his Children in another way, though they take
up truth in a rational way as men, (and do not lay all upon Impressions and
revelations) yet they receive these things from God, by the teaching of the
blessed Spirit of God, and that has demonstration going along with it, I
preach not in the enticeing words of man's wisdom (says the Apostle) but in
the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, and the more we can learn things
in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit of God, the more light there
will be in our reason, for the Spirit of God enlightens the spirit of man; if a
man have a great deal of understanding, and be unacquainted with the way of
the Spirits teaching, he knows nothing, and understands nothing; The natural
man understands not the things of the Spirit of God, because they are
spiritually discerned, discerned by the light of the holy Spirit, therefore
says he, We have not received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit that is
of God, that we might know the things that are given to us of God; as if he
should have said, there are blessed things given us of God, glorious things
given us of God, such things as are worth ten thousand worlds given us of God,
but how shall we know these things? why not by the spirit of the world, but by
the Spirit of God, By this Spirit of God we know the things that are freely
given us of God, it is the Spirit of God that enlighten's us.

Thirdly, All our Inward life and motion, its laid up in this promise: There Is
no motion that can be in our souls, which may be called spiritual life or
spiritual motion, if it be not from the holy and blessed Spirit of God; the
Spirit of God to the soul of man is as the soul is to his body; what is the
soul to the body? the principle of life and motion, if the soul be but out of
the body, the man is presently but a carkase, and there is no stirring, moving,
breathing or acting; so the Spirit of God is to the soul, if the Spirit of God
be gone from the soul, there is no motion, no stirring, no acting, a living
Saint this hour, a dead block the next hour, one that has a great deal of
life from God in this duty, is so dead and low as if he had no life at all in
the next; so, the life of the Saints is not in themselves, but its in the
Spirit of God, and so its laid up in this promise.

Fourthly, Further, All the spiritual strength by which the soul moves, its
all laid up and lodged in this great promise: the Spirit of God gives forth all
the strength the soul has; Ephesians: 3. the latter end, We are strengthened with
all might by his Spirit in the inner man; all the strength or might that a
poor soul has in the inward man, its all from the blessed Spirit of God; if
a soul has strength to stand up against Satan, truly its from the Spirit of
God, The Lord shall tread down Satan under your feet shortly; If the Spirit
of God withdraw and leave the soul but an hour, Satan will tread him down
and trample upon him, but if the soul be a conqueror, an overcomer, its by the
blessed Spirit, all the strength we have whereby we are victors over any
Corruptions, its by the blessed Spirit; is there the mortification, the killing
of any corruption in our souls? its from this Spirit; If ye through the Spirit
do mortify the deeds of the body ye shall live; its not the work of our
faith, its not in our own power, we may struggle and strive and labor and
toil, but the least corruption is too strong for the strongest Christian in
his own strength; but now the Spirit, that mortify's the deeds of the body;
so, have we strength to perform any duty, any work, to hear, to speak the
word of God? truly this is not our own, its of the blessed Spirit, for if the
Spirit of God do but leave a poor soul, it cannot speak, it cannot pray, it
can do nothing; the strength that acts the people of God, its not from
themselves, therefore one while they have a heart full of the groans and
breathings of the Spirit, and a mouth full of words to spread before God, and
at another time they have not a groan in their hearts, nor a word in their
mouths, and they may pump, and they can bring up nothing; this shows the
strength of Christians is not from themselves but from the holy Spirit of God,
therefore a Christian that can at all times command his strength, to pray or
preach, its to be feared that that is the strength of man and not the strength
of God, the strength of the creature and not of the Spirit, the strength of
parts and of old Adam: The Lord let us his Children feel that they have not
strength sometimes, sometimes they have, sometimes they have not, that they
might live all their whole life only in dependence upon God; what experience
had Paul of this? I know how to want, and I know how to abound, and can do all
things, but how? through Christ that strengthens me; yet another while Paul
could not speak, his mouth is shut up, therefore pray for me, says Paul to
the Saints, pray for me that I may have a door of utterance; so, we are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing; I am nothing, says Paul, yet by
the grace of God I am that I am, all my strength is laid up in the blessed
Spirit, its not in my self, its the Spirit of God that is our strength; so all
our strength is laid up in this promise.

Fifthly, All our boldness to the Throne of grace, its laid up in this promise:
Can a poor soul go to God, and cry father, father, Abba father? why truly
its the Spirit that enables him so to do, Because you are sons, God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts crying Abba father; and that is
the reason why a Saint one time can go to God and say, father, father, he can
speak it out, another time he cannot go and speak out father; it is because
the Spirit, that makes the soul to cry Abba father, its not in the power of
the creature, but our boldness with the Father its the gift of the Spirit of
God, its this blessed Spirit of Adoption whereby a man can run to God as a
child unto his father.

Sixthly, All our help and assistance at the Throne of Grace, its laid up in
this promise: We know not what to pray for (Rom: 8.) as we ought, but the
Spirit helps our infirmities, and the Spirit makes Intercession for us with
groans which cannot be uttered; its truth, a child of God does not know what
he should pray for, what he should speak or utter to God, or what he should
most need, but the Spirit of God comes and helps our Infirmities; our work in
prayer is not, to think what we should speak, but to lay our selves down
before the Spirit, Lord come thou by thy Spirit and manage all our work for
us, we are to spread our selves before the Spirit of God, and let the Lord come
and speak all in us: and the Spirit helps our Infirmities with groans, not
with words, the Spirit helps a Christian many times, when the soul cannot
bring out a word; the soul is full of groanings, groanings that cannot be
uttered, groanings that have so much in them that they cannot be uttered, the
soul many times is put by words, and is confounded through fulness; for there
is by the holy Spirit of God the representation of a multitude of wants
together, and of a multitude of mercy's together, and the soul would feign
breath out all to God, and he cannot speak them out all, but he sends them up
all to God in a groan together, therefore says the Apostle, It helps our
Infirmities with groans that cannot be uttered; a poor gracious soul comes
and ly's before God, and cannot speak a word, O but it sends up a groan to
God, and though it cannot utter one word to God, yet it may send up twenty
petitions in one groan.

Seventhly, Our speeding at the Throne of Grace, our presenting such things
there only as are the will our father, its from this blessed Spirit: When we
come to pray of our selves we do but ask our own Thoughts, and spread our
own wills before God, but if we could come and lay our selves alway's under
the Spirit of God, and be willing alway's to be led and guided by the Spirit of
God, there would come forth alway's the will of God, and not the will of the
creature, He that searches the heart knows what the mind of the Spirit is,
because he makes Intercession for the Saints according to the will of God; let
the Spirit pray, and it shall be the will of God; though we are poor creatures
and do not know the will of God, yet when the holy Spirit comes and draw's
forth the heart, it speaks out the will of God: O therefore let us come and
lie down under the motions of the Spirit, and the guidance of the Spirit, He
that searches the heart knows what the mind of the Spirit is, he does not
look so much what words, and what brave expressions, and how these things are
uttered, but he know's what the mind of his spirit is; when God comes and looks
upon his Children, he does not hearken what brave words come out, but what the
mind of the Spirit is therein, the great thing God looks after, is, what the
Spirit groans after, what the mind of the Spirit is: so that all our boldness
at the Throne of Grace, all our help and assistance, and our speaking so as to
put up such Petitions only as are the will of God, its all lodged up in this
blessed promise of the holy Spirit.

Eighthly, All our Assurance and Evidence from heaven, its lodged up in this
promise: has a poor soul any assurance, any hope, any Evidence, O here its
lodged; the Spirit is our earnest and evidence; He has given us the earnest of
his Spirit; as the giving one an earnest is an assurance of the bargain, so
the Spirit of God is the earnest which assures the Children of God of their
glorious Inheritance with the Saints in light; The Spirit is called the first
fruits, the first fruits were the assurance of the harvest's coming, they are
the beginnings of the harvest; so the Spirit of God in the hearts of Gods
children is the first fruits its the seal wherewith the children of God are
sealed, After ye believed ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise; and
grieve not the holy Spirit of God wherewith you are sealed to the day of
redemption, that comes and seals up heaven to them, and glory to them, the
Spirit comes and witnesses to them and with them, that they are the Children of
God; Romans 8.16. The Spirit of God bears witness with our spirits, that we
are the Chidlren of God. He says before Ye have not received the spirit of
bondage again to fear, but ye have received the spirit of Adoption whereby we
cry, Abba, father. As if he should have said, we have not the old Covenant
spirit, the old Testament spirit, the spirit of bondage to fear, but the
glorious new Covenant spirit which helps us to go to God and call him father;
what can be a more glorious witness and evidence to a Christian than this, yet
this spirit alone cannot bear witness; therefore he says in the next verse,
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that is, with this glorious
Gospel-new-Testament spirit, the Spirit of God himself comes and witnesses
with this Gospelspirit, with this spirit of Adoption, that we are the Children
of God; this sweet Gospel Spirit that is wrought in us, it would not witness
alone, but the Spirit of God comes and puts his seal upon it and says, O this
is a true work of mine, a true work of the father in a child, so it bears
witness with our spirit.

Ninthly, The being and the Habit of Grace, its laid up in this promise: the
Spirit of God its the root and principle of all grace in the Saints, those
habits of grace within, are but the offspring of the Spirit in the soul:
Grace, its not a thing natural, a thing that we bring into the world with us,
but a thing created and begotten; now the creating and begetting principle, its
the holy Spirit; the Spirit it is, that does create and beget all grace, were
not the Spirit first given, there would be no habits of grace in any; all grace
in the hearts of the Saints, its from this blessed Spirit; and therefore its
laid up in this glorious promise.

Tenthly, All the Acting of every grace, its laid up in this promise also, the
acting of faith and patience and humiliation, and all grace; as we have not the
principle or habit of grace from our selves but from the blessed Spirit, so
every act of grace, its from the holy Spirit also; as the Lord says of his
Vineyard, I will keep it and water it every moment; God keeps his Vineyard
and waters it too, and he waters it every moment, or else it would wither and
decay; so the Lord keeps us and our grace, and waters us every moment, else we
should decay, the Spirit of God it is, that comes and waters us, and waters all
our grace; though the soil be never so good, the fruit is not brought forth
if there be not dropping from heaven upon it, so let the soul be good, and the
plant of grace in the soul, yet, if the Spirit do not come and continually
drop upon and water our hearts, there will be no fruit brought forth; every
soul therefore that is able to put forth any grace, he has this from the
blessed Spirit; O what a wretched thing therefore is it, that there should be
such a thing in the world as the slighting of this blessed Spirit? that any man
in the world should slight and contemn this blessed Spirit, wherein all our
grace is, and the acting of every grace lies in it; and its the exceeding
greatness of the power of the Spirit that makes every grace to act, look upon
faith in the first acting, its not wrought by us, but by an exceeding great
power, even the same that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, when he lay
under all our sins and his Fathers wrath, its that power that works the
first acts of faith, that exceeding greatness of power, that helps us to
believe; and so it is in all other grace, and the people of God do know that
their strength is not in themselves, nor their growth in themselves, I cannot
be holy, I cannot walk humbly by any strength of my own, I cannot believe, I
cannot love the Saints, nor love God, or the cause of God by any strength of my
own, I cannot do it of my self, all the acting of my grace its from the
blessed Spirit of God.

Eleventhly, All those convictions that are wrought in the soul, they are from
the Spirit of God: all the conviction in the soul, whether of sin or of
righteousness, it is from the Spirit of God; If a poor soul come to be
convinced of sin, that he is an unbeleiver, its the Spirit of God must convince
the world of sin, because they believe not in Christ; if a soul come to see
all his righteousness nothing, whether it lie in the works of the Law, or in
the very acts of beleiving, that all is nothing, its the Spirit must convince
the soul of righteousness; men run from one piece of righteousness to another,
from confession of sin to vows and promises, and thence to Reformation, and so
to higher things, but this does not convince till the Spirit of God come and
convinces the soul, and then it says, Lord I am nothing, I have nothing, I
can do nothing, I am empty, O that thou would come and fill me with thy
holiness; all that can be done by man, and the utmost of reason and parts, and
the utmost demonstration of truth to the ear, can never do this till the
Spirit of the Lord come.

Twelfthly, All those hints of truth, those remembrances of truth, those
bringings of the blessed word and promise of Christ to our mind they are all
laid up in this promise of the Spirit: Its the Spirit, its the Spirit that
shall bring to your remembrance, says Christ, whatsoever I have said unto you;
The holy Spirit of God comes and makes the soul to remember all the words of
the Lord Jesus Christ, all the promises in the blessed book of God, that
concerns our sanctification, any piece of it, any thing belonging to it, or
that concerns our consolation, or any piece of it, or any thing belonging to
it, they are all lodged up in this great and glorious and blessed promise of
the Spirit of God; as in the promise of the Messiah, are lodged all the
promises of our Justification, and every piece of it, so in this promise of the
Spirit, is lodged up all the promises of our sanctification and consolation;
Justification flow's out of the one, and holiness, peace, and comfort out of the
other: is it not then a great promise? O its a glorious and most blessed
promise.

I had thought to have shown you how it is the great New Testament promise,
the great promise that we are to look for under the new Testament; but I shall
not be able to come to that at this Time.

The Lord therefore set that upon our hearts; and as there is much lodged up in
this promise, so, O that our hearts were now all taken with it, that we might
all look up unto God for the giving out of this Spirit; methinkes none should
go home now and say, I will not regard this Spirit, I do not see any thing in
this Spirit, much less that any should go away and jeere at the Spirit, laugh
at the Spirit, and make a mock of it, O far be it from our souls that any
here should do so; but let us every one look after this Spirit, Lord come and
give out of thy Spirit to my soul, come and give out of thy Spirit to my
soul; Lord I have been a Rebel, an Enemy, a wretch, an opposer, but let thy
Spirit come and subdue my Corruption, let thy Spirit come down and bring up my
heart to thee; O thy Spirit Lord to subdue this wretched distemper in me, that
have been a mocker and jeerer at thy Spirit: Poor soul, do thou want a
word of conviction, to be thoroughly convinced before the Lord? O say now, O
Lord send thy Spirit to convince me, now O Lord let thy Spirit convince my
soul of sin, let thy Spirit convince my soul of righteousness, let thy Spirit
come and show me how I have not believed in Christ, how that I have taken up
other things besides Christ as my foundation, and laid other foundations
besides the foundation of God; let the Spirit of the Lord come and show me how
many righteousnesses I have set up instead of the Lords righteousness: If the
Spirit of God should come to our hearts now, not a man or woman here but would
go out and say, O I am a poor wretched creature, I thought I had had wisdom
when I came hither, but I go out a fool; and I thought I had had strength
when I came hither, but I am weakness it self; and I thought I had had parts
and gifts, but I am nothing; I thought I could have believed and acted faith
upon God, but I can do nothing, nothing of my self; if the Lord come to
convince by his Spirit it will be thus indeed.

There are many legal convictions, and men go away hardened after them, and
they are ten times worse; have thou man or woman been convinced of that, and
have gone away mightily affected, and yet can thou come again and sit here
and sleep? O beg of the Lord to give out his Spirit to convince thee, and to
do all thy works in thee and for thee; have thou been a long time doubting
and seeking what way God will own, what truth God will own for his truth? O
labor for the Spirit, cry for the Spirit, for the teachings of the Spirit, beg
of the Lord to teach thee by his Spirit, spread the promise before the Lord;
have thou not said Lord, Thy Spirit shall teach us all things, and guide us
into all truth? Here Is thy promise Lord, Lord now let me have thy Spirit to
reveal thy truth to me, and to show me thy will; and when the Spirit comes and
teaches us, we shall know principles in another way than we did before, a
Christian can see a clear evident distinction betwixt those principles he
fetches in from reason, and those he has from the Spirit of God enlightening
his reason.

Now would thou depart? O beg of the Lord to come and give thee h^s Spirit,
and then being taught by the Spirit of God, thou will stand to the truth, the
reason why men are this to day, and another thing to morrow, it is because they
are not taught by the Spirit, but their faith is laid in the wisdom of men,
and they take up things from men, and do believe a thing because such a wise
man speaks it, and when a wiser than he comes and speaks otherwise, then they
will leave that and take up what he says; now says the Apostle, I came not to
you with the enticeing word: of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the
Spirit, and of power; that your faith might stand not in the wisdom of man,
but in the power of God; as if he should have said, I know how apt you are to
take up things in the wisdom of man, and not in the light of the Spirit of
God; but cry out Lord let me have nothing but in the power of God and from thy
Spirit upon my heart, in the demonstration of thy Spirit; this will hold, a man
will stand to this, he will say, I did not receive this truth by the light of
my reason, but by another light, hereupon the soul will hold to truth. As the
Saints in Queen Mary's days could not dispute, but yet they would dye for the
truth, they had their principles in the light of the Spirit, and in the power
of the Spirit; Now how many now aday's have their faith founded in the wisdom
of men and not in the power of God? If God should come and sift men, you will
never hold if you will not learn of the Spirit, but have things only from
your reason. How many have spoken gloriously of the truths of the present age,
and when it comes to some trial, when there comes suffering, and their own
Interest calls off to the other side, turn their backs upon it? that which men
have had only from their reason will not lead them through Temptation, if
Temptation come that man will give away his truth rather than part with his
Interest, his honor or profit, or the like; a man that has reason will gather
up a great deal in the notion, but if the Lord do not teach us by his own
Spirit we shall not hold; O beg this every heart for himself, and for all the
children of God at this day, that we might not know things by the Spirit of man
but by the Spirit of God, for the spirit of man will get a great deal of
knowledge and let it out again, O that the Spirit of God (condemned by many in
this generation) might be honored by us; art thou a poor soul? have thou no
strength nor life to duty? do thou say, I come to pray sometimes and would
feign have my heart in heaven, and keep my faith up, and be full of groans,
but I cannot speak a word nor utter a groan, but am just like a block? O
come to the Lord and say, Good Lord give me of thy blessed Spirit, I have sat
often and heard in a customary and formal way, and so have I prayed, but Lord
give me thy Spirit to hear, and thy Spirit to pray, and thy Spirit to do all
in my soul; O then you should find strength and assistance and help, and
such help as the soul cannot Imagine: so, have thou not boldness, can thou
not call God father? say, now Lord thy Spirit, let the Spirit of Adoption come
into my heart, Lord fill my heart with thy Spirit, that I may cry Abba father,
if thy Spirit come down into my soul I shall cry father, it will help my
Infirmities and tell me what to say; I would go to God but I know not what to
say, nor what to lay before God, nor what to ask, O Lord thy Spirit now to put
words into my mouth, and thy Spirit to put groans into my heart; so, a poor
soul that goes about doubting, and says I am undone, such and such are happy
and blessed, they are the Children of God, but I shall perish for ever,
whosoever goes to heaven I shall go to hell; O go to the Lord and say, Lord I
cannot see thy seal upon this my affliction, good Lord come and give me thy
Spirit, that earnest of glory, and seal my Spirit for glory, and witness by thy
Spirit with my spirit that I am thy child; O let every one look after this,
every one mind this, we are here but a little while, we run through the world
and little think of Eternity, and then at last we cry out, O that I had
looked after God and his Spirit, O that I had now the Evidence of the Spirit; I
have followed pride, and vanity, and wantonness, and the world, and how I
might be rich, O that I had now the Spirit of God, I would give ten thousand
worlds if I had them, that I had but the witness of the Spirit, and the
Evidence of the Spirit; O, Christians do not mind the great things of God, of
Religion, and of their souls, but we have gotten Religion in a form, and as
an art like a trade in the world, men think they do enough if they do but now
and then say over a prayer, and read one of the Psalms, or the like, O you
will wish another day, O that I had Jesus Christ, O that I were sealed with the
Spirit of God, if you want this, the day of Christ will be a bitter day to you:
so, is your heart dry and withering? pray to God to come by his Spirit and
water you every moment; it may be your hearts are a little stirred when you are
under a Sermon, but you go away again and forget all, now say soul, say to
the Lord my conscience is touched now, good Lord as I go out of this place
water me, and as I go home water me, and all the week water me, and every
moment Lord water me till I come again; there is need of this, beg of the Lord
for it, and pray to the Lord to give his Spirit for this end, for the Spirit of
the Lord does this; so, have thou had many sweet promises many times, and thou
forgettest them? cry Lord thy Spirit, thy Spirit to bring all these things to
my remembrance, all the glorious promises, O that I might remember them all,
and that by the holy and blessed Spirit; O that day is not far off, that God
will come down with more abundance of this Spirit, it will fall upon our
hearts, O therefore think of these things, ponder something, and go away with
these groanings in your hearts, O father, give thy Spirit thy Spirit to my
poor soul.

The Lord work with you; I have spent many words, but its God that must give
you his Spirit, look up for it, and if you will help all faults, heal all
divisions, cure all distempers in the soul, bring the soul to Joy
unspeakeable and full of glory, get this Spirit, it will give such peace to the
soul as shall pass all understanding; The Lord give more of it to every one
of us.

FINIS.
The second Sermon.
ACTS. 1.4. Wait for the Promise of the Father.


THis promise its no other but the promise of the holy Spirit; and our Lord
Jesus is pleased to entitle it the Promise of the Father, that his Disciples
and Children might be as thoroughly apprehensive of the Fathers willingness to
give forth the Spirit, as they were confident of his.

The last time I showed you that this promise was a great promise: I shall now
(the Lord assisting) go on, and come to the second thing.

Secondly, That the Promise of the Spirit is the great new Testament promise. I
say the promise of the holy Spirit is the great new Testament promise: here are
two things to be cleared and proved.

First, That the promise of the Spirit is a new Testament promise.

Secondly, That its the great new Testament promise.

First, That its a new Testament promise; my my meaning is not, that its a
promise proper and peculiar unto the new Testament Times, so, as that we are to
conceive the people of God that lived under the old Testament Administration
had not the Spirit, we must not so conceive of the thing, for the people of God
in the time of the old Testament they had the Spirit; Holy men of God (says
the Apostle Peter) spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, and therefore
they had the holy Spirit with them; and if they had it, they had it in a way of
promise, and therefore its not a promise so peculiar to the new Testament
times, as that the Saints of the old Testament had not this promise as well as
we; nay the Saints and people of God under the old Testament, they had that
very same Covenant (in which this glorious promise of the Spirit is held forth
and given) that we have, the new Covenant it runs down even from Adam (as I
may say) to the end of all things, the new Covenant it runs through all the
times of the old Testament, and its this Covenant (the new Covenant) that gives
forth the Spirit, and they had that Covenant running through all that long
time, they had therefore the Spirit given forth to them. But when I say, the
promise of the Spirit is a new Testament promise, we are to understand it thus;
That its a promise that does in a more especial manner relate to the new
Testament Times, though it was a promise that had a fulfilling even in old
Testament times, yet it has in a more especial manner a fulfilling to the
Saints in new Testament Times: the people of God in the times of the old
Testament, they had the Spirit; but they had the Spirit (as I may so say) in
the beginning, or in the dropping of it; but now the people of God in the new
Testament Times, they have the pouring of it forth, look to the promise of the
Spirit in new Testament Times, and the promise runs to the pouring it forth,
that is, more abundance of it; the people of God in the times of the old
Testament, they had the promise of the Spirit, but they had not this promise as
their great promise, for (as I told you the last day) they had another promise
which was their great promise, they had the promise of the Messiah as their
great promise; but now the people of God under the new Testament
Administration, they have the promise of the Spirit as their great promise,
they have not only the promise of the Spirit, but they have it as the greatest
promise of all other made to them under that administration. Now these things
being premised, (which I thought meet to do, that there might not be a
mistake, and that none might exclude the people of God of old from the Spirit)
I shall show you, That the promise of the Spirit is a new Testament promise;
and this will appear from two things.

First, All those several promises that we find in the old Testament, of the
more full giving forth, and pouring out of the blessed Spirit, did not relate
to those times, but to the new Testament Times for their fulfilling: I shall
show you this in two or three places; In Ezekiel: 36 27. among many precious
promises of the new Covenant this is one, I will put my Spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do
them; but to what time does this more especially relate; why, it does relate
(as you may see, if you look into the foregoing verses) unto the time when God
will gather together his Ancients the Jews out of all Country's, verse. 24. For
I will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out of all Country's,
and will bring you into your own land: it does in a more especial manner,
look to the time of the Jews coming in for the complete fulfilling and
accomplishing of this promise; then will it most evidently be seen, that the
Spirit of God is the guider and leader and teacher of his Children, then will
the promise of the Spirit in the fulfilling of it be more visible. And so
likewise in Joel 2.28, 29 verses, And it shall come to pass afterward, that I
will power out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall
Prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions:
And also upon the servants, and upon the handmaids in those days, will I power
out my Spirit: To what time does this relate? Compare the second of the Acts
and you shall there find, that Peter tells us, now is this word fulfilled in
your ears, Acts 2.16, 17 verses, But this is that which was spoken by the
Prophet Joel, And it shall come to pass in the last days (says God) I will
power out my Spirit upon all flesh, etc The fulfilling of it is under the new
Testament Administration; and truly though that in the first powering out of
the Spirit, there was a glorious fulfilling of it in part, yet (I take it) the
complete fulfilling of it, and that which is specially aimed at in the Prophet
Joel, does relate, not to the first, but to the last of the new Testament
times; for Joel speaks of those times, when he shall bring again the
Captivity of Jacob and Jerusalem, and Joel speaks of a more universal pouring
out of the Spirit upon Gods sons and daughters, than was before; so, as that at
the beginning of the new Testament times, there was a fulfilling of that
promise in part, yet it has in a more special manner a look to the last
times, in which the people of God upon the account of this new Testament
promise, may wait for the promise of the Father, and expect more of the
blessed Spirit to be given forth to them, to be powered out upon them. So
likewise Zach: 12.10. And I will power upon the house of David, and upon the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of supplications, and they
shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn, etc. But
when is this? why, it is (if you look into the 14 Chapter) in a time when all
nations shall be gathered against Jerusalem, and when God will destroy all
nations that shall come against Jerusalem, and in that day when there shall be
great mourning among the Jews upon their coming in, in that day this blessed
promise will have a glorious fulfilling: all those precious promises of the
pouring forth of the Spirit that we read of in the old Testament, they look to
the new Testament times.

Secondly, That this is a new Testament promise does appear, from the words of
Christ himself: If you look into John 7.38, 39. He that beleiveth on me, as the
Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living water. But
this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him, should receive:
for the holy Ghost was not given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified.
Observe the giving forth of the Spirit is made a consequent of Christ's
glorification, of Christ's being glorified at the right hand of the Father; and
therefore the more full giving forth of the Spirit, its a promise to the new
Testament times. But then

Secondly, How does it appear that this is the great new Testament promise?
the promise of the Spirit is a new Testament promise, Gods people in new
Testament times, they look for it; but how does it appear this is the great
promise, to be of all other promises the greatest under this dispensation?

I Answer, There are three great promises that we have in the book of God,
three promises that may be called the greatest of all; first, there is the
promise of Christ's first coming; Secondly, There Is the promise of the coming of
the Spirit; and then Thirdly, There Is the promise of Christ's second coming;
These are (as I may say) the greatest promises that we have in all the book of
God: The promise of Christ's first coming, that was a promise that did belong to
the old Testament Administration, as I showed you the last day: The glorious
promise of Christ's second coming, that is to have its fulfilling and
accomplishment, in the time of the new Jerusalem, that the people of God do
hope and wait for; which coming of Christ's personal appearance, his second
coming in glory, under that Administration shall have its fulfilling: But now
the promise of the coming of the Spirit, that is the promise that we are to
expect the fulfilling of, under the present Administration, that Administration
which is betwixt Christ's first and second coming; not but that there shall be
much more (as I shall show anon) of the Spirit of God given forth, when Jesus
Christ shall be personally present with his Children, yet notwithstanding the
great promise of the Spirit (which is spoken so much of, in the old Testament
and in the new) is that, which we are to look up to God for, betwixt the time
of Christ's first and second coming. When Jesus Christ was to go up to heaven
and leave his Children, and they were to undergo a very black and tempestuous
day, and Christ saw what the rage of the world was, what the Roman power, and
the Antichristian power, and the Kings of the earth would do, therefore that
he might not in such a dark day leave them comfortless, he makes this great
promise of the Spirit; as if he should have said, In all that time, O Saints,
when ever you suffer, look for my Spirit; when ever you want comfort, look
for my Spirit; when you fear that this Antichrist will deceive you, look for
my Spirit; and so this promise of the Spirit, is a promise that runs through
all that time in a more especial manner to the people of God, which they do
wait for the fulfilling of.

Object: If the promise of the Spirit be the great new Testament promise, how
then comes it to pass that the Saints and people of God under the new
Testament Administration, have so little of the Spirit?

Ans: Why truly there may be something in this as one reason of it, namely, The
way of Gods dispensation; which has been, and it is, to put death's upon his
promises, not only before the fulfilling time of a promise comes, but even
when the fulfilling time is come, and in the fulfilling time God will put a
death upon his promise. Though Abraham had a blessed promise made to him by
God, that he should have seed, and God told him that it should be in Bondage
four hundred and thirty years, and at the end of that time he would
wonderfully show his power, bringing them forth with a high hand, and give them
the land of Canaan; but before the fulfilling time came, there is first one
death and another upon the promise; first Abraham was a hundred years old, his
body dead, and yet without any that should be the heir of the promise; and
Sarah is old and her womb dead before the fulfilling of the promise; and after
the heir of the promise was come forth, Abraham must go and offer up his Son,
why, what might Abraham think would become of Gods promise, Isaac was the Son
of the promise, and must I go and offer him up, where will Gods promise be?
Here was a death upon a death upon it; and after this, Isaac the Son of the
promise, in whose loins (as I may say) the promise ran, the promised seed was
to come forth from him, yet Isaac (after Abraham) had no seed a great while;
so that before the fulfilling time of the promise came, there was deaths upon
deaths upon it: yet notwithstanding when the Time was come for the fulfilling
it, when the Lord was now giving forth that that he had promised to Abraham,
and when he had sent Moses into Egypt to bring Israel out, yet then the Lord in
the very fulfilling time brings deaths upon it; when the Lord had raised up
some measure of faith in the people of God, expecting deliverance, yet the
bondage grow's so great that their hearts grow dead as to hope, and they think
they are further off than ever before; and afterward, when they thought they
had nothing to do but to run to the land of Ca^aan, no, but there are great
deaths in the way, they must go through a Sea, and through a wilderness, and
this not all, but they must wander forty years in the wilderness, and there
the whole generation that came out of Egypt dies, what deaths were there upon
the promise in the fulfilling time? So God made a promise to his people in
Jeremiah's time, that after 70 years Captivity in Babylon they should come to
Jerusalem again, and that should be built; but when the fulfilling time was
come, what deaths were put upon the promise, so that for many years together
the building of Jerusalem and the Temple was hindered? I do urge this notion to
this purpose, that though the new Testament Administration, be the
Administration in which the Saints are to wait for the fulfilling of this
great promise, yet in the fulfilling time there may be very great deaths upon
the promise, and such, as we may see very little of the Spirit given forth, and
it may be for ages and generations together (as in some generations it has
been) but little of the Spirit may appear.

Secondly, Because although the promise of the Spirit is the great new
Testament promise that is made to those times, yet the fulfilling of this
premise may not be alike to all, but may be especially made good to some
periods of that time; The promise of Christ was the great old Testament
promise, that which Saints all along in the old Testament waited for, but that
was not fulfilled till the last period of that time: so it may be with this.

Thirdly, Another Reason why Saints under the new Testament Administration have
so little of the Spirit, though this is the great new Testament promise, It may
be from Saints darkness in the way of the new Testament (Saints going out of the
way of the new Testament) and that Legality that is in and upon the spirits of
the Saints; As the promise of the Spirit is the great promise of the new
Testament that God gives fo^th in new Testament times, so God will give forth
his promise in the way of the new Testament; if so be therefore the saints be
dark as to the way of the new Testament, in which God will give forth new
Testament mercy's, why truly they may be under the new Testament
Administration, and yet have but very little of the Spirit; for even in new
Testament times there is (as I may say) an old Testament spirit upon the
Saints, they look upon themselves (through their darkness and Ignorance) as
standing under the old Administration, they have thereby the Spirit of the old
Covenant and of the old Testament wrought in them; and so far as they have an
old Testament spirit, so far there will not be a giving forth of the Spirit to
them in that full measure, for God will give forth the Spirit in the way of the
new Testament.

Quest: What is the way of the new Testament, in which God will give out new
Testament Mercy's?

Ans: To that I answer, The way of the new Testament its this, To receive all
from God as I am a poor wretched nothing creature: This indeed is the very way
of the new Testament, in which God does give forth new Testament mercy's to his
Children; if a soul come to Christ for Justification, the way of the new
Testament is, to give forth this precious glorious privilege to him as he is a
poor wretched sinner, an unworthy one; and so if we come to the Lord for the
Spirit in the way of the new Testament, why it is to come to God as I am a
poor miserable sinner without the Spirit, having no hope nor any thing in my
self, that I can ground hope upon, why God should give forth the Spirit to me;
This is the way of the new Testament to come to God for all, and to expect all
from God as I am a poor sinner; why now if Saints be unacquainted with the way
of the new Testament, they may miss of the mercy's of the new Testament: if
Saints come to God for the Spirit and bring somewhat of their own with them,
(as if a man in coming to God for Justification, will bring a righteousness of
his own to patch with the righteousness of Christ, the Lord will not give it
forth, if you do not come as a poor sinner that has nothing in himself,
expecting all from the righteousness of Christ, so, if I come to God for the
Spirit,) if I think to bring somewhat of my own, to bring some good desires,
and some good breathings with me, and thou say, Lord I am so and so, I have
such and such breathings, therefore give me the Spirit; why, thou art now out
of the way of the new Testament, and God will not give forth the Spirit: if you
would have the Spirit you must say, Lord thou know I have nothing, thou
know that there is not a good thought, nor a good desire in me, and I bring
nothing with me, but am a poor wretched sinner, and know not what to do but I
lie bebefore thee, that thou would give forth thy Spirit to me; so that
Saints, they may in new Testament times enjoy but very little of the Spirit, if
they are cast into the way of the old Testament.

Fourthly, Another ground and Reason of this point, why there is so little of
the Spirit given forth, and this the great new Testament promise, it is,
because Saints are no more in assembling together; Saints are not found (as I
may say) as they should be in the work of Assembling together; there was a
twofold giving forth of the Spirit to the Disciples and Apostles of our Lord;
Christ did give them the Spirit, and that Immediately at his resurrection, he
gave them the Spirit, and breathed the holy Ghost upon them in some measure, to
bear up their spirits against the sorrows that were to attend them; afterward
he gave them the Spirit more fully; and at both these times, the Spirit was
given forth unto them when they were assembled together; John 20.22. When the
Disciples were assembled together Christ came and breathed on them, saying,
Receive ye the holy Ghost: so if you look into the second of the Acts where
you have the more full giving forth of the Spirit, you shall find it was when
the Saints were assembled together. Acts 2. the beginning of the Chapter:
Here Is the giving forth of the Spirit in a more full measure to them, and it
was when they were all with one accord in one place, when they were met
together: Christ might have given it to them one by one, when they were alone,
no, but our dear Lord chooses to give forth the Spirit when they were
assembled together; that teaches us how much he loves the assembly's of the
Saints, the Saints meetings together; that though he could have given them the
Spirit to every one in a corner alone, yet he will not do it, but he chooses
to give it to them when they are assembled together: so that if the Saints
neglect their meeting together, there may be little enjoyment of the Spirit,
though it be the great promise of the new Testament Administration. So much for
the second thing.

Thirdly, Why is the promise of the Spirit, the great promise under the new
Testament; why does God give this as their great promise?

First, One Reason of it may be this, Because God in the new Testament
Administration would make an advance, a step nearer (as I may say) to heavenly
perfection and glory, than the former administration was: God all along has
been making an advance, ever since man fell God has been making an advance,
carrying him up step by step; now the more of the Spirit is given forth, or the
more of the Spirit is in any dispensation, the greater the advance is, for its
the Spirit that makes the advance in the hearts of Gods Children; now because
the Lord under the new Testament Administration would make an advance, he would
raise the hearts of his Saints nearer to heaven and glory than they were
before, therefore he gives forth more of the Spirit, and he does hold forth the
promise of the Spirit as the great promise; and indeed, in the Administration
that is to come (upon this account, in that of the new Jerusalem) there shall
not be less, but there shall be more of the Spirit, for if there should be
less there could not be an advance, there shall be the personal presence of
Christ, and more of his Spirit too; if we did look upon it only as an outward
thing, then it might well be called (as some call it) a carnal thing, but
there shall be more of the Spirit of God given forth, in that day there shall
be an advance in the Saints upon this account.

Secondly, The Lord gives forth the Spirit as the great new Testament promise,
Because new Testament Saints they are Sons: This is the reason the Apostle Paul
gives, Gal: 4.6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit into your
hearts, crying Abba father: the father expects from a Son (a grown Son) that
he should carry himself better than a child; he does expect from his Son that
he should know how to govern himself, and to order things better than a
servant; why now new Testament Saints are Sons, and the Lord does expect under
the new Testament, that there should be a better carriage, that there should be
more holiness, that they should know how to govern themselves in another manner
of way than the people of God under the old Testament: Now to the end that
Saints might be able to govern themselves in another manner of way, its
needful they should have more wisdom and grace given forth to them, and that
they may have it, God gives forth more of the Spirit: Because ye are Sons
therefore he has sent forth the Spirit of his Son therefore he has sent forth
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts.

Thirdly, Because God does expect more work from new Testament Saints: This
fallows upon the other, as ye are Sons there is more work expected, God
looks for more duty and more obedience from the Saints of the new Testament,
than he did expect from the Saints of the old Testament; in the new Testament
they have not so much tireing work, they have not so much burdensome work, O
but if you look to the spiritual work, as they come to higher light, so God
looks for higher obedience, therefore for Moses his ten precepts in the old
Testament we have many spiritual precepts in the new: the new Testament does
not set us free from holiness and obedience, but indeed the new Testament calls
us to a more strick't holiness and a more spiritual obedience, ye are called to
a higher pitch of holiness and obedience under the new Testament, and not freed
from it; the Lord has set his Saints free from all that that was burdensome
and that that was legal obedience under the old Covenant, but they are not
free from obedience, indeed the Saints of the new Testament they are called to
a higher pitch of obedience; as one that is a son grown, the father does not
lay such laws upon him as he does upon a little Child, you must not meddle with
this, nor do that, nor go out of the doors, nor run in the wet and dirty
your self, etc. there are a great many laws laid upon a child, but now when
once the son is grown, the father lay's no such law's upon him, but he does
expect that this grown son should do him more service than the child, there is
not the law's upon him as was upon the child, the son is free, but yet
notwithstanding here is more work called for at the hands of the son: so it was
with the people of God under the old Testament, the Apostle tells us, they were
heirs under age, and therefore their state was nothing differing from the
state of a servant: though they were Lord's of all in the appointment of the
father, and were true heirs, yet because they were under age, they were under
such a rigid Governor and Tutor as the old Covenant, that held them under the
rod of a great many law's; but now under the new Testament we are sons, and
being sons, the people of God they should go out and serve God freely, with
another manner of spirit: I do not say we do so, for truly we are much to
short of what we should be, the Saints should go out and worship God with a
free spirit; we are not set loose from duty's, but we are rather called to do
more, and that in another manner, in a free manner, with a free spirit; as one
that is an apprentice, he lives in a servile fear of his Master, and does a
great deal of work, why now when this man comes to have his freedom does he
do less? no, he does more work, but he does it with a free spirit, he does
it with another spirit; so its with the Saints under the old and new Testament,
they do more work under the new Testament, but with less fear than under
the old Testament, being delivered out of the hands of their enemies, they
serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness all their day's.

Fourthly, Another ground and Reason of it may be this, God has greater
discovery's of truth for the new Testament times, and his people under the new
Testament Administration, than was for the times of the old Testament under
that Administration, and therefore the Lord holds forth the promise of the
Spirit as the great promise: under the old Testament the Lord brought forth
truth by little and little, precept upon precept, and line upon line, and here
a little and there a little; God brought forth truth after diverse and sundry
manners, sometimes by way of vision and dreams, and voice, and the like, many
way's of Revelation: But now under the new Testament God speaks out all his
word, he has spoken in these last times by his Son, he speaks forth all his
mind to us at once; now the more truth is spoken out, the more need we have of
the Spirit to enable us to understand this Truth, for its by the Spirit we are
given to understand the truth's of God, as they are held forth in their beauty
glory and fulness: and therefore because Christ under the new Testament
Administration was to speak out all of truth, the whole of truth; that the
Saints and people of God, might be able to apprehend the blessed truths of the
new Covenant, as they are held forth to them, therefore it is necessary that
they should have more of the holy Spirit given forth to them under the new
Testament Administration.

Fifthly, Because the Saints under the new Testament are to conflict with
greater Trials and more sore Temptations than Saints of the old, and therefore
the Lord gives forth mere of the Spirit; Though the people of God under the old
Testament met with sore Trials, yet they were not comparable to the sufferings
of the Saints under the new Testament, the rage of the Heathen and
Antichristian powers was greater than ever the world knew before; now to bear
up the people of God under this sad-black-long day that they were to go
through in suffering, they had need of the Spirit; therefore God gives forth
the Spirit, he does promise that, as the great new Testament promise.

Use 1. If it be so, That the promise of the Spirit is the great new Testament
promise, Then hence we see what that thing is that all of us should have our
eyes and our hearts and our thoughts fixed upon, and taken up with; O that
every soul would be looking for it, crying for it, Lord give me thy Spirit,
what ever the soul wants, it may go to God and say, Lord give me thy Spirit:
This is the great promise, in which all other promises are locked up, the
promise of conviction, the promise of strength and life, all are rapt up in
this; why, now we should go to God in a more special manner for the
performance of this promise.

Use 2. O then what spiritualnes is there required of the Saints of the new
Testament? If in the old Testament Time, when the promise of the Spirit was not
given forth as the great promise, if then spiritualnes was required, O how much
more is it required of the Saints and people of God under the new Testament? if
under the Administration of the letter there was required spiritualnes, then
how much more is it required under that Administration, which is the
Administration of the Spirit? if the Administration of the letter be
spiritual, and says to all the Children of God live spiritually under me,

First, Saints, now you are under the Administration of the Spirit, It does
bespeake us to be spiritual, to have spiritual hearts, to be spiritual in
all our duty's, in all our addresses to God. Truly its not so much the length
of our duty's, the multitude of our duty's that God looks at, but that that
God looks at is the spiritualnes of the duty; what shall I find of my spirit
in that duty? what shall I find of my spirit in that prayer? what shall I find
of my spirit in that word spoken? what shall I find of my spirit in that soul?
God looks at the spiritualnes of the duty and performance: men may pray hours
together and twenty times a day, and yet not all this so acceptable to God as a
poor broken expression and groan of another poor soul may be; and truly,
you shall find God will not Judge as they do, if there be much of the Spirit,
if it be in poor broken expressions, its more acceptable unto God than a
multitude of words, and there be not much of the Spirit; Conscience will not
let men alone, but they must pray, but do you look if you have the Spirit in
a duty, for this God looks at: there are many, that like to the rich men that
cast into the treasury, they are able to offer up abundance, as to the bulk,
the outward part, the outside of a duty, and the abundance of their parts and
gifts, O but many a poor gracious soul, that has not those parts and gifts
and abilities, and cannot speak twenty words together so handsomely as some
(it may be) can speak hours together, yet this man's prayer may be more
precious in the account of God than all that the other does; many a soul can
cast in much, yet its little with God, and many a soul cast's in little as to
the outward appearance, yet its much with God; as all the gifts of the rich men
were little with Christ, yet the two mites of the widow it was much with him:
O that we might not look so much unto the outward building, as to what there
is of the Spirit of God. How spiritual was that holy man Paul in prayer, what
spiritual Petitions, what spiritual groans did he offer up? he could never
know when he had enough, he must have all, he must be filled with all the
fulness of God, he must comprehend with all Saints, what is the height and depth
and length and breadth, and must know the love of God which passes knowledge,
and all his prayers run in such a high way, as one that never could know when
he had enough, then we are acceptable when all that we do is filled with the
Spirit.

Secondly, As its good to have our prayers so filled with the breath of the
Spirit, so in our discourses we should be more spiritual: the discourses of
good people they are too empty, there is too little of the Spirit in them; there
are young Christians (many men and women) can tell, when the Lord first wrought
upon their hearts, they could not endure to come into that company that would
not discourse of that which was good, and they cared not to hear of any thing
but God and Christ and heavenly things, but now they have been a great while in
the School of Christ, they can go a great while together and have no
conference of spiritual and heavenly things; I remember thy kindness (says
God) in the days of thy youth, youthful times were loving times, then their
hearts were warmed, and then they were full of good speeches and discourses,
but now Saints can go up and down and meet one another, and speak of nothing
but about their trade, etc. We are less spiritual in our discourses, whereas
we should be more: The two Disciples were in good discourse, and as they were
so Employed Christ came to them by the way and made their hearts to burn
within them; so it is with Saints now, when Christ comes and meets his
Children in spiritual discourses, he warmes their hearts in a spiritual way:
yea Christ himself left us a pattern of this, for it is said of him, that
after his resurrection he continued forty days speaking to them of the things
pertaining to the kingdom of God, the verse before the Text: This was the
discourse of Christ about the things of the kingdom, about things appertaining
to the kingdom of God, and if we were risen with Christ, we should delight to
speak of the things of the kingdom of God, but its too little in our hearts.

Thirdly, We should be more spiritual in all our Meditations: It is reported
of that holy Martyr of Christ Mr John Bradford, that he was so spiritual and
heavenly in his Meditations, that ordinarily as he was at meat, the Tears
would Trickle off his cheeks upon the Table; so, if we would be spiritual in
our thoughts and duty's, we must be spiritual in our Meditations, a man that
has not spiritual Meditations, will not be spiritual in any thing else, for
Meditation it feeds the soul with strength and life, and the more spiritual a
soul is in Meditation, the more spiritual will it be in other things.

Fourthly, We should be more spiritual in all our Conversation: How spiritual
was Paul's conversation? Our Conversation is in heaven; how few are there of us
whose conversations are like his? Take most men in the world, and their
conversation is in hell or the world, one of the two, either they are profane,
and so their conversation is in hell, or they are only Civil, or if more yet
they are Covetous, worldly, carnal, etc. and so their conversation is in the
world; few there are that have heaven written upon their conversation, heaven
written upon their thoughts, words, and actions, etc.

Use 4. If the promise of the Spirit be the great promise of the new Testament,
Let every soul take heed of under-va^uing the blessed Spirit of God: If it be
the great promise of the Gospel, its a great sin to under-value him; as in the
old Testament, those that would not believe the great promise of the Messiah,
were to be accursed, as Pagans and Heathens; so in the new Testament, he that
shall speak slightly of this great and glorious Promise of the Spirit, is not
a Christian, but a Pagan, a Heathen; if he can speak slightly of the great
promise of the new Testament, he does under-value it: take heed of
under-valuing this great promise of the Spirit; men do undervalue the Spirit
diverse way's.

First, When indeed they have but a low Esteem of the Spirit of God; When a
man has a low esteem of a thing that is of great worth, then he under-values
that thing, so when a man has a low esteem of the Spirit of God, he
under-values the Spirit of God.

Secondly, Men under-value the Spirit of God when they do not cry unto God for
his Spirit: when a thing of wonderful worth and excellency may be had for
asking for, and men will not ask for it, its an under-valuing of it, says
Christ, My father will give the holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11.13.
If your earthly fathers know how to give good things to their children that
ask them, how much more shall your heavenly father give his Spirit to them
that ask him?

Thirdly, Men under-value the Spirit, when they would set-up any thing equal
with or above the Spirit: when then cry up learning, parts, gifts, or any other
thing more than the Spirit, this is an undervaluing of the Spirit; though these
things be good in their place, and the best parts of pure nature, yet they are
not the Spirit, and if we go to set up any of these things with the Spirit, we
do exceedingly under-value the Spirit of God: The reason why the Lord is
casting contempt upon learning and parts in our day's, its because men set them
up equal with the Spirit, looking upon these things as fitting them for the
work of God, and not looking for the Spirit.

Fourthly, Men under-value the holy Spirit of God, when they despise the little
ones of Christ in whem the Spirit of the Father dwells: When I love one Saint
that has the Spirit because of his greatness, (he goes in silk and satin, and
is honorable, and therefore I love him) and despise another Saint that has the
Spirit because of his meannesse, he goes in his leather-coate and there is
little love to such a one; now when Saints despise mean ones in whom the
Spirit of the father dwells, there is an under-valuing of the Spirit; If any
despise one of these little ones, it were better for a millstone to be hanged
about his neck, and that he were cast into the midst of the Sea; why? because
there is a dispising of the Spirit of the father that dwells in them; every
poor little and contemptible one of Christ's, though never so poor in the
world, we must love them; for if I desire to prize a Saint because of the
Spirit in him, then I shall prize the meanest Saint as well as the greatest.

Fifthly, Men under-value the Spirit when they stop their ears against the
Motions and Instructions of it: if a man instruct me, advise me, or counsel me
for my good, I will not hearken to him, but slight what he says, I undervalue
the man in undervaluing his Counsel; so, we undervalue the spirit when we
slight and will not hearken to the motions and dictates of the Spirit.

Sixthly, Men undervalue the Spirit when they speak slightly and contemptuously
of it; when they jeare at the people of God, saying, You have the Spirit
forsooth, aye, such a one prays, speaks by the Spirit, etc. Men know not what
they say when they speak thus, such slight words of the Spirit, argues an
undervaluing thereof: If you did know the worth of the Spirit, you would not
speak thus.

Lastly, Men undervalue the Spirit, when in a a downright way they persecute
the Spirit; when they hate a Saint, and persecute a Saint for no other reason
in the world that they can give, but because he is a Saint, and has the Spirit
in him. O take heed of undervaluing the Spirit.

Last Use. Is the Promise of the Spirit the great Gospel Promise? Then hence
let us learn the duty in the Text, to wait upon God for the Spirit. Promises
are to be waited for; this is the great Gospel Promise; this Promise of the
Spirit here, is not so much the Promise of the having of the Spirit, (for that
many old Testament Saints had, and the Disciples had before this time that
Christ bids them wait for the Promise) as the having more of it. When ever you
come to an Ordinance, when you come to the Assemblies of the Saints, say, O
Lord now give down thy Spirit, why may not thy Spirit be given down to me
now? Thou did give down thy Spirit formerly when the Saints were met
together? So, wait in every duty for the Spirit to come down, be always
waiting for this Promise of the Spirit, it is an every-day Promise, for though
it be fullfilled in part, yet there is more and more of it still to be given
forth, and will be every day till we come to heaven; so as that there is no
time in which we can say, this Promise is so fullfilled to us, as that we need
no more to wait for the fullfilling of it.

There are some Promises have the time of their fullfilling, and then the duty
of waiting cease; but this Promise is every day fullfilling, and this Promise
will never be so fulfilled, while we abide in this house of clay, till we come
to Heaven, but there will be room left for waiting. Which considered, will
answer that Objection which kills our hearts in waiting: O, I have waited so
long, and yet have not the Spirit.

Poor soul, It may be thou have not that measure of the Spirit thou look
at; thou would have so much of the Spirit as to have no room left for
waiting for any more; but this Promise of the Spirit is not such a Promise, it
is a Promise as is fullfilled by degrees, and will not be completely fullfilled
till thou come to heaven. Thou may therefore have more of the Spirit than
thou had before, and thy desires after it, and complaints more then formerly
for the want of it, argue thou have it; but thou have not so much of it as thou
would have, and therefore thou complainest: O soul, bless God for what
thou have, and wait for more, and in Gods time the Promise of the Father shall
be fullfilled to thee according to thy desire. We should be every day begging
for the Spirit, Lord give me more of thy Spirit: Wait upon God for the Spirit,
that we may have more of the Spirit of God, that we may be taught more by the
Spirit, instructed more by the Spirit, assured more by the Spirit, led more by
the Spirit, and sealed more by the Spirit; and the Lord grant our souls may be
filled with this Spirit, and that Jesus Christ by his Spirit may dwell in us,
and take possession of us, from henceforth even for ever.

FINIS.
The Evil of the Times.
MALACHI 3.16, 17. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another,
and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of Remembrance was written
before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name.

And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my
Jewels; and I will spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves him.


THis Prophet, as he was the last Prophet of the Old Testament, so he lived in
a time of great Apostasy, after their return from Babylon, after the second
Temple was built, wherein men were grown cunning in Apostasy, the Lord by his
Prophet no sooner charges them with any thing, but they justify themselves,
saying, Wherein have we done thus, and wherein have we done thus? as you may
see in the 7, 8, and 13 verses; They were so cunning in their Apostasy, that
the Prophet could not charge them with any thing but they would shift it off,
and put him upon the Proof: Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to
another, even in this time when others had Apostatized and backsliden from God;
yea, when the Apostasy was so high, and so great, that they justified
themselves in it, they called the proud happy, they counted none, nor looked
upon any as the happy men, but the proud men, the great men, and the lofty men
of the world, there was none to them: And they that were wicked were set up,
whereas they should have been thrown down, and those that wrought
righteousness should have been exalted and set up: And they that tempted God
were delivered; I wish I might not say from Experience, that as it was then
after their coming out of Babylon, that it is so in our days.

From hence we may observe.

That it is the special work and duty of Gods People, when others, and the
generality of people, cast off, and Apostatize from the work of God, to speak
often one to another. They should be more lively, and more zealous, and more
active for God. But it may be Questioned,

What are those things that the Saints should be often speaking one to another
of, in a day of Apostasy?

I answer, They are these three things.

1 Of the Sin of the Time.

2 Of the Work of God in that Time and Age.

3 Of the precious and glorious Promises which God has made of better times,
of times to come, to keep up and bear up our hearts.

1 They should be often speaking one to another, Of the special evil and sin
of such a time: When the Church of God is in a growing thriving state, there is
the abounding of some spetiall grace; and so on the contrary, when it is in a
declining condition, in times of Apostasy, there is the breaking forth of some
spetiall sin and evil. Now it is our duty in that time and age in which we
live, as in the one, to look after the grace that we may flourish in that; so
in the other to pry into the evil that we may avoid that.

And we should do this the rather, Because, as such times have their spetiall
evils, so, there is no evil that does so suddenly surprise, and carry away the
soul, as the sin of the times, and of the Age: And that, because it is a
general sin, there is a crowd goes along with that iniquity, and men do
usually in the sin and evil of times, go from God. When an evil is general,
men swallow it the more easily, and it is a hard thing even for a good man to
escape that; therefore we ought the more especially to be looking to that, and
speaking of that often one to another.

When the Children of Israel came out of Egypt, their great sin was,
mistrusting God; their great duty was, to trust in God, to believe in him, to
rest upon him; in all his dispensations he did call upon them to perform this
duty, but they murmured against God, and were full of unbelief; and this sin
was so general, and became such a sin of the time, that of fix hundred
thousand men that came out of Egypt, there were but two, Caleb and Joshua,
that escaped this rock, and went into the Land of Canaan; yet undoubtedly there
were many more good men among them, but they fell upon the common sin of the
Time.

And when the people of God came out of Babylon, the great work of God then
was, the building of the Temple; yet they cry out, the time is not come, the
time is not come, and so there is a general neglect of it by the whole
Congregation; this was the evil of that time, and spread it self over good
and bad; and indeed good men, that have escaped many other sore and great
evils, yet, when it came to this, the sin of the Times, they have not been
able to escape, but have fallen into it, not Zerubbabel nor Joshua but are
guilty.

When the Children of Israel were in Egypt, they could very well see and look
upon the Idolatry that was there committed, and yet keep themselves very well
from it; but when it came to be a sin of the times, in the Land of Canaan, then
they were caught with it, and were split upon that Rock; and if the Lord by
special grace and mercy do not withold us, we shall fall into this sin; and
it is wonderful mercy and loving kindness, that any soul does escape the evil
and sin of the Times.

But it may be asked,

How shall we come to know the evil of the Times, that so we may escape and be
kept from it?

For Answer to this,

1 Let us take notice and observe that sin which lies diametrically opposite to
the work of God in the time: As in the Children of Israel, their work and duty
was to believe and trust in God, in an extraordinary way; now in direct
opposition to this, they mistrust God, and that was then the sin of the time:
And so, in their coming out of Babylon, their work was to build the Temple,
Gods House; but in opposition to that, they build their own Houses, and
neglect the work of building the Temple, and the House of God lies wast. Hag.
1.3, 4. Then came the word of the Lord by Haggai the Prophet, saying, Is it
time for you, O ye, to dwell in your cieled houses, and this house lie wast?
Why now, suppose it were evident, that God has written it in large and plain
Characters, that he that runs may read if he will, that THE PRESENT WORK OF
GOD IS, TO BRING DOWN LOFTY MEN, TO LAY MEN LOW, AND TO THROW DOWN
ANTICHRIST; now if there be in opposition to this, an exalting of man, and
setting up of Antichrist; is God destroying Idols, and are men making of them?
This is a neglecting the work of God, and going contrary to it, this is the sin
of the time. If there be a setting up of any such thing, that God has lift up
his hand against (it is not rashness nor passion to speak the truth of God,
before God and the world, that) this is in opposition to the work of God: If
God has been throwing down High things, the great ones of the world, and
there is a setting up of those things again, things that have the same stamp,
and the same nature upon them that those things had that were thrown down
before them, this is the sin and the evil of the times.

And again, Suppose it is clear that it has been the work of God, to appear
against, and destroy whatsoever may be said to have the mark of the Beast upon
it it; now if so be, there be any thing in this time and age, set up again,
that indeed has no other ground nor bottom for it to stand upon, but the
wisdom of man, and the invention of man, and so should intermeddle so far, as
that the power of it should be felt in the Churches of Christ, it is evident and
plain enough, (and it is the speaking of the truth of God, before God and the
world to speak it) that this is the sin and evil of the times.

2 Take special notice and observe, that sin with which the most precious
Saints and people of God are most taken, and drawn away from God by, that is
the evil and sin of the times; For that is usually the sin and evil of the
times, which the Saints of God are most taken with, and embrace; for the sin of
the times does not only run through and run along with the wicked and profane
of the world, but also the most precious servants of God: Moses that meek
servant of God, and Aaron that Saint of the Lord, were catched with it, in
mistrusting God; for the sin of their time did not fasten upon the rude
multitude only, but upon those two, and many other precious servants of the
Lord. So, in the building of the Temple, the sin of neglecting that work, did
not only seize upon the Congregation, but also it seized upon those two brave
spirited men, Zerubabbel and Joshua, they were asleep and neglected this work,
as you may see by the words of Haggai; it had seized upon, and catched many of
the precious Saints of God; and doubtless, if the Lord did not keep us, there
is none of us now here, that are speaking of and against the evil of the
times, but we should without Gods great mercy and love to us, be catched and
carried away with it, as well as any other.

3 Observe what that evil is, that though it runs up and down without the
least control or contradiction from the generality of men, yet
notwithstanding God has a little Remnant that will oppose, and stand up
against that sin, and that evil; that is the sin of the times. For observe it,
to bear witness to his cause in every age, God will have a handful that will
oppose themselves to the evil of the times, and ordinarily but a handful.

When the whole Congregation of Israel rebelled and Apostatized from God, and
would have returned again into Egypt, and made them a Captain, and mistrusted
God; then there was a little Remnant that stood up for God, and spoke against
that sin, Caleb and Jeshua, they stand up and plead for God against the whole
Congregation, Let us (say they) not rebel against the Lord, let us not make us
a Captain to go back again into Egypt, for they shall be bread for us, the
Lord will deliver them into our hand, we shall go in and possess the Land
which the Lord our God has promised. Thus they stand up and plead for God
against the whole Congregation.

And so in their return out of Babylon, the Lord stirred up a little Remnant to
bear testimony against the sin of that time; the Lord stirred up the spirit of
Haggai and Zechary, against their sin of neglecting the building of the Temple,
and returning out of Babylon; and where God stirs up a spirit in a little
Remnant to oppose the evil of the times, God is there, that is I say, a clear
evidence that God is with them, and that God stands for them, and will own
them, when he stirs up a spirit in them to tell men their own, for so did
Haggai and Zechary. Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your cieled houses,
and this house lie wast? (I instance in those two times, because coming out of
Egypt and Babylon, being both Types of our deliverance from spiritual Egypt
and Babylon, nothing in the word is so pat to us, as the example of those Ages.)

I remember the Speech of a holy man yet living, That if he were to stand with
any party, he would stand with that party that was the least, and that bore
testimony against the sin and evil of the times; looking upon this, that God
was there, and with those that stood up against and bore testimony against the
sin and evil of the times: When there is a controversy whether there is an
Apostasy or no, now the generality of men, of the proud men, they will say, no,
there is no Apostasy at all, and so justify their Apostasy; I, but what says
the little Remnant? what says the few? they say, yes, there is an Apostasy,
they say it is clear, and plain, and evident enough to them, that there is an
Apostasy, though the generality see it not, will not know it, nor own it, yet
a little Remnant see it, and will declare and bear their testimony against it.

But the second thing we should speak often one to another of, is, The special
work of God at that time, what the work of God is, and what the special duty
of Christian is, in such an evil and Apostatising time.

Now there are many Duties that in such a day and age, lie upon the Saints, but
I shall name but one or two, which are duties that especially lie upon the
Saints.

1 This is one special duty, To be humbled before God, and to labor to bring
others to be humbled and lie low before him, for that sin. In Ezra's time, he
makes it his days work to be humbled and lie low before God for the sin of the
Congregation; he goes and spreads their sin before the Lord, and lies low to
beg mercy and grace of God for the whole Congregation, and he labors also to
bring the Congregation to this, to be humbled and lie low before the Lord. But

2 It Is a special duty of the Saints, and people of God in such a day and time
of Apostasy (whatever others say and think of it, yet I say it is the duty of
Saints in such a day) to appear for God, to stand up for God, to declare for
God against those sins; Though others count it rashness, hastiness, and
over-forwardnesse, yet certainly it is the duty of the Saints, and is a good
Principle to practice, in which we should be found, if we will show our love to
the Lord Jesus, and his name, and his cause and interest, though all run from
it. Thus in all ages, those whom the Lord has kept faithful to himself, have
not only kept themselves pure from the evil of the times, but declared
against it in others.

So it was with Caleb and Joshua, they stood up for God, and protested for him,
and declared for him against the sin of the whole Congregation, though they
were but two, they will hazard their lives for God; O, say they, do not
rebel against the Lord, do not return again into Egypt. And so Haggai and
Zechary, they would stand up for God, and declare for him against the
Congregation, and tell them to their very faces, That they builded their own
houses, but let the house of God lie wast, whereas it was their work and duty
to build the house of God. They told the greatest of them, the chiefest of them
their sin, and that to their faces; they Preached openly against the negligence
and sluggishnesse of that Age to Gods work. And have not good men of latter
times looked upon themselves called to do so against the superstitions of the
Age before us; Saints in all Ages have looked upon it as their duty to bear
witness against the sin and evil of the Age. Hence Christians are called
Witnesses, a man that keeps all in his breast is no witness, but he is a
Witness that gives forth a Testimony to others. And truly I speak this,
because we may be holy and humble and wise in doing this our duty, in bearing
witness and testimony against the sins of the times. O my thinks, when a Saint
in cold blood shall sit down and consider, that he sees God, and his name, and
his cause and interest blasphemed, and trod under foot, and abused, and
dishonored, and shall not stand up for God, nor appear for God, not have a
word to speak for God, how will this grieve him and trouble him? And may such a
one not question his love to Christ? It Is to be feared, we have but little love
to Christ and his cause, his name and interest, when we cannot speak and appear
for him; for men to have such a Principle as this, I may stand by and look on,
and see God and his name, cause and interest trodden under foot, and yet not
speak a word, but hold my peace and say nothing, and another may stand and look
on, but say nothing, no man must speak a word; truly, this is such a piece of
Doctrine that I never heard of, and that has read such Lectures already, as I
think were never yet read: when they themselves that do such things, cannot
but know and see (and they that look on (it is so plain, that they that run may
read) that there is an Apostasy, and yet notwithstanding none must speak of
these things, and bear testimony against it, truly, it is such a Principle and
such a piece of Doctrine as never was practiced by the Saints in former times.
And if the Saints and people of God in former and later times had practiced
such a Doctrine and Principle as this is, they would never have lost their
lives as they did, there would not have died so many Saints as there did, there
would never have been such a large Book of Martyrs as there is; we should never
have had so many living Testimonies of dying Saints as we have, if such a
Doctrine and Principle as this had been practiced.

If any say these men are good men though they have many and great failings.
Why if it be so, this cannot excuse the matter, Is a sin the less evil
because a good man commits it? And you cannot but acknowledge that if King
Charles or the former Powers had don some things these men have done, you would
not have put such favorable constructions upon them, and why should you think
any thing the better of an evil because you think good men commit it? It Is not
the badnesse of any person that can make a good cause bad, nor the goodness of
the person that can make a bad cause good; for though we and all the people of
God have many weaknesses and infirm^ties, yet that cannot make his good cause
bad; the poor people of God (it has been often upon my spirit, that they)
should be allowed their infirmities; in all times and ages they have been
allowed their infirmities, and truly the allowance now should be larger and
greater then ever it was in former times; and that upon the account of reason,
because they and their enemies have been brethren and friends together; and I
speak this to this end that we may not go and condemn all; (as I know this is
the noise abroad) I am persuaded when we come to stand before the Lord Jesus
our Judge, Christ will make another manner of judgment than now is made, and
pass another manner of Sentence then now is past upon the Saints by men. And I
am persuaded if so be that good men would but study things, they would see more
into them than they do, I mean things by which God is dishonored, and his
name blasphemed, and they see it not, and know it not: And they could not in
such a day as this but venture hard for God; This I am persuaded is the truth
of God, and many souls that do not see it, God will make them one day ashamed
of it, that they have not had hearts for God, and tongues for God, and mouths
for God in such a day as this is, wherein his cause has called for it.

Thirdly, Another duty that lies upon the Saints in such a day as this is, is,
That they endeavor their utmost the reformation of such a thing. Ezra did so,
he endeavored to bring the Congregation upon their knees, and to a reformation
of the sin of that Age, of taking strange wives, he caused the Congregation to
enter into a Covenant to put them away, Ezra 10.

But the third General Head is this, That the Saints should be often speaking
one to another of the precious great and glorious Promises that God has made
of better times to come And we find the Prophets are full of these speakings,
telling us of glorious times wherein we shall come to enjoy that which will
make up all our sufferings, afflictions and persecutions. God bears up the
hearts of his people this way, by promising and discovering of better times to
come.

When the Children of Israel were in Egypt, God told them of a better time,
promises them the Land of Canaan; so, when his people were in Babylon, he made
them a Promise of a better time to come, he told them, then in the time of
their Captivity, to comfort and cheer their hearts, that the time was coming
wherein all the Kingdoms of the earth, and the power and greatness of the
Kingdom shall be given to the Saints of the most high; and with this Christ
bears up the hearts of his Disciples, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, says he;
and truly this will sweeten the bitterness of an evil time, this will make up
suffering times, this will make amends for all, the Kingdom that Jesus Christ
will give unto those that abide with him in an evil time; as the Saints have
had a day of Patience, so they shall have a day of Power; as they have had a
day of sorrow, so they shall have a day of joy; they shall have a day of Peace
and Comfort, they shall have full peace, and full joy, yea, they shall have joy
and peace running over, an overflowing of joy and peace, they shall have a day
of power and rejoicing; and therefore says the Apostle Paul, speaking about
suffering, Romans 8.18. I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time, are
not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. O the
thoughts of that time of glory and power, swallows up all the thoughts of this
time of suffering and of evil; I reckon and account that the sufferings of
this present world, are not worthy to be compared unto the glory which shall be
revealed, which we shall enjoy, and be made pertakers of; with this Paul
comforts Timothy, If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him: And
whatever the poor blind world thinks, suffering Saints shall be glorified
Saints; they that suffer with Christ, shall be glorified with Christ; the great
thing that Paul presents to the thoughts of the Saints in suffering times, to
comfort them, and refresh and bear up their hearts, is, that they shall have a
Kingdom, they shall come into the Kingdom of God, and reign with him there:
There Is a most excellent place for this purpose, Revel. 5.9, 10, 13 verses. And
they sung a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to open
the seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy
blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and Nation, and have made
us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on earth. And every
Creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as
are in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying, Blessing, and
honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and
unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Now look into the next Chapter, verse. 9, 10,
11. And when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar the souls of
them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
held, and they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, Holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth? And white Robes were given unto every one of them. We see white Robes in
one place under the Altar, crying, How long, How long O Lord, will thou not
avenge our blood on them that dwelt upon the earth? And in another place we see
them in their Kingdom, sing Praises and Hallelujah's to God, and the Lamb;
there they are in their glory, and in their triumph. O let us look to our white
Robes, to keep our white Robes about us, for white Robes shall not always lie
under the Altar; O this we should be often arguing of, and speaking one to
another of; O the sweet and the great, and the glorious precious Promises, that
God has made of better times to come; Let us make it our care (I say) to keep
our white Robes about us, that in all our bearing testimony, and appearing for
God against the sins of the Times, we may keep our white Robes: And then we
shall conquer and overcome all our enemies; for that noble Spirit has overcome
come and conquered all along; though it has been in the fewest, and never so
weak and despised a company, yet that noble Spirit has conquered all along;
though it has been never so low, and never so contemptible, yet it has
carried it from the great and mighty and high ones of the world O let us speak
often one to another of these things, and this will quicken us, and keep a
lively and active spirit in us, and among us; and therefore see what notice the
Lord takes of it.

The Lord hearkened and heard. O, God did hearken and listen to hear what his
Children did say for him, and to him, at such a time as this was, wherein there
was such great and high Apostacies and backslidings. It is, as when a man hears
many speaking against him, and his Child stands and looks on, and hears them;
the father will listen and hearken to hear what his Child says, and what his
Child will speak for him, he will take special notice what his Child says,
and how he appears and stands up for him: Why so does the Lord, when he sees a
company fall from him, and tread his name under foot, then he will take
special notice of them that speak and appear for him; and not only so, but

A Book of Remembrance is written before him. Like unto a man that keeps a
Note-book about him, to write down things, that so he may not forget them; so
does the Lord, (to speak after the manner of men) the Lord has a Notebook, and
he writes down what they do that fear him, that fear his name, and speak and
plead for him, he writes it down: O says he, there is such a one, he speaks
for me, and he appears and pleads for me against the sins of the times, O writ
it down presently (says God) I will not have that forgot, I will not loose
that note; when others revolt and turn their backs upon me, and when others
look upon my name, and see it trodden under foot, and blasphemed, they will not
speak for me, nor appear for me, but these do, O write it down, I will not
forget that.

For them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name. O it is good to
fear the Lord, to be of a fearful spirit lest we should fall, and lest we
should turn aside with the crowd, and with the workers of iniquity. to fear
least we should backslide and Apostatize, and see Gods name dishonored, and
not appear for him, to speak a word for him; it is good to be fearful, lest we
should be drawn and carried away with the stream; Let us pray often for one
another, lest we should be led and drawn away.

But these fear the Lord, and thought upon his name, though they could not
speak for God, nor it may be declare for God, as others did, yet they thought
upon his name; they thought, how is the name of God dishonored? How is it
spoken against and blasphemed by this Apostasy? How does the name of God
suffer? And thus they thought upon his name.

But now these men to whom the Prophet spoke, they forget God, and yet they
say, Wherein have we forgotten God, and wherein have we done thus and thus?
Well says God, there is a company of poor souls that fear me and think upon my
name, write it down, write down every thought that they have of me, and of my
name, how that suffers, and how that is dishonored; truly, if we can do
nothing else, let us think of the name of God at this day, how that suffers,
and how that is trodden under foot; God took this exceeding well from them, and
certainly God will take it well at our hands too.

And says God, They shall be mine in that day when I make up my Jewels: Thou
shall be mine says God, and what would thou have God say to thee more than
this, Thou shall be mine in that day when I make up my Jewels; thou art mine
now, but then at that day it shall appear that thou art mine: It does not yet
appear (as John says) what we shall be, but when he shall appear, we shall be
like him. Poor soul, what would thou have God say to thee more then this,
Thou shall be mine; God's thou shall be mine, is more worth then all the world:
If we could be but faithful to God, he would gather us up to himself, in that
day when he makes up his Jewels. O says God to his Angels, go and gather up
that soul, for that soul is mine, he is one of my Jewels. O, God will then
show what it is to own him, God will make it appear plainly then, what we are,
and who we are.

And I will, says God, spare him as a man spares his own Son that serves
him; I will spare them and pity them; O, they have many weaknesses and
infirmities, what though? yet says God, I will spare them; it is true says
God, they have many weaknesses, and have much frowardness, O but yet I will
pardon all, and overlook all, I will spare them notwithstanding all that; I see
what they drive at, and what they aim at, I see what their ends are, they aim
at my glory, at my honor, and they aim to be serviceable to me, and would
very gladly do something form, well, I will overlook and pass by all their
weaknesses and infirmities, and I will spare them as a man spares his Son that
serves him: though their brethren and friends will not pardon nor forgive their
passions and their frowardness, their weaknesses and infirmities, yet says
God, I will, I will spare them. O Saints, here is our glory and our comfort,
that our father, our God will spare us, he will overlook our infirmities; it is
true Saints, we have many weaknesses, much frowardness of spirit, much
passion, many failings, and many outgoings from God, and we cannot manage that
blessed cause we have in our hands, with that wisdom, and with that meekness,
and with that humility of spirit as we should; O, but here is our comfort, we
have a sparing God, an over-looking and forgetting God. O Saints, our father
will spare us, the father will overlook our infirmities, he sees we aim at his
glory, and would do service for him, and that delights his heart; and
certainly this will appear to be the great sin of Saints one day, that they
cannot forgive and forget and overlook one another weaknesses, and one
another infirmities. O but here is the great comfort of the Saints in such a
time, that though they have many weaknesses and infirmities, yet they have a
God and father will spare them and pardon them; Saints there is sparing mercy in
God, there is forgiving mercy in God, there is forgetting mercy in God, there is
over-looking mercy in God: O the good Lord keep our hearts close to him, and
help us to keep our white Robes about us, and to walk in his fear always; O
let us cast and venture our selves upon the rich grace of God in the New
Covenant, and love in Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
Look to your Aims and Ends.
MATTHEW 11.7. And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the Multitude
concerning John, what went ye out into the wilderness to see? A Reed shaken
with the wind?


IN the foregoing Verses, we have John (who is now in Prison) sending some of
his Disciples to Christ, to propound a Question, that he might receive
satisfaction therein from the mouth of Christ himself: The Question is, Art
thou he which should come, or do we look for another? In effect, Whether art
thou the Christ or not? Or are we to look for some other yet to come that is
the Messiah, whom God has promised by his holy Prophets to send unto his
People? It seems John, though he had Preached Christ, and was his Harbinger, his
Forerunner, and had all the time of his Liberty spoken gloriously of Christ;
yet now when he is brought into a Prison, into a state of temptation, he is
doubting: As it does befall the dear Children of God, when they come into that
state, when they are under Temptation, they do then question those things
which they believed in the day of their Prosperity and Joy: So John, when he
was Preaching in his Prosperity, and at Liberty, he then held forth Christ, but
when John is cast into Prison, John's faith is not strong, now (though it was
very strong once, yet) it had need of confirmation from Christ himself,
therefore he sends to Christ, Art thou he which should come, or do we look
for another? Our Lord answers John's Disciples that came to him, that they
should Go and tell John what they heard and saw: And what things are those?
The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk: The Leapers are cleansed,
and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel
Preached to them. Go tell John of my works, says Christ, Christ endeavors to
convince him by his works, and then he concludes, And blessed is he whosoever
shall not be offended in me: As if he should have said, it will be a hard thing
not to be offended in me; it is a very hard thing for a poor Creature not to be
offended in Christ; John himself that had Preached Christ so much, is upon the
very brink of an offense, and had much ado to keep himself from being
offended; therefore Christ says, Blessed is he that is not offended in me, I
do not wonder at John, it is a very blessed thing not to be offended in me; my
people shall meet with such Trials and Temptations in owning ^^e, that it is a
very hard thing not to be offended. Having this opportunity put into his hands
by John's Disciples putting this Question unto him, Christ turns unto the
multitude, As they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitude concerning
John, what went ye out into the willdernesse to see? what were ye taken with?
A Reed shaken with the wind? The multitude were much taken with John, they
cried up John as a great Prophet, and indeed Christ says, that among all that
were borne of women, there was not a greater that then had risen, then John the
Baptist; yet this great John, John that had so much light, John that had so
much grace, John that had Preached Christ so clearly, John that the whole
multitude followed, this John, when he comes into Temptation, is but a Reed
shaken with the wind, What went ye out for to see, a Reed shaken with the
wind? The strongest Christian, that has the strongest grace, and most
experience, and most strength, yet let him but enter into Temptation, and he is
but as a Reed shaken with the wind, What went ye out for to see, a Reed shaken
with the wind? But this is not that I intend to stand upon; The word that I
intend to speak to, is grounded upon Christ's Querie, What went ye out into the
wilderness to see? The multitude followed after John, but alas, they did not
know him, nor wherefore they went after after him; So it is with poor sinners,
they are apt to be taken with any thing a while, but we do not know our own
hearts, our own designs: What went ye out into the wilderness to see? As if
he should have said, What was your end? He put them upon their end, to look
unto their aims in spiritual work, their ends and designs in spiritual
work; and so indeed the Truth which lies before us in these words, is this:
That it is a very good, and a very profitable thing for souls to be very
inquisitive into their own ends in all Spiritual Actions.

Was not this a good work for men to run out into a Wilderness to hear John?
Here was a good work, yet there was a bad end, they had not a holy end, a pure
end; therefore Christ takes this opportunity to show them their ends, What went
ye out into the Wilderness to see? We should be much in looking to our ends;
men are at this day found much in the ways of God, I mean, in attending upon
the outward Ordinances, following of the means, for this is grown a thing in
fashion, why now in such a day as this is, wherein it is so much in fashion for
men to have something of Religion, every man and woman should look into their
heart, what our end is; Do I appear holy, because I can have no credit if I
do not appear so? We should be looking and prying into our ends, that Christ
puts them upon, What went ye out into the wilderness to see?

The Grounds and Reasons why we should be inquisitive into our ends, they may
be such as these.

1 Because our ends and our aims they are secret things; they are things that
do lie deep and unseen, and therefore we must be very inquisitive as touching
our ends and aims. We may be acted very high in the ways of God, and of the
most forward in the things of God, and yet we may mistake, and loose our
selves, and run upon a false ground, if we mistake our ends. The more secret
and hidden any thing is, the more need there is of enquiry into it: A man may
come and appear with a great show of Religion, O but there may be some end
lying at the bottom, which we do not see, which makes all filthy and
abominable before God, therefore we should look to our end.

2 Because it is a most certain truth, that a man's heart is where his end is.
Let his end be where it will, there his heart is; If a man have the credit of
men, honor, reputation among men, or if he have his own profit or advantage,
if any of these be his end, there his heart is, whatever he does his heart goes
not along with it, but his heart is rapt up in his end; where ever the end is,
a man shall find his heart there, therefore we had need look to our end in such
a day as this is: If we would find our hearts, if we would know our own
hearts, then let us search where our ends are, for where our ends are, there
will our hearts be.

3 Because a man's heart is as his end is. As a man's heart is where his end is,
so a man's heart is as his end is; If so be that the end be good, then the heart
in the work is good, if the end be bad, then the heart in the work is bad; a
man's heart is ever as his end is.

4 Because God does lock at our ends: The great thing God looks at in all our
addresses to him in any duty, is our end; God does not look so much at the
outside of the duty (as we are apt to think the Lord looks at that) but God
looks at the end, he looks at the heart: as the end is, so the heart is, so God
looks at the heart; as when Samuel came to the house of Jesse^ he says of
Eliab, Surely the Lords anointed is before me; no, says God, I judge not as
man judges. God looks not at the outward appearance, but upon the heart: Now
the heart is as the end is, for the heart lies in a man's end, therefore God
looks at the end, and judges of us and of all our actions, as he sees our ends
are.

5 Because God will overlooke many failings in our obedience, if so be our end
be right; and on the other side, God will not accept of whatsoever we do,
though it be never so glorious outwardly, if the end be false. God will
overlook failings if the end be right, as it is with a father that has a
Child that does aim and design at his fathers good name, honor, credit, and
profit, though the Child do miscarry very much in laboring to honor his
father, yet notwithstanding because the father sees the Child's end is, that he
might honor him, the father passes by all his failings: Why so, I say, the
Lord when he sees that the end of a soul is, to honor God, to serve God, if
this be that that lies at the bottom, if this be our great end, though there
may be many failings creeping forth, as of pride, of self, of passion, and of
many weaknesses of the Creature, yet God will accept of the work, though it
have so many failings: But on the other side. God will accept of nothing,
though it be never so glorious outwardly, if his end be naught. Though we may
do some work wherein God may be honored and glorified, yet if our end and
design be not that we may honor God and serve him, God will not accept it;
That which is done (as I may say) by the bye, it is God glorifying himself, the
Creature not seeking it nor desiring it; so God glorifies himself by the very
sins of men, by the very oppositions of his Enemies, yet he will judge them for
it.

6 Because there is nothing that our hearts do so much deceive us in, as our
ends: A man is more beguiled here than he is in any one thing; for we are ready
to think our ends are very good and holy, and that when indeed they are very
corrupt and wicked: How wonderfully was Jehu deceived? and how did he loose
himself in this thing? he thought he had had very holy aims in his zeal
against the house of Ahab, therefore he cries out, Come see my zeal for the
Lord; and alas! Jehu had no zeal for God, only his heart deceived and gulled
him, he was deceived about his ends; and so we are many times deceived about
our ends, we think that which we aim at is Gods honor, and yet in this does
our hearts very frequently go beyond us, and this is most common at such times
when Gods glory and our interest meet together; for when his interest and Gods
glory ran together, he could run along as moved by his own interest, and yet
keep his eye upon Gods glory, and make his own heart believe that that was it
that moved him; therefore a great deal of deceit is here, and here was the
very deceit of Jehu, Gods glory and Jehu's interest did run together, and
herein he lost himself.

Now the way to discover our ends to be false at such a Time, it is:

1 To consider whether or no does my heart willingly run with God in such ways
wherein my interest lies with Gods glory, and is unwilling to run with God in
the way wherein I have no interest at all: I say if we put this to our hearts,
we shall bring them upon the Trial, if so, then it is a clear discovery,
whatever the heart may pretend, how high soever it may seem to set up Gods
glory, yet that is not the end, but its own interest, for if so be I can run
along with Gods glory only when I can carry my interest with me, it is a sign
I act not for Gods glory, but for my own interest.

2 To consider whether or no I will go along with Gods glory so far till I
come to the end of my own interest, and then go with God no further, if so,
this is a clear evidence how great soever the zeal pretended might be for the
glory of God, yet Gods glory was not my end. For if Gods glory had been the
end, then the soul when it had come at the Butt (as I may say) that its own
interest would advance no further, yet it would have gone upon the pure account
of Gods glory; but now when I go no further than the Butt where my own
interest is, I go not one part of the way upon the account of Gods glory. It Is
very remarkable that example of Jehu as to this, Jehu pretended high for the
glory of God, but here was the trial, when he came to that which ran cross to
his own interest, there he stuck, be runs through the whole Commands of God
concerning the house of Ahab, he destroys that utterly; but when he came to
the Calves of Dan and Bethell, he could not destroy them, for that was contrary
to his interest. And that very reason of state that moved Jeroboam to set up
the Calves, caused Jehu to keep them up, to keep up his interest, to ensure the
Kingdom to himself; therefore when he had gone just so far as he could with
his own interest, destroyed the house of Ahab, and all the friends of Ahab,
which conduc't to his settlement in the Kingdom, was suitable to his interest,
he could go no further; but when he saw he was to make an advance, and go
forth beyond his interest, he must go over the head of his interest, or follow
God no further; he is at a stand; he goes up to the utmost bounds of his
interest, to the Calves of Dan and Bethell, but the Calves of Dan and Bethell
must stand, I will not meddle with them, I will not destroy my interest, this
is a clear and evident Argument that all the steps he had made before was not
for Gods glory, but indeed for his own interest.

7 Because a bad end is of such force as that it will make that action which in
it self is good, to be bad, and instead of reward, it will bring Judgment
from God upon a man for doing of it: That very word was spoken by the Prophet
Hosea, touching that man we have been speaking of, Hos. 1.4. says the Lord,
Call his name Jezreel, for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of
Jezreel upon the house of Jehu; It Is a very strange passage; why, what did Jehu
do more then God bid him? Jehu destroyed Ahabs house, God bid him do it; Jehu
destroyed the house of Baal, and that was Gods will he should do it; Jehn was
found in the very Commands and will of God in what he did, and yet says God, I
will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the head of Jehu; The very blood he shed
in the cause of God, was charged upon him as if he had been a murderer; What
was the reason of it? Why, his end was not right; it was not Gods end, his end
was to root out all Idolatry, God commanded Jehu to destroy all the Idols in
the Land; he bids Jehu, go stand forth in my name, and tread down in my name
all the Idols, and high places of Idolatrous worship, and all the Tyrannies and
wickednesses in the Land; Jehu thinks, well if I can do it I shall get a
Kingdom, and I can settle my self fast; he goes with another end, he goes to
destroy all to settle himself fast in his seat; and surely this was the reason
why the Lord would avenge the blood of Jezreel upon Jehu, says he, I will
bring it upon him because he had an evil end in the doing of it.

8 Because a good end it will make that action which in the interpretation of
others may be bad, and may be others be accounted bad, it will make that action
good* I would not be mistaken, I do not say a good end will make an action
that in it self is bad, good; but a good end will make that action which in
the Interpretation of another may be bad, it will make that good; do but look
upon Paul's actions, and they will seem very strange, when as Paul says of
himself in the Epistle to the Corinthians, To the Jew I became a Jew that I
might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as under the Law, that I
might gain them that are under the Law; to them that are without Law, as
without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ) that I
might gain them that are without Law. To the weak became I as weak, that I
might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all
means save some; and this I do for the Gospels sake. And so in 1 Cor. 10.32,
33. Giving none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God, even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own
profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. One would think that
read over these passages, that Paul was a mere Statist, a politic man; for a
man to please all men in all things, to come among the Jews, and there
conform to them, to come among the weak, and there stoop to them; come among
them that are without Law, and there conform to them. One would think that
here was a mere Hypocrite, but here was a blessed end that made the action
good, here was his end that he might gain some to Christ; here was a holy end,
Paul did not do it to please men, that men might own him, and that men might
cry him up, but that carriage was to gain men to Christ; and the action
becomes a blessed action through a holy end.

9 Because all a man's comfort in suffering it will be as his end is. If a man
do appear for God in a way of action, or speak for God, why truly his comfort
if he be called out to suffer, will be as his end was; what was it that made
Paul he could run through all things, evil reports and good reports, that he
did not care what came to him, or what men thought of him? it was this, he had
a holy sincere end; when the Corinthians judged him, says he, I care not to be
judged of you, or of man's judgment: So in such a day as this, when the people
of God are under suffering^, (and who may be under sufferings it is only known
to the Lord) O that the Lord would give us to have such ends in our actions as
may be holy and sincere, that we may have comfort, joy, and peace.

10 If a man have false ends, he will never be able to continue and hold out in
a good work. It Is very remarkable that we have in these men here that ran
after John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? They were very
earnest, and very hot, and very zealous, they had a great delight in John's
Preaching, I but says Christ, What went ye ought to see? What is your end? it
was bad: He was a burning and a shining light, and ye were willing for a season
to rejoice in his light. It held but for a season, they make a very great
profession, and seem much to own John, and to own the truth, and seem much to
be taken with the word, but have a wrong end, therefore they rejoicing but for
a season, they came to have their hearts hardened, and they rejoice no more:
Therefore what need have we to look into our own hearts, and observe our aims
and ends; and indeed that we may know our ends

1 It Is good to be jealous of our own hearts, that there may be some end that
lies deeper than I am aware of or than I do discern. Its good to have a holy
jealousy over our hearts in our acting, that there may be some end that we see
not.

2 If we would know whether we have a right end, It Is good to take a view of
our own hearts and ends at such a time as we have most light, and have fairest
opportunity and advantage. When we have most light, that is, at such a time
when the Lord does most clearly shine upon the soul, if there be any time
wherein you have a more clear sight of the love of God then at another, at that
time look into your heart; to see your ends.

3 Look into them at such time as we seem to have a helping opportunity: There
are two times, which if we fall in with, will give us great help to look into
our ends.

First, Look into our ends, When we see others more eminent than we, and that
go before us in graces and abilities, when we see them drop; for then the
soul has some stirring and working, and I may come to get a sight into my
ends the more by that opportunity.

Secondly, Look into our ends at such time when others do censure and judge
us: If a Christian be censured by another, that is a good time for him to look
into his end, that will make him look more narrowly, and pry into every corner
of his heart.

4 Beg of the Lord, That he would be pleased to come search and try; for after
all our trialls if God does not try us, we may be at a loss, and deceived; and
herein was the sincerity of David's heart manifested, Prove me and try me, O
Lord, says he: And so it is with every gracious heart, he will say, Prove me
and try me, O Lord. if there be any wickedness, if there be any corruption
that I do not see, Prove me and try m^ O Lord; if there be any Hypocrisy that
I have not yet found, Prove me and try me O Lord* We are to be much in begging
of the Lord, tha^ he would try us and prove us.

5 If we would see fully into our ends, Then as soon as ever thou do find
any false end, presently deliver it as a Traitor to be executed. Say, Lord I
have found out such a juggle, I have found out such a bye way wherein my heart
is gone, good Lord come and destroy it.

Lastly, Keep the love of Christ warm upon thy heart. O labor so to go to
Christ as that the love of Christ may be warm upon thy heart, that thou may
live in the light of that love, and the more thou see of that love, the more
will thy soul desire to live according to it.

FINIS.
The Idols Abolished.
ISAIAH 2.18. And the Idols he shall utterly Abolish.


WOuld you know the time to which this Prophecy looks, the second Verse tells
us in general, The last days, And it shall come to pass in the last days;
now because last days, is taken sometimes largely, for the whole of Gospel
times; sometimes strictly for the very last of the last times; therefore in
other expressions of this Prophecy it is held forth, that last days is to be
taken strictly, as

1 This relates to the time when the Mountain of the Lords house shall be
established in the top of the Mountains, verse. 2. The Mountain of the Lords
house is Christ's Kingdom, which is the Lords Mountain; it shall be
established in the top of the Mountains, that is, in the top of worldly
Kingdoms: when yet has this ever been? Indeed, we have for many Generations
had Antichrist lifting up his Scepter above worldly Princes, but we are all
clear enough that yet there has been no fullfilling of this Prophecy; But as
the Devil, when he sees any glorious work of Christ to come forth, he will
forestall it, and set up something of his own that shall be so like it, that
we are sometimes almost deceived; so the subtle Dragon, seeing that in time
such a thing should be, a Kingdom of Christ should overtop all the Kingdoms
of the world, he fore-runs it, and sets up a thing like it, viz. a Kingdom of
his own, which himself sets up, rules in; such is Antichrist, whose rise is
not from God, but from the Devil; nor is Christ there served, but the Dragon is
worshipped, Revel. 13 14. And they worshipped the Dragon which gave power
untothe Beast. This Kingdom (the blind of Christ's) by which the world has
been deceived, and wondered after it, before which the Kings of the earth have
laid their Crowns, has been set up; But all discerning souls, know this to
be the Devils Kingdom, no Gods; the very Throne of Iniquity, not of Holiness;
but when was there such a Kingdom of Christ's, over-topping others?

2 This relates to a time; when the Law shall go forth out of Sion, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem, verse. 3. By Law (being distinguished from Word
of the Lord) I understand, the Civil Law, the Law of Civil Government, as by
the word of the Lord, the spiritual Law: This therefore relates to a time,
when Civil Government shall be in the hands of the Saints; when the Law of the
world shall go forth from Sion; and the Spiritual Law also, the Preaching of
the Gospel from Jerusalem, that is, from the Cities or Churches of the Saints.
And such a time has not yet been from the beginning of the world to this day,
Civil Power has been in the hands of worldly men, all has been managed by
them, Servants have ruled over Gods Heritage: And for the Gospel, has it not
ever come out of Universities, though Christ no where in the Gospel, did ever
appoint the building of such Cities to send his Gospel from, but has appointed
his City Jerusalem, his true Church, thence it is sent.

3 This relates to a time, when the House of Jacob shall be come in, or upon
coming in, for they are called to come, verse. 5. O House of Jacob, come ye,
and let us walk in the light of the Lord.

4 This relates to a time, when God will darken all the glory of the world, and
exalt himself only, from verse. 10. to 18. Enter into the rock, and hide thee
in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty. The lofty
looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed
down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. For the day of the Lord
of Hests shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one
that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. And upon all the Cedars of
Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the Oaks of Bashan, and
upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up, and
upon every high Tower, and upon every fenced wall, and upon all the ships of
Tarshish, and upon all pleasant Pictures. And the loftiness of man shall be
bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low: And the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day.

Lastly, This relates to a time, In which God will shake terribly the earth;
and what time is that? Other Scriptures tell us, that Christ a little before
his coming, will shake all Nations. Hag. 2.6, 7. For thus says the Lord of
Hosts, yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the Heavens, and the
Earth, and the Sea, and the dry Land. And I will shake all Nations, and the
desire of all Nations shall come, quoted Heb. 12.26, 27. Whose voice then
shook the earth, but now he has promised, saying, yet once more I shake not
the earth only, but also Heaven. And this word, yet once more signifies the
removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that
those things which cannot be shaken, may remain. To this time this relates, so
that our Text looks to a time a little before Christ's coming, and so falls into
the lap of our Times.

Quest. What will Christ do at this day?

Answ. Many glorious things here mentioned, which particularly I cannot now
handle, of which this is one most glorious thing, The Idols he will utterly
abolish. Of which a word.

There is a most glorious day a coming, in which all Idols shall be utterly
abolished. I shall show,

1 What is meant by Idols By Idol is meant any thing that a man loves,
honors, and prefers before God and his glory. So, a coverous man's money, is
his Idol. Hence Covetousness is Idolatry; the Gluttonous and voluptuous man's
belly is his Idol; hence, Phil. 3.19. Their belly is their God: The ambitious
man's honor, name, and credit, is his Idol. The holy man's Grace, when trusted
in, gloried in, and when it is preferred before Christ, his truth, and word, and
when it is made a thing more infallible than Gods truth, it is an Idol; whatever
is preferred, loved, looked at, talked of, trusted to, and gloried in, more
than Christ, be it a thing good or bad, it is an Idol.

Quest. 2. What Idols will God abolish?

Answ. 1 The Idol of Profaneness; Some men make an Idol of their very
wickedness, love, serve, and glory in that; God will abolish this Idol.

2 The Idol of Pomp worldly glory, and greatness: What an Idol has this
been? This God will abolish, verse, 12. For the day of the Lord of Hosts shall
be upon every one that is proud, and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted
up, and he shall be brought low. That is, those persons that are haughty,
proud, lofty; puffed up with their dignity, honor, advancement and preferment,
the day of the Lord shall be upon them to bring them low, to lay them, their
glory and honor in the dust; and verse. 13. And upon all the Cedars of Lebanon,
that are high and lifted up; Cedars, tall Trees, Ezekiel. 17.22. Cedars, tall
Trees upon high Mountains, verse. 14. And upon all the high Mountains, and
upon all the hills that are lifted up. Men that are in honor and dignity over
others, to whom therefore others come and bow the knee, the day of the Lord
shall be upon them.

3 The Idol of Strength. Strength is an Idol; the proud King, Dan. 11.
honors the God of forces in his strong holds, verse. 38, 39. But in his estate
shall he honor the God of forces; thus shall he do in the most strong holds
with a strange God. The Assyrian King glories in strength, Isa. 37.24. By thy
servants have thou reproached the Lord, and have said, by the multitude of my
Chariots am I come up to the height of the Mountains, to the sides of Lebanon,
and I will cut down the tall Cedars thereof, and the choice Fur Trees
thereof; and I will enter into the height of his border, and the forest of his
Carmell. This Idol shall be destroyed, verse. 13. The day of the Lord shall be
upon all the Oaks of Bashan. Oaks, the strongest of Trees, verse. 15. And upon
every high Tower, and upon every fenced wall. Towers and fenced places are the
strength of a City, the day of the Lord shall be upon these. So see Isa. 26.5.
He brings down them that dwell on high, the lofty City he lays it low; he
lays it low even to the ground, he brings it even to the dust. Compared
with verse. 2. Open ye the gates, that the righteous Nation which keeps the
truth may enter in. Thus for Land strength. Is the strength gloried in, Sea
strength, Navall strength? God will take away that Idol, verse. 16. And upon
all the Ships o^ Tarshish. Whether Land strength, which lies in Armies, fenced
Cities, Towns; or Sea strength, which lies in Shipping, Navies, God will
abolish this Idol.

4 The Idol of Policy: What a wonderful Idol is this, and how much adored
in the world? God will abolish this Idol. Isa 29.14. Therefore behold, I will
proceed to do a mavelous work amongst this people, even a mavelous work,
and a wonder, for the wisdom of the wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. To what time does this relate?
verse. 18, 19, 24. In that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and
the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness. The
meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men shall
rejoice in the holy one of Israel. They also that erred in spirit, shall come
to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine. By comparing
this with Isa. 35.5, 6. Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the
ears of the deaf shall be unstopped, then shall the lame man leap as an Heart,
and the tongue of the dumb sing; for in the wilderness shall waters break
out, and streams in the desert, it is clear, it is the last days.

Yea, as God will destroy the Idol of Policy, so also, all those rare
inventions and ^nacks, that this Idol policy has woven, framed and made.
What ever policy, for the honor and support of it self has made, that God
will destroy, verse. 10. And upon all pleasant Pictures. The day of the Lord
will be upon all rare inventions of humane policy; all the curious wrought
Pictures and Images, that through the craft and wiliness of this thing called
Policy are made, so neat that they seem pleasant and delighting to the eyes,
the day of the Lord will be upon them, the day of Gods shaking, shakes all
things that are made, Heb. 12

5 The Idol of Parts and Learning. What an Idol has this been? If a man be a
Scholar, has been at the University, though he have not a dram of grace in
his heart, no Gospel knowledge, never perhaps seriously read Paul's Epistles
over, will tell you stories out of Aristotle, Plato, etc. and should he speak
his heart, he thinks Paul but a fool to them; yet this man forsooth, if he
have but a little Logic, etc. in his head, and can but get him some few
Commentators and good Books, out of which he can scrape a few Principles of
Divinity, and form them according to his Logical notions, and write all in a
Paper, and come and read it in a Pulpit, he is a Minister, and Orthodox, and to
speak a word against him, is to cry down the Ministry, and destroy
Church-Ordinances. Most loathed stuff, and a filthy Idol! I honor from my
heart parts and learning, I reverence a Gospel Ministry; but this Ministry (and
such is the generality of the Ministry this day in England) my soul loathes,
because I know Christ's soul abhors them; and this Idol he will shortly
abolish.

6 The Idol of Grace. Grace is the best thing in the world, because it is the
Image of Christ upon us; yet if we adore the Image more than him whom it
represents, we make an Idol of it, and so far God will blast it: With a
respect to this, I take it those words are added in the close of all, verse. 22.
Cease ye from man, that is, from the best of men, gracious men, lay no
confidence, expect no great matters from them, wherein is he to be accounted
of? And has not our times verified this? Let us give glory to God, and take
shame to our selves.

Quest. But when is Grace made an Idol.

Answ. 1. When that I lay the foundation of my Principles in grace. Here is a
most wouderfull mistake among Saints, they found their Principles in grace, and
such shall fall one time or other, to have their Idol discovered: If they have
perceived themselves to act grace in such a way, they thence conclude the way
to be good, and the Principle to be good; whereas a gracious man that has a
Principle of grace, does oftentimes act his grace, even in his falls; for he
never so falls, as wholly to loose the life and activity in one way or other of
this Principle, whilst it is in him it will act, and if a man's fall shut it up
from acting this way, it will act in another, as fire enclosed may be shut up
from breaking out in this place, but it will break out in another, whilst there
is fire you cannot keep it from breaking out: So, where there is grace it will
vent in the time of falls one way or other; the activity of grace is as
natural to it, as the life of it.

Now take a gracious man under falls, his fall shuts up the activity of grace
as to this way, but grace being in him as fire shut up in his bones, will break
out in some other way: There is an aptness in man, though the way he is in be
evil; yet when he can see an activity of grace in himself, to conclude
thence, his way is good: As for instance, suppose a good man under some great
fall, yet not convinced of it, but thinks otherwise, he finds his heart very
willing to hear and receive a reproof, or to be showed his evil from any, in
this he sees an acting of grace, and because of it, he thinks his way is right;
but this is a great mistake, this comes from the principle of grace in him, not
from the goodness of his way.

So also for grace in others; we see such a man has much grace, and upon that
we think whatever he holds must surely be the mind of God, hence we become his
Disciples, not from convictions upon our hearts from the word, but from an
adoration of his grace; this we are very prone to, and it is to make an Idol
of grace.

2 When I give that to grace I should give to Christ. As suppose, I have been
acting, or I have seen another acting in this or the other duty, and abundance
of grace, as faith, love, humility, etc. has been acted in that duty, and some
glorious effect has followed thereupon, I now look upon the thing, and say,
aye, this is for my grace; This is to make an abominable Idol of grace, we
give that to grace which is Christ's.

Quest. But why will God abolish Idols?

Answ. 1. Because his design is to exalt himself alone, and this, whilst
Idols stand cannot be; Whilst pomp, greatness, strength, policy, parts, and
grace are Idols, these are exalted; Some men therefore that speak not a word
of God all the year long, cry up this great man, or the other great man,
commend him, and God is not exalted; others attribute this or that, to theirs,
or such a ones strength, wit, or parts, or grace, are exalted, made Gods, but
God is not exalted.

2 Because Gods soul hates Idols above all: For Idols strip God of his
glory, and he can part with any thing better than his glory.

Quest. How will God Abolish Idols?

Answ. 1. By the Manifestation of his own glory. Verse. 10. Enter into the
rocks, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of
his Majesty.

1 He will in this day so manifest the glory of his Holiness, that the Idol
of Profaneness shall hide its head. Hence, this day, Holiness shall be written
upon every thing, Zech. 1.4. In that day shall there be upon the Bells of the
Horses, Holiness to the Lord, and the Pots in the Lords house shall be like
the Bowls before the Altar, yea, every po^ in Judah and in Jerusalem shall be
Holiness unto the Lord of Hosts; Sin shall be ashamed to appear. When the
Apostles Preached, such a light there was of Gods glory, that some sins were
ashamed to appear in day time, as Drunkenness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. They that be
drunken, are drunken in the night.

2 He will so discover the glory of his own greatness and Majesty, that all
other dignities shall be in a manner nothing; As though you set up ten thousand
Candles, yet when the Sun arises, the light of them all is nothing: The Suns
of the world shall have their light put out, by the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness.

3 He will so discover the glory of his own power, as shall destroy the
Idoll-strength, his Arm shall appear to be all in all. Men shall visibly see,
that not Creatures strength, but Gods Arm is al: See how they shall sing then,
Isa. 12.1, 2. And in that day thou shall say, O Lord, I will praise thee,
though thou wast^angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortest
me. Behold, God is my Salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid, for the Lord
Jebovah is my strength and my Song, he also is become my Salvation. God is my
salvation: Now men cry such a valiant man, such valiant men have saved us, but
then the Song will be God alone is our Salvation.

4 He will so discover his wisdom, as shall wholly destroy Idol Policy. Men
shall see Gods wisdom so visibly; in discovering Plots, etc. as that they
shall see all wisdom of man to be folly.

5 He will so power out of his Spirit, as shall utterly abolish parts,
learning, and all those things as they are an Idol. He will power out of his
Spirit upon the Sons and daughters of Sion, that they shall thereby be more
filled with truth, and more able to utter the great things of God, than all the
Scholars of the world.

2 By shaking all Idols. Verse. 21. When he arises to shake terribly the
earth: He will terribly shake whatsoever has been or is an Idol, whether
honor, or strength, or parts, or grace, And how has God been shaking all
these amongst us? How has he shaken the honor of the world, plucked off
Crowns from the heads of Princes, and thrown Nobles out of their seats? How
has he been shaking strength? broken in a wonderful way Armies by Land,
Navies by Sea; How has he shaken men's parts and wisdom? brought wise men and
learned men, who made an Idol of their learning and wisdom, to so low an
ebb, in respect of esteem, as they never were; and just it is, and they shall
yet be brought lower, till they learn to give God the glory. Yea, how has he
shaken grace? and how many men of grace are fallen? that we might learn indeed
to cease from man whose breath is in his Nostrills.

Use (...) Is it so, that God will abolish all ^dolls? Then learn this, That a
day will be, how much soever men now cry up their Idols, that they shall be
ashamed to own them, Isa. 1.29. For they shall be ashamed of the Oaks which
ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens ye have chosen.
Men shall be in this day ashamed to cry up worldly greatness, strength,
policy, parts, as now they do: They may have a love in their hearts to these
things as Idols still, but shall be ashamed to own them in the way they now
do. Read, verse. 20. In that day a man shall cast his Idols of silver, and his
Idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the Moles,
and to the Batts.

2 Is it so, Then let us take heed we do not in this day set up Idols. To set
up Idols in this day God is pulling them down, makes the offense double. We
have seen the Lord pouring contempt upon many Idols already, and he is now
punishing us with the Idols we have set up, let us not go about to set up
more. O let us take heed of spiritual Idols, the great Promise of the New
Covenant, is, Cleansing from Idols, Ezekiel. 36.25. Then will I sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all
your Idells will I cleanse you. Plead it with God.

3 Is it so, Then learn this, There shall be a day in which Saints shall have
hearts to exalt God only; The wretched Idol self shall be utterly abolished:
This is a good day.

4 Is it so, Then Saints, seeing such a day shall come, Let us labor for a
spirit sit for this day when it comes.

Two things will work such a spirit in us.

1 A Mortified heart to a man's own things, being dead to our honor, wisdom,
parts, etc.

2 An enlivened heart to the things of God, and his glory. And O! that this
Spirit were in us, that the glory of our father could be more to us then all
the world. See those blessed ones, Revel. 5. they cry out with a loud voice,
Worthy is the Lamb that was stain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. We too often cry out our
own worthiness, with a loud voice, but they the Lambs, power is the Lambs,
glory, honor, wisdom and blessing is the Lambs.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF The Chief Heads of the preceding SERMONS.
I. The Fifth Kingdom, or Kingdom of Christ founded on the New Convenant. In
one Sermon, on Jerem. 33.20, 21. Preached at Ham.
THE Text opened. Page. 1, 2 Qu: What that Covenant is that was made with
David, Answered. Page. 3 Doct: That the Kingdom (or visible Kingdom) of
Christ is founded on the New Covenant, proved 1 From the first striking up of
the Covenant betwixt the Father and the Son. Page. 4, 5, 6 Qu: What are we to
understand by Gods dividing to Christ a Portion with the great, and the Spoil
with the strong. Page. 7, 8, 9, 10 2 From the Promulgation of the Covenant.
Page. 11 Who are the Seed of the Woman, and what it is to break the head of the
Serpent Page. 11, 12 3 From the Renovation of the Covneant. Page. 15 It was
renewed with Abr^ham Page. 16 What it is for Christ to possess the Gate of his
Enemies. Page. 17 It was renewed with David. Page. 21 Qu: How does it appear
that this is the new Covenant. Page. 22 4 From the work it self, where the
work does begin to rise in the world, etc. Page. 25 Use 1. Let men or Satan do
what they can, for the crushing and keeping down such a thing, yet a day there
is when it will come forth, and that in the spite of all the power of men and
hell Page. 29 2 The unworthiness of the Saints it cannot, it shall not hinder
or deprive them of this mercy Page. 30 3 It ought not to be strange to us, if
we should see a death upon this work, when it seems to he coming forth. Page.
36 4 We should wait upon God patiently for the bringing of it forth. Page. 38
5 This will be a sweet mercy when it comes. Page. 39 6 It will be a Spiritual
thing ibid.
II. Signs of the Times. In two Sermons, on Mat. 16.3. Preached at
Great-Allhallowes.
THe Text opened. Page. 45 Obs: That the Times of the Lords more glorious
appearing and manifestation of himself, they are such Times as have evident
Signs set upon them, proved. Page. 46 to 50 The Reasons of the Point. First,
That God might thereby strengthen the faith of his Children. Page. 50 Secondly,
To leave his Enemies inexcusable. Page. 52 Qu: What hinders men from seeing the
Signs of the Times? Answered. Page. 53 to 58
The Second Sermon.
Assertion. THat the Kingdom of Christ, his visible Kingdom, or that thing
called The Fifth Monarchy, it is twofold, or it does consist of two parts,
namely, The Kingdom of the Stone, and The Kingdom of the Mountain. Opened
and proved from Page. 61 to 66 Three Reasons to prove, That the cutting out of
the Stone cannot be meant of Christ's first coming. Page. 66. 77 Eight Reasons
to prove, That the Civil and Military Power is to be in the hands of the
Saints, with which they are to break the great Image, to overturn the Thrones
of Kings, and that before the day of Christ's appearance Page. 68 to 79 Obj:
That it is the ten Horns that hate the Whore, answered. Page. 79 Obj: Christ's
Kingdom is not of this world, answered. Page. 80 Ten Signs of the present
Times, from Page. 82 to 98
III. Christ the Only Foundation. One Sermon on 1 Corinthians: 3.11. Preached at
Pancras Soperlane.
Doct: THat the Lord Jesus Christ is the only foundation. Page. 99 1 Qu: What
are we to understand by Christ's being a foundation? Answered. Page. 100 2 Qu:
In what respect is Christ a foundation? Answered. Page. 101 1 In respect of the
fathers laying for a foundation. ibid. 2 In respect of Gospel Revelation. ibid.
3 In respect of his own meetnesse. Page. 102 to 107 Where Jesus Christ's
meetnesse and fitness for a foundation, is showed in many particulars. 4 In
respect of Believers being built upon him Page. 107 5 In opposition to all
other foundations. Page. 108 to 127 Where we have seventeen false foundations
mentioned, in opposition to which Jesus Christ is a foundation.
The prosecution of the Point, as it was found in his Notes.
3 Qu: What is Christ the foundation of? Answered. Page. 129 to 135 4 Qu: Who
lays Christ as a foundation? Answered. Page. 135, 136 5 Qu: How does God lay
Christ as a foundation? Answered. Page. 137 to 141 6 Qu: When does God lay
Christ as a foundation in the soul, is it in the first work or change that is
wrought upon the soul, or afterward? Answered. Page. 141 to 158
IV. The Promise of the Father. Two Sermons, on Acts 1.4. Preached at
Bishopsgate.
THe Text opened. Page. 159, 160 Qu: Why does Christ call it the Promise of the
father, does not Christ himself Promise the Spirit? Answered. Page. 161, 162
Qu: Why does Christ pitch the faith of his Disciples now at this time of his
Ascension, rather upon this Promise, than upon any other? Page. 163 to 166 Obs:
That the Promise of the Spirit is the great New Testament Promise. ibid. Proved
by several Considerations. Page. 167 to 182 Some Application of the Point.
Page. 182 to 188
The Second Sermon.
THe Promise of the Spirit is the great Testament Promise. 1 It Is a New
Testament Promise. Page. 189 to 193 2 It Is the great New Testament Promise.
Page. 194 Obj: If it be the great New Testament Promise, how comes it to pass
that the Saints and people of God under the New Testament Administration have
so little of the Spirit? answered. Page. 195 to 198 Qu: What is the way of the
New Testament, in which God will give out New Testament mercies. Page. 198 to
200 Why the Promise of the Spirit is the great Promise under the New Testament:
Several Reasons for it. Page. 201 to 205 Use 1. Hence we see what that thing
is that all of us should have our eyes and our hearts fixed upon, and taken up
with. Page. 205 2 Then what spirituallnesse is there required of the Saints of
the New Testament. Page. 206 to 209 3 Let every soul take heed of undervaluing
the blessed Spirit of God: Several particulars showing how men undervalue the
Spirit. Page. 210, 211 Lastly, Let us learn the duty in the Text, to wait upon
God for the Spirit. Page. 212, 213
V. The Evil of the Times. One Sermon, on Mal. 3.16, 17. Preached at
Great-Allhallowes.
THe Text opened Page. 215 Obs: That it is the special work and duty of Gods
people, when others and the generality of people, cast off, and Apostatize from
the work of God, to speak often one to another. Page. 216 What those things
are that Saints should be speaking one to another of. 1 Of the special Sin and
Evil of the Time. Page. 217 How shall we come to know the Evil of the Times?
Answered. Page. 218 to 222 2 Of the special work of God at that Time, and what
the special duty of a Christian is in such an Evil Time. Page. 222 to 227 3
Of the precious great and glorious Promises that God has made of better times
to come. Page. 227
VI. Look to your Aims and Ends. One Sermon, on Mat. 11.7.
THe Text opened. 235, etc. Doct: That it is a very good, and a very profitable
thing for souls to be very inquisitive into their own ends in all spiritual
actions. Page. 238 The Grounds and Reasons of the Point. 1 Because our Ends and
our Aims are secret things. Page. 238 2 Because that a man's heart is where his
End is Page. 239 3 Because a man's heart is as his End is. ibid. 4 Because God
does look at our Ends. ibid. 5 Because God will overlook many failings in our
obedience, if our End be right. Page. 240 6 Because there is nothing our hearts
do so much deceive us in, as our Ends. Page. 241 7 Because a bad End is of
such force as it will make that action which in it self is good, to be bad,
and instead of reward, it will bring judgment from God upon a man for doing of
it. Page. 243 8 Because a good End will make that action which in the
Interpretation of others may be bad, good. Page. 244 9 Because all a man's
comfort in suffering, it will be as his End is. Page. 245 10 Because if a man
have false Ends, he will never be able to continue and hold out in a good work.
Page. 246 How we may know our Ends. Page. 246 to 248
VII. The Idols Abolished. His Notes, on Isaiah 2.18.
THe Text opened, showing to what Time it relates. Page. 249 to 252 Doct: There
is a most glorious day a coming, in which all Idols shall be utterly
abolished. Page. 252 Qu: 1 What is meant by Idols. ibid. Qu: 2 What Idols
will God abolish? The Idol of Profaneness. Page. 253 The Idol Pomp, worldly
glory, and greatness. ibid. The Idol Strength. ibid. The Idol Policy. Page.
254 The Idol Parts and Learning. Page. 255 The Idol of Grace. Page. 256
Qu: When is Grace made an Idol? Answered. ibid. Qu: 3 Why will God abolish
Idols. Page. 258 1 Because his design is to exalt himself alone, and this,
whilst Idols stand, cannot be. ibid. 2 Because Gods soul hates Idols above
all. ibid. Qu: 4 How will God abolish Idols? ibid. 1 By the manifestation of
his own glory, showed in five particulars, from Page. 258 to 260 2 By shaking
all Idols. ibid. Use 1 Learn this, That a day will be, how much soever men now
cry up their Idols, that they shall he ashamed to own them. ibid. 2 Let us
take heed we do not in this day set up Idols. Page. 261 3 There shall be a
day in which Saints shall have hearts to exalt God only. ibid. 4 Seeing such a
day shall come, let us labor for a spirit fit for this day when it comes.
ibid. Two things will work such a spirit in us. 1 A mortified heart to a man's
own things. ibid. 2 An enlivened heart to the things of God. ibid.
FINIS.

