THE LASHER proved LIAR. OR, The Beadles LASH laid open.
In a short Reply to a slight Pamphlet ushered into the world with the
scurrilous Title of, A Lash for a LIAR, discovering the vanity of William
Jennison, with his ungodly abuse of Thomas Tillam, Minister of Christ's Gospel.
I Know it is no new thing for Professors to ( Lash or) smite with the tongue,
Jer. 18.81.
and devise devices against Gods Ministers: But woe to that evil servant who
shall be found ( lashing or) smiting his fellow servants, like this abusive
Beadle, Mat. 24.48.
much fitter to converse with those Salvages or wild Heathens in America (from
whence he came) then with any civil man. Psalm. 20.3, 4.


It is my mercy that the Litigious Title of my sordid adversary has rendered
the Book contemptible with men of ingenuous spirits (even of his own opinion)
and no less my misery (in bandying with my Beadles Lash) to be led to a
Language which I loath; for whiles I would be serious, I see my self
necessitated to answer (a fool according to his folly, Prey. 15.4, 5. Isa.
37.22. 2 Timothy 3.8.
and warrantably allowed to laugh railing Rabshakeh to scorn, yea and to mak^
the man's folly manifest to all men. I cannot justly be censured for terming my
Lasher a Beadle, since his own sinnious Title Page entitles him to the office
which he might easily learn in New England, whose Magistrates (about seven
years since) most barbarously condemned Christ's servants to be lasht at the
common whipping-post, for professing the same Gospel-baptisme which I practice,
and my Beadle opposes.

The persons thus persecuted were Mr. John Clarke (the present Minister of the
Baptized Church at Worcester-house in London) and Mr. Obadiah Holms, with John
Grandall, etc. And though Mr. Clarks friends secretly purchased his freedom of
the mercenary Magistrates (as the Pope parts with his pardons) for money, yet
Mr. Holms could not consent to the payment of their imposed thirty pound fine,
so that he was most lamentably lashed on his naked body by the Beadle of
Byston's who several times spitting on his hand, laid on with all his
strength. It would greatly affect a gracious heart to hear the sad story (now
lying in print Entitled ill news from New England.
before me) how the enraged blood-thirsty Governor told Mr. Clarke, he had
deserved death for denying Infant Baptism: And how Mr. Wilson (Pastor of
Boston Church) did strike Mr. Holmes before the Judgment Seat, saying, The
curse of God or Jesus go with thee.

Here Is a sad account of New England courtesy (who were themselves but lately
under Prelaticall persecution:) And why should I look for better from my
Beadle, then to bring his Lash along with him? that he may make a display of a
New England spirit, in attempting that with his tongue and pen, from which (at
present) his hands are tied.

First, The sordid title of his Lash publishes his own punishment: If it be a
punishment to be often plucked from his dwelling place, Psalm 52.5.
which he subtlely endeavored to avoid, when he was plucked from his
dewlling place at Colchester fiege, by his shameless seeking for some hundreds
of pounds amongst the sufferers, desiring our Elder (who assisted him in
securing his cash) to keep his counsel, saying, He would put in for enough,
since it was like he should have little enough.

In his slander of me as a common slanderer of so many as are contrary to my
opinions, Lash. page 46.
he confutes himself by his own confession, That I justify his reprover, who
was the Town-Lecturer, and one of those many that oppose my opinions: So are
their present Mayor and Magistrates (for not many wise, mighty or noble are
called) as also the people termed the Separation; all of them contrary to my
opinions: And if I be not a common slanderer of all these, then my Lasher
himself is a slanderer. Yea, such a slanderer shall I prove him, as will blast
the vain boasting of his Factor Burges, in applauding his Pamphlet for sober
and serious, without railing or slandering, just like the late vaunts of his
neighbor Luskin (now lying in his grave) whose sale of the fatherless Libel
(by my speedy Reply) was dashed as it were in a day.

But how sober my Lasher is, may appear by a taste of his common slanders,
special abuses, gross absurdities, manifest contradictions, and notorious
falsehood.

1. A touch of his common Slanders.
THe two grand opinions of Sabbath and Baptism (which lie under his Lash) will
clearly discover him the common Slanderer of so many as oppose his opinions.
Lash, paeg 1. and 38.


For first, he so deifies his first-day-Sabbath, that who ever strikes at it,
he publicly proclaims and reproaches them all for Impostors, and the Devils
instruments, which surely are slanders sufficient. He spares none, from ancient
Origin to this instant; but all both former and later (if they either deny a
Sabbath, or assert every day a Sabbath, or sanctify Jehovah's seventh-day
Sabbath) all are branded by my Beadle. The many thousands in Court, City,
Country, Army, whether Notionists, Baptists, Independents, etc. (though dark
in the seventh-day Sabbath, yet) if they disown his first day Sabbath, must all
taste of his Lash: So that we are put upon this necessity, either to condemn
them all, both former and later for Impostors, and the Devils instruments, or
else to record our Lasher for the common Slanderer.

Which is further confirmed by his opposition of Gospel-Baptisme, wherein he
confidently condemns all of this opinion by branding Anabaptism it self (as he
terms it) for the main Engine of the Jesuits and their Factors to overthrow
Protestantisme.

Why, Lash. page 72.
what a notable learner is our Lasher? who at one Sermon at Peter's (hearing the
Anabaptists termed the Devils Factors) commenceth Doctor in the same Dialect:
But believe it, if the President of the Privy-Councel, and so many persons of
this opinion in high places be (indeed) engaged in the main Engine of the
Jesuits and their Factors to overthrow Protestantism, it is time for our Beadle
and his brethren to look about them. And if this be not so, I am sure the
Lasher is a common Slanderer of such as oppose his opinion.

The Beadles special ABUSES.
WHen his Lash comes to my loins, he lays about him like the Beadle of Boston,
and as busily as old Burges, when the crabbed Caitiffe is cruelly scourging his
fellow creatures called Quakers, upon the account of their conscience: And yet
we must not say here is any thing but what is serious and sober; not one bit of
bitterness, not a rag of railing, unless we should censure his lovers as
liars; wherefore to secure their credit, it seems I must grant;

First, Lash. page 1.
That he kindly unchristens me in the first encounter, and continues the same
courteous complement in several lines of his Lash. With the same piety he
paints me to the world with a loathsome spirit of Apostasy for opposing (Parish
Hirelings) set maintenance; Lash. page 26.
yea full as bad as Julian (that desperate Apostate) for reviving Jehovah's
Sabbath. And to express the pinnacle of his piety, he appoints sundry
Professors (laboring under the like loathsome disease) to keep me company.

How comfortably he courts me as one eudowed with cunning craftiness, Lash. p.
28:
laboring to beguile and deceive my Reader (not only beguiling and deceiving,
but laboring so to do.

With like humility he heaves me up as a man of a horrible Lash. page 30.
spirit of contradiction and delusien; most sober and serious salutes unless
his Factors say falsely.

I cannot say it is unsuitable to his sincerity to spread forth my praises as
one so t^shly drunk with delusions. Lash. page 37.


See how lovingly he lifts me out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, Lash,
page 38.
where he found me smothered (if he speaks truth) and commends me for
mavelous ignorance, which is more then every one will do.

Is it not Saint-like indeed to enshrine me (in his own dear bosom) as
falsitying and deceiving, seared and senseless? Lash. page 46.
And now who will say here is ought of bitterness belched forth! But if all
this be true, I may rue the time of my coming to Colchester; for I was then so
far from being sottishly drunk with delusions, seared and senseless, that you
may see my loving Lasher contradict all.

His manifest Contradictions,
FOr he tells you, Lash. page 43.
That I principally bent my self in my preaching against the Quakers, who had
ensnared many: Page 42.
But yet he suspects some design: And indeed there is as good ground for it
(upon our entrance both in one day) as for the meeting of Simon Magus and Simon
Peter at Rome. Eusebius.
Yet doubtless the great God eminently designed by my reproached self on the
one hand, and the Quakers on the other, to pluck so many plumes from the Parish
Presbyters Classical Cap, that the hirelings and their hackneys are become
restless in their rage, while the doom of their jus divinum draws on apace.

For further proof of my being sottishly drunk with delusions seared, and
senseless; my Lasher assures you, Lash. page 42:
that I discharged my self freely and fully, to the great and full
satisfaction of those that heard me. And that I gained esteem of the best and
most sound Christians, who were taken with the strength of my gifts, and
plausibility of my deportment. And are not these sufficient signs of one
smothered in the smoke of the bottomless pit? which is a punishment somewhat
more painful, and less profitable then the fume of a Tobacco-shop.

The last evidence (brought by my Beadle) of my being sottishly drunk with
delusions, Lash, page 43.
may be my renewed call to the high employment of preaching; For he says, my
Labors were again desired. But was not my Lasher himself smothered in smoke,
and sottishly drunk with delusions, to be one that desired my Labors, after he
knew my opinion in Baptism? and I had printed it, with my owning of the Sabbath
in my Book of laying on of hands? which he esteems the Devils doctrine, and
Jesuits design. But here is more then enough for a discovery of his
Contradictions. I shall proceed to a taste of

His Gross Absurdities.
1. Lash. page 25. and 41. and 33. and 35.
HE assigns the begginning of his Sabbath to morning, and his morning to
midnight, and then sends poor Israel to grope for Manna, and to offer
sacrifice; but if he say true, that his day begins with the morning, and that
morning at midnight, I am sure his Night must needs begin at Noor. Genesis 1.5.
Ainsw. in loc.
Our blessed Creator calls the darkness night, and begins the day with the
evening; but the presumptuous creature, who has no more grace then to change
Jehovah's Sabbath, dare adventure to destroy the very course of nature, Isa.
5.20.
without dreading that doom of putting darkness for light, and light for
darkness. Will Saints be thus deceived of Gods sanctified Sabbath, by such as
dare assert the day begins at Midnight, and Night at Noon?

2 He makes no scruple of beginning his First day-Sabbath in his midnight
morning, and yet deems it a mavelous difficulty to set upon the true
Seventh-day Sabbath in a cloudy evening; But if it be so hard to distinguish
between common and sacred time in a cloudy evening, when we are generally
awake, how shall thousands be able to discern such difference in his dark
midnight morning, when fast asleep.

3 But here admire with me the just hand of God against this subverter of his
holy Sabbath, who is so smothered in absurdities, that after sixteen months
deliberation, he has yielded his whole Cause by this his full confession;
Lash, pa. 26.
That now Christ being come, though the services be abolished, yet the day may
be observed.

Which confession being discovered since his book was printed, himself is so
ashamed of it, that he has raced and blotted it out.

It Is strange, that after so long consideration, and so many suppers for
consultation, the Lash being lickt over and over by so many hirelings
correction and alteration, it should come forth with such a clear confession as
abolisheth the Ceremonies, and celebrates the royal Sabbath.

4 I shall at present cease from his Absurdities, Lash, page 44.
with his censure of me as deeply drencht in little better then gross Popery
about the Sacraments. And indeed this absurdity way well pass for my Lashers
Masterpiece; for he says, he found me thus drencht by this expression of
mine, That the outward elements of bread and wine in the Lords Supper were
spiritual things. I do not remember the expression; but let us try by what
Logic he will prove me drencht in Popery; for thus he must argue.

The Pope affirms the Sacramental bread and wine to be corporal, carnal,
natural things.

But Thomas Tillam has said they are spiritual things. Therefore Tho: Tillam
is drencht in little better then gross Popery.

Sure the Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, Hosea 4.7.
and the joint testimony of his nine New England Confederates will not recover
his credit, Lash, page 40.
nor secure him from this sink of absurdities, which ushers in his falsehood.

His notorious Falsehood. The first falsehood.

HIs leading sin may be that deceitful falsehood of his, Lash. page 22: Romans
2.14.15.
in asserting, That the Gentiles still have the Law written in their hearts. He
that dare thus adulterate Gods word, will not stick to censure pure Adam of
ignorance of the Seventh-day Sabbath, Lash. page 23:
nor scruple at railing accusations against Christ's Ministers; but new
Covenant-Christians know, that the Law written in the heart is their
prerogative Royal, and not the words of the Law, but only the work of the Law
is found in the hearts of Heathens.

From this and the like abuse of Scripture, A second falsehood.
he hastens to vent his distempered spleen at me, in a subtle envious
suggestion, Lash. page 42.
that (at my coming to Colchester) I appeared necessitous; which falsehood the
present Mayor can and will discover to such as shall enquire, seeing he first
courteously entertained, invited, and encouraged me to the work; and so
comfortably was I accommodated by the Gentlewoman with whom I sojourned, Page
43.
that all who know it must censure it as baseness in my Beadle to upbraid me
with his Table. Wherefore until he produce sufficient evidence of my appearing
necessitous in person, purse, horse, habit, or something, I shall make bold to
record my Lasher for the Liar.

Who proceeds to a third, A third falsehood. Lash. page 48.
in affirming that I promised not to meddle with Baptism. And yet himself and
the Town in general are witness of my public engagement to preach the
whole body of Divinity, Heb. 6 1, 2.
which is impossible to be done without handling the foundation principles of
Christian Religion, whereof Baptism is one. And if they did desire me to
conceal it (as he asserts) I am sure it discovers their sin and shame. It being
a sad sign of a sinking cause, and a corrupt conscience to smother truth. 1
King. 22.13.
They were Baals worshippers that desired the Lords Prophet to speak like the
Nations Priests; and 'twas a Jewish Presbytery that would have suppressed the
Name of Jesus, Acts 4.
as my Beadle confesses would have served his baptism.

But seeing I have sufficient testimony that his own mouth several times
confessed, that my promise was not to meddle with the controversy of baptism
at his meeting (which accordingly I performed, it is not I, but himself is the
Liar.

And he further foments, A fourth falsehood.
That soon after this promise I fell pell-mell upon the point of Baptism. I
confess if my Beadle be as expert at Pel-mel as at jumping, Lash. p. 48.
and shovel-bord he is too hard for me. But if after this promise I preached
more then 60. sermons before I left Pel-mel upon baptism, my Lasher must be
left in the lurch for the Liar.

My other Principles, Lash. p. 44.
(reprinted by my Beadle) were formerly published by some Libellers long since
filenced, and though they were ashamed of their names, yet they are upon
discovery, and do sound like their slanders.

The young Levite who lay lurking in the North till he endanger his Fellowship,
looks like one Daresly his stinging tongue being sharpened like a shaft, for
envious Archers bow confirms the country Proverb, that a Fools bolt is soon
shot, whereby himself is snared; my Lasher also laying himself open as a party
in Print; He further complains that I never dealt with him in a Christian way
for his miscariages, which does but increase his score. A fifth falsehood.
Lash. p. 55.
Seeing I so laid Ham's Sin to his charge (for his treachery against that party
he had sided with as the honest party) that his wife (trembling) said they were
never so reproved, nor did I spare his passionate adversary, but pressed
satisfaction on both sides, which was promised, but most hypocritically
performed by my Beadle. Indeed such were the actings both of Lecturer and
Lasher, that it has moved me to hear how it became even proverbial for
fellows to call unto each other in the streets, thus; Mr. Jennison is a knave,
else ask M. Archer, Mr. Archer is a knave, else ask Mr Gennison. Lash. p. 17
I know not well what the Beadle means by that Infamy, which he says will
hardly ever be wiped off, but this I knew (to the praise of free grace) that my
Ministry has been frequently attended by the chief of the Magistrates, with
great resorts of people, and confirmed by the conversation of many souls, with
sweet communion of more then two hundred baptized disciples, Celebrating
Jehovah's Sabbath, so tha^ my God has set me above the blast of a Tobaco-man,
and out of the reach of his New England lash that would make me a liar. Lash.
p, 41. The 6th falfe-hood. 2 Timothy 3.8.


And his first charge, is my opposing the Spells of the contentious Lecture at
Peter's for which, he says, there was never the least color: But the daily
discovery of the parish presbyters, resisting the truth of God, like those
ancient Enchanters Jannes and Jambres sufficiently clears me, and proves my
Lasher the liar.

Who is like to speed to better in his second slander is terming it a gross
untruth that I have printed him, Lash. p. 48. Lash. 41. The 7th. falsehood.
Lash. p. 40.
as polluting his conscience in opposing his principles, and (that he may
falsify to purpose) he says, I condemn him because he will not oppose his
New England principles; That the falsehood here of may be manifested; observe,
that he professes the morality of the fourth commandment, The. Sab. p. 147.
etc.
as New England does; now it is plain that New England professedly opposes
those very Arguments which our Beadle takes up from Heylin and the Prelates,
with very much vaper in the 22, 23, and 24. pages of his Lash: If then the
Beadle be so, for the morality of the fourth commandment as they are, I do
once more affirm that in his opposing the Seventh days certainty, and
beginning of the Sabbath (which they so strenuously attest) he does still more
and more pollute his conscience in opposing his professed principles, so that
the gross falsehood he would fasten upon me, reflects upon himself, and
further confirms my Lasher the liar.

His third slander which he terms a very foul and manifest untruth, Lash. p.
49.
is my saying that (whilst he opposed his principles at Peter's) the decaying
Clergy sat silent; and to prove it so, he tells us that the parish Minister
prayed before he began, and spoke when he had done, and by this Logic the
Lasher confirms his title in making me a Liar; The 8th. falsehood.
and indeed it is a notable whiff from a Tobaco shop. The parish Minister
prayed before our Beadle began, and speak when he had done: Ergo it is a very
foul and manifest untruth to say the dacaying Clergy sat silent whilst he
speak, doubtless the old man is smothered in the smoke of his botomless pit,
could none of the decaying Clergy save the man's sense from this in evitable
shipwreck? Had I been admitted to their pretended conference at Peter's, I
should have done my best in rescuing his reason; But they be like feared
defilements, Lash. p. 42.
seeing the Lasher lays me out to be as bad as excommunicate; But (if he be
not too old to learn) let me instruct him, that no censure is so bad as
excommunication, much less my own voluntary withdrawing. The fourth falsehood
or gross lie (to use that durty dialect wherein he disciples me) in my speech,
that he highly applauded me, without the least contradietion, long after some
of my different principles were delivered.

Ans. That he highly applauded me, let his own pen testify where he tells the
world, that I bent my self freely and fully in my preaching against the
Quakers, who had ensnared many, yea and that to the great and general
satisfaction of my hearers, and that I gained esteem of the best and most sound
Christians, who were taken with the strength of my gifts and plausibility of my
deportment, etc. I think he has applauded me to purpose.

But to prove that he contradicted me, after some of m^ different doctrines
were delivered, he tells us that he discoursed, Lash. p. 50.
and diverse times argued the points of Baptism with me, which I hope may be
done without a spirit of contradiction. And that such discourses and arguings
were without contradiction, his own pen proves, Lash. page 48. where it is
published, that after I was discovered to be against infants baptism, diverse
Christians (meaning himself for one) desired me to wave it, being so
controversall, using this argument that it would but make breaches, and they
stood in need of healings: Now let any ingenious person judge whether such
desires, discourses, or arguments may be termed contradictings, if not, then
here is full proof from his own pen that my Lasher is the gross liar, The
ninth falsehood.
who indeed was so far from contradicting me in the point of infants baptism,
that there are sufficient witnesses of his saying, that for his part he should
not dislike it, if baptism were forborne 3. or 4 years, till the children
could answer for themselves.

His fifth untruth, about justifying faith, Lash. p. 50.
reflects upon himself, seeing I have as sufficient testimony as any can be
produced in Colchester, that I have published the truth (for substance) in my
Christian account confirmed; but lastly, The 10th false hood.
that I helped to uphold the meeting at his house which was almost sunk through
his treachery in revenging himself of the Town Lecturer is so generally known,
that if he were not sottishly drunk with delusions, he could not gainesay it,
but this indeed is true, that till the Lecturer so vehemently charged him and
his wife as implecable persons (which I doubt was too true) there had been a
meeting many years, in all which time they could never find away to communion;
and if there be any thing of God in their sacrament since, both Presbyterians,
Independants, and separation should give me thanks for rouzing them.

It is also true, Lash. p. 50.
that since my departure their meeting is grown numerous; for it being deserted
and forsaken for it by the Towne-Lecturer, and secondly by my self, the man
prostituted his house even to the parish Presbyterians, so that in the former
season it became too hot to hold them.

I have omitted very many of his down right untruthes in both parts of his
Lash, being heartily wearied with digging in his Dunghill; I have carefully
avoided reproaching terms, unless his own language be censured as such. The
Lord has marvelously discovered the man's folly, and ordered his own pen to
vindicate my integrity; he has sufficiently proved himself the busy
Tobaco-man, and with his art of a New England Lasher is fully proved the liar,
and so let him trudg to Stannaway bowling-green, he were better leave his
jangling and follow his jumping, only let him beware of jumping out of the
London wagon any more, seeing his last leap so long retarded his lash, and
possible has spoild that sport, but he knows how to recreate himself with his
shovel-boord-table, which he can easily turn to a communion Table upon his
first days fabbath, for the fellowship of Fordham, and as suddenly turn it
again for a Classical consultation, how to be revenged on the Dipper who (if
the persons of Peter's and Dedham preach truth) trips up folks heels in the
water, and is not ashamed to pull off women's stockens, and wash their feet.

Beadle, bring out your Lash, and do your office lustily upon these egregious,
Jer. 9.5. But I must be modest, and turn to the controversall part of the
pamphlet, which savoures of a little more sobriety, which I would meet, with a
proportionable spirit; The controversall Part.
wherefore leaving sorded Will. Jennison with the Beadles in Bridewell, I come
seriously to contend with the more sollid Mr. Jennison, on the battlements of
Beth-el.

And upon our very first encounter we are agreed, Lash. p. 3. Act. 2.
both Master Jennison and my self freely subscribing to the Apostles Pentecost,
and fully concluding that the same glorious day on which Pentecost then fell,
was and is that blessed, Sanctified day which the Saints did, and ought to keep
as their Sabbath.

For although the Authority of the seventh day be firmly established by the
Fathers institution, 7th. day Sabbath sought out ^.68. etc:
the Sons confirmation, the spirits Approbation, and the Saints observation (as
I have fully proved in my book of the Sabbath) yet since Master Jennison omits
three of these impregnable Pillars, and singles out the fourth to cast his
whole cause upon: I am cheerfully resolved, through the assistance of the
promised spirit of truth, to embrace that wonderful day of Pentecost, and none
but that, for the undoubted Sabbath of Christians, which I shall convincingly
and undeniably prove to be Jehovah's certain sanctified seventh day, which
(being performed) Mr. Jennison stands obliged in credit and conscience to own
it; Seeing therefore we are agreed herein, I shall with all possible brevity
touch (and I hope overturn) his other Arguments, and refer the whole matter
to the Apostles Pentecost. Lash. page 2.
And first Master Jennison (silently) yields, that he has neither command from
God, nor council from Christ for the observation of the first day of the week.
In that he flies for his prime Argument to the supposed example of Saints,
which if he could prove (as no man can) yet were it not sufficient ground to
reject the true seventh day Sabbath, settled by clear commands.

For this must be observed as a general conclusion. A General rule.
That example^ do only allow us liberty and nothing but a clear command can
oblige us to duty, Romans 4.15. As for instance. Community of goods is the Saints
liberty, because it was practiced. But liberality of our proper substance is a
duty because it is commanded.

Saints may freely Feast before Communion, because we have Apostical president.
But all true Disciples must break bread, because we have Evangelical Precept.
Even so we have liberty to meet the first day, as freely as any other weekday,
for we find the Saints at Troas then, (occasionally) assembled. But we are tied
in duty to celebrate the seventh day-Sabbath, as being expressly commanded. The
Saints example at Troas once, does no more obliege us to their time, then their
meeting in an upper chamber does tie us to the like place. If examples alone
were binding, Act. 17.2. and 18.4.
we have innumerable for the seventh day Sabbath: and this may be sufficient to
show the invalidity of Mr. Jennisons first Argument; and that part of his
fourth which is grounded upon Act. 20. Lash. p. 18.19.
His Arguments from Christ's appearing, page 2. and blessing page 15. etc.
depend upon the beginning of the Scripture day which always begins at Even,
Exo. 12.18.19. Deuteronomy. 16.46.
and so Christ's non-appearing till the first day at Even makes rather against
it, Jer. 6.14.
and so does the famous examples of Father, Son, and Saints; for, in stead of
the honor Master Jennison would put upon it ( page 17.18.)

1. The Father wrought upon it, Genesis 1. and therefore we should be his
followers as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1.

2. The Son traveled upon it, Luke 24.13.15. And he has given us example that
we should do as he has done, John 13.15.

3. Lash. page 12:
The Saints cast their accounts upon it, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. and so may we; Master
Jennisons apprehensions of the year of Jubilee are altogether impertinent, since
it is evident it was the year of Christ's first Preaching, Luke 4.16. and not of
his Resurrection.

Neither does John's being in the spirit in the Lords day show what day that
was, Page 13.
nor any more prove the first day, the Saints meeting time, then his being in
the spirit in the Isle of Patmos can prove Patmos their meeting place.

As for succeding ages, they do as much justify Easter Day, as the first day
of the week, and as much may be conjectured for the one as the other, Page 14.
and 27:
from Psalm. 118. one command is worth 10000: suppofitions. Christ's birthday
bids fairest for it, Luke 2.10, 11. But Ioh. 8.56. carries it.

If any can discern the Saints assembling in 1 Cor. Page 19. Page 20.
16. (as Mr. Jennison suggests) it must be by some other light then Gods word.
The day of Christ's greatest power prophesied, Psa. 110.3. was the Apostles
Pentecost, Act 2. with Luke 24.49 and Acts 1.8. Though Master Jennison cannot
see why the seventh day from the words Creation should rather be man's holy rest
day, Page 22:
then the seventh day from man's own Creation, yet through grace I and others
can; Exodus 20.11.
For in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, and rested the seventh
day, wherefore Jehovah blessed the Sabbath day, and sanctified it.

Mr. Lash. p. 23, 24.
Jennisons Arguments against the certainty of the seventh day do equally strike
at the certainty of his first day, and to what end should he contend for any
Sabbath if both were uncertain? But my book of the Sabbath has undoubted
evidence of the seventh days certainty, to which I refer my Reader where he
shall not only find the certain day, but the undoubted beginning of the day, not
at Master Iennisons midnight morning, but the sixth day Evening, Page 25. and
35. Levit. 23 32.
for doubtless our glorious Creator had finished his work before midnight; yea
the very ceremonial Sabbaths (because honored with the Title of Sabbaths)
were to be celebrated from Even to Even, which begins and ends at Sunset,
Lash. page, 36. Mar. 1.32. Deuteronomy. 16.6.
as is fully evident from plain Scripture which needs no consequence to confirm
it, yet do I not deny a fair deduction from Scripture, but do utterly deny the
setting up a first day Sabbath by conceited consequence, against the true
seventh day Sabbath confirmed by clear command. Or that any Ordinance of Christ
was ever Instituted by consequence, I shall never be condemned for omitting
what was never commanded, 1 John 3.4. Romans 4.15.
as first day, and Infant Baptism; For sin is the transgression of some Law,
and where no Law is, no transgression.

It is not so as Master Jennison asserts; Lash. p. 25.26
That if the seventh day appointed (in the Royal Law) be the Christian Sabbath,
that then all the Ordinances appropriated (by the beggarly Ceremonial Law) are
still to be observed. He that appointed double sacrifices for the Sabbath day,
as a Sabbath day, enjoined single sacrifices for week days, as weeks days;
and as soon shall the week days cease to be week, days as Jehavah's
Sanctified seventh day shall cease to be the Saints Sabbath day, Isay 66.21.
Mal. 3 3. Isai, 56.6.7. Heb. 10.5.6.7. and 13.16. Rev. 5.8.
and as soon shall the mountain of Gods house be melted, because made up of
Priests and Levites, as G^ds Sabbath shall be subdued, because mentioned with
burnt-offerings and sacrifices; He that accepts their persons for a Royal
Priesthood will graciously own their Savior and services for burnt-offerings
and sacrifices.

And Mr. Lash, page 27.
Jennison may one day understand that Christ was never more active then in and
after death, Col. 2.14, 15. And that when God brought his Son into the world,
then all the Angels did worship him, Luke 2.14. Math. 4.11. But Heb 1, 6 speaks
not of his resurrection day, nor Psa. 118. of every first day of the week,
Page 28.
nor were the disciples in a hopeless condition till the first day was almost,
and altogether ended, Luke 24. Lash. page 29.
Mark 16.13, 14. As for Heb. 4. I have faithfully expounded it in my book of
the Sabbath, and whereas Mr. Jennison says the word Sabbatism denotes not any
days rest. Mr. Carter. (in his covenant) will tell him it denotes the first
day, and I suppose he knows the original as well as Mr. Jennisons
instructers. But let the Lexicons and Dictionaries be examined (whose authors
were equally ignorant of the true Sabbath) and they will inform that the word
Sabbatism signifies the Celebration of the Sabbath, or a day of rest, But Mr.
Jennison is quite mistaken, in applying to the rest mentioned in the other
verses, Lash. p. 31: Heb. 7.27. and 9.26. and 10.10.
for they are all of them an other different greek word, and it is utterly
untrue that he says Christ's sufferings ceased not at his death, and that the
holy woman's celebrating Sabbath was not after Christ's sufferings, Luke 23. for
when he once died he bequeathed his spitit to God, and entered into rest, Luke
23.46. Act. 2.26.

If the 4th. commandment be given to the Gentiles (as Mr. Iennison confesses)
I am sure it commanded nothing but the sanctifying of the 7th day Sabbath which
is to continue for ever and ever, Lesh. p. 32. and 32. Ps. 111.7, 8. Mat. 5.18.
even till heaven and earth passes away, and so was it never said of
circumcision nor first fruits.

As to that of Col. 2.14.16. I am sure it does not so much as mention the
seventh. day, if it oppose any thing in the 4 th. commandment it must be the
Sabbath it self, which Mr. Jennison will not say. But I have fully proved it
touches not the Royal seventh day Sabbath at all, which Mr. Jennison does not
answer. Lash. p. 34.


As to Mr Ienisons assertion that the day begins with morning, he does not
only oppose New England principles, but the order of God himself, Genesis 1:
who placed the evening before the morning; And Mark 14.30. is pregnant for it,
for the 14th day at even when the Passover was eaten, was the beginning of the
fifteenth day, as is confessed by the learned commentators Anot. Lev. 23.5.
Lash. p. 37.
and is plain Exodus 12.18, 19. and however Mr. Jenison terms it a shuffle to
say the first fruits were offered the morrow of (or after) the Sabbath,
Amsworth.
and yet this morrow was the Sabbath it seife, he terms not me but Moses, if
not God himself the shufler, who plainly calls the 15 th. day of the first
month the morrow after the Passover, when they came out of Egypt, and yet the
very same night of eating the Passover, and departing out of Egypt was the
beginning of the 15th day, Numb. 33.3.
Exodus 12.18, 19. If this be mavelous ignorance as Mr. Jenison terms it, I
am content to be so sensured by him, whilst I have learned Ainsworth, Diodati.
the English commentators, Moses, and God himself to bear me out in it. lash.
p. 38.
And that Savior who is Lord of the Sabbath Sabbath will reckon with Mr.
Ienuison for his hard speeches; Lash. p. 38, 39.
for we shall seek none other Savior, but he who commands the keeping of his
Sabbath, Mat. 24.20.

As to the judgment of God upon the Prelates, indeed it is most just for their
opposing the morality of the Sabbath, and let those who assert it, that slight
it, expect the next Vial. I have seen variety of judgments, even to
astonishment, upon rejecters of the revived seventh day Sabbath, which (in my
Reply to the next book which I hear is in the Press) I may possibly have more
leisure and just ground to particularize.

The Stress of the Controversy.
AFter this brief, yet full Confutation of Mr. Iennisons inferior Arguments, I
find him (in my entrance upon (the Apostles Pentecost) which he concludes the
main Stress of the Controversy) laboring under two very gross mistakes; Act.
2. Lash. p. 3.
The first is a strange conceit, that the first fruits (enjoined Lev. 23.11.)
was to be ripe corn; and upon this his mistake, he renders the day of reaping
uncertain, p. 4. and 10.
according as Harvest came sooner or latter; and so runs on in reckoning the
fifty days, or seven weeks, at random, to fasten (the Apostles) Pentecost to
his First Day Sabbath; whereas the Scripture requires not ripe corn, but green
ears, Lev. 2.14. Exodus 9.31. Deuteronomy. 16.12. Exodus 23.14.
such as the field afforded at their going out of Egypt, in Memorial whereof
these first fruits were appointed, and Gods Israel prohibited to eat thereof,
until this homage were performed.

This foul fault in the entrance of his account of fifty days, must needs be
ill in the end.

His second intolerable mistake, Lash. p. 9.
(which has nothing to save it from high blasphemy, but gross ignorance) is
his confident assertion, that the feast of first fruits was not at the end of
the weeks, but at the beginning; yea, and charge it as a very great mistake,
to say the Feast it self was not till the end of the weeks. This Charge flies
in the face of God himself, who has thus expressy spoken by his servant Moses.
Also in the day of the first fruits, when ye bring a new meat offering unto the
Lord, AFTER YOUR WEEKS BE OVT, ye shall have an holy Convocation, Numb. 28.26.
with Lev. 23.2.4.
ye shall do no servile work. This was that holy Convocation, Act. 2.1, 2.
called (in Greek) Pentecost, whereon the bread which was made of the Sheaf (or
^n^er) waved, Let. 23.11. was to be again waved before the Lord, as the first
fruits, Lev. 23.17, 20, 21. I shall not henceforth wonder at Mr. Iennisons
error, in his reckoning the seven weeks, so as to make Pentecost fall upon his
first day, who can so confidently affirm that this Feast was in the beginning
of the weeks, and charge Moses with a very great mistake, for recording it to
be after the weeks were out.

Now touching that which he terms the main Stress of the Controversy between
us, Lash. p. 3.
we have both solemnly engaged before the world (in print) casting (as he
says) our whole cause upon it. That the day whereon (the Apostles) Pentecost
fell, Act. 2.1.
was, and is that glorious day, which the Saints did, and ought to keep as
their Sabbath. And I desire no more, but that he which shall shrink from this
clear confession, may be henceforth judged and deemed a deserter and profaner
of the true acknowledged Christian Sabbath.

The fair discovery of this Question, upon what day the Apostles Pentecost
fell, will be fully evident in the institution of the Feast, Lev. 23.10, 11,
15. where Jehovah required Moses to speak unto the children of Israel, and say
unto them, when ye be come into the Land which I give unto you, and shall reap
the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring a sheaf of the first fruits of your
harvest unto the Priest, and he shall wave the sheaf before the Lord, (...)
to be accepted for you on the morrow of the Sabbath (for so is the Hebrew, and
so Ainsworth renders it) on the morrow of the Sabbath the Priest shall wave it.
And what ever this Sabbath was, this is plain, that from the morrow following,
they were enjoined to begin their reckoning of seven Sabbaths, Lev. 23.15, 16.
which is expressly called seven weeks, in Deuteronomy. (...), Lev. 23.
16. and the Septuagint is the same in both places. And ye shall count unto you
from the morrow after the Sabbath, from the day that ye brought the sheaf of
the wave-offering, seven Sabbaths shall be complete, even unto the morrow after
the seventh Sabbath, shall ye number fifty days.

This Sabbath from whose morrow the account began, is by Ainsworth, Diodat,
etc. called the Passover Sabbath, Lash, p. 4. and 5. and 8.
and Easter; But Mr. Jenison is very angry with me for so speaking, and yet
from the bare authority of certain obscure Informers, he confidently concludes,
that it was the Jews seventh-day weekly Sabbath, and so boldly begins upon the
first day of the week to number the 7 weeks, or fifty days, so to make
Pentecost fall ( Pat, as he phraseth it) upon his supposed first day Sabbath.

I shall not (with my small skill in the Hebrew) presume to contend with his
unknown informers, who assures him that it can be no other then the weekly
Sabbath; yet I suppose modesty will even constrain both him and them to submit
unto the information of the most profoundly learned, which the long Parliament
and Assembly could find for that eminent mark of the English Annotations upon
the whole Bible, whose Notes upon these very words [ Lev. 23.11.15. On the
morrow after the Sabbath] are quite contrary to Mr. Ienison and his informers,
who say it can be no other then the weekly Sabbath. Their notes are these; Not
the weekly Sabbath, English Annot. on Lev. 23.
but the first day of the Feast of unleavened bread called (say they) a
Sabbath, verse. 7. Yea, and to put the seven weeks or fifty days out of doubt,
these learned men do expressly declare in the same place, the punctual day of
the Feast, and of the month which begins our account, even the second day of
the Feast, which is (say they) the 16th day of the month Nisan, from which day
were reckoned the fifty days ended at Pentecost, reckoning that second day
inclusively. Here Is the most clear confession, that the Sabbath leading to the
account of fifty days is not the weekly Sabbath; but that the morrow following
the waved sheaf is the (certain fixed) 16th day of the month, and begins the
number of 50 days, or seven weeks; and on what day this 16th of Nisan fell at
the death of Christ is clear; for upon the 14th day of the first month at
even, Exodus 12.18. Coll. 2.16, 17. Matthew. 26.
did our Lord Jesus (who is the true body of these shadows) punctually
celebrate the Passcover; and upon the morrow being the 15th day (and commonly
called good Friday) was our first fruits waved by the Priests upon the Cross:
So that the 16th day being the seventh day Sabbath, must unavoidably begin the
seven weeks, or fifty days; and this is easily known, that the same day which
begins the account must needs end it, and be the true day of Pentecost.

Though this clear confession from the Sabbaths adversaries might suffice, yet
through strength from on high with demonstrations of the spirit and power, I
shall further produce three infallible proofs that the Apostles Pentecost was
none other then the sanctified seventh-day Sabbath: And this will be evident by
Gods institution of a Feast, for he assigned a certain day, from which the
number of fifty days began; That Christ was punctual in time, see Mat. 27.55,
56. Luke 22.35. John 8.20.
and this day was the morrow of (or after) a certain Sabbath, which must be
punctually fulfilled in and by Christ, as well in the Time as in the Type, or
else why was the time so precisely appointed, and the fifty days so exactly to
be numbered?

The morrow after this certain Sabbath will be readily known.

First, by the sickles first entering the Corn, Deuteronomy. 16.9.

Secondly, by the waving of the first fruits, Lev. 23.11.

Thirdly, by offering the same day a Lamb without spot, Lev. 23.12.

The time when these shadows were all punctually fulfilled in Christ the body
is abundantly manifest. And first, the certain day when the the sickle was
first put to him, Isai. 53.8.
to cut him down, the whole world knows to be that they call good Friday, Luke
23.54, 55, 56.
that is the sixth day of the week, The day of the preparation before the 7th
day Sabbath, from which sixth day Gods account of the seven weeks begun by his
appointment, Deuteronomy. 16.9. Seven weeks shall thou number unto thee, begin to
number the seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to
the Corn. Is it possible for any truth to shine more clearly? Now either Mr.
Jenison must deny (what he grants, page 38.) That Christ was by the sickle of
death cut down, (upon the sixth day of the week) or else he must give glory to
God by beginning to number the fifty days or 7 weeks, from that time the
sickle first entered our corn, and cut him down by death, from which day the
holy Sabbath is the very first of the account, and at the end of seven full
weeks, the same blessed seventh day Sabbath that began, must needs end the
fifty days exactly upon the Apostles Pentecost, Heb. 10.1.
although the Law was not the very image of good things to come, yet certainly
this Sickle was a notable shadow in many particulars.

1. It was put to the corn, Deuteronomy. 16.9. which the Jews performed the night
following the Passover, with great solemnity; and just so was it fulfilled in
Christ, Ioh. 18.3.

2. They were to cut down green ears, Lev. 2.14. Hos. 14.3.
And even so our Savior expounds himself the very day of his suffering, Luke
23.31. when our green fir tree was cut down.

3. The green corn was bound, (as the Hebrew signifies, Lev. 23.10.) and
brought to the Priests, and so was our green plant, Ioh. 18.12, 13.

4. The green corn was to be dried by the fire, Lev. 2.14. neither was this
wanting to our first fruits, Luke 22.54, 55.

5. It was to be beaten out of full ears, Lev. 2.14. and just so was our
Savior served, (at full age) Matthew. 26.67, 68. and 27.26.30. After the first
fruits were thus fitted, (as the English Annotations show, on Levit. 23.10.)
they were upon the morrow of that Sabbath to be waved by the Priest, Lev.
23.11. And this is the second infallible token what that Sabbath was, namely,
the Passover, on the morrow of which Sabbath it was exactly accomplished in
Christ, by the crucifying Priest, who waved him between heaven and earth upon
the sixth day of the week, from which day began the count of the Apostles
Pentecost, punctually beginning and ending upon the seventh day Sabbath.

The third infallible mark by which that Sabbath ( Lev. 23.11, 15.) is more
then fully found, was the Lamb without spot, appointed to be offered the very
same morrow of the Sabbath, but this was such an infallible token to know the
undoubted day wherein it was accomplished in Christ, that Mr. Jeunison has
wholly (and I doubt deceitfully) omitted it. And indeed it is impossible that
any thing but wilful blindness should obscure the glory and stupendous
eminency of that sixth day of the week, whereon our Lamb without spot or
blemish was offered, Heb. 9.14. 1 Pet. 1.19.
from which sixth day begun the account of the Apostles Pentecost, and as it
began, so it exactly ended on the seventh day Sabbath, to its everlasting
glory, and the glory of him that sanctified it, God blessed for ever, Amen.

And thus while Mr. Jennison and his Informers affirm, (without one word of
Scripture) that the Sabbath from whence our reckoning arises, ( Lev. 23.11,
15.) was the Jews weekly seventh day Sabbath: I affirm, (with the most learned
of this Age) that it was not the weekly Sabbath, but the first day of the
Passover Feast; and I have fully proved by three infallible Scripture marks,
that the fifty days did at the death of our Redeemer, most exactly begin and
end upon the seventh day Sabbath.

Why blessed be Jehovah the Institutor of this Sabbath, and glorified be Jesus
the professed Lord of this Sabbath, and for ever honored be that excellent
spirit, who at the Apostles Pentecost, most wonderfully owned and approved this
same seventh day Sabbath, as has been convincingly proved by

1. The Sickles first entering our Corn.

2. The waving of our sheaf of first fruits, and

3. The offering of our Lamb without spot.

And now unless Mr. Jennison can confute this precious point, (which I am sure
is utterly impossible) I must expect the speedy performance of his promise,
Lash. p. 3. and 11, 12.
to own and embrace this glorious day on which the Apostles Pentecost fell, as
the very day which ye did, and ought to keep as their Sabbath. And I shall for
ever acquit him of all the abuses in his book, and esteem it abundant
satisfaction to see a sinner return from the error of his way. Jam. 5.20.
Amen.

As touching the second part of Mr. Iennisons Lash, concerning Baptism, he
must excuse me if I deem it a dishonor to that flourishing truth, to contend
with him, after so many learned debates of persons with whom neither of us may
compare, much less conceit to exceed.

The Covenant made to litteral Israel, which he would have to be one with
mystical Israel, do exceedingly differ. As;

1. In the Mediator, Gal. 3.19.

The servant being veiled, 2 Cor. 3.13.

The Son revealed, Mat. 17.5. 2 Cor. 3.18. Ioh. 1.14.

2. In the parties taken into Covenant.

In the Type a fleshly seed, Genesis 17.7, 13.

In the truth a faithful seed, Gal. 3.9, 29. Rev. 12.17.

Then not in Covenant, till first they were Abraham's, now not in Covenant, till
first they be Christ's.

3. There Is difference in the Sign.

The shadow signed the outward man, Genesis 17.10, 11.

The truth signs the inner man, Romans 2.28, 29. Ephesians. 1.13, 14.

4. In the Sacrifice:

The Type Carnal, Heb. 9.10.

The Truth Spiritual, 1 Pet. 2.5.

The Type dead, Heb. 10.1, 4, 5.

The Truth living, Romans 12.1, 2.

5. In the Inheritance:

The Type Temporal, Deuteronomy. 4.21, 38. Ier. 11.3, 5.

The Truth Eternal, Heb. 9.15. 1 Pet. 1.4.

His conceits upon 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. Lash. p. 61.
pleads as much for Infant Communion, as for Infant Baptism, neither of which
is found in Christ's House.

That of 1 Cor. 7.14. p. 64.
tells you the unbelieving wife is sanctified to the husband, and so are the
children.

Mr. p. 66. etc.
Iennison at length grants that he can none other way help Babes to Baptism,
but by consequence; and because he confesses William Iennison cannot prove his
interest in Christ, but by consequence; he judges the same of Tho. p. 69.
Tillam, who through distinguishing grace has a fairer evidence then a bare
consequence; Romans 8.16. Ephesians 1.13. 1 Cor. 2.14.
the Spirit it self bearing witness with his spirit, that he is the Child of
God.

When Scripture fails for Baby-Baptisme, Mr. Iennison fetches an argument from
the Turk and the Devil; Lash. p. 73. p. 74.
but I shall not travel into their Regions to disprove him.

They that now censure dipping of Disciples, as immodest and dangerous, would
much more have cried out upon the circumcision of men's privy parts.

But I shall cease to contend about a point so fully controverted and cleared,
expecting a fair and speedy submission to that Christian Sabbath whereon the
Apostle Pentecost was celebrated, recording to his full confession, wherewith I
shall conclude, That the day of the first New Testament Church its meeting, and
that wherein the Lord so highly blessed them, Lash. p. 12. and 3.
is that glorious day which the Saints did, and ought to keep as their Sabbath.
Amen.

THE END.
(...) As to the Lady Abergavenny mentioned in my Information, I have this to
add further, that I do very well remember, that at the time when the five
Jesuits were to be hanged, drawn and quartered, the said Lady came to the
Portugal Ambassador, and made a most dreadful Complaint to his Excellency, to
this Effect, how that we were all ruined, if the said five Jesuits should
suffer, for to be sure that the next man that should die would be Sir George
Wakeman, in regard the five Jesuits were condemned upon the same Fact, that Sir
George Wakeman was guilty of, therefore I desire your Lordship by all means to
see if your Lordship can find any way to prevent the Death of those Jesuits.

Upon which my Lord made answer to the said Lady, that he could not Imagine or
Find out any way to save their Lives, but that they must die, for said he, we
have used all our Endeavors, and made all the Interest we can, and it will
not be granted.

Then the said Lady made answer to my Lord, that then Sir. George Wakeman
would have his Trial, and would be condemned and suffer, and then all our
Plot will be discovered.

My Lord made answer in these words, No Madam, we will seek to prevent his
Death by some Friend that we shall make.

Upon which my Lady Abergavenny took her leave of my Lord: I Francisco de
Faria was Interpreter betvveen them both.

Thus far I have followed the Series of Relation without interruption, as being
Occurances that happend and depended one upon another.

I am now to repeat some passages which as they come to my Knowledge upon
Various occasions, and at Several times, require not to be so punctually
disposed in order as being complete within themselves.

In January or Febuary 1678/9. A Letter was sent into Portugal by a Capuchin,
belonging to the Queens Chapel at Somerset House, called by the name of
Paulenio, to a Friend of his at Lisbon, the Letter Containd Words to this Efect.

Our affairs are very well in London, where I hope in a little time there
will be a great alteration, and our business will be at an end in a short
time, so that I hope this place will all become Catholics.

The Gentleman that received the Letter in Lisbon, showed it to a Friend of his
that was an English Man, who by that time had intelligence of the Discovery
of the Plot in England, that Gentleman writes over immediately from Portugal
to a Friend of his in London what he had heard by a Letter from a Capuchin of
Somerset House, upon which the said Gentleman went to the King and Counsel;
and declared what News his Friend had sent him out of Portugal: presently the
King and Counsel caused the Queens Confessor to be called, and to be Examined,
who at that time denied all, protested his Innocence, that he never vvrote any
such Letter, vvhereupon the King and Counsel discharged him, but that very
Night there was private Intelligence given to the said Father Paulenio upon
which he Immediately made his Escape for Flanders, where he staid till the
Portugaal Ambassador arrived in the Downs in his passage homevvards, whom he
then met and Embarked with him for Portugal, in the Ruby Frigate, under the
Command of Captain Alum.

And now that the World may see, how this Popish Plot was carried one by
General Contributions and Collected Maintenances, either out of Devotion or
Fear, I will add one Certainty more, which is this, that while I was
Employed in the service of the said Ambassador, I was entrusted among other
things, to pay to Mr. Anderson, Alias Munson, a Secular Priest, then a Prisoner
in the Kings Bench upon the account of the Plot, fifty Shillings a Month, which
money I Constantly paid to his Sister, Mrs. Barbara Tempest, Living in Holborn
near the Kings Gate, during the whole time of the Ambassadors Residence in
England. One day I took the boldness to ask his Excellency why he gave that
Allowance to the said Monson, to which he was pleased to answer, because he had
been his Chaplain fifteen Years before, when he was but Envoy Extraordinary to
the King of England from the King of Portugal, to which when I replied, that I
supposed his Excellency did not allow it him for that reason only, but that I
belived he was concerned in the Plot, his Excellency returned this Answer, why
Francis do you think that if you were taken upon Suspicion, that I and all of
us were not bound to assist you with our Lives and Fortunes, as we do
particularly this Mr. Munson, and all others in his Condition, lest they should
discover the Plot? And at the same time among the rest of the Contributors, his
Excellency named the Lady Penalua, Sister to Don Franciso de Melo, who died
Ambassador in Ordinary in England, in the Year 1678.

A certain Sign that the Ambassador was deeply concerned, who was so profuse of
his Life and Fortune, to Strangers in a Foreign Country, where if it had been
otherwise neither his Life nor his Fortune had been in the least danger or
Jeopardy.

The further INFORMATION of Francisco de Faria upon Oath before me Edmund
Warcupp Esquire Mid. and West.
one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the said County and City, this
Day of December, 1680.
THis Informant being duly Sworn and Examined, says, that in the Month of
July 1679, when Sir George Wakeman Baronet, William Marshal and William Rumley,
Gentlemen; and James Corker the Priest were Tried in the Old Bailey, he employed
one Mr. Cooper by Order of his Master Gasper de Abreu de Frietas, Ambassador in
Ordinary from the Crown of Portugal, to take in Writing the said Trials, which
he did; and the said Trials were transcribed, and afterward read and
interpreted unto the said Ambassador, who seemed to be exceedingly displeased
with Mr. Marshal for so over-doing his Defense, in regard said he, the said Mr.
Marshal was well assured before hand, he should not be Condemned, and in these
long Speeches, said he, he has too much reflected on the Innocence of them
that had already Suffered, and took too much No, tice of the Blood already
shed, by which he endangered the spoiling of the whole Business, by
exasperating the Court and Jury against them all.

That some time after the said Trials, there was a report about the Court and
City, that Articles were coming out against the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs,
upon which the said Ambassador told this Informant, he would give fifty
Guinneys to have a Copy of them before they were made public.

That some time before, the Ambassador acquainted this Informant, that he
intended to send to Portugal for his Lady, and that this Informant should be
her Gentleman Usher, and also continue in his present Capacity of Secretary and
Interpreter.

That the said Ambassador did in order thereto furnish his House, and one Day,
being very intent upon Work Men, who were putting up some Tapestry Hangings, a
very large Packet of Letters was brought his Excellency by Doctor Mendex, one
of the Queens Majesty's Physicians, which he had no sooner read, but he
acquainted this Informant, that he must forthwith go for Portugal, to which
this Informant answered, that he much wondered at it, and was not a little
surprised to hear it especially, in regard that his Excellency being Ambassador
in Ordinary, must then leave the Ambassadage Extraordinary behind him, a thing
unusual. But his Excellency answered this Informant, that he must go, and that
immediately, and would leave Orders to sell his Coach and Horses, and other
things after he was gone. This Informant still pressing the Reasons of so
sudden a Departure, was by the said Ambassador answered, that otherwise he
thought he should be called before the King and Counsel, upon the Lord Scroggs
his account, and added, Francis, you must then go also, but I charge you not to
say, that you went to the said Lord Scroggs from me, that Friday on which Sir
George Wakeman was Tried, but that you went on your own head, and that you went
to him from me on the Saturday after only, for God above knows, what we do is
for the Catholic Cause, and that God below (pointing to his Chapel, which was
under his Chamber, in which we then were) will pardon us, and justify us in
what we do. At which time there being a remour that the Earl of Offory was to
go for Madrid, to complement that King upon his Marriage, and that he would
Embarque for Lisbon, and go thence by Land to Madrid, the Ambassador said he
would go with him. But he then again further charged this Informant to say, if
he should happen to be examined before the Council, that the Ambassador sent
him, and went himself to the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs by a Mistake, as
looking on him to be a public Minister of State. Whereupon this Informant
having always great Freedom of Discourse with the said Ambassador, asked his
Lordship his reasons, and why his Lordship did direct him to say in that manner
touching the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, and his Lordship thereupon answered
him in the Portuguese Language with a Proverb of that Country, in these words,
Chenes muy curioso, novive muto, which in English is, He that is overcurious
never lives long. Whereupon this Informant thought fit to forbear any further
Questions in that Matter, promising to obey his Lordships Command about the
said Lord Chief Justice Scroggs.

And this Informant says, that he well remembers, that this Discourse was on
the last Lord Mayors Day was twelve Months.

And this Informant says, that at the time when his Majesty was ill at
Windsor, this Informant being in Discourse with the said Ambassador, did ask
his Lordship what should be done with the Queen in Case his Majesty should then
die, which God forbid he should, who answered, that so soon as his Majesty's
Eyes were closed, the Marquess de Aronches Extraordinary Ambassador, or else
himself would immediately go with her Majesty to Calais, and her Majesty being
by one of them thus secured, the other should stay here, and then England
should be treated with, to restore Tangeir, and the rest of her Majesty's
Dowry, which he said was the reason that two Ambassadors were here at one
time, for said he, should the King die, the Queen would be imprisoned and
punished, or made a Slave in England, and we come not hither (to repeat his own
words) Nos non vimus para ensilar perlos, to thread Pearl, but to take care of
her Safety. Frantisco de Faria.

And this Informant further says, That the Ambassador one day asked him if he
knew Dugdale. To which he answered, That he knew none of the Witnesses. Then
the Ambassador said, Dugdale is a Rogue, because he would not accept the money
that was offered him by a Chambermaid; For if he had taken the money, he might
have gone beyond Sea, and might there have lived happy, and been adored, for
that our Church will forgive all that repent. The Ambassador further added at
that time, that Burgomanero the Spanish Ambassador was a great Friend of the
said Chambermaids, and that the said Burgomonero would be examined before the
Council about that Matter, as he thought.

And this Informant further says, That the Ambassador his Master, after he
came home one night from Court, with great Joy said, That Villain Shaftsbury is
put out of the Council, and now we must have his Blood; calling this Informant
Dunce and Blockhead, that he should be at White Hall and not hear it before.

And this Informant further says, That at one other time, discoursing of Mr.
Coleman that was Executed, he said, If ever any Man was Guilty that died,
Coleman was, and therefore could not ever be Canonized for a Saint because of
the Guilt, but he might be Absolved.

And this Informant further says, That at the time when the Duke of Monmouths
Cook accused Segnior Antonio Farnandez, belonging to the Queens Confessor, for
somewhat said by him or to him about the four Ruffians at Windsor, after he had
given directions to one of the Hhrbingers to provide Lodging for four Irish
Gentlemen, for which as this Informant beleives the said Antonio Fernandez was
imprisoned in Newgate, and to be tried at Westminster before the Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs, as this Informant heard, but he being out upon Bayl, he came
to vvait upon the Ambassador, who ask him whether or no he had spoken to any of
the four Irish Gentlemen at Windsor, who replied, yes, he had to one of them,
but he was sure the Rogue, the Cook that had accused him, could not hear him
direct the said Person to see him at Night, to which the Ambassador presently
replied, Segnior Fernandez, you shall not be Canonized or suffer Martordom this
bout, for we have taken care that nothing shall appear against you, which
proved true, the Ambassador giving this Informant a Guiney that day he was to
be tried, and he did attend at Westminister and there saw him in Court, and
nothing did appear against him: and this Informant further says, that Dr.
Mendez beforementioned, was once in the absence of this Informant Interpreter
betwixt the said Ambassador and the Lady Abergavenny, and that the said Dr.
Mendez about a Month after the said Ambassador was gone for Portugal, was
passing in his Coach by the Shop of one Mr. Phillips on Ludgate Hill, where the
said Dr. Mendez espying this Informant, he took him into his Coach, and as they
rode together, this Informant complained that the Ambassador was not so kind to
him at his departure as he expected, adding, that he knew enough against the
said Ambassador, to ruin him, and should he discover it, would hurt many in
England, and the Dr. made answer, I hope you will be more honest than to
discover any thing, and this Informant believes, that if the said Dr. Mendez
were Examined he would own the same.

This Informant further says, that before the said Ambassador went out of
England, he this Informant having much trouble upon his Spirits arising from
the Knowledge of the things he has now discovered, to ease his Mind, did write
down the Heads of the same in Portuguese upon a Piece of Paper, and delivered
the same to his Mother to lay up carefully for him, and more especially what
related to the Design against the Earl of Shaftbury, Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow
and a Country Justice, which Paper was Svvorn unto in the House of Peers on
Friday the 19th. of November, 1680.

Sworn by Order of the Lords Committees for Examinations, etc. the 10th. of
December, 1680. before me Edmund Warcupp, Esquire

The following INFORMATION was delivered in the Spanish Language, fairly
written by Mr. John Faria my Father, to his Majesty and the Lords, Spiritual
and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, who were pleased to Command Mr. William
Blathwaite to Translate the same into English, which was done, and the same
Sworn unto in the Lords House, his Majesty present, upon the 19th. Day of Nov.
1680.
THIS Informant says, that at the first Arrival of Gasper de Abreu de
Freitas, the last Ambassador in Ordinary from Portugal, at the Court of
England, this Informant went to visit him, as having had an old Acquaintance
with the said Ambassador, at the time when he was here before, in the Quality
of Envoy extraordinary to his Maejesty of Great Britain (whom God preserve)
And the said Ambassador asking the Informant about his Son Francisco de Faria,
whom he had a mind to make his Secretary of Languages, as being skilled in the
English, French, and Portugeze Languages; whereupon this Informant carried his
said Son to the Ambassadors House, and left him there to be his Interpreter,
and this Informant continuing often to visit the Ambassador, who used to
complain much in his Discourse of the great Persecution, which he said, the
Roman Catholics lay under in the Kingdom of England, and that all was
occasioned by Mr. Oats and Bedlow, who were base Rogues and Villains, and that
for their having caused so great Mischiefs, they deserved to be killed,
swearing by God, that he would take care to have them killed; and this
Informant hearing the Ambassador use at several times this Sort of Discourse,
this Informant told him (as he used to be very free with the Ambassador) That
his Ambassy in England was about the affair of the Kingdom of Portugal, and
that he needed not trouble himself with any Body else, and that he should let
the King of Englands Subjects live in Peace, to which the said Ambassador
replied, that for those great Mischiefs those Rascals had brought upon the
Roman Catholics, they deserved to be killed. And this Informant further
says, that a Month or five Weeks before the said Ambassador took leave of his
Majesty of Great Brittan, upon his Return to Portugal, the aforesaid Francisco
de Faria brought to the House of this Informant some Papers belonging to his
said Son, that this Informant might keep them for him, and amongst the rest
there was one which the Informant saw written with the Hand of the said
Francisco de Faria, wherein were several Memorandums written in the Portuguese
Tongue, with the Names of English Persons as may be seen by the said Paper,
which the said Francisco de Faria took away afterward out of the House of the
said Informant. And this Informant further says, that at that time when the
Book made by Mr. Oats was published in French, being a Narrative of the Plot,
the said Ambassador sent to buy one of them, which the Informant translated and
read out of the French into Portuguese unto the Ambassador, who then spoke
verily angerly of Mr. Oats, and said that the Jesuits that had suffered died
as Martyrs; whereunto this Informant replied, that if they were so Zealous of
their Religion, it had been better for them to have exercised it in Flanders
and in other Parts, since they well knew, that if they were found in England,
they were to be punished with Death, by the Laws of the Kingdom; and the
Ambassador did also say that Coleman had suffered only for endeavoring to
bring the Roman Catholic Religion again into England; and the Informant also
says, that the Paper annexed to which he has put his Hand is the same Paper
of Memorandums before mentioned, which the said Francisco de Faria brought to
the House of this Informant.

SIGNED John de Faria

Translated out of Portuguese.
TO take care to Kill Oats. To Kill Bedlow. To take care to Kill Lord
Shaftsbury. To take care to Kill the Justice of Peace that lives in the
Country. A Complement to the Queens Doctor. A Complement to the Lord Scroggs.
The Letter that I was to send to Flanders by a man. About Friar Paulino, the
Letter he wrote and sent to Portugal. About Madam Abergavenny and what she said
to the Ambassador. The Porter of Summerset-House. To take care to Kill Oats and
Bedlow. To take care to Kill Lord Shaftsbury. Madam Abergavenny what she said.
The following INFORMATION being Sworn unto at the same time, and the Matter
therein contained relating to part of my Information in Page 29, I have with
leave Inserted it at the End of this my Information. December 15th. 1680.
Francisco de Faria
I Thomas Buss of the Parish of St. Margerets Westminister, Cook and Servant to
his Majesty, in the Office of a Cook in his own Kitchen, as third Cook, called
by the Name of Groom of the Kitchen, and being Master-Cook to their Graces the
Duke and Duchess of Monmouch, and in the Year of our Lord Christ 1678, when
his Majesty was then, in the Month of September, at Windsor, I the said Thomas
Buss, then waiting on their Graces, as abovesaid, was on the 13th. or 14th. of
September, being on a Friday, about seven of the Clock in the Morning to buy in
such Provisions as was needful for his Graces Family, his Grace being then
returned from the Battle of Montz, I by chance espied Four of my Acquaintance
talking together, viz. three Portugals, and one of them an English Man, and I
having not seen the English Man of three or four Years before, then Saluted him
by the Name of Father Hankinson, not knowing his Christian Name, in these Words
of Father Hankinson, May I say by or to you, as God Almighty said to the Devil,
Whence came you? or how shall I say to you? for he and I being acquainted ever
since her Majesty's first Arrival into England at Portsmouth, he the said
Hankinson made me no other Answer, but, You will never leave your Old Drolling,
but I having him by the Hand all this while, said, Well then come prithee from
whence came you indeed? Why I came from Italy, and then two of the three
Portugals left him, and one Portugal with me, and did ask him (he saying he
came from Italy) if he had brought over any Bulls or Pardons from his Holiness
the Pope, whereunto he did reply, You will never leave your drolling; and I did
ask him when he arrived at the City of London, and then the other Portugal
named Segnior Anthonio Fernandez turned from our Company over to the Fishermen
that sat in the Market, which was not above a yard and a half distance from
the place where we two then stood still talking, (their Majesty's both being
then at the Castle of Windsor) I there ask't the said Father Hankison if he did
arrive at Windsor on the said Wedensday Night, or no, and he told me No, his
Horse did tire, and it was late, so he stayed in Town all Night, and came for
Windsor on Thursday the 13th. about four or five of the Clock in the Afternoon.
Then I did ask of him, if he and I and three or four more of his old
Acquaintance should not drink together before his Departure, for he was then in
a traveling Posture? He told me by no means, for he was in great have, for he
was going about ten or twelve Miles to a Lords House, naming the Lords Name to
me, but truly I did forget his Lords Name, but he told me. If he could dispatch
betimes, to get to Windsor by four or five of the Clock in the Afternoon, then
his other Acquaintances and I should Drink together, and then the said Father
Hankison called over to the aforesaid Segnior Antonio Fernandez the Portugal
aloud, and prayed him for Gods Sake to have a care of those four worthy
Gentlemen the Strangers, and then I hearing him tell me that he came from
Italy, (thinking they might be four of the Gentlemen of Italy, come over to see
the Court of England) ask't him, what these Gentlemen were? and he told me they
were four Irish Gentlemen, and called to the before mentioned Segnior Antonio
Fernandez, saying aloud as he did before, Segnior Antonio, Segnior Antonio, for
Gods Sake have a great care of those four Gentlemen, worthy Gentlemen, the
Irish Men, for they will do our Business in the Grace of God; and the said
Segnior Antonio answered, And Grace of God I will have a great Care of them, in
the Grace of God fear nothing. And so he the said Father Hankison, being about
to be gone, well said I to him, if I shall see you no more, pray when do you
leave England? Tomorrow. And then said I, whether then? For Paris, and then for
Italy again. And then I bid him remember me to his Holiness the Pope, at which
he did laugh, and told me, you will never leave your Drolling, and so we
parted, and have not seen each other never since, nor thinking nothing of it
more, till I reading Coleman's Papers, wherein I heard the Names of four Irish
Ruffians named, should kill his Majesty, and I being his said Sworn Servant and
bound by my Oath as his Majesty's Servant, not to hear any Secret or public
Mischief, nor Treason against his most Sacred Majesty, but the same to reveal
to some of his Majesty's Officers, the which I did by Name to Sir Steven Fox,
and he did order me to acquaint the Committee of Secrecy with it, and likewise
I did acquaint Mr. Vernon, as Secretary and Steward to their Graces, the Duke
and Duchess of Monmouth, and my Superior Officer in their Family, and he liked
it very well, and told me he would inform some of the Committee of Secrecy of
it, and so he did, and I went before them at Sergeants Inn in Fleet Street, and
they did like the Information very well, for then they did want some to second
Dr. Oats's Depositions, and at the Trial of Councellor Langhorn, I was fetched
by the under Sheriff from dressing their Graces Dinner, to give Evidence
against the said Prisoner at the Bar, the which Evidence was after Oath taken,
highly approved on there, and this aforenamed Segnior Antonio Fernandez sent
for to the Court at the Old Bailey, by the Undersheriff with to the Earl of
Ossory, to Speak to their Majesty's, that the said Segnior Antonio Fernandez
might be brought before the Court at the Old-Bayly, and he being brought before
the Court, the Court ordered Sir George Jefferys, to take his Defense for
himself, he making so weak a one, he then being the Recorder of London, sent
the said Antonio by and with the Keepers to Newgate for the Matter of High
Treason against his Majesty, where he lay till the end of the next Term, and
then was Bailed out, and I was bound by Sir George Jefferys to prosecute, and
did Appear, on Summons from Windfor at Sir George Wakemans Trial, and never was
once so much as called, nor a great many more, near seventeen or eighteen, and
when the Court of Justice did rise, I asked Dr. Oats whether he or the Court
had any other Business with me, and he told me no, so I returned to Windsor the
same Night, and never heard more of it till this Sessions of Parliament.

Thomas Buss

Sworn by Order of the Lords Committees for Examinations etc. the 10th. of
December 1680, before me.
Edmund Warcupp. Esqu
And now Reader give me leave to admire the Providence of God, that I Francisco
de Faria should be brought from almost the utmost Parts of the far distant
habitable World to be an Instrument here in England to detect, or at least more
convincingly to prove the truth of those Horrid Treasons and Conspiracies, that
have been for so long time as wickedly denied, as impiously perpetrated; but I
am answered, when I consider that the Judgments of God are Unsearchable, and
that there is no Craft or Subtilty of Man, can hide or conceal those
Impieties, and foul Conspiracies which God will bring to Light.

Francisco de Faria.

FINIS.

