THE SEVENTH-DAY SABBATH Sought out and celebrated.

OR, The Saints last Design upon the man of sin, with their advance of Gods
first institution to its primitive perfection, being a clear discovery of that
black character in the head of the little Horn, Dan. 7.25.

THE Change of TIMES and LAWS.

With the Christians glorious Conquest over that mark of the Beast, and
recovery of the long-slighted seventh day, to its ancient glory, wherein Mr.
Aspinwal, may receive full answer to his late piece against the SABBATH.

By Tho. Tillam, Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm 102.13, 14. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion for the time to
favor her, yea the set time is come. For thy servants take pleasure in her
stones, and favor the dust thereof. London, Printed for the Author, and are to
be sold by Livewell Chapman at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1637.

To the Church of Christ which is at Colchester gathered by Gods grace with the
Authors Ministry into the beautiful order of the Gospel.
Precious and therefore Beloved,
WHat has the holy one done for you! what has Gospel grace wrought in you?
who are these that fly as a cloud and as doves to their win^ows: Isa. 60.8.
Happy day when the eternal spirit broke open your doors, and led you through
the pangs of the new birth into the favor of God by Christ. Blessed season
when the Almighty displayed his bright beams of evangelical light, forming
Christ in your souls by the same way that the blessed virgin conceived, viz. by
the ear; alluring you out of B^bylonish abominations, worldlly pollutions, and
unscriptural mazes to follow the Lamb in all his precious appointments.

Look (my beloved) from the top of the mountain (to which grace has advanced
you,) and behold the woeful world still wallowing in wickedness and weltring in
blood under the wrath of a jealous God, 1 Cor. 6.11.
in a hopeless, graceless, christless condition.

And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified; no more strangers and forreiners but fellow Citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God, founded upon your Rock of Ages whose
mysterious habitation and temple ye are. Now what shall we return to the Lord
for these invaluable benefits?

I hope there is not a soul of you that dare slight such unsearchable riches of
grace, I trust you are truly enlightened and purely principled, which with the
sense of your former weight of sin (the intolerable burden of an awakened
conscience) will cause you for ever to delight in Christ's shadow, and sit with
soul-satisfaction under the spread wings of the eternal Savior; that soul has
only a name to live that loves not such a Lord.

Amongst all the blessings bestowed upon man, God made for him a holy sabbath,
and this of old was the honor of Gods Israel, and shall be again the glory of
such as stand in the ancient path enquiring for the good old way. Now since
Jehovah has graciously revealed Sabbath l^ght amongst you, and laid you under
many endearments, let each soul (that is indeed a Saint) take up with the
Psalmist, Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee, for truly you have need of rest amidst all your reproaches for the
Law of your God, and to strengthen you for new trials, especially if you and I
(who have hitherto enjoyed our precious liberty) should experience what we
hear; namely that the present powers make no conscience of Oaths or Acts; if
this should prove so indeed, what can be expected to Sabbath-keepers but new
prelatical persecution?

There is a solumn Oath taken before God and men to protect such as profess
faith in God by Jesus Christ though differing from the doctrine or discipline
of the nation which is seconded by the present Parliament who have enacted,
Inster for Gover. Artic. 36, 37.
That such as profess faith in God, Father, Son, and Spirit, and own the
scriptures, Parl. Petit. and advic. 1657. page 13.
shall not be compelled by penalties, nor restrained from their profession,
though differing from the public Doctrine, and discipline, but shall be
protected in the peacable exercise of their religion.

But notwithstanding these great engagements, there would be little prohability
of peace should their principles be as some are persuaded.

Wherefore fly with speed to your experienced City of resuge and improve your
interest in heaven for the suppression of Jeroboams sin, 1 Ring. 32.33.
who did not only advance the device of his own heart in the time of worship,
but imposed it on the people, and so made Israel to sin.

Strive with your prayers against the remaining corruptions, rising
oppressions, appearing persecutions: a manifold enormities of a revolting
nation: God has eminently punished the princes and the Kings children and
(threatens) all such as are clothed in strange Apparel: Zeph. 1.8.
and yet how this abomination abounds amongst us! yea it is feared that as Jehu
pulled down one Baal and advanced two golden Calves, In Hebr. Lord.
so the suppression of one proud Prelate may be attended with the promotion of
many persecuting Presbyters, and then farewell our precious Gospel privileges
if ever our liberty should be at their allowance; They have already put forth
their sting by underhand attempts to obstruct this great truth of Gods sabbath.

Their contentious Lecture at Colchester, termed your Gospel Baptism, an infant
damning doctrine and the minsters thereof the Devils Factors stirring up Rulers
against us, which prebably may prove their strongest arguments in opposing the
Sabbath. As for such (either Presbyterian or any other opinion) who are of a
Gospel frame of Spirit free from Ishmaelitish persecuting principles, I do not
in the least reflect upon them, but highly prize all the lovely appearances of
Christ in them: knowing that such (though our elder Brethren) dare not murmr
at our fathers love, who has enlightened our minds: with the revived glory of
his Royal Sabbath but will like noble Bereans weigh this serious (and I hope
sober) work in the balance of the sanctuary.

If such as would have a precept of this high import smothered or concealed,
under a bed of security or Bushel of plenty were thoroughly a wakened by the
whisperings of Christ; they would readily proclaim this glorious truth upon the
house top. If this lively oracle of Gods seventh day Sabbath be not clearly
Instituted by the Father, Ratified by the Son, Approved by the spirit, and
observed by the Saints, Let it be confuted and rejected; but if this Royal Law
be thus established, how dreadful must be the continued weekly pollution of it
after Christ's call to repentance and reformation? God has long winked at the
days of our ignorance but he will not long bear with wilfulness. As for you
the beloved spouse of Christ (Elders, Deacons and Brethren) I do bless the
Almighty for you; I can never sufficiently admire that unexpected passage of
providence that made plain my path unto you; and truly since God has so
eminently crowned my weak (but willing) endeavors among you, we cannot without
ingratitude for get the many fatherly favors and constant encouragements of
that worthy instrument who first invited me to serve you.

The good Lord strengthen us by the choice graces of his precious spirit that
we may never forfeit our interest in this honored Patriot, or in the least
blemish our most holy profession. Your gracious submission to gospel truth has
filled my soul with joy, and I am sure God has enriched your hearts with gifts
and grace since your souls were set toward his Sabbath. It Is very much for yoar
sakes (who have earnestly desired it) that I have thus far engaged; wherefore
with endeared bowels of love I present it to you, the good Spirit engrave it in
your hearts that you may honor it in your lives, till the Lord of the Sabbath
crown all your services and sufferings with everlasting rest. Dear Brethren
cease not to pour out your souls on the be half of,

Your faithful and affectionate Minister Tho. Tillam.

THE Seventh Day SABBATH Sought out, and celebrated, BY Saints obtaining
Victory over the Mark of the Beast.
THe first Royal Law that ever Jehovah instituted, and for our Example
celebrated, (namely his blessed Seventhday Sabbath,) is in these very last days
become the last great controversy between the Saints and the Man of sin, The
Changer of Times and Laws. Awake ye slumbring Virgins, the fig tree is
apparently budded; the signs of his second coming who is The Lord of this
Sabbath, are so fairly visible, that although the day and hour be not known,
yet doubtless this generation shall not pass, till new Ierusalems glory shall
crown obedient Saints with everlasting Rest.

Wherefore rouse up your selves, ye spirited Citizens of Sion; shake off the
dust and trash of beastly Babylon; and whiles that imperious Harlot shames not
to assert that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, let heavenly wisdom be
your sole design, with raised expectations of his faithful performance; Hab.
2.14.
who has promised, That the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the
glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea.

Many shall run to and fro, Dan. 12.4. 2 These. 1.8.
and knowledge shall be increased.

Whiles vengeance in fiery flames shall be the portion of such as are
disobedient and willingly ignorant.

Remember the slights and deceits of imposing Pope and Prelate, their Altars,
Pictures, Gossips, kneeling at the Rail, Surplice, with the whole Systeme of
invented service; and let this consideration quicken all that fear the Lord,
That the very same Horn who thus imposed his Canons upon our consciences, must
change our Times no less then our Laws, Dan. 7.25.
or else he is not Antichrist.

Since therefore it is undeniable that we have been deceived by his Laws, it is
worthy our enquiry, whether we have been cheated of the appointed Times of Gods
worship? 'Twill be said to that soul that (after warning) shall be found in the
weekly pollution of Gods Sabbath; it is not one day in seven will serve turn,
Rev. 2^
when the books shall be opened, and that very seventh day on which God himself
rested shall be found expressly commanded. The Beasts Wafer c^kes and Water in
stead of enjoined Bread and Wine, will be as excusable one day as the change of
Gods holy Sabbath.

As for such professors who surpass the late Prelates in scoffing at Gods
Sabbath as an empty form, a trifle, etc. let New England (however mistaken in
the precise time) mourn over their licentiousness in these sorrowful strains.

No measure of tears are sufficient to lament the present estate of times, that
when the Lord Jesus was come forth to vindicate the cause and controversy of
Sion, there should rise up other instruments of spiritual wickedness in high
places, to blot out the name and sweet remembrance of this day from off the
face of the earth.

The enemies of the Sabbath are now not so much negligent time servers and
aspiring brambles, whom preferment principally biased to knock at the Sabbath;
but those who have eaten bread with Christ (a generation of professing people)
do lift up their heel against the Sabbath: So that what could formerly not be
done by Angels of darkness, the old Serpent takes another course to effect by
seeming Angels of light.

And what enlightened soul can cease to c^st in a heart full of sighs, not
only for such frothy professors, whose earthly minds under spiritual pretenses
contemn Gods hallowed time without fear or trembling; but even for those whose
ignorance hurries them (hoodwinked) from week to week to wallow in wickedness,
being that day most busily employed about their perishing bodies, which God
has solemnly designed for his honor, and health of their immortal souls.
Never more cause of mourning, then to see Saints in these days of light still
honoring the little Horn in the gross abuse of the Lords Sabbath, time, and
the Lords Supper-time. Why Christians will you stick here? Have you got victory
over the Beast, and beheld the Holy One tumble down his Image, and will you now
lose all your labors for want of a complete victory over the Mark of the
Beast, Rev. 15.2. and 20.4.
which is so visible and legible in the head of the little Horn, The changer of
Times and Laws. Therefore has the curse devoured the earth, Isa. 24.5.
Because they have transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinance, broken the
everlasting Covenant.

You are assured Christians the Horn has changed the Laws, and he cannot be
that Horn unless he change your Times also; will you therefore wisely weigh
that he had no Times to change, save the Lords Sabbath-time, and the Lords
Supper-time, and these he and none but he has changed, as I shall plainly
prove under this Position.

The seventh day Sabbath is a perpetual royal Rule for the righteous,
established by precept and president, to Gods praise, and Saints privilege.
And to prevent a sudden censure of singularity, let the ingenuous know, that
this Conclusion contains not a tittle different from the professed doctrine of
the esteemed Orthodox of this age, as will appear in its parts as so many heads
of the ensuing Treatise.

1. 1 The Rest. The Sabbath is one of the Assemblies approved points. Art.
Relig. p. 35.

2. 2 The Time. These. Sab. p. 100. Large Cat. p. 34
The time is confessed to be the very seventh day determined by God; for thus
write the Elders of New England (with whom accord our English Synod.)

Not only a day, not only a rest day, but the rest day or Sabbath day which
is expressed and expressly interpreted in the Commandment to be the 7th. day,
or a 7th. day of Gods determining, and therefore called the Sabbath of the Lord
our God, is here also enjoined and commanded as generally moral.

Here is a full and free confession, and all I shall crave of Christians is but
to observe the true seventh day Sabbath until some other day of Gods
determining shall be produced; but since that will never be done, I shall
proceed to the third point.

3 The Authority. Gods precept, seconded by his own practife gives such full
honor to the Sabbath, that I hear of none save Atheists, Papists, Prelates,
Ranters, Quakers, and some Notionists that gainsay it.

4 Perpetuity. Neither was this ancient Law instituted for a year, or an age,
but perpetuated to all posterity, as is sully acknowledged, Synod confess. p.
38.

5 The sanctification. This royal Sabbath is no base or beggarly rudiment (as
some tremble not to reproach it) but an honorable perfect Law of liberty,
These. sab. p. 49
worthy to be embraced by all the heavenly race of true believers.

6 The Rule. Not as a Covenant accompanied with thunder, denouncing curses for
the least disobedience; but as a holy, just, religious Rule, breathed by the
still and soft voice of the Gospel.

7 The Persons. To persons principled in Church order, Isa. 8.13. (the Antitype
of Gods Ark) in whose renewed hearts by virtue of the new Covenant all Gods
Laws are fairly registered which are by others slighted. Hos. 8.12.

8 The Use and End. And all for these two great Ends, 1. To honor God, 2. To
enjoy him for ever (which is the peculiar prerogative of such as obta^u victory
over the Beasts Mark, The changer of Times and Laws. And thus each tittle of my
tenent being attested (in so many words) by such as are esteemed Orthodox, I
hope it may freely appear without prejudice.

The seventh-day Sabbath is a perpetual royal Rule for the righteous,
established by precept and president, to Gods praise and Saints privilege.
First, Of the Rest.
The Hebrew (...) Shabbat, signifies a cessation from common work, Genesis 2.
and where it is first found it is Gods rest, and the day for ever separated
and consecrated or the honor of the most High, in memorial of his most
glorious works of Creation, the benefit whereof is extended even unto us, and
morally engages us to the Religious Observation of it, which can never be
truly sanctified until all false Rests be removed, such as National custom,
humane tradition, shadie speculation (all which are but vain worship;) Matthew.
15.9.
and as for natural or civil relations, carnal encumbrances, with those sensual
pleasures which steal away the soul from Gods Sabbath, they are all but
Egyptian reeds; and therefore let the Prophets alarm rouse up the self-denying
Disciple from every deceit, Mic. 2.10.
Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest, because it is polluted it
shall destroy you with a sore destruction. And so taking up the Cross of
Christ, with Spouse-like affections, enquire, as for the place, so for the Time
of rest. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, Caut. 1.7.
where thou feedest, where thou make thy flock to rest at Noon. Observe, the
Spouse of Christ enquires not only where, but when; not only for his flocks
resting place (which is his bosom,) but also for the Time, Isa. 40.11.
the rest at Noon; Christ has his Gospel seasons to sit in State; Meridian
heighths like the Sun in his circuit weekly returns to beam forth his grace to
his beloved, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
which the Spirit terms, IN SEASON.

I have heard of a silly shift to shuffle off Gods Sabbath, in making Christ
the bolster of disobedience, unscripturally asserting that Christ is the
Sabbath, thus confounding resting place with resting time. But as for this Time
of rest placed in the midst of the Royal Law, it is truly Moral and so
termed, as Baptism and the Lords Supper are termed Sacraments, in distinction
from inferior Ordinances, though neither of the terms Mo^al or Sacrament be
found in Scripture.

The word Moralis, signifies belonging to manners, and therefore the ten
Commandments are fitly termed Moral, as being indeed an exact rule of good
manners, informing us how to demean our selves toward God and men, and it is
in all things equal, holy, just, and good; yea and every way suitable to pure
Nature and Grace, and though the Bishop White.
see not a sutableness in the Sabbath to pure Adam, yet those who are better
learned, can see it suitable to the glorious Creator; who in observing it, made
himself a pattern to his Creature, and surely nothing can be more lovely and
delightful to a person principled, then to follow his gracious God in a
president so pleasant: Indeed Natures light as now it is blurred and clouded is
not capable of judging in the things of God, every man is naturally Popish,
framing Idea's of the Deity, 1 Cor. 2.14.
setting up images or imaginations, it is therefore most absurd to try the
morality of the Second or of the Fourth Commandment at corrupt natures
Tribunal.

But this threefold mystery may possibly add strength to the Sabbath Morality
if it be observed:

1. That innocent Adam had all the ten Commandments written in his heart,
whiles his heart was flesh. Romans 2.


2. When his heart was condensed into stone, and thereby the Moral Law was
defaced, Gal. 3.19.
God condiscends (for prevention of sin) to write all the very same Laws in
Tables of stone.

3. And when Gospel grace appears in new Covenant clemency transforming our
hearts again from stone to flesh, Heb. 8.10, 11. 2 Cor. 3.3. Eze. 11.18, 19, 20.
the very Laws written in Tables of stone are once more registered in the fair
Tables of renewed hearts, and that for this end, that we should walk in his
statutes, and keep his ordinances and do them.

He that sees not through this threefold mystery, depths of wisdom, with
unsearchable riches of mercy, may well suspect an unchanged stony heart, whiles
the renewed soul beholds the revived glory of Gods seventh-day Sabbath, as a
Moral duty suitable to Adam in his pure nature, and good for Saints in the
present state of grace, freely concurring with this conclusion touching the
morality of a Law; That a moral Law is not merely good because commanded; but
it is therefore commanded because it is good: and such is the nature of the
seventh day whereon God rested purely good, and therefore commanded; though
depraved Nature cannot discern it.

As the nature of a moral Law does thus confirm Gods Sabbath and none other; So
the title of the moral Law, involves and secures this blessed day amongst the
ten precepts, termed in Hebrew, Exodus 34.28.
(...) in Greek (...), in English it has borrowed the title of Decalogue, or
the Law of ten words or Commandments, all of equal honor and dignity; though
Satan's delusions have prevailed with licentious spirits to slight and censure
one of these ten Moral commands as ceremonial, and from hence to ascend even to
Blasphemy, in reckoning this Moral precept amongst beggarly Elements, and so
charging the glorious God with the observation of a base Ceremony, since
nothing is more certain then that the Highest himself did both sanctify and
celebrate the seventh-day Sabbath, and that before sin, and consequently before
any need of a Savior, or Ceremony shadowing him: As for the arguments levelled
against the Morality of the Sabbath, they do most of them strike at the
morality of the whole Decalogue.

For if the Sabbath be ceremonial because the Jews were obliged by their
deliverance from Egypt to observe it; Deuteronomy. 5.15.
upon the same account the whole Decalogue is ceremonial, since they are laid
under equal engagements to the whole Law; Exo. 20.
I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt from the
house of Servants, Rev. 11.8.
Thou shall have no other Gods before me, etc.

Wherefore let such as are experienced of their greater deliverance from all
the slavery of spiritual Egypt, religiously observe every jot and tittle of
this Moral, holy, just spiritual Law, as spiritually as is possible, and God
will teach such sincere souls that it is a strong delusion to talk of keeping
that seventh day Sabbath spiritually, whiles it is profaned literally.

It Is true our Lord Jesus enjoyneth a more intrinsecal and spiritual
observation of the Decalogue, Math. 5.
but withal he ratifieth and establishes every tittle, he that dare be so
deluded as to profane the Seventh day under pretense of keeping a spiritual
Sabbath, dare not commit corporal uncleanness or murder, under the like color
of the spiritual observation of these Laws. The truth is, such consciences dare
be bolder with God in robbing him of holy time, then they dare be with Man in
stealing his common goods.

Christian, thy Redeemer has obtained as well corporal as spiritual mercies
for thee; Wherefore glorify thy God (in sanctifying his Sabbath with the whole
Law) both with thy body and with thy spirit which he has purchased. 1 Cor.
6.20.


Such who study contention instead of obedience, labor to undermine the
Morality of the Law from that promise (which they say was peculiar to Israel)
of long life in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

1. But first, this smites at the whole Law out of hatred to Gods seventh day
Sabbath.

2. Let it be considered that those words are rather a motive then a mandate.

3. It Is dull Atheism to fancy the possession of a foot of Land that is not
Gods gift, and therefore binding us to obedience. Acts 17.26.
For he has made of one blood all the Nations of men for to dwell over all the
face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed and the
bounds of their habitations.

4. It Is high ingratitude in us above all people, in the midst of so much
peace, plenty, light and liberty, to contend against Gods holy Laws, rather
then to submit to his holy Sabbath.

5. The promise of long life was not peculiar to Palestine, but a motive to
Isreal's obedience both in the Wilderness and in Babylon, Act. 2.5.
yea and to the Gentile Proselytes in all Nations, Ephesians. 6.2.
and it is worthy our consideration how the Apostle renders it. Not land but
earth, that thou may live long on the earth; and so the word, (...) properly
signifies, and the statute word for word runs thus. Ex. 21.15, 17. Pro. 20.20.
Mat. 15 4, 6, 9.
Honor thy father and thy mother that they may prolong thy days upon the
earth. Thereby freeing obedien: children from untimely death, and investing
them with the comforts of life; Hence it is manifest, that both Jews and
Gentiles are bound to improve their blessings unto obedience, and no longer
endeavor to defile the whole Decalogue, rather then set to the sanctification
of Gods true Sabbath.

But the Sabbath has another sort of adversaries, who assert the whole Laws
morality, and yet plead the Sabbaths mutability (which scarce savours of
rationality) And that the depraved creature may sin with an high hand, against
that very place where first he sinned, he endeavors to divert Paradise of the
glory of the Sabbaths institution, boldly asserting that man's sin was more
ancient then Gods Sabbath. And this fancy is fathered upon the Psalmist, whence
it is asserted, Psalm. 49.12.
That Adam being in honor did not abide a night, and therefore his sin
prevented the Sabbath. But the text is abused, for the word (...) is future
Hiphil, and thus word for word rendered, Man in honor shall not abide a night,
that is, such as the context mentions, Verse. 19.
that trust in their wealth, etc. But (says the spirit) He shall go to the
generation of his father, they shall never see the light; this cannot be
applied to Adam, unless the Preacher of Peter's Colchester, or some of the same
fancy (whom I would modestly provoke to a reply) can show what fathers Adam
could go to.

But to prove that the Sabbath was instituted before sin, and consequently no
Ceremony leading to a Savior, take notice that man (the last and best piece of
the visible creation) yea and Angels also stood in their integrity with the
closure of the sixth day, for then all things were very good.

And no sooner did the sixth day end, Genesis 1.31. and 2.1. with Job 38.7 Luke
2.13. Ex. 31.17.
and the seventh begin, but God rested, sanctified, and celebrated his holy
Sabbath, in which he was refreshed, or exceedingly well fatisfied with the
goodness of all his creatures, which must needs precede sin, by which the
creature became very bad.

Some time must be allowed for the sin of Angels, and after that for the parley
with the woman. It was no little space wherein Adam gave significant names to
every creature one by one.

But enough is showed of the Sabbaths precedence of sin, and so for the
vanishing of this invention.

But it is further objected (though faintly) that Adam having no servants, etc.
was not in a capacity of keeping the fourth Commandment.

This is such a shift that it opens the door of licentiousness too wide for all
persons that have no servants, rich Citizens that use no cattle, etc. So that
still Gods first, and man's best and most delightful Law for spiritual solace,
shines in full glory out of Paradise; and though the decayed Prelates would
render it improper for pure Adam, Mar. 2.27.
yet since 'twas observed by the pure God, and declared by Christ to be made
for * Man, doubtless if Adam were a man 'twas made for for him, yea and for all
his posterity that bare the image of God, and are called Man or Woman. The
first invention thus failling and no possibility of expelling the Sabbath out
of Paradise, a second design is endeavored, Viz. to confine this royal Law
within the precincts of Palestine, as a legal ceremony peculiar to the Jews.
This was the account given of a pretended conference at Peter's Colchester,
where they were careful to prevent opposition, by continued dictates far
differing from the nature of a conference. The Person chiefly, engaged was a
Tradesman, a sad Omen to the decayed Clergy, who silently admired his inven^on
whiles he opposed his own N^w England princlples, manifestly sinning against
his light, in rendering the Sabbath ceremo^a^, because given to the Jews for a
signt; over whose deplorable condition New England thus laments.

It may affect ones heart with great mourning to see the many inventions of
men's hearts to blot out this remembrance of the Sabbath day; Shep. Sab.
they first cast it out of Par^d^se, and shut it out of the world until Moses
time, when in Moses time it is published as a Law, and crowned in the same
manner as all Moral Laws, yet then they make it to be but a ceremonial Law,
continuing only till the coming of Christ Jesus.

Thus New England mourns over such impieties, and it is cause of grief indeed,
that one of their own professed Members should so openly oppose their
impregnable doctrine of the morality of the Sabbath.

It is truth that the Sabbath was given to the Jews for a sign, Exo. 31.13.
and so was Christ himself, Isa. 7.14. Euk. 2.11,34. but it follows not that
either Sabbath or Savior must be therefore ceremonial. The Saints are set for
signs, so is the holy spirit, 1 John 4.13. Isa. 8.18 Eze. 20.12, 20.
yea for the very same sign as the Sabbath is, viz. That you may know that I am
the Lord that does sanctify you. There the same honor is put upon the
Sabbath, as upon the holy Spirit; yea let the self-denying Disciple know, that
in the conscientious observance of Gods Sabbath, he shall not long want the
blessed sign of Gods sanctifying presence.

The Sabbath is indeed a sign of goed things formerly produced, Exo. 20. and
31.13.
as the worlds creation, or else of good things at present enjoyed, as Gods
sanctifying grace; but never was it set for a sign of good things to come, like
the ceremonial Compare Col. 2.17, 18. with Lu. 4.18, 19, 21. Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6, 7,
8. and 13.18, etc. Mat. 22.17.
Sabbaths. I might here retort the vaunting language of the Preacher of Peter's
(of cutting off Goliahs head with his own sword) for if the Morality of the
Sabbath cease by being a sign to the Jews in their generations, upon the same
account must the whole Law cease to be Moral, since Gods spirit has set it
also for such a sign.

Thus while vain man finds out inventions to slight Gods Sabbath, as a Jewish
ceremony because given to that people for a sign, he rejects the Holy spirit,
Scriptures, Christ and all, as so many Jewish ceremonies.

Neither is it possble to escape the Dil^^^ma by saying that the Sabbath is
Moral, but the seventh day Ceremonial, for though the seventh day and Sabbath
be terms convertible in the fourth Commandment, yet even in the place
mentioned the term seventh day is not set for the sign, but the term Sabbath.

And whereas the same person puzzled the people by a third inwention (but
without the Book)



1.

2. Heb. 7.
All sacrifices were recorded types of Christ, and therefore abolished; but the
Sabbath did never type out Christ therefore never abolished nor changed.

3. The seventh day Sabbath is part of the Law Moral, where no syllable is
found of sacrifices, it is therefore as absurd to conclude we must offer
sacrifice, if we will keep the Sabbath, as to say we must keep the Ceremonial
Law if we observe the Moral.

When these fancies fail, and the Sabbath can neither be expelled Paradise, nor
confined to Canaan. A third invention is found, to make Christ a bolster to
disobedience, by proclaiming him a Sabbath-breaker. Who never transgressed no
not a tittle of the least Ceremony. For had he failed of the smallest service,
he could never have been the Savior of the world. God must have a Lamb without
spot or blemish.

The charge brought against Christ is (...)

1. That he justified his Disciples in plucking Ears of Corn; as well he might,
when the Law expressly allows it, Deuteronomy. 23 25.
without restraint of time; and where no Law is, there is no transgression.

If the Phariseos were righteous over much (who had so deeply suffered for
slighting the Sabbath formerly) shall the Lord of the Sabbath be censured for
allowing that to his hungry Disciples, which even the Hipoc^ites themselves did
not deny their beasts? that is, Luke 3.15.
Necessary food.

If Professors are not ashamed to join with Scribes and Pharisees in censuring
our Savior as a Sabbath-breaker, yet let not these continue bold, whiles
Christ's words make the others blush, Luke 13.17.

And whiles our Advocate performs his office in pleading the cause of his
Disciples, let Christians learn to content themselves (by the Apostles
examples) with a slender Sabbath days Dinner, rather then profane the
sanctified feason to make provision for their perishing bodies. Trust to his
word who has promised to such as first seek his King, dome, that all things
needful shall be supplied, he will never leave thee nor forsake thee, but
rather then fail, Mar. 6.34.
he will put forth a beam of his Divinity to feed thee, who do faithfully
follow him. Wherefore resolve to serve him, though he feed thee but with Ears
of Corn: and this also be grudged by superstitious Pharisees.

A second charge jointly brought by the Hipocrites of old, and present
Professors against our innocent. Savior, is about the Cripples miraculous
cure, J^^ ^^.8.
and carrying his Bed on the Sabbath. Whereas they were no more capable of
understanding the supposed violated Scripture, then of discerning the person
they quarrelled with.

The scope of the Scripture is only to restrain traffic and travel for gain
in our ordinary callings, Jer. 13.21. Neh. 13 11, etc.
but not to obstruct any work simply for Gods glory and spiritual profit;
neither did the man transgress any letter of the Law, for it is Thy work the Law
forbids, but this was properly the Lords work to confirm the miracle wrought
upon a helpless and almost hopeless creature.

The Word of God freely allows bearing Mat. 12 5.
of Burdens for his own honor even on the Sabbath, Joh. 7.21 23. Josh. 6.12
etc. 1 Kin 20 28, 29.
as in Circumcsion and Sacrifiees, in the miraculous taking of Jericho, and in
Heb. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
war. And so lar was our dear Redeemer from slighting the Sabbath that he
singled out that Sanctified season to honor it with his chief miracles. Gods
spirit enjoins exact obedience to those truths that were confirmed by Heb. 2.1,
2, 3, 4.
maricles, and as the woe was greater to those ungrateful Cities where his
chief maracles were wrought, so it will be sad for such as will persist in
slighting the holy Sabbath, which he has so eminently arown'd with his wonders.

After labor has bin spent in vain to fasten some defamation on the Lord of
the Sabbath, the next invention is to fall upon his servants. And first, they
seek some shelter for Sabbath^ breaking from the Apostles words; One Man
esteems one day above another: Romans 14.5.
Another osteemeth every day alike. The Apostle does not here expose Gods moral
Sabbath to our censure, or to be esteemed or disesteemed as we please; for he
had before firmly established the moral Law Romans 3 31.
and cannot be thought to destroy what he has settled in the same Epistle;
only in meats and days ceremonial, he leaves weaklings to liberty, for since
Christ has took down the wall of partition, The persons places, meats and days
which did support it are all levelled, but the seventh day Sabbath was
instituted long before that partition wall was raised. So that it is not in our
liberty to esteem it as we please, for God himself has made it holy, and so
esteems it whether we do or no. It Is God that from the Worlds foundation placed
holiness in this day, and what God has sanctified let not us presume any
longer to make common.

Another argument, is drawn from Gal. 4.10. Ye observe Days, and Months, and
Times, and Years.



The third argument aspersing the Apostles, is raised from Col. 2.16, 17. Let
no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink. or in respect of part of a
Feast, So the Greek.
or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to come,
but the body is of Christ.

1. Here at first sight it is evident that only such Sabbaths are ceased, as
were a shadow of good things to come: But the seventh day was never such a
Sabbath; a sign indeed of good things past, and present, as is already showed,
but never termed a shadow of things to come.

2. The blessed Spirit by two other terms declares clearly what Sabbaths are
ceased; 1. Col. 2.14.
such as were against us, 2. contrary to us; and such were those annual
Sabbaths, requiring great labor and travel in coming three times a year from
all parts to Jerusalem; far from the sweet Rest which the fourth Commandemnent
enjoins upon the seventh day Sabbath, which never was in the least against us,
or any way contrary to ^s, and therefore not here intended, though he Prelates
by perverting the Text would ^volve it; for unto the Greek (...), (which only
signifies Sabbaths) they have deceitfully added [dayes] to the Text, as though
there were no other Sabbaths but Sabbath days, whereas the seventh year was a
Sabbath, and the seventh seventh the great ceremonial Sabbath or Jubilee.

And whereas by this bold and absurd addition some would cast off the seventh
day as ceremonial, who yet plead strongly for the morality of the Sabbath, it
is very considerable that this Text touches not the Day at all, but the Duty,
that is, the Sabbath, which even many enemies of the seventh day confess to be
moral. Evident it is, that as the seventh day points out the time of worship,
so the Sabbath denptes the worship it self, and the Apostle mentions not the
day or time as a shadow, but the Sabbaths; and so if any thing in the fourth
Commandment were a shadow of Christ, it must be only the Rest, which is the
duty, and not the Time which is the seventh day. As warrantably may they reject
the moral Law upon that expression of the Law being changed, Heb. 7.12.
as the seventh day upon this word of Sabbaths being ashadow. We may as well
distinguish of Sabbaths in this place, as Laws in that.

Mr. Aspinwal pretends to reform the Bishops abuse of this Col. 2. and
translates it rightly [Sabbaths;] but renders those words a Feast, which he
knows is only part of a Feast; and from hence takes liberty ( p. 4.) to
descant upon Feasts, contrary to the word. Well; after all attempts the 7th.
day Sabbath remains a glorious lively Oracle to Christians; it is no b^se
ceremony, or beggarly rudiment, for God himself observed it, and with his own
voice with great Majesty enjoined and recorded it a among the rest of his
royal perpetual precepts; it requires no toil nor trouble (like the ceremonial
Sabbaths) but lovingly releaseth man from his labors. It is no way against us,
or contrary to us, unless we be against God, and contrary to those heavenly
spirits, who prefer one day in Gods Courts before a thousand, in that dunghill
drudgery wherein earthy, carnal, base-born muck worms delight to be toiling and
moiling in this bewitching world. It mounts the Dove-like Spouse from earth to
heaven, where she obtains a taste of her eternal glory, dwelling this day in her
Beloveds bosom, sweetly reposing her weatherbeaten Vessel (in this shining
season of noontide Rest) in the very arms of Christ. Caut. 1.7.
These are undeniably the sweet enjoyments, and soul-ravishing delights which
this Royal Sabbath of Jehovah opens to the sincere obedient soul, and therefore
only to be slighted by such, as observing lying vanities, forsake their own
mercies. When restless spirits find their fancies frustrate, and that they have
only wearied themselves with these inventions.

1. To expel the glorious Sabbath out of Paradise.

2. To imprison it in Palestina.

3. To defame our Savior as a Sabbathbreaker.

4. To asperse the Apostles as Sabbathslighters.

And finding the Sabbaths luster breaking through these foggy inveations, 5.
Satan the Prince of darkness transforming himself into an Angel of Light,
furnishes them with the last invention, under the most specious pretense of a
spiritual Sabbath, to live in the weekly pollution of that blessed day which
the Father of Spirits has appointed for the inlet of all spiritual sweets into
the soul.

And the poor deceived Notionists, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. Genesis 3.5.
forgetting how the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty (under the very
same bait of disobedience to Gods Commands promising most g^orious spiritual
enjoyments) are so transported with the glistering Alchymie of his sublime
aerie notions, that away goes all the tried Gold of the Law and the Testimony;
and now no duties will down with these lawless Libertines, but all their
devorion lies buried in the abyss of pretended spiritual prayer, spiritual
singing, spiritual fasting, spiritual feasting, spiritual baptism, spiritual
supper, spiritual sabbath, leaving all literal obedience as too low for their
bewitched fancies, as if Christ and primitive Christians were not as spiritual
in obedience to these litreal commands, as any of these pretenders; who
notwithstanding all their boasted high seize, are most of them deeply
drenched in earthy Dens: whiles they promise librety to others, 2 Pet. 2.19.
many of themselves are the servants of corruption. The spring of these
delusions (for the most part) breaks forth from the palpable contradictions of
such, as having laid an impregnable foundation for Gods Sabbath by their
excellent arguments for its morality, do presently demolish their own structure
again, in asserting its mutability. And whiles they labor in the very fires to
find some Scripture authority for their supposed change; ingenious mounting
refined spirits seeing not the least Gospel ground for a first day Sabbath, and
being prejudiced against the seventh day, (stigmatized with the odious
unscriptural character of JEWISH Sabbath) they presently become a prey to
Satan, who persuades them that in slighting the Sabbath literally they may keep
it spiritually, and belike God; whiles thus they become most unlike him, who
really sanctified and observed the seventh day Sabbath. And thus like Eve,
casting off the literal command upon a spiritual pretense, they break the
bounds of Paradise: and whither will they post? for it is evident in Scripture,
that all Religionebs and flows according as the Sabbath is slighted or
sanctified.

Being thus confounded with the contradictions of such as assert the Sabbath to
be moral and yet mutable; and withal blinded by Satan's baits to construe all
Scripture according to his custom (promising spiritual blessings upon literal
disobedience Genesis 3.4, 5. Mait. 4.4.6. Mat. 5.
) they now endeavor to support their deceits by slandering our Saviors first
Sermon; as if his prohibition of spiritual adultery, opened a gap to corporeal
Uncleanness, (which this principle has even hurried many to practice:) whereas
the great Expositor detecting and detesting that Phatisaical outside service,
then in esteem for true Religion, binds us over to spiritual obedience, without
destroying one jot or tittle of the Law; Mat. 5.19.
severely threatening such as should transgress the least of those staturea.

And yet these deceived souls fear not to break all bands and bounds, that so
they may drive on in disobedience without sense of sin; for where no Law is,
there is no sin; and where no sin is, there can be no Savior; and where no
Savior, no possibility of salvation, which they shall find too true that leave
Gods moral Law, or put away or deprave any part thereof: They shall find, that
if Gods Law be nothing to them, God himself will be nothing to them, but a
severe Judge to condemn them by that Law they refuse to rule their lives by.

Sad will the sight of this sentence be to deceived souls in that dreadful day,
(when Books and hearts shall be opened.) Now go, Isa. 30.8, 9.
write it before them in a table and note it in a book, that it may be for the
time to come for ever and ever, that this is a re^ellious people lying
children, chilaren that will not hear the Law of their God.

And whereas us objected that our Lord has fulfilled the Law; and that indeed
one jot or tittle might not pass till he had fulfilled it, but that we need not
now fulfill it:

Let such know, that it is no more lawful now then before to be unclean, lie,
steal, or covet; it is as unlawful now as ever to b^aspheme, make, or worship
images, and it will one day be found as sin^ull now as ever it was, Mat. 3.15.
to slight Gods sanctified seventh-day Sabbath which Christ fulfilled; he
fulfilled Baptism, and so must we; he observed his Supper, and so must we; he
sanctified the seventh-day Sabbath (and established it for ever) and therefore
so must we.

As to that objection that Christ mentions not the Sabbath in his Sermon, and
therefore it may be neglected:

By the same reasons the Papists may justify their abominable idolatries,
since in all that Sermon no mention is made of images. Thus while the unwary
Rebel thinks to escape S^ylla he wracks upon Charybais, so dangerous is it to
dally with any one of Gods Laws; Wherefore take heed of disobedience under a
pretense of spirituality. That principle which now prompts you to the weekly
profanation of the Lords Sabbath will lead you by insensible degrees to as
light esteem of the Lords Supper; and under a pretense of praying continually,
force you from family prayer as a formality. Christ delights in his Doves
voice, and surely our voice is not too good for God, neither it man more
spiritual then his Maker; he that made us prays often for us both with heart
and voice, and so taught us to pray; 1 John 2.6.
and so he observed Gods seventh-day Sabbath both literally and spiritually,
and left us an example that we should follow his steps in all Moral actions.

Some Sabbath-slighters would fain affix a Type to the Sabbath, but are
pitifully puzzled how to bring it to pass. One would have it a type of our Rest
in Christ; but for want of Scripture this conceit is cashiered.

A second supposes, that the sacrifices annexed to the Sabbath made it
typical; upon which account every day must be typical, since sacrifices were
enjoined every day.

A third, thinks the Sabbath may be a type of Christ's lying in the grave, but
i^stead of may-be's, I shall prove in its place, that his rest in the grave on
the Sabbath confirms this Law to Christians

A fourth confesses, it is very difficult to find out this supposed
typicalness, and yet adventures to affix the deliverance out of Egypt to the
Sabbath, as a type of our deliverance by Christ; but every babe in Christ at
first blush beholds the very same deliverance affixed upon the front of the ten
Commandments, which manifestly proves the Sabbath as free from being typical,
as any other part of the Law.

A fifth (with whom my spirit joins) finding that the Sabbath was never any
type of Christ, Ledgard Heb. 4.
is persuaded if it be typical, it is only since Christ; and that not Moses but
Paul makes it typical of that glorious Rest-day which saints shall enjoy with
Christ a thousand years, that as the Weekly labor of six days ends in a
Rest-day of grace, so the worlds 6000. years travel shall terminate in a
Rest-day in glory.

Now although I judge that as marriage (ordained in Paradise) is not a type but
a similitude of Christ, so the Sabbath (of the same descent) does rather
resemble then type out that Rest; yet I shall not contend, but rather conclude
that if the seventh day Sabbath be typical of that expected happy Rest, then of
necessity the type must remain until it shall be swallowed up of the glorious
Antitype.

A sixth (in the midst of such uncertainties) conceives the Sabbath may be
typical of the Gospel or day of grace.

But what an absurdity would this conceit put upon our Savior, as if he should
direct his Disciples to pray, Mat. 24.20.
That their slight might not be in the Winter nor on the Sabbath day of grace;
i. e. that they might not fly at all, when as yet he had commanded them to
fly.

2. If the day of grace be our enjoined Sabbath, then we must be sure as long
as the Gospel lasts to do no servile work according to the Commandment: but
here it is also conceived, that the works now prohibited are our sins.

Answ. 1. The Law did no less prohibit sin then the Gospel.

2. This conceit supposes God thus commanding; six days (of the Laws duration)
thou shall or may labor and do all thy work of sin, but the day of grace is
the Sabbath, in it thou shall not sin, thou, thy son (and which is extremely
absurd) thy cattle and the stranger that is within thy gates. Either this
opinion must reject the rest of the fourth Commandment, as it does the seventh
day, or else it puts it self upon more then an Egiptian task, to keep his son,
servants and strangers from sin. As for the poor cattle, they are incapable of
such a Rest as cessation from sin; and the merciless Notionist is reasoning
them out of that natural rest wherewith the merciful God has privileged them:
so that if there be no rest required but from sin, the poor bruits may rue the
time of Christ's coming into the world, 'twere well for them that Peter had
prevailed to build Tabernacles, that they might have still enjoyed the good
days of Moses.

And as for English servants, their condition would be little different from
Turkish slaves, so that they might well bewail MESSIAH's birth should this
opinion prevail, for the boundless desires of earthy-minded Masters, would
seldom be weary of the way of getting wealth; neither would their pretended
spirituality dictate what day to spare their wearied servants. But instead of
the Angels good tidings of great joy to all people, servants would soon cry out
sad tidings of great sorrow, to be thus deprived of the happy rest for soul and
body, and constrained to toil and travel on the Sabbath.

Thus by Origens allegorical Divinity, (making cessation from sin the only
Gospel Sabbath) the letter of Gods Law (which calls for corporal rest and
spiritual service) is perverted, Christ's Sermon abused, Exe. 20. Is. 58.13
the Royal Sabbath (like a typical ceremony) rejected, the poor bruits wearied,
servants defrauded, and manifold absurdities introduced; to the great dishonor
of the great Lawgiver, and grievous sin of such as assert the only Sabbath is
to abstain from sin, which that soul shall do indeed who abstains from labor
on Gods Sabbath, servile work being the known sin of the fourth Commandment.

Cease from thy shallow conceits thou deluded slighter of holy Sabbaths. The
Saints day of eternal cestation from sin and sorrow is not yet come, we see
Babylon yet in being, the Jews uncalled, all the eath in confusion; the day of
peace is indeed approaching when such only as are found in ways of obedience,
shall enter in by the gate to the glorious City of everlasting Rest.

Thus having through Divine aid vindicated the Sabbaths morality from those
inventions and aspersions raised against it; I shall now proceed to the second
part in the Position.

Viz.

The select season or precise time, determined by him who is hasting to the
ruin of that blasphemous Little Horn; for his change of Times and Laws.
THat the seventh day was the Lords holy Sabbath, Genesis 2.2. Heb. 4.3
from the Worlds foundation to our Saviors Passion is undeniable: And yet such
is satan's envy at the Sabbath, that he suggests a possibility of alteration,
by the Suns station in Joshua's time, and retrogradation in Hezekiah's days.

But it may easily be understood, that when the same power who placed the Sun
in its Sphere, stayed its course one day, and commanded it to return backwards
another, this did only lengthen those individual days, and then returned to its
natural motion, but altered not the next day at all.

2. It must be concluded that our Savior (who fulfilled the Law exactly)
observed punctually the very Sabbath, and the scripture testifies that the holy
women rested the Sabbath day according to the Commandment, Luke 23. ult.
that is, upon the very seventh day which God instituted and required to be
observed.

And the whole world (though different in Religion) will give full testimony
that neither the Heathens saturday (so called long before Christ's time;) the
Turks friday, the Papists sunday, nor any other day in the week has since met
with any change: so that I may with as much reason, question whether my right
hand be that the world calls so, as I may question whether saturday be the very
seventh day, seeing the Jews also dispersed through the world punctually
observe it.

And yet what a deal of dust has been raised from the Prelates ashes by an old
Professor of New England-way against their principles, and his own conscience;
his great Argument (borrowed from the Bishops) is this:

That since all Regions cannot observe the same hours for the Sabbath, by
reason of the various rising and setting of the Sun; therefore the seventh day
is not universally moral. Answ. What will not enmity to Gods Sabbath set upon?
seeing such a one as Capt. Jenison is not ashamed to use the old Prelates
worm-eaten Arguments in flat opposition to his Brethren; Me thinks it should
wound his soul to receive answer from Mr. Shepherd (with approbation of the
consociated Elders of New England) in detestation of such deceit, thus.

The fourth Commandment must stand firm, Shep. sab. page 147.
the Heaven and Earth must fall asunder; the Lord will rather waste Kingdoms,
and the whole Christian world with fire and sword, then let one tittle of his
Law perish: the Land must rest when Gods Sabbath cannot, etc.

And surely it may sadly affect their hearts in New England, if ever this
reaches their eye or ear, that one of their professed members, in a great
public assembly, should combat the Sabbath with the same weapons foiled by
them. And in hopes it will make the Captain ashamed, and silence all
adversaries, I shall transcribe the solid answer of reverend Mr. Shepherd to
the cloudy argument, (which he says Carpanter and Heylin compassed the whole
earth and heavens to find out.

To think (says he) that the Sabbath was proper to the Jews, Shep. sab. page
148.
because they only were able to keep and exactly observe the time of it, being
shut up (as Mr. Primvose says) within a little corner of the earth, and that
the Gentiles are not therefore bound to it, because they cannot exactly observe
the time of it in several quarters of the earth so far distant, is a very
feeble argument; for why might not all Nations exactly observe the rising and
setting of the Sun according to several Climates, by which the natural day, and
so this if the Sabbath is exactly measured, and which God has appointed
(without limitation of any hour) to be the bounds of the Sabbath, as it sooner
or later rises or sets: Were not the Mariners of the men of Judah bound to
observe the seventh day in all the several coasts where they made their
voyages? Did God limit them to the rising or setting Sun of Indea only, etc.

Thus far New Englands answer to that argument taken up by Mr. Ienison against
them: into whose treasury I shall cast my mite upon consideration of,

1. Act. 2.5. and 15.11. and 13.14. and 17.1.
The Proselytes of Jerusalem out of all Nations under heaven; whose undoubted
observation of the Sabbath in their several Countries, is a full confutation of
this aerie argument.

2. There will probably be granted some variation between ^^ai and Sion, yet
the Sabbath punctually observed in both places. Captain Ienison is not ignorant
of four hours difference in the rising Sun between England and the American
Colonies, and yet the same first day observed both here and there. But by the
way we may observe, that the wounds he would give unto the seventh day Sabbath,
fall as heavily upon the first day, whereunto he pretends great devotion (with
his Brethen;) for if the seventh be uncertain, the first must needs be so: and
thus whiles he would weaken the true Sabbath, he opens a gap to that impiety of
rejecting the authority of the fourth Commandment, which sober spirits abhor.
But our God has not bound us to the obedience of such hours, but of such a
day: the Clock is not to be our guide, but the Sun.

Here they object, That in some (though scarce any habitable) Regions, the Sun
for many months leaves not their view; whence they suppose an impossibility of
observing the sabbath.

The answer is, That in all parts the Sun is ever upon motion, his Eastern and
Western circuits are not only observed, but exactly measured familiarly each
four and twenty hours, so as not only to know their times of repose, but
possibly to shame us in the abuse of ours: should the clouds, or other meteors
in ercept their sight of the Sun (or ours,) the fowls of the heaven would give
information. (...). 8.7.


And as sleeping and working time is easily discerned each four and twenty
hours; with like facility may the six working days be distinguished from the
Sabbath. If once the heart be free to yield obedience, it will cease to create
Prove. 22.13.
and invent difficulties; and the renewed nature will no less breath after the
souls weekly Sabbath, than the old nature will expect its accustomed repose.
The Suns daily circuit, and weekly revolution, is no such difficulty to a
devout soul.

But whither are we roving? Will not our own Climate contain us? Joh. 21.21, 22.
Are we not more inquisitive (with Peter) to know what other Nations shall do,
then to study our own duty? We should even shame to slight Gods Sabbath, whiles
the Heavens declare his glory; and whiles we fancy Bugbears of uncertainty in
observing the exact time, Lo day unto day utters speech, Psalm. 19.
night unto night shows knowledge, there is no speech or language where their
voice is not heard. What beter directions can we desire, then this faithful
witness of Heaven? by his several circuits exactly measuring out our time, and
informing our eye, as words instruct our ear? When his fix days light leaves
our Land, it is then time to leave our labors: For then does the glorious Lamp
of Heaven like a Herald proclaim the approaching Sabbath, that Saints may set
open the everlasting Gates for the King of Glory.

I would not leave this scruple, wherewith the self condemning adversary
reproached his own principles, till the path rendered so abstruse and intricate,
attain its promised perspicuity, Isa. 35.
even to the weakest sight, that so way faring men, though fools, may not err
therein. Wherefore observe, that in the beginning, when Heavens bright Eye
declined the sixth Evening in Eden, the holy God gave unto man not only a
precept, but a fair president also, in ceasing from the work of Creation, to
sanctify and observe his holy Sabbath. Howbeit at the same hour it was
impossible for other Climates of the World (regularly) to begin the Sabbath,
for the more Western parts must wait for the Suns warning, or else they should
not sanctify the seventh day exactly, as measured and regulated by the Sun,
which God has purposely set for signs and for seasons, Genesis 1.14.
and for days and years.

Having therefore proclaimed rest in Paradise (leaving man with his Maker to
sanctify the Sabbath) away he posts as a Bridegroem from his Chamber, Psalm. 19.
rejoicing as a Giant to run his race; and so coursing in his circuit through
the Heavens, he declares to the Regions sooner or later (as fast as he can sly)
when to cease from their six days servitude, to sanctify the exact seventh day
Sabbath: Yea, when mounting the other Hemisphere, the interposition of the
terrestrial Globe, makes their Meridian the Antipodes Midnight; yet is the
seventh day (as measured by the Sun) punctual and certain in each Region. God
has not engaged us to the same hours, but to that assured seventh day, or
seventh part of time, regulated by the glorious Lamp, ordained for times and
seasons, for days and years. Where then lies the difficulty of the seventh days
certainty, which was suggested to the people with such a cloud of confusion?

But lastly, the difference between out Summer and Winter Sabbath in this
little Island, is as evident to every A, B, C, Christian, as is the certainty
of the seventh day in the midst of such variation; for who knows not that our
Winters Sabbath begins four hours sooner then in Summer, and ends upon the same
account, making full eight hours difference between Summer and Winters Sabbath:
But though the hours so much differ, yet the seventh day surrounded by the Sun,
is unalterabiy the fame, and the Sabbath certain, as in Summer and Winter
season with us, so in each Climate and Country throughout the world. And
therefore it is but an aerie flourish borrowed from the Bishops (and perhaps a
vaunt of more A^. then suits education or capacity,) to compass the earth for
an agument to prove the variation of time, which is so obvious and familiar in
our little angle, and yet I suppose never begat the least scruple in any
Christian, neither is there the least cause. But I hope the adversary sees
great cause by this time, to be ashamed of his cloudy speculation (amusing the
people) and humbly to confess he did he knew not what, (against New Englands
testimony, and Scripture evidence,) and so obtain the benefit of Christ's
Petition, Luke 23.34.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Carnal hearts might with
more reason contend against the Lords Supper in some Countries for want of
Wine, then against the Lords Sabbath for want of Light: But when Grace shall
make Saints as zealous for the Sabbath as the Sacrament, they will find less
difficulty in observing the seventh Circuit of the Sun, then in supplying the
defects of their native soil, by plowing the Ocean for the fruit of the Vine.

Having thus by Sunbeams, and Scripture streams, rescued the certainty of the
seventh day from the clouds of obscurity; it will be time with all humility to
enquire at the gate of Grace, Whether this seventh day be the unaltered solemn
season for holy service under the Gospel?

That there is a special season designed, distrinct from common time, is
generally asserted and received by Scripture-Christians, and one would think
that the Levellers of days and duties, should even be thunder-smitten with the
Apostles alarm; 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom, Preach the Word, be
instant IN SEASON, OUT OF SEASON, i. e. on the Sabbath day, on the Week days,
in Gods time, in man's time; and this sense will be found the saving truth, if
we take that igitur in the Text for our direction to the foregoing Chapter, I
charge thee therefore, i. e. since thou art so well instructed in the truths of
the Old Testament (the only known Scriptures when thou wast a child) which
are able to make thee wise through faith unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.14.
therefore be instant in season, out of season. Now the only moral season
those scriptures in join us, is the famous seventh-day Sabbath never changed
till the little horn arose. No wonder then the same spirit by another Apostle
highly approves our fulfilling the royal Law accoring to the Scriptures, Ja.
1.8.
which (as to the season of worship) is none other in the royal Law then the
seventh-day Sabbath; and therefore we shall approve our selves noble Bereans
indeed, by searching the Scriptures whether this thing be so? concluding that
if the Scriptures be able to furnish the man of God thoroughly to all good
works, 2 Timothy 3.17.
then the seventh day Sabbath is that certain designed season which God will
own as a good work in such as observe it. Proud man presumes to make all
seasons equal and alike, but the good spirit promised by Christ to lead us into
all truth, puts undeniable difference between season and season. And the
Apostle which lays so great a charge upon Timothy, to Preach in season, out of
season; does thus declare his own practice: That he had been with the Saints At
all seasons. Acts 20.18.
And he expounds his meaning; first that he had preached publicly, i. e. as in
open places, so in the solemn season designed by God for public worship. And
from house to house, Verse. 20.
i. e. improving all opportunities, night and day. Now that the seventh-day
Sabbath was the special season for Gospel service (namely prayer and preaching)
the Apostles practice, yea his constant practice is pregnant proof, as will be
showed in its proper place.

This is not left to the liberty of any creature to alter, Acts 13. and 16. and
17. and 18
(though some who thereby justify the abominations of the little hom) do
assert (but not for want of ignorance) that it is not that special seventh day
that is enjoined, but A seventh day; whereas we have not only the Pattern in
the Mount, namely the precise time of Gods Rest to point out the Sabbath day,
but to end all cavils, he points twice in the fourth Commandment to that very
seventh on which he rested, by the emphatical demonstrative particle (...), so
that it is not a seventh, but (...) the seventh day, and further requires that
we should keep Is holy because he blessed IT, and sanctified IT. And therefore
they had need make sure work of a very clear word, for a change or repeal of
that seventh day, against the day of judgment, for fear of being left
speechless.

And as for such as suppose A seventh day or A seventh part of time is the
morality of the fourth Commandment, they will never help themselves by it, for
if it be a seventh day, then it cannot be A sixth day, or an eighth day, or any
other, but simply A seventh day, unless they will destroy their own morality;
and so for the other notion of a seventh part of time, which they confess is
purely moral, if so, then no other time but simply the seventh part, must from
week to week be devoted to Gods worship throughout all ages, for whenever the
seventh part of time is altered, the Morality must needs be destroyed.

But by such vain jangling, it seems they had rather have any Sabbath, or no
Sabbath then the true sanctified Sabbath, which God has especially designed,
and whereon the choicest blessings may be in faith expected. All other days
were good wherein God wrought, but the seventh day was and is peculiarly
blessed, wherein God rested. And therefore Antichrist engages earthly powers,
more especially to profane the seventh as the chief Market day, and rakes up
all the filth he can find to defile the Lords Sabbath, and affright the Saints
from following the Lord in observing it.

His grand odium wherewith Mr. Aspinwal has polluted his Title page, is; That
it was the Jews Sabbath; like that scornful reproach of Pilate cast upon
Christ, Joh. 18.35.
who was (indeed) a Jew, and Lord of the Sabbath; in which sense Gospel-saints
may very safely embrace this blessed Jews Sabbath, who has proclaimed himself
as well Lord of his Sabbath as of his Supper, and there is safe shelter under
the skirts of this Jew. But in scripture dialect it is Jehovah's Sabbath, and no
where termed the Jews Sabbath that I know of; but this I know, that as it was
instituted before there was any distinction either of Jew or Gentile, so it
remains in full force to the people of God for ever, ever since that wall of
partition was demolished.

Christian, is the fourth Command for the Sabbath made odious, because it was
given to the Jews; thou may even cast off all the Commandments upon the same
account: Why the whole Law was given to the Jews, the holy Scriptures was given
to the Jews, Ast: 7.38.
They received the lively Oracles to give unto us; Observe Christian, these
lively Oracles are Gods moral Laws, which by a lively voice he committed to
them, Romans 8.2
and that not only for themselves but to give unto us: As they received them
from God, so they gave them unto us, and therefore see thou keep them as they
gave them; and amongst the rest, the express seventh-day Sabbath: And beware of
slighting it because given to the Jews. Let but this scoff drive thee to
disdain what was given to the Jews, and so living and so dying, thou shall
assuredly be damned: For the Scriptures that are able through faith in Christ
to make wise unto salvation, were given to the Jews. 2 Timothy 3
Our Lord Jesus himself was a Jew and given to the Jews, and will shortly come
in his glory to make them a glorious people; neither will any thing more hasten
mercy to Sion, Ps. 102.13, 14.
then Christians taking pleasure in her stones, and favoring the dust thereof;
that is, the times and Laws changed by Antichrist: For it is impossible that
ever that beloved people should receive the Messiah, while they see his
Disciples disobedient to Gods royal commands.

We (who were once drowned in the delusion) can now discern and detest that
Popish impiety of image worship (in defiance of the second Commandment) and
yet they can plead as plausibly for Idolatry by their wretched distinction of
(...) and (...), as we can possibly for change of the Sabbath. As their
image worship is one great stumbling block to long forsaken Israel; so our
weekly wallowing in Sabbath pollutions, sadly obstructs the hopes of their
conversion, Heb. 6.6
and indeed puts our dear Savior to an open shame; as may appear by a passage
lately communicated which exceedingly affects my soul, and so I hope it will my
Readers, thus.

The Jews in London are very much affected with our keeping of the Sabbath, and
do frequent our meeting places every Sabbath in the latter part of the day, and
truly I hope the Lord will in time awake upon them to embrace the truth: As yet
they keep on their Hats in the time of prayer; I am well acquainted with their
Rabbi, He and the rest of the Jews with him were so taken with Brother Sallars
prayer for the restoration of the Kingdom to Israel, Acts 1.6
as that they desired that they might have it in writing, promising that they
would print it, and send it to all the places where the Jews inhabit; I told
them also your resolution to preach up the Sabbath, and they are very much
taken therewith, desiring the Lord to prosper you in your endeavors therein. I
perceive it is a great stumbling block to them as to believe Christ to be the
Messiah, because Christians violate the Sabbath; for (say they) if Christ were
not a Sabbath-breaker, why are Christians? and if Christ were a Sabbath breaker
then he was a sinner, and if a sinner, what benefit can we expect by the death
of an evil doer? And thus you see what evil consequents follow the
non-observance of the Lords holy Sabbath: I hope this may be useful to your
Auditors, especially to those of your society.

Reader, does not thy heart (with mine tremble before the Lord in the perusal
of these lines? why if the offense of one little one deserve so great
punishment, Mat. 18.6.
what will be the doom of Sabbath Breakers (after warning) whose weekly
disobedience so much dishonours Christ, and stumbles all the Tribes of Israel?
how vain are their petitions for Isreal's conversion, whose practice so much
obstructs the glorious work? Cast ye up, Isa. 57.14.
cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling blocks out of the way of my
people. Awake, awake Saints, the seventh seal is opened, and the seventh day
Sabbath breaks through those Romish fogs that long obscured it, under the
Heathenish title of saturday, or Saturns day. The same blasphemous Horn that
robbed us of the Holy Scriptures, has long deprived us of the Holy SABBATH,
telling us that it was Jewish.

It Is high time wholly to depart from Popish pollutions, Zech. 8.13.
and fulfill part of that Prophecy, in taking such hold on the skirts of the
Jews, as to observe all their Moral Laws with delight. Let nor the unscriptural
odium of a jewish Sabbath, startle us any more then a jewish SAVIOR: But let
us put on Ruths resolution in meeting the Jews, saying: Thy Scriptures shall be
my Scriptures, thy Promises shall be my portion, thy salvation shall be my
expectation, thy seventh day shall be my Sabbath, thy Messiah shall be my
SAVIOR, and thy God my God.

And thus shall we take up the stumbling blocks, obstructing their return who
can neither brook Babels abominations in the breach of Gods second Royal Law,
nor Protestants weekly profanation of the Sabbath with deep disobediance to
the fourth Commandment. Which is most dreadful in such as continue
sabbath breakers, for earthly advantage, after some light of Gods Law has
broken in upon their souls (at least) to suspect that it may be Gods Sabbath.
So that they have nothing to say against it, and yet (through the worlds snares
and love of relations) dare continue to act against it, wallowing Week after
Week in Sabbath pollutions, till the just judgment of GOD at last leave them
(through custom of sin) to a scared conscience.

Another odium cast upon the seventh day Sabbath, by Gallio like indifferents
and lukewarm Laodiceans, is; that it is but a circumstance of time: But the
wise experienced Preacher does speedily confute their folly, in a sentence
worthy our observation. Who so keeps the Commandment shall feel no evil
thing, and a wise man's heart discerns both TIME and judgment, Eccl. 3.5.
Such as dare be careless of keeping the Commandments, and judge themselves so
wise as to contemn that TIME which God has ordained to make men wiser, we
shall leave to that wisdom which is mere foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 3.19.
even to trifle with that precious time which weekly conveys precious plants
into the Palace, and special presence of their Prince.

But whereas it is objected. That holy time and holy place were both of like
force: Let such show us the least syllable in Gods moral Law enjoining holy
place, 2 Timothy 4.1.2. Joh. 4.20, 21. 1 Timothy 2.8.
and we shall well weigh it, and in the mean time do our duty in that holy time
which is expressly commanded us of God, knowing that our Lawgiver has as fully
confirmed this holy time, as he has laid common all holy place.

Thus these devices fail, as not able to foyl this shining season, Gods
sanctified seventh day Sabbath, which stands with strength in Gospel times: Let
our next business therefore be, to know when to enter upon this holy rest; for
it cannot be conceived, that God, who has been so punctual in prescribing the
precise time of Circumcision, the Passover, Penticost, and other ceremonies,
should leave us to our liberty for the beginning of his holy Sabbath. But oh
the amusing Meanders, perplexing and distracting Labyrinths, that do even drink
up their spirits who assert the Sabbaths change to the first weekday, being not
able to find when to begin their supposed Sabbath.

Some affirming it beins in the morning when the Lord arose, but what hour they
are not able to say, since God has purposely concealed Christ's rising, as he
did Moses burial place, to prevent our sin; so that whether to begin their
Sabbath at break of day, or Sunrising, they are uncertain, and know not what
to do.

Others are moved (but by what rule or reason I know not) to appoint midnight
for the entrance of their Sabbath, when most are asleep.

A third sort are content to observe their Sabbath by halves, and having twenty
four hours to their own days. they shut up their Sabbath with one half, and say
an artificial day of twelve hours is sufficient.

A fourth declares, that the evening is the time their Sabbath must begin,
Shep. beg. sab. p. 34.
and sadly bewails the secret knots and difficulties that are found in the
beginning of their first day Sabbath, calling for humility and many tears.

But whiles thus they are confounded in their languages, laboring with
manifold difficulties to find some beginning of Man's Sabbath; behold the lively
Oracle of Gods unchangeable seventh day Sabbath, opening all prison doors,
breaking all bars, untying all knots, and like Ariadue's Clue leading the
perplexed spirit out of his Labyrinth, whiles he returns (by Christ's direction)
to the beginning: where in the infancy of time we meet with Gods spirit in a
night of darkness brooding upon a confused Chaos, Genesis 1.2, 3.
to produce a world of Wonders. So that manifest it is, night was the beginning
of time, in which the rude mass was made before any light appeared; and this
darkness with the ensuing light completed the first day, and so the second,
third, fourth, fifth, and sixth, wherein the Almighty finished the whole
fabric of heaven, earth, and sea, leading man (Gods Masterpiece) to the
highest admiration. And no sooner did the sixth days sun cease (with the
completing of this peerless Potentate,) but Elohim ceased to show his virtue
and power in creation, and withdrawing himself into himself, he immediately
sanctified the seventh day Sabbath, to enjoy his own infinite beatitude,
delighting himself with full satisfaction in the pure and spotless works of his
hands; for as yet sin had not soiled the creature, but whiles Jehovah
celebrated his Sabbath (with man for whom it was made, Mar. 2. last. Job 38.7.
) lo, the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy:
So that here the Lords Sabbath (without the least loss of time) exactly begins
when with the sixth days sun the worlds creation ends; and therefore such as
desire to be holy as God is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15. 1 John 3.3.
must not only observe this seventh day Sabbath, but begin this holy Rest
according to the pattern showed in the Mount, that is, when the sixth circult
of the sun shows us it is time to cease from earthly labors, as Jehovah in his
royal Law has proposed himself for our example. Exo. 20.11.
This has been the constant course of believers: I suppose it will scarce be
questioned in Moses time, since even the ceremonial Sabbaths (because honored
as Sabbaths) were so to be observed; Lev. 22.32.
From even unto even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath. So after the Jews were
rewarded in Babylon for slighting the Sabbath 2 Chro. 36.22.
, did honest Nehemiah set to the exact observance of this day, by causing
Ierusalems gates to be shut before the Sabbath, even whiles the declining sixth
day sun (by descending the Mountains surrounding Jerusalem) cast some
obscurity upon the City gates: a good example for earthy minds, who will not
leave their servile labors till the last minute, but perhaps allow themselves
liberty to do some household business after the Sabbaths beginning. We lie under
equal engagements (at least) with ancient Israel, which should oblige us to
such evening sacrifice as appears to be their custom by that Psalm designed
for the Sabbath, Psalm. 92.1.
It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy
Name, O most High; to show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy
faithfulness every night. This sacrifice very well becomes Christians, who
should not be outstript by those devour Tribes, whose joys are further
expressed by the Prophet, Isa. 30.29.
Ye shall have a song as in the night when a holy solemnity is kept. Hence it is
evident with what affection, and at what time they set to the solemnity of this
highest Sabbath. Neither is the New Testament wanting of instructions when to
begin this holy Rest; for even after the sufferings of our Savior, the Saints
did not only observe the Sabbath, but the Spirit is express in the beginning
of the solemnity, as is recorded for the everlasting honor of the precious
women, that having attended their Savior to his sepulcher, Luke 23.55, 56.
They returned, and prepared spices and ointments, and rested the Sabbath day
according to the Commandment. That part of the preparation day that remained
after Christ's burial, these precious souls improved in preparing Aromaticks to
embalm their beloved; Luke 23.54.
but as the sixth day ended, and the Sabbath drew on, their work was done; for
so well were they discipled by our Savior, as not to violate his holy Sabbath,
no not to embalm his blessed body. And yet some scoffers in these last days,
are so bold as to cast ^il^^ in the faces of such as tread in these Saints
stops, reproaching them as worshippers of A dead Christ, Col. 2.14, 15. Act.
2.26.
who was never more active then in the grave, being there a conqueror, not a
sufferer.

But leaving these in scorners Chair, the same Testament which thus shows us
the Saints beginning of the Sabbath, informs us also of the end by our Saviors
example; Mar. 1.21.
who having performed the public duties of the day, retired to Peter's house,
further to honor the Sabbath with his wonted miracles: ver. 19. Luke 13.14.
And though the envious Pharisees taught that the people should nor come for
healing on the Sabbath day, yet hereby we learn when the holy season
determines, by the liberty the people took, (according to the Pharisees
doctrine;) Mar. 2.32.
And at evening when the Sun did set, they brought unto him all that were
diseased. So that it is abundantly manifest, Deu. 16.6.
that from Even to Even (or from Sun to Sun) the Sabbath is to be celebrated.
Thus the Jews constantly observe it, and thus all faithful Christians ought to
sanctify it, who by scripture authority are thus set free from all that
confusion and contention which (as a scourge from God) porplexeth the observers
of the supposed first day Sabbath, who know not when to begin, nor when to make
an end.

But here it will be objected, That upon this account the first day raust be
utterly discarded since the 4th. Commandment as well requires six days service,
as the 7th. days Sabbath.

To which I answer, 1. That whereas the Lord does expressly require cessation
from work on the Sabbath day, he does not (by a negative) require that we never
cease from work upon any of the six days; for then we must never feast, nor
fast, nor use any kind of recreation throughout the week.

2. The Hebrew tense has a various aspect, (...)
yet it is rather future then imperative, and may well enough point out the
creatures earthy inclinations, thus. Six days thou will (or shall) labor, or
as it is rendered elsewhere, six days may work be done. God gives us leave to
serve our selves six days, Exo. 31.15.
that we may not murmur or repine in devoting the seventh wholly to his
service: but he is no Egyptian Task-master, to bind us to six days incessant
labor; for then Paul sinned in such a charge, to preach in season, out of
season; and God himself should cross his own Command, in requiring Israel to
observe the Passover, Penticost, Feast of Tabernacles, etc. taking up as many
days as the year has weeks; which ceremonial days Christ has abolished; and
therefore we should not grudge to give unto God every first day, as an addition
to the Sabbath, with thankfulness for our double benefit, Creation, and
Redemption, especially if both days be anthorized by the word of truth.

As for the scriptures quoted in the New Testament for the change of the
seventh day Sabbath, to the first day of the week, I shall demonstrate in due
time, that not any one of them, nor all together, can make up an argument to
satisfy a truly enlightened soul. But that the Resurrection day is designed
for a rejoicing day to Christ's Disciples, seems undeniable by the Psalmists
saying, Ps. 118.24.
This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.
Which being compared with Peter's speech Act. 4.10, 11.
, must needs be meant the Resurrection day.

And whereas some (who are loath to appear in Gods presence too often) do
suppose this rejoicing day to be only Easter day, once in a year; I shall
forbear to answer them til they can better agree about the celebration of their
traditional Easter, and excite Gods people to rejoice and be glad on the
Resurrection day as often as the week brings it about.

But is this impossible to be done unless we reject Gods ancient 7th. day
Sabbath? why may not the Sabbath stand with the first day amongst Christians as
it stood with so many holy days amongst the Jews, especially since the mercy of
a free Redeemer is added to the blessings of a bountiful Creator. It Is sad to
see persons spend more time in sin to satisfy their lusts, then Profestors can
part with to serve the Lord.

Welf it seems to be Scriptural that the Lord made the Resurrection day a
rejoyoing day, but he never made it a Sabbath day; and if it be allowed that
honorable title of the Lords Day, Rev. 1.
yet does it no more cashier the seventh day Sabbath then did the ceremonial
Feasts, called Sabbaths of old.

Those many Jewish holy days (honored with the title of Sabbaths, did not
then weaken the Royal Sabbath, nor can the supposed title given to the first
weekday now do it, seeing Christ has for ever confirmed each point and parcel
of the Moral Law. Jam. 2.8 10, 11.
Both days may lovingly live amongst Christians, redeemed from the earth. And
though many would be accounted Saints that think they should be undone in so
doing, yet the spotless Spouse of Christ, whiles arrayed in those royal robes of
Sun-like Majesty, Rev. 12.
and decked with that diadem of infallibility, trampling under feet all
sublunary fading mutable glories; I say in this her primitive purity, during
the first three Centuries, she constantly observed both these days, in honor
of her Creator and Redeemer, till the little Horn changed her Times and Laws.

This is so generally confessed even by the adversaries of the seventh day
Sabbath, that other proof would be needless in this place. It cannot be denied
that the primitive saints did honor the Resurrection day with the honorable
title of their Lord; so that it became a proverbial question in their
greetings, Servasti Dominicum? have thou kept the Lords day? to which the other
would answer, Christian^^ sum, intermittere non possum, I am a Christian, I may
not omit it.

This I conceive is a second ground for observing the first day, and although
the decree of Constantine with the Council of Laodicea do not any way concern
us in this point, 2 Chr. 10.10.3. Neh. 9.27. Est. 9.20
yet the statutes enacted by a just authority for the observation of days
should be observed, provided that such decrees be no way destructive to the
Sabbath of the Lord our God. Matthew. 15.2, 3.

This I offer as a third ground of rejoicing on the Resurrection day, commonly
called the Lords day, which we should more readily embrace then any Lecture
day. According to the good old Christian custom of Saints; and it may be fitly
termed the Lords day, Romans 14.6.
when with delight we observe it to the Lord.

Reasons for observing both days are these:

1. Christians have more engagements upon them then ever ancient Israel had, to
devote as much of their time to God; shall the greatness of his graces
straighten us in the advancement of his glory?

2. We have as frequent necessity of heavenly supplies as they had; why should
we be seldomer at the throne of grace?

3. We are set free from those great burdens and bondages, long journeys and
vast expenses, sacrifices and ceremonies, under which they groaned; and are two
days in seven such a task? Is our fathers presence and saints fellowship so
itksome? Doubtless it is so to drossie Disciples, whose love extends no further
then the Leaves: why, we are invited into the holy of holies, to make sure work
of eternal mansions, to bear up Gods standard and honor in the world for a
little season; and are two days for God and our souls so tedious and
troublesome, when we have more then twice two for our perishing bodies? we
should not be weary to approach the presence of an earthy Prince so often, for
wealth and honor.

4. The highest pretender to spirituality had need enough to get often into
Gods Courts and Saints company, to shake off his earthy shackles, the durty
face of our earthly Mother too frequently dulls our affections to our heavenly
Father: we have little cause to cousen our consciences with with a device to
honor God by disobeying him in slighting his precepts, under pretense of
spiritual performances, as if frequent attendance at heavens gates could hinder
our spiritual growth, or Gods Sabbath suppress one sanctity.

5. We are marvailously delivered from all those Mass days upheld by the Beast
and his image, to which Saints were compelled by Parators, as Candle Mass,
Christ-Mass, Michael-Mass, and I know not how many Mastes; and is it now such a
matter (with the Sabbath day) to devote the first day of the week to Gods
worship as Saints have done? I fear such Professors did never count the cost
before they took up Christianity; and therefore they fail in that measure of
self-denial which the Sabbath calls for, which I confess is more then all other
Ordinances; but let such know, they will find it as hard for flesh and blood to
inherit the Kingdom of God, as now they feel the observance of Gods Sabbath,
and the Lords day. I know not why this term of Lords day should offend
Christians now, more then of old: if some sabbath-keepers shall scruple it, yet
I hope they can religiously embrace those Gospel-opportunities and precious
privileges that the first day affords; Let us beware of a censorious spirit
toward persons of different persuasions. Our God waited long upon us, whiles
living in disobedience to the Law of the seventh day Sabbath, and he looks for
a spirit of forbearance toward others, till Sabbath light break in upon their
souls; unless satan prevail with them to deprive us of our hopes, by their
forsaking of our assemblies, as the manner of some is; whose practice proclaims
they will learn no more, nor suffer sabbath-light to take possession of their
souis: We shall leave such to that drerdfull doom which attends; Heb. 10.25,
26.27.
Those that wilfully sin in forsaking the assemblies of the Saints for whom
there remains no more sacrifice, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation to devour the adversaries, who will not have
the Lord of the Sabbath reign over them, but will follow their earthly
enjoyments and employments, till he return to tell them they have already
received their good things ( i. e. the things they esteemed so, and preferred
before the celebration of his Sabbath) and therefore must never look for more.

But for the enlightened Saint, who sees the abiding glory of Gods seventh day
Sabbath in its morality, exact measure of time, beginning and end; let him
proceed in the power of Gods spirit, what ever he pay for it. Though parents
forsake him, he has a God to go to, who will willingly receive him into a
bosom of grace, and after a few more weekly returns (to the Gospel noontide
Rest) he and I shall be translated into New Jerusalems glory, to join in songs
of praise to the honor of the Lord of the Sabbath, in the Saints everlasting
rest.

Thus through Divine assistance, I have (to the full satisfaction of my own
foul) vindicated the morality of the holy Rest of Saints, or the Sabbath of the
Lord our God, which is undeniably the solemn Season for Gospel worship.

The next thing is the special warrant for Christians to celebrate this holy
day, which is sour-fold, 1. The Creators institution. 2. The Redeemers
confirmation. 3. The Spirits approbation. 4. The Saints observation.


Which being confirmed by clear Scripture, will undoubtedly be fully
satisfactory to all that are willing to embrace truth.

The third Head. VIZ. The AUTHORITY.
THough the Great God be not engaged to give any account of his matters, yet
behold his marvailous condiscentions in giving his creature not only a
command, but the reason why he requires the solemn observation of this seventh
day Sabbath (which cannot possibly (for this reason be changed) to any other
day) For in six days Jehovah made the Heavens and the Earth, the Sea and all
that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore Jehovah blessed the
Sabbath day, and sanctified it.

As our Lord Jesus sets forth the excellency of that universal decree of
marriage made in Paradise for Adam (which is therefore honorable amongst men)
even so does Jehovah lay the Basis of our obedience to his holy Sabbath, in the
first institution reducing us to the beginning, when first (as his first and
his Saints best ordinance) he made the Sabbath for man: thereby engaging all
mankind, both Jews and Gentiles to observe it, upon which account the
Israelites were bound not only to sanctify it themselves, but to see that all
strangers within their gates did observe the same; a practice exemplary in holy
Nehemiah. Neh. 13.


If then all Gentiles when but resident in Palestina, were required to rest on
Gods Sabbath, whiles they were Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, much more
are we now engaged, being fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of Gods family.

The Authority then (with its equity) universally obliging all Adams posterity
to observe the seventh day Sabbath, purely springs from Gods holy Rest and
Divine institution, Point Institution.
after the Worlds creation, which being not made only for Israel but for all
people, I appeal to all conscientious understanding Christians (that presume
not to destroy the reason of the fourth Commandment) whether all mankind be
not hence obliged to observe that very 7th. day Sabbath, who enjoy the benefit
of the creation:

God has not only vouchsafed his children such a precious precept with the
ground of it, Precept.
President.


But is graciously pleased to make himself a perfect president in observing
this seventh day Sabbath. A most pure pattern for his Saints to work by; a most
clear copy for his scholars to write after; and lot such as desire to be
Godly (that is God-like) follow their first and fairest example. The spirit of
Christ in the Gospel enjoins us to Be followers of God as dear children; Ephesians.
5.1.
To be holy as he is holy, pure as he is pure. Impure persons pollute the
Sabbath, but the holy God sanctifies and observes it, that his dear children
may follow him in it. Shall we pretend to press after God-like purity, and yet
slight Gods example in this sweet solemnity? Why Gods president is the most
absolute pattern of all perfection; the best of men may fail, and be outstript
by their folfollowers; but who so makes the perfect God his pattern, still
presses forward, and has still more perfections before him, which allures the
growing mounting soul from grace to grace, and so to glory.

Since then the blessed Creator so completed every creature in six days, that
he might immediately consecrate and celebrate the seventh day Sabbath for man's
example; let not man think to be wiser then his Maker, either in presuming to
change his holy day, or pretending a spiritual observance in a literal
disobedience. Can poor worms, dust and ashes, contrive a way to be more
spiritual then the Father of spirits? Can Satan suggest a president more
perfect then Perfection it self? Be not righteous overmuch, but learn of the
Lawgiver, who in expounding his own Law, sums up all in this instruction, Be ye
therefore perfect, Mat. 5.48.
even as your heavenly Father is perfect: (that is, in quelity, though equality
is utterly impossible.) Wherefore let that very seventh day which your heavenly
Father has separated by his institution, benediction, and celebration, be your
constant observation, that in this point you may be perfect EVEN As your
heavenly Father is perfect.

Here it appears plainly with what full authority the blessed seventh day
Sabbath is established even from the Worlds foundation: Heb. 4.3, 4.
So that it may well be owned as a foundation Oracle instituted and observed by
God himself. The royal Psalmist elegantly sings, Ps. 87.1.
That Gods foundations are in the holy mountains; and certainly this toyal Law
is thus gloriously founded: For as it was the first statute decreed by Jehovah,
so its foundation [as has been shewed] was first laid in that pure pleasant
Paradise, Eden.
where God rested, and inseparably united the Sabbath to the seventh day.

The second holy Mountain wherein God established this foundation truth, Sinai.
was Mount Sinat, made glorious by the terrible Majesty of the Lord descending
with shrill trumpet, in dreadful tempests, thunder and lightening; where with a
lively voice he immediately delivered this lively Oracle, crowning this seventh
day Sabbath with the very same honor and dignity as the other nine Royal
statutes, and recording the same in Tables of stone, which by his new Covenant
he writes in renewed hearts: so that if Christians stand obliged to those ten
Commandments as so many lively Oracles committed to the Jews to be given unto
us, Romans 3.2. Act. 7.38. Iam. 2.8.
and that we shall do well in observing these royal Laws according to the
Scripture; that is, according as God himself has written them; then must this
very seventh day Sabbath (as one of those Royal Laws) be for ever observed by
saints without alteration or diminution; and the rather, since this foundation
oracle obtains confirmation in the third glorious holy Mountain, even in the
heighths of Gospel Sion, where the very same seventh day Sabbath instituted by
the Father is established by the Son: which is the second point proposed,
wherein I shall prove, Confirmation.
That the seventh day Sabbath sanctified by Jehovah, is ratified by Jesus upon
a twofold account.

1. He owns it by his Words.

2. He crowns it by his Works. And if this be cleared, then surely Christians
should carefully observe it both in word and work.

1. Our blessed Redeemer confirms the seventh day Sabbath by his Word more
generally amongst the rest of those Royal statutes which he assures us shall
continue in every tittle (not so much as one Hebrew point to be diminished or
altered) til the heavens be no more, and the earth be removed, and all be
completed and fulfilled: Christian turn to thy Bible, and behold with horror
the dreadful doom which thy Redeemer has denounced against such as shall
transgress the least of his Laws and teach others to be disobedient. Mat. 5.18,
19.


O how dangerous is the disobedience to this duty, seeing it is undeniable that
the seventh day Sabbath is a tittle, and more then a tittle of that royal Law,
the wilful offense of one point whereof renders the Rebel a transgressor of
all Gods Laws. Iam. 2.10.
Suppose the Sabbath were the least Commandment, yet says Christ our King,
Comp. Mat. 5.19. with Act. 3.23.
He that breaks and bids others break the least of these Commandments, shall
be cut off from Gods Kingdom.

Neither does Christ in flesh (whiles the ceremonial Law was in full fore)
only confirm the whole moral Law; but even since his ascension by his holy
spirit he moves his Apostles to establish the whole and every part of the ten
words; Romans 3.
Do we then make void the law through faith (says Paul?) God forbid: yea we
establish the law. Which cannot be the ceremonial Law, Christ having utterly
abolished all those beggarly elements. It must be only that * holy, Romans 7.7,
12, 14.
just, good, spiritual Law which ends with this Command, Thou shall not covet.
And not in part is this Law perpetuated, but in every point (says the other
Apostle. Jam. 2.10.
) And therefore let such as after warning slight the seventh day Sabbath, make
sure work that it be no point of that Law whose every jot and tittle is
established by Christ and his Apostles.

And yet after this full confirmation how fain would vain contentious flesh
find out a device to live in disobedience to that precious heavenly Law!



2. Christ has confirmed every tittle, and his Apostles every point of the
Royal Law, will not this suffice? if not, behold the kindness of Christ
condescending to our weakness, showing us as it were the very print of the
nails, fastening his seventh day Sabbath for ever as a foundation Oracle, not
only in Eden and Sinai, but in the beauty of Sion; for he does expressly own
the seventh day Sabbath particularly with the honor that none other Law
enjoys, professedly acknowledging it to be his Sabbath, proclaiming himself
Lord of it, and most punctually observing it; yea, solemnly averring, that he
came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. And indeed this spotless Lamb
did faithfully fulfill this Law of the Sabbath (as the rest) without the least
violation of any tittle, even then when those presumptuous spirits charged him:
Mar. 2.27, 28.
He cheeking their blind conceit, who thought (belike) that Man was made for
the Sabbath, and informs them that the Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man
for the Sabbath; (that is, for man's benefit and comfort both body and soul,)
[even as the Laws of a Nation are made for the subjects, and not subjects for
the Laws.] And further be compleats his answer to their false accusation by
proclaiming himself Lord of the Sabbath; as if he should say, The Sabbath is
mine. I am the Lord of it, I made it for Man that he should sanctify it, and
therefore having given Man a precept and pattern to keep it. I shall not make
my self a president to profane it, as you superstitiously suppose. Certainly
Christ's engagement to fulfill it to the least jot or tittle with his professed
owning of it, claim to it, and care for it as its Lord; is the fullest
confirmation that can possibly be desired.

That which Christ lays claim to as Lord, must needs be confessed to be his,
esteemed and honored as his; the Bride is his, for he is her Lord; Psalm. 45.11.
the Harvest is his, Heaven and Earth is his, the Angels are his, and all to be
esteemed his who is proclaimed Lord of all: Therefore we celebrate the holy
Supper, because it is the Lords Supper; and therefore we ought to sanctify the
holy Sabbath, because he declares himself Lord of the Sabbath: He gave it the
institution when he made the world, he gave it confirmation when he redeemed
the world, and his Saints must endeavor to observe every jot and tittle of it
to the end of the world.

For as he does expressly own his holy day, in asserting himself Lord of the
Sabbath, so he takes special care by particular instruction, that his Saints
might avoid the violation of this rest on earth, even whiles he himself should
rest triumphantly in Heaven; wherefore after his predictions of the approaching
calamities of his rebellious Nation, he directs his dear Disciples when to
depart from those direful miseries; but especially, to be importunate in
prayer for forty years together, Mat. 24 15.
that they might not be forced to fly in the Winter, for then the foul ways and
short days would make it irksome to their bodies, especially to breeding and
nursing mothers; and no less was the care of this tender shepherd to the souls
of his Saints, (whom he bears in his bosom) as also to the sanctity of his
Sabbath, and therefore adds this petition to their forty years Prayer, that
they might not be put to fly on the Sabbath day, to the dishonor of God and
trouble of their spirits, in profaning the sacred season for the preservation
of their bodies, which was designed for the sweetening of their souls in
Hearing, Prayer, and Praise, amiddest the precious societies of Gospel Saints.

It cannot easily be imagined that Christ should be so careful in securing his
Sabbath, had it been ceremonial, Col. 2.16, 17.
at such time as all ceremonies were abolished by Apostolical Proclamation.



Vespatians Armies and Titus Ensigns should strike no more terror, then that
the Jews in stead of securing themselves should trifle away their time in
persecuting the Christians.

Had their flight been on the Sabbath, yet seeing they were not to carry any
thing (no not their clothes) they could not be counted transgressors.

Moreover, so superstitious were the Jews that they durst not fight for their
life, much less persecute others; and therefore this could not be intended by
our Savior: but his sole design was to have his seventh day Sabbath
sanctified by his Disciples.

And as our Redeemer thus generally and particularly owned this Sabbath by his
holy word, so he gloriously crowned it (above all other days) by his mighty
works, viz. such miracles as never man wrought. Mat. 11 20, 11, 20
If then those Cities were most honored and engaged where his mighty works
were done, upon the same account is that day to be most highly esteemed, which
Christ crowned with his greatest wonders. God forbid that Gospel Saints should
side with envious Sadduces, in reproaching our Savior for putting forth his
glory on that blessed day, but rather with heighthened affections, let that
Sabbath be religiously celebrated, whereon such divine virtue was showed.
Neither does our great exemplar cease here to honor his Sabbath but having
owned it by his word, and crowned it with his works, his constant care both in
life and death, was to leave a lively president for his people.

His constant custom during life is visible to all that can read the fourth
Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel, and for his cessation from his work of
redemption the same day of the week and time of the day that the father ceased
from his work of creation, entering exactly into his rest on the Sabbath, as God
did; this is such a misterious discovery and full confirmation of the seventh
day Sabbath, as for ever binds all believers by a double obligation, to this
sweet soul-refreshing duty, of which more may be spoken in due time. This may
suffice abundantly for the confirmation of the seventh day Sabbath by our
blessed Savior.

The third thing promised, Approbation.
is his approbation of that holy spirit which was appointed by the Savior of
souls to be a constant guide to Gods people. So that whatsoever this blessed
spirit shall approve of, we may safely receive as tried gold weighed in the
balance of the sanctuary, and rest upon (...) as infallible truth.

Three things will fully evince the holy spirits approbation of the seventh day
Sabbath.

1. Luke 23. ult.
His high Encomium. 2. His mighty operation. 3. His constant appellation.
1. His high applause given to the pious women's practice of resting according
to the Commandment is a full proof of divine approbation. For though they
celebrated the Sabbath upon Christ's crucifixion, yet Saint Luke was not
inspired to write his Gospel till after Christ's ascension, as is evident in his
preface, and confessed by our learned adversaties; Luke 1.2, 3, 4. Leigh Syst.
p. 822.
That diverse years after when all Levitical institutions lost their power of
binding the whole Law, and each principle thereof does bind all under the
Gospel.

If then such praise were given to the holy women's celebration, that the spirit
so long after records it to their honor (That they rested the Sabbath day
according to the Commandment) let the conclusion of the parable be the
obedient souls instruction, Luke 10.37.
Go and do thou likewise, set to the Sabbaths observation according to the
Commandment, if thou would have like praise of Gods spirit. Though this
might satisfy a willing soul, yet others see such a measure of self-denial
required in this duty, that either God must stoop to their arms in recording
the celebration of the 7th day Sabbath after Christ's ascension, or else they
will not obey. Well, the blessed spirit sweetly condiscends, and by the most
glorious manifestation and wonderful operation that ever visited the earth,
confirms the seventh day Sabbath. For it was upon this blessed day that he
gloriously descended upon the Apostles, to the amazement of men; Act. 2.
for though Antichrist has long deceived us, and we have taken it upon trust,
that Pentecost was upon the first day of the Week, which he has long honored
with Whitson Ales, Wakes, and May games; yet in plowing up the truth with Gods
heifer, we shall find such treasures of long-unveiled mysteries in this
renowned day, as can never sufficiently be admired.

And the first mystery that displayeth it self, Ez. 13.6. wa^ 19.1, 11.
lies in the institution of the Feast called Pentecost, or the fiftieth day;
for as the fiftieth day after the first Passover and wonderful deliverance
from the Egyptian ^urnace, the spirit descended in fire upon Sinai, to instruct
the twelve Tribes of Israel; even so the fiftieth day (most exactly) after
Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us, and had wrought our mighty
deliverance from that worse then Egyptian bondage, Heb. 2.14, 15.
did the same eternal spirit descend in fire upon Sion, to inspire the twelve
Apostles of the Lamb. And surely this harmonious descent upon the fiftieth day
both at Sinai and Sion; Barthol. de propr. rerum, p. 152.
cannot but be soul-ravishing satisfaction to the religious Christian, for the
confirmation of his faith in the true Messiah. As also this mavelous
dispensation upon the seventh day Sabbath, cannot but affect his heart with
this royal rest which the spirit so eminently approves by his superlative
presence. And the clearing of this fiftieth day to be the seventh day Sabbath
will open more divine mysteries, as so many coals from the Altar to inflame our
affections; for hence we shall behold the sheaf of first fruits waved, and that
Lamb without spot so fairly sacrificed in our blessed Savior, as will make
every Babe in Christ a sufficient Arithmetician) in numbering the fifty days)
to find out the seventh day Sabbath. Lev. 23.9.15. So Diodation Lev. 23.


The institution of this Feast of Pentecost is recorded by Moses, who from God
appointed Israel to bring (on the morrow after their Passcover Sabbath) a sheaf
of of their first fruits to be waved by the Priest before the Lord; and to
offer the same day a Lamb without blemish to the Lord. Deu. 16.9.


And from that very day to count seasen Sabbath or Weeks, and the morrow after
the seventh Week was the Feast of Pentecost or the fiftieth day. And this
numbering of seven Weeks or fifty days, is still observed by the Jews, who
every night when the stars arise, Chilm. p. 132. Ross. view 300. 1 Cor. 15.23.
say a prayer and conclude. To day are so many days past of the Omer. And here
let the Believer (who sees all types ended in Christ) with confidence behold
his dying Redeemer as the undoubted sheaf of first fruits, waved upon the Cross
by the crucifying Priests, the very morrow after he had eaten the Passover;
and for the Lamb without blemish (to be offered the same day) behold the
spotless Lamb of God taking away the sins of the world. And after admiration of
this complete Savior, in whom all these mysteries (which point out this true
Messiah) are fully accomplished. Let us number fifty days or seven full Weeks
according to the rule; that is, Lev. 23.15, 16.11, etc.
from the day that the sheaf and Lamb were offered. Now our sheaf of first
fruits and Lamb without spot, is known to every Babe to be offered up on the
sixth day of the Week commonly called Good Friday, from which day we must
number fifty days or seven full Weeks, and the morrow after the seventh Week
is the fiftieth day, called Pentecost; and because we have been so long
deceived of our true Sabbath by Antichrist, and that his Image would still
persuade us his Whitsunday is the day of Pentecost, I shall take the tender
Lambs of Christ by the hand, and if they have no readier Arithmetic, let them
but take an Almanac and number seven weeks or fifty days, and see with their
own eyes whether the fiftieth day be the seventh day Sabbath, from the day that
our sheaf of first fruits and Lamb without spot was offered.

As thus, Good Friday (so called) is the known day from which we must begin our
account of seven complete weeks or fifty days, and the first of these fifty
days is Saturday (as Heathens term it) and the following Friday is the end of
the first week, which makes seven complete days; The second Friday is the 14th
day. The third Friday is the 21th day. The fourth Friday is the 28th day. The
fifth Friday is the 35th day. The sixth Friday is the 42th day. The seventh
Friday is the 49th day.
Making up seven complete weeks: And the fiftieth day (being the morrow after
the seventh week) must undeniable be granted the Worlds Saturday, and the
Saints seventh day Sabbath, upon which Sabbath the Apostles were assembled,
with one accord in one place, Acts 2.
when the eternal Spirit gave full testimony to that Royal solemnity, with the
highest approbation that ever was given to any assembly of Saints; and the
unspotted Virgin-spouse of the Lamb, did sweetly celebrate the most glorious
Sabbath that ever Church enjoyed; for here heaven and earth accord, mutually
inviting each other. Here the promised Spirit says come, with his quickening
motions inviting the Saints to assemble themselves upon his holy Sabbath.

And here the lovely Bride says come, purposely presenting her self on Gods
seventh day Sabbath, in expectation of this glorious power from on high: What
then should hinder the desired inspiration? Christ's promise is engaged, his
saints are solemnly assembled, in a season sanctified, their unanimous
supplications are continued, Acts 1.14.
their hopes are heightened, and down comes the eternal Dove with a sudden
sound from heaven, as a rushing mighty wind, filling the house, and furnishing
all their hearts with Divine abilities to publish the Gospel of Christ to all
Nations under heaven.

Thus while the saints are acted by the spirits operation, the seventh day
Sabbath is crowned with the highest approbation, thousands this day were
convinced, converted, baptized, incorporated, and with transcendant joys
transported, feeding like Lambs in fresh pastures, closing this blessed seventh
day Sabbath with the incomparable feast of the Lords Supper, and sacramental
union into one entire body by breaking of bread. O what a day of wonders is the
Lords true Sabbath! instituted in Eden, advanced at Sinai, owned and crowned by
Christ, and thus highly approved by his spirit in Sion. A day of mavelous
mysteries, a day of manifold mercies. Was ever day honored like Iehovah's
Sabbath? the Lord Iesus's Sabbath? the Holy Spirits Sabbath? which therefore
must be the Saints Sabbath.

I have been the more exact and free even to the shallowest capacity in opening
these mysteries, that Christians may clearly discern the deceits of the little
Hom, in changing Times as well as Laws; persuading poor souls to live by an
implicit faith, in taking his Whitsunday upon trust for the day of Pentecost,
as is still pressed by Parish preachers to shuffle off the renowned seventh day
Sabbath.

But some seeing they can no longer delude the people, it being so apparent
that the day of Pentecost was the very seventh day Sabbath, yet devise to
detain them longer in disobedience, objecting, Pentecost was the Sabbath, yet
the Saints assembled upon the other days, as appears Act. 1.14.



2. It Is not likely they did watch all those ten nights, and as improbable that
they all lodged together.

3. But this is manifest, That very early upon the fiftieth day they were
unanimously and solemnly assembled in one place, which is not affirmed in that
solemn manner of the other days; neither was any day like this honored with
the glorious presence of the Holy Spirit. This Sabbath was the first honored
with the conversion of souls, this and no day before did they break bread
together; yea, many signal tokens of Divine approbation have (beyond all
dispute) advanced the glory of this day above all other days.

But it is further objected, day of Pentecost is as much honored as the seventh
day Sabbath?

1. Pentecost as a ceremony not yet buried, yet undeniably they would much more
honor the Royal Sabbath: No ceremony was ever esteemed like the Law of ten
Commandments.

2. This objection was never made against Whitsunday, till the glory of Gods
Sabbath discovered the vanity of that Antichristian invention. But,

3. We must learn to distinguish between Ceremonials and Morals; both are not
alike confirmed when they are together mentioned: Act. 5.20, 42.
The Apostles preached and prayed in the Temple, yet are they not of equal
authority: The Royal Sabbath is indeed mentioned with New Moons and sacrifices;
but it is no more rejected then Prayer and the prayer hearing God, which are
mentioned together. Isa. 1.13, 14, 15. and 57.6, 7. 3d. Obj.


A third objection is newly made by Mr. Aspinwal, who grants Pentecost to be
indeed the seventh day, but thinks the word (...) translated [fully come]
should rather be rendered [fully past:] Page 5.
Whence he would persuade, that the Spirit did not descend upon the true day of
Pentocost, but upon the Jews false day of Pentecost, which he says was the
first day of the week.

1. The Greek (being a Gerund in Do) signifies [fulfilling,] and most certain
it is, that as the saints were fulfilling the true Pentecost on the seventh
day, the spirit of Christ descended early upon them.

2. His great mistakes are manifest, in that our Lord Jesus (who was punctual
(as he grants, p. 5.) to his own Law) exactly celebrated the Passover upon the
5th. day, the Jews on the 7th. and such distance must needs be at the true and
false Pentecost; the true on the 7th. the false (not as he asserts on the first
day, but) on the second: so that his supposition of all those wonders which he
would have done on the Jews Pentecost* do utterly vanish; Page 35.
and the glory of the 7th. day Sabbath whereon those mighty things were wrought
(as I have convincingly proved) is more abundantly confirmed, seeing himself
grants ( page 34.) That those actions (of the spirits effusion, glorious
conversion, baptism, breaking bread, etc.) are signal characters of our
Christian Sabbath.

Thus whiles we seek for wisdom in Gods way of counting his numbers, Pro. 2.4.
Rev. 13.18.
we find the ancient Sabbath of the Lord our God within the mysterious numbers
of Pentecost, which saints should esteem as highly approved by the spirits
glorious manifestation.

To which may be added, 3ly. His constant Appellation. Christ's promise was,
that the blessed spirit shall be ever with us to instruct us in all his truths:
And since this infallible guide does constantly call the seventh day the
Sabbath, it must be received as a word of truth from God that cannot lie.

And truly it is high presumption to alter the perfect word of God, in calling
any day the Lords Sabbath which the Lord never dignified with any such
honorable appellation. Let but the least authority be produced for honoring
any other day as a Sabbath day (in the Gospel) besides the Lords honorable
seventh day, and the controversy will soon be ended.

I know what some have endeavored to pacify their perplexed spirits about the
Sabbath; who would persuade themselves that the first day of the week was thus
honored by the Evangelists in terming it (...) the first of the Sabbath. Mat.
28.1.


But first, etc.

2. Whether they take this (...) for one of the Sabbaths, or the first of the
Sabbaths, to be sure it is not any one of the sanctified Sabbaths instituted or
authorized by the Lord our God, Father, Son, or Spirit; neither can it be the
first of the Sabbaths in their sense, for the seventh day was undeniably the
first Sabbath. If they say it was the first individual Gospel Sabbath, then I
suppose that first day in the 1 Cor. 16.1. may be the twentieth Sabbath (at
least,) and yet that also is (...).

As for the proper signification and sense of the word, it is the first of the
week in English; for Sabbath is an Hebrew (not an English) word, and must be
rendered week where ever it points at any time except the seventh day, or some
ceremonial sabbath) as as the Pharisees vaunt shows -- Luke 18.12. (...), I
fast twice on the Sabbath, that is, not twice in one day, but twice a week. The
Evangelist fairly follows that form of expression used by the Septuagint,
(which the Apostles more frequently observed then the Hebrew, as being more
common amongst the Gentiles, where especially their work lay,) terming the week
days, the first of the sabbath, the second of the sabbath, etc. instead of the
heathen names of Sun-day, Moon day, etc. which I hope may satisfy all such as
had rather use scripture then heathenish names. As in the title of Psalm. 24
(...), the first of the Sabbath or Week; Ps 48. (...), the second of the
Sabbath or Week; Psalm. 94. (...), the sourth of the Sabbath, or the fourth of
the Week, etc. The Sabbath day is the peculiar honor given to the seventh day
alone, Luke 4.16. Act, 13, 14. and 16.13 etc.

So that if we be followers of God as dear children, and take the blessed
spirit for our guide in all our expressions and actions, we must honor the
Sabbath with holy devotion, which he has so honored; with highest Encomiums
we must reverence that day above all days, in which he so gloriously descended
upon the first pure Church solemnly assembled: If this be not the pattern
showed Christians in the Mount, I desire them to show me some other pattern of
some pure Church? but if this be the undoubted pattern showed this blessed day
in the Mount, Then Christian look well to thy walk; Heb. 8.5
See that thou make all things according to the Pattern showed thee in the
Mount.

And since the spirits appellation is a further approbation of the seventh day,
which is the only day he honors with the royal name of Sabbath day; See thou
presume not to call any day the Sabbath day, but that which he has so called;
See thou observe that for the Sabbath day, which he has so crowned; It is the
presumption of the little Horn, not only to change times, but that this time
of Gods solemn worship might be for ever buried in oblivion, he has divested
it of this royal appellation of the Sabbath day, and obscured its glory under
the detestable name of Saturday, i.e. Saturns day, and so shows himself to be
that Antichrist, misteriously opposite to Christ, devoting that very day to the
father of Demons or chief of idolized Devils, which our Lord has designed,
owned, crowned and approved his chief day for Gospel worship.

And truly Christians the holy spirit would not that you should have fellowship
with Devils. 1 Cor. 10.20.
Our English Laws have somewhat lessened this impiety (wherein the secret hand
of providence eminently appears in preserving the honorable memory of the
seventh day Sabbath) for whereas the Heathenish names of Weeks days are still
retained in the decrees of the highest Courts, passed on the seventh day; the
Acts have the proper appellation, Die Sabbati. But it is sad that such as so
honor it with their Pen, should profane it so openly in their practice. And
though Satan should prevail with them to become my persecutors, I cannot but in
faithfulness remember them, That as their Laws look for obedience, till by the
same power that enacted them they shall be repealed; so it is most equal they
should cease from profanation of this royal Law of Jehovah, till a repeal form
the same power can be proved, or that the blessed spirit has any way altered
or changed it. How sad would a sentence of this import be, when it is too late
to reform? O thou Prince and Parliament! Out of thy own acts I will judge thee,
who have recorded the seventh day Die Sabbati, and yet have proclaimed thy
chief Markets upon this my Sabbath. You profess it in words, but profane it in
works; you honor it in your Laws, but shame it in your lives. Oh can it be
hoped that a Josiah-like spirit should set upon reformation instead of
persecution, 2 Rin. 22 8, 10, 1^ and ca. 23
instead of penalties to begin with Sabbath practice. Is there no other way to
confute Sabbath Keepers, then by fine or imprisonments? Must Prelatical
principles appear, after so many Engagements and solemn Protestations of
liberty? why yet here is this remedy: The will of the Lord be done.

And so I have done with my three first Proposals for the authority of this
truth;

1 The Father Institution.

2 The Sons confirmation.

3 The Spirits approbation: And now proceed to the fourth; namely.

4. The Saints observation, Saints observation.
whereinto I have already made some entrance: As first, the precious women's
practice after our Saviors sufferings, when all ceremonies were abolished,
They rested the seventh day according to the Commandment. And doubtless it is a
blessed thing to be found obedient to Gods Commandments.

2. It has been clearly and plainly showed, that even after our Lords highest
exaltation, the most glorious assembly of saints that ever the world saw was
upon the seventh day Sabbath most exemplarily celebrated with prayer,
preaching, baptizing, incorporating, communicating, and all this eminently
approved and sealed by the spirits miraculous and special grace in the
conversion of thousands: su^^ a day no Age ever produced. Well may this day
deserve the honor of a pattern (in the Mount) and to be exemplary to all
posterity.

3. The great wisdom of God eminently shines in concealing the practice of the
Apostles deputed to serve the Circumcision; Gal. 2.9. 2 Timothy 1.11.
since it must be acknowledged, that if the Apostle of the Gentiles (who was
the great rejecter of ceremonies) did constantly celebrate the seventh day
Sabbath, then much more those Apostles among the Jews, whose forbearance was
much even in ceremonials. The Gospel then being the Epitome of things most
necessary, only presents us with Paul's practice for our Christian pattern, who
expressly requires our conformity in these words, Phil. 4.9.
Those things which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in
me, do, and the God of peace shall be with you.

Here Is a general injunction, which must be observed only with these
limitations, That Paul's practice be plain, possible, peaceable, Evaugelical,
and unrepealed, or else it binds not.

1. It must be plain, such as our Lord has promised to his Lambs; Joh. 16.25,
2 Cor. 3.12. Col. 2.8.
We must take heed of Philosophy and vain deceits of men, who set up Ordinances
by consequences; and have some plain precept or president for our practice; and
such is the seventh day Sabbath. There Is not a plainer precept in all the
scripture, not any thing more plain then Paul's practice herein, and therefore
to be observed by saints who desire the presence of the God of peace.

2. It must be possible; for some things Paul practiced impossible for saints,
as mighty miracles, travels, etc. But for the seventh day Sabbath, though flesh
and blood think it a bondage to be detained a day from the Dunghill, yet to the
self denying Saint it is a most pleasant season, and his soul can seal to it as
an easy yoke, a light burden, a day exceeding a thousand, therefore in this
Paul is to be followed.

3. His practice must be peaceable, if we tread in his steps, for Paul was but
a man, Acts 13.39.
and sometimes a very angry man, his precept may possibly exceed his practice
herein; If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all
men: Romans 12.18.
and let the peace of God rule in your hearts. Now the seventh day Sabbath is a
day of rest and peace, which sweetly calms the perplexed spirit; so that thus
far we may freely follow Paul's practice.

4. It must be Evangelical, for we may not follow Paul in his compliance with
the Jews in ceremonials, no not to gain the Jews; 1 Cor. 9.20.
and therefore let Paul pass into the Temple to purify himself with his
Votaries, this is no president for me. But for the sacred seventh day Sabbath,
as it was instituted before any ceremony was in the world, for was confirmed
Evangelically by the Son of God, and by his holy Spirit; and therefore in this
Evangelical duty I shall attend Paul,

5. It must be unrepealed, if it oblige Saints, for something Paul did which
himself after repealed, Gal. 5.1, 2, 3.
as the Circumcision of Timothy, which he solemnly declares to be utterly
destructive to Christianity; and therefore waving that, let Christians conform
to the Apostles practice of the seventh day Sabbath. which is proved to be
plain, possible, peaceable, truly Evangelical, and never in the least tittle
repealed, or any way altered. And thus doing, we shall follow Paul as Paul
followed Christ. 1 Cor. 11 1, 2.
For as it was undeniably Christ's custom to celeb^ate the seventh day Sabbath,
so it was Paul's mannet to observe the same day. The words are the fame in the
Greek both of Christ's practice Luke 4.16. Acts 17.2.
and Paul's, the Penman is the same, and all the difference (in English) is
only this* Christ's custom, and Paul's manner. Christ as his custom was went
went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, Luke 4.16. And Paul as his manner
was did the same thing, Acts 17.2. Christ preached, and Paul preached, and
where lies the difference between Christ's obsetvation of the seventh day
Sabbath, and Paul's observation of the seventh day Sabbath.

It is made a great argument for the observation of the first day, Act. 20.7.
That Paul once preached on that day, but it is as clearly declared ( Acts.
18.4.) that Paul preached every Sabbath day, only the Translators have not
dealt so clearly; for in Acts 20.7. they tell us that Paul preached on the
first day, but in Acts 18.4. they say Paul reasoned every Sabbath day, and yet
the Greek word is the very same in both places.

Neither was this Paul's single practice, But the constant custom of all the
Disciples that ever accompanied him, we find one company with Paul Acts
13.13, 14. who solemnly observed the Sabbath in holy duties. Other associates
he selects Acts 15.40. and these celebrate the Sabbath Acts 16.13, 17. and
17.1, 2.

Thus we may follow Paul and his companions from place to place, and constantly
find them observing the seventh day Sabbath: And though he solemnly professed,
He had not shunned to declare the whole counsel of God, Act. 20.
yet this great slighter of ceremonies never gives the least hint of a change,
which undoubtedly he would have done, had it been any way altered: Nay, he
strictly requires all believers to follow his example as he followed Christ's;
and certainly, in the observation of the Sabbath, he followed Christ as close
as in any Ordinance whatsoever.

Paul only took that opportunity to preach to the people.



2. They render this Apostle of the Gentiles a constant dissembler.

3. They may as warrantably lay this crrime to Christ, [that he did but take
such opportunities, and not in conscience of the Sabbath;] for it is proved,
that Christ's custom herein is the very same with Paul's.

Such as assert that Paul only observed the Sabbath among the Jews, and not
among the Gentiles, may be better informed, Act. 18.4. and 13.42. where it is
evident, That when the Jews were gone out of the Synagogue, the Gentiles
besought that these words might be preached the next Sabbath. Here the Apostle
had the fairest opportunity that possibly could be desired (in the Jews
absence) to instruct the Gentiles in a first day Sabbath, if ever such a change
had been intended; for why should public preaching be deferred till the next
seventh day Sabbath (especially to the Gentiles) if the first day had been a
Sabbath? The Apostles silence at this time and occasion, will not allow any
rational conjecture of such an intention of a first day Sabbath.

But here it is objected.

1. I demand between what? Paul to preach the Sabbath between their desire and
his departure; and without some such supposition, this translation of (...)
will scarce be good sense.

2. If we may rely on the schollarship of Arius Montanus (who was a professed
enemy to the seventh day Sabbath) he will tell us, it is sequens Sabbatum, the
following Sabbath.

3. However, this is manifest, Act. 13.44.
that the next Sabbath day Paul did p each, and either it was in answer to the
request made, or else if the Gentiles desired him to preach to them on some
week day, and yet the Apostle deferred it to the known Sabbath day, this will
much more abundantly testify his special respect to the seventh day Sabbath.

So that beyond all contradiction the Apostle and the Christians with him did
as constantly observe the seventh day Sabbath as Christ himself; and if none
other ground (next to Gods command) be given us why they did so, but that we
should be followers of Paul as he was of Christ, we must either press after our
pattern, or resolve to rest in disobedience to so great a Commandment.

Me thinks ingenious saints should even read Christ's confirmation of the
seventh day Sabbath in the Apostles practice, for undoubtedly such as Paul's
constant custom was, such was his Commission. It was not only in the Lords
Suppet that Paul delivered the same to the Church (by precept or president)
which he received of the Lord; but his constancy was equal in observing the
Lords Sabbath as the Lords Supper; 1 Cor. 11.1, 2.
and in requiring the same Church in the same Chapter to follow him as he
followed Christ in all things. There is a heavenly ha^mony between Christ's
commission, and Paul's custom, both in the observation of the Lords Supper and
the Lords Sabbath.

And seeing it is so manifest, that Paul and the saints with him did constantly
observe the known seventh day Sabbath, both amongst Jews and Gentiles, and that
the blessed spirit gives us none other reason of Paul's custom, but that we
should be followers of that blessed Apostle even as he also was of Christ; set
us not coin or invent reasons (without book) of the Apostles constant
observation of the Sabbath, to justify our own profaneness, but bethink our
selves what we shall answer in the day of judgment, when it shall be set
fairly before us, that as it was Christ's custom to observe the Sabbath, even
so it was Paul's custom with his companions punctually to tread in the same
steps: and since the Spirit of truth never gave other reason why the Apostle
did so, but that we should follow him as he followed Christ in this divine
duty, which is so plain, possible, peaceable, evangelical, unrepealed. Ah
Christian, ask thy conscience if thou can judge this a sufficient answer for
thy weekly pollution of the seventh day Sabbath, That thou badst thought Paul
had only practiced it to please the sews when it will appear plainly that he
did it purposely for a pattern to the Gentiles. And that thou may be utterly
silent, and for ever left without excuse, take notice (if thy spirit be not too
much prejudiced, and thy heart hardened against this truth) that one of the
fairest patterns of the Apostles (for Sabbath-keeping) was set before these
very Gentile Corinthians, whom he so strictly enjoins to follow him as he
followed Christ.

For in their famous City it was that the blessed man abode, and preached in
the Sinagogue EVERY Sabbath day, Acts 18.1, 3, 4.
and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks. If any should contend that I term that
preaching [here] which is translated reasoning, let them mind, that the word is
the very same which is rendered preaching Acts 20.7. Well, to these Greeks he
gives that pattern, which he commands them to follow, and truly Christian out
best way will be to walk with them in the same narrow path to new Jerusalem
especially seeing their Epistle is expressly directed to us, 1 Cor. 1.2. with
11, 1.
as well as to them.

Under this fourth point of the Saints observation of the seventh day Sabbath,
next to the Apostles constant custom, I shall offer the practice of the purest
times, as the best an^iquity affords. And in the first place that blessed
Clement (whose name is written in Phil. 4.3.
the book of life and himself now in glory) instructs us in that undoubted
Epistle of his to the Corinthians; How God has ordered that oblations and
other duty of his worship, Clem. first Ep. to Corin. p. 21.
be preformed according to the APPOINTED SEASONS: not as it happens and
disorderly but at SET TIMES and hours -- they therefore that perform their
oblations according to the APPOINTED TIMES are accepted and blessed.

Here observe, how this blessed Minister of Christ seconds the Apostle in
laboring to reform that great disorder amongst the Corinthians, who came as
they listed to the Lords Supper, some sooner, some later, whence sprang that
confusion, transgression, and woeful desolation amongst them, 1 Cor. 11.20, 21,
29, 30.

Wherefore he informs them and us that our oblations (or sacrifices of praise)
are not to be performed at our liberty, but that the Lord himself has ordered
and appointed set times and hours, which undoubtedly is the sum of the Apostles
mighty charge to Timothy, That he should be instant in preaching in season out
of season. And the holy Clement assures us, that in observing the appointed
seasons we shall be accounted blessed.

Now what these appointed seasons and time are, that this great God has
ordered his Saints should observe; the same elect vessel declares in these
words; Epist. Constable. l. 7. c. 24.
You must keep holy the Sabbath in memory of the Creation, and the Lords day in
memory of Christ's Resurrection. Certainly this ancient Disciple of Paul did
clearly understand these days to be ordered and appointed of the Lord; and
since a person so assuredly sanctified would not deceive us, Let us follow
Clement also as he followed Paul, and not think two days time too much for our
souls, whiles we have more then twice as many for our bodies. Another famous
Disciple of the Apostles, and holy Martyr of Jesus, even that heavenly Ignatius
teaches the very same doctrine in this Dialect; Next after the Sabbath day,
let every friend of Christ make the Lords day a solemn Festival. And the same
holy man (ad Philip) shows his his detestation of Sabbath pollution saying. If
any one shall keep a fast on the Lords day or on the Sabbath day, Ignat. ad
Magn.
let him be accursed.

Certainly he that shows such indignation against those that pervert the Law of
the Sabbath from a Feast to a Fast, would much more abominate those that turn
it from spiritual delight to corporal labor.

Thus were these two appointed days honored in the Virgin state of the
unspotted Spouse ((...), Germani fratres) like lovely twins or natural
brethren; the one born at the Creation, the other at the Redemption of the
world.

But in the third Century man took upon him to be more spiritual then his
Maker, and some parts began to be infected with Origens allegorical Divinity,
taking liberty to profane the seventh day, under pretense of keeping a
mystical Sabbath, by cessation from sin; while they lived in the manifest sin
of slighting the Sabbath. So that the mystery of iniquity g^t ground, by this
mistical notion making way for the rising of the presump^uous little Horn, to
change Times and ^^aws, till at last he prevailed with the Emperor (abolishing
the seventh day Sab^ath) by a Decree to establish the Lords day, or first day
of the Week, Eus^b. vit. Constant. l. 4. c. 17.
for the great ho^y day, appointing a set form of Latin prayers to be used upon
it.

And this was done the 330. year after of out Redemption. But maugre this
presu^^ptious decree, many precious Churches still devoted themselves both
days to Gods honor, as is evident in that of Ambrose. Sacrum. l. 4. c. 6.
Upon the next day (says he) being the Sabbath, and after that on the Lords
day I will treat of the order to be used in prayer.

And I wish I could entreat all that read this holy resolution, to resolve to
walk in the same order, and reject those Romish abominations, as Rome rejected
the Christian custom of saints, witnessed by Socrates four hundred years after
Christ. Though (says he) in manner all the Churches throughout the world, do
celebrate and receive the holy mysteries every Sabbath day, after other, yet
the people inhabiting Alexandria and Rome, of an old tradition do not use it.
Socrat. scholast. l. 5. c. 21.
The Egytians adjoining to Alexandria, use to celebrate the communion upon the
sunday. Here you may see how long the Saints honored Gods Sabbath, for the
generality of Christians almost throughout the world, did then communicate in
the highest mysteries of the body and blood of our Redeemer upon the Sabbath
day. whiles only the apostatizing Church of Rome (with some few of her
adherents, did communicate upon the sunday, so called.

Now which of the examples we should follow, the good Lord help us to consider,
though me thinks it might easily be determined, if we well weigh the pattern in
the Mount (where we find the first pure Church breaking bread upon the
seventh day Sabbath. Acts 2.


I may not omit another instance of the same authentic Author (404. years
after Christ) who being one of the best Historians we can boast of, thus
writes.

Wherefore when the festival meeting throughout every week was come, Socr.
schol. lib. 6. cap. 8.
I mean (says he) the Saturday and the Sunday, upon which days the Chr^stians
are wont solemnly to assemble in the Church.

Since therefore this was the Saints custom through those purest times, even
400. years after Christ, why should not we also be followers of Christ and his
Scripture Spouse with them? Especially, if we consider that unto this very day
those Christians that have lived from under the power of Rome, do constantly
celebrate both these days. It is the testimony of Mercator, Heylin, and other
Historians of good account, That the Aethiopians do constantly observe both the
Sabbath day, and the Lords day, without doing any work, according Market. hist.
mun. p. 827.
to the ancient manner of the Christians.

This Aethiopia is described to be as large as all the Empire of Germany, with
France, and Italy, having threefcore and ten Kingdoms tributary; their King is
called Presbyter John, exercising both the Legal and Ministerial functions. It
was their Queen who traveled so far to hear the wisdom of Solomon, Matthew.
12.42.
and shall rise up in judgment to condemn such as wilfully refuse to wait upon
the Lord of the Sabbath. To this people did Gods spirit punctually fulfill that
royal Prophecy, Psalm. 86.31.
[Aethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands to God,] directing the Evangelist
to instruct, convert, Act. 8.26, 27, 35.
and baptize the Treasurer to another of their Queens, so that the Noble Eunuch
returning with joy into his own Country (as their Histories inform us)
converted and baptized his Prince, who with joint endeavors spread the Gospel
through those large territories, likely to abide in the faith of Christ until
his second coming, according to the ancient Prophecy, Zeph. 3.9, 10. And thus
I have faithfully performed my task, in vindicating the ample authority of the
seveuth day Sabbath, as being

Instituted by the Father, Established by the Son, Approved by the Spirit, and
Observed by the Saints.
And if these will not prevail with Christians so called, to break off their
weekly profanation of this sanctified Sabbath. I shall leave them to the
righteous judgment of the great day: and for their sakes who obtain the grace
of self-denial, to cast off their carnal encumbrances, and join with the
ancient Gospel Saints in observing the Sabbath, I shall now descend to the 4th.
part of my general Pofition; and as I have confirmed the Sabbaths Authority, so
I doubt not through Christ strengthening me to prove its Porpetuity.

THE Fourth head. Perpetuity of the seventh day Sabbath.
The infinite wisdom (who is Lord of the Sabbath) foreseeing the high
presumption of the little horn, such as to change both times and laws; and
knowing that all truths ebb and flow (in the sonls esteem) as holy time is
slighted and observed was graciously pleased most strongly to secure that law
against which Satan and his eldest Son, would make their first and fiercest
assault.

For it is to be observed that the horn attempted, first, to change times, and
then laws, well knowing that holy laws are taught and learned especially in
holy times, and therefore he first prevailed with Constantine (as is declared)
to change the Sabbath time into the first day.

But against this design does the good God graciously guard his Sabbath, and
Alarm his Saints to be especially mindful of this truth, setting a
superscription (as it were a watchword) upon the portall of this precept,
REMEMBER the Sabbath day to keep it holy, telling us expressly what day it is;
The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, so that if the Lord be
indeed thy God, thou must observe that seventh day for his Sabbath, which he
has so carefully required thee to remember, as knowing that Antichrist would
do his utmost to cause thee to forget it, either in slighting of it as a
ceremony, or else in changing this blessed day Jeroboam-like, and burying its
very name under the odious and most detestable name of Saturday, that it may
therefore be known to his Saints, as no ceremony, but a perpetual unchangeable
Royal Law the Lord has fenced it above all other Laws, first positively, keep
it holy; Secondly, negatively, do not work upon it, and that thou may never
be ensnared to change or alter it: I charge thee carefully to Remember this Law
in a special singular manner. This may for ever silence their conceits who
would slight the seventh day Sabbath, as a jewish ceremony, though their
consciences know it was instituted before any Jew or ceremony had being. Ten
Royal Laws the Lord delivers to his Saints and knowing that all of them would
be more or less observed as his Sabbath should be sanctified or slighted, he
bids, he forbids, he marks it above all the rest that it may be remembered, and
yet disobedient spirits dare reject it as ceremonial and put upon the highest
an absurdity as gross as likely can be imagined: As if wisdom it self should
with so much care command the exact remembrance of a ceremony above all his
moral Laws, for thus vain man would render his maker. I your Lord God do
here deliver you ten precents nine of which are perpetual, but one ^s a
changeable ceremony, wherefore I chang you to observe all my nine royal
precepts, but especially observe my perishing Sabbath, which is but a mere
ceremony, besure you sanctify that, besure you do not profane that, besure
you remember that, I lay it as a special command upon your souls to remember
my mutable ceremonial seventh day Sabbath more especially.

Me thinks gracious hearts should tremble to put such an absurdity upon God
himself as, binding us to remember that, which as a mutable ceremony should be
forgotten and buried in oblivion! yea and which is yet more absurd [if more may
be] they render the reason of sanctifying the seventh day Sabbath on this wise:
For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth and rested the first day
wherefore the Lord blessed the first day for his Sabbath, and sanctified it,
either we must put this absurdity (also) upon our God, or else we must cast off
the fourth commandment (at least the reason of it must be rejected) or else
(which is better then a thousand shifts) we must return from the little horn
to our first husband, and do the Saints first works, and religiously remember
the seventh day Sabbath to sanctify it.

Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness, Isa. 64.5.
those that remember thee in thy ways.

If it be objected that not Christians but Jews are commanded to remember and
observe the seventh day Sabbath; I answer.

1. That not the Christians but the Jews were first commanded the rest of the
ten commandments. If Christians are to walk by the Jews nine commandments
(as a righteous rule) they are no less obliged to every jott and tittle of
the Jews ten commandments.

The Royal Law of God was dispensed to the Jews not only for themselves, Act.
7.38.
But to give unto us, as that first faithful martyr of the Lord Jesus, taught
in his funeral sermon, when filled with the irresistible wisdom of the holy
Spirit, he sealed the faith of the Gospel with his blood, and amongst the rest
of those Evangelicall verities which the protomartyr prized as the Christians
privileges, this is undeniably, an eternal truth, That the Jews did receive
those lively Oracles from mount Sinai to give unto us. Here then it is evident,
first, what Laws are Gods lively Oracles, namely, those precious precepts
which God himself by the Angel of his presence, delivered with a lively voice
in the mount Sinai, one of which lively Oracles is the seventh day Sabbath.

2. To whom these lively Oracles were delivered; and this is agreed on all
hands, that the only people so highly privileged above all the world were the
beloved Israelites.

3. For whom and to what end were these lively Oracles from mount Sinai
delivered to Israel. And this is as clear by blessed Stephens divine
Testimony, They received the lively Oracles (from the mount Sinai) to give unto
us, that is unto me Stephen an Officer in the church of Christ, and to all my
brethren, for whose faith in the true Messiah I am now pleading my last, they
received the lively Oracles to give unto us. Christians this is clear that the
Jews received the lively Oracles from the Mount Sinai to give unto us, though
we have no heart to receive them; yet God has a heart of love to give them,
not only to the Jews, but even to us Christians.

4. Then the fourth inquiry will be, whether these lively Oracles from Sinai
were given us to be broken or kept? to be slighted or observed? If to be kept
and observed, then either we must deny the seventh day Sabbath to be one of
Sinai's lively Oracles, or deny Stephens doctrine of their being delivered to
the Jews to give unto us, or else we must become followers of God as dear
children in sanctifying this lively Oracle of his seventh day Sabbath, This
divine truth of the Sabbaths perpetuity, is in words confessed by our English
assembly, who do not only acknowledge that the Law (in general) does for ever
bind Christians, Confess. Page 33
and that Christ did not ANY WAY dissolve it, but much more strengthen this
obligation in the Gospel; But in particular they confess that God by a
positive, moral and perpetual commandment does bind all men in all ages to
that particular seventh day which himself has appointed. Idem. Page 39.
And whereas they say this is changed in the Gospel from that seventh day to
the first day of the week, I shall with the candle of Gods word search their
grounds which will be found too shallow to satisfy an awakened conscience, for
if Christ does perpetually bind his Saints to exact entire personal obedience
to his lively Oracles, then surely no power is able to absolve his people from
that obedience. And if it be as they say that Christ did not any way dissolve,
but much strengthen this obligation in the Gospel, then it is impossible to
prove any kind of alteration; yet

Further, If God by a positive moral and perpetual commandment does bind
all men; in all ages to such a particular seventh day as himself appointed,
then either they must prove that God has made his moral Law mutable by
appointing some other day, or else the seventh day Sabbath must be restored to
its primitive glory. Their first ground for change of the Sahbath to the first
day is raised from Christ's resurrection, and apparition to his Disciples.

But the very great difference between the fathers example at the worlds
creation, and the Sons action at his resurrection will soon discover the
vanity of this argument. For upon the Creation of the world, God did solemnly
sanctisie the seventh day for his Sabbath and rested on it, giving as an
example for the ground of our obedience, but upon the resurrection there is not
the least syllable of a change, institution sanctification, or celebration; yea
so far was Christ from resting upon his resurrection day, that be traveled
15 Miles upon this supposed New-Sabbath, and this not to any Church-meeting but
from Jerusalem (the place where most of his Disciples were) purposely joining
with the two Disciples that were journeing on foot (7 miles and a half) into
the Country. Luke 24.13.15. Mar. 16.13.


Why Christians awake in the name of the Lord, and polute your souls no longer
with weekly profanation upon such a salf supposition of a change at Christ's
resurrection you see your Creator sanctified his seventh day, Sabbath and
solemnly rested upon it, but for the resutrection day, you have not one word of
a command to keep it as a sabbath, and for an example, you have indeed a lively
one, in your Saviors refusing to appear all that day to his Disciples, at
Jerusalem, and traveling with two (upon their private occasions) not giving
them the least admonition about Sabbath observation (which undoubtedly he would
have done as freely as in other things had he intended that day for his new
Sabbath.

Now I beseech you consider, whether this be likely, that Christ (who was
saithfull in all his house) should intend the first day for his Sabbath, and
yet never leave one word of institution, nor any other pattern but journeying
15 miles.

And whereas it is gloried that our Lord appeared several first days to his
Disciples as they were assembled. I believe upon diligent search, it will be
found but a vainflourish, and that he never appeared to any assembly, no not
any one first day. For it is most certain, that the day upon the Scripture
account begins (with the evening.

And now let us observe that upon the first day, Luke 24.29, 30.
he arose we find him at the Village 7 Miles from Jerusalem, when it was
toward evening, and the day far spent, Luke 24.29, 30.
after which he supped with the two, which took up some time; then they
returned that, 7 miles and a half, to Jerusalem on foot, So that, if the day
were far spent before they entered the Village it must doubtless be quite spent
before they could provide and eat their suppers, and return 7 miles and a
half.

And so before Christ appeared to the eleven, Luke 24.22. John 20.19.
the first day must needs be done, and whereas it is said, he appeared the first
day at evening yet you must know, that the first day was then as fully ended,
as it is plain the sabbath Mar. 1.32.
was ended at evening, when the Sun did set, and the people brought their sick
to be healed, which they were forbidden to do on the Sabbath day.

As for Christ's second appearing to the assembled Disciples, John 20.26.
it is expressly said, it was after eight days, and therefore could not be on
the first day of the Week.

And for his third apparition, John 21.
surely they will not say, 'twas on the first day, seeing they were at their
trade.

But indeed the Lord was seen of some, Acts 1.2.3.
or other of them, forty days, never being idle all the time, 1 Cor. 15.6.
so that his apparations prove not any thing as to a change of the Sabbath.

There is a conceit that the cause of the Disciples assembling on the first day
was to celebrate the new Sabbath, in honor of Christ's resurrection; when as
they were so far from believing Christ was risen, that the women's tidings there
of, Luke 24.11. Mar. 16.13.
seemed to them as idle tales. Yea, the first day was finished before they
believed, so that they could not in faith, do any such thing. But here it is
evident how sadly they are put to it, that must say something for their first
day Sabbath and yet can say no better.

For although they would make some show of Scripture, yet all amounts to a bare
endeavor to draw some support for an unwarantable Sabbath from any Text that
does but mention the first day of the Week Act. 20.7.


As first from the Disciples occasional, meeting to break bread upon Paul's
departing by Sea, they suppose this may make something for a first day, Sabbath
and truly they may as groundly plead for an every day Sabbath, Act. 2.26.
since it is as clear that the Saints assembled, and brake bread every day.

2. We find the Saints at Troas, no sooner assembled, but many lights are seen
in their upper chamber. So that it is not probable, they met till toward
evening, which is no good example for celebrating a Sabbath.

3. If breaking of bread had been a service designed for the honor of the
first day, the Apostle who so much pressed to Church Order, 1 Cor. 11. ul^.
(and particularly in this Ordinance) would not have deferred breaking of
bread, till the second day, especially, now that he was to see them no more,
and to give them an example (to which he binds the Saints) so that his
deferring breaking of bread, 1 Phil. 4.9.
till after midnight, when the first day was more then finished, shows
plainly, that this was no duty proper to the first day, or in the least,
pointing it out for a Sabbath.

4. It Is strange that once mention of Preaching on the first day should be so
stood upon; when Paul's constant custom of preaching, and praying upon the
seventh day Sabbath (with his company) both amongst Jews, Acts 16.13.16. and
18.4.
and Geneiles, is not only slighted, but opposed, as no proof of the Sabbath.
O how indulgent are poor creatures to brats of their own breeding! A second
Scripture is produced as though it favored the change of the Sabbath, because
the Apostle gave order to some Churches for laying aside relief, 1 Cor. 16.1.2.
for the present necessities of the Saints, in Judea, upon the first day of the
week. But first, Let it be considered, that if this had been a Sabbath days
duty, the Apostle would not have omitted it either present or absent, whereas
he plainly declares his dislike of gathering at his coming and desires it may
be then in a readiness.

2. The direction he gives for this collection, shows evidently, he intends no
Sabhath days work, for there is not the least hint of any assembly; though
custom has prevailed so far with most I have met with that they frequently
urge the Text thus, Upon the first day of the week when ye come together, etc.
Though there is no such word as coming together. But let every one of you lay by
* himself in store.

He does not enjoin them to a Church meeting, nor to lay it before the Deacons
(as doubtless he would had there bin a Church meeting that day) Let every one
of you lay by himself in store, That is, at his own house in the poores box,
which truly, every tender Christian should have always with some stock by him
for charitable uses. 1 Timothy 6.17. Tit. 3.14.


3. The Survey (the Apostle exhorts every man to take of his own estate (that
he may give thereafter) does notably overthrow the conceit of a first day
Sabbath, for he orders every man to lay something by himself in store. As God
has prospered him, that is, according as his yearly revenue increases, or his
weekly trade proves more, or less gainful.

Now if the first day had been a Sabbath, surely, Col. 3.1, 2.
the Apostle knowing the pronenesse of our nature, to mind earthly things, from
which he rouseth Saints) would not have put upon them, the consideration of
their outward estates. But

Why should he have this done on the first day?

Answ. It has been clearly showed, that Paul's constant practice was, to preach
on the seventh day, Sabbath, and that it was the exact examplar, Act. 18.
he set before this Church of Corinth, in particular (they being the fruit of
his Sabbath exercises) who were enjoined to follow him, as he followed Christ.
So that, if we can believe they walked in Paul's constant Practice in keeping
the true Sabbath, we may easily judge that Paul's Epistle was read in the Church
at their solemn assembly, on the Sabbath day, and we may not doubt that the
Teachers would stir up the people to liberallity, upon the Apostles order, and
the rather seeing he closed his Epistle with it, that it might sit close and
warm upon their hearts, and for as much as they were not like to be so well
stored at present (upon the Sabbath) he would have it to be their first work,
the very next day, whilst the sweet sense of the Epistle, and heavenly relish
of Gospel Sermons, and other Ordinances, which they enjoyed the day before,
were yet fresh, and divinely pleasant upon their spirits, and before they
lanched into the worlds weekly employments (which puts too great a damp upon
our best purposes) he would especially make choice of the first day of the
Week, and have them make it their first business, (next to the consideration
of their abilities, how God had prospered them in worldly goods) to present
unto God (in secret by themselves) the first fruits of their increase, for the
refreshing of Christ's bowels, and as anearnest of their duties toward him unto
whom they owed all.

Thus with very good reason did the Apostle make choice of the first day, for
this duty.

But to assert the first day to be a Sabbath, because the Apostle ordered every
man by himself to lay up something for the poor Saints there being not the
least mention of a Church-meeting that day (and yet I say) to assert that day
for a Sabbath) is altogether irrational and utterly unscriptu^all.

The third Scripture abused about the supposed change of the Sabbath only
speaks thus much, That John was in the spirit on the Lords day, but that this
was any individual day is uncertain, Rev. 10.
or if it were he says not what day it was, and therefore we must enquire in
some other Scriptures (seeing they are able to furnish us thoroughly to every
good work) and if the first day, 2 Timothy 3.17.
shall any where in Scripture appear to be called the Lords day, let it wear
the Garland as a day devoted to the Lord, or designed by the Lord to be kept
holy, which yet I hope may be done without rejecting or profaning the seventh
day Sahbath.

But if the Scripture may be our guide, it will inform us, but of two days
honored as the Lords days.

And the first is the ancient sanctified seventh day Sabbath royally dignified
with that title of the Sabbath of THE LORD OUR GOD, Isa. 57.5.
which is owned by the father for his holy honorable day, and by the Son is
expressly declared to he his Sabbath. Mar. 2. ult
The Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath, and no other day declares he to be his
throughout the Gospel. So that, the seventh day Sabbath, and only that (as an
individual and single day) is honored with this high title, of the Lords day,
and therefore if John intends any single day, it is most like it was the Sabbath
of the Lord that here he calls the Lords day.

But I rather think he spoke of that other Lords day owned in Scripture as the
Lords judgment day, Mal. 14. Luke. 17. Phil. 1.16.10.
and this the Lord himself calls his day, and this day was most clearly showed
unto John in many glorious visions, and in the Spirit he was in this day for so
runs the Greek, I was in the Spirit, (...) IN the Lords day.

But grant the first day should be here intended, and called the Lords day, yet
how dare any avouch it to be the Sabbath day, since we have not the least hint
in Scripture to warrant it? much less to reject the true Sabbath, and set up
the first day not only as the Lords day for Christians to rejoice and to be
glad in; But as the Sabbath day enjoined in the fourth Commandment against the
reason there rendered, For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and
rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and
sanctified it.

Saints! For your souls sake search the Scripture, if ever you find the Lord
resting upon the first day. I have prove^ unto you that when he arose the first
da^ he was so far from resting, that he traveled 15 miles that very day, and
encouraged his Disciples so to do; Ask your consciences in the fear of God, if
this were sanctifying a new Sabbath?

The ancient Christians who called it the Lords day, did never term it the
Sabbath day, but religiously celebrated the seventh day Sabbath with it. But
see what partiality this is to avouch that to be the Lords day which is so
uncertain in Scripture, and to reject the seventh day which is constantly
called the Sabbath.

And thus I have faithfully opened the 3 Scriptures which neither singly nor
jointly give the least ground to observe the first day as a Sabbath: So that
Scriptures failing, they flee to unscripturall consequences to support their
supposed change.

First,

Adam) who told thee that thou wast naked? who told thee the work of Redemption
was the greater? who told thee the greater ^ork (if it were so) deserves the
honor of the day? has God no other way to bear up the honor, and preserve
the memory of Redemption, but thy supposed Sabbath? Then learn to know that
for the honor of the glorious work of creation God has instituted his holy
Sabbath, and for the commemoration of the gracious work of Redemption, he
invites thee (if thou have grace) to his sacred Supper.

Wherefore cease, presumptuous man, to set up thy posts by Gods Pillars; bless
his name for his Royal Sabbath, to meditate on the work of his hands, and
sound forth his praise for his precious Supper that sets forth the Love of his
heart.

Israelites obligation to offer their firstborn and first fruits, and
therefore it is thought more equal to offer the first day for a Sabbath; then
first to serve our selves six days, and put of Gods Sabbath till the seventh.



I freely join thus far with the adversaries argument, That it is most meet
for man to offer unto God his first day. But I fear my Antagonists will not
stick to their own conclusions, when they are remembered that the seventh day is
man's first day, he being made on the sixth day, and immediately the seventh day
Sabbath made for him, to offer his first fruits unto his maker, who in very
deed accepts no other Sabbath but man's first day, since then the adversary
himself has concluded that man's first day is most equal to offer unto God
for his Sabbath, let him either stand to his own argument, Job. 5.12.13. 1 Cor.
1.1.
and see that he offer none other Sabbath to the Lord then man's first day, or
else be for ever condemned by his own mouth. Thus the Lord disappointeth the
devices of the crafty, and snareth them in their own wisdom, yet will they not
cease their vain jangling,

Act. 2.41. and 1^.42. and 44, 45. and 6.13.14.
but blessed be the Lord of the Sabbath, that multitudes of Jews and Gentiles
have found such plenty of the heavenly Manna upon this blessed seventh day
Sabbath, that the adversary may stop his mouth with shame, yea, many living
witnesses can bear their joyful testimony to the free effusion of Gospel grace
upon the true sanctified seventh day Sabbath.

Another reason is rendered why the first day should be observed, viz.



If more persons be truly converted on the first day, then upon other days,
the honor is due to Gods grace in that means which more abounds on the first
day, then other days, and he that commands the word to be preached in season,
and out of season, will not fail to follow it with his blessing at all
seasons, witness the notable success of Lectures.

But if conversion of souls be a seal to Gods Sabbath, never was day so
crowned with true converts in the Scripture as the seventh day; instances,
whereof have been already given in that famous 50 day Acts 2. and 13. and 16.
and 18. cap.

Old things are passed away, all things are become new.

It Is true, The good old way promising rest to our souls, Jer. 6.16. Heb.
10.20.
is none other then the Gospel, New, and living way, The new commandment of
Christ's Apostle, is the old commandment that was from the beginning. John
3.17.8.


And the very first institution that we here of in the beginning, is the
seventh day Sabbath, therefore if we are Christ's Disciples indeed, let us
reform in observing the true Sabbath, as we are directed about the true
marriage, Mat. 14.5.6.
[i. e.] look to the beginning; we do no more put new wine into old bottles,
by celebrating the Ancient Sabbath, then by joining in the ancient way of
marriage.

The purest water is at the spring head, 1 John 2.24. Let that therefore abide
in you, which you have heard from the beginning, if that which ye have heard
from the beginning shall remain in you; ye also, shall continue in the Son, and
in the Father.

If you will not believe that the Sabbath which was from the beginning, does
still remain to be observed, unless you hear the same in so many words, give
me leave to take off the Translators vail, and let but Gods Spirit speak in
his own language, wherein the holy Oracles were written, and you will soon be
informed, Heb. 4.9.
(...) Thero remains therefore the celebration of the Sabbath to the people
of God.

I know 'twil be suddenly objected, Psalm. 132.
there is no mention of the Sabbath in our English Bibles, only, there remains
a rest to the People of God. Indeed the greater is their sin, who have abused
the word Sabathismos, translating that (only) rest which signifies the
celebration of the Sabbath, Mar. 28.13.14.
as any Grammar Schoolboy may see in his common Dictionary, and the greatest
Adversaries of the Seven day Sabbath, are not able to deny.

If any shall plead; Psalm 27.19, 20.
That seeing the keeping of the Sabbath is a Rest, therefore the Translators
may be excused in rendering the word [Rest] let them know, that although every
Sabbath is a Rest, yet every Rest is not a Sabbath.

We rest in our beds, yet, who is so simple to call that a Sabbath? That word
which so often is rendered Rest, in Heb. 3.4. is quite another Greek word; So
that, their sin cannot be excused, who have perverted the sense, and by mis
translation, and their own additions to the Scripture, have obscured the
Sabbaths Gospel-glory, more then once or twice, as in Col. 2.36. they have
destroyed the A postles scope, by their addition of [Dayes] so in Acts 18.4
they have translated that word [Reasoning] to the undervaluing of the Sabbath,
which in Acts 20.7. they English [Preaching] for the greater advancement of the
first day.

But since so great a cloud of obscurity is cast over the Sabbath, by
translating that barely rest, which signifies so clearly the celebration of the
Sabbath, and finding many perplexing their spirits to find out what rest is to
pressed by the spirit, In Heb. 3. and 4.

I shall endeavor to help their understandings, who through some cursorie
consideration of the Scripture have supposed that it only intends some one
single Rest, whereas upon a serious search into these two Chapters, there will
be found a five-fold rest. 1 Typical, 2 Spiritual, 3 Evangelicall, 4 Moral,
and 5 Eternal, though indeed they are as mysteriously, and promiscuously held
forth as those interwoven predictions of our Lord Jesus, In the 4 of Mat. and
the book of the Revelation, which are purposely so delivered, to exercise the
faith, and mind of wisdoms children, I shall therefore through grace lay open
this five-fold rest, as it appears to be the mind of the Spirit, by the
Apostle; Heb. 3. ver. 3.5.6, 7,
whose scope is to warn and admonish Christians (by Isreal's woes) of falling
short of the true Rest, and having showed the difference between Christ, and
Moses, with their two houses, he takes his Text (as it were) from David Psalm.
45.7. exhorting Christ's house by faith to walk in Gods ways, verse. 10, 12, 13,
14.
from which Israel swerved, and so fell short of that Rest (termed another day)
whereof Joshuah's Canaan was only a Type. This being the Apostles scope by that
Typical rest to shadow forth that other day, (viz.) Gospel grace and Glory by
Christ.

The entrance into which grace is the Saints spiritual rest, For (says the
Apostle) We which have believed do enter in to rest. This is that promised
rest to heavy-laden souls, the delightful fold of believing Lambs,

The very same resting place (says Christ) my Father makes for me, have I
prepared for you, even mine own bosom, and all I look for from you in liew of
this great love, John 1.18.
is as thus as I rest in my Fathers bosom, and you in mine, so I may rest in
yours. Wherefore let each spiritual Virgin Spouse, conlude, My beloved shall
lie as a bundle of myrrh all night between my breasts. Can. 1.13.


And having thus attained their Spiritual rest by Faith, the Saints third
repose, I term, Rest Evangelical.
a Church estate caled by the Apostle The house of Christ, the Zion of God,
built up of Spiritual stones, the rest which God himself has chosen, Heb.
31.6. and 12.22. Ps. 132.13, 14.
and all should choose that have entered by faith into that Spiritual rest; For
the Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his habitation, this is my
rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it. Here Christ has
promised his precious presence to the worlds end, and this should be that on
thing in believers desires; whilst pretenders to Spirituallity, are passing
from mountain, to hill, forgetting their resting Place.

4. As Christ's Church is his resting place where we may find him, and rest in
him. So he has a solemn resting time, or Gospel-Season, which is the noon time
rest, after which the Spouse enquires (not only where, but when) Tell me, o
thou whom my soul loloveth, where thou feedest, where thou make thy slocks to
rest at noon?

At this Season Christ sits in his meridian glory, amidst his flocks, in his
weekly return to his beloved; this I call his Moral rest, or the mannerly
attendance which the Church owes unto Christ entering his Royal palace decked in
robes of righteousness, when the Royal Scepter is graciously extended to every
trembling Hester.

The neglect of this moral rest was woeful Isreal's sin: for which the Lord
destroyed them in the Wilderness, as is plain Ezekiel. 20.13. and this being
compared with the Apostles, Admonition to the Christians, plainly points out
the Sabbath that remains to the people of God. He sets forth Isreal's fin and
Isreal's sorrow, on this wise. Although God finished his works from the
foundation of the world, and thereupon speaks ( Genesis 2.) And God rested the the
seventh day from all his works, yet neither the glory of his wonderful
Creation, authority of his institution, or observation of his holy Sabbath (to
keep up the Creators honor) could engage them to follow his example, but so
highly did they provok him in the wilderness by refusing his Statutes, and
despising his judgments (in general) but especially in poluting his Sabbaths,
that he swear in his wrath, they should not enter into his rest, but for their
sins, (and particularly sabbath-breaking) he consumed them in the Wilderness.

Wherefore the Apostle concludes in applying all unto believers exhorting them
to labor (in the use of that means which Israel neglected) To enter into the
eternal rest after the true Jesus, least any man fall by the same example of
unbelief (or disobedience; as the Greek signifies) Christians! believe it,
this is the sum of the Apostles admonition, so to press after our eternal
rest, that we fall not after Isreal's example of disobedience, Ezekiel. 20.13.
in rejecting Gods statutes, despising his judgments, and (in particular)
poluting his seventh day Sabbath which he made, and wherein he rested for a
pattern to all that enjoy the benefit of his works of creation. But especially
for Christians who by entering into his spiritual rest through faith are become
the people of God; There remains therefore the celebration of the Sabbath to
the people of God, for he that is entered into his rest, he also has ceased
from his works, as God did from his own works.

And here we have considerable, first, the continued duty, that is The
celebration of the Sabbath.

2. The persons exhorted to the duty, and they are such as by entering into the
spiritual rest through faith are the people of God.

3. Here Is the ground and reason of the duty, and this is twofold.

1. Gods rest from Creation.

2. Christ's rest from Redemption.

First as to the remaining duty, the celebrating of the Sabbath, I need say
little having already showed that the seventh day Sabbath is one of those
lively Oracles that Israel received from Sinai to give unto us. And that our
God has especially commanded us (to whom these Oracles are given) to REMEMBER
his seventh day Sabbath to sanctify it, and it is our mercy that his holy spirit
does here record (what the translators were loath to reveal in english) That
there remains the keeping of the Sabbath to the people of God. I know it is set
down in the margin of our Bibles the keeping of a Sabbath, whence they would
evade the seventh day Sabbath, and set up a Sabbath of their own (although the
Dictionaries, and Lexicons render it plainly the keeping of the Sabbath. But
let the people of God celebrate the seventh day Sabbath until they can find
the holy Spirit calling any other day a Sabbath, and then let them change.

The second thing is, the persons exhorted to this duty, and they are believers
entered into their spiritual rest; and therefore it is most irrational to affirm
this remaining Sabbath to be nothing but a spiritual rest into which believers
enter, verse 3. and so become the people of God; and as Gods people they are to
celebrate the Sabbath; There remains therefore the celebration of the Sabbath
to (those that are already) the people of God. And I hope such as are the
people of God will remember to observe it as being under a double obligation. I
Gods institution, and observation, making himself our president of which I
have already spoken. 2. Christ's cessation from his great works, and entering
thereupon into his rest; and this is laid down as the Gospel reason why the
Sabbath remains to the people of God. For he that is entered into his rest, he
also has ceased from his works, as God did from his own works.

Some conceive, That believers are here said to enter into rest; but then it
would be needless to excite them to enter in the verse following, It is Christ
only Heb. 4.12
whose entrance into rest is here intended, who ceased from his works as God
did from his; and therefore there remains che celebration of the Sabbath to
the people of God.

Here then the mysterious payment of man's Ransom is matter of high admiration,
being the same day that man was made, and that very day, and time of the day
whereon God finished the glorious work of creation: and so ceasing from his
labors, our Savior exactly entered into his rest that very day and time as
God began his rest; povidentially ordering his body to be taken down, and laid
to rest in his Sepulcher in the Close of the sixth day, that no part of his
Sabbath should be violated; and thus ceasing from his works as God did, and
entering into his Rest exactly as God did; it lays believers under a double
engagement to sanctify the seventh day Sabbath.

That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, i.e. As
the Father engages us to honor him in celebrating the sabbath because he
rested on it from the works of Creation. John 5.23.
So ((...)) even so the Son engages us to sanctify the same holy sabbath,
because he rested in it from the works of our redemption; There remains
therefore the keeping of the Sabbath to the people of God.

Mr Aspinwall, and others would persuade us (without one word from God) that
Christ entered into his rest upon the day of his Resurrection, whereas he
journeyed fifteen miles that very day, which was no fair president for
celebrating a Sabbath.

But that he entered into rest the true seventh day Sabbath when he had finished
his great work of Redemption, the Scripture gives full evidence.

Our dear Redeemers soul was no sooner separated from his body, but his
better part immediately entered into glory, by his own resignation of it into
Gods custody, saying; Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit; And now the
converted theife reaped his promised fruits; To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. And soon after our Saviors soul had taken possession for us of
glory, his blessed body was laid to rest in the grave, the quiet cell of a
weary soul, There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at
rest. Job. 17.3.
There are some that deny Christ's rest in the grave, mistaking that text of
Gods loosing The pains of death.

As if God had not then loosed the pains of death, Luke 24:25, 26.
when Christ resigned his spirit into his protection; and for his body, that
also was far from pains, for having finished his work, John 19.30. Heb. 1.14.
Rev. 14.13.
and by one offering for ever perfected them that are sanctified, he enjoyed
that rest from his labors which is the lot of those that die in the Lord: yea,
the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the grave, his heart rejoiced, his
tongue was glad, and his flesh did Rest in hope. Act. 2.26
Whiles the Deity held Christ's body and soul asunder, like a man with a drawn
sword in one hand, and a Scabberd in the other, which the third day he again
put into his sheath. Since then it is so fully manifest that Christ ceased from
his works, as God did from his own works, and so entering into his rest exactly,
celebrated the seventh-day Sabbath quietly (and out of the reach of desperate
enemies) his soul in glory, his body in the grave; we must conclude that there
remains therefore the celebration of the Sabbath to the people of God. And so
according to our precious Saviors example, let us resolve through grace, with
the close of the sixth day, to recall our better part, and resign it to Gods
service, saying, Return unto thy Rest O my soul, Psa. 116.
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee; and likewise with the burial of
Christ's body, burying all our earthly business in the grave of oblivion. Let us
at last begin to consecrate the true seventh day-Sal bath, as a day of delights
to the Lord, and so obtain mercy for the Sabbath pollution of our days of
ignorance, and Christ will not fail to pour oil and wine into those wounds our
souls have received amongst Thieves, who have stolen and taught us to steal
holy time from God. And thus grace by weekly returns from Sabbath to Sabbath,
shall so strengthen our hearts, that at last we shall arrive at our expected
home, our joyful jubilee, a Sabbath whose Sun shall never set, Rest eternal.
which is that true eternal rest whereunto the Apostle presses, v. 11.

Let us therefore labor to enter into that Rest, Heb. 4.11.
lest any man fall after Isreal's example of Disobedience. And thus in opening
the five-sold rest contained (though promiscuously) in the third and fourth to
the Hebrews, I hope it is convincingly manifested, that the seventh day Sabbath
(by a double obligation) remains to the people of God. And indeed it is
impossible to change it, without violation to the confessed morality of the
commandment; for whereas our adversaries assert a just seventh part of time,
yea, and a seventh day, as truly Moral, they know the seventh day from the
Creation was instituted in Paradise, and the same day commanded from Mount
Sinai; and certain it is that if the Jews had observed any other day, they had
destroyed the morality, neither can the wisest Christian in the World contrive
a change, but he destroys the morality; for let him change the Sabbath to the
sixth day, and that cannot be a seventh day, or seventh part of time. Let him
translate it to the eighth day, and then seven days pass without any one
Sabbath. Let him keep the seventh day, and the eighth (or first day) at his
change of the sabbath, and then he keeps two sabbaths within the circuit of
seven days.

So that do what he can, the morality is subverted, either he must deny the
morality of a seventh day, or seventh part of time; or else he must stick to
the good old Seventh-day Sabbath.

I would not smother any objection that might carry the least show for any
other Sabbath then this lively oracle of the Seventh day, knowing therefore
that some endeavors have been used (by such my soul honors, for the image of
God upon them) I shall weigh their apprehensions as they are declared, and
first from Mark 16.1.

Object. 1 Object. Mark 16.1.
1. It Is supposed that the word (...) may signify [being dissolved] and so it
may be rendered when the Sabbath was dissolved.

Answ.

2.

what the Objectors strike at, for it is not the Sabbath they contend against
but the seventh day; now if they will strain at the word, let them stick to the
word, which mentions not the seventh day at all, but the sabbath, St. Mark does
not say the seventh day was finished, but when the sabbath was ended, so that
they cannot hence reject the seventh day, and retain the sabbath.

4. Luke 23. ult.
and that was the sabbathday (or the duty) not one syllable expressed of the
time (or seventh day) and though I am abundantly satisfied that the sabbath,
and the seventh day, are unseparable never to be divided, yet the objectors can
distinguish as clearly, as my self between the seventh day, which is the time,
and the sabbath, which is the duty, so that if they will dissolve any thing from a
squeezed participle, it must not be the seventh day, which lies unmentioned,
but the sabbath duty, which is expressed. And doubtless many great professors,
had rather cashier the sabbath duty, morality of the fourth commandment yea
and the morality of all the commandments, (as no way concerning Christians,)
then set to the celebration of the seventh day.

The Lord pity them; whiles I return to another, (precious to the Lord, and
faithful amongst the Saints,) who yet objecteth that Saint Matthews (...) may
signify the ultimate end of the sabbath, Math. 18.1.
never to be celebrated more amongst Christians.

1 Answ. This may receive the same answer, with the former, for if it destroy
any thing it must be the duty, which is expressly in the word sabbaths, and not
the day and time of the rest, which is not mentioned. If persons will strain at
expressions they must keep to these expressions.

This adverb, (...) does not primarily or properly signify the end, but the
genuine signification of it is vespere the evening and to it should be rendered,
viz. the evening, of the Sabbaths.

Let the scriptures be consulted where this adv^^b is used which is but twice
that I can find in the new testament, Mark. 11.19. and 13.25.
in both which places it signifies the evening (for the sense would be marred to
render it other wise, and so here the evening of the Sabbaths (termed Sabbath
in the plural, as being not only the seventh day sabbath, but the Jews
passover sabbath, as is evident) well I hope it is not possible for Satan to
delude tender consciences long with such sorry slights, Luke, 23. with John.
19.24.31.
as to neglect a royal statute of Jehovah upon such slender terms. But since
the seventh day sabbath is undoubtedly one of those lively oracles which Israel
received from Sina to give unto us; O Christians embrace it, love it, lay it in
your bosoms it: in vites and will conduct you weekly into the Princes
presence, where it will open unto you all the rest of those lively oracles and
divine mysteries that are coupled with it, while such as slight and reject this
heavenly law and still assert a chang without book, shall run themselves upon
many dangerous rocks and sands which tender hearts should tremble at.

As first they must affront the holy spirit, who was most punctual in sundry
scriptures, for the solemn repeal and abrogation of circumcision, and all those
typical Sabbaths which were against us and contrary to us, shaddowing good
things to come with the visible burial of the whole body of the ceremonial law,
and yet this blessed spirit (purposely appointed to lead us into all truth) was
so far from repealing the seventh day Sabbath, that he constantly calls that
(and none other) the Sabbath day, that is, the Lords holy rest-day, and pours
down his graces in most abundant measure that day.

So that if the sabbath day be altered, Gods holy spirit cannot escape an
affront for concealing the change from us. Certainly there is need of a clear
word for the change, or repeal of such a royal Law, and lively oracle.

Next to their traducing of Gods spirit; Acts 20.
The sabbath changers must needs bring a high charge against the Apostle, for
calling God to record that he had not shunned to declare all the counsel of
God, and yet never opened his mouth about the change of the royal seventh day
sabbath.

He manifestly declared the nullity of all ceremonial Laws, but as for this
lively Oracle (with the rest) he termed it a holy, Romans 3
just, spiritual, good Law, and so (without the least exception) established
the whole Law, yea, and the sabbath in particular, declaring in express terms
that there remains the celebration of the sabbath to the people of God, and
not only so, but having laid such a high charge upon all Christian Ministers *
to be instant in Preaching, Compare 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. with chap. 2.2.
in season, out of season, he plainly shows by his constant practice in
Preaching every sabbath day both among Jews and Gentiles this which is the very
Gospel season of Preaching, wherein he follows Christ and binds believers to
follow him.

So that if it be true as sabbath changers say, where can we find a more
dissembling person then the Apostle Paul?

Neither do they rest here, but even accuse Christ himself who is said to be
faithful in all his house, even as Moses was faithful in his house. Now we know
that Moses has most expressy set down from time to time the very solemn season
wherein his house should assemble and worship God. But of the sabbaths change,
Christ never spoke one word to his house, nay on the contrary he declared, that
as long as Heaven and earth lasted his Disciples must not break one jot or
title of those lively oracles that Israel received from Sinai to give unto us,
yea in particular he owned the seventh day Sabbath, as his Sabbath, and so left
it under his hand, and sealed it by his mavelous miracles, and with tender
fatherly care required his house to pray that they might not be forced to flee
upon it sortie years after his death.

And as for the day which sabbath changers accept, and assert for their
Sabbath, he never gave them one syllable of a precept, and for his president it
has plainly appeared, that he journeyed freely fifteen miles upon it. So that
if the Sabbath be changed, Christ is far enough from Moses faithfulness in all
his house; But further how dreadful is it to father that change of the Sabbath
upon the precious Son of God, Dan. 7.25.
which is the detestable design of the little horn. The changer of times and
Laws what! charge that upon Christ which is the proper presumption of
Antichrist! is not this the whores mark, to change the Saints times? the Saints
Sabbath time, and the Saints supper time. Me thinks Sabbath changers should be
heartily ashamed, whiles the opening of the seventh seal shows so clearly the
Strumpets Blasphemy, that they may run and read her mark as it were in the
heart of her detestable decalogue. Whore she has most impudently changed the
fourth lively oracle into this d^mnable dialect. Remember to sanctithe holy
feastivals. Sabbath changers! it is high time to spit in the whores face, strip
her naked, hate her, burn her flesh with fire?

If you will not detest and loath and leave her now that she is so manifestly
marked out to you, Rev. 18.
I shall even leave you in her lustful embraces to share in what she must
shortly suffer.

And turn me to my dear companions who have obtained grace at last, to see and
sanctify the true Sabbath of Father Son and spirit, with whom I shall go on
with weekly expectation of the day of our full release, when vengeance pure and
unmixed shall be poured upon the head of the sabbath changing, Rev. 18.20.
whiles joys unspeakable shall possess our hearts as our promised portion.

Rejoice over her thou Heaven and ye holy Apostles and Prophets for God has
av^nged you on her:

There are, that think the difference of a day is no such great matter, so long
as one day in seven is honestly observed. And truly no wonder they can so
easily dispense with the change of a day who can so freely change the subject
in Baptism.

Christ calls for believers and they bring him infants, Christ calls for made
disciples and they bring him sucking children, Christ commands to teach them
first and baptize them after, and they sprinkle them first and promise to teach
them to be disciples after whether they will learn or not! So Christ calls for
the seventh day Sabbath to be celebrated by the people of God, and they weekly
pollute the seventh day and put him off to the eighth, Lev. 23.35, 36.
as some have eagerly endeavored to prove by the gross abuse of Gods precept,
for the Ceremonial sabbaths of the feast of Tabernacles, which they would fain
have to be typical of the eighth or first day, which they call the Christian
sabbath. But that persons may for ever dread such indifferency and impiety in
putting off the Almighty from a seventh to an eighth, I shall present you with
the horrible presumption of that unparalled Jewish Antichrist Jeroboam, whose
ten revolted Tribes did as notably resemble the ten horns of the Romish
Antichrist, as his change of the seventh month of Gods appointment to the
eighth of his own invention did shadow forth the impudence of the Man of sin in
changing the seventh day Sabbath into an eighth day of his consecration. This
wicked Jeroboam had not only changed Gods Ceremonial Laws but he further
presumed to change the Ceremonial time of the feast of Tabernacles; Lev.
23.33.34. 1 Kin. 12 32.33.
for whereas God commanded Israel to keep the fifteenth day of the seventh
month, Jeroboam ordained the fifteenth day of the eight month, and see how God
records this in his book of remembrance. And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the
eight month on the fifteenth day of the month like unto the feast that is in
Judah -- so he offered upon -- the fifteenth day of the eighth month even in
the month which he had devised of his own heart.

Take notice sabbath changers! who plead for altering a moral Law of God from
the seventh to the eight, behold the Idolatrous Jeroboam but changing a
ceremonial Law from the seventh to the eighth and he is for ever stigmatized
for devising this of his own heart.

And if you will not be warned but go on in polluting Gods seventh day and put
him off Jeroboam-like to your invented ^i^hth or first day sabbath, you will
shortly find that God will be as exact in reckoning with you for your
Antichristian device of changing his moral seventh day as with the Jewish
Antichrist for changing his Ceremonial seventh month. You say your eighth or
first day sabbath is like the seventh day sabbath, there is but a day
difference, and you perform the like services on your sabbath as God enjoined
on his. And just so did Jeroboam, his feast was like the feast o^ Judah; and
the sacrifices likely the same, but when alls done he is branded for a
time-changer, who devised the time of his own heart? Surely he that sees not
this Jewish Antichrist (in his change of the seventh month to the eight month)
shadowing forth the Romish Antichrist (in his change of Gods seventh day to his
eighth day) has little spiritual eye sight.

But that Gods children may for ever beware of changing his appointments, let
his displeasure that brake forth against holy David be our admonition.

David had a pious purpose to fetch the Ark of God to Jerusalem, he goes with
30000. chosen men, 2 Samuel 6.
s^ts the Ark upon anew cart, the oxen they shake it, Vzzah endeavors to
support, God smits him dead, and spoils all their mirth.

But what is the cause of all this? why it is their invention of setting the
Ark upon a new a cart, which should only have been carried on the Levites
shoulders, of which error holy David being made sensible humbly repents before
the Lord saying, 1 Chr. 15.2.13.
None ought to carry the Ark of God but the Levites -- for because ye did it
not at the first, the Lord our God made a breach upon us for that we sought him
not after the due order. I solemnly profess unto you my flesh trembles in
writing this sad example, and dare any continue by weekly disorder to provoke
this jealous God? believe it Christians it is not all your doing that will
avail, it must be so doing that God will accept; Let all things be done
decently and in order. Now all these things were written for our admonition.
Romans 15.4.
Therefore think not (after admonition) that any sabbath will be accepted but
that alone which God has ordained. God will at last make a breach upon you if
you do not repent in time, and seek him after the due Order.

I have nowthrough grace fully proved the unchangable perpetuity of Gods
seventh day Sabbath.

That it is Gods special command to remember it, That it is one of those lively
oracles received by Israel, from Sinai to give unto us, That we are under a
double obligation to observe it,

First, from Gods rest at the Creation.

Secondly, from Christ's rest at our Redemption. There remains therefore the
celebration of the sabbath to the people of God.

Undoubtedly Sinai's lively oracles given to Christians, are some of Sions
cords or stakes to fasten us in obedience to our God; and it is his faithful
promise, that they shall be perpetuated.

Not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, Isa. 33.20.
neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken.

Let Antichrist conspire with earthly powers to break these bands in sunder,
Psa. 2.3.
and cast away these cords from them.

It Is but for a time, times, and half a time, Da 7.25.
The saints shall recover their changed Laws, and changed times too, and in
keeping the royal Law, (those lively oracles) according to the scriptures,
they shall do well, and be blessed in their deed: Ia. 1.15. and 2.8.10.
whiles such as content themselves with partial obedience shall know (when
Lord, Lord will be to late) that whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet
off end in one point (wilfully after warning) he is guilty of all.

Now, that sincere souls may sweetly conform themselves to this Royal Law, this
lively Oracle, this perpetual remaining seventh day-Sabbath, I shall in the
power of the Highest assist them in the next part of my Position.

The fifth Head. Sanctification.
AS the word sabbath fignifies holy Rest, so this rest is to be sanctified to
the honor of the holy God, by a holy People, in a holy manner. It Is no small
mercy that God has winked at the days of our ignorance, while we were weekly
wallowing in Sabbath-pollution, and that now he calls upon us to repent, Acts
17.30.
and reform in Sabbath sanctification.

The seventh seal being undoubtedly opened, Pro. 9.1. Romans 12. Ep. 4.11, 12.
has discovered the seven Pillars of wisdoms house, i. e. Those seven sorts
of officers, into whose Hearts God will put grace to trumpet forth the glory of
the Seventh-day Sabbath, whiles faithful souls coming out of their one thousand
two hundred and sixty years wilderness condition, Can. 8.5.
leaning upon their beloved, Re. 12.17
will readily embrace and keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.
Observe here the blessed character of those blessed souls that come flying, as
a cloud out of Babylonish abominations to the Windows of the Ark of God. These
are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. Here Is the
Character of a new Creature, that has a faith working by love, he knows that
circumcision is nothing, Compare Gal. 6 15. with 5.6. and 1 Cor. 7.19.
and uncircumsion is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God. All
the tongue profession in this World is nothing, all the pretenses of spiritual
Sabbatizers with their gilded expressions of living in the bosom of love is
nothing. This is the Love of God, 1 John 5.3.
that we keep his commandments and his commandments are not grievous.

To be sure this command of sanctifying Gods Sabbath, is not g^ievous to
gracious souls. As the Jews in their return from literal Babylon set to the
observation of all they sound enjoined them in the holy Scriptures (though some
things bad been discontinued a long time.) So the faithful Christians coming
out of mystical Babylon, Read Neh. 8.8.14.17.
such as do not only believe in Jesus, but are likewise found with the
commandments of God, those lively oracles, that Israel received from Sinai to
give unto us. Wherefore seeing how Antichrist violated the second commandment
by his idolatrous images, they first cast out the Idols, and kept the second
commandment; they also relinquished the horrible blasphemies of the Beast, and
so observed the third commandment. And at last taking a serious view, how
Antichrist had changed times as evidently as laws, Rev. 12.17.
they set long since to the sanctification of Gods seventh-day Sabbath,
according to the fourth commandment, upon which the Dragon was wroth with the
woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

A remnant there was in the Prelates days that endeavored to keep Gods
Sabbath amongst his commandments, but the Dragon in Lawn sleeves was wroth
with them, the Proud image of the Beast pushed at them, and undoubtedly
whatsoever relic remains of the Beasts image in the present powers, will be
putting forth the horn to push at the observers of the true
Seventh-day Sabbath; whatsoever is of Antichrist in the present Authority, will
not, cannot endure to see those times reformed which the little horn has
changed. It is the nature of all Jeroboams golden Calves, not only to observe
those times which their Founder has devised of his own heart, But to push at
Gods people, and impose penalties upon them for observing Gods Sabbath. But
whiles these go on in sin, and make England to sin, in the weekly pollution of
the Lords true Sabbath, handed from Sinai by Israel unto us, and whiles others
have devised an every-day. Sabbath to secure themselves under spiritual
pretenses, in literal disobedience; the Lord will persuade his precious ones to
receive the Alarm of the seventh Angel, sounding forth the ancient glory of the
Lords Sabbath, Re. 10.6.
swearing by him that lives for ever and ever, That time shall be no longer.

Me thinks none should be so simple as to suppose the seventh Angel should put
an end to all time, seeing it is evident that his Alarm must yet pass among
Many peoples, and Nations, and Tongues, Verse. 11.
and Kings. But in swearing that time should be no longer, is meant that the
mystery of God by his Prophets should be finished, which is the mystery of
iniquity, Verse. 7.
and the mystery of Isreal's glory; and since it is impossible that Sion should
be raised, but in the ruins of Babylon after a time, times, and the dividing of
time, the seventh Angel means that the time changing horn shall no longer
prevail, Dan. 7.25, 26, 27.
but the Lords Sabbath time, and the Lords supper time shall be recovered by
the Saints, who keep the commandments of God, as well as the faith of Jesus.

Wherefore awake, arise, and arm your selves, ye obedient souls, to Jehovahs
Sabbath, at the distinct sound of the seventh Angel, who swears for your
encouragement, that you shall be no longer deprived of your appointed time,
changed and obscured by the mystery of iniquity, as the grand obstruction, and
stumbling block to Isreal's glory.

And to quicken your souls to this heavenly royal duty, Ja. 4.12. Je. 5 22.
consider; it is the will of that one Royal Lawgiver, who is able to save and to
destroy; will you not fear him? will you not tremble at his presence, who has
declared himsel Lord of the sabbath? not to break it (no, not in one title) but
that faints thould sanctify it, Mat. 24.30.
because it is hi^ will, who will shortly set forth his Royal Majesty in the
clouds of heaven, with power and great glory, to take account of all his
Citizens, who show their hatred to him, in slighting that sabbath, whereof he
is the Lord (which he has for ever established by a perpetual decree.) Ah!
what can be expected by s^bbath-breakers, when the Royal Lord of the sabbath
shall appear: Luke 19.27.
But those mine enemies who would not that I should reign over them, bring them
hither and slay them before me.

Happy souls, who shall then be found observing his sabbath, because it is the
will of the Royal Lawgiver.

Because it is a Royal Law, Romans 7.12, 14.
a perfect Law of Liberty, setting the heavenborn soul free from that earthy
bondage to which dunghil-drudges, would willingly be slaves, being then chiefly
in bondage, when called from the World to wait upon God. But the soul that is a
Saint indeed takes sweet delight in this Royal Law, which not only allows him
the open freedom of Jehovahs Courts, his ear, his heart, a whole day together,
Ja. 1.25.
but sends him away laden with blessings, fraught with spiritual favors,
shaming himself that he can yet be no more like this Royal Lawgiver, in the
sanctification of this Royal Law, whiles his soul labors to be transformed
into the same Royal image, 1 Cor. 3.18.
because it is a Royal Law, and yet

Because it is ordained for a Royal people;

For 1. this royal Law of the sabbath for man. Mark 2 ult.

2. Exodus 19.5.
his Israel (that is in the Hebrew A Prince with God) then he dispensed this
Law in great Majesty and glory to them.

3. Acts 4.33.
then the first and most Princely of all these seven was selected (whose name
signifies A Crown) And whiles the power of the spirit appeared in the purest
luster for the vindication of the faith of Jesus, Acts 6.3.5.
by the Peerless Protomartyr, this glorious deed of gift was made to all
Christians by the precious Doctrine of Stephen, who assures us in the word of
the Lord, that Israel received the lively oracles from the Mount of Sinai to
give unto us, and having declared this blessed truth he suddenly sealed it with
his blood. Acts 7.38.


And now it cannot be but Gods royal people should bethink themselves of this
royal Doctrine delivered by the first Christian Martyr; and as becomes a royal
people set to the sanctification of the royal sabbath of our royal Lord Jehovah
in Jesus the Lord of the Sabbath; And Gods Saints shall no sooner search the
Scriptures whether this be so or no, but presently they shall be made noble men
and women; Acts 17.11.
and when once they are brought into obedience of this and therest of those
lively oracles (which seeming Saints must stumble at) they are presently
proclaimed A Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet 2.8 9.
a chosen generation, a holy Nation a peculiar People.

And as they grow up in obedience to Stephens lively Oracles (all which are set
op^n, especially on Gods S^bbath) they shall be transformed into Christ's image
and the same Character stamped upon them as once upon Gideons Brethren; As thou
wast (Jesus;) Jud. 8.18.
so are they each one resembling the children of a King: And whiles this royal
race are sanctifying the Royal rest of their Royal Redeemer Behold! Number. 23.4.
the Lord his God is with him and the shout of a King is among them.

Now who would not be one of these? who would not sanctify this true Sabbath,
as becomes such a Law, such a Lawgiver, such a people?

1. The way to perform this is by preparation: the Lord our God would have us
to remember so to sanctify his sabbath as to remove all impediments that might
any way obstruct out solemn celebration.

Then away with all your lusts and lovers. I will wash mine hands in innocence
so will I compass thine Altar O Lord. Psalm. 26.6.
Sin is doubled on the sabbath day. Sin is sinful at all seasons but exceeding
sinful in this sanctified season.

A way with all your labors. In it thou shall do no work, that is no servile,
gainful work. Sx days thou may do all thy work, in six days thou must so
finish thy work that the seventh may be wholly designed to My work says the
Lord: whose service is pure freedom. Saints must so leave their labors as
Abram left his servants* Gen 22.5.
at the bottom of the hill whiles he ascended to sacrifice his son Isaac.

No work may be done in our ordinary callings: 1 Works of necessity. Josh.
6.14.15. 1 Kings 20.19. Acts 20.6. and 27.20 2 Works of piety.
unless in case of necessity as soudiers in War, Sailors in their voyages;
though I supose no warrant can be found for setting forth on Gods Sabbath.

Physicians Surgeons, Midwives and any other in straits.

Ministers may and must Labor at all seasons, but especially in this season: I
mean Ministers of Christ, who Preach freely and live honorably of whatsoever
is freely given: but for hirelings (bargaining Preachers) who pretend to Gods
work, yet dare not trust him for wages, Mic. 3.5.11.
these do their own works and not Gods work, like to the tradesman that labors
for advantage.

This holy day the poor may be supplied, the sick visited, and a sabbath days
journey lawfully performed; which I conceive is so far as a person may ride or
go without toil, to such meeting where his soul may be most refreshed. For
where no Law is, there is no transgression. A sabbath days journey is
Scripture; Works of convenience.
the extent of it is left to conscience.

Convenient food is to be received with thanks, which each sincere Sabbath
keeper will remember so to provide and prepare before the sabbath that his
servants souls be not deprived of sustenance by staying at home to provide for
his body. We find the Lord of the sabbath content with bread, Luke 14.1.
and his Disciples with ears of corn on the sabbath day.

As for the Jewish prohibition of kindling a fire, it is not mentioned but in
the ceremonial Law and so concerns not Christians who though not in danger of
stoning yet I hope will find somewhat else to do then gather sticks on the
sabbath.

In brief I doubt not but a person principled with the love of God will so
remember to sanctify the sabbath, as to order all his business to be as much
as possible in the worship of Jehovah.

3. As we must leave our unlawful lusts and servile labors, so we must part
with our own lawful pleasures, and be sure we plead not for any pastimes or
whatsoever may please the flesh further then Gods word will warrant, and what
can please or delight a devout soul like Christ's presence amidst his saints, in
the use of gospel ordinances?

It Is the revealed will of God, that we should turn away our foot from
(defiling) the Sabbath, and from doing our pleasures, on his holy day; that we
should call the Sabbath our delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and
honor our God upon it, not doing our own ways, nor finding our own pleasures,
nor speaking our own words. Is. 58.13,


And therefore being thus prepared, by removing all obstructions, making all
possible preparations, and being furnished with heavenly directions, let us
religiously set to the observation and sanctification of this blessed Sabbath.
And upon our entrance into Sabbath duties, If there be the hapy convenience of
saints that may assemble together (as through mercy is our privilege) when the
sixth day is done; then be sure to turn away thy foot from sabbath pollution
and being shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace take the wise man's
precept, Eccl. 5.1.
Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God.

If thou should have no society to sanctify the Sabbath, with thee, yet
thou can not want company, having the promised presence of the Lord of the
Sabbath, and his holy Angels to attend thee. Heb. 1. ult.
When thy beloved has been lodged all night, between thy breasts, and thy soul
is warmed with his bosom embraces, let not the sun shame thee by his salute,
before thou salute thy Lord in secret and in the private family (if such
advantage be given thee) or else the garden, fields, grove, or water side may
furnish thee with matter enough for meditation. Indeed no place can exclude the
Creators glory from a contemplative sabbath keeper. When the doves begin to
flee to their windows, Is. 60.8.
let no secret or private duty (much less emcumbrance) keep thee from the
flocks of Christ's companions, and being assembled stir up the gift and grace
that is in thee, till Jacobs ladder, mount thy soul to Jacobs height of
admiration; How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the house of
God, and this is the gate of heaven, surely the Lord is in this place. Genesis
28.16.17.


And now let the awful dread of the Lord of the Sabbath (before whose peircing
eyes thy actions and affections are naked and open) engage thy soul and body to
such a mannerly demeanor as becoms a saint in so great a service. Keep thy
heart with all diligence because of the Almighty, Prove. 24.23. 1 Cor. 11.10.
keep thy body in a comely deportment because of the Angels. Remember thou art
upon a moral duty, wherefore do all things decently and in order, pray when the
saints pray. Saints must be like Aaron and Hur holding up Moses hands; 1 Cor.
14.40.
they must be like the heavenly host singing forth the praises of God together;
they must do all things as becoms the blessed communion of Saints, and breath
after the fullest communion with God, that is attainable in this state of
grace, the communion to be sought by every Sabbath keeper must be,

1. A choice communion, such as the saint must prefer to all enjoyments. Never
let the soul think to sanctify Gods Sabbath that does not esteem one day in
Gods courts better then a thousand. Psalm. 84.10.
Let him never imagine, his service shall be accepted unless he endeavor (at
least) to make a Moses, a Mary's, a David's choice. One thing have I desired of
the Lord that will I seek after. He that makes such a a choice he shall enjoy
the comforts promised to Christians, Psalm. 27.4. Is. 56.4, 5, 6, 7
that keep Gods Sabbath from polluting it, even them (says the Lord) will I
bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful, in my house of prayer, God
cannot choose but delight in that soul, who makes his choice of Sabbath
communion with his maker.

2 It must be a close communion. Can. 8.1.
O (says the spouse) that thou were my brother, that su^ked the breasts of my
mother -- I would kiss thee etc. It is good for me (says the Psalmist,) to
draw near to God. O Christian keep close and let him not go till he send thee
to thy house with a blessing in thine heart.

3. Thou must labor for a clear communion. 3. Ps. 63.2.
Content not thy self, till thou see his power and his glory, as his saints
hase seen him in his sanctuary. 2 Cor. 3.18. Acts 2.
Press after primitive experience to behold as in a gl^sse the glory of the
Lord, till thou be changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by
the spirit of the Lord. O the clear communion saints enjoyed that blessed
sabbath on which the spirit descended!

4. 4. Can. 5 1. 1 John 1.3, 4, 5.
Thou art invited to a complete communion, Eat O friends, drink abundantly O
beloved. The saints have fullness of joy in their fellowship with God.

5. Thy communion must be constant. Never leave loving thy loving Lord, for he
has said he will never leave thee nor forsake thee: Heb. 13. Rev. 14.
the virgins that are redeemed from the earth follow Christ constantly; and
shall the love of this world interrupt thy communion with thy God? Psalm.
42.12.14.


That famous Psalm for the sabbath, sets forth the constancy of saints
communion with their God day and night, and let this be the measure of thy
souls devotion the holy Sabbath. And if thus thou obtain a choice, close,
clear, complete, constant communion with thy God, I am sure thy communion will
be very comfortable, so that having thus sanctified Jehovahs Sabbath, he will
send thee home with a sanctified soul, and renewed strength, wherewith every
Sabbath, thy vessel shall be replenished till at last thou shall enjoy
immediate communion with thy God in rest eternal.

The sixth Head. The Rule.
THis royal Law was unto Israel a severe Schoolmaster, Gal. 4. and 3. Romans 7.
and strict husband, requiring exact and punctual obedience, and denouncing
dreadful curses upon the least transgression. But Christ having drawn out that
terrible sting, Rev. 11.1, 2.
and turned it from a fiery Serpent to a friendly Scepter, thereby measuring
the Temple, the Altar, and them that worship therein, Psalm. 23.
it is now the joy and solace of a sanctified soul, Thy rod, thy staff shall
comfort me.

As a staff o^ Beauty it directs the new creature to obedience. Zech. 11.14.


As a staff of Bands, it only engages as a rule of Righteousness, showing our
defects, that we may see our need of a Savior: The thunders of Sinai, the
blackness, darkness, and terrible trumpet, Heb. 12.
are now by Christ so sweetened, that all it can speak or say to Saints, is, If
ye fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scripture, Ja. 1, 8.
ye shall do well.

But what if we should fail of fulfilling it, through humane frailty? Why if
any man Sin we have an advocate with the father.

Well may we say here is an easy yoke, 1 Jo. 2.1.
a light burden indeed! and yet too hard and heavy for Ranters, Quakers,
Notionists, Antinomians, etc. who (though contrary to each other) will not
admit of the royal Law, no not as a rule of righteousness, but pervert the
Scripture, which says the Law was not made for a righteous man, and Pharisee
like concluding themselves righteous, 1 Timothy 1.9. Luke 16.15.
they utterly reject the precious Law of God, as not made for them, to which I
answer.

1. It Is true the Law is not made to bind over the righteous man, to its curse
and malediction, but to be sure the law was made for Christ's disciples, and
whosoever speaks not according to the Law (though he boast of his light within,
Isa. 8.16.20.
yet) he has no light in him, nay more especially this very Law of the Sabbath,
Mar. 2.27.
was made for Christ's Disciples, and surely they were righteous men.

2. In the very same Scripture from whence this objection is made, It is
manifest, That the Law is good, and to be used by Saints if they use it
lawfully. Now the Objectors will not use it at all, but though it be proclaimed
a good law, a holy, just, spiritual Law, yet they will have none of it; but
will join with Antichrist in breaking bands asunder, Psalm. 2.
and casting away Christ's cords from them, after he has told them, that
whosoever breaks and teaches to break the least of these lively Oracles given
unto us shall be least in the Kingdom, I shall leave these Libertines to their
lusts, and show the orderly Saints how this good Law may be lawfully used, and
how it is not made for a righteous man.

2 Cor. 3. Romans 8.1.
For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

wherein we were held (as a covenant) that we should serve in newness of
spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter; Romans 7.6.
he does not undervalue the letter of the Law (no not the least point or title)
but rejects the oldness of the Letter as a covenant.

Gal. 3.12
it is neither under us, nor over us, we are not under the Law, but under
grace, To. 6.14.
neither are we above the Law, except we belong to that Lawless one. As we must
nor reject the least point of the Law, 2 These. 2.
unless we would be least in the Kingdom of God, To. 8.3. 1 Cor. 3.11, 12.
neither must we rest upon the greatest duty of the Law, (no nor of the Gospel)
since all rests short of Christ, are but Egyptian Reeds.

But Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to all them that believe;
He says not that Christ is the end of the Law, but that Christ is the end of
the Law for righteousness, for the Law can neither give us life, nor
righteousness, but Christ is made unto us of God, Wisdom and Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, Gal. 3.1^ 1 Cor. 1^.30.
in none of these respects is the law made for a righteous man, and yet we know
the Law is good and may, and must be used lawfully.

Then it is utterly unlawful to destroy one Letter of the Law under a pretense
of worshipping God in spirit, he that worships God in spirit must worship him
also in truth by the Law of truth, it is a strong delusion for Papists to say
they know God is a spirit, whilles they make his image, it is absurd to say we
keep our hearts in the Spirit, if we transgress the letter, and commit
corporal Fornication; it is no less ridiculous to assert we keep the Sabbath
in the spirit whiles we live in the weekly pollution of the Letter.

The lawful use of the Law is,

1. To make known sin to the most righteous soul, for says that excellent
Apostle, I had not known sin, but by the law; if there be no Law, there can be
no sin, if there be no sin there is no Savior for such a Soul. Romans 7.7 and
4.15. Mat. 9.13.


The lawful use of the Law is to direct a righteous soul, to be a rule (not a
Schoolmaster) to the new creature, 2. Is. 8.20.
and this new creature is he, whose faith works by Love, and this is the love
of God, that we keep his commandments, Gal. 6.15. and 5.6. and 1 Cor. 7.19. 1 John 5.3. Ga. 6.16.
and as many as walk according to this rule (of the new creature) peace be upon
them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God, Christ's death has not opened a
door to our disobedience, Heb. 5.9, 10.

The good law of God is to the righteous man a perfect Law of liberty. 3. Ja.
3.25. and 2.8, 12.
As first it would be such a bondage to bow to any other God; that with the
three children, the saint would rather be bound like a saggot for the fire.

Spain or Italy, his spirit would be perplexed like Paul's, to see their
abominable idolatry. O! what a righteous rule? O! what a Law of Liberty is that
which calls the soul from the bondage of Babylon in breaking the second
commandment? Acts 17.8.10.
And alas what a bondage is it to his blessed soul, to hear the third royal Law
broken by Blasphemers, his flesh trembles, his hairs stands an end, his heart
and soul is wounded to hear the name of God blasphemed. But when he gets among
righteous men and women walking by this most righteous rule, why he is out of
prison and at perfect liberty, though his feet were ever so sast in the stocks.

But amongst all Gods royal Laws none sets the righteous soul more at liberty
then the fourth lively oracle, Jacobs ladder toward new Jerusalem.

Here is the perfect Law of liberty, here is the righteous rule of a
Christian, here is the lawful use of the good Law for a righteous man, who is
the person, for whom the sabbath was specially made, which is,

The seventh Head. The Persons.
I have already fully showed that the sabbath was made for Man, and it is
evident that in the first invtitution it was made for righteous Man. Eccl. 29.
Adam was not only Man but good man, upright Man, when the sabbath was made
for him.

The proud Prelates have indeed confessed that Adam was then a righteous man,
but they would persuade their proselytes, that the sabbath was not suitable for
pure Adam, and that he had no need of the sabbath in the state of innocence.
But surely every saint can see (further then such blind guides) that the
sabbath was as suitable and needful for the pure creature, as for the
transcendantly pure Creator; neither can it enter into a wise man's heart, that
Adam should be dressing his garden, upon the seventh day, when God was
sanctifying his holy sabath when the morning stars sang together, Job. 38.7
and all the sons of God sh^^ted for joy; Ephesians. 5.1.
certainly if Adam were a follower of God as a dear child, he then kept sabbath
with his father.

2. Ephesians. 19.5.
When God dispensed his sabbath upon Sinai, it was to righteous Israel, and
when they degenerated, the Lord did even abhor their sabbaths and services.

3. to righteous Stephen and all his fellows. The sabbath is certainly
designed for the same persons to whom the supper is enjoined; Our Lord tells us
that his sabbath was made for (...) man and woman, Mar. 2. ult. 1 Cor. 11 28.
and the same Lord puts (...) man and woman upon the celebration of his supper:
they both belong to the same persons. Not but that the vilest men in the world
are bound to observe the sabbath, the pollution whereof shall increase their
damnation, for though man has lost his ability to obey, yet God has not lost
authority to command.

The Sabbath is a precept as ancient and universal as marriage: both made for
Adam a public person, and for all his posterity. But none can (though all
should) sanctify the Sabbath, save Christ's Disciples: who are redeemed from
earthly interests and brought out of Babylon; Rev. 14.4.12. and 12.12.17.
these in these last days has God designed to build the old wastplaces to
raise up the soundations (that Antichrist has destroyed) of many generations
to repair the breach, and restore paths to dwell in, by turning the foot (of
transgression) from (any further pollution of) the sabbath. Isai. 57.12 13.
This is a generation work, here is royal service for enlightened souls.
Glorious work for such only as get victory over the Beast his image and his
mark, viz. THE CHANGE OF TIMES AND LAWS.

But had not our Godly Fathers victory over the Beast his Image, and his mark.



David's preparing materials for the royal building, and some of them with a
prophetic spirit have foreseen and foretold glorious things such as themselves
never knew, As Mr. Rogers of Dedham. etc.
but now when those glorions things are in view (by the discovery of the beasts
mark) the great admirers of our fathers are become the greatest opposers of
their glorious predictions.

But we hear nothing of the Patriarchs keeping Sabbath, or reproof for Sabbath
profanation, before the Law at Sinai.

Abels sacrifice was on the sabbath day, for though the word be translated [in
process of time] yet the Hebrew is [at the end of days] and what may this end
of days mean, more likely then the end of the week days when the time came
for solemn sacrifices.

Genesis 7.10.
as is evident in the margent of our Bibles.

Enoch walked with God, so as to please him; Genesis 5.4.
or that Noah should be esteemed righteous, or that Abraham should be recorded
for one who kept Gods commandments, Genesis 5.14 and 7.1. and 26.5.
his statutes and his Laws; unless they observed his sanctified sabbath which
was undoubtedly one of Gods commandments.

stand or fall, as man either keeps them or is reproved for the transgression.
But whether men observe them or not, the moral Laws of God are still in force.

That Gospel Saints are not reproved, or admonished about the Sabbath, as
probably they would, had it been a duty incumbent upon them.

1. Acts 13.


2. Had any of the Christians prcphaned the sabbath doubtless the priests and
legal professors (that were so hot about ceremonies) would have made the
World^ring with their clamours. Acts 21.27.28.
The Priests universal silence, a notable Argument that Christians kept the
seventh daysabbath, they that made such noise against Christ, for doing what
was lawful on the sabbath day would not have spared Christians, had they done
any thing unlawful.

Acts 13.20.
keeping of the sabbath, or the reproof for not observing it, and yet that
person must renounce his reason, and Religion that shall deny their keeping the
sabbath, much more if he shall reject the sabbath, because in five hundred
years no mention is made of it.

4. Dydimus will not believe unless he see the print of some admonition to
Christians about the Sabbath, lo, the spirit condiscends, and upon serious
search we shall find Christians admonished to beware of Sabbath polution, 1
Cor. 6.10. to 12.
for the Apostle presents the Christians at Corinth, with several instances of
Isreal's miseries in the wilderness, and plainly declares, That all these things
happened unto them for our ensamples, and are written for our admonition?
therefore it behooves us to search the Scriptures for the cause of their
calamity, Ezekiel. 20.13.
and in searching we shall sind that the special cause of all their plagues was
sabbath profanation (as I have already proved by another warning peal to
professors out of Heb. 3^ and 4^) Well Christians, if Israel be set for our
ensample, and their sad story be written for our admonition, as is plain, then
let us be warned that we partake not of their sins, least we partake of their
plagues, Neh. 9.14.15. and 13, 17.18.
wherewith they were destroyed in the Wilderness, and afterward captivated in
Babylon, as godly Nehemiah sadly bewailes, setting forth the special cause of
both to be Sabbath-breaking.

And therefore let this be a seasonable warning to all that fear the Lord, that
they no longer provoke him with Isreal's Sabbath pollution, least they bring
Isreal's punishment upon themselves, for God will at length wound the hairy
scalp of such as go on in their wickedness after warning. Ps. 64.21.


It is objected, That God does not plague Sabbath breakers, but has poured
down judgments upon such as have slighted the first day.

1. Eccles. 8.11.
Because God is so patient, art thou resolved to be still profane? build upon
it, That after a Seal is opened, and Gods trumpet proclaims the truth, and
gives warning, the next to be expected, is the out-powring of a vial of wrath.

2. If any humane testimony be produced of Judgments upon the first day, we
have both humane and divine, of high displeasure of seventh day-sabbath
breakers.

As for Divine vengeance poured forth by Scripture, proof enough has been
showed for our ensample and admonition, to which this may be added, Lev. 26.33,
34, 35.2 Cor. 36.20, 21.
that as the cause of Isreal's desolation for one generation was Sabbath
polution; so the grand cause of the woeful desolations for many generations (in
treading under foot the Temple, the Altar, and Worshippers) was the little
horns presumption, in changing the Saints time and laws. Rev. 11.2. Dan. 7.25.
Here are Judgments with a witness, and now the only way to raise the
desolation of many generations is to advance those holy times, and Laws changed
by ANTICHRIST.

There are already since this truth sounded, many signs of high displeasure
upon Sabbath Breakers. No plague like that of a hard heart, no judgment like
those strong delusions, which have already seized upon Ranters and Quakers,
whose enmity never appeared so eminently against any one ordinance, (nor scarce
against all, that ever I knew) as against this glorious Oracle of God,
laboring with all their might against it in the very birth.

And as for sundry hypocrites, who masked and marched in profession, as far as
their gifts would carry them, The Lord has notably unhooded them by this
glorious truth; so that the Sabbath being too hot for them, Satan has drawn
them from the worship of the Lord, to wallow again in the world; near upon
twenty persons has the enemy thus ensnared, out of two hundred and fifty. Let
all take heed by the sad example of a young man one William Sloat who upon
hearing of this Doctrine, that Gods commandments are not grevious to gracious
souls was brought under self-condemnation being convinced, 1 John. 15.13.
that this lively oracle of the true sabbath was most grevious to him through
fear of relations and loss of earthly advantages, so that he fell into a
dreadful Agony (like unto what is related of Francis Spira) the terrors of his
eternal state tormenting him for a season, till at last with the advice of
carnal relations, he Apostatized not only from the Sabbath, but from all that
ever he professed in the way of Church worship, declaring that all he had done,
was in hypocrisy and so with a raging tortured spirit he was hurried up and
down to persuade all he could meet with that they were hypocrites like himself)
exclam against the ordinances of the Gospel and returning to the parish
profession like the dog to his vomit, and to the filth of the world like the
Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, where we shall leave him
under the unpardonable sin, to the judgment of the great day, Heb. 6. S, 5, 9.
and 10.26, 27.
for if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking
for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries.

As for external judgments it is hard to conclude love or hatred from thence?
suppose ye that these Galileans were the greatest sinners? I tell you nay, but
except you repent ye shall likewise perish, Luke. 13.2.3. 1 Cor. 11 30. Rev. 2.
and. 3.
for though sometimes the Lord does externally afflict yet usually gospel
judgments are spiritual judgments, and therefore there is little in those
instances of fire and other providence upon the first day; for if the
judgments but of one generation were observed, it is easy to think that as
many fires, floods, or the like may be found upon any other day. Dumbar and
Worcester sight are fresh instances of the same day twelve month, yea diverse
instances of this nature might be brought against the first day of thunder,
lightnings etc. Wounding and killing diverse persons in sundry places, Psa.
81.11, 12.
while they have been at public worship on the first day. But the most
dreadful judgment is to leave persons after conviction, to their own hearts
lusts. As also so those woeful wordly wights that are convinced of the Lords
sabbath and prefer a little gain before it, what will they, what can they
answer the Lord of the sabbath in the last day, when they shall see all their
dross (which they have doted upon) devoured by the burning flame before their
faces?

Then shall their sorrows be greatly aggravated to see those sabbath keepers
(whom for sabbaths sake they envied and maligned) invested with robes, and
palms of victory in eternal glory.

And now that these righteous persons (the people of God, for whom in special
the sabbath was made) may be encouraged in their continued sanctification of
this blessed day. I shall in the last place show the use and end of this
seventh day Sabbath of the Lord our God.

The eighth Head. Use and End.
THe two great designs of a sanctified soul are Gods glory, and his own
felicity, and these are the scope of my Position, and with these I shall
conclude,

That the seventh day Sabbath is a perpetual royal rest, for the righteous;
established by precept and president for Gods praise and Saints privilege.

1. I have fully proved the rest in its morality, incapable of mutability.

2. I have demonstrated the punctual appointed time to be the seventh day.

3. I have vindicated the authority of this seventh day-Sabbath, from, 1. The
fathers institution. 2. The sons confirmation, 3. The spirits appellation. 4.
The Saints observation.


4. I have cleared the unchangeable perpetuity of this Seventh-day Sabbath.

5. I have showed how it should be sanctified.

6. I have declared the nature of the royal law, not a covenant, but a Rule.

7. I have pointed out the persons who are specially concerned in the
celebration of this day, viz. the saints of Christ.

And now I am to inform these precious persons of the blessed end, and holy use
of this lively oracle, for as there is no precept that does more promote
Jehovahs praise, so there is no part of the royal Law of Liberty, that does
more advance the Saints privilege; upon this day the Almighty sits in his
throne of State, amidst the assemblies of Saints in the beauties of holiness.

This day the faithful Doves mounting on the wings of contemplation, Isa. 33.17.
behold the King in his beauty, and cease not soaring, till seeing things
invisible, their raised notes sing forth his glorious praise, with the sweet
singer of Israel, O Lord, Psalm 8.
our Lord, how excellent is thy name, in all the earth, thou have set thy glory
above the heavens. This day with self-denying grace, they leave the Worlds
lovers to that muck which moves their earthly minds, and take some turns with
their Prince in paradise, delighting to behold the wonderful glory, and
celerity of the Sun in his circuit, the moon in her constant unconstancy; the
stars as so many sparling glories in the expanded firmament, communicating some
glimmerings of that inaccessible light from the Empyreal Heavens. And then from
this Pinnacle (as it were a Pisgah sight of Palestine) wondering at the wisdom
and power of that glorious potentate, who has hung the earth (this vast massy
Globe) in the midst of the fleeting air, upon nothing! admiring the Sea, that
huge, unruly element surrounded in a sandy girdle, with such a mavelous
motion as makes the wisest of the Sons of men amazed. O the glory, excellency,
might and majesty of the maker of all these!

The soul cannot but make one in that heavenly consort, which with united
hearts and voices, sounds forth Jehovahs praise, in that Psalm especially
designed for the Sabbath. Psalm. 92.


1.
To praise the Lord most thankfully,
it is an excellent thing,
And to thy Name, O thou most High,
sweet Psalms of praise to sing.
2.
To spread thy loving kindness Lord,
When Mornings glory springs,
And all thy faithfulness record,
3.
Each might with heavenly firings:
4.
For thou have made me to rejoice.
in work so wrought by thee,
And I triumph in heart and voice,
thy handy works to see.
5.
How great, O Lord who can express
thy works and thoughts profound,
Which are a deep so bottomless,
that none can search or sound.
Thus does the Heavenly Psalmist teach Sabbath-keepers to set forth the glory
of the invisible Creator, by the admirable beauty, and excellency of the
sisible creature, This is the first use and end of the sanctified seventh-day
Sabbath, purposely appointed to spread forth Jehovahs praise. And after the
Prophet has discovered the ignorance of brutish persons (with the vanity and
issue of their earthly endeavors, That though they spring as grass and
flourish in their sensuality for a season, yet it is but like beasts in a fat
pasture, feeding for the shambles, to perish for ever.

He acquaints us in the close of this Psalm with the second Use, and end of the
Sabbath, which is strength and growth by insensible degrees, as so many plants
of renown to full maturity.

10.
But like the Stately Unicorn.
shall I advanced be,
Jehovah will exhalt my horn,
and pour fresh oil on m^
11.
The righteous like the Palm shall be
flourishing every one,
And like the goodly Cedar Tree,
in lofty Lebanon.
13.
Those that within the house of God,
are planted by his grace,
In our Gods Courts shall spread abroad,
and flourish in their place.
14.
And in their age much fruit shall bring
delightful to be seen,
And pleasantly both bud and spring,
with boughs and branches green.
15.
The Lords uprightness to express
who is a rock to me,
And there is no unrighteousness
in him, nor none can be.
What glorious privileges are here presented as the precious portion of
Sabbath-keepers? and yet, as if these were too little for us, whom God has
stirred up in these last days to raise the razed foundations of many
generations, he assures us, by his Prophet that he who was Jacobs portion, will
be also ours, If we turn away our foot from Sabbath-pollution, and make that
day our delight, then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, Is. 58.12, 13,
14.
and I will cause thee to ride upon the High places of the earth. and feed thee
with the heritage of Jacob thy father, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Friends, God is not obliged to us for sanctifying his Sabbath, but we are for
ever engaged to our God, that will accept of our service, and give us true
repentance, and pardon for sabbath profanation, and that he will honor us to
set up and celebrate his long slighted sabbath, according to his faithful
promises in several scriptures, where the gracious soul may find out the work
of his generation.

Wherefore let such as are sincere, unite heart and voice with one shoulder,
Comp. Is. 58.12. and 69.1, 2, 3, 4. with Acts 15.16. Rev. 11.1, 2.
to advance this lively oracle, to its ancient glory.

I know this doctrine would be readily embraced by earthworms, did it but
produce such privileges as are their prized portions, a fat benefice, a
gainful office, or a good market, but how can such embrace Gods sabbath, who
are greedy of gain, and sit upon thorns whiles they are at such services. O
the Egyptian bondage of such obedience to a home-born slave!

When will the new moon be gone that we may sell corn? Jer 2 14. Amos 3.6.
and the sabbath that we may set forth wheat, said the like drudges of old.

Indeed, all the discipline of the Gospel together, calls not for such a
measure of self-denial, Phil. 3.13.19.
as this weekly duty of the holy Sabbath. But in recompense of our obedience
(though our creation mercies oblige us to whatsoever the creator calls for) the
most High has freely held forth very many priveledges to encourage us in our
service.

1. Fredom. Ps. 84.
It Is no small priveledge to be exempted from dunghill drudgeries to enjoy a
whole day in a week in sweet Sabbath communion with our God. Christians often
complain for want of spiritual enjoyments and acquaintance with Christ, the
Sabbath opens the door of the holy of holies, as a spring of spiritual joys.

2. Fullness
He who so freely handed forth health to body and soul on the Sabbath day by
himself and his Apostles will not now fail to pour out of his spirit to such as
seek him in his own ways, Acts. 16.14.
he that opened Lydias heart upon his holy Sabbath, will also open thine, If
thou set open the everlasting doors for the King of Glory.

3. Knowledge,
If once the soul set to the advance of those times which Antichrist has
changed, the promise will pursue him (whiles he pursues his purpose) many shall
run to and fro, Dan. 12.
and knowledge shall be increased, yea the day is now dawned (and will shine
more and more as the Sabbath is sanctified) that the earth shall be filled with
the knowledge of the glory of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.

The sabbath keeper shall enjoy the legacy that Christ has left him, He. 2.13.
Peace. Jo 14.27 Ps. 119.165.
great peace have they that love thy laws, and nothing shall offend them, the
Lord longs to invest thy soul with this privilege of peace Isa 43.73. O that
thou had hearkened to my commandments, then had thy peace been as a river,
and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea.

He that will but follow Paul as well in sabbath keeping as in other gospel
duties, Ph. 4.9.
shall be sure to enjoy the God of peace.

2. The prince of peace.

3. A life of peace, Isa. 26.3.

4. A death of peace, Psalm. 37.37.

5. And, after death eternal peace, Isa. 57 2

5. Pleasure.
The obedient foul shall not want his pleasure whose delight is placed in
sanctifying Gods sabbath Isa. 57.13. Job. 36.11.

6. Plenty. 1 Timothy 4.3.
Let him not fear scarcety, for he may be ass^^ed of plenty, which no man
enjoyes but he that can be content with what God sends.

7. prosderity Jos 1, 7, 8.
All that he takes in hand shall prosper, and all shall work together for his
good, his very miseries have mercy in their bowels, witness Moses, Mordecai,
Joseph. Paul, Heb. 11.
and the whole catalogue of Saints

8. Victory.
And whiles he is combating (perhaps sometimes foiled) he is assured of a
complete conquest; Genesis 49.19.
Gad (says Jacob) A troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at the
last, he shall overcome the beast, and his image, the triple-crowned monster
Pope, Prelate and persecuting Presbyter; yea, he shall not fail of an absolute
victory over the mark of the Beast, the changer of times and Laws i. e. he
shall raise the foundations of many generations in restoring the Lords Sabbath
time and the Lords supper time.

9. Trials. Phil. 1.29.
And howsoever he meet with many difficulties, such as must be expected in a
work of this high nature (even all that malicious men and Devils can do) yet
let the obedient soul build upon it that all his Trials shall end in Triumph.

10. Triumph.
It is the faithful promise of the Sabbaths Lord to make a rich return for all
the reproofs, sorrows and sufferings of Christian Sabbath-keepers, and we may
rest upon it, for it is a gracious Gospel-promise.

I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly, Zeph. 3.18.
who are of thee to whom the reproach of it was a burden. then Sabbath-keepers
sorrow shall end, and then Sabbath-slighters sorrows shall begin: Jesus Christ
himself forewarns had they hearts to consider, that as it was in the days of
Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of Man.

Now it appears in the days of Noah, the deluge came upon the world on the
seventh-day, Heb. 2.14 Luke. 17.26. Genesis 7.10. See the margin.
and the Apostle speaks expr^sly (though scoffers remain willingly ignorant of
this admonition) that as the old world perished by water, so this is reserved
for fire, against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men. It will be
sad for profess^rs to be found fighting under Antichrists banner in
Sabbath-prof^nation after admonion! 2 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5, 6.
Ah poor slumbering souls, it is not hearing, fasting, feasting, baptising that
will avail in that (...) day, it is not Lord, Lord, we have prophesied in thy
name, we have done many things by thy power, alas miserable muckworms many
things will not serve their turn, Mat. 7.^2.
he who keeps the whole law and offends (wilfully) in one point, he is guilty
of all. God gave ten commandments to Israel, and Isreal's duty was to deliver
them as so many lively oracles unto us, Ja. 2.12.
now one of those lively oracles enjoynes the seventh day Sabbath; Acts. ^.38.
it will not avail to tell Christ they have kept nine of them in the very
letter, if the tenth be slighted in the letter; they must then see and feel
that not one jot or title of those lively oracles is in the least altered,
Confess. Page 33. Eze. 33.4.
or ANY WAY dissolved (as Englands whole assembly have in words confessed) Woe
and alas what will become of those that Jeroboam-like have changed the time
expressly appointed in that Law which they say Christ has not ANY WAY dissolved
but much strengthened to bind Gospel Saints? Miserable Sabbath breakers, that
will not take warning, I shall leave you to the hardness of your own hearts
till you bring your own blood upon your heads I expect nothing from you but
scoffs, reproaches persecutions, the worst you can do; it is your nature you
must act up to your principles and to the height of your power; 2 Pet. 3.3.
I pity you and pray that God may give you grace to pity your selves before it
be too late.

He that overcomes shall sit with Christ in his throne when the Sabbaths
weekly returns have wasted his obedient soul from strength to strength to keep
a joyful Jubilee in Messiahs Mansions of majesty. Days shall be changed into
years, yea the Lords Sabbath of grace to a thousand years rest with the Lord of
the Sabbath in glory. Then those that carefully keep Gods Sabbath through
reproaches as (Jew) turning back to Moses shall find a heavenly harmony between
Jew and Gentile joining in continual Alelujah to Jesus; Rev. 19.
then they shall find Christ and Moses friends, and none honored to sing his
praise who have contemned Moses music; then those and only those that have
obtained victory over the Beast, his image, his Mark, and the number of his
name; Rev. 15.2.3.
shall sing the song of Moses the servant of God and the song of the Lamb:
happy souls who shall be found in the possession and faithful profession of
Moses lively oracles and the oracles of the Lamb together; Moses's ten precepts
received from Sina, Acts 7^ 38.
and the Lambs six principles delivered in Sion are equally honored by the
Spirit of truth as the oracles of God; Heb 5.12. Heb. 1.2. and 6.1.2. 1 Pet.
4.11.
and equally given to the Saints, and therefore let such as would approve
themselves Saints be careful to speak as the oracles of God.

This is the very day of singing the song of Moses and the Lamb that is of
reviving the ten precepts and six pinciples as through Gods grace I shall
fairly prove in another piece, wherein it will appear how the sixth seal opened
the six principles of Christian Religon in their primitive purity, which many
precious souls have with joy embraced, and that of the opening the seventh seal
has now discovered the long concealed mystery of the seven pillars of wisdoms
palace which I shall demonstrate by good authority to be the seven sorts of
Officers that Christ has appointed in his house, As 1. Prove. 9.1.
Prophets 2 Apostles 3. Evangelists 4. Pastors. 5. Teachers, 6. Elders 7.
Deacons all which were brought to open view upon the late terrible commotion
wherein the tenth part of the City fell with the tenth horn, Re. 11.13. So the
Greek,
and 7000 names of men in whose ruins all the seven stars o^ heaven ascended
our horiz^n, to trumpet forth the long concealed seventh day sabbath, which
with the foremen^ioned precepts and principles make up the melodious harmony of
Moses and the Lamb.

But look about you unbelievers, for whiles the Saints stand on a sea of glass
mingled with the oracles of Moses and the oracles of the Lamb in their hearts
and mouths professing the precepts and principles of Law and Gospel, Rev.
15.1.23.4;
Behold 7 Angels having the 7 last plagues full of the wrath of God to pour
upon the heads and hearts of such as join not in the song of Moses and the song
of the Lamb.

Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy
ways thou King of Saints.

Observe as you desire your souls good that the song of Moses and the song of
the Lamb are the JUST AND TRUE WAYS of the Lord handed forth by Moses and the
Lamb. Rev. 15.3.


Who shall not fear thee O Lord and glorify thy name for thou alone art holy,
Verse. 4.
for all nations shall come and worship before thee for thy judgments are made
manifest.

High praises to thy glorious majesty for thy special grace O God, in the
glorious discovery of thy pure precepts and precious principles those lively
oracles left, unto the Saints by Moses and the Lamb! honor, and glory unto thy
great Name in revealing the high presumption of that little horn in changing
times and Laws. for ever magnified be thy mercy in making this precious truth
manifest to the souls of many of thy Saints; That there remains the
celebration of the Sabbath to the People of God. Sweet spirit of Holiness do
thou sanctify our hearts that we may Religiously sanctify thy blessed
Sabbath, till thou bring us to thy Palace in peace and receive us into our
Masters joy where we shall enjoy everlasting rest. Alelu^ah. Blessed are they
that do his Commandments that they may have right to the tree of life and may
enter in through the gates into the city. Rev. 22.14.
Amen.

FINIS.

