A THUNDERCLAP FROM NEWGATE TO THE Quaking Saints OF LONDON, Their Cabinet of
Iniquity Unlookt, and laid open to public view.

Wherein is discovered, the querks, quillets, subtle whimsies and sophistical
devises used by them, to delude and ensnare the ignorant and unlearned, to the
disturbance of the Peace of His Majesty's Kingdoms.

Also an exact Narrative of their proceedings in the University of Newgate,
with their strange actings, and devises to raise new Commotions, by divulging
treasonable, seditious and libellious papers through the City of London. And
the manner how they would have raised one Watson to life two hours after he was
buried.

Written by J. J. an eye witness of their proceedings; and Licenced according
to Order.

LONDON, Printed by A. Coe for J. J. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, 1662.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.

A Thunderclap FROM NEWGATE TO THE London Quakers.
FIrst I shall give you a Character of these new vampt Christians called
Quakers; A Quaker is a person who swallows shame like sweet-Butte^, his
Confidence carries him beyond all Ordinances, he denis the Scripture to be a
Rule of Holiness, building his own foundation on the bottom of his own
Hypocrisy, he is full of dissimulation, a mere Crack-braind and self-conceited
piece of Impudence, he will not swear but lie without aim, Clouding all evil
with a Cloak made of Yeas and Nays; He works altogether Sophistically, to
ensnare the ignorant and unlearned, persuading them that the word of God is but
a dead Letter, and the life, light and power is in themselves; He is the Spawn
of an Anapabti^^ whose overgrown opinions (as he says) have brought him
through all evils to the height of perfection, so that he beleives and av^ches
he has no further to go, but just to step into Heaven it self; he says further
he cannot commit sin or err in any thing he acts, for he has nothing but life
and light in him; whom he Curse are damned, and whom he blesses (he conceives)
shall be saved, he is a self-conceited fire brand of Hell, sent on earth as
(...) set Nations togethe^ b^ the ears: (...) full of flatte^y and deceit that
is all Government, ^den^s Magistracy, and owns no power but his own justs, and
(...) subjects (...) he owns all; but yet will not submit to any supe^iour
Officer, he (...) to swea^ at all, yet will stand in a lie to the (...), which
makes him so rough in the throat that he cannot swal^^w the Oath of Allegiance
more out of a self-willed humor th^n ^atter of Conscience, but for his own ends
he will ^og, Lie, H^^ter, Dissemble, and it may be rap out an Imprecation as
bad as an Oath; he will pretend to plead only by reason, but it is his own
reason, thwarting all others that oppose him, though contrary to reason, truth
or Christianity, he is an unma^nerly impudent Fellow that has not so much as
moral Civility; his Hat grows as fa^^ on his Head as his ears.

He is one that loves a prison better then his Liberty, pretending to glory in
his suffering, not that he loves bonds, but rather that he may live in
idleness, and be maintained by a Collection of the Brethren, who work to supply
him with all varietyes of Belly-(...), and pomper him up with daint^es as Pig,
Mutton, Pye-Pork, Beef, and other daintys, (which I have been an eye Witness
of) in so plentiful a manner as is not fit for such miscreants, who Rebel
against all Government, both Spiritual and Temporal.

The chief heads of these Belly-gods or Quaking Saints are old Jesuiticall
opinionists, who have traveled through other Countries so long, that they are
forced to return to their own; as Fisher, Burrows, Baily, and several others,
besides a prattling Parrot that came lately from Rome, Who if they had continued
longer beyond Seas, might have had as g^ea^ a Crop of Seditious Members there,
as here, since their return.

In fine, they are a mad; hair-b^an'd; bewitched multitude who seek nothing more
then to throw down powers and b^^ng ^i^gdoms into a confused Chaos, by
dissembling and drawing innocent souls into ete^nal Captivity. Nay in a paper
the publish^ lately they would appear to be Prophets.

To Prophecy they also do pretend,
And say the world shall have a sudden end;
Nay in short space they prophecy to know
In London-Streets for stones green grass shall grow.
Thus do these lying Prophets, or confident Quaking Christians unchristian then
selves by their Impudent actions; for since their coming to Newgate for
disobeying the Act against private meetings, they did in contempt fling down
Treasonable Libels from the Leads into the Streets, on purpose to raise new
Insurrections in his Majestyes Kingdom; till they were prevented by the
diligent care of the Ma^^er Keeper, by whose Order they were taken away, and
several hundreds of them burned which were stufft with lies and su^tle devises
to pervet the ignorant and unlearned, to the great disturbance of the peace of
his Majestyes Kingdom.

But to give you a hint of the actions of these Metrapolitan dissemblers, I
shall insert some few, here being only room in this sheet to draw the Curtain
from before these Quaking Pu^pets. Not long since a Common strumpet (being
brought into Newgate for some notorious fact took notice of one of these black
Saints, and said, that the Monday before he would have given her money if she
were free to satisfy his lust, which she would not consent to at his price, all
which he could not deny; for if she had been as free as he, she might soon have
been made a fellow creature, so that though they will not swear, they will lie
with any body; and though they be perfect (as they say) yet some scu^f of
fleshly lust is still left behind, which like a scab does make a slaw in the
Scutchion of their purity.

This story is much like that of their Phanatick Champion Cap. J. G. the devout
Tanner, (a prisoner not long since in the same place) who acted a part of
Tuquoque in Newgate on the Stage of a maid, after the Chillinden fashion, as
she confessed, when he proved false to her, in not providing her a lodging and
marrying her (according to promise) though he had a wife of his own at the same
time.

For lying none can go beyond them, except some little Devil should leap out of
the mouth of Grand Pluto, as will appear by the ensuing story, viz.

Some few weeks since one Watson dyed (who was a prisoner amongst these
dissembling converts) and his brother came the day following to fetch away his
bed-cloths, which he brought down into the Lodge belonging to Newgate, whereupon
the turn-key (fearing some of the Master Keepers cloths should be amongst them)
desired him to lay them down (intending to see whether there were or no) but he
out of stubborness denied him, upon which, the Turn-key took hold of the rope
that tied them, and pulled them from him, which some of these lying Sophisters
seeing, presently gave out a report, that three men fell upon him and kicked him
up and down the Lodge, though they never touched his body, as will (if occasion
require) be justified by the testimony of seven or eight several witnesses, who
were then and there present.

One of their chief witnesses was black-mouthed Vulcan, or Mulciber the
Blacksmith of hell, (a turbulent fellow whom some call J. Bury) he blazed the
report strongly, and justified it stoutly, though when the business was acted,
he was at least four pair of stairs high, which must needs be an invallid
Witness, except he had the art of Inspection, and could see through four floores
at once, or left his eyes hanging on the Iron Grates, as a Centry, to view this
unthought of and unacted combat.

Another of the blind-guided tremblers was so unreverend, that when the
servants were locking up the Jayle, he said; If they locked up the leads they
were fools that lay above, if they did not take the Pulpit Cushion and empty it
and ease their Bodies in the Case; If this be Christianity Reason or plain
honesty, the Devil may well be Governor in a Commonwealth of such audacious
Subjects.

Not long after the aforesaid Watson was buried, which being done, within two
hours comes down one of the Lunatic brethren who sitting in the Lodge,
resolved to work a miracle, and said Arise, arise, arise from the dead, the
Brethren waiting by him expecting Watsons coming again, but no Watson appearing
after he had said it three times, the Turn-key showed a greater miracle for he
said, arise and go up stairs, quoth he, I must not for I am commanded to stay
for a time, upon which the Turn-key lifted him up, and no sooner he was in a
doors, but he was transported up stairs into the Leads where he was juddenly
(for madness that he could not raise the dead) possessed with the Devil, and with
raving screeking, howling, tossing and tumbling, and other horrid noise he
shock the roof, so that the Anabaptists who lay underneath could not rest all
night, affirming in the morning that he was possessed with the Devil, which they
that unlockt are able to witness.

Upon Monday the first of September, 1662: One of these mad bewitched hypocrites
was commanded by the Devil and their Jesuitical Fathers to do penance, through
Bartholmew-Fair with a pan of fire-coals on his head, which he did willingly,
as a Meritotious piece of madness, and stripping himself naked, he set the pan
on his head with the fire burning, and ran round the Fair till he came to the
Hospital gate, where he slung down the pan breaking it in pieces expressing
some words not sit to be inserted by any but R^bels to their King and Country.

Great pity it was indeed that this shameless piece of madness went unpunished,
for had his back been well Nayle^^ a by the B^adel it might have been a warning
for the suture to all such shameless pieces of madness, who neither fear God
honor the King nor believe in any thing but their own Lusts and inventions,
thinking themselves to be all in all.

Their manner of Burial is disorderly and unhandsome, the Corpse being put in a
Coffin without a decent covering, contrary to the custom of all other
Christians. For two of them being Dead were brought by Newgate one being
carried with the head foremost the other with the head behind, so that they were
turned tail to tail like Samsons Foxes, with a great gang of silly women
following like, so many dumb images, and conveyed to the ground where they were
flung in like Dogs without any word or Instruction to those that accompany the
Bodies of these Monstrous Christians.

FINIS.

