THREE TREATISES Concerning the Scottish Discipline. 1. A Fair Warning to take
heed of the same: By the Right Reverend Dr. Bramhall, Bishop of Derrie. 2. A
Review of Dr. Bramble, late Bishop of Londonderry, his Fair Warning, etc. By
R. B. G. 3. A Second Fair Warning, in Vindication of the First, against the
Seditious Reviewer: By Ri. Watson, Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Lord
Hopton.


To which is prefixed, A Letter written by the Reverend Dean of St. Burien, Dr.
Creyghton.

HAGH: Printed by Samuel Broun, English Bookseller. 1661.

A FAIR WARNING, To take heed of the SCOTTISH DISCIPLINE, As being of all others
most Injurious to the Civil Magistrate, most Oppressive to the Subject, most
Pernicious to both.

By Dr JOHN BROMWELL Lord Bishop of London-Derie in Ireland.

LUKE 9. 35. No man having drunk old wine straightway desires new, for he
says, the old is better.

HOSEA 2. 7. I will go and return to my first husband, for then was it better
with me than now.

Printed in the Year 1649.

A FAIR WARNING, To take heed of the Scottish Discipline, as being of all others
most Injurious to the Civil Magistrate, most Oppressive to the Subject, most
Pernicious to both.
CHAP. I.
The Occasion and Subject of this Treatise.

IF the Disciplinarians in Scotland could rest contented to 1
dote upon their own inventions and magnify at home that Diana which
themselves have canonised, I should leave them to the best School-Mastresse,
that is, Experience, to feel where their shoe wrings them, and to purchase
Repentance. What have I to do with the regulation of foreign Churches to burn
mine own fingers with snuffing other m^ns Candles? Let them stand or fall to
their own Master: It is charity to judge well of others, and piety to look well
to our selves.

But to see those very men who plead so vehemently against all kinds of
tyranny, attempt to obtrude their own dreams not only upon their
Fellow Subjects, but upon their Sovereign himself, contrary to the dictates of
his own conscience, contrary to all Laws of God and Man, yea to compel foreign
Churches to dance after their pipe, to worship that counterfeit image which
they feign to have fallen down from J^piter, and by force of arms to turn their
neighbors out of a possession of above 1400 years, to make room for their
Trojan horse of Ecclesiastical Discipline, (A practice never justified in the
world but either by the Turk or by the Pope) This put us upon the defensive
part, They must not think that other men are so cowed or grown so tame, as to
stand still blowing of their noses, whilst they bridle them and ride them at
their pleasure. It is time to let the world see that this Discipline which they
so much adore, is the very quintessence of refined Popery, or a greater Tyranny
than ever Rome brou^he forth, Incon^t with all forms of civil Government,
destructive to all sorts of Policy a rack to the conscience, the heaviest
pressure that can fall upon a people, and so much more dangerous, because by
the specious pretense of Divine Institution, it takes a way the sight, but not
the burden of slavery. Have patience Reader and I shall discover unto thee
more pride and arrogancy through the holes of a threed-bare coat, than was
ever found under a Cardinals Cap or a triple Crown. All this I undertake to
demonstrate not by some extraordinary practices justified only by the pretense
of invincible necessity (a weak patrociny for general Doctrine) nor by the
single opinions of some Capricious fellows but by their books of Discipline, by
the acts of their general and provincial Assemblies by the concurrent votes and
writings of their Commissioners.

I foresee that they will suggest that through their sides I seek to wound
foreign Churches. No, there is nothing which I shall convict them of here, but
I hope will be disavowed, though not by all Protestant auctou^s, yet by all the
Protestant Churches in the world. But I must take leave to demand of our
Disciplinarians, who it is they brand with the odious name of Erastians in the
Acts of their Parliaments and Assemblies, S^n. G^r. 16. 7. D^ar. Parl. 1648.
etc.
and in the writings of their Commissioners and reckon them with Papists,
Anabaptists, and Independents; Is it those Churches who disarm their
Presbyteries of the Sword of Excommunication which they are not able to weeld?
so did Erastus; or is it those who attribute a much greater power to the
Christian Magistrate in the managery of Ecclesiastical affairs than themselves?
So did Erastus, and so do all Protestant Churches. The Disciplinarians will
sooner endure a Bishop or a Superintendent to govern them, than the Civil
Magistrate. And when the Magistrate shall be rightly informed what a dangerous
edg'd-tool their Discipline is, he will ten times sooner admit of a moderate
Episcopacy, than fall into the hands of such hucksters.

If it were not for this Disciplinarian humor, which will admit no latitude in
Religion, but makes each nicity a fundamental, and every private opinion an
Article of faith, which prefers particular errors before general truths. I
doubt not but all reformed Churches might easily be reconciled. Before these
unhappy troubles in England, all Protestants both Lutherans and Calvinists did
give unto the English Church the right hand of fellowship; the Disciplinarians
themselves though they preferred their own Church as more pure, (else they were
hard-hearted) yet they did not, they durst not condemn the Church of England,
either as defective in any necessary point of Christian Piety, or redundant in
any thing that might virtually or by consequence overthrow the foundation.

Witness that letter which their General Assembly of Superintendents, Assemb.
G^ A^no 1556.
Pastors and Elders sent by Mr. John Knox to the English Bishops, wherein they
style them Reverend Pastors, fellow-preachers, and joint opposers of the Roman
Antichrist. They themselves were then far from a party, or from making the
calling of Bishops to be Antichristian.

But to leave these velitations and come home to the point. I will show first
how this Discipline entrencheth most extremely upon the right of the civil
Magistrate, secondly that it is as grievous and intolerable to the Subject.

CHAP. II.
That this new Discipline does utterly overthrow the Rights of Magistrates, to
convocate Synods, to confirm their Acts, to order Ecclesiastical affairs, and
reform the Church within their Dominions.

ALl Princes and States invested with Sovereignty of power do justly challenge
to themselves the right of Convocating National Synods of their own subjects,
and ratifying their constitution.

And although pious Princes may tolerate or priveledge the Church to convene
within their territories annually or triennially, for the exercise of
discipline, and execution of constitutions already confirmed, (nevertheless we
see how wary the Synod of Dort was in this particular,) yet he is a Magistrate
of straw, that will permit the Church to convene Can. 50.
within his territories, whenever, wheresoever they list, to convocate before
them whomsoever they please, all the Nobles, all the Subjects of the Kingdom,
to change the whole Ecclesiastical policy of a Commonwealth, to alter the
Doctrine and Religion established, to take away the legal rights and
privileges of the Subjects, to erect new tribunalls and courts of Justice, to
which Sovereigns themselves must submit, and all this of their own heads, ^ue
of a pretended power given them from heaven, contrary to k^own laws and lawful
customs, the Supreme Magistrate dissenting and disclaiming. Synods ought to be
called by the supreme Ench. cand. S. min. ex decr^o sal. The Edit. Gron. 1645.
page 161.
Magistrate if he be a Christian, etc. And either by himself, or by such as he
shall please to choose for that purpose, he ought to preside over them. This
power the Emperors of old did challenge over General Councels, Christian
Monarchs in the blindness of Popery over National Synods, the Kings of England
over their great Councels of old, and their Convocation of later times, The
Estates of the united Provinces in the Synod of Dort, this power neither Roman
Catholic or Protestant in France dare deny to his King. None have been more
punctual in this case then the State of Geneva, where it is expressly
provided, that no Synod or Los ordiu^ Eccles. printed at Geneva 1562. page 66.
Presbytery shall alter the Ecclesiastical policy, or add any thing to it,
without the consent of the civil Magistrate. Their elders do not challenge an
uncontrolable power as the Commissioners of Christ, but ate still called page
20.
the Commissioners of the Signiory. The lesser Council names them with Pagin.
20.
the advice of the Ministry, (their consent is not necessary) The great
Council of 200 does approve them or reject them. At the end of the year they
are presented to the Signiory, who continue them or discharge them as they see
cause. At their admission they take an oath, to ke^p the Ecclesiastical
Ordinances of the civil Magist^ate. The final determination Page 9.
of doctrinal differences in Religion, (after conference of, and with the
Ecclesiastics,) is referred to the Magistrate. The proclamations published Page
11.
with the sound of trumpet registered in the same book, do plainly show that
the ordering of all Ecclesiastical affairs is assumed by the Signiory.

But in Scotland all things are quite contrary, the civil Magistrate has no
more to do with the placing or displacing of Ecclesiastical Elders, than he
has in the Electoral College, about the Election of an Emperor. The King has
no more legislative Power in Ecclesiastical causes than a Cobbler, that is a
single Vote in case he be chosen an Elder, other wi^e none at all. In Scotland
Ecclesiastical persons make repeal, alter their Sanctions eyery day, without
consent of King or Council King Jon^s proclaimed a Parliament to be held at
Edinburgh, and a little before by his letter required the Assembly to abstain
from making any Innovatio^s October. 20. 1597.
in the Policy of the Church, and from prejudging the decisions of the States
by their conclusions, and to suffer all things to continue in the condition
they were until the approc^ing Parliam^nt. What did they hereupon? They
neglected the Kings letter, by their own Authority they determined all things
positively, questioned the Archbishop of St. Andrews upon their own Canons,
For collating to benefices, and Voting in Parliament, according to the
undoubted Laws of the Land. Yea to that deg^ee of sawcines they arrived, and
into that contempt they reduced Sovereign power, that twenty Presbyters (no
more at the highest sometimes but thirteen, Ass^. Abberd. 1600
sometimes but seven or eight) dared to hold and maintain a General Assembly,
(as they miscalled it,) after it was discharged by the King, against his
Authority, an Insolence which never any Parliament durst yet attempt.

By their own Authority, long before there was any Statute made to 1 Book dise.
1. held.
that purpose, they abolished all the Festivals of the Church, even those which
were observed in memory of the Birth, Circumcision, Resurrection and Ascension
of our Savior.

By their own Authority they decreed the abolition of Bishops, requiring them
to resign their offices, as not having any calling from Gods word, under pain
of Excommunication. And to desist from preacbing until they had a new admission
from the General Assembly. And to complete their own Ass Dun. 1580.
folly, added further, that they would dispose of their possessions as the
Churches Patrimony in the next Assembly, which ridiculous Ordinance was
maintained stiffly by the succeeding Synods, notwithstanding the Statute, that
it should be Treason to impugn the Authority of the three Estates, or to Patl.
1584
procure the innovation or diminution of any of them. Which was made on purpose
to control their vain presumption. Notwithstanding that themselves had formerly
approved, and as much as in them lay established Superintendents, to endure for
term of life with their numbers, bounds, 1 Book discip. 4. and 6. head.
salaries larger than those of other Ministers, indewed with Episcopal power,
to plant Churches, ordain Ministers, assign Stipends, preside in Synods, direct
the censures of the Church, without whom there was no Excommunication. The
world is much mistaken concerning Episcopacie in Scotland: for though the King
and Parliament were compelled by the clamours and impetuous violence of the
Presbyters to annex the temporalities of Bishops to the crown, yet the Function
it self was never taken away in Scotland, from their first conversion to Anno
203.
Christianity, until these unhappy troubles. And these very temporalities were
restored by the Act of restitution, and their full power was first 1606. Ass.
Glasg. 1610. Parl. Edenb. 1612.
established Synodically, and afterward confirmed by the three Estates of the
Kingdom in Parliament.

By their own Authority when they saw they could not prevail with all their
iterated endeavors and attempts to have their book of discipline ratified,
they obtruded it upon the Church themselves, ordaining that all those who had
born or did then bear any office in the Church should Ass. Edenb. 1590.
subscribe it, under pain of Excommuication.

By their own Authority or rather by the like unwarrantable boldness they
adopted themselves to be heirs of the Prelates and other dignities and orders
of the Church suppressed by their tumultuous violence, and decreed that all
tithes, rents, lands, oblations, yea whatsoever had been given in former times,
or should be given in future times to the service of God, was the patrimony of
the Church; and ought to be collected and distributed 2 Book disc. Chap. 9.
by the Deasons as the Word of God appoints. That to convert any of this to
their particular or profane use of any person, is detestable Sacrilege before
God. And elsewhere, Gentlemen, Barons, Earls, Lords, and others 1 Book disc.
6. head.
must be content to live upon their just rents, and suffer the Kirk to be
restored to her liberty. What this liberty is follows in the same place, all
Ibidem.
things given in hospitality, all rents pertaining to Priests, Chanteries,
Colleges, Chappelries, Frieries of all orders, the Sisters of the Seens all
Ibidem.
which ought to be retained still in the use of the Ki^k. Give them but leave
to take their breath and expect the rest. The whole revenues of the
temporalities of Bishops, Deans, and Arch-Deans lands, and all rents pertaining
to Cathedral Kirks. Then supposing an objection, that the Possessours had
Leases and Estates, they answer, That those who made them were thieves and
murderers and had no power so to alienate the common Good of the Kirk. They
desire that all such Estates may be anulled and Ibidem.
avoided, that all Collectours appointed by the King or others, may be
discharged from intermedling therewith, and the Deacons permitted to collect
the same: yea to that height of madness were they come, as to define and
determine in their Assembly, (judge whether it be not a modest constitution for
a Synod.) That the next Parliament the Ass. Edenb. 1 6 4 7.
Church should be fully restored to its Patrimony, and that nothing should be
past in Parliament until that was first considered and approved. Let all
Estates take notice of the^e pretensions and designs If their project have not
yet taken effect, it is only because they wanted sufficient strength hitherto
to accomplish it.

Lastly by their own Authority, under the specious title of Jesus Christ, King
of kings, and Lord of lords, the only Monarch of his Church, and under
pretense of his Prerogative Royal, they erected their own Courts and
Presbyteries in the most parts of Scotland, long before they were legally
approved or received, as appears by their own Act, alleging that many suites
had been made to the Magistrate for approbation of the Policy of the Kirk,
which had not taken that happy effect which good men would crave: Ass. Glasg 1
5 8 1 Ass. Edenb. 1 5 9 0 Ass. Edenb. 1 5 9 1.
And by another act acknowledging that Presbytertes were then established
(Synodically) in most parts of the Kingdom. And lastly by the Act of another
General Assembly at Edenburg, ordaining that the Discipline contained in the
acts of the General Assembly should be kept, as well in Angus and Mernis as in
the rest of the Kingdom.

You see sufficiently in point of practice how the Disciplinarians have
trampled upon the Laws, and justled the civil Magistrate out of his Supremacy
in Ecclesiastical affairs. My next task shall be to show that this proceeds not
from Inanimadvertence or Passion, but from their Doctrine and Principles.

First, they teach that no persons, Magistrates nor others, have power to Vote
in their Synods, but only Eccl si^tical. 1 (...) Book disc. Chap. 7. 2


Secondly, they teach that Ecclesiastical persons have the sole power of
convening and convocating such Assemblies, All Ecclesiastical assemblies have
power to convene lawfully together, for treating of things concerning the Kirk.
They have power to appoint times and places. Again, National Assemblies of this
Country ought always to be retained in their own liberties, Chap. 12.
with power to the Kirk to appoint times and places. Thus they make it a
Liberty, that is a Privilege of the Church, a part of its Patrimony not only
to convene, but to convocate, whomsoever, whenever, wheresoever.

Thirdly for point of Power, they teach, that Synods have the judgment 3 Ass.
Edenb. 1 7 0.
of true and false Religion, of Doctrine, Heresies, etc. the election,
admission, suspension, deprivation of Ministers, the determination of all
things that pertain to the Discipline of the Church. The judgment of
Ecclesiastical matters, causes beneficiary, matrimonial and others.
Jurisdiction to proceed to excommunication against those that rob the Church of
its patrimony. They have legislative a Book disc. Chap. 7.
Power to make rules and constitutions for keeping good order in the Kirk. They
have power to abrogate and abolish all Statutes and Ordinances concerning
Ecclesiastical matters, that are found noisome and unprofitable, and agree not
with the time, or are abused by the people. And all this without Chap. 12.
any reclamation, or appellation to any J^dge, Civil or Ecclesiastical

Fourthly, they teach that they have these privileges not from the Magistrate
2 Book disc. Chap. 1.
or People, or particular Laws of any other Country. The Magist^ate can not
execute the censares of the Church, nor prescribe any rule how it should be
done, but Ecclesiastical power flows immediately from God, and from the
Mediator Jesus Christ And yet further, The Church cannot be governed Theorema^
III. imp. Edenb. 1 6 4 7. decreto Synodi Theor. 4 Theor. 8.
by others, than those Ministers and Stewards set over it by Christ, nor
otherwise than by his Laws. And therefore there is no power in earth that can
challenge to it self a Command or Dominion upon the Church. And again, It is
prohibited by the Law of God and of Christ, for tho Christian Magistrate to
invade the Government of the Church, and consequently to challenge to himself
the right of both Swords spiritual and temporal. And if any Magistrate do
arrogate so much to himself, the Church shall have cause to complain and
exclaim, that the Pope is changed, but the Papacy remains. So if Kings and
Magistrates stand in their way, they are Political Popes as well as Bishops are
Ecclesiastical. Whatsoever these men do, is in the Name The^r. ^2.
of our Lord Jesus, and by Authority delegated from him alone.

Lastly, they teach that they have all this Power, not only without the
Magistrate, but against the Magistrate, that is, although he dissent, and send
out his prohibitions to the contrary, Parliamentary ratifications can
Information from. S^t. and p. 19
no way alter Church canons concerning the worship of God. For Ecclesiastical
Discipline ought to be exercised, whether it be ratified by the civil
Magistrate or not. The want of a civil Sanction to the Church, Theor 98.
is but like Lucrum cessans, non damnum emergens. As it adds nothing to it, so
it takes nothing away from it. If there be any clashing of Jurisdictions or
defect in this kind, they lay the fault at the Magistrates door. It is a great
sin or wickedness, for the Magistrate to hinder the Theor. 82.
exercise, or execution of Ecclesiastical Discipline.

Now we have seen the pernicious practices of their Synods, with the Doctrines
from which they flow; it remains to dispel umbrages wherewith they seek to hide
the ugliness of their proceedings and principles from the eyes of the world.
We (say they) do give the Christian Magistrate a political Power to convocate
Synods, to preside in Synods, to ratify the Acts of Synods to reform the
Church. We make him the keeper of both tables. Take nothing and hold it fast,
here are good words, but they signify nothing. Trust me whatsoever the
Disciplinarians do give to the Magistrate, it is always with a saving of their
own stakes, not giving for his advantage but their own. For they teach that
this power of the Christian Magistrate is not private and destructive to the
power Theor. 96.
of the Church but cumulative, and only auxiliary or assisting.

Besides the power which they call abusively authoritative, but is indeed
ministerial, of executing their decrees, and contributing to their setlement,
they ascribe to the Magistrate concerning the Acts of Synods that which every
private man has, a judgment of discretion, but they retain to themselves the
judgment of Jurisdiction. And if he judge not as they would have him, but
suspend out of conscience the influence of his political power, where they
would have him exercise it, they will either teach him another point of Popery,
that is an implicit faith, or he may perchance feel the weight of their Church
censures, and find quickly what manner of men they be, as our late gracious
King Charles, and before him his Father, his Grandmother, and his great
Grandmother did all to their cost.

Then in plain English what is this political Power to call Synods, to preside
in Synods, and to ratify Synods, which these good men give to the Magistrate,
and magnify so much? I shall tell the truth. It is a duty which the Magistrate
ows to the Kirk, when they think necessary to have a Synod convocated, to
strengthen their summous by a civil Sanction, to secure them in coming to the
Synod, and returning from T^r. 50. 5^.
the Synod, to provide them good accommodation, to protect them from dangers,
to defend their Rights and Privileges. To compel obstinate persons by civil
Laws and punishments to submit to their censures and decrees. What gets the
Magistrate by all this to himself? He may put it all in his eye, and see never
a whit the worse. For they Ibid.
declare expressly that neither all the power, nor any part of the power, which
Synods have to deliberate of, or to define Ecclesiastical things, (though it be
in relation to their own Subjects) does flow from the Magistrate, but because
in those things which belong to the outward man, (mark the reason) the Church
stands in need of the help of the Magistrate. Fair fall an ingenuous
confession, they attribute nothing to the Magistrate, but only what may render
him able to serve their own turns, and supply their needs. I wish these men
would think a little more of the distinction, between habitual and actual
Jurisdiction. After a Schoolmaster has his license to teach, yet his actual
Jurisdiction does proceed from the Parents of his Scholars. And though he enjoy
a kind of Supremacy among them, he must not think that this extinguisheth,
either his own filial duty, or theirs.

Like this power of presiding politically in Synods is the other power which
they give him of reforming the Church, that is when the State of the Church is
corrupted, but not when it is pure, as they take it for granted, that it is,
when the Jurisdiction is in their own hands. Although godly Kings and Princes,
sometime by their own Authority, when the Kirk is corrupted, and all things out
of order, place Ministers, and 2 Book of disc. ch^. 10.
restore the true service of the Lord, after the example of some godly Kings of
Judah, and diverse godly Emperors and Kings also in the light of the New
Testament; yet where the Ministry of the Kirk is once lawfully constituted,
and they that are placed, do their office faithfully, all godly Princes and
Magistrates ought to hear and obey their voice, and reverence the Majesty of
the Son of God speaking in them. Leave ^his juggling; who shall judge, when the
Church is corrupted; the Magistrates or Churchmen? if the Magistrates, why not
over you, as well as others? If the Churchmen, why not others as well as you?
here is nothing to be answered, but to beg the question, that they only are
the true Church. Hear another witness, in evil and troublesome times, and in a
lap ed state of affairs; when the order instituted by God in the Church, is
degenerated to Tyranny, to the trampling Theor. 84. and 85.
upon the true Religion, and oppressing the Professors of it, when nothing is
sound the godly Magistrate may do some things, which ordinarily are not lawful
etc. But ordinarily and of common right, in Churches already constituted, if a
man fly to the Magistrate complaining that he is injured, by the abuse of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, or if the Sentence of the Presbyteries displease the
Magistrate, either in point of Discipline or of Faith, he must not therefore
draw such causes to a civil trib^nal, nor introduce a Political Papacy. And as
the Magistrate Ibid^.
has power in extraordinary causes, when the Church is wholly corrupted, to
reform Ecclesiastical abuses; so if the Magistrate shall Tyrannize, over the
Church, it is lawful to oppose him, by certain ways and means, extraordinary;
how ever ordinarily not to be allowed. This is plain dealing, the Magistrate
cannot lawfully reform them but in cases extraordinary; and in cases
extraordinary they may lawfully ^eform the Magistrate, by means not to be
ordinarily allowed, that is by force of arms. See the principles from whence
all our miseries; and the loss of our gracious Master, has flowed; and learn
to detest them; They give the Magistrate the custody of both tables, so they do
give the same to themselves, they keep the second table, by admonishing him;
Theor. 43.
he keeps the first table by assisting them: they reform the abuses, of the
first table by ordinary right, of the second table extraordinarily. He reforms
the abuses against the second table; by ordinary right: and the abuses against
the first table extraordinarily.

But can the Magistrate according to their learning call the Synod to an
account for any thing they do, can he remedy the errors of a Synod either in
Doctrine or Discipline? No, if Magistrates had power to change, Theor. 97.
or diminish, or restrain the Rights of the Church; the Condition of the
Church, should be worse, and their liberties less, under a Christian
Magistrate, than under an Heathen. For (say they) Parliaments and supreme
Senates, are no more infallible then Synods, and in matters of Faith and
Discipline more Theor. 88.
apt to err^; And again, the Magistrate is not judge of Spiritual causes
controverted in the Church. And if he decr^e any thing in such businesses,
according Theor. 82.
to the wisdom of the flesh, and not according to the rule of Gods Word, and
the wisdom which is from above, he must give an account of it unto God.

Or may the supreme Magistrate oppose the execution of their discipline 2.
practiced in their Presbyteries, or Synods, by Laws or prohibitions? No it is
wickedness, If he do so far abuse his authority, good Christians Theor. 82.
must rather suffer extremities, than obey him.

Then what remedy has the Magistrate, if he find himself grieved in 3.
this case? He may desire and procure a review in another National Synod, that
the matter may be lawfully determined by Ecclesiastical judgment. Yet upon
this condition, that not withstanding the future review, the first sentence
Theor. 91. 92.
of the Synod be executed without delay, This is one main branch of Popery, and
a gross incrochment upon the right of the Magistrate.

CHAP. III.
That this Discipline robs the Magistrate of the last appeal of his Subjects.

The second flows from this. The last appeal ought to be the Supreme 2.
Magistrate, or Magistrates, within his or their Dominions, as to the highest
Power under God. And where it is not so ordered, the Commonwealth can enjoy no
tranquillity, as we shall see in the second part of this discourse. By the Laws
of England, if any man find himself grieved with the sentence or consistoriall
proceedings of a Bishop, or of his officers, he may appeal from the highest
judicatory of the Church to the King in Chancery, who uses in that case to
grant Commissions under the great Seal to Delegates expert in the Laws of the
Realm, who have power to give him remedy, and to see Justice done. In Scotland
this would be taken in great scorn, as an high indignity upon the Commissioners
of Christ, to appeal from his Tribunal, to the judgment of a mortal man. In
the year 1582, King James by his letter, by his messenger, 1582.
the Master of Requests, and by an Herald at Arms prohibited the Assembly at
Saint Andrews to proceed in the case of one Mongomery, Ass. Saint Andr^ws, 1582.
and Mongomery, himself appealed to Caesar, or to King and Council. What did our
new Masters upon this? They slighted the Kings letter, his Messenger, his
Herald, rejected the Appeal, as made to an incompetent Judge, and proceeded
most violenlty in the cause. About four years after this another Synod held at
Saint Andrews, proceeded in like Ass. Saint-Andr^ws. 1582.
manner against the Bishop of that See, for Voting in Parliament according to
his conscience, and for being suspected to have penned a Declaration, published
by the King and Parliament at the end of the Statutes, notwithstanding that he
declined their judicature, and appealed to the King and Parliament. When did
any Bishops dare to do such acts? There need no more instances, their book of
Discipline it self being so full in the case, from the Kirk there is no
reclamation, or appellation, to any Judge Civil or Ecclsiastical, within the
Realm.

CHAP. IV.
That it exempts the Ministers from due punishment.

THirdly, if Ecclesiastic persons in their Pulpits or Assemblies, shall leave
their text and proper work to turn incendiaries, trumpeters of (...)
sedition, stirring up the people to tumults and disloial attempts, in all well
ordered Kingdoms and Commonwealths, they are punishable by the civil
Magistrate, whose proper office it is to take cognisa^ce of treason and
sedition. It was well said by a King of France to some such seditious Shebas,
that if they would not let him alone in their Pulpits, he would send them to
preach in another climate. In the united provinces there want not examples of
seditious Orators, who for controlling their Magistrates too sawcily in the
Pulpit, have been turned both out of their Churches and Cities, without any
fear of wresting Christ's Scepter out of his hand. In Geneva it self, the
correction of Ecclesiastical Eccl. Ord. page 14.
persons (qua tales,) is expressly reserved to the Signiory. So much our
Disciplinarians have outdone their pattern, as the passionate writings of
heady men outdo the calmer decrees of a stayed Senate.

But the Ministers of Scotland have exempted themselves in this case from all
secular judgment, as King James (who knew them best of D^c. 15^
any man living) wirnesseth. They said, he was an incompetent judge in such
cases, and that matters of the Pulpit ought to be exempted from the judgment
and correction of Princes. They themselves speak plain enough. It is an absurd
thing, that sundry of them, (Commissaries) having no function of the Kirk,
should be judges to Ministers, and depose a Book di^c. ch^p. 11.
them from their rooms. The reason holds as well against Magistrates, as
Commissaries. To pass by the saucy and seditious expressions of Mr. Dury, Mr.
Mellvill, Mr. Ballcanquall, and their impunity. Mr. James At Ed^: 1587.
Gibson in his sermon taxed the King for a persecutor, and threatened him with
a curse, that he should die childlesse, and be the last of his race, for which
being convented before the Assembly, and not appearing, he was only suspended
during the pleasure of his brethren, (he should have been suspended indeed,
that is hanged.) But at another Assembly, in August following, upon his
allegation, that his not appearing was out of his tender care of the rights of
the Church, he was purged from his contumacy, without once so much as
acquainting his Majesty.

The case is famous of Mr. David Blake Minister of St. Andrews, who Minster
^vid B^ 1596.
had said in his sermon, that the King had discovered the treachery of his
heart, in admitting the Popish Lords into the country. That all Kings were the
devils barus, that the devil was in the Court, and in the guiders of it, And in
his prayer for the Queen he used these words, we must pray for her for ^ashion
sake, but we have no cause, she will never do us any good He said that the
Queen of Englan^ (Queen Elisabeth) was an (...) eist, that the Lords of the
Session were mi^creants and bribers, that the Nobility were degenerated,
godless, dissemblers, and enemies to the Church, that the Council were holly
glasses, cormorants, and men of no Religion. I ap eal to all the Estates in
Europe, what punishment could be evere enough for such audacious virulence? The
^ish Ambassador complains of it; Blake is cited before the Council. The
Commissione^s of the Church plead, that it will be ill taken, to bring M^ers in
question upon such trifling delations, as inconsistent with the liberties of
the Church. They conclude that a Declinatour should be used, and a Protestation
made against those proceedings, saying it was Gods cause, whe^ein they ought to
stand to all hazards. Accordingly a Declinatour was framed and presented. Blake
desires to be remitted to the Presbytery, as his O^dinary. The Commissioners
send the copy of the Declinatour to all the Presbyteries, requiring them for
the greater corroboration of their doings to subscribe the same, and to commend
the cause in hand in their private and public prayers to God, using their best
credit with their flocks for the maintenance thereof. The King justly incensed
herewith, discharges the meeting of the Commissioners. Notwithstanding this
Injunction they stay still and send Delegates to the King, to represent the
inconveniences that might ensue. The King more desirous to decline their envy,
than they his judgment, offers peace. The Commissioners refuse it, and present
an insolent petition, which the King rejects deservedly, and the cause was
heard the very day that the Princ^sse Elisabeth, (now Queen of Bohemia) was
Christened. The witnesses were produced, M^. Robert Ponte in the name of the
Church makes a Protestation. Blake presents a second Decli^atour. The Council
decree that the cause being treasonable, is cognoscible before them. The good
King still seeks peace, sends messengers, treats, offers to remit; But it is
labor in vain. The Ministers answer peremtorily by Mr. Robert Brace their
Prolocutor, that the liberty of Christ's Kingdom had received such a wound, by
this usurpation of the rights of the Church, that if the lives of Mr. Blake and
twenty others had been taken, it would not have grieved the hearts of good
people so much, as these injurious proceedings. The King still woos and
confers. At last the matter is concluded that the King shall make a Declaration
in favor of the Church, that Mr. Blake shall only make an acknowledgement to
the Queen, and be pardoned. But Mr. Blake refuses to confess any fault, or to
acknowledge the King and Council to be any judges of his Sermon. Hereupon he is
convicted, and sentenced to be guilty of false and treasonable slanders, and
his punishment referred to the King. Still the King treats, makes propositions
unbeseeming his Majesty, once, or twice. The Ministers reject them, proclaim a
fast, ^ai e a tamult in Edinburgh, Petition, prefer Articles. The King depa
teth from the City, removes his ^rts o^ J^uice the people repent, the
Ministers persist, and seek to engage the Subjects in a Covenant for ^utuall
defense. One M^. Wa^sh in his Sermon tells the people, that the King was
possessed with a devil, yea with seven devils, that the subje^s might lawfully
rise and take the sword out of his hands. The Seditious encouraged from the
Pulpit, send a letter to the Lord Hamilton, to come and be their General He
noblv refuses, and shows their letter to the King. Hereupon the Ministers
are sought for to be apprehended, and fly into England. The Tumult is declared
to be trea on by the Estates of the Kingdom. I have urged this the mo^e largely
(yet as succinctly as I could) to let the wo^ld see, what dangerous Subjects
these Di^ciplinarians are, and how inconsistent their principles be, with all
orderly Societies.

CHAP. V.
That it subjects the supreme Magistrate to their censures, etc.

FOurthly, they have not only exempted themselves in their duties of 4
their own function from the tribunal of the Sovereign Magistrate, or Supreme
Senate, but they have subjected him, and them (yea even in the discharge of the
Sovereign trust) to their own Consistories, even to the highest censure of
Excommunication, which is like the cutting of a member from the body Natural,
or the out-lawing of a 1 Book d^. 7 he^d.
Subject in the body politic. Excommunication, that very engine, whereby the
Popes of old advanced themselves above Emperors. To discipline m^st all the
Estates within this Rcalm be subject: as well R^lers, 2 Book d^c. Chap. (...).
as they that are ruled. And elsewhere, all mea, as well Magistrates as
Inferiors, ought to be subject to the judgment of General Assemblies. And yet
again, no man that is in the Church, o^ght to be exempted The. (...).
from Ecclesiastical censires. What horrid and pernicious mischiefs do use to
attend the Excommunication of Sovereign Magistrates, I leave to every man's
memory or imagination. Such cour^es make great Kings become ciphers, and turn
the tenure of a crown copie-hold, ad voluntatem Dominorum. Such Doctrines might
better become some of the Roman Alexanders or Bonifaces or Grego^ius or Plus
Quintus than such great Professors of Humility, such great disclaimers of
Authority, who have inveighed so bitterly against the Bishops for their
usurpations. This was never the practice of any orthodo^ Bishop, St. Ambrose is
mistaken, what he did to Theodosius was no act of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
but of Christian discretion. No, he was better grounded, David said, Against
thee only have I sinned, because he was a King. Our Disciplinarians abhor the
name of Authority, but hug the thing, their profession of humility, is just
like that Cardinals hanging up of a fishers net in his dining room, to put him
in mind of his descent, but so soon as he was made Pope he took it down,
saying, the fish was caught now, there was no more need of the net.

CHAP. VI.
That it robs the Magistrate of his Dispensative power.

FIfthly, all supreme Magistrates do assume to themselves a power of pardoning
offenses and offenders, where they judge it to be expedient. 9
He who believes that the Magistrate cannot with a good conscience dispense
with the punishment of a penitent malefactor I wish him no greater censure
than that the penal laws might be duly executed upon him, until he recant his
error. But our Disciplinarians have restrained this dispensative power, in all
such crimes as are made capital by the judicial Law, as in the case of Blood,
Adultery Blasphemy, etc. in which cases, they say the offender ought to suffer
death, as God has commanded. And, If the life be spared as it ought not to be
1 Book disc. ^d 9.
to the offenders, etc. And, the Magistrate ought to prefer Gods express
commandment before his own corrupt judgment, especially Ibid.
in punishing these crimes which he commands to be punished with death. When
the then Popish Earls of Angus, Huntley, and Erroll, Ass Edenb. 1594. Parl. Ed.
1594.
were excommunicated by the Church, and forfeited for treasonable practices
against the King, it is admirable to read with what wisdom and charity and
sweetness his Majesty did seek from time to time to reclaim them from their
errors, and by their unfeigned conversion to the reformed Religion to prevent
their punishment. Wherein he had the concurrence of two Conventions of Estates,
the one at Falkland, the other at Dumfermling. And on the other side to see
with what bitterness and radicated malice, they were prosecuted by the
Presbyterics, and their Commissioners, sometimes petitioning, that they might
have no benefit of law, as being excommunicated, Sometimes threatening, that
they were resolved to pursue them to the uttermost, though it should be with
the loss of all their lives in one day. That if they continued enemies to God
and his Truth, the Country should not brook both them and the Lord together.
Sometimes pressing to have their est^es confisea^d, and their lives taken away.
Alleging for their ground, that by Gods Law they had deserved death. And when
the King urged that the bosom of the Church should be ever open to penitent
sinners, they answered, that the Church could not refuse their satisfaction, if
it was truly offered, but the King was obliged to do justice. What do you think
of those that roar out, Justice, Justice, now a days, whether they be not the
right spawn of these Bloud-suckers, Look upon the examples of Cain, Esau,
Ishmael, Antiochus, Antichrist, and tell me, if You ever find such
supercilious, cruel, bloodthirsty persons, to have been pious toward God, but
their Religion is commonly like themselves, stark naught, Cursed be their anger
for it was fierce, and their wrath, for Genesis 79. 7.
it was cruel.

These are some of those encroachments which our Disciplinarians have made upon
the rights of all supreme Magistrates, there be sundry others, which especially
concern the Kings of Great Britain, as the loss of his tenths, first fruits,
and patronages, and which is more than all these, the dependence of his
Subjects; by all which we see, that they have thrust out the Pope indeed, but
retained the Papacy. The Pope as well as they, and they as well as the Pope,
(neither barrel better herrings,) do make Kings but half Kings, Kings of the
bodies, not of the souls of their Subjects: They allow them some sort of
judgment over Ecclesiastical persons, in their civil capacities, for it is
little (according to their rules) which either is not Ecclesiastical, or may
not be reduced to Ecclesiastical. But over Ecclesiastic persons, as they are
Ecclesiastics, or in Ecclesiastical matters, they ascribe unto them no
judgment in the world. They say it cannot stand with the word of God,
Vindication of Commissioners Jun. 6 1648.
that no Christian Prince ever claimed, or can claim to himself such a power,
If the Magistrate will be contented to wave his power in Ecclesiastical
matters, and over Ecclesiastical persons, (as they are such,) and give them
leave to do what they list, and say what they list in their Pulpits, in their
Consistories, in their Synods, and permit them to rule the whole Commonwealth,
in order to the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ. If he will be contented
to become a subordinate Minister to their Assemblies, to see their decrees
executed, then it may be they will become his good Masters, and permit him to
enjoy a part of his civil power. When Sovereigns are made but accessaries, and
inferiors do become principals, when stronger obligations are devised, than
those of a subject to his Sovereign, it is time for the Magistrate to look to
himself, these are prognostics of ensuing storms, the avaunt curriers of
seditious tumults. When supremacy lights into strange and obscure hands, it can
hardly contain it self within any bounds. Before our Disciplinatians be well
warmed in their Ecclesiastical Supremacy, they are beginning, or rather they
have already made a good progress in the invasion of the temporal Supremacy
also.

CHAP. VII.
That the Disciplinarians cheat the Magistrate of his Civil Power in order to
Religion.

That is their sixth in croachment upon the Magistrate, and the vertical 6
point of Je^uitisine. Consider first how many civil causes thev have drawn
directly into their Consistories, and made them of Ecclesiastical cognizance,
as tra^ in Bargaining, false w^ights and measures, opp essing 1 Book dise. 7.
head. 2 Book dise. Chap. 7.
one another, etc. and in the case of Ministers, bribery, perjury, theft,
fighting, ^sury, etc.

Secondly consider that all offenses whatsoever are made cognoscible in their
Consisto^ies in case of candal, yea even such as are punishable by the civil
sword with death: If the civi sword foolishly spate the life 1 Book disc.
(...). head and Th^r. ^3.
of the offender, yet may not the Kirk be negligent in their office, which is
to excommunicate the wicked

Thirdly they ascribe unto their Ministers a liberty and power to direct the
Magistrate, even in the Managerie of civil affairs: To govern the
Commonwealth, and to establish civil laws is prope, to the Magistrate: To
interpret the word of God, and from thence to she v the Magistrate his duty,
how he ought to govern the Commonwealth, Theor. 47. 4^
and how he ought to use the Sword, is comprehended in the office of the
Minister, for the holy Scripture is profitable to show what is the best
government of the Commonwealth. And again all the duties of the second table
as well as of the first, between King and Subject, parents and children,
husbands and wives, Masters and servants, etc. Vindicat. com. p. 6.
are in difficult cases a subject of cognizance and judgment to the Assemblies
of the Ki^k.Thus they are risen up from a judgment of direction to a judgment
of Jurisdiction, And if any persons, Magistrares or others dare act contrary to
this judgment of the Assembly, (as the Parliament and Committee of Estates did
in Scotland in the late expedition) thev make it to be an unlawful engagement,
a sinful War, contrary to the Testimonies of Gods servants, and dec^ce the
parties (...) knowledge. (...) (...) (...). (...) 1648.
so offending to be (...) sper^ed from the communion, and from their offices in
the Kirk. I confess Ministers do well to exhort Christians to be careful
honest, indust ious in their special callings: but fo them to meddle
pragmatically with themysteries of particular trades and much more with the
mysteries of State, which never came within the compass of their shallow
capacities, is a most audacious insolence, and an insufferable pre umption.
They may as well teach the Pilot how to steer his course in a tempest, or the
Physician how to cure the distempers of his patient.

But their highest cheat is that Jesuiticall invention, (in ordine ad
spiritualia,) they assume a power in worldly affairs indirectly, and in order
to the advancement of the kingdom of Christ. The Ecclesiastical Ministry is
conversant spiritually about civil things. Again must not duties to Theor. 63.
vindication. p. 5.
God whereof the securing of religion is a main one, have the Supreme and first
place, duties to the King a subordinate and second place? The case was this.
The Parliament levied forces to free their King out of prison. A mere civil
duty. But the commissioners of the Assembly declare against it, unless the
King will first give assurance under hand and seal by solemn oath, that he will
establish the Covenant, the Presbyterian discipline, etc. in all his Dominions,
and never endeavor any change thereof, least otherwise his liberty might bring
their bygone proceedings Humble advise Edchb. June. 10. 2^48.
about the League and Covenant into question, there is their power in ordine ad
spiritualia. The Parliament will restore to the King his negative voice. A mere
civil thing. The commissioners of the Church oppose it, because of the great
dangers that may thereby come to Religion. The Parliament name Officers and
Commanders for the Army. vindication. p. 8.
A mere civil thing. The Church will not allow them because they want such
qualifications as Gods word requires, that is to say in plain terms, because
they were not their confidents. Was there ever Church challenged such an
omnipotence as this? Nothing in this world is so civil or political, wherein
they do not interest themselves, in order to the advancement of the kingdom of
Christ.

Upon this ground their Synod enacted, that no Scottish merchants Ass. Dund.
1593.
should from thenceforth traffic in any of the dominions of the King of
Spain, until his Majesty had procured from that King some relaxation of the
rigor of the inquisition, upon pain of excommunication. As likewise that the
Monday market at Edinburgh should be abolished, It seems they thought it
ministered some occasion to the breach of the Sabbath. The Merchants petitioned
the king to maintain the liberty of their trade, He grants their request but
could not protect them, for the Church prosecured the poor merchants with their
censures, until they promised to give over the Spanish trade, so soon as they
had perfected their accounts, and paid their Creditors in those parts.

But the Shoemakers who were most interested in the Monday markets with their
tumults and threatenings compelled the Ministers to retract, whereupon it
became a jest in the City, that the Souters could obtain more at the Ministers
hands, than the King. So they may meddle with the Spanish trade or Monday
markets, or any thing in order to Religion.

Upon this ground they assume to themselves a power to ratify Acts of
Parliament, So the assembly at Edinburgh enacted, That the Acts made in the
Parliament at Edinburgh the 24 of August. 1560, (without either Commission or
Proxy from their Sovereign,) touching Ass. Fd^b 1567.
Religion, etc. should have the force of a public Law. And that the said
Parliament, so far as concerned Religion, should be maintained by them, etc.
and be ratified by the first Parliament that should happen to be kept within
that Realm. See how bold they make with Kings and Parliaments, in order to
Religion. I cannot omit that famous summons which this assembly sent out, not
only to entreat, but to admonish all personstruly professing the Lord Jesus
within the Realm, as well Noblemen as Barons and those of other estates to
meet and give their personal appearance at Edinburgh the 20 of July ensuing,
for giving their advise and concurrence in matters then to be proponed,
especially for purging the Realm of Popery, establishing the policy of the
Church, and restoring the patrimony thereof to the just possessours. Assuring
such as did absent themselves that they should be esteemed dissimulate
professors, unworthy of the fellowship of Christ's flock, who thinks your
Scottish Disciplinarians know not how to ruffle it?

Upon this ground they assume a power to abrogate and invalidate Laws and Acts
of Parliament, if they seem disadvantagious to the Church. Church Assemblies
have power to abrogate and abolish all (...) Book dise. ^h. 7.
statutes and ordinances concerning Ecclesiastical matters, that are found
noysom and unprofitable, and agree not with the times, or are abused by the
people. So the Acts of Parliament 1584. at the very same time that they were
proclaimed, were protested against at the market cross of Edinburgh by the
Ministers, in the name of the Vindication p^g. 11. (...) 10.
Kirk of Scotland. And a little before, whatsoever be the Treason of impugning
the authority of Parliament, it can be no Treason to obey God rather than man.
Neither did the General assembly of Glasgow 1638, etc. commit any treason, when
they impugned Episcopacy, and Perth-Articles, although ratified by Acts of
Parliament, and standing laws then unrepealed. He says so far true, that we
ought rather to obey God than man, that is, to suffer when we cannot act; but
to impugn the authority of a lawful Magistrate, is neither to obey God nor
man. God commands us to die innocent rather than live nocent, they teach us
rather to live nocent, than die innocent Away with these seeds of sedition,
these rebellious principles, Our Master Christ has left us no such warrant,
and the unsound practice of an obscure Conventicle is no safe pattern. The King
was surprised at Ruthen by a company of Lords and 1582.
other conspirators; this fact was as plain Treason as could be imagined, and
so it was declared; (I say declared, not made) in Parliament. 1583.
Yet an Assembly General (no man gainsaying) did justify that Treason Ass.
Edenb. 1582.
in order to Religion as good and acceptable service to God, their Sovereign,
and native Country, requiring the Ministers in all their Churches to commend
it to the people, and exhort all men to concur with the actors, as they
tendered the glory of God, the full deliverance of the Church, and perfect
reformation of the Commonwealth, threatening all those who subscribed not to
their judgment with Excommunication. We see this is not the first time that
Disciplinarian Spectacles have made abominable Treason to seem Religion, if it
serve for the advancement of the good Cause. And it were well if they could
rest here, or their zeal to advance their Ecclesiastical Sovereignty, by
force of Arms, and effusion of Christian blood, would confine it self within
the limits of Scotland: No, those bounds are too narrow for their pragmaticall
spirits: And for busy Bishops in other men's Diocesses, see the Articles of
Sterling, That the securing and Sept. 27. 1648. Ar. 3
settling Religion at home, and promoting the work of Reformation abroad, in
England and Ireland, be referred to the determination of the General Assembly
(of the Kirk) or their Commissioners. What, is old Edinburgh turned new Rome
and the old Presbyters young Cardinals, and their Consistory a Conclave, and
their Committees a Juncto for propagating the faith? Themselves stand most in
need of Reformation; If there be a more in the eye of our Church, there is a
beam in theirs. Neither want we at home God be praised, those who are a
thousand times fitter for learning, for piety, for discretion, to be reformers,
then a few giddy innovators. This I am sure, since they undertook our cure
against our wills, they have made many fat Churchyards in England. Nothing is
more civil, or essential to the Crown, then the Militia, or power of raising
Arms: Yet we have seen in the attempt at Ruthen, in their Letter to the Lord
Hamilton, in their Sermons, what is their opinion. They insinuate as much in
their Theorems, It is lawful to resist the Magistrate by certain extraordinary
Theor. 84.
ways or means, not to be ordinarily allowed. It were no difficult task out
of their private Authors, to justify the barbarous acts that have been
committed in England. But I shall hold my self to their public actions and
records. A mutinous company of Citizens forced the gates of Halyrood-house, to
search for a Priest, and plund^r at their pleasure. Mr. Knox was charged by the
Council to have bin the Ann. 1562.
author of the sedition; and further, to have convocated his Majesty's Subjects
by Letters missive when he pleased. He answered, that he was no preacher of
Rebellion, but taught people to obey their Princes in the Lord; [I fear he
taught them likewise, that he and they were the competent judges what is
obedience in the Lord.] He confessed his convocating of the Subjects by virtue
of a command from the Church, to advertise the brethren when he saw a necessity
of their meeting, especially if he perceived Religion to be in peril. Take
another instance, The Assembly having received an answer from the King, about
the trial Ass. Edenburg. 1593.
of the Popish Lords, not to their contentment, resolve all to convene in Arms
at the place appointed for the trial; whereupon some were left at Edinburgh to
give timely advertisement to the rest. The King at his return gets notioe of
it, calls the Ministers before him, shows them what an undutifull part it was
in them to levy Forces, and draw his Subjects into Arms without his Warrant.
The Ministers pleaded, That it was the cause of God, in defense whereof they
could not be defieient. This is the Presbyterian wont, to subject all causes
and persons to their Consistories, to ratify and abolish civil Laws, to
confirm and pull down Parliaments, to levy Forces, to invade other Kingdoms, to
do any thing respectively to the advancement of the good cause, and in order to
Religion.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Disciplinarians challenge this exorbitant Power by Divine Right.

BEhold both Swords spiritual and temporal in the hands of the Presbytery,
the one ordinarily by common right, the other extraordinarily; the one
belonging directly to the Church, the other indirectly; the one of the Kingdom
of Christ, the other for his Kingdom, in order to the propagation of Religion.
See how these hocas p^cases with stripping up their sleeves and professions of
plain-dealing, with declaiming against the tyranny of Prelates, under the
pretense of humility and Ministerial duty, have wrested the Scepter out of the
hand of Majesty, and jugled themselves into as absolute a Papacy, as ever was
within the walls of Rome. O Savior, behold thy Vicars, and see whither the
pride of the servants of thy servants is ascended. Now their Consistories are
become the Tribunalls of Christ. That were strange indeed! Christ has but one
Tribunal, his Kingdom is not of this world. Their determinations pass for
the Sentences of Christ. Alas there is too much faction, and passion, and
ignorance in their Presbyteries. Their Synodall Acts go for the Laws of
Christ. His Laws are immutable, mortal man may not presume to alter them, or
to add to them; but these men are chopping and changing their constitutions
every day. Their Elders must be looked upon as the Commissioners of Christ. It
is impossible! Geneva was the first City where this discipline was hatched,
though since it has lighted into hucksters hands. In those days they
magnified the platform of Geneva, for the pattern sbewed in the mount. But
there, the Presbyters at their admission take an oath, to observe the
Ecclesiastical Ordinances of the small, great, and general Councels of that
City. Can any man be so stupid, as to think, that the high Commissioners of
Christ swear fealty to the Burgers of Geneva? Now forsooth their Discipline is
become the Scepter of Christ, the Eternal Gospel. (See how success exalts
men's desires and demands.) In good time, where did this Scepter lie hid for
1500. years, that we cannot find the least footsteps of it in the meanest
village of Christendom? This world draws toward an end; was this discipline
fitted and contrived for the world to come? Or how should it be the Eternal
Gospel? When every man sees how different it is from it self, in all
Presbyterian Churches, adapted and accommodated to the civil policy of each
particular place where it is admitted, except only Scotland, where it comes in
like a Conqueror, and makes the Civil Power stoop and strike topsaile to it.
Certainly, if it be the Gospel, it is the fifth Gospel, for it has no kindred
with the other four. There is not a Text which they wrest against Episcopacy,
but the Independants may with as much color of reason, and truth, urge it
against their Presbyteries. Where does the Gospel distinguish between temporary
and perpetual Rulers? Between the Government of a person, and of a
corporation? There is not a Text which they produce for their Presbytery, but
may with much more reason be alleged for Episcopacy, and more agreeable to the
analogy of faith, to the perpetual practice and belief of the Catholic
Church, to the concurrent Expositions of all Interpreters, and to the other
Texts of holy Scripture; for until this new model was yesterday devised none
of those Texts were ever so understood. When the practice ushers in the
doctrine, it is very suspicious, or rather evident, that the Scripture was not
the rule of their reformation, but their subsequent excuse. This (jure divine)
is that which makes their sore incurable, themselves incorrigible, that they
father their own brat upon God Almighty, and make this Mushrome which sprung
but up the other night, to be of heavenly descent. It is just like the doctrine
of the Popet infallibility, which shuts the door against all hope of remedy.
How should they be brought to reform their errors, who believe they cannot
err, or they be brought to renounce their drowsy dreams, who take it for
granted, that they are divine revelations!

And yet when that wise Prince, King James, a little before the An. 1596.
National Assembly at Perth, published in print 55. Articles or Questions,
concerning the uncertainty of this Discipline, and the vanity of their
pretended plea of divine right, and concerning the errors and abuses crept
into it, for the better preparation of all men to the ensuing Synod, that
Ministers might study the point beforehand, and speak to the purpose; they who
stood affected to that way were extremely perplexed. To give a particular
account, they knew well it was impossible; but their chiefest trouble was, that
their foundation of divine right, which they had given out all this while to be
a solid rock, should come now to be questioned for a shaking quagmire. And so
without any opposition they yielded the bucklers. Thus it continued until
these unhappy troubles, when they started aside again like broken bows. This
plant thrives better in the midst of tumults, then in the times of peace and
tranquillity. The Elm which supports it, is a factious multitude, but a
prudent and courageous Magistrate nips it in the bud.

CHAP. IX.
That this Discipline makes a monster of the Commonwealth.

WE have seen how pernicious this Discipline (as it is maintained in Scotland,
and endeavored to be introduced into England by the Covenant,) is to the
supreme Magistrate, how it rob^ him of his Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
affairs, and of the last appeals of his own Subjects, that it exempts the
Presbyters from the power of the Magistrate, and subjects the Magistrate to the
Presbyters, that it restraines his dispensative power of pardoning, deprives
him of the dependence of his Subjects, that it does challenge and usurp a power
paramount both of the Word and of the Sword, both of Peace and War, over all
Courts and Estates, over all Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical, in order to the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, whereof the Presbyters alone are
constituted rulers by God, and all this by a pretended divine right, which
takes away all hope of remedy, until it be hissed out of the world; in a word,
that it is the top-branch of Popery, a greater tyranny, then ever Rome was
guilty of. It remains to show how disadvantagious it is also to the Subject.

First, to the Commonwealth in general, which it makes a Monster, like an
Amphis^baina, or a Serpent with two heads, one at either end. It makes a
coordination of Sovereignty in the same Society, two supremes in the same
Kingdom or State, the one Civil, the other Ecclesiastical, then which nothing
can be more pernicious, either to the consciences, or the estates of Subjects,
when it falls out (as it often does) that from these two heads issue contrary
commands, If the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to
the battle? 1 Cor. 1^. 1.
Much more when there are two Trumpets, and the one sounds an Alarm, the other
a Retreat. What should the poor Soldier do in such a case? or the poor Subject
in the other case? If he obey the Civil Magistrate, he is sure to be
excommunicated by the Church; if he obey the Church, he is sure to be
imprisoned by the Civil Magistrate; What shall become of him? I know no
remedy, but according to Solomon's sentence, the living Subject must be divided
into two, and 1 Kin. 3. 25.
the one half given to the one, and the other half to the other. For the Oracle
of Truth has said, that one man cannot serve two Masters. But in Scotland
every man must serve two Masters, and (which is worse) many times disagreeing
Masters. At the same time the Civil Magistrate has commanded the Feast of the
Nativity of our Savior to be observed, and the Church has forbidden it. At
the same time the King has summoned the Bishops to sit and Vote in Parliament,
and the Church has forbidden them.

In the year 1582. Monsieur-le-mot, a Knight of the Order of the 1582.
Holy Ghost, with an associate, were sent Ambassadors from France into
Scotland: The Ministers of Edinburgh approving not his Message, (though merely
Civil,) inveigh in their Pulpits bitterly against him, calling his White
Cross the badge of Antichrist, and himself the Ambassador of a Murderer. The
King was ashamed, but did not know how to help it; The Ambassadors were
discontented and desired to be gone: The King willing to preserve the ancient
Amity between the two Crowns, and to dismiss the Ambassadors with content,
requires the Magistrates of Edinburgh to feast them at their departure; so they
did; But to hinder this feast, upon the Sunday Febr. 16.
preceding, the Ministers proclaim a Fast to be kept the same day the Feast was
appointed; and to deteine the people all day at Church; the At Saint Giles
Church.
three Preachers make three Sermons, one after another without intermission,
thundering out curses against the Magistrates and Noblemen which waited upon the
Ambassadors by the Kings appointment. Neither stayed they here, but pursued the
Magistrates with the censures of the Church, for not observing the Fast by them
proclaimed; and with much difficulty were wrought to abstain from
Excommunicating of them; which censure, how heavy it falls in Scotland, you
shall see by and by. To come yet nearer, the late Parliament in Scotland
enjoined men to take up Arms for delivery of their King out of prison; The
Commissioners for the Assembly disallowed it; and at this present how many are
chased out of their Country? How many are put to public repentance in
sackeloth? how many are excommunicated, for being obedient to the Supreme
Ludicatory of the Kingdom, that is, King and Parliament? Miserable is the
condition of that people where there is such clashing and interfereing of
Suprem Judicatories and Authorities. If they shall pretend that this was no
free Parliament: First, they affirm that which is not true; either that
Parliament was free, or what will become of the rest? Secondly, this plea will
advantage them nothing; for (which is all one with the former) thus they make
themselves Judges of the validity or invalidity of Parliaments.

CHAP. X.
That this Discipline is most prejudicial to the Parliament.

FRom the Essentiallbody of the Kingdom we are to proceed to the
repraesentative body, which is the Parliament. We have already seen, how it
attributes a power to National Synods to restrain Parliaments, and to abrogate
their Acts, if they shall judge them prejudicial to the Church. We need no
other instance, to show what small account Presbyteries do make of Parliaments,
then the late Parliament in Scotland. Notwithstanding that the Parliament had
declared their resolution to levy forces vigorously, and that they did expect
as well from the Synods and Presbyteries, as from all other his Majesty's good
Subjects, aready obedience to the commands of Parliament, and Committee of
Estates. The Commissioners of the Assembly not satisfied herewith, do not only
make their proposalls, that the grounds of the War and the breaches of the
Peace might be March, 22.
cleared, that the union of the Kingdoms might be preserved, that the popish
and prelaticall party might be suppressed, that his Majesty's offers
concerning Religion might be declared unsatisfactory, that before his Majesty's
restitution to the exercise of his Royal power, he shall first engage himself
by folemn Oath under his hand and Seal, to pass Acts for the settlement of the
Covenant and Presbyterian Government in all his Dominions, etc. And never to
oppose them, or endeavor the Change of them, (An usurer will trust a bankrupt
upon easier terms, then they will do their Sovereign,) and lastly, that such
persons only might be entrusted, as had given them no cause of jealousy,
(which had been too much, and more then any estates in Europe will take in good
part from half a dozen Ministers,) But afterward by their public Declaration
to the whole Kirk and Kingdom, set forth that not being satisfied Declar.
in these particulars, they do plainly dissent and disagree, and declare that
they are clearly persuaded in their consciences, that the Engagement is of
dangerous consequence to true Religion, prejudicial to the Liberty of the
Kirk, favorable to the Malignant party, inconsistent with the union of the
Kingdom; Contrary to the word of God and the Covenant, wherefore they cannot
allow either Ministers or any other whatsoever to concu^ and cooperate in it,
and trust that they will keep themselves free in this business, and choose
affliction rather then iniquity. And to say the Truth, they made their word
good. For by their power over the Churchmen, and by their influence upon the
people, and by threatening all those who engaged in that action with the
censures of the Church, they retarded the Levies, they deterred all preachers
from accompanying the Army to do divine offices. And when Saint Peter's keys
would not serve the turn, they made use of Saint Paul's sword, and gathered the
country together in arms at Machleene-Moore to oppose the expedition.

So if the high court of Parliament will set up Presbytery, they must resolve
to introduce an higher court then themselves, which will overtop them for
eminency of authority, for extent of power, and greatness of privileges, that
is, a National Synod.

First for authority, the one being acknowledged to be but an humain
convention, the other affirmed confidently to be a divine instistution. The one
sitting by virtue of the Kings writ, the other by virtue of Gods writ. The one
as Councellers of the Prince, the other as Ambassadors and Vicars of the son
of God. The one as Burgesses of Corporations, the other as Commissioners of
Jesus Christ. The one judging by the law of the land, the other by the holy
Scriptures. The one taking care for this temporal life, the other for eternal
life.

Secondly for power, as Curtius says, ubi multitudo vana religione capta est,
melius vatibus suit quam ducibus paret, where the multitude is led with
superstition, they do more readily obey their Prophets then their Magistrates.
Have they not reason? Pardon us O Magistrate, thou threatenst us with prison,
they threaten us with hell fire. Thy sentence deprives us of civil prorection,
and the benefit of the law, so does theirs indirectly, and withal makes us
strangers to the commonwealth of Israel. Thou can outlaw us, or horn us,
and confiscate our estates, their keys do the same also by consequence, and
moreover deprive us of the prayers of the Church, and the comfortable use of
the blessed Sacraments. Thou can deliver us to a Pursevant, or commit us to
the Black Rod, they can deliver u^ over to Satan, and commit us to the prince
of darkness.

Thirdly for privileges, the privileges of Parliament extend not to treason
selony, or breach of peace, but they may talk treason, and act treason, in
their pulpits and Synods without controlment. They may securely commit not
only petilarciny but Burglary, and force the doors of the palace Royal. They
may not only break the peace, but convocate the Subjects in arms, yea give
warrant to a particular person, to ^onveen them by his letters missives,
according to his discretion, in order to religion. Of all which we have seen
instances in this discourse. The privileges of Parliaments are the Graces and
Concessions of man, and may be taken away by humane Authority, but the
privileges of Synods they say are from God, and cannot without Sactiledge be
taken away by mortal man. The two Houses of Parliament can not name
Commissioners to sit in the intervalles, and take care ne quid detrimenti
capiat respublica, that the Commonwealth receive no prejudice; But Synods have
power to name vicars General, or Commissioners, to sit in the intervalles of
Synods, and take order that neither King nor Parliament nor people do incroach
upon the Liberties of the Church. If there be any thing to do, they are (like
the fox in Aesops fables,) sure to be in at one end of it.

CHAP. XI.
That this Discipline is oppressive to particular persons.

Toward particular persons this Discipline is too full of rigor, like Dracos
laws that were written in blood. First in lesser saults, inflicting Church
censures upon sl ight grounds, As for an uncomely Scot. Leit. p. 57. 58.
gesture, for a vain word, for suspicion of covetousness or pride, for
superfluity in raiment, either for cost or fashion, for keeping a table above a
man's calling or means, for dancing at a wedding, 1 Book dis. 7. head.
or of servants in the streets, for wearing a man's hair a^la mode, for not
paying of debts, for using the least recreation upon the Sabbath, though void
of scandal, and consistent with the duties of the day. I wish they were
acquainted with the practice of all other Protestant Countries. But if they did
but see one of those kirmesses which are observed in some places, the pulpit,
the consistory, the whole Kingdom would not be able to hold them. What
digladiations have there been among some of their sect about starch and cuffes,
etc. just like those grave debates which were sometimes among the Franciscans,
about the color and fashion of their gowns? They do not allow men a latitude
of discretion in any thing. All men, even their Superiors must be their slaves
or pupils. It is true they begin their censures with admonition, And if a man
will confess himself a delinquent, be sorry for giving the Presbyters any
offense, and conform himself in his hair, apparel, diet, every thing, to what
these rough hewn Catos shall prescribe, he may escape the stool of repentance,
otherwise they will proceed against him for contumacy, to Excommunication.

Secondly, this discipline is oppressive in greater saults. The same man is
punished twice for the same crime first by the Magistrate according to the
laws of God and the land, for the offense: then by the censures of the Church
for the scandal. To this agrees their Synod, Nothing forbids the same fault in
the same man to be punished one Theor. 63.
way by the political power, another way by the Ecclesiastical; by that under
the formality of a crime with Corporal or pecuniary punishment, by this under
the formality of scandal with spiritual censures. And their book of
Discipline, If the civil sword foolishly spare the life of the offender, yet
may not the Kirk be negligent in their office. Thus their 1 Book. 9. head p. 44.
Liturgy in express terms, All crimes which by the law of God deserve death,
deserve also Excommunication. Yea, though an offender abide an assise, and be
absolved by the same, yet may the Church enjoin him public satisfaction. Or if
the Magistrate shall not think sit in his judgment, or cannot in conscience
prosecure the party Scot lit. 48
upon the Churches intimation, the Church may admonish the Magistrate
publicly. And if no remedy be found, excommunicate the 47.
offender, first for his crime, and then for being suspected to have corrupted
the judge. Observe first that by hook or crook they will bring all crimes
whatsoever, great and small, within their Jurisdiction. Secondly, observe that
a delinquents trial for his life is no sufficient satisfaction to these third
Cato's. Lastly, observe that to satisfy their own humor, they care not how
they blemish publicly the reputation of the Magistrate upon frivolous
conjectures.

Thirdly, add to this which has been said, the severity and extreme rigor
of their Excommunication, after which sentence no person (his wife and family
only excepted) may have any kind of conversation with him that is
excommunicate, they may not eat with him, nor drink with him, nor buy with
him, nor sell with him, 1 Book dis. 7. h a^.
they may not salute him, nor speak to him, [except it be by the license of the
Presbytery,] His children begotten and born after that sentence, and before his
reconciliation to the Church, may not be admitted to baptism, until they be
of age to require it, or the mother or some special friend being a member of
the Church present the child, abhorring and damning the iniquity and obstinate
contempt of the Father. Add further that upon this sentence letters of horning
(as they use to call them in Scotland) do follow of course, that is an
out-lawing of the party, a confiscation of his goods, a putting him out of the
Kings protection, so as any man may kill him, and be unpunished; yea, the party
excommunicate is not so much as cited to hear those fatal Letters granted. Had
not David reason to pray, Let me fall into the hands of the Lord, not into the
hands of men, for their mercies are cruel. Cruel indeed, that 55. Articl.
1596.
when a man is prosecuted for his life, perhaps justly, perhap^ unjustly, so as
appearing and hanging are to him in effect the same thing; yet if he appear
not, this pitiful Church will Excommunicate him for contumacy: Whether the
offender be convict in judgment, or b^ fugitiv^ from the Law, the Church ought
to proceed to the sentence of Excommunication; as if the just and evident fear
of death did not purge Scot. Li^ 49
away contumacy.

CHAP. XII.
That this Discipline is hurtful to all orders of men.

LAstly, this Discipline is burdensome and disadvantagious to all orders of
men. The Nobility and Gentry must expect to follow the fortune of their Prince.
Upon the abatement of Monarchy in Rome, remember what dismal controversies did
presently spring up between the Patricii and Plebci. They shall be subjected to
the censures of a raw heady novice, and a few ignorant Artificers; they shall
lose all their advowsons of such Benefices as have cure of souls, as they have
lately found in Scotland) for every Congregation ought to choose their own
Pastor. They shall hazard their Appropriations and Abbey-lands: A Sacrilege
which their National Synod cannot in conscience tolerate, longer then they
have strength sufficient to overthrow it. And if they proceed as they begin,
the Presbyters will in a short time either accomplish their design, or change
their soil. They shall be bearded and maited by every ordinary Presbyter,
witness that insolent speech of Mr. Robert Bruce to King James, Sir, I see
your resolution is to take Huntley in favor; if you do, I will oppose; You
shall choose whether you will lose Huntly or me; for us both you cannot keep.
It is nothing with them for a pedant to put himself into the balance with one
of the prime and most powerful Peers of the Realm.

The poor Orthodox Clergy in the mean time shall be undone, their straw shall
be taken from them, and the number of their bricks be doubled: They shall lose
the comfortable assurance of an undoubted succession by Episcopal Ordination,
and put it to a dangerous question, whether they be within the pale of the
Church: They shall be reduced to ignorance, contempt, and beggary; They shall
lose an ancient Liturgy, (warranted in the most parts of it by all, in all
parts of it by the most public forms of the Protestant Churches, whereof a
short time may produce a parallel to the view of the world,) and be enjoined to
prate and pray nonsense everlastingly. For howsoever formerly they have had a
Liturgy of their own, as all other Christian Churches have at this day; yet
now it seems they allow no prayers, but extemporary. So faith the information
from Scotland, Motus Brtanici. 171
It is not lawful for a man to tie himself, or be tied by others, to a
prescript form of words in prayer and exhortation.

Parents shall lose the free disposition of their own children in marriage if
the child desire an husband or a wife, and the parent 1 Book. dis: 9. head.
against and their request, and have no other cause then the common of men have,
to wit lack of goods, or because the other party is not of birth high enough,
upon the childs desire, the Minister is to travail with the parents, and if he
find no just cause to the contrary, may admit them to maerriage. For the work
of God ought not to be hindered by the corrupt affections of worldly men. They
who have stripped the father of their Country of his just right, may make bold
with fathers of families, and will not stick to exclude all other fathers, but
themselves out of the fifth commandment. The doctrine is very high, but their
practice is yet much more high, The Presbyteries will compel the wronged
parent to give that child as great a portion as any of his other children.

It will be ill news to the Lawyerrs to have the moulter taken away from their
Mills upon pretense of scandal, or in order to Religion, to have their
sentences repealed by a Synod of Presbyters, and to receive more prohibitions
from Ecclesiastical Courts, then ever they sent thither.

All Masters and mistresses of families, of what age or condition soever, must
come once a year before the Presbyter, wish their households, to be examined 1
Book dis. 9 head.
personally whether they be fit to receive the Sacrament, in respect of their
knowledge, and otherwise. And if they suffer their children or servants to
continue in wilful ignorance (What if they cannot help it?) they must be
excommunicated. It is probable, the persons catechized could often better
instruct their Catechists.

The common people shall have an High Commission in every parish, and groan
under the Arbitrary dec^ees of ignorant unexperienced Governors, who know no
Law but their own wills, who observe no order but what they list; from whom
lies no appeal but to a Synod, which for the shortness of its continuance can
afford which for the condition of the persons will afford them little relief. If
there arise a private jar between the parent and the child, or the husband and
the wife, these domestical Judges must know it, and censure it.

Scire volunt secreta do^us, atque inde timeri. And if there have been any suit
or difference between the Pastor and any of hi flock, or between Neighbor and
Neighbor, be sure it will not be forgotten in the sentence. The practice of
our Law has been, that a Judge was rarely permitted to ride a circuit in his
own country, least private interest or respects might make him partial. Yet
a Country is much larger then a Parish and a grave learned Judge is presumed to
have more temper then such homebred fellows. Thus we see what a Pandoras box
this pretended holy Discipline is, full of manifold mischiefs, and to all
orders of men most pernicious.

CHAP. XIII.
That the Covenant to introduce this Discipline is void and wicked, with a
short Conclusion.

But yet the conscience of an Oath sticks deep. Some will plead, that they have
made a Covenant with God, for the introduction of this Discipline, Oaths and
Vows ought to be made with great judgment, and broken with greater. My next
task therefore must be to demonstrate this clearly, that this Covenenant is not
binding, but merely void, and not only void but wicked; so as it is necessary
to break it, and impious to observe it.

The first thing that cracks the credit of this new Covenant is, that it was
devised by strangers, to the dishonor of cur Nation, imposed by Subjects, who
wanted requisite power upon their Sovereign and fellow subjects, extorted by
just fear of unjust sufferings. So as a may truly say of many who took this
Covenant, that they sinned in pronouncing the words with their lips, but never
consented with their hearts to make any vow to God.

Again, error and deceit make those things voluntary to which they are
incident, especially when the errour^s nor merely negative by way of
concealment of truth, when a man knows not what he does, but positive, when
he believes he does one thing, and does the clean contrary, and that not about
some inconsiderable accidents, but about the substantial conditions. As if a
Physician, either out of ignorance or malice, should give his Patient a deadly
poison under the name of a cordial, and bind him by a solemn oath to take it,
the Oath is void, necessary to be broken, unlawful to be kept; if the patient
had known the truth, that it was no cordial, that it was poison, he would not
have swom to take it. Such an error there is in the Covenant with a witness,
to gull men with a strange, unknown, lately devised platform of Discipline,
most pernicious to the King and Kingdom, as if it were the very institution of
Christ, of high advantage to the King and Kingdom, to gull them with that
Covenant which King James did sometimes take, as if that and this were all one,
whereas that Covenant issued out by the Kings Authority, this Covenant without
his Authority, against his Authority; that Covenant was for the Laws of the
Realm, this is against the Laws of the Realm; that was to maintain the
Religion established, this to overthrow the Religion established: But because I
will not ground my Discourse upon any thing that is disputable, either in
matter of Right, or Fact; And in truth, because I have no need of them, I
sorgive them these advantages, only with this gentle memento, That when other
foreign Churches, and the Church of Scotland it self (as appears by their
public Liturgy used in those days) did sue for aid and assistance from the
Crown and Kingdom of England, they did not go about to obtrude their own
Discipline upon them, but left them free to choose for themselves.

The grounds which follow are demonstrative; First, no man can dispose that by
vow, or otherwise, either to God or man, which is the right of a third person
without his consent: Neither can the^nferiour oblige himself to the prejudice
of his Superior, contrary to his duty, without his Superiors allowance: God
accepts no such pretenses, to seem obsequious to him, out of the undoubted
right of another person. Now the power of Arms, and the defense of the Laws,
and protection of the Subjects by those Arms, is by the Law of England clearly
invested in the Crown. And where the King is bound in conscience to protect,
the Subject is bound in conscience to assist. Therefore every English Subject
owes his Arms and his Obedience to his King, and cannot dispose them as a free
gift of his own; nor by any act of his whatsoever diminish his Sovereigns
right over him, but in those things wherein by Law he owes subjection to his
Prince, he remains still obliged, notwithstanding any Vow or Covenant to the
contrary; especially when the subject and scope of the Covenant is against the
known Laws of the Realm. So as without all manner of doubt, no Divine or
Learned Casuist in the world dissenting, This Covenant is either void in it
self, or at least voided by his Majesty's Proclamation, prohibiting the takirg
of it, and nullifying its obligation.

Secondly, It is confessed by all men that, that an Oath ought not to be the
bond of iniquity, nor does oblige a man to be a transgressour. The golden rule
is, in malis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto muta decretum, To observe
a wicked engagement doubles the sin: Nothing can be the matter of a Vow or
Covenant, which is evidently unlawful. But it is evidently unlawful for a
Subject or Subjects to alter the Laws established by force, without the
concurrence, and against the commands of the Supreme Legislator, for the
introduction of a foreign Discipline. This is the very matter and subject of
the Covenant. Subjects vow to God, and swear one to another, to change the
Laws of the Realm, to abolish the Discipline of the Church, and the Liturgy
lawfully established, by the Sword, (which was never committed to their hands
by God or man,) without the King, against the King, which no man can deny in
earnest to be plain rebellion, And it is yet the worse, that it is to the main
prejudice of a third order of the Kingdom, the taking away whose rights without
their consents, without making them satisfaction, cannot be justified in point
of conscience. (Yea though it were for the greater convenience of the Kingdom,
as is most falsely pretended,) And is harder measure then the Abbots and Friars
received from Henry the eight, or then either Christians or Turks do offer to
their conquered enemies.

Lastly a supervenient oath or covenant either with God or man, cannot take
away the obligation of a just oath precedent. But such is the Covenant, a
subsequent oath, inconsistent with, and destructive to a precedent oath, that
is the oath of Supremacy, which all the Church men throughout the Kingdom, all
the Parliament men at their admission to the house, all persons of quality
throughout England have taken. The former oath acknowledges the King to be the
only supreme h^ad, (that is civil head to see that every man do his duty in
his calling,) and Governor of the Church of England, The second oath or
covenant, to set up the Presbyterian Government as it is in Scotland, denies
all this virtually, makes it a political papacy, acknowledges no governors
but only the Presbyters. The former oath gives the King the supreme power over
all persons in all causes, The second oath gives him a power over all persons,
(as they are subjects,) but none at all in Ecclesiastical causes, This they
make to be sacrilege.

By all which it is most apparent, that this Covenant was neither free nor
deliberate, nor valide, nor lawful, nor consistent with our former oaths, but
insorced, d^ceitfull, invalide, impious, rebellious, and contradictory to our
former engagements, and consequently obliges no man to performance, but all
men to repentance. For the greater certainty whereof I appe^le, upon this
stating of the case, to all the learned Casuists and Divines in Europe,
touching the point of common right; And that this is the true state of the
case, I appeal to our adversaries themselves. No man that has any spark of
ingenuity will deny it. No Englishman who has any tolerable degree of
judgment, or knowledge in the laws of his country, can deny it, but at the
same instant his conscience must give him the lie.

They who plead for this rebellion, dare not put it to a trial at law, they
do not ground their defense upon the laws, But either upon their own
groundless jealousies and fears, of the Kings intention to introduce Popery,
to subvert the laws, and to enslave the people. This is to run into a certain
crime, for fear of an uncertain.

They who intend to pick quarrels, know how to feign suspicions. Or they ground
it upon the success of their arms, or upon the Sovereign right of the people,
over all laws and Magistrates, whose Representatives they create themselves,
whilst the poor people sigh in corners, and dare not say their soul is their
own, lamenting their former folly, to have contributed so much to their own
undoing.

Or lastly upon Religion, the cause of God, the worst plea of all the rest to
make God accessory to their treasons, murders, covetousness, ambition. Christ
did never authorize Subjects to plant Christian Religion, much less their own
fan^ticall dreams, or fantastical deviles, in the blood of their Sovereign,
and fellow subjects.

Speak out, is it lawful for Subjects to take up arms against their Prince
merely for Religion? or is it not lawful? It ye say it is not lawful, ye
condemn your selves, for your Covenant testifies to the world, that ye have
taken up arms, merely to alter Religion, and that ye bear no Allegiance to your
King, but only in order to Religion, that is in plain terms, to your own
humors and conceits. If ye say it is lawful, ye justify the Independents in
England, for supplanting your selves, ye justify the Anabaptists in Germany,
John of Leyden and his c^ue. Ye break down the banks of Order, and make way for
an inundation of blood and confusion in all Countries. Ye render your selves
justly odious to all Christian Magistrates, when they see, that they owe their
safety not to your good wills, but to your weakness, that ye want sufficient
strength to cut their throats. This is fine doctrine for Europe, wherein there
is scarce that King or State, which has not Subjects of different opinions and
communions in Religion. Or lastly if ye say, it is lawful for you to plant
that which ye apprehend to be true Religion by force of arms, but it is not
lawful for others to plant that which they apprehend to be true Religion by
sorce, because yours is the Gospel, theirs is not. Ye beg the question, and
make your selves ridiculously partial by your overweening opinion, worse then
that of the men of China, as if ye only had two eyes, and all the rest of the
world were stark blind. There more hope of a fool, then of him that is wise in
his own eyes.

I would to God we might be so happy as to fee a General Council of
Christians, at least a General Synod of all Proteftants, and that the first
Act might be to denounce an Anathema Maranatha, against all brochers and
maintainers of seditious principles, to take way the scandal which lies upon
Christian Religion, and to show that in the search of piety, we have not lost
the principles of humanity. In the mean time, let all Christian Magistrates,
who are principally concerned, beware how they suffer this Cockatrice egg to
be hatched in their Dominions. Much more how they plead for Baal, or
Baal-Berith, the Baalims of the Covenant. It were worth the inquiring, whether
the marks of Antichrist do not agree as eminently to the Assembly General of
Scotland, as either to the Pope, or to the Turk: This we see plainly, that they
spring out of the ruins of the Civil Magstrate, they sit upon the Temple of
God, and they advance themselves above those whom holy Scripture calls Gods.

FINIS.
A REVIEW OF DOCTOR BRAMBLE, Late Bishop of LONDENDERRY, HIS FAIR WARNING
Against the Scotes Discipline.

By R. B. G.

Printed at DELF, By Michiel Stael, dwelling at the Turf-Market 1649.

For the right Honorable the Noble and potent Lord JOHN Earl of Cassils, Lord
KENNEDY, etc. one of his MAJESTY'S privy counsel, and Lord Justice general of
Scotland.
RIGHT HONORABLE.
MY long experience ofyour Lordships sinceer zeal to the truth of God, and
affection to the liberties of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, against all
enemies whomsoever; has imboldened me to offer by your Lordships hand to the
view of the public, my following answer to a very bitter enemy of that Church
and Kingdom for their adhaerence to the sacred truth of God and their own just
liberties.

At my first sight of his Book and many days thereafter I had no purpose at
The Author^ reasons of his writing.
all to meddle with him: your Lordship knows how unprovided men of my present
condition must be, either with leisure, or accommodations, or a mind suitable
for writing of books. Also Doctor Bramble was so well known on the other side
of the Sea, the justice of the Parliament of England and Scotland having
unanimously condemned him to stand upon the highest pinnacle of infamy, among
the first of the unpardonable incendiaries, and inthe head of the most
pernicious instruments of the late miseries in Britain and Ireland: and the
evident falsehood of his calumnies were so clearly confuted long ago in printed
answers to the infamons Authors whence he had borrowed them; I saw lastly the
man's Spirit so extreme saucy, and his pen so wespish and full of gall, that I
judged him unworthy of any answer. But understanding his malions boldness to put
his Book in the hand of his Majesty, of the Prince of Orange, and all the
eminent personages of this place who can reed English; yea to send it abroad
unto all the Universities of these Provinces, with very high and insinuating
commendations, from the prime favorers of the Episcopal cause: hearing also
the threats of that faction to put this their Excellent and unanswerable piece,
both in Dutch, Frensh, and Latin; that in the whole neighboring World the
reputation of the Scotes might thereby be wounded, killed, and buried, without
hope of recovery; I found it necessary, at the desire of diverse friends, to
send this my review after it, hoping that all who shall be pleased to be at the
pains of comparing the reply with the challenge, may be induced to pronounce
him not only a rash, untimous, malicious, but also a very false accuser. This
much justice do I expect from every judicious and aequitable comparer of our
wrytes, upon the hazard of their censure to fall upon my side. The Praelats are
unable by reason to defend Episco pacy.


His invectives against us are chiefly for three things; our Discipline, our
Covenant, our alleged unkindnes to our late Sovereign. My apology for the
first is that in discipline we maintain no considerable conclusion, but what is
avowed by all the Reformed Churches, especially our Brethren of Holland and
France, as by the approbatory suffrages of the Universities of Leyden, Vtrecht
and others, to the theorems whereupon our adversary does build his chief
accusations, may appear. If our practice had aberred from the common rule, the
crookednes of the one ought not to praejudge the straightnes of the other:
though what our adversary alleges of these aberrations is nothing, but his
own calumnious imputations: the chief quarrel is our rule it self, which all
the reformed harmoniously defend with us, to be according to Scripture; and
the Episcopal declinations, to be beside and against the line or the word,
yea Antichristian.

If our Praelats had found the humor of disputing this maine cause to stir in
their veins, why did they not vent it in replies to Didoclavius and Gersome
Bucerus, who for long thirty years have stood unanswered? or if fresher meats
had more pleased their taste, why did not their stomachs venture on Salmasius or
Blondels books against Episcopacy? If verbal debates had liked them better then
writing, why had none of them the courage to accept the conference, with that
incomparably most learned of all knights now living or in any bygone age Sir
Claud Somayis; who by a person of honnour about the King, did signify his
rendines to prove before his Majesty, against any one or all his praelaticall
divines, that their Episcopacy had no warrant at all in the word of God, or any
good reason?

But our friends are much wiser then to be at the trouble and hazard of any
such exercise; the artifices of the court are their old trade, they know better
Cheir stronge^ (...) are (...) of (...).
how to watch the seasons, and to distribute amongst themselves the hours of
the Kings opportunities, when privately without contradiction they may instill
in his tender mind their corrupt principles, and instruct him in his cabine,
how safe it is for his conscience, and how much for his honor rather to ruin
himself, his family and all his Kingdoms with his own hands, then to desert
the holy Church, that is the Bishops and their followers; then to join with
the rebellious Covenanters, enemies to God, to his Father, to to Monarchy that
the embracing of the Barbarous Irish, the pardoning of all their monstrous
murders, the rewarding of their expected merits with a free liberty of Popery,
and access to all places of the highest trust, though contrary to all the
Laws which England and Ireland has known this hundred years; all this
without and before any Parliament, must be very consistent, with conscience,
honor and all good reason. Yea to bind up the soul of the most sweet and
ingenuous of Princes, in their chains of their slavery for ever, they have
fallen upon a most rare trick, which hardly the inventions of all their
praedecessors can pararel. They rest not satisfied, that for the upholding of
their ambition and greed, they did harden our late Sovereign The (...) in (...)
to his very last in their Errors, and without compassion did dryve him on to
his satal praecipice, unles they make him continue after his death to cry loud
every day in the ears of his Son in his later will and testament, to follow
him in that same way of ruin; rather then to give over to serve (...).
the lu^ts of the praelaticall clergy. They have gathered together his
Majesty's last papers, and out of them have made a book, whereupon their best
pens have dropped the greatest eloqution, reason and devotion was among them;
by way of essays; as it were to frame the heart of the Son by the fingers of
the dying Father to piety, wisdom, patience, and every virtue, but ever and
anon to let fall so much of their own ungracious dew, as may irrigat the seeds
of their praelaticall Errors and Church interest; so far as to charge him to
perseveer in the maintenance of Episcopal government upon all hazards,
without the change of any thing except a little p. 278. and to assure that all
Covenanters are of a faction engaged into a Religious rebellion, who may never
be trusted till they have repented of their Covenant; and that till then never
less loyalty justice or humanity may be expected from any, then from them;
that if he stand in need of them he is undone, for they will devour him as
the Serpent does the dove.

These and the like pernicious maxims framed by an Episcopal hand, of purpose
to separat for ever the King from all his covenanted subjects, how far they
were from the heart, language and wrytings of our late Sovereign, all who were
aquainted with his carriage and most intime affections at New Castle, in the
Isle of Wight and thereafter, can testify, But it is reason when the Praelats
do frame an image of a King that they should have liberty to place their own
image in its forheade, as the statuary of old did his, in the Boss of Pallas
targe, with such arti^ice that all her worshipers were necessitat to worship
him and that no hand was able to destroy the one without the dissolution and
breaking in pieces of the other; yet our Praelats would know, that in this age
there be many excellent Engyneers, whose witty practicks transcend the most
skillful experiments of our Ancestors: and what ever may be the ignorance or
weakness of men, we trust the breath of our Lords mouth will not fail to blow
out the Bishop from the Kings arms, without any detriment at all to royalty,
Always the wicked and impious cunning of these craftsemen is much to be
blamed who dare be bold to insert and engrave themselfes so deeply in the
images of the Gods as the one cannot be intended to be picked out of the other
more then the Aple from the eye, unles the subsistence of both be put in hazard.

The other matter of his railing against us is the solemn league and covenant;
The only crane of the Covenant, is that it extirpate praelacy.
when this nimble and quick enough Doctor comes assisted with all the reasons
the whole University of Oxford can afford him, to demonstrat it as he professes
in his last Chapter, to be wicked, false, void, and what not; we find his most
demonstrative proofs to be so poor and silly that they infere nothing of his
conclusion. To this day no man has showed any error in the matter of that
covenant; as for our framing and taking of it, our adversaries drove us
thereunto, with a great deal of necessity; and now being in it, neither their
fraud nor force may bring us from it again, for we fear the oath of God.
After much deliberation we found that covenant the sovereign means to join
and keep together the whole orthodox party in the three Kingdoms, for the
defense of their Religion and Liberties which a popish, praelaticall and
malignant faction with all their might were overtarning who still to this day
are going on in the same design, without any visible change, in the most of
their former principles. And why should any who loves the King hate this
covenant, which is the straytestty the world can devise, to knit all to him and
his posterity, if so be his Majesty might be pleased to enter therein; but by
all means such a mischief must be averted, for so the root of Episcopacy
would quickly wither without any hope of repullulation; an evil far greater
in the thoughts of them who now manage the conscience of the Court the^ the
extirpation of Monarchy the eversion of all the three Kingdoms or any other
earthly misery.

As for the third subject of the Warners fury against us, our unkindnes to The
Bishops are most justly cast out of England.
the late King, if any truth were in this false challenge, no other creature on
earth could be supposed the true cause thereof, but our unhappy praelats: all
our grievances both of Church and State, first and last, came principally from
them: had they never been authors of any more mischief, then what they
occasioned to our late Sovereign, his person, family and Dominions this last
dozn of years, there is abundant reason of burying that their praeter and
Antiscripturall order in the grave of perpetual infamy. But the truth is,
beside more ancient quarrels, since the days of our fathers the Albigenses,
this limb of Antichrist has ever been witnessed against; Wickleif, Huss, and
their followers were zealous in this charge, till Luther and his disciples got
it flung out of all the reformed world, except England; where the violence of
the ill advised princes did keep it up for the perpetual trouble of that land,
till now at last it has well near kicked down to the ground there, both
Church and Kingdom. As for the point in hand we deny The Scots were never
injurious to their King.
all unkindnes to our King whereof any reasonable complaint can be framed
against us. Our first contests stand justified this day by King and Parliament
in both Kingdoms. When his Majesty was so ill advised as to bring down upon
our borders an English army for to punish our refusing of a world of novations
in our Religion contrary to the laws of God and of our country, what could our
land do less then lie down in their arms upon Dunce law for their just and
necessary defense? when it was in their power with ease to have dissipat the
opposite army, they show themselves most ready upon very easy conditions to go
home in peace, and gladly would have rested there, had not the furious Bishops
moved his Majesty without all provocation, to break that first peace and make
for a second invasion of Scotland, only to second their unreasonable rage: was
it not then necessary for the Scots to arm again? when they had defeat the
Episcopal Army and taken New Castle though they found nothing considerable to
stand in their way to London, yet they were content to lie still in
Northumberland, and upon very mean tearnes to return the second time in
peace. For all this the praelats could not give it over, but raised a new Army
and filled England with fire and sword, yea well near subdued the Parliament
and their followers and did almost accomplish their first designs upon the
whole Isle. The Scots then with most earnest and pitiful entreaties were
called upon by their Brethren of England for help, where unwilling that their
brethren should perish in their sight and a bridge should be made over their
carcasses for a third war upon Scotland, when after long trial they had
found all their intercessions with the King for a moderat and reasonable
accommodation slighted and rejected they suffered themselves to be persuaded to
enter in covenant with their oppressed and fainting brethren, for the
mantainance of the common cause of Religion and liberty, but with express
Articles for the preservation of royalty in all its just rights in his Majesty
and his posterity; what unkindnes was here in the Scots to their King?

When by Gods blessing on the Scotes help the opposite faction was fully
subdued, his Majesty left Oxford with a purpose for London, but by the
severity The Scotes selling of the King is a most false calumny.
of the ordinances against his receivers, he diverted toward Linn, to ship for
Holland or France; where by the way fearing a discovery and surprise, he was
necessitate to cast himself upon the Scotes army at New-wark; upon his promise
to give satisfaction to the propositions of both Kingdoms, he was received
there and to New Castle: here his old oaths to adhaere unto Episcopacy hindered
him to give the expected satisfaction. At that time the prime leaders of the
English army were seeking with all earnestnes occasion to fall upon the Scots,
much out of heart and reputation by James Grahame and his Irishes incursions,
most unhappy for the Kings affairs: Scotland at that time was so full of
divisions that if the King had gone thither they were in an evident hazard of a
present war both within among themselfes, and without from England: our friends
in the English Parliament whom we did, and had reason to trust, assured us that
our taking the King with us to Scotland, was the keeping of the Sectarian Army
on foot, for the wrack of the King, of Scorland, of the Presbyterian party in
England; as the sending of his Majesty to one of his houses near London,, upon
the faith of the Parliament of England, was the only way to get the Sectaryes
disarmed, the King and the people settled in a peace, upon such terms as
should be satisfactory both to the King and the Scots and all the well-affected
in England. This being the true case was it any, either unjustice, unkindnes or
imprudence in the Scots to leave the King with his Parliament of England? was
this a selling of him to his enemies? the monyes the Scots received at their
departure out of England had no relation at all to the King, they were scarce
the sixth part of the arreares due to them for bygon service; they were but
the one half of the sum capitulat for, not only without any reference to the
King, but by an act of the English Parliament excluding expressly from that
Treaty of the armies departure all consideration of the disposal of the Kings
person. The unexpected evils that followed in the Armies rebellion, in their
seasing on London, destroying the Parliament, murdering the King, no mortal
eye could have forseen. The Scots were ever ready to the utmost of their power
to have prevented all these mischiefs with the hazard of what was dearest to
them; notwithstanding of all the hard measure they had often received both from
the King and the most of their friends in England. That they did not in time
and unanimously stur to purpose for these ends they are to answer it to God,
who were the true Authors; the innocence of the Church is cleared in the
following treatise. Among the many causes of these miseries the prime fountain
was the venom of Episcopal principles which some serpents constantly did
infuse by their speeches and letters in the ears and heart of the King to keep
him of from giving that satisfaction to his good subjects which they found most
necessary and due; the very same cause which ties up this day the hands of
covenanters from redressing ali present misorders could they have the King to
join with them in their covenant, to quit his unhappy Bishops, to lay aside
his formal and dead Liturgy, to cast himself upon the counsels of his
Parliaments it were easy to prophecy what quickly would become of all his
enemies: but so long as Episcopal and malignant agents compasses him about
(though all that comes near may see him as lovely hopfull, and promising a
prince for all natural endowments as this day breaths in Europe or for a long
time has swayed a Scepter in Britain) yet while such unlucky birds nest in his
Cabin and men so ungraciously principled do daily besiege him, what can his
good people do but sit down with mournful eyes and bleeding hear^s, till the
Lord amend these otherwise remediles and insuperable evils? but I hold here
least I transgress to far the bounds of an Epistle?

I account it an advantage to have your Lordship my judge in what The reason of
the dedi^ation.
here and in my following treatise, I spoke of Religion, the liberties of our
country and the Royal Family: I know non fitter then your Lordship, both to
discern and decerne in all these matters. Me thinks I may say it without
flattery (which I never much loved either in my self or others) that among all
our Nobles for constancy in a zealous profession, for exemplary practice in
public and private duties; the mercy of God has given to your Lordship a
reputation second to none. And for a rigid adhaerence to the Rights and
Privileges of your Country, according to that ancient disposition of your
most Noble Family, noted in our Historians, especially that Prince of them
Georg Buchanan, the Tutor of your Grandfather, I know none in our Land who will
pretend to go before you, and for the affairs of the King, your interest of
blood in the Royal Family is so well known, that it would be a strange
impudency in me, if in your audience I durst be bold wittingly to give
sinistrous information. Praying to God that what in the candid ingenuity and
true zeal of my spirit, I present under your Lordships patrociny unto the eye
of the World, for the vindication of my mother Church and Country, from the
Sicophantick accusations of a Stigmatized incendiary may produce the intended
effects,

Hague this 28 May 7 Iunie. 1649. I rest your Lordships in all Christian duty,
R. B. G.

CHAP. I.
The proelaticall faction continue resolute, that the King and all his people
shall perish, rather then the praelats, be not restored to their former places
of power, for to set up Popery, Profanity, and Tirranny, in all the three
Kingdoms.

WHile the Comissioners of the Church The unseasonablenes of Doctor Brambles
warning.
and Kingdom of Scotland, were on their way to make their first addresses to
his Majesty, for to condole his most lamentable afflictions, and to make offer
of their best affections and services for his comfort, in this time of his
great distress; it was the wisdom and charity of the praelaticall party, to
send out Doctor Bramble, to meet them with his Fair Warning. For what else?
but to discourage them in the very entry from tendering their propositions, and
before ever they were heard, to stop his Majesty's ears with grievous
praejudice, against all that possibly they could speak; though the world sees
that the only apparent fountain of hope upon earth, for recovery of the
woefully confounded affairs of the King, is in the hands of that
Antipraelaticall nation: but it is the hope of these who love the welfaire of
the King and his people, of the Churches and Kingdoms of Britain, that the
hand of God, which has broken all the former devices of the Praelats, shall
crush this their engine also.

Our warner undertaketh to oppugn the Scotes discipline The irrational way of
the warners writing.
in a way of his own, none of the most rational. He does not so much as
pretend to state a question, nor in his whole book to bring against any maine
position of his opposites, either Scripture, father or reason, nor so much as
assay to answer any one of their arguments against Episcopacy; only he culs
out some of their by-tenets, belonging little or nothing to the maine
questions, and from them takes occasion to gather together in a heap all the
calumnies which of old, or of late their known enemies out of the forge of
their malice and fraud, did obtrude on the credulity of simple people: also
some detorted passages from the books of their friends, to bring the way of
that Church in detestation without any just reason.

These practices in our warner, are the less pardonable, that though he knows
the chief of his allegations, to be The most of his stuff is borrowed and
long ago confuted.
but borrowed from his late much beloved Comerads Master Corbet in his
Lysimachus Nicanor, and Master Maxewell in his Issachars Burden, yet he was
neither deterred by the strange punishments, which God from heaven inflicted
visibly on both these calumniatores of their mother Church, nor was pleased in
his repeating of their calumnious arguments, to releeve any of them from the
exceptions under the which they stand publicly confuted, I suppose to his own
distinct knowledge, I know certainly, to the open view ofthousands in Scotland,
England and Ireland; but it makes for the warners design to dissemble here in
Holland, that ever he heard of such books as Lysimachus Nicanor, and Issachars
Burden, much less of Master Baylies answer to both, printed some years ago
at London, Edinburgh and Amsterdam, without a rejoinder from any of that
faction to this day. The con^ bitterness of the warners spirit.


How everlet our warner be heard. In the very first page of his first chapter,
we may taste the sweetness of his meek Spirit: at the very entry, he
concludes but without any pretense to an argument there or else where, the
discipline of the Church of Scotland to be their own invention, whereon they
dote, the Diana, which themselves have canonized, their own dreams, the
counterfeyt image which they feign has fallen down from Jupiter, which they so
much adore, the very quintessence of refined popery, not only most injurious to
the civil Magistrate, most oppressive to the subject, most pernicious to both;
but also inconsistent with all forms of civil government, destructive to all
sorts of Policy, a rack to the conscience, the heaviest pressure that can fall
on a people. So much truth and sobernes does the warner breath out in his very
first page.

Though he had no regard at all to the clear passages of Holy Scripture,
whereupon the Scotes do build their Anti-Episcopall tenets; nor any reverence
to the harmony of the reformed Churches, which unanimously join with the
Scotes in the maine of their discipline, especially in that which the Doctor
hates most therein, the rejection of Episcopacy: yet me thinks some little
respect might have appeared in the man to the authority of the Magistrate, and
civil Laws, which are much more ingeminated by this worthy divine over all his
book, then the holy Scriptures.

Can he so soon forget that the whole discipline of the The warner stricks at
the Scotes discipline through the Kings sides.
Church of Scotland, as it is there taught and practiced, is established by
acts of Parliament, and has all the strength which the King and State can give
to a civil Law? the warner may well be grieved, but hardly can he be ignorant,
that the Kings Majesty this day does not at all question the justice of these
sanctions: what ever therefore be the Doctors thoughts, yet so long as he
pretends to keep upon his face the mask of loyalty, he must be content to eat
his former words, yea, to burn his whole book: otherwise he lays, against
his own professions, a slander upon the King, and His Royal Father, of great
ignorance, or huge unjustice, the one having established, the other offering to
establish by their civil laws, a Church discipline for the whole nation of
Scotland, which truly is the quintessence of Popery, pernicious and destructive
to all forms of civil government, and the heaviest pressure that can fall on
a people.

All the cause of this choler which the warner is pleased to speak out, is the
attempt of the Scotes, to obtrude their In the threshold he stumbles on the
Kings conscience.
discipline upon the King, contrary to the dictats of his own conscience, and
to compel foreign Churches to embrace the same. Ans. Is it not presumption
in our warner, so soon to tell the world in print what are the dictats of the
Kings conscience, as yet he is not his Majesty's confessor, and if the Clerk of
the Closet had whispered some what in his ear^, what he heard in secret, he
ought not to have proclaimed it without a warrant; but we do altogether
mistrust his reports of the Kings conscience: for who will believe him, that a
knowing and a just King will ever be content, to command and impose on a whole
Nation by his Laws, a discipline contrary to the dictats of his own
conscience. This great stumble up on the Kings conscience in the first page,
must be an ominous cespitation on the threshold.

The other imputation had no just ground: the Scotes did The Scots never
offered to impose any thing u^ on England.
never meddle, to impose any thing upon foreign Churches, there is question of
none, but the English; and the Scotes were never so presumptuous, as to impose
any thing of theirs upon that Church. It was the assembly of divines at
Westminster, convocat by the King and Parliament of England, which after long
deliberation, and much debate, upanimously concluded the Presbiterian
discipline in all the parts thereof, to be agreeable to the word of God: it was
the two Houses of the Parliament of England without a contrary voice, who did
ordain the abolition of Episcopacy, and the setting up of Presbyteryes and
Synods in England and Ireland. Can here the Scotes be said to compel the
English to dance after their pype, when their own assembly of divines begins
the song, when the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England
concur without a discording opinion, when the King himself for perfecting
the harmony offers, to add his voice for three whole years together?

In the remainder of the chapter the warner lays upon the The elder praelats
of England were Erastians, and more, but the younger are as much an i-Erastian
as the most riged of the Presbytery.
Scotes three other crimes: first, That they count it Erastianisme to put the
government of the Church in the hand of the Magistrate. Answ. The Doctors
knowledge is greater then to be ignorant, that all these go under the name of
Erastians, who walking in Erastus ways of flattering the Magistrate, to the
prejudice of the just rights of the Church, run yet out much beyond Erastus
personal tenets; I doubt if that man went so far as the Doctor here and else
where, to make all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but a part of the Magistrates
civil power, which for its execution, the supreme Governors of any state may
derive out of the fountain of their supremacy to what ever hands civil or
Ecclesiastic themselfes think fit to commit it. Let the Doctor add to this
much knowledge, but a little ingenuity, and he shall confess that his Brethren
the Later Bishops, who claim Episcopacy by divine right, are all as much
against this Erastian Caesaro-papisme, as any Presbiterian in Scotland. The
elder Bishops indeed of England and all the Laws there for Episcopacy seem to
be point blank according to the Erastian errors: for they make the crown and
royal supremacy the original, root and fountain whence all the discipline of
the Church does flow: as before the days of Henry the eight it did out of the
Popes head-ship of the Church under Christ. How ever let the Doctor ingenuously
speak out his sense, and I am deceived, if he shall not acknowledge, that how
gross an Erastian so ever himself and the elder Bishops of England might have
been, yet that long ago, the most of his praelatical friends have become as
much opposite to Erastianisme, as the most rigid of the Presbiterians.

The other crime he lays to the charge of the Scotes is, The Scotes first and
greatest crime is irreconciliablenes with Rome.
that they admit no latitude in Religion, but will have every opinion
afundamentall article of faith, and are averse from the reconciliation of the
Protestant Churches: Ans. If the warner had found it seasonable to vent a
little more of his true sense in this point, he had charged this great crime
far more home upon the head of the Scotes: for indeed though they were ever
far from denying the true degrees of importance which do clearly appear among
the multitude of Christian truths, yet the great quarrel here of the warner
and his friends against them, is that they spoiled the Canterburian design of
reconcealing the Protestant Churches not among themselfes, but with the Church
of Rome. When these good men were with all earnestnes proclaming the greatest
controversies of Papists and Protestants, to be upon no fundamentalls but only
disputable opinions, wherein belief on either side was safe enough, and when
they found that the Papists did stand punctually to the Tenets of the Church of
Rome, and were obstinately unwilling to come over to England, their great
labor was that the English and the rest of the Protestants, casting aside
their needless belief of problematick truths, in piety, charity and zeal, to
make up the breach and take away the shisme, should be at all the pains to
make the journey to Rome. While this design is far advanced and furiously
driven on in all the three Kingdoms, and by none more in Yreland then the
Bishop of Derry, behold the rude and plain blewcapes step in to the play and
mar all the game: by no art, by no terror can these be gotten alongs to
such a reconciliation. This was the first and greatest crime of the Scotes,
which the Doctor here glances at, but is so wise and modest a man as not to
bring it above board.

The last charge of the Chapter is, that the Scotes keep not The Scotes were
ever anti episcopal.
still that respect to the Bishops of England, which they were wont of old in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign. Ans. In that letter cited by the
warner from the general assembly of Scotland. 1566. Sess. 3. there is no word
of approbation to the office of Episcopacy: they speak to the Bishops of
England in no other quality or relation, but as Ministers of the word, the
highest style they give them is, reverend Pastors and Brethren; the tenor of
the whole Epistle is a grave and brotherly admonition to beware of that fatal
concomitant of the most moderat Episcopacy, the troubling of the best and most
zealous servants of Christ for idle and fruitles Ceremonies. How great a
reverence the Church of Scotland at that time carried to praelacy, may be seen
in their supplication to the secret counsel of Scotland, in that same assembly
the very day and Session wherein they write the letter in hand to the Bishops
of England. The Archbishop of S. Andrews being then usurping jurisdiction over
the ministry by some warrant from the state, the Assembly was grieved, not only
with the popery of that Bishop; but with his ancient jurisdiction, which in
all Bishops, Popish and protestant, is one and the same: That jurisdiction was
the only matter of their present complaint; and in relation thereto they assure
the counsel in distinct terms, that they would never be more subject unto
that usurped tyranny the they would be to the devil himself: So reverend an
opinion had the Church of Scotland at that time of Episcopal jurisdiction.

But suppone that some fourscore years ago, the Scotes before they had tasted
the fruits of Protestant Bishops, had The Praelates lately were found in the
act of introducing Popery, into the Church, and Tyranny into the Kingdom.
judged them tolerable in England, yet since that time by the long tract of
mischiefs, which constantly has accompanied the order of praelacy, they have
been put upon a more accurat inspection of its nature, and have found it not
only a needles, but a noxious and poisonous weed, necessare to be plucked up by
the root, and cast over the hedge. Beside al its former malefices, it has been
deprehe^ded of late in the very act of everting the foundations, both of
Religion and government, of bringing in Popery and Tyranny, in the Churches
and States of all the three Kingdoms, (Canterburian self conviction cap. 1.)

And for these crimes, it was condemned, killed, and buried in Scotland, by the
unanimous consent of King, Church and Kingdom: when England thereafter both in
their Assembly and Parliament, without a discording voice had found it
necessary, to root out that unhappy plant, as long ago with great wisdom, it
had been cast out of all the rest of the reformed Churches, had not the Scotes
all the reason in the World, to applaud such pious just and necessary
resolutions of their English Brethren, though the warner should call it the
greatest crime?

CHAP. II.
The Presbiterians assert positively, the Magistrates right to convocat No
controversy in Scotland betwixt the King and the Church, about the convocating
of Synods.
Synods, to confirm their acts, to reform the Churches within their dominions.

IN the second Chapter the warner charges the Scotes presbytery, with the
overthrowing the Magistrates right in convocating of Synods. When he comes to
prove this, he forgets his challenge: and digresses from it to the Magistrates
power of choysing elders and making Ecclesiastic laws, avowing that these
things are done in Scotland by Ecclesiastic persons alone, without consent of
the king or his counsel. Ans. It seems our Warner is very ignorant of the way
ofthe Scotes discipline, the ordinary and set meetings of all assemblies both
national and provincionall since the first reformation are determined by acts
of Parliament, with the Kings consent, so betwixt the King and the Church of
Scotland, there is no question for the convocating of ordinary assemblies, for
extraordinary, no man in Scotland did ever controvert the Kings power to call
them when and where he pleased: as for the inhaerent power of the Church to
meet for discipline, alswell as for worship, the Warner falls on it hereafter,
we must therefore pass it in this place.

What he means to speak of the Kings power in choysing The warners Erastian
and Tirannick principles, hated by the King.
elders or making Ecclesiastic Laws, himself knows: his Majesty in
Scotland did never require any such privilege, as the election of elders, or
Commissioners to Parliament, or members of any incorporation, civil or
Ecclesiastic, where the Laws did not expressly provide the nomination to be in
the crown. The making of Ecclesiastic Laws in England, alswell as in
Scotland, was ever with the Kings good contentment, referred to Ecclesiastic
assemblies: but the Warner seems to be in the mind of these his companions,
who put the power of preaching, of administering the Sacraments and discipline
in the supreme Magistrate alone, and derives it out of him as the head of the
Church to what members he thinks expedient to communicate it: also that the
legislative power alswell in Ecclesiastic as civil affairs, is the property
of the King alone. That the Parliaments and general assemblies are but his
arbitrary counsels, the one for matters of the state, the other for matters of
the Church, with whom or without whom he makes acts of Parliament and Church
cannons, according to his good pleasure, that all the offices of the Kingdom,
both of Church and State are from him, as he gives a Commission to whom he will
to be a sheriff or justice of peace, so he sends out whom he pleases to
preach and celebrate Sacraments by virtue of his regal mission. The Warner and
his Erastian friends may well extend the royal supremacy to this largenes, but
no King of Scotland was ever willing to accept of such a power though by
erroneous flaterers, sometimes obtruded upon him, (see Canterburian self
conviction. cap. ult.)

The Warner will not leave this matter in general, he discends The Warners
ignorant and false report of the Scotes proceedings.
to instance a number of particular incroatchments of the Scots Presbiters upon
the royal authority: we must dispense in all his discourse with a small
peckadillo in reasoning, he must be permitted to lay all the faults of the
Presbiterians in Scotland upon the back of the Presbitery it self, as if the
faylings of officers were natural to, and inseparable from their office:
mis-kenning this little more of unconsequentiall argumenting, we will go
through his particular charges, the first is, that King James anno 1579,
required the general assembly, to make no alteration in the Church-Policy,
till the next Parliament, but they contemning their Kings command, determined
positively all their discipline without delay, and questioned the Arch-Bischop
of Saint Andrews for voting in Parliament according to the undoubted Laws of
the Land, yea twenty Presbiters did hold the general assembly at Aberdeen
after it was discharged by the King. Ans. The Warner possibly may know, yet
certainly he does not care what he writes in these things to which he is a
mere stranger: the authentic registers of the Church of Scotland convinces
him heir of falsehood. His Majesty did write Bishops were abolished and
Presbyteries set up in Scotland with King James consent.
from Stirling to the general assembly at Edinburgh 1579, that they should
cease from concluding any thing in the discipline of the Church, during the
time of his minority; upon this desire the assembly did abstain from all
conclusions, only they named a committee to go to Striveling for conference
which his Majesty upon that subject. What follows thereupon? I. Immediately a
Parliament is called in October 1579, and in the first act declares and grantes
jurisdiction unto the Kirk, whilk consistes in the true preaching of the word
of Jesus Christ, correction of manners, and administration of the true
Sacraments, and declares that there is no other face of Kirk, nor other face of
Religion then is presently by the favor of God established within this realm,
and that there be no other jurisdiction Ecclesiastical acknowledged within this
realm then that whilk is, and shall be within the samen Kirk, or that which
flows therfra, concerning the premises. II. In Aprile 1580. Proclamation was
made ex deliberatione Dominorum Consilii in name of the King, charging all
Superintendentes and Commissioners and Ministers serving at Kirkes. To note the
names of all the subjectes alsweel men as women suspected to be Papists or --
and to admonish them -- to give Confession of their faith according to the
Form approved by the Parliament, and to submit unto the discipline of the
true Kirk within a reasonable space --: and if they fail -- that the
Superintendents or Commissioners present a role or catalogue of their names
unto the King and Lords of Secret Counsel whereby they shall be for the time,
between and the 15 day of Iulie nixt to come, to the end that the acts of
Parliament made against such persons may be execute. III. The short
Confession was drawn up at the Kings command, which was first subscrived by
his royal hand, and an act of Secret Counsel commanding all subjectes to
subscrive the same; as is to be seen by the Act printed with the Confession,
wherein Hierarchy is abjured, that is (as has been since declared by
National assemblies and Parliamentes both called and held by the King)
episcopacie is abjured. IV. In the assemblies 1580 and 1581 that Confession of
faith and the second book of discipline (after debating many praeceding years)
were approved (except one chapter de diaconatu) by the Assembly, the Kings
Commissioner being always present, not find we any thing opposed then by
him: yea then at his Majesty's special direction about fifty classical
Presbyteries were set up over all Scotland which remain unto this day, Was
there here any contempt of the royal authority?

About that time some noble men had got the revenues of the Bisshop-rickes for
their private use; and because they could not enjoy them by any legal right,
therefore for eluding the Law, they did effectuate that some Ministers should
have the title of this or that Bishopric; and the revenues were gathered in
the name of this titulare or tulchan Bishop, albeit he had but little part: e.
g. Robert Montgomerie Minister at Sterline was called Archbishop of Glasgow:
and so it can be instanced in other Bishop-rickes and abbacies. Now this kind
of praelats pretended no right to any part of the Episcopal office, either in
ordination or jurisdiction: when some of these men began to creep in to vote
for the Church in Parliament, without any Law of the State, without any
commission from the Church, the general assembly discharged them, being
Ministers, to practice any more such illegal insolences, with this ordinance
of the Church, after a little debate, King James at that time did show his good
satisfaction.

But the Warner here jumps over nolesse then twenty seven The innocence of the
much maligned assembly of Aberdeen.
years time from the assembly at Edinburgh 1579, to that at Aberdeen 1605, then
was King James by the English Bishops persuasion resolved to put down the
general assemblies of Scotland, contrary to the Laws and constant practice of
that Church, from the first reformation to that day. The act of Parliament did
bear that once at least a year the assembly should meet, and after their
business was ended they should name time and place for the next assembly. When
they had met in the year 1602, they were moved to adjourne without doing any
thing for two whole years to 1604, when then they were conveened at the time
and place agreed to by his Majesty, they were content upon his Majesty's
desire without doing any thing again to adjourne to the nixt year 1605, at
Aberdeen, when that diet came his Majesty's Commissioner offered them a Letter:
To the end they might be an Assembly and so in a Capacity to receave his
Majesty's Letter, with the Commissioners good pleasure they sat down, they
named their Moderator and Clark they received and read the Kings letter
commanding them to rise, which they obeyed without any farther action at all
but naming a diet for the nixt meeting according to the Laws and constant
practice of Scotland, hereupon by the pernicious counsel of Archbishop
Banckroft at London, the King was stirred up to bring sore trouble upon a
number of gracious Ministers. This is the whole matter which to the Warner heir
is so tragic an insolence, that never any Parliament Christmas and other
superstitious festivals abolished in Scotland, both by Church and State.
durst attempt the like. See more of this in the Historical vindication.

The nixt instance of our Presbiteryes usurpation upon the Magistrate is their
abolition, (before any statute of Parliament thereupon) of the Church festivals
in their first book of discipline. Ans. Consider the grievousnesse of this
crime, in the intervall of Parliaments, the great counsel of Scotland in the
minority of the Prince entrusted by Parliament to rule the Kingdom, did charge
the Church to give them in write their judgment about matters Ecclesiastical:
in obedience to this charge the Church did present the counsel with a write
named since the first book of discipline: which the Lords of counsel did
approve, subscribe and ratify by an Act of State: a part of the first head in
that write was that Christmas, Epiphany, purification, and other fond feasts of
the virgin Mary, as not warranted by the holy Scriptures, should be laid
aside. Was it any encroachment upon the Magistrate for the Church to give this
advice to the privy counsel when earnestly they did crave it? the people of
Scotland ever since have showed their ready obedience to that direction of the
Church founded upon Scripture, and backed from the beginning with an injunction
of the state.

His third instance of the Church of Scotlands usurpation The friends of
Episcopacy thryves not in Scotland.
upon the Magistrate is, their abolition of Episcopacy in the assembly 1580,
when the Law made it treason to impugn the authority of Bishops, being the
third estate of the Kingdom. Ans. The Warner seems to have no more knowledge
of the affairs of Scotland, then of Japan or Utopia, the Law he speaks of was
not in being some years after 1580, how ever all the general assemblyes of
Scotland are authorized by act of Parliament, to determine finally without an
appeal in all Ecclesiastic affairs: in the named assembly Lundie the Kings
Commissioner did sit and consent in his Majesty's name to that act of
abolition, as in the nixt assembly 1581, the Kings Comissioner Caprinton did
erect in his Majesty's name the Presbiteryes in all the Land; it is true, three
years thereafter a wicked Courtier Captain James Stuart, in a shadow of a
closse and not summoned Parliament, did procure an act to abolish Presbiteries
and erect Bishops, but for this and all the rest of his crimes that evil man
was quickly rewarded by God before the world, in a terrible destruction: these
acts of his Parliament the very nixt year were disclaimed by the King, the
Bishops were put down, and the Presbitry was set up again, and never more
removed to this day.

The Warners digression to the perpetuity of Bishops in Scotland, to the acts
of the Church and State for their restitution, is but to show his ignorance in
the Scotes story: what ever be the Episcopal boastings of other Nations, yet
it is evident that from the first entrance of Christian Religion into Scotland,
Presbiters alone without Bishops for some hundred years did govern that
Church: and after the reformation their was no Bishop in that Land, but in
tittle and benefice till the year 1610; when Bancroft did consecrat three
Scotes Ministers, all of them men of evil report, whom that violent
Commissioner the Earl of Dunbar in the corrupt and null assembly of Glasgow,
got authorized in some pairt of a Bishops office; which part only and no more
was ratified in a posterior Parliament. Superintendents are no where the same
with Bishops much less in Scotland where for a time only till the Churches
were planted, they were used as ambulatory Commissioners, and visitors to
preach the word, and administer the Sacraments for the supply of vacant and
unsettled congregations.

The fourth instance is the Churches obtruding the second The second book of
discipline why not al ratified in Parliament.
book of discipline, without the ratification of the State. Ans. For the
Ecclesiastic enjoining of a general assemblyes decrees a particular
ratification of Parliament is unnecessary; general acts of Parliament
commanding obedience to the acts of the Church, are a sufficient warrant from
the State, beside, that second book of discipline was much debated with the
King, and at last in the general assembly 1590, his consent was obtained unto
it: for in that assembly where unanimously the subscription of the second book
of discipline by all the ministers of the Kingdom was decried, his Majesty
some time in person and always by the chancellor his Commissioner was present,
and in the act for subscription Sess. 10. Augusti 8. it is expressly said that
not only all the Ministers but also all the Commissioners praesent did consent,
among which Commissioners the chancellor, his Majesty's Commissioner was chief.
But neither the King nor the Church could get it to pass the Parliament in
regaird of the opposition, which some Statesmen did make unto these parts
thereof, which touched on their own interest of unjust advantage, this was the
only stick.

The next instance of the Churches encroachement is their usurpation of all the
old rents of the clergy, as the Churches The Warners hipocrisy, calling that a
crime, which himself counts a virtue.
patrimony, and their decerning in anassembly that nothing in the nixt
Parliament should pass before the Church were fully restored to her rents.
Ans. Consider here the Warners hypocrisy and unjustice, he challenges the
Presbiterians for that which no praelate in the world did ever esteem a fault,
a mere declaration of their judgment that the Church had a just right to such
rents, as by law and long possession were theirs, and not taken away from them
by any lawful means. What if here they had gone on with the most of the
praelaticall party to advance that right to a jus divinum? what if they had put
themselves by a command from Court, into the possession of that right, without
a process, as diverse of the Warners friends were begun lately to do in all
the three Kingdoms? but all that he can here challenge the Scotes for, is a
mere declaration of their simple right, with a supplication to the Regent his
grace, that he would endeavor in the nixt Parliament, to procure a ninth part
of the Churches patrimony, for the mantainance of the ministry, and the poor
of the country: for all the rent that the Churches then could obtain or did
petition, was but a third of the thirds of the benefices or tithes. That ever
any assembly in Scotland did make any other address to the Parliament for
stipends then by way of humble supplication, it is a great untruth.

The last instance is, the erecting of Presbyteries through all the Kingdom, by
an act of the Church alone. Ans. I have shown already the untruth of this
alleadgeance; the proof here brought for it, is grounded only upon an
ambiguous word which the Warners ignorance in the Scottish discipline and
Presbitery (though the maine subject of his book) permits him not to
understand. The Presbyteries were set up by the King after the assembly 1580,
but the second book of discipline of which alone the citation speaks, how ever
enjoind by many assemblies, yet it could never be gotten ratified in any
Parliament, only because of these parts of it which did speak for the
patrimony of the Church, and oppugn the right of patronages.

How well the Warner has proven the Presbiterian practices The Warner a gross
Erastian.
to be injurious to the Magistrate we have considered, possibly he will be
more happy in his nixt undertaking, in his demonstrations that their doctrinall
principles do trample on the Magistrates supremacy and Laws; their first
principle he takes out of the second book of discipline. Cap. 7. That no
Magistrate nor any but Ecclesiastic persons may vote in Synods. Ans. Though I
find nothing of this in the place cited, yet there is nothing in it that
crosses either the Laws or the Kings supremacy: for according to the acts of
Parliament of Scotland both old and late and the constant practice of that
Church, the only members of Presbyteries are Ministers and ruling elders. Is it
the Warners mind to vent here his super-Erastianisme, that all Ecclesiastic
assemblies Classical, Provincial, national are but the arbitrary Courts of
the Magistrate for to advise him in the execution of his inhaerent power about
matters Ecclesiastical; and for this cause, that it is in his arbitrament to
give a decisive voice in all Church assemblies, to whom and how many so ever
he will? Though this may be the Warners mind, as it has been some of his
friends, yet the most of the praelaticall party will not mantaine him herein.
How ever, such principles are contrary to the Laws of Scotland, to the
professions also and practices of all the Princes and Magistrates that ever have
lived there.

But the Warner here may possibily glaunce at another Praelatical principles
impossibilitate alsolid peace, betwixt the King and his Kingdoms
principle of his good friends, who have been willing lately to vent before al
Britain in print their Elevating the supremacy of Sovereigns so far above
Laws, that what ever people have obtained to be established by never so many
assemblies and Parliaments and confirmed with never so many great seals of
ratification, and peaceably enjoyed by never so long a possession, yet it is
nothing but commendable wisdom and justice for the same Prince who made the
first concessions or any of his successors when ever they find themselfes
strong enough, to cancel all and make void what ever Parliaments, Assemblies,
royal ratifications, and the longest possession made foolish people believe to
be most firm and unquestionable. To this purpose Bishop Maxwel (from whom much
of this warning is borrowed) does speak in his Sacro-Sancta regum Majestas.
Though this had been the Cabine divinity of our praelats, yet what can be their
intentions in speaking of it out in these times of confusion, themselves must
declare: for the clear consequente of such doctrine seems to be a necessity
either of such Warners perpetual banishment from the Courts and ears of
Sovereigns, or else that subjects be kept up for ever in a strong jealousy,
and fear that they can never be secure of their liberties, though never so
well ratified by Laws and promises of Princes any longer then the sword and
power remains in their own hand to preserve what they have obtained. Such
Warners so long as they are possessed with such maxims of state, are clear
everters of the first fundations of trust betwixt Sovereigns and subjects,
they take away all possibility of any solid peace of any confident setlement in
any troubled state, before both parties be totally ruined or one become so
strong that they need no more to fear the others malcontentment in any time to
come.

Our second challenged principle is that we teach the whole power of
convocating assemblies to be in the Church. Erastian praelats evert the legal
foundations of all government.
Ans. The Warners citations prove not that we maintain any such assertion, our
doctrine and constant practice has been to ascribe to the King a power of
calling Synods, when and wheresoever he thought fit, but that which the Warner
seems to point at is, our tenet of an intrinsicall power in the Church to
meet, as for the word and Sacraments so for discipline; in this all who are
Christians, old and late, the praelaticall and Popish party as well as others,
go along with us to mantaine in doctrine and practice, a necessity even in
times of persecution, that the Church must meet for the worship of God and
execution of Ecclesiastic discipline among their own members. In this the
doctrine and practice of the Scots is according to their settled laws,
uncontroverted by his Majesty. If the Warner will mantaine, that in reason and
conscience all the Churches of the world are oblidged to dissolve and never more
to meet when an erroneous Magistrate by his Tyrannous edict commands them to do
so, let him call up Erastus from the dead to be disciplined in this new
doctrine of the praelats impious loyalty.

The third principle is that the judgment of true and false doctrine of
suspension and deprivation of Ministers belongs to the Church. Ans. If this
be a great heresy it is to be The final determination of all Ecclesiastic
causes by the Laws of Scotland, is in the general assembly.
charged as much upon the state as upon the Church, for the acts of Parliament
give all this power to the Church, neither did the laws of England or of any
Christian state, popish or protestant, refuse to the Church the determination
of such Ecclesiastic causes; some indeed do debate upon the power of appeals
from the Church, but in Scotland by the law, as no appeal in things civil
goes higher then the Parliament so in matters Ecclesiastic none goes above the
general assembly. Complaints indeed may go to the King and Parliament for
redress of any wrong has been done in Ecclesiastic Courts, who being custodes
religionis may by their coercive power command Ecclesiastic Courts to rectify
any wrong done by them contraire to Scripture, or if they persist take order
with them. But that two or three praelats should become a Court of delegats, to
receave appeals from a general assembly, neither Law nor practice in Scotland
did ever admit, nor can the word of God or any Equity require it. In the Scotes
assemblies no causes are agitat but such as the Parliament has agreed to be
Ecclesiastic and of the Churches cognizance: no Process about any Church rent
was ever cognosced upon in Scotland but in a civil Court: its very false that
ever any Church censure, much less the highest of excommunication did fall
upon any for robbing the Church of its patrimony. The divine right of
discipline, is the tenet of the most of praelats.


Our fourth challenged principle is that we maintain Ecclesiastic
jurisdiction by a divine right. Ans. Is this a huge crime? is there divine in
the world, either Papist or Potestant, except a few praelaticall Erastians, but
they do so? If the Warner will profess (as it seems he must) the
contradiction of that which he ascribes to us, his avowed tenet must be that
all Ecclesiastic power flows from the Magistrate, that the Magistrate himself
may execute all Church censures, that all the Officers appointed by Christ for
the government of his Church, may be laid aside, and such a kind of governors
be put in their place, as the Magistrate shall be pleased to appoint: that the
spiritual sword and Keys of heaven belong to the Magistrate by virtue of his
supremacy, als well as the temporal sword and the Keys of his earthly
Kingdom: our difference here from the Warner will not (I hope) be found the
greatest heresy.

Our last challenged principle is, that we will have all our All the power of
the Church in Scotland is legal, and with the Magistrates consent.
power against the Magistrate, that is, although he dissent. Ans. It is an
evil comentare that al must be against the Magistrate, which is done against
his consent: but in Scotland their is no such case: for all the jurisdiction
which the church there does enjoy, they have it with the consent of the
Magistrate: all is ratified to them by such acts of Parliament as his Majesty
does not at all controvert. Concerning that odious case the Warner intimats,
whither in time of persecution, when the Magistrate classheth with the Church,
any Ecclesiastic discipline be then to be exercised; himself can better answer
it then we, who with the ancient Christians do think, that on all hazards
(even of life) the church may not be dissolved, but must meet in dens and caves
and in the wilderness for the word and Sacraments and keeping it self pure by
the divine ordinance of discipline.

Having cleared all the pernicious practices and all the The prelates rather
then to lay aside their own interest, will keep the King and his people in
misery for ever.
wicked Doctrines, which the Warner lays upon us, I think it needles to insist
upon these defenses which he in his abundant charity brings for us, but in his
own way, that he may with the greater advantage impugn them: only I touch one
passage whereupon he make injurious exclamations: that which Mr. Gilespie in
his theoremes wryts; when the Magistrate abuses his power unto Tyranny and
makes havoc of all, it is lawful to resist him by some extraordinary ways
and means, which are not ordinarily to be allowed: see the principles from
which all our miseryes and the loss of our gracious Master have flowed. Ans.
We must here yield to the Warner the great equity and necessity that every
doctrine of a Presbyter, should be charged on the Presbytery it self, and that
any Presbyter teaching the lawfulness of a Parliaments defensive arms is
tantamont to the Churches taking of arms against the king. These small
unconsequences we must permit the Warner to swallow down without any stick,
however we do deny that the maxim in hand was the fountain of any our
miseryes, or the cause at all of the loss of our late Sovereign. Did ever his
Majesty or any of his advised counselors declare it simply unlawful for a
Parliament, to take arms for defense in some extraordinary cases, however the
unhappines of the Canterburian Prelates did put his Majesty on these courses,
which did begin and promote all our misery, and to the very last these men were
so wicked as to refuse the lousing of these bands which their hands had tied
about his misinformed conscience, yea to this day they will not give their
consent; that his Majesty, who now is, should say aside Episcopacy, were it
for the gayning the peaceable possession of all his three Kingdoms, but are
urgers of him night and day to adhaere to their errors, upon the hazard of all
the miseries that may come on his person, on his family and all his people: yet
few of them to this day durst be so bold as to print with this Warner, the
unlawfulnes of a Parliaments arms against the Tyranny of a Prince in any
imaginable case, how extraordinary soever.

CHAP. III.
The Laws and customs of Scotland admit of no appeal from the general
assembly.

IN this chapter the challenge is, that there are no appeals Appeals in
Scotland from a general assembly were no less irrational then illegal
from the general Assembly to the King, as in England from the Bishops Courts
to the King in Chauncery, where a Commission uses to be given to delegats, who
discuss the appeals. Ans. The warner considers not the difference of the
Government of the Church of Scotland from that which was in England. what the
Parliament is in the State, that the general assembly is in the Church of
Scotland: both are the highest courts in their own kind. There is no appeal
any where in moderat Monarchies to the Kings person, but to the King in
certain legal courts; as the Warner here confesses the appeal from Bishops
lies not, to the King in his person, but to the King in his court of Chauncery.
As no man in Scotland is permitted to appeal in a civil cause from the Lords
of Session; much less from the Parliament; so no man in an Ecclesiastic cause
is permitted by the very civil Law of Scotland to appeal from the general
assembly. According to the Scots order and practice, the King in person or else
by his high Commissioner sits als usually in the general assembly, as in
Parliament. But though it were not so, yet an appeal from a general assembly
to be discussed in a Court of delegats, were unbeseeming and unreasonable, the
one Court consisting of above two hundred, all chosen men the best and most
able of the Kingdom; the other but of two or three, often of very small either
abilities or integrity, who yet may be more fit to decerne in an Ecclesiastic
cause then a single Bishop over his official, the ordinary trusted in all acts
of jurisdiction for the whole dioces. But the Scots way of managing
Ecclesiastic causes is a great deal more just, safe and Satisfactory to any
rational man then that old popish order of the English, where all the
spiritual jurisdiction of the whole dioces was in the hand of one mercenary
official without all relief from his sentence, except by an appeal, as of
old to the pope and his delegats, so thereafter to the King, though never to be
cognosced-upon by himself, but as it was of old by two or three delegats, the
weakest of The Churches just severity against Montgomery and Adamson was
approven by the King and the parties themself.
all courts, often for the quality and ever for the number of the judges.

Two instances are brought by the Warner to prove the Church of Scotlands
stopping of appeals from the general Assembly to the King, the cases of
Montgomery and Adamson: if the causes and events of the named cases had been
well known to the Warner, as he made this chapter disproportionally short, so
readily he might have deleted it al together. Both these men were infamous not
only in their Ministerial charges but in their life and conversation; both
became so insolent that contrary to the established order of the Church and
Kingdom, being suborned by wicked statesmen, who in that day of darkness had
well near brought ruin both to King and country, would needs take upon them the
office of Archbishops. While the assembly was in process with them for their
manifold and high misdeameanors, the King was moved by them and their evil
patrons, to show his high displeasure against the assemblyes of the Church.
they for his Majesty's satisfaction sent their Commissioners and had many
conferences; whereby the pride and contempt of these prelates did so increase,
that at last they drew the sentence of excommunication upon their own heads:
the King after some time did acknowledge the equity of the Church proceedings,
and professed his contentment their with: both these unhappy men were brought
to a humble confession of their crimes, and such signs of repentance, that
both after a renunciation of their titulare Bishopriks were readmitted to the
function of the ministry, which they had deserted. Never any other before or
after in Scotland did appeal from the general assembly to the King: the late
excommunicat praelats in their declinatour against the assembly of Glasgow, did
not appeal as (I remember) to the King, but to another general assembly to
be constitute, according to their own Popish and Tyrannical principles.

CHAP. IV.
Faulty Ministers in Scotland are less exempted from punishment, then any
other men. The pride of prelates lately, but never the Presbitery did exempt
their fellows from punishment for their civil faults.


THE Warner in his fourth Chapter offers to prove, that the Scottish discipline
does exempt Ministers from punishment for any treason or sedition they can act
in their pulpits. Ans. This challenge is like the rest, very false. The rules
of the Church discipline in Scotland obliges Churchmen to be subject to
punishment, not only for every fault for which any other man is liable to
censure, but ordaines them to be punished for sundry things, which in other
men are not at all questionable: and what ever is censurable in any, they
appoint it to be much more so in a Minister. It is very untrue, that the
pulpits in Scotland are Sanctuaries for any crime, much less for the grievous
crimes of sedition and treason. Let the Warner remember, how short a time it
is, since an Episcopal chair or a canonical coat did privilege in England
and Ireland from all censure either of Church or State, great numbers, who were
notoriously known to be guilty of the foulest crimes. Was ever the Warners
companion Bishop Aderton challenged for his Sodomy, so long as their commune
patron of Canterbury did rule the court? did the warner never hear of a
prelate very sibb to Doctor Bramble, who to this day was never called to any
account for flagrant scandals of such crimes as in Scotland are punishable by
the gallows? the Warner does not well to insist upon the Scots Clergy
exempting themself from civil punishments: no where in the world are
Churchmen more free of crimes deserving civil cognizance then in Scotland: and
if the ears and eyes of the world may be trusted, the popish clergy this day in
Italy and Spain are not so challengeable, as the praelaticall divines in
England and Ireland lately were for many gross misdemeanors.

But why does the Warners anger run out so far as to the preachers in
Holland? is it because he knows the Church The Warner is injurious to the
Ministers of Holland.
discipline in Holland to be really the same with that he oppugnes in the Scots,
and that all the reformed Churches doejoyne cordially with Scotland in their
rejection of Episcopacy? is this a ground for him to slander our Brethren of
Holland? Is it charity for him a stranger to publish to the world in print that
the ministers in Holland are seditious orators, and that they saucily control
the Magistrates in their pulpits? Their crime seems to be, that for the love of
Christ their master, they are zealous in their doctrine, to press upon the
Magistrate as well as upon the people the true practice of piety, the
sanctification of the sabbath day, the suppression of heresy and shisme, and
repentance for the sins of the time and place wherein they live. This is a
crime whereof few of the Warners friends were wont to be guilty of: their
shameful silence and flattery was one of the great causes of all the sins and
calamities that have wracked the three Kingdoms: the stream of their sermons
while the enjoyed the pulpit, was to encourage to superstition and contempt of
piety, to sing asleep by their ungracious way all, that gave ear unto them.
The man is impatien, t to see the Pastors of Holland or any where, to walk in
another path then his own, and for this cause would stir up their Magistrates
against them: as it was his and his Brethrens custom to stir up the
Magistrates of Britan and Ireland to imprison, banish, and heavily vex the most
zealous servants of God, only for their opposition to the praelats profanity
and errors. The Warner (I hope) has not yet forgotten, how Doctor Bramble and
his neighbor Lesly of Down did cast out of the Ministry, and made flee out of
the Kingdom, men most eminent for zeal, piety and learning, who in a short
time had done more good in the house of God, then all the Bishops that ever
were in Ireland, I mean Master Blaire, Master Levingston, Master Hamilton, and
Master Cuningham, and others.

The Warner needed not to have marked as a singularity of Geneva, that there
all the Ecclesiastics, qua tales, are punishable by the Magistrates for civil
crimes; for we know none of the reformed Churches, who were ever following
Rome in exeeming the Clergy from saecular jurisdiction, except it were the
Canterburian Praelats: who indeed did skarre the most of Magistrates from
medeling with a canonical coat though desiled with drunckenesse, adultery,
scolding, fighting, and other evils, which were too common oflate to that order.

But how does he prove, that the Scots Ministers exempt The pretended
declaration of King James, was Bishop Adamsons lying libel.
themselves from civil jurisdiction? first (says he) by the declaration of
King James 1584. Ans. That declaration was not from King James, as himself did
testify the year thereafter under his hand, but from Master Patrike Adamson,
who did acknowledge it to be his own upon his death bed, and professed his
repentance for the lies and slanders, wherewith against his conscience he had
fraughted that infamous libell.

His second proof is from the second book of discipline Though always in
England yet never in Scotland had Commissarie any jurisdiction over Ministers.
Chapter II, It is absurd that Commissaties having no function in the Church,
should be judges to Ministers to depose them from their charges. Ans. Though in
England the Commissary and official was the ordinary judge to depose and
excommunicat all the Ministers of the diocese, yet by the Laws of Scotland no
Commissaries had ever any jurisdiction over Ministers. But though the
officialls jurisdiction together with their Lords the Bishops were abolished,
yet does it follow from this, that no other jurisdiction remains whereby
Ministers might be punished either by Church and State, according to their
demerits? is not this strongly reasoned by the Warner?

His third proof is the case of James Gibson, who had railed James Gibson was
never absolved by the Church from his Process.
in pulpit against the King, and was only suspended, yea thereafter was
absolved from that fault. Ans. Upon the complaint of the Chancellor the
alleged words were condemned by the general assembly: but before the man's
guiltines of these words could be tried, he did absent himself: for which
absence he was presently suspended from his Ministry: in the nixt assembly he
did appear and cleared the reason of his absence to have been just fear and
no contumacy, this he made appear to the assemblyes satisfaction, but before
his process could be brought to any issue, he fled away to England, where he
died a fugitive never restored to his chardge, though no tryell of his fault
was perfected.

The fourth proof is Mr. Black his case: hereupon the Master Blacks appeal
from the counsel cleared.
Warner makes a long and odious narration. If we interrogat him about his
ground of all these Stories, he can produce no warrant but Spots-woods
unprinted book: this is no authentic register whereupon any understanding man
can rely, the writer was a professed enemy, to his death, of the Scottish
discipline, he spent his life upon a Story for the disgrace of the Presbytery
and the honor of Bishops: no man who is acquainted with the life or death of
that Author will build his belief upon his words. This whole narration is
abundantly confuted in the historical vindication, when the Warner is pleased
to repeat the challenge from Issachars burden he ought to have replied
something after three years advisement to the printed answer.

The matter (as our registers bear) was shortly thus, in the year 1596 the
Popish and malignant faction in King James his court grew so strong that the
countenance of the King toward the Church was much changed, and over all the
Land great fears did daily increase of the overthrow of the Church discipline
established by Law. The Ministers in their pulpits gave free warning thereof,
among others Mr. Black of Saint Andrews, a most gracious and faithful Pastor,
did apply his doctrine to the sins of the time; some of his Enemies delated him
at Court for words injurious to the King and Queen: the words he did deny and
all his honest hearers did absolve him by their testimony from these calumnies:
of himself he was most willing to be tried to the uttermost before all the
world, but his Brethren finding the libelled calumnies to be only a pretense
and the true intention of the Courtiers therein was, to stop the mouths of
Ministers, that the crying sins of the time should no more be reproved in
pulpits, they advised him to decline the judgment of the counsel, and appeal
to the general assembly, as the competent judge according to the word of God
and the Laws of Scotland, in the cause of doctrine; for the first instance they
did never question, but if any thing truly seditious had been preached by a
Minister that he for this might be called before the civil Magistrate and
accordingly punished but that every Minister for the application of his
doctrine according to the rules of scripture to the sins of his hearers for
their reclaming, should be brought before a civil court at the first instance,
they thought it unreasonable and desired the King in the nixt assembly might
cognosce upon the equity of such a proceeding. The Ministers had many a
conference with his Majesty upon that subject, often the matter was brought
very near to an amicable conclusion, but because the Ministers refused to
subscribe a band for so great a silence as the Court required against his
Majesty's countenancing of treacherous Papists, and favoring the enemies of
religion, a seveer Sentence was pronounced not only against Master Black, but
also all the Ministers of Edinburgh.

In the mean time malcontented Statesmen did add oil to the flame, and at
the very instant while the Ministers and The tumult of the seventeenth day of
December was harmless and no Minister guilty of it.
their friends are offering a petition to his Majesty, they subborne a villane
to cry in one part of the streets the Ministers are slain, and in another part
of the streets that the King was killed: whereupon the People rush all out to
the streets in their arms, and for half an howr at most were in a tumult,
upon mere ignorance what the fray might be, bur without the hurt of any one
man: so soon as it was found that both the King and Ministers were safe, the
people went all peaceably to their houses. This is the very truth of that
innocent commotion, whereupon the Warner here and his fellows elsewhere make
all their tragedies. None of the Ministry were either the authors or approvers
thereof, though diverse of them suffered sore troubles for it.

CHAP. V.
No Presbyterian ever intended to excommunicat any supreme Magistrate.

THE Warner in his fifth chapter chardges the Scotes for The praelats
ordinarily, but the Presbytery never were for rash excommunications.
subjecting the King to the censure of excommunication and bringing upon
princes all the miseries which the popes excommunications of old wont to bring
upon Anathematised Emperors. Ans. It does not become the Warner and his
fellows to object to any the abuse of the dreadful sentence of
excommunication, no Church in the world was ever more guilty of that fault then
the praelats of England and Ireland, did they ever censure their own officialls
for the pronouncing of that terrible sentence most profanly against any they
would, had it been for the non-payment of the smallest sums of money. As for
the Scotes, their doctrine and practice in the point of excommunication is as
considerat as any other church in the world, that censure in Scotland is most
rare and only in the case of obstinacy in a great sin: what ever be their
doctrine in general with all other Christians and as I think with the
praelaticall party themselves, that the object of Christian doctrine Sacraments
and discipline is one and the same, and that no member of Christ, no sone of the
Church, may plead a highness above admonitions and Church censures, yet I know
they never thought it expedient so much as to intend any process of Church
animadversion against their Sovereign. To the worlds end I hope they shall not
have again greater grievances and truer causes of citation from their Princes
then they have had already. It may be confidently believed that they who upon
so pregnant occasions did never so much as intend the beginning of a process
against their King, can never be supposed in danger of any such proceeding for
time to come. How ever, we love not the abused ground of the Warners flattering
of Princes to their own great hurt: is it so indeed The Praelats flatter
Princes to their ruin.
that all the sins of princes are only against God, that all Kings are not only
above all laws of Church and State but when they fall into the greatest crimes
that the worst of men have ever committed, that even then their sins must not
be against any man or against any law? such Episcopal doctrine spurrs on
princes to these unhappy praecipies, and oppressed people unto these outrages
that both fall into inextricable calamities.

CHAP. VI.
It grieves the Praelats that Presbyterians are faithful Watchmen, to admonish
Princes of their duty.

THE sixth Chapter is spent on an other crime of the Presbytery; it makes the
Presbiters cry to the Magistrate for justice The Scots Ministers preaching for
justice, was just and necessary.
upon capital offenders. Ans. What hes Presbytery to do with this matter were
it never so great an offense: will the Warner have all the faults of the
praelaticall faction, flow from the fountain of Episcopacy? this
unconsequentiall reasoning will not be permitted to men below the degrees of
Doctors. But was it a very great crime indeed for Ministers to plead the cause
of the fatherless and widows, yea the cause of God their Master and to preach
unto Magistrates, that according to Scriptures murderers ought to die, and the
Land be purged from the stain of innocent blood? when the shameful impunity
of murder made Scotland by deadly feuds, in time of peace a field of war and
blood, was it not time for the faithful servants of God to exhort the King to
execute justice, and to declare the danger of most frequent pardons drawn from
his hand often against his heart by the importunity and deceitful information
of powerful solicitors, to the great offense of God against the whole land, to
the unexpressible grief and wrong of the suffering party, to the opening also
of a new floodgate of more blood which by a legal revenge in time easily might
have been stopped? Too much pity in sparing the wilful shedders of innocent
blood ordinarlie proves a great cruelty, not only toward the disconsolat
oppressed who cry to the vicegerents of God the avenger, for justice in vain,
but also toward the soul of him who is spared and the life of many more who
are friends either to the oppressor or oppressed.

As for the named case of Huntly let the world judge, Huntlyes notorious crimes.
whether the Ministers had reason often to give Warning against that wicked man
and his accomplices. Beside his apostasy and after-seeming-repentance his
frequent relapses into avowed popery, in the eighty eight he banded with the
King of Spain to overthrow the religion and government of the whole Island and
after pardon, from time to time did renew his treasonable plots for the ruin
of Britain: he did commit many murders, he did invade under the nose of the
King, the house of his Cousin the Earl of Murray, and most cruelly murdered
that gallant Nobleman, he appeared with displayed Banner against the King in
person, he killed thereafter many hundreds of the Kings good people, when these
multiplied outrages did cry up to the God of heaven, was is not time for the
men of God to cry to the judges of the earth to do their duty, according to
the warrant of many Scriptures? what a dangerous humor of flattery is this in
our Praelats, not only to lull asleep a Prince in a most sinful neglect of his
charge, but also to cry out upon others more faithful then themselves for
assaying to break of their slumber by their wholesome and seasonable
admonitions from the word of God?

The nixt challenge of the Scotes Presbyters is that they Never any question in
Scotland betwixt the King and the Church, for Tithes and patronages.
spoil the King of his Tithes, first fruits, patronage and dependence of his
subjects. Ans. The Warner understands not what he writes, the Kings Majesty in
Scotland never had, never craved any first fruits: the Church never spoiled the
King of any Tithes, some other men indeed, by the wickedness most of Praelats
and their followers, did cousin both the King and the Church of many Tithes:
but his Majesty and the Church had never any controversy in Scotland about
the Tithes: for the King, so far as concerned himself, was ever willing that
the Church should enjoy that which the very act of Parliament acknowledges to
be her patrimony. Nor for the patronages had the Churh any plea with the King:
the Church declared often their mind of the iniquity of patronages, wherein
they never had from the King any considerable opposition, but from the Nobility
and gentry the opposition was so great, that for peacesake the Church was
content to let patronages alone, till God should make a Parliament lay to heart
what was incumbent for gracious men to do, for liberating congregations from
their slavery of having Ministers intruded upon them by the violence of
Patrones. Which now at last (blessed be God) according to our mind is
performed. As for the dependence of any vassals upon the King, it was never
questioned King James avowes himself a ^ater of Erastianisme.
by any Presbyterian in Scotland.

What is added in the rest of the Chapter, is but a repetition of that which
went before, to wit, the Presbyters denying to the King the spiritual
government of the Church, and the power of the keys of the Kingdom of heaven:
such an usurpation upon the Church, King James declared under his hand (as at
length may be seen in the Historical vindication) to be a sin against the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which puts in the hand of the Magistrate the power
of preaching and celebrating the Sacraments: a power which since that time no
Magistrate in Britain did assume, and if any would have claimed it, none would
have more opposed, then the most zealous patrones of Episcopacy. The injurious
invectives, which the Warner builds upon this his Erastian assertion, we pass
them as Castles in their air, which must fall and evanish for want of a
foundation. Only before I leave this Chapter, let the Warner take a good
Sentence out of the mouth of that wise Prince King James, to testify yet
farther his mind against Erastianisme. His Majesty in the year 1617 having
come in progress to visit his ancient Kingdom of Scotland, and being present
in person at a public disputation in Theology in the Universitie of St.
Andrews, whereof also many both Nobles and Churchmen of both Kingdoms were
auditors; when one of those that acted a part in the disputation, had affirmed
and went about to maintain this assertion that the King had power to depose
Ministers from their Ministerial function. The King himself as abhorring such
flattery, cried out with a loud voice, Ego possum deponere Ministri caput, sed
non possum deponere ejus officium.

CHAP. VII.
The Presbytery does not draw from the Magistrate any paritie of his power by
the cheat of any relation.

IN the seventh chapter the Warner would cause men believe many more of the
Presbyteries usurpations upon the civil Magistrate. The first is that all
offenses whatsoever The Presbytery cognosceth only upon scandals, and that in
fewer civil things then the Bishopscourts were wont to meddle with.
are cognoscible in the consistory upon the case of scandals. Ans. First the
Presbytery makes no offense at all to come before the consistory, but scandal
alone. Secondly these civil offenses (the scandal whereof comes before the
Presbytery) are but very few, and a great deal fewer than the Bishops
official takes notice of in his consistoriall court. That capital crimes past
over by the Magistrate should be censured by the Church, no society of
Christians who have any discipline, did ever call in question. When the sword
of the Magistrate hes spared a murderer, an adulterer, a Blasphemer; will any
ingenuous, either praelaticall or popish divine, admit of such to the holy
table without signs of repentance?

The Warners second usurpation is but a branch of the first, that the
Presbytery draws directly before it self the cognizance of fraud in
barganing, false measures, oppression and in the case of Ministers, brybing,
usury, fighting, perjury, etc. Ans. Is it then the Warners mind, that the
notorious slander of such gross sins does not deserve so much, as an
Ecclesiastic rebooke? Shall such persons without admonition be admitted to the
holy communion? Secondly the named cases of fraud in barganing, false measures,
oppression, come so rarely before our Church-judicatories that though these
thirty years I have been much conversant in Presbyteries, yet did I never see,
nor do I remember that ever I heard any of these three cases brought before
any church assembly. In the person of Ministers, I grant, these faults which
the canons of the Church in all times and places make the causes of deprivation
are cognosced upon in Presbyteries, but with the good liking (I am sure) of all
both papifts and praelats, who themselves are free of such vices. And why did
not the Warner put in among the causes of church men's deprivation from office
and benefit, adultery, gluttonny and drunkenness? are these in his, etc. which
he will not have cognoscible by the Church in the persons of Bishops and
Doctors?

The Warners third challenge amounts to an high crime, that Presbyterian
Ministers are bold to preach upon these scriptures which speak of the
Magistrates duty in his office, or dare offer to resolve from scripture any
doubt, which perplexeth the conscience of Magistrates or people, of Husband or
Wife, of Master or Servant, in the discharge of their Christian duty one to
another. What ever has been the negligence of the Bishop of Derry, yet I am
sure, all the preaching Praelats and Doctors of England pretended a great care
to go about these uncontroverted parts of their ministerial function, and yet
without meddling with the Mysteries of State, or the depths of any man's
particulare vocation; much less with the judgment of jurisdiction in
political or aeconomicall causes.

As for the Churches declaration against the Late engagement; The Churches
proceedings in the late engagement cleared from mistakes.
did it not well become them to signify their judgment in so great a case of
conscience, especially when the Parliament did propone it to them for
resolution, and when they found a conjunction driven on with a clearly
malignant party, contrary to solemn oaths and covenants, unto the evident
hazard of Religione and them who had been most eminent instruments of its
preservation; was it not the churches duty to give warning against that sin,
and to exhort the ring leaders therein to repentance?

But our Warner must needs insist upon that unhappy engagement, and fasten
great blame upon the Church for giving any advice about it. Ans. Must it be
Jesuisitisme, and a drawing of all the civil affairs to the Churches bar in
ordine ad Spiritualia, for an assembly to give their advice in a most eminent
and important case of conscence, when earnestly called upon in a multitude of
supplications from the most of the Congregations under their charge; yea when
required by the States of the Kingdom in several express messages for that
end? It seems, its our Warners conclusion, if the Magistrate would draw all the
Churches in his jurisdiction to a most unlawful war, for the advancement of
the greatest impiety and unjustice possible, wherein nothing could be expected
by all who were engaged therein but the curse of God; if in this case a
doubting Natione should desire the assemblies counsel for the state of their
souls, or if the Magistrate would put the Church to declare what were lawful
or unlawful according to the word of God, that it were necessary here for the
servants of God to be altogether silent, because indeed war is so civil a
business, that nothing in it concerns the soul, and nothing about it may be
cleared by any light from the word of God.

The truth is, the Church in their public papers to the Parliament, declared
oftener then once, that they were not against, but for an engagement, if so that
Christian and friendly treaties could not have obtained reason, and all the
good people in Scotland were willing enough to have hazarded their lives and
estates, for vindicating the wrongs done, not by the Kingdom of England, but
by the sectarian party there, against God the King, covenant and both
Kingdoms: but to the great grief of their hearts, their hands were bound and
they forced to sit still, and by the over great cunning of some, the erroneous
mis-perswasions of others and the rash praecipitancy of it, that engagement was
so spoiled in the stating and mannaging, that the most religious with peace of
conscience could not go along nor encourage any other to take part therein.
The Warner touches on three of their reasons: but who will look upon their
public declarations, shall find many more, which with all faithfulness were
then propounded by the Church, for the rectifying of that action, which, as it
stood in the state and management, was clearly foretold to be exceeding like to
destroy the King and his friends of all sorts in all the three Kingdoms. The
irreparable losses and unutterable calamities which quickly did follow at the
heels, the misbeleefe and contempt of the Lords servants and the great danger
religion is now brought unto in all these Kingdoms, hes, I suppose, long ago
brought grief enough to the heart of them whose unadvised rashness and
intemperate fervor did contribute most for the spoiling of that design.

The first desire about that engagement which the Warner gives to us, concerns
the security of religion. In all the debate of that matter, it was aggreed
(without question upon all hands, that the Sectarian party deserved punishment
for their wicked attemptes upon the Kings person, contrary to the directions
of the Parliamentes of both Kingdoms, and that the King ought to be rescued
out of their hands, and brought to one of his houses for perfecting the treaty
of peace which often had been begun: but here was the question; Whither the
Parliament and Army of Scotland ought to declare their resolutiones to bring
his Majesty to London with honor, freedom and safty, before he did promise
any security for establishing Religion; The Parliaments of both Kingdoms in
all their former treaties had ever pressed upon the King a number of
propositions to be signed by his Majesty before at all he came to London: was
it then any fault in the Church of Scotland to desire the granting but of one
of these propositions concerning Religion and the covenant, before the King
were brought (by the new hazard of the lives and estats of all the Scottish
nation) to sit in his Parliament in that honor and freedom which himself did
desire? There was no complaint, when many of thirty propositions were pressed
to be signed by his Majesty for satisfaction and security to his people, after
so great and long desolations: how then is an outcry made, when all other
propositions are postponed, and only one for Religion is stuck upon, and that
not before his Majesty's rescue and deliverance from the hands of the
sectaries, but only before his bringing to London in honor freedom and safety?
This demand, to the Warner, is a crime, and may be so to all of his belief,
who takes it for a high unjustice, to restrain in any King the absolute power
by any condition: for they do mantaine that the administration of all things
both of Church and state does reside so freely and absolutely in the mere will
of a Sovereign, that no case at any time can fall out, which ought to bound
that absolutnesse with any limitation.

The second particular the Warner pitches upon, is the Kings negative voice;
behold how criminous we were in the point; When some (most needlessly) would
needs bring into debate the Kings negative voice in the Parliament of England,
as one of the royal praerogatives to be maintained by our engagement: it was
said, that all discourse of that kind might be laid aside as impertinent for
us: if any debate should chance to fall upon it, the proper place of it was, in
a free Parliament of England; that our Laws did not admit of a negative voice
to the King in a Parliament of Scotland; and to press it now as a prerogative
of all Kings, (besides the reflection it might have upon the rights of our
Kingdom,) it might put in the hand of the King a power to deny all and every
one of these things, which the Parliaments of both Kingdoms had found
necessary for the settling the peace in all the three dominions. We marvail
not, that the Warner here should tax us of a great error, seeing it is the
belief of his faction, that every King has not only a negative but an
absolute affirmative voice in all their Parliaments, as if they were nothing
but their arbitrary counsels for to persuade by their reasons but not to
conclude nor impede any thing by their votes; the whole and entire power of
making or refusing Laws being in the Prince alone, and no part of it in the
Parliament.

The Warners third challenge against us about the engagement is, as if the
Church had taken upon it to nominate the officers of the army; and upon this he
makes his invectives. Ans. The Church was far from seeking power to nominate
any one officer: but the matter was thus; when the State did require of them,
what in their judgment would give satisfaction to the people, and what would
encourage them to go along in the engagement? one and the last part of their
answer was, that they conceived if a War shall be found necessary, much of the
peoples encouragement would depend upon the qualification of the commanders, to
whom the mannaging of that great trust should be committed: for after the right
stating of the War, the nixt would be the carrying on of it by such men who
had given constante proof of their integrity. To put all the power of the
Kingdom in their hand, whose by past miscariadges had given just occasion to
suspect their designs and firmness to the interest of God before their own
or any other man's, would fill the hearts of the people with jealousies and
fears, and how wholesome an advice this was, experience has now too clearly
demonstrate.

To make the world know our further resolutiones to meddle with civil affairs,
the Warner is pleased to bring out against us above 80 years old stories, and
all the stuff which our malicious enemy Spotsewood can furnish to him: from
this good author he alleges that our Church discharged merchants to traffic
with Spain, and commanded the change of the market days in Edinburgh. Ans.
Both these calumnies are taken of at length in the Historical Vindication.
After the Spanish invasion of the year eighty eight, many in Scotland kept
correspondence with Spain for treacherous designs: the Inquisitors did seduce
some, and persecute others of our merchants in their traffic, the Church did
deal with his Majesty to interceed with the Spanish King for more liberty to
our country men in their trading: and in the mean time while an answer was
returned from Madrile, they advertised the people to be warry, how they
hazarded their souls for any worldly gain which they could find about the
inquisitors feet.

As for the market days, I grante, it was a great grief to the Church, to see
the sabbath day profaned by handy labor The Church meddled not with the manday
market but by way of supplication to Parliament.
and journeying, by occasion of the munday-mercats in the most of the great
tounes: for remedy heerof, many supplications have been made by the Assembly
to the Parliament: but so long as our Bishops satte there, these petitiones of
the Church were always eluded: for the praelats labor in the whole Island was
to have the sunday no Sabbath, and to procure by their Doctrine and example the
profanation of that day by all sorts of plays, to the end people might be
brought back to their old licentiousnes and ignorance, by which the Episcopal
Kingdom was advanced. It was visible in Scotland, that the most eminent
Bishops were usual players on the Sabbath, even in time of divine service. And
so soon as they were cast out of the Parliament, the Churches supplications
were granted, and acts obtained for the careful sanctification of the Lords
day, and removing of the mercats in all the land from the Monday to other days
of the week.

The Warners nixt challenge of our usurpation is, the assembly at Edinburgh
1567 their ratifying of acts of Parliament, and summoning of all the country to
appear at the The Church once for safty of the infant Kings life, with the
concurrence of the secret counsel did call an extraordinary meeting.
nixt assembly. Ans. If the Warner had known the history of that time, he
would have choysed rather to have omitted this challenge, then to have
proclaimed to the world the great rottenness of his own heart; at that time
the condition of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland was lamentable, the Queen
was declared for popery, King James's Father was cruelly without any cause
murdered by the Earl of Bothwell; King James himself in his infancy was very
near to have been destroyed by the murderer of his Father, there was no other
way conceivable of saftie for Religion for the infant King, for the Kingdom,
but that the Protestants should join together for the defense of King James
against these popish murderers. For this end the general assembly did crave
conference of the secret counsel: and they with mutual advise did call for a
meeting of the whole Protestant party: which did conveen at the time appointed
most frequently in an extraordinary and mixed assembly of all the considerable
persons of the Religion, Earls, Lords, Barrons, Gentlemen, Burgesses and
Ministers, and subscribed a bond for the revenge of King Henryes death, and the
defense of King James his life: This mixed and extraordinary assembly made it
one of the chief articles in their bond to defend these Acts of the
Parliament 1560 concerning religion, and to endeavor the ratification of them
in the nixt ensuing Parliament. As for the assemblies letter to their Brethren
for so frequent a meeting at the nixt extraordinary assembly, it had the
authority of the secret counsel; it was in a time of the greatest necessity,
when the Religion and liberties of the land were in evident hazard from the
potent and wicked counsels of the popish party, both at home and abroad; when
the life of the young King was daily in visible danger from the hands of them
who had murdered his Father, and ravished his Mother. Less could not have
been done in such a juncture of time by men of wisdom and courage, who had any
love to their Religion, King and country: but the resolution of our praelats is
to the contrary, when a most wicked villain had obtained the connivance of a
Queen to kill her husband, and to make way for the killing of her Son in his
Cradle, and after these murders to draw a nation and Church from the true
Religion, established by Law, into popery; and a free Kingdom to an illegal
Tyranny; in this case there may be no meeting, either of Church or State, to
provide remedies against such extraordinary mischiefs. Believe it, the Scotes
were never of this opinion.

What is subjoined in the nixt paragraph of our Churches By the laws and
customs of Scotland the Assembly praecieds the Parliament in the reformation
of Ecclesias-tical abuses.
praesumption to abolish acts of Parliament; is but a repetition of what is
spoken before. Not only the laws of Scotland but equity and necessity referres
the ordinary reformation of errors and abuses in Religion to the
Ecclesiastical assemblies: what they find wrong in the Church, though ratified
by acts of Parliament, they rectify it from the word of God, and thereafter by
petition obtaines their rectification to be ratifyed in a following Parliament,
and all former acts to the contrary to be annulled. This is the ordinary
Method of proceeding in Scotland and (as I take it) in all other States and
Kingdoms. Were Christians of old hindered to leave paganism and embrace the
Gospel, till the imperial laws for paganism and against Christianity were
revoked? did the oecumenicall and National Synods of the ancients stay their
reformation of heresies and corruptions in religion, till the laws of State
(which did countenance these errors) were cancelled? Was not popery in Germany
France and Britain so firmly established, as civil laws could do it? It
seems, the Warner here does join with his Brother Issachar, to proclaim all
our Reformers in Britain France and Germany, to be Rebels for daring by their
preachings and Assemblies to change these things, which by acts of Parliaments
had been approven, before new Parliaments had allowed of their reformation.
Nevertheless this plea is foolishly intended against us, for the Ministers
protestation against the acts of Parliament 1584, establishing (in that hour
of darkness) iniquity by a law, and against the acts of the Assembly of Glasgow
declaring the unlawfulness of Bishops and ceremonies; which some Parliaments
upon Episcopal misinformation had approven: both these actions of the Church
were according to former Laws and were ratified afterward by acts of
Parliament yet standing in force which for the Warner (a privatman, and a
stranger) to challenge, is to contemn much more grossly the law, then they
do, whom here he is accusing of that crime.

By the nixt Story the Warner will gain nothing, when The Church part in the
road of Ruthven clecred.
the true case of it is known. In King James minority, one Captain James
Stuart did so far prevail upon the tender and unexperienced years of the
Prince, as to steal his countenance unto acts of the greatest oppression; so
far that James Hamelton Earl of Arran (the nixt to the King in blood, in his
health a most gallant Prince, and a most zealous professor of the true
Religion) in time of his sickness, when he was not capable to commit any crime
against the State, was notwithstanding spoiled of all his lively hood and
liberty: his Lands and honor with the dignity of high Chancellor of Scotland
were conferred on that very wicked Tyrant Captain James, a number of the best
affected and prime nobility impatient of such unheard of oppressiones, with
mere boasts and no violence at the road of Ruthven chased away that unhappy
chancellor from the Kings person, this his Majesty for the time professed to
take in so good part that under his hand he did allow it for good service, in
his letters to the most of the Neighbor princes: he dealt also with the
secret counsel and the chief judicatories of the land, and obtained from them
the approbation of that act of the Lords as convenient and laudable, promising
likewise to ratify it in the nixt ensuing Parliament. When the Lords for their
more abundante clearing required the Assemblies declaration there upon, the
Ministers declined to meddle at all with the case; but the Kings Majesty sent
his Commissioners to the Assembly, entreating them withal earnestness to
declare their good liking of that action, which he assured them was for his
good, and the good both of the Church and Kingdom: for their obedience to the
Kings importunity they are here railed upon by the wise Warner. It is true,
Captain James shortly after creept in again into Court, and obtained a sever
revenge against the authors of that action, before a Parliament could sit to
approve it, but within a few months the same Lords with some more did at
Striveling chase again that evil man from the Court: whither he never more
returned, and this their action was ratified in the nixt Parliament, and so
stands to this day unquestioned by any but such as the Warner, either out of
ignorance or malice.

I am weary to follow the Warner in all his wanderings; at the nixt loupe he
jumps from the 1584 to the 1648, skipping The interest of the general assembly
of Scotland, in the reformation of England.
over in a moment 64 years. The articles of Striveling mentions that the
promoving of the work of Reformation in England and Ireland, be referred to
the general assembly, upon this our friend does discharge a flood of his
choler: all the matter of his impatience here is, that Scotland when by fraud
they had been long allured, and at last by open violence invaded by the English
Praelats, that they might take on the yock of all their corruptions, they were
contented at the earnest desire of both the houses of Parliament, and all the
well-affected in England, to assist their Brethren, to purge out the leaven of
Episcopacy, and the Service book with all the rest of the old corruptions of
the English and Irish Churches; with the mannaging of this so great and good an
Ecclesiastic work, the Parliament of Scotland did entrust the general
assembly. No mervaile that Doctor Bramble a zealous lover of all the
Arminianisme, Popery and Tyranny, of which his great patron Doctor Lade stands
convicted yet without an answer to have been bringing in upon the three
nations, should be angry at the discoverers and dis-appointers of that most
pious work as they wont to style it?

What here the Warner repeats, it is answered before, The violent apprehension
of Mass Priests in their act of idolatry reproved by the Warner.
as for the two Stories in his conclusion, which he takes out of his false
Author Spots-wood, adding his own large amplifications; I conceive, there
needs no more to be said to the first, but that some of John Knocks zealous
hearers understanding of a Mass Priest at their very side committing idolatry
contrary to the Laws, did with violence break in upon him and sease upon his
person and Masse-cloathes, that they might present him to the ordinary
Magistrate to receave justice according to the Law; This act the Warner will have
to be a huge rebellion, not only in the actors, but also in John Knocks, who
was not so much as present thereat.

What first he speaks of the Assemblies convocating the people in arms to be
present at the trial of the popish Lords and their avowing of that their deed
to the King in his face we must be pardoned to mistrust the Warner heerin upon
his bare word without the relief of some witness, and that a more faithful one
then his Brother in evil, Mr. Spotswood, whom yet here he does not profess
to cite. Against these popish Lords after their many treasons and bloody
murders of the lieges, the King himself at last was forced to arm the people;
but that the general assembly did call any unto arms we require the Warners
proof that we may give it an answer.

CHAP. VIII.
The chief of the Praelats agree with the Presbyterians about the divine right
of Church discipline.

THE Warners challenge in this chapter is that we mantaine our discipline by a
Iure divino, and for this he spewes out upon us a sea of such rhetoric, as
much better beseemed. Ans. Mercurius Aulicus then either a Warner or a
praelate. In this challenge he is as unhappy as in the rest, it is for a matter
wherein the most of his own Brethren (though our Adversaries) yet fully agree
with us that the discipline of the Church is truly by divine right, and that
The Warner and his Praelatical Erastian brethren are obliged by their own
principles to advise the King to lay aside Episcopacy and set up the
Praesbytery in all his dominions.
Jesus Christ holds out in scripture the substantials of that Government
whereby he will have his house to be ruled to the worlds end; leaving the
circumstantials to be determined by the judicatories of the Church according to
the general rules, which are clear also in the word for matters of that
nature. In this neither Papists nor the learndest of the Praelats find any
fault with us; yet our Warner must spend a whole Chapter upon it.

It is true as we observed before the elder Praelats of England in Edwards and
Elizabeth's days, as the Erastians now, did mantaine that no particular
Government of the Church was jure divino, and if this be the Warners mind, it
were ingenuity in him to speak it out loud, and to endeavor to persuade his
friends about the King of the truth of this tenet, he was never employed about
a better and more seasonable service: for if the discipline of the Church be
but humano jure then Episcopacy is kept up upon no conscience, conscience
being bottomed only upon a divine right, so Episcopacy wanting that bottom may
well be laid aside at this time by the King for any thing that concerns
conscience since no command of God nor warrant from scripture ties him to keep
it up. This truly seems to be the maine ground whereupon the whole discourse
of this Chapter is builded. Is it tolerable that such truths should be
concealed by our Warners against their conscience, when the speaking of them
out might be so advantageous to the King and all his Kingdoms, how ever we
with all the reformed Churches do believe in our heart the divine right of
Synods and Presbyteries, and for no possible inconvenient can be forced to deny
or pass from this part of truth, yet the Warner here joins with the elder
Praelats who till Warner Banckrofts advancement to the sea of Canterburry did
unanimously deny Episcopacy to be of divine right, and by consequent affirmed
it to be moveable, and so lawful to be laid aside by princes, when so ever
they found it expedient for their affairs to be quyte of it, why does not the
warner and his Brethren speak plainly their thoughts in his Majesty's ears?
why do they longer dissemble their conscience, only for the satisfaction of
their ambition, greed, and revenge? sundry of the Praelaticall divines come yet
further to join fully with Erastus in denying not only Episcopacy and all
other particular forms of Church government to be of divine institution, but
in avowing that no government in the Church at all is to be imagined, but such
as is a part of the civil power of the Magistrate. The Warner in the Chapter
and in diverse other parts of his book seems to agree with this judgment: and
upon this ground if he had ingenuity he would offer his helping hand to untie
the bonds of the Kings conscience, if here it were straytened, by
demonstrating from this his principle, that very safely without any offense to
God and nothing doubting for conscience sake, his Majesty might lay aside
Episcopacy and set up the Presbytery so fully as is required in all his
dominions though not upon a divine right which the Presbyterians believe, yet
upon Erastus royal right which the Warner here and elsewhere avouches.

What the Warner puts here again upon the Presbytery, the usurpation of the
temporal sword in what indirect relation The praelaticall party were lately
bent for Popery.
so ever, its probation in the former chapter was found so weak and naughty,
that the repetition of it is for no use: only we mark that the Warner will
have the Presbitery to be an absolute papacy, for no other purpose but to vent
his desire of revenge against the Presbyterians, who gave in a challenge
against the Praelats, especially the late Canterburians, among whom Doctor
Bramble was one of some note, to which none of them have returned to this hour
an answer; that their principles unavoidably did bring back the pope. For a
Patriarch over all the western Churches, and among all the Patriarchs of the
whole Catholic Church a primacy in the Roman, flows clearly out of the
fountain of Episcopacy, according to the avowed doctrine of the English
praelats: who yet are more liberal to the pope in granting him beside his
spiritual super-inspection of the whole Catholic Church, all his temporal
jurisdictions also in the patrimony of St. Peter, and all his other fair
principalities within and without Italy. There is no ceremony in Rome that
these men stick upon: for of all the superstitious and idolatrous ceremonies of
Rome, their images and altars and adorations before them are incomparably the
worst; yet the Warners friends without any recantation we have heard of, avow
them all; even an adoration of and to the altar it self. As for the doctrines
of Rome what points are worse then these which that party have avowed in
express terms, a corporal presence of Christ's body upon the Altar the
Tridentine justification, free will, final apostasy of the Saints: when no
other thing can be answered to this our sore challenge, it is good to put us
off with a Squib that the Presbytery is as absolute papacy as ever was in Rome.

The Presbyterian position which the Warner here offers not to dispute but to
laugh at, that Christ as King of his Church according to his royal office and
Scepter hes appointed the office-bearers and laws of the house, is accorded to
by the most and sharpest of our adversaries, whether English or Romish, as
their own tenet: howbeit such foolish consequences, that all acts of Synods
must be Christ's Laws, etc. neither they nor we do acknowledge.

His declamations against the novelty of the Presbytery in The Praelats
profess now a willingness to abolish at least three parts of the former
Episcopacy.
the ordinary style of the Jesuits against Protestants, and of the pagan
Philosophers against the Christians of old, who will regard: our plea for the
Praesbyterie is, that it is scripturall; if so; it is ancient enough: if not;
let it be abolished. But it were good, that here also the Warner and his
friends would be ingenuous, to speak out their minds of Episcopacy. Why have
they all so long deceived the King, in assuring him that English Episcopacy was
well warranted both by Scripture and antiquity. Be it so (which yet is very
false) that something of a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter had any footing in
Scripture, yet can they be so impudent, as to affirm, that an English Bishop
in his very flesh and blood, in his substantial limbs was ever known in the
World till the pope was become Antichrist? A Bishop by virtue of his office a
Lord in Parliament, voycing in all acts of State, and exercising the place of a
high Thesaurer, of a Chancellor, or what ever civil charge the favor of a
Prince did put upon him; a Bishop with sole power of ordination and
jurisdiction, with out any Presbytery; a Bishop exercising no jurisdiction
himself in any part of his dioces, but devolving the exercise of that power
wholly upon his officials and Commissaries; a Bishop ordaining Presbyters
himself alone, or with the fashionall assistance of any two Presbyters, who
chance to be near; a Bishop the only Pastor of the whole dioces, and yet not
bound to feed any flock, either by word or Sacrament, or government, but
having a free liberty to devolve all that service upon others, and himself to
wait at court so many years as he shall think fit. This is our English Bishop
not only in practice but in law, and so was he defended by the great
disputants for praelacy in England.

But now let the Warner speak out, if any such treasure can more be defended
or was ever known in scripture, or The portion of Episcopacy, which yet is
stuck to, cannot be kept up upon any principle either of honor or conscience.
seen in any Christian Church for 800. years and above, after the death of
Christ. I take it indeed, to be conscience, that forces now at last the best of
our Court-divines to divest their Bishop of all civil employment in Parliament
court or Kingdom, in denying his solitarines in ordination, in removing his
official and Commissary courts, in taking away all his arches, Arch - Bishops,
Arch - Deacons, deane and Chapter and all the, etc. in erecting Presbyteries
for all ordinations and spiritual jurisdiction. It is good that conscience
moves our adversaries at last to come this far toward us: but why will they
not yet come nearer, to acknowledge that by these their to lately recanted
errors they did to long trouble the world; and that the little which yet they
desire to keep of a Bishop is nothing less then that English Bishop but a new
creature of their own devising never known in England which his Majesty in no
honnour is obliged to mantaine for any respect either to the laws or customs
of England, and least of all, for conscience?

While the Warner with such confidence avowes, that no The smallest portion of
the most moderat Episcopacy is contrary to scripture.
text of Scripture can be alleged against Episcopacy, which may not with more
reason be applied against the Presbytery; behold I offer him here some few,
casting them in a couple of arguments, which according to his great promises, I
wish, he would answer at his leisure.

First I do reason from Ephesians 4. 11: all the officers that Christ has
appointed in his Church for the Ministry of the word, are either Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors or Doctors: but Bishops are none of these fyve:
Ergo they are none of the officers appointed by Christ for the Ministry of the
word. The Major is not wont to be questioned: the minor thus I prove; Bishops
are not Apostles, Evangelists, nor prophets: for its confessed, all these were
extraordinary and temporary officers: but Bishops (say you) are ordinary and
perpetual: our adversaries pitch upon the fourth, alleging the Episcopal
office to be pastoral; but I prove the Bishop no Pastor thus; no Pastor is
superior to other Pastors in any spiritual power: but according to our
adversary, a Bishop is superior to all the Pastors of his dioces in the power
of ordination and jurisdiction. Ergo. The doubt here is only of the Major,
which I prove Argumento a paribus: no Apostle is superior to an Apostle, nor an
Evangelists to an Evangelist, nor prophet to a prophet nor a Doctor to a
Doctor in any spiritual power according to scripture. Ergo no Pastor to a
Pastor. Again I reason from 1. Tim. 4. 14. Math: 18. 15. 1. Cor. 5. 4. 12. 13,
What taks the power of ordination and jurisdiction from Bishops, destroys
Bishops: as the removal of the soul kills the man, and the denial of the
form takes away the subject; so the power of ordination and jurisdiction the
essential form, whereby the Bishop is constitute and distinguished from the
Presbyter and every other Church officer, being removed from him, he must
perish: but the quoted places take away clearly these powers from the Bishop:
for the first puts the power of ordination in the Presbytery, and a Bishop is
not a Presbytery; the second puts the power of jurisdiction in the Church; and
the third in a company of men which meet together: but the Bishop is not the
Church nor a company of men met together: for these be many, and he is but one
person.

When the Doctors learning hes satisfied us in these two, he shall receave more
scripturall arguments against Episcopacy. The Praelats unable to answer their
opposits.
But why do we expect answers from these men, when after so long time (for
all their boasts of learning and their visible leisure) none of their party hes
hade the courage, to offer one word of answer to the Scriptures and Fathers,
which in great plenty Mr. Parker and Mr. Didoclave of old, and of late that
miracle of learning most noble Somais, and that Magazin of antiquity Mr.
Blondel have printed against them?

What in the end of the Chapter the Warner adds of our trouble at King James
his fifty and five questions 1596, and of our yielding the bucklers without
any opposition till the late unhappy troubles; we answer that in this as every
where else the Warner proclaines his great and certain knowledge of our
Ecclesiastic story: the troubles of the Scots divines at that time were very
small, for the matter of these questions, all which they did answer so roundly,
that there was no more speech of them thereafter by the propounders: but the
manner and time of these questions did indeed perplex good men, to see Erastian
and Prelaticall counselors so far to prevail with our King, as to make him
by captious questions carpe at these parts of Church Discipline, which by
statuts of Parliament and acts of Assemblyes were fully established.

Our Church at that time was far from yielding to Episcopacy: Prelacy was ever
grievous to Scotland.
great trouble indeed by some wicked Statesmen was then brought upon the
persons of the most able and faithful Ministers, but our land was so far from
receiving of Bishops at that time, that the question was not so much as
proposed to them for many years thereafter, it was in Ann. 1606 that the
English Praelats did move the King by great violence to cast many of the best
and most learned Preachers of Scotland out of their charges, and in Ann. 1610,
that a kind of Episcopacy was set up in the corrupt assembly of Glasgow; under
which the Church of Scotland did heavily groan till the year 1637, when their
burdens was so much increased by the English praelaticall Tax-masters, that all
was shaken of together, and divine justice did so closly follow at the heels,
that oppressing praelacy of England as to the great joy of the long oppressed
Scotes, that evil root and all its branches was cast out of Britain, where
we trust, no shadow of it shall ever again be seen.

CHAP. IX.
The Commonwealth is no monster, when God is made Sovereign, and their
commands of men are subordinated to the clear will of God.

HAving cleared the vanity of these calumnious challenges, wherewith the Warner
did animate the King and all Magistrates against the Presbyterians, let us try
if his skill be any greater, to inflame the people against it. He would make
the World believe that the Presbyterians are great transsubstantiators of whole
Commonwealths into beasts, and Metamorphosers of whole Kingdoms of men, into
Serpents with two heads; how great and monstrous a Serpent must the Presbytery
be, when she is the Mother of a Dragon with two heads. But it is good, that
she has nothing to do with the procreation of the Dragon with seven heads, the
great Antichrist, the Pope of Rome: this honor must be left to Episcopacy:
the Presbytery must not pretend to any share in it.

The Warners ground for his pretty fimilitude is, that the There is no Lordship
but a mere service and ministry in the Pastors of the Church
Presbyterians make two Soveraignities in every Christian State, whose commands
are contrary. Ans. All the evil lies in the contrariety of the commands: as
for the double Soveraignity, there is no show of truth in it: for the
Presbyterians cannot be guilty of coordinating two Soveraignities in one
State, though the Praelats may well be guilty of that fault; since they with
there Masters of Rome mantaine a true hierarchy, a Spiritual Lord-ship, a
domination and principality in their Bishops above all the members of the
Church, but the Presbyterians know no (...), no dominion, no Soveranity in
Church officers, but a mere ministry under Christ. As for the contrariety of
commands, its true: Christ's Ministers must publish all the commands oftheir
Sovereign Lord, whereunto no command of any temporal Prince needs or ought to
be contrary; but if it fall out to be so, it is not the Presbytery; but the
holy Scriptures, which command rather to obey God then man. Dare the Warner
here oppose the Presbyterians? dare he mantaine a subordination of the Church
to the State in such a fashion, that the clear commands of God published by the
Church ought to give place to the contrary commands of the State? if the Warner
must needs invert and contradict Christ ruling of this case, let him go on to
preach doctrine point blank to the Apostles, that it is better to obey men then
God. It falls out as rarely in Scotland as any where in the world, that the
Church and State run contrary ways; but if so it happen, the commune rules of
humane direction toward right and wrong judgment must be followed: if a man
find either the Church or the State or both command what he knows to be wrong
(for neither the one nor the other has any infallibility) their is no doubt
but either or both may be disobeyed, yet with this difference, that for
disobedience to the Churches most just commands, a man can not fall under the
smallest temporal inconvenient without the States good pleasure, but for his
disobedience to the most unjust commands of the State he must suffer what ever
punishment the law does inflict without any relief from the Church.

Two instances are brought by the Warner, of the Church and States contrary
commands: the first the King commanded Edinburgh to feast the frensh
Ambassadors, but the Church commanded Edinburgh to fast that day when the King
desired them to feast. Ans. Here were no so contrary commands, but both were
obeyed, the people did keep the humiliation, and some of the Magistrates that
same day did give the banquet to the frensh Ambassadors as the King commanded;
that for this any Church censure was intended against them it is a malicious
calumny, according to the author of this fable his own confession, as at
length may be seen in the unloading of Issachars burden.

As for his second instance, the difference of the Church The Warner is full of
calumnious untruths.
and State about the late engagement we have spoken to it in the former chapter
at length: the furthest the Church went was by humble petitions and
remonstrances to set before the Parliament the great danger, which that
engagement (as it was stated and managed) did portent to religion, the Kings
Person and whole Kingdom, when contrary to their whole some advices the
engagement went on, they meddled not to oppose the act of State further then to
declare their judgment of its unlawfulness, according to the duty of
faithful watchmen Ezekiel. 33. It is very false that the Church has chased any
man out of the country, or excommunicated any for following that engagement, or
have put any man to sackcloath for it, unto his day. Neither did ever any man
call the freedom of the late Parliament in question, how unsatisfied soever
many were with its proceedings.

When the Warner heaps up so many untruths in a few lines, in things done but
yesterday before the eyes of thousands, we shall not wonder of his venturing to
lie confidently in things past long before any now living were borne: but there
are a generation of men who are bold to speak what makes for their end upon
the hope that few will be at the pains, to bring back what hes flowne from their
teeth to the touchstone of any solid trial.

CHAP. X.
The Nature of the Presbytrie is very concordant with Parliaments.

IN the tenth chapter the Warner undertakes to show the antipathy of
Presbyteries to Parliaments; albeit there be no greater harmony possible
betwixt any two bodies, then betwixt a general assembly and Parliament, a
Presbytery and an inferior civil court, if either the constitution or end or
daily practice of these judicatories be looked upon: but the praelaticall
learning is of so high a flight, that it dare undertake to prove any
conclusion: yet these men are not the first, that have offered to force men to
believe upon unanswerable arguments though contrary to common sense and and
reason that snow is black and the fire cold and the light dark.

For the proof of his conclusion he brings back yet again The eight desires
of the Church about the engagement were just and necessary.
the late engagement: how often shall this insipide colwort be set upon our
table? Will the Warner never be filled with this unsavory dish? The first crime
that here the Warner marks in our Church against the late Parliament in the
matter of the engagement is, their paper of the eight desires: upon this he
unpoureth out all his good pleasure, not willing to know that all these desires
were drawn from the Church by the Parliaments own messages, and that well
near all these desires were counted by the Parliament it self to be very just
and necessary: Especially these two which the wise Warner pitches upon as most
absurd for the first a security to religion from the King upon oath under his
hand and seal: where the question among us was not for the thing it self, but
only about the time, the order and some part of the matter of that security.
And for the second, the qualification of the persons to be employed, that all
should be such who had given no just cause of Jealousy; no man did question,
but all who were to have the managing of that war should be free of all just
causes of Jealousy, which could be made appear not to half a dossen of
Ministers, but to any competent judicatory according to the laws of the
Kingdom. The Warner has not been careful to inform himself, where the knot
of the difference lay, and so gives out his own groundless conjectures for
true Historical narrations, which he might easily have helped by a more
attentive reading of our public declarations.

The second fault he finds with our Church is, that they proclaim in print
their dissatisfaction with that engagement as favorable to the malignant
party, etc. Ans. The Warner knows not that it is one of the liberties of the
Church of Scotland established by law and long custom to keep the It is one of
the liberties of the Church of Scotland to publish declarations.
people by public declarations in their duty to God, when men are like to draw
them away to sin according to that of Esaias. 8. v. 12. 13. What in great
humility piety and wisdom was spoken to the world in the declaration of the
Church concerning that undertaking, was visible enough for the time to any who
were not peremptor to follow their own ways: and the lamentable event since
has opened the eyes of many, who before would not see, to acknowledge their
former errors: but if God should speak never so loud from Heaven, the Warner
and his party will stop their cares: for they are men of such gallant
Spirits, as scorn to submit either to God or men, but in a Roman constancy
they will be ever the same though their counsels and ways be found never so
palpably pernicious.

The third thing the Warner lays to the charge of our The leavy was never
offered to be stopped by the Church.
Church is, that they retarded the leavies. Ans. In this also the Warner shows
his ignorance or malice: for how sore soever the Levy (as then stated and
managed) was against the hearts of the Church, yet their opposition to it, was
so cold-rife and small, that no complaint needs be made of any retardment from
them. So soon as the commanders thought it expedient, there was an Army gotten
up so numerous and strong, that with the ordinary blessing of God was
abundantly able to have done all the professed service: but where the aversion
of the hearts of the Church and the want of their prayers is superciliously
contemned, what mervaile, that the strongest arm of flesh be quickly broken
The Church was not the cause of the gathering at Mauchlin Moore.
in pieces?

The fourth charge is most calumnious, that the Church gathered the country
together in arms at Mauchline moor to oppose the expedition. Ans. No Church
man was the cause of that meeting a number of yeomen being frighted from their
houses, did flee away to that corner of the Land, that they might not be forced
against their conscience to go as soldiers to England: while their number did
grow, and they did abide in a body for the security of their persons, upon a
sudden a part of the Army came upon them: some Ministers being near (by
occasion of the communion at Mauchlin the day before) were good instruments
with the people to go away in peace. And when the matter was tried to the
bottom by the most Eagle-eyed of the Parliament, nothing could be found
contrary to the Ministers protestation, that they were no ways the cause of
the peoples convening or fighting at Mauchlin.

The parallel that the Warner makes betwixt the general The assembly is
helpful and not hurtful to the Parliament.
assembly and Parliament is malicious in all its parts. For the first, though
the one Court be civil, and the other Spiritual, yet the Presbyterians lay
the authority of both upon a divine fundation, that for conscience sake the
Courts civil must be obeyed in all their Lawful commands, alsewell as the
assemblyes of the Church; God being the author of the politic order as well as
the Ecclesiastic, and the revenger of the contempt of the one alswell as of
the other. But what does the Warner mean, to mock at Ministers for carrying
themselves as the Ambassadors of Christ, for judging according to the rule of
Scripture, for caring for life eternal? is he become so shamefullie impious,
as to persuade Ministers to give over the care of life eternal, to lay aside
the holy Scripture, and deny their embassage from Jesus Christ? behold what
Spirit leads our praelats, while they jeere the World out of all Religion, and
chase away Ministers from Christ, from Scripture, from eternal life.

Of the second part of the parallel, that people are more ready to obey their
Ministers then their Magistrates what shall be made? all the power which
Ministers have with the people is builded on their love to God and religion:
how much so ever it is, a good Statseman will not envy it: for he knows that
God and conscience constrain Ministers to employ all the power they have with
the people to the good of the Magistrate, as the deputy and servant of God for
the peoples true good. The Warner here understands best his own meaning, while
he scoffs at Ministers for their threatening of men with hells fire. Are our
Praelats come to such open proclamations of their Atheism, as to printe their
desires to banish out of the hearts of people all fear not only of
Church Censures, but even of hell it self? whither may not Satan dryve at last
the instruments of his Kingdom?

The third part of the parallel consists of a number of unjust and false
imputations before particularly refuted.

What he subjoines of the power of the general Assembly The apointment of
comittees is a right of every court as well Ecclesiastic as civil.
to name Comittees to sit in the intervalls of Assemblies, it is but a pcore
charge: is it not the daily practice of the Parliaments of Scotland to nominat
their Comittees of State for the intervalls of Parliament? Is it not ane
inhaerent right to every Court to name some of their number to cognosce upon
things within their own sphere at what ever times the court it self finds
expedient; how ever the judicatories of the Church by the laws of the Kingdom
being authorized to meet when themselves think fit both ordinarily and pro
renata, their power of appointing Comittees for their own affairs was never
questioned: and truly these Comittees in the times of our late troubles when
many were lying in wait to disturb both Church and State, have been forced to
meet oftener then otherwise any of their members did desire: whose diversion
from their particular charges (though for attendance on the public) is joined
with so great fashery and expense, that with all their heart they could be
glade to decline it, if fear of detriment to the Church made not these
meetings very necessary.

CHAP. XI.
The Presbytery is no burden to any honest man.

THE bounds and compass of the Warners rage against There is no rigor at all
in the Presbytery.
the Presbytery is very large; not being content to have incensed the King and
Parliament against it, he comes down to the body of the people, and will have
them believe the special enimity of the Scots discipline against them, first
because it inflicts Church censures upon every one for the smallest faults.
Ans. The faults which the Warner mentions may well be ane occasion of a private
advice in the ear, but that any of them did ever procure the smallest censure
of the Church, it is a great untruth: no man who knows us, will complain of
our rigor, here we wish we were able to refute upon as good reason the charge
of our laxenes in the mouth of sectaries as we are that of our strictnes in the
mouth of Erastianes. We would know of the Warner, what are these Sabbath
recreations, which he says are void of scandal, and consistent with the duties
of the day; are they not the stage plays and the other honest pastimes,
wherewith his friends were wont to sanctify the Lords day, as no more a
Sabbath then any other day in the year, and much less then diverse popish
festivalls? An Aposteme in the lowest gutt will show it self by the unsavory
vapors, which now and then are eructat from it. That ever in Scotland there
was one word of debate about starch and cuffs, is more then the Warner can
prove.

The second oppression, whereby the Presbytery trods Crimes till repented of
ought to keep from the holy table.
the people under foot is a rare cruelty; that persons, for grievous crimes
whereof the Magistrate takes notice, are called to Ecclesiastic repentance.
Will the Doctor in his fury against us, run out upon all his own friends for
no appearance of a fault? Will either the English or popish praelats admit
murderers, whoores or thieves to the holy table without any signs of
repentance? Is not the greatest crime the ground of the greatest scandal? Shall
small scandals be purged away by repentance, and the greatest be totally past
by? The Warner here may know his own meaning but others will confess their
ignorance of his mind.

The third grievance he would have the people conceive Excommunication in
Scotland is not injurious to any.
against the Presbytery is, the rigor of their excommunication; in this also
the Warner seems to know little of the Scots way, let excommunication be so
seveer in Scotland as is possible, yet the hurt of it is but small: it is so
rare an accident, men may live long in Scotland, and al their life never see
that censure execute; I have lived in one of the greatest Cities of that land
and for forty seven years even from my birth to this day, that censure to my
knowledge or hearing was never execute there in my days but twice; first upon
ane obstinat and very profane Papist; and nixt on some horrible scandalous
praelats. Again when any is excommunicated by the Church, we go no further
with them then Paul's command: 2. These. 3. 14. only they who are not tied to
them by natural bonds, abstain from familiar and unnecessary conversation, to
bring them by the sense of this shame to repentance for their sins.

Thirdly the civil inconvenientes which follow that censure come along from
the State and the acts of Parliament, for which the Church ought not to be
challenged; especially by praelats who wont to allow their officials to
excommunicat whole incorporations of people for a small debt of money, and to
press the contemners of that frivolous and profane sentence, with all the
civil inconvenientes they could. Fourthly what ever be the laws in Scotland
against them who continues long in the contempt of Excommunication, (which are
not inflicted but for great sins and after a long process) yet certainly their
execution is very far from all cruelty, as they who know the proceedings of
that land, will bear witness.

What he objects about fugitives; it is true, when a process is begun, a
fugitive may have it concluded, and sent after him; but we count not that man a
fugitive from discipline or contumacious as the Warner quarrels us, who upon
just fear to hazard his life does not compear.

CHAP. XII.
The Presbytery is hurtful to no order of men.

PRaelaticall malice is exorbitant beyond the bounds of all The Warners outrage
against the Presbytery*
show of moderation: was it not enough to have calumniat the Presbytery to
Kings, Princes and Sovereigns, to Parliaments and all Courts of Justice, to
people and all particular persons, but yet a new chapter must be made to show
in it the hurtfullnes of Presbytery to all orders of men: we must have
patience to stand a little in the unsavory air of this vomit also. The
Praelats were constant oppressors of the Nobility and gentry.


Unto the nobility and gentry the Presbitery must be hurtful, because it
subjecteth them to the censures of a raw heady novice and a few ignorant
artificers. Ans. Its good that our praelats are now turned pleaders against the
oppression of the Nobility and gentry: its not long since the praelatical
clergy were accustomed to set their foul feet on the necks of the greatest
peers of the three Kingdoms with to high a pride and pressure; that to shake
of their yock, no suffering, no hazard has been refused by the best of the
Nobility and gentry of Britain: but natures and principles are so easy to be
changed, that no man now needs fear any more oppression from the praelats,
though they were set down again and well warned in their repaired throns.

But to the challenge we answer, that the meanest Eldership The way of the
Scotes Presbytery is incomparably better then that of the English Episcopacy.
of a small Congregation in Scotland consists of the Pastor, and a dozen (at
least) of the most wise pious and learned that are to be found in the whole
flock; which yet the Warner here makes to be judges but of the common people in
matters of smallest moment. But for the classical Presbytery, to which he
referres the Ecclesiastical causes of the Nobility and gentry, and before whom
indeed every Church process of any considerable weight or difficulty does
come, though it concern the persons of the meanest of the people, this
Presbytery does consist ordinarily of fifeteen Ministers (at least) and fifeteen
of the most qualified noblemen, gentlemen and Burgesses, which the circuit of
fifteen parishes can afford, these (I hope) may make up a judicatory of a
great deal more worth then any official court, which consists but of one
judge, a petty mercenary lawyer, to whose care alone the whole Ecclesiastic
jurisdiction over all the Nobility and gentry of diverse shyres is committed,
and that without appeal as the Warner has told us, except it be to a Court of
delegats; a miserable relief that all the Nobility, gentry and Commons of a
Kingdom, who are oppressed by Episcopal officials, have no other remedy but
to go attend a Committee of two or three civilians at London deputed for the
discussing of such appeals.

The Presbyterian course is much more ready, solid and equitable: if any
grievance arise from the sentence of a Presbytery, a Synod twice a year does
sit in the bounds, and attends for a week, or if need be, longer, to determine
all appeals, and redress all grievances: now the Synod does consist of all
the Ministers within the bounds, which ordinarily are of diverse whole shyres as
that of Glasgow, of the upper and nether ward of Clidsedaile, Baerranfrow,
Lennox, Kile, Carrick and Cunninghame; also beside Ministers, the constant
members who have decisive voice in Synodes, are the chief Noblemen, Gentlemen
and Burgesses of all these shyres, among whom their be such parts for judgment
as are not to be found nor expected in any inferior civil Court of the
Kingdom, yet if it fall out so, that any party be grieved with the sentence of
a Synod, there is then a farther and final appeal in a General assembly,
which consists of as many Burgesses and more Gentlemen from every shire of the
Kingdom then come to any Parliament: beside the prime Nobility and choicest
Ministry of the land; having the Kings Majesty in person, or in his absence,
his high Commissioner to be their praesident. This meeting yearly (or oftener,
if need be) sits ordinarily a month; and if they think fit, longer: the number,
the wisdom, the eminency of the members of this Court is so great, that
beside the unjustice, it were a very needless labor to appeal from it to the
Parliament, for (as we have said) the King or his high Commissioner, sits in
both meetings albeit in a different capacity: the number and qualification of
knights and Burgesses is ever large as great in the assembly as in the
Parliament: only the difference is, that in the Parliament all the Nobility in
the Kingdom sit without any election and by virtue of their birth, but in the
Assembly only who for age, wisdom and piety are chosen by the Presbyteries as
fittest to judge in Ecclesiastic affairs but to make up this odds of the
absence of some Noblemen, the Assembly is always adorned with above ane
hundred of the choicest Pastors of the whole land, none where of may sit in
Parliament: nothing that can conciliate authority to a Court, or can be found
in the Nation, is wanting to the general assembly; how basely so ever our
praelats are pleased to trample upon it.

The second alleged hurt which the Nobility have from All questions about
patronages in Scotland are now ended.
the Presbytery, is the loss of their patronages by congregations electing
their Pastors. Ans. Howsoever the judgment of our Church about patronages is no
other then that of the Reformed divines abroad, yet have our Presbyteries
always with patience endured patrons to present unto vacant Churches, till the
Parliament now at last has taken away that grievance.

The Nobilities last hurt by the Presbytry is their loss of The possessors of
Church lands were ever feared for Bishops, but never for the Presbytery.
all their impropriations and Abey-lands. Ans. How Sycophantick an accusation
is this? for who knows not, how far the whole generation of the praelaticke
faction do exceed the highest of the Presbyterians in zeal against that which
they call Sacrilege? never any of the Presbyterians did attempt either by
violence, or a course of Law, to put out any of the Nobility or gentry from
their possessions of the Church Lands, but very lately the threats and vigorous
activity of the praelats, and their followers were so vehement in this kind,
that all the Nobility and gentry who had any interest, were wackned (to
purpose) to take heed of their rights. In the last Parliament of Scotland when
the power of the Church was as great as they expect to see it again, though
they obtained the abolition of patronages, yet were the possessors of the
Church Lands and tithes so little harmed that their rights thereto were more
clearly and strongly confirmed, then by any praeceding Parliament.

The fourth hurt is that every ordinary Presbyter will make himself a Noblemans
fellow. Ans. No where in the World does gracious Ministers (though mean borne
men) receive more respect from the Nobility then in Scotland: neither any where
does the Nobility and gentry receive more duly their honor then from the
Ministers there. That insolent speech fathered on Mr. Robert Bruce is
demonstrat to be a fabulous calumny in the historical vindication.

How ever the Warner may know that in all Europe where Bishops have place, it
hes ever, (at least these 800 years) been their nature to trample under foot
the highest of the Nobility. As the Pope must be above the Emperor, so a
little Cardinal Bellarmin can tell to King James, that he may well be counted
a companion of any Ilander King: were the Bishops in Scotland ever content,
till they got in Parliament the right hand and the nearest seats to the
throne, and the door of the greatest Earls, Marquesses and duks? was it not
Episcopacy, that did advance poor and capricious pedants to strive for the
white staves and great Seals of both Kingdoms, with the prime Nobility; and
often overcome them in that strife? In Scotland I know, and the Warner will
assure for England and Ireland, that the basest borne of his brethren hes
ruffled it in the secreet counsel, in the royal Exchequer, in the highest
courts of justice, with the greatest Lords of the Land: its not so long, that
yet it can be forgotten, since a Bishop of Galloway had the modesty to give
unto a Marquise of Argile, tanta mont to a broadly The praelats continue to
annull the being of all the reformed Churches for their want of Episcopacy.
in his face at the counsel table. The Warner shall do well to reckon no more
with Presbyters for braving of Noblemen.

The nixt he will have to be wronged by the Presbytery are the orthodoxe
clergy. Ans. All the Presbyterians to him (it seems) are heterodoxe;
Episcopacy is so necessary a truth that who denies it, must be stamped as for a
grievous error with the character of heterodox. The following words clear
this to be his mind, they loss (says he) the confortable assurance of
undoubted succession by Episcopal ordination: what sense can be made of these
words, but that all Ministers who are not ordained by Bishops, must lie under
the confortlesse uncertainty of any lawful succession in their ministerial
charge, for want of this succession through the lineall descent of Bishops from
the Apostles; at least for want of ordination by the hands of Bishops, as if
unto them only the power of mission and ordination to the Ministry were
committed by Christ: because of this defect the Presbyterian Ministers must not
only want the confort of an assured and undoubted calling to the Ministry, but
may very well know and be assured that their calling and Ministry is null. The
words immediately following are scraped out after their printing: for what cause
the author lest knows: but the purpose in hand makes it probable, that the
deletted words did express more of his mind, then it was safe in this time and
place to speak out: it was the late doctrine of Doctor Brambles prime friends,
that the want of Episcopal ordination did not only annual the calling of all
the Ministers of France, Holland, Zwit-zerland, and Germany, but also did
hinder all these societies to be true Churches: for that popular Sophisme of
the Jesuits our praelats did greedily swallow; where are no true Sacraments,
there is no true Church; and where is no true Ministry, there are no true
Sacraments; and where no true ordination, there is no true ministry; and where
no Bishops, there is no true ordination: and so in no reformed country but in
England and Ireland where were true Bishops, is any true Church. When
Episcopacy comes to this height of elevation, that the want of it must annull
the Ministry, yea null the Church and all the Reformed at one strock, is it any
mervaill, that all of them do concur together for their own preservation, to
abolish this insolent abaddon and destroyer? and notwithstanding all its ruin
have yet no disconfort at all, nor any the least doubt of their most lawful
ordination by the hands of the Presbytry.

After all this was written, as here it stands, another copy The Praelats are
so baselie injurious to all the reformed Churches that their selses are ashamed
of it.
of the Warners book was brought to my hand wherein I found the deleted line
stand printed in these distinct terms, and put it to a dangerous question
whither it be within the payle of the Church, the deciphering of these words
puts it beyond all peradventure that what I did conjecture of the Warner and
his Brethrens mind, of the state of all the reformed Churches, was no
mis-take, but that they do truly judge the want of Episcopal ordination to
exclude all the Ministers of other Reformed Churches, and their flocks also
from the lines of the true Church. This indeed is a most dangerous question:
for it stricks at the root of all. If the Warner out of remorse of conscience
had blotted out of his book that error, the repentance had been commendable:
But he hes left so much yet behind unscraped out, as does show his mind to
continue what it was, so that fear alone to provoke the reformed here at this
unseasonable time, seems to have been the cause of deleting these too clear
expressions of the praelaticall tenet against the very being and subsistence of
all the Protestant Churches, which want Episcopacy, when these me^ do still
stand upon the extreme pinnacle of impudency and arrogance, denying the
Reformed to be true Churches, and without scuple averring Rome as she stands
this day, under the counsel of Trent, to be a Church most true, wherein there is
an easy way of salvation, from which all separation is needless, and with
which are-union were much to be desired? That gracious faction this day is
willing enough to persuade, or at least to rest content without any opposition
that the King should of himself without and before a Parliament, (though
contrary to many standing Laws) grant under his hand and seal a full liberty
of Religion to the bloody Irish, and to put in their hands, both arms, Castles
and prime Places of trust in the State; that the King should give assurance of
his endeavor, to get all these ratified in the nixt Parliament of England,
these men can hear with all moderation and patience: but behold their furious
impatience, their whole art and industry is wakned, when they hear of any
appearance of the Kings inclination toward covenanting Protestants: night and
day they beat in his Majesty's head, that all the mischieves of the world does
lurk in that miserable covenant, that death and any misfortune, that the ruin
of all the Kingdoms ought much rather to be embraced by his Majesty, then
that prodigious Monster, that very hell of the Covenant, because forsooth it
does oblige in plane terms the taker to endeavor (in his station) the
abolition of their great Goddess, praelacy.

The nixt hurt of Ministers from the Presbytry, is, that by it they are brought
to ignorance, contempt and beggary. The generality of the Episcopal clergy have
ever been covered with ignorance, beggary, and contempt.
Ans. Whither Episcopacy or Presbytry is the fittest instrument to avert these
evils, let reason or experience teach men to judge. The Presbyteriall
discipline does oblige to a great deal of severer trials in all sort of
learning requisite in a divine before ordination then does the Episcopal: let
either the rule or practice of Presbyterian and Episcopal ordination be
compared or the weekly Exercises and monthly disputations in Latin upon the
controverted heads be looked upon which the Presbytry exacts of every Minister
after his ordination all the days of his life: for experience let the French,
Dutch and Scots divines who have been or yet are, be compared with the ordinary
generation of the English Clergy, and it will be found, that the praelats have
not great reason so superciliously to look down with contempt upon their
Brethrens learning. I hope, Cartwright, Whitaker, Perkins, Reynolds, Parker,
Ames, and other Presbyterian English were inferior in learning to none of their
opposits: some of the English Bishops has not wanted good store of learning,
but the most of them (I believe) will be content to leave of boasting in this
subject, what does the Warner speak to us of ignorance, contempt and Beggary?
does not all the world know, that albeit some few, scarce one of twenty, did
brook good benefices, yea plurality of them whereby to live in splendour at
Court, or where they listed in their non-residency, nevertheless it has been
much complained, that the greatest part of the priests, who had the cure of
souls through all the Kingdom of England, were incomparably the most ignorant,
beggarly and contemptible clergy, that ever have been seen in any of the
reformed Churches? neither did we ever hear of any great study in the Praelats
to remeed these evils, albeit some of them be provident enough for their own
families. Doctor Bramble knows who had the skill before they had sitten seven
year in their charge to purchase above fifeteen hundred pounds a year for
themselves and their heirs what somever.

The third evil which the Ptesbytery brings upon Ministers is that it makes
them prat and pray nonsense everlastingly. The Praelats continue to hate
preaching and prayer but to idolize a popish service.
Ans. It is indeed a great heartbrake unto ignorant, lazy and unconsciencious
Ministers to be put to the pains of preaching and prayer, when a read service
was wont to be all their exercise: but we thought that all indifferently
ingenuous men had long ago been put from such impudence. It was the late
labor of the praelats by all their skill to disgrace preaching and praying
without book, to cry up the Liturgy as the only service of God, and to idolize
it as a most heavenly and divine piece of write, which yet is naught but a
transcript of the superstitious breviary and idolatrous missall of Rome. The
Warner would do well to consider and answer after seven years advisement Mr.
Bailie his pararell of the service with the missall and Breviarie, before he
present the world with new paralels of the English liturgy, with the
directories of the Reformed Churches. Is it so indeed, that all preaching and
praying without book is but a pratting of nonsense everlastingly, why then
continues the King and many well minded men to be deceived by our Doctors,
while they affirm that they are as much for preaching in their practice and
opinion as the Presbyterians, and for prayer without book also, before and
after sermon, and in many other occasions? it seems these affirmations are
nothing but gross dissimulation in this time of their lowness and affliction,
to decline the envy of people against them for their profane contempt of divine
ordinances; for we may see here their tenet to remain what it was, and
themselves ready enough, when their season shall be fitter, to ring it out loud
in the ears of the World, that for divine service people needs no more but the
reading of the liturgy, Vide lad^nsium. cap. 7.
that sermons on week days and Sundays afternoon must all be laid aside, that
on the Sabbath before noone Sermon is needless, and from the mouths of the
most Preachers very noxious; that when some learned Scholars are pleased on
some festival days to have an oration, it would be short and and according to
the Court pattern, without all Spirit and life for edification; but by all
means it must be provided, that no word of prayer either before or after be
spoken, except only a bidding to pray, for many things even for the welfare of
the souls departed; and all this alone in the words of the Lords prayer. If
any shall dare to express the desires of his heart to God in private or public
in any words of his own framing he is a gross Puritan, who is bold to offer
to God his own nonsense rather then the ancient, and well advised prayers of
the holy Church.

The Warner is here also mistaken in his belief, that ever the Church of
Scotland had any Liturgy, they had and have still some forms for help and
direction, but no ty ever in any of them by law or practice: they do not
condemn the use of set forms for rules, yea nor for use in beginners, who are
thereby endeavoring to attain a readiness to pray in their family out of
their own heart in the words which Gods spirit dytes to them; but for
Ministers to suppress their most confortable and useful gift of prayer by
tying their mouth unto such forms which themselves or others have composed we
count it a wrong to the giver, and to him who has received the gift, and to the
gift, and to the Church for whose use that was bestowed.

In the nixt place the Warner makes the Presbytry injurious Episcopal warrants
for clandestin marriages, rob Parents of their children.
to parents, by marying their children contrary to their consent, and forcing
them to give to the disobedient as large a portion as to any other of their
obedient children, and that it is no mervail the Scots should do these things
who have stripped the King the father of their country of his just rights. Ans.
By the Warners rule all the actions of a nation where a Presbytry lodges must
be charged on the back of the Presbytry. II. The Parliament of Scotland denies,
that they have stripped the King of his just rights; while he was stirred up
and kept on by the praelaticall faction to courses destructive to himself
and all his people; after the shedding of much blood, before the exercise of
all parts of his royal government, they only required for all satisfaction and
security to religion and liberties, the grant of some few most equitable
demands. The unhappy Praelats from the beginning of our troubles to this day
finding our great demand to run upon the abolition of their office, did
everpresse his Majesty to deny us that satisfaction, and rather then Bishops
should be laid aside they have concluded that the King himself, and all his
family and all his three Kingdoms shall perish: yet with all patience the
Scotes continue to supplicat and to offer not only their Kingdom, but their
lives and estats and all they have for his Majesty's service upon the grant of
their few and easy demands; but no misery either of King or people can overcome
the desperate obstinacy ofPraelaticall hearts.

As for parents consent to the marriage of their children, how tenderly it is
provided for in Scotland it may be seen at length in the very place cited. It
was the Bishops, who by their warrants for clandestine marriages, and
dispensations with marriages without warrant have spoiled many parents of their
dear children: with such abominations the Presbytery was never acquainted;
all that is alleged out of that place of our discipline is, when a cruel
parent or tutor abuses their authority over their children, and against all
reason for their own evil ends perversely will cross their children in their
lawful and every way honest desires of marriage; that in that case the
Magistrates and Ministers may be entreated by the grieved child to deal with
the unjust parent or tutor, that by their mediation reason may be done. I
believe this advice is so full of equity, that no Church nor State in the world
will complain of it: but how ever it be, this case is so rare in Scotland that
I profess, I never in my life did know, nor did hear of any child before my
days, who did assay by the authoritative sentence of a Magistrate or Minister
to force their parents consent to their marriage. As for the Warners addition
of the Ministers compelling parents to give portions to their children, that
the Church of Scotland haths any such canon or practice its an impudent lie,
but in the place alleged is a passage against the sparing of the life of
adulterers, contrary to the Law of God: and for the excommunication of
Adulterers, when by the negligence of the Magistrate their life is spared, this
possibly may be the thorn in the side of some which makes them bite and spurn
with the heel so furiously against the Authors and lovers of so severe a
discipline.

The Presbyteries nixt injury is done to the Lawyers, Synodes and other
Ecclesiastic Courts revoke their Sentences. Ans. No such matter ever was
attempted in Scotland; frequent prohibitions have been obtained by curtisan
Bishops, against the highest civil judicatories in England, but that ever a
Presbitry or Synod in Scotland did so much as assay to impede or repeal the
proceedings of any the meanest civil court, I did never hear it so much as
alleged by our adversaries.

The nixt injury is against all Masters, and Mistresses of families, Serious
catechizing is no Episcopal crime.
whom the Presbytery will have to be personally examined in their knowledge
once a year, and to be excommunicat, if grossly and wilfully ignorant. Ans. If
it be a crime for a Minister to call together parcels of his congregation to
be instructed in the grounds of Religion, that servants and children and (where
ignorance is suspected,) others also may be tried in their knowledge of the
Catechism; or if it be a crime that in family-visitations oftener then once a
year the conversation of every member of the Church may be looked upon; we
confess the Ministers of Scotland were guilty thereof, and so far as we know
the generality of the Episcopal faction may purge themselves by oath of any
such imputation: for they had somewhat else to do, then to be at the pains of
instructing or trying the Spiritual State of every sheep in their flocks: we
confess likewise, that it is both our order and practice to keep off from the
holy table, whom we find groslly and wilfully ignorant: but that ever any for
simple ignorance was excommunicat in Scotland, none who knows us will affirm
it.

The last whom he will have to be wronged by the Presbytery Church sessions are
not high commissiones.
are the common people, who must groan under a high commission in every
parish, where ignorant governors rule all without Law, meddling even in
domestical jarres be twixt man and wife, Master and Servant. Ans. This is but
a gybe of revenge for the overthrow of their Tyrannous high Commission-Court,
where they were wont to play the Rex at their pleasure above the highest
subjects of the three Kingdoms, and would never give over that their insolent
domeneering court, till the King and Parliaments of both Kingdoms did agree to
throw it down about their ears. The thing he jeares at, is the congregationall
Eldership, a judicatory which all the Reformed do enjoy to their great confort
as much as Scotland. They are far from all arbitrary judications; their Laws
are the holy Scripture and acts of superior Church-judicatories, which rule so
clearly the cases of their cognizance, that rarely any difficulty remains
therein: or if it do, immediately by reference or appeal it is transmitted to
the Classes or Synod. The judges in the lowest Eldership (as we have said
before) are a doszen at least, of the most able and pious who can be hade in a
whole congregation to join with the Pastors one or more as they fall to be:
but the Episcopal way is to have no discipline at all in any congregation:
only where there is hope of a fine, the Bishops official will summon before
his own learned and conscientious wisdom, who ever within the whole dioces
have fallen into such a fault as he pleases to take notice of: as for
domestic infirmities, Presbyterians are most tender to meddle therein; they
come never before any judicatory, but both where the fault is great, and the
scandal thereof flagrant, and broken out beyond the walls of the family.

These are the great injuries and hurts which the Church discipline has
procured to all orders of men in the whole reformed world, when Episcopacy has
been such an innocent lamb, or rather so holy an angel upon earth, that no
harm at all has ever come by it to any mortal creature: a misbeleeving Jew
will nothing misdoubt this so evident a truth.

CHAP. ULT.
The Warners exceptions against the covenant are full of considence but
exceeding frivolous.

THough in the former Chapters the Warner has showed out more venom and gall
then the bag of any one man's stomach could have been supposed capable of, yet
as if he were but beginning to vomit, in this last Chapter of the covenant a
new flood of blacker poison rusheth out of his pen. His undertaking is great,
to demonstrat clearly that the covenant is merely void wicked and impious. His
first clear demonstration is, that it was devised by strangers, imposed by
subjects, who wanted requisite power, and was extorted by just fear of unjust
suffering, so that many that took it with their lips, never consented with
their hearts. Ans. This clear demonstration is but a poor and evil argument:
the Major, if it were put in form, would hardly be granted, but I stand on the
minor as weak and false for the covenant was not devised by strangers, the
Commissioners The Covenant was not dishonorable to union.
of the Parliament of England together with the Commissioners of the Parlia
meant and general assembly of Scotland were the first and only framers thereof,
but they who gave the life and being to it in England were the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament at West-Minster by the Kings call, and at that
time acknowledged by his Majesty without any question about the lawfullnes of
their constitution and authority: these men and that Court were not I hope
great strangers in England. The covenant was not imposed upon the King: but the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms made it their earnest desire unto his Majesty,
that he would be pleased to join with them in that Covenant, which they did
judge to be a maine piece of their security for their Religion and liberties in
all the three Kingdoms. As for their imposing of it upon the subjects of
England, an ordinance of Parliament (though the King consent not) by the
uncontroverted laws of England, is a sufficient authority to crave obedience
of all the subjects of England, during the continuance of that Parliament.

The last part of the demonstration is dishonorable indeed to the English
Nation if it were true, it was no dishonor to England to join with their
brethren of Scotland in a Covenant for mantainance of their Religion and
Liberties: but for many of the English to swear a covenant with their lips,
from which their heart did dissent and upon this difference of heart and mouth
to plead the nullity of the oath, and to advance this plea so high as to a
clear demonstration, this is such a dishonor and dishonesty, that a greater
cannot fall upon a man of reputed integrity, Especially when the ground of the
lie and perjury is an evident falsehood: for the covenant was not extorted from
any flesh in England by fear of any unjust suffering; so far was it from this,
that to this day it could never be obtained from the Parliament of England, to
enjoyne that covenant upon any by the penulty of a two pence.

The Warners second demonstration is no better then the Covenanters were not
deceived, but understood what they swear.
first, the ground of it is, that all oaths are void which have deceit and
error of the substantial conditions incident to them. This ground had need to
be much better cautioned, then here it is, before it can stand for a major of
a clear demonstration: but how is the minor proved? behold how much short the
Warners proofs are of his great boastings. His first argument is grounded upon
an evident falsehood, that in the Covenant we swear the lately devised
discipline to be Christ's institution. Ans. There is no such word nor any such
matter in all the Covenant: was the Warners hatred so great against that piece
of write, that being to make clear demonstrations against it, he would not so
much as cast his eye upon that which he was to oppugn, Covenanters swear to
endeavor the reformation of England, according to the word of God and the best
reformed Churches, but not a word of the Scotes Presbytery, nor of any thing in
any Church even the best reformed, unless it be found according to the pattern
of Gods holy word.

The second ground of his demonstration is also an evident error, that the
covenant in hand is one and the same The Warner unwittingly comends the
Covenant.
with that of King James. Ans. Such a fancy came never in the head of any man,
I know; much less was it ever written or spoken by any: that the Covenant of
King James in Scotland 1580, should be one and the same with the Covenant of
all the three Kingdoms 1643, whatsoever identities may appear in the matter
and similitude, in the ends of both; but the grossest errors are solid enough
grounds for praelaticall clear demonstrations. Yet here the Warner understands
not how he is cutting his own vines; his friends in Scotland will give him
small thanks for attributing unto the national Covenant of Scotland, (that
Covenant of King James) these three properties, that it was issued out by the
Kings authority, that it was for the maintenance of the Laws of the realm,
and for the maintenance of the established Religion: time brings adversaries to
confess of their own accord long denied truths. But the Characters, which the
Warner inprints upon the solemn league and Covenant of the three Kingdoms,
we must be pardoned to controvert, till he have taken some leisure to try
his wild assertions. First that the league is against the authority of the
King, secondly that it is against the Law; and thirdly that it is for the
overthrow of Religion. The man cannot think, that any should believe his
dictats of this kind without proof, since the express words of that league do
flatly contradict him in all these three positions.

His gentle memento, that Scotland, when they sued for aid from the crown of
England, had not the English discipline obtruded upon their Church, might here
have been spaired: was not the English discipline and liturgy obtruded upon us
by the praelats of England with all craft and force? did we ever obtrude our
discipline upon the English? but when they of their own free and long
deliberate choice had abolished Bishops and promised to set up Presbytery, so
far as they had found it agreeable to the word of Cod, were we not in all
reason obliged to encourage and assist them in so pious a work?

In the nixt words the Warner for all his great boasts finding the weakness of
all the former grounds of his second The King did not clame the sole and
absolute possession of the militia.
demonstration, he offers three new ones: which doubtless will do the deid: for
he avowes positively that his following grounds are demonstrative, yet
whosoever shall be pleased to grip them with never so soft an hand shall find
them all to be but vanity and wind. The first, after a number of prosyllogismes
rests upon these two foundations, first that the right of the militia resides
in the King alone: secondly that by the covenant the militia is taken out of
the Kings hands; and that every covenanter by his covenant disposes of himself
and of his arms, against the right which the King has into him. Ans. The
Warner will have much ado to prove this second so, that it may be a ground of
a clear demonstration: but for the first that the power of the militia of
England does reside in the King alone, that the two houses of Parliament have
nothing at all to do with it, and that their taking of arms for the defense
of the liberties of England or any other imaginable cause against any party
countenanced by the Kings presence against his laws must be altogether
unlawful; if his demonstration be no clearer, then the ground where upon he
builds it, I am sure, it will not be visible to any of his opposits: who are
not like to be convinced of open rebellion by his naked assertion, upon which
alone he lays this his mighty ground. Believe it, he had need to assay its
relief with some color of ane argument; for none of his own friends will now
take it of his hand for ane indemonstrable principle, since the King for a long
time was willing to acknowledge the Parliaments jointe interest in the militia,
yea to put the whole militia in their hands alone for a good number of years
to come: so far was his Majesty from the thoughts, that the Parliaments
meddling with a part of the militia, in the time of evident dangers, should be
so certainly and clearly the crime of rebellion.

The Warners second demonstrative ground we admit without question in the
major, that where the matter is evidently unlawful, the oath is not binding;
but the application of this in the minor is very false. All that he brings to
make it appear to be true, is that the King is the supreme Legislator, that
it is unlawful for the subjects of England to change any thing established by
Law, especially to the prejudice of the Praelats without their own consent,
they being a third order of the Kingdom; otherwise it would be a harder measure
then the Friars and Abbots received from Henry the eight. Ans. May the Warner
be pleased to consider The change of laws in England ordinarily begin by the
two houses without the King.
how far his dictats here are from all reason, much more from evident
demonstrations. That the burden of Bishops and ceremonies was become so heavy
to all the three Kingdoms, that there was reason to endeavor their laying
aside, he does not offer to dispute; but all his complanit runs against the
manner of their removal: this (say I) was done in no other then the ordinary
and high pathway, whereby all burdensome Laws and customs use to be removed.
Does not the Houses of Parliament first begin with their ordinance before the
Kings consent be sought to a Law? is not an ordinance of the Lords and Commons
a good warrant to change a former Law during the sitting of the Parliament? The
Laws and customs of England permit not the King by his dissent to stop that
change. I grant for the turning The King did really consent to the abolition of
Bishops.
an ordinance to a standing Law, the Kings consent is required, but with what
qualifications and exceptions we need not here to debate, since his Majesty's
consent to the present case of abolishing Bishops was obtained well near as
far as was desired; and what is yet lacking, we are in a fair way to
obtain it: for the Kings Majesty long ago did agree to the rooting out of
Episcopacy in Scotland, he was willing also in England and Ireland to put them
out of the Parliament, and all civil courts, and to divest them of all civil
power, and to join with them Presbyteries for ordination and spiritual
jurisdiction; yea to abolish them totally name and thing, not only for three
years but ever till he and his Parliament should agree upon some settled order
for the Church. was not this Tantamont to a perpetual abolition for all and
every one in both houses having abjured Episcopacy by solemn oath and
Covenant, the Parliament was in no hazard of agreing with the King to re-erect
the fallen chaires of the Bishops: so there remained no other, but that either
his Majesty should come over to their judgment, or by his not agreing with
them, yet really to agree with them in the perpetual abolition of Episcopacy,
since the concession was for the laying Bishops aside ever, till he and his
houses had agreed upon a settled order for the Church. If this be not a full
and formal enough consent to the ordinance of changing the former Laws anent
praelats, his Majesty, who now is, easily may and readily would supply all
such defects: if some of the faction did not continually, for their own evil
interests, whisper in his ears pernicious counsel, as our Warner in this place
also does by frighting the King in conscience from any such consent, for this
end he casts out a discourse, the sinshews whereof are in these three
Episcopal maxims. First that the legislative power is sollie in the King,
that is according to his Brethrens The Praelats would flatter the King into a
Tyranny.
Co^mentary, that the Parliament is but the Kings great counsel of free choice,
without or against whose votes he may make or unmake what Laws he thinks
expedient; but for them to make any ordinance for changing without his consent
of any thing that has been, or instituting any new thing, or for them to defend
this their legal right and custom (time out of mind) against the arms of the
Malignant party, no man may deny it to be plain rebellion.

II. That the King and Parliament both together cannot The praelats takes to
themselves a negative voice in Parliament.
make a Law, to the praejudice of Bishops without their own consent, they being
the third order of the Kingdom: for albeit it be sacrilege in the Lords and
Commons, to clame any the smallest share of the legislative power, (this i^
them were to pyck the chiefest jewel out of the Kings Crown) yet this must be
the due privilege of the Bishops, they must be the third order of the
Kingdom, yea the first and most high of the three, far above the other two
temporal States of Lords and Commons; their share in the Legislative power
must be so great, that neither King nor Parliament can pass any Law without
their consent, so that according to their humble protestation, all the Laws
and acts, which have been made by King and Parliament, since they were expelled
the house of Lords, are clearly void and null.

That the King and Parliament in divesting Bishops of The Praelats grieve that
Monks and Friars, the Pope and Cardinals were casten out of England by Henry
the eight.
their temporal honor and estats, in abolishing their places in the Church,
do sin more against conscience then did Henry the eight and his Parliament,
when they put down the Abbots and the Friars. We must believe that Henry the
eight his abolishing the order of Monks was one of the acts of his greatest
Tyranny and greed: we must not doubt, but according to Law and reason, Abbots
and priours ought to have kept still their vote in Parliament, that the
Monasteryes and Nunryes should have stood in their integrity, that the King and
Parliament did wrong in casting them down, and that now they ought in
conscience to be set up again, yea that Henry the eight against all reason and
conscience did renounce his due obedience to the Pope, the Patriarch of the
West, the first Bishop of the universe, to whom the superinspection and
government of the whole Catholic Church in all reason does belong. Though all
this be here glaunced at by the Warner, and elsewhere he prove it to be the
declared mind of his Brethren, yet we must be pardoned not to accept them as
undeniable principles of clear demonstrations. The just supremacy of Kings is
not prejudged by the Covenant.


The last ground of the Doctors demonstration is, that the covenant is ane oath
to set up the Presbyterian government in England at it is in Scotland and that
this is contrary ^o the oath of Supremacy; for the oath of Supremacy makes the
King the only supreme head and governor of the Church of England, that is,
the civil head to see that every man do his duty in his calling; also it gives
the King a supreme power over all persons in all causes: but the Presbytery is
a political papacy, acknowledging no governors but only the Presbyters: it
gives the King power over all persons as subjects, but none at all in
Ecclesiastic causes. Ans. Is there in all this reasoning any thing sound?
First what article of the covenant bears the setting up of the Presbyterian
government in England as it is in Scotland? II. If the oath of supremacy import
no more then what the Warners express words are here, that the King is a civil
head, to see every man do his duty in his calling, let him be assured that no
Presbyterian in Scotland was ever contrary to that supremacy. III. That the
Presbytery is a papacy, and that a political one, the Warner knows it ought
not to be granted upon his bare word. IV. That in Scotland no other governors
are acknowledged then Presbyters, himself contradicts in the very nixt words,
where he tells that the Scots Presbytery ascribes to the King a power over all
persons as subjects. V. That any Presbyterian in Scotland makes it sacrilege
to give the King any power at all in any Ecclesiastic cause; it is a
senseless untruth.

The Warners arguments are not more idle and weak, The Warners insolent vanity.
then his triumphing upon them is insolent: for he concludes from these wise
and strong demonstrations, that the poor covenant is apparently deceitful,
unvalide, impious, rebellious, and what not? yea that all the learned divines
in Europe will conclude it so, and that all the covenanters themselfes who have
any ingenuity, must grant this much; and that no knowing English man can deny
it, but his own conscience will give him the ly. Ans. If the Warner with any
seriousness has weighed this part of his own write, and if his mind go
along with his pen, I may without great presumption pronounce his judgment to
be none of the most solid.

His following vapors being full of air we let them evanish, only while he
mentions our charging the King with intentions of changing the Religion and
government, we answer, that we have been most willing always to ascribe to the
King good intentions but withal we have long avowed that the praelaticall
party have gone beyond intentions to manifest by printed declarations and
public actions their former design to bring Tyranny upon the States, and
popery upon the Churches of all the three Kingdoms: and that this very write
of the Warners makes it evident, that this same mind yet remains within them
without the least show of repentance. So long as the conscience of the court is
managed by men of such principles, it is not possible to free the hearts of
the most understanding, from a great deal of Jealousy and fear to have
Religion and laws still overturned by that factione.

But the Warner commands us, to speak to his Dilemma, whither we think it
lawful or unlawful for subjects to take The covenant is not for propagating
os Religion by arms.
arms against their prince merely for Religion. We answer, that the reasons
whereby he thinks to conclude against us, on both sides are very poor, if we
shall say, it is unlawful; then he makes us to condemn our selfs, because
our covenant testifies to the world, that we have taken up arms merely to
alter Religion, and that we bear no alleadgance to our King but in order to
Religion, which in plain terms is to our own humors and conceits. Ans.
There be many untruthes here in few words, first how much reality and truth the
Warner and some of his fellows believes to be in that thing which they call
Religion, their own heart knows; but it can be no great charity in him to
make the Religion of all covenanters to be nothing but their own humors and
conceits. Secondly it is not true that Covenanters bear no alleadgance to the
King but only in order to religion. III. The Parliament of England denied that
they took up arms against their King, though to defend themselves against the
popish praelaticall and malignant faction, who were about to destroy them with
arms. IV. They have declared, that their purpose was not at all, to alter
Religion but to purge it from the corruptions of Bishops and ceremonies that to
long had been noxious unto them. V. They have often professed that their arms
were taken for the defense of their just liberties, whereof the preservation
and reformation of Religion was but one.

The other horn of his Dilemma is as blunt in pushing as the former. If we
make it lawful (says he) to take up arms for Religion, we then justify the
independents and Anabaptists; we make way for any that will plant what ever
they apprehend to be true Religion by force, and to cut the throat of all
Magistrates, who are in a contrary opinion to them; that it is a ridiculous
partiality for any to privilege their own Religion as truth and Gospel. Ans.
Whether The Warners black Atheism.
will these men go at last, the strength of this reason is blak atheism, that
their is no realty of truth in any Religion, that no man may be permitted to
take his Religion for any thing more but his own apprehension, which without
ridiculous folly he must not praeferre to any other man's apprehension of a
contrary Religion: this is much worse then the pagane Scepticisme, which turned
all reality of truth into a mere apprehension of truth, wherein their was no
certainty at all: this not only turns the most certain truths, even these
divine ones of Religion, into mere uncertain conceptions; but which is worse,
it will have the most orthodoxe believer so to think, speak and act, as if the
opinions of Independents, Anabaptists, Turks, Jews, Pagans or gross Atheists
were as good, true and solid as the belief of Moses or Paul, were of the
truths revealed to them from heaven. Secondly we say that subjects defense of
their Religion and liberties established by Law, against the violent usurpation
of Papists, Praelats or Malignants, is not the planting of Religion by arms;
much less is it the cutting of the throats of al Magistrates, who differ in any
point of Religion. The Praelats condemn the defensive arms of the Dutch and
Frensh Protestants.
III. In the judgment of the praelaticall party, the defensive arms of the
Protestants in France, Holland, and Germany, must be als much condemned as the
offensive arms of the Anabaptists in Munster, or of the sectaries this day in
England. Can these men dream that the World for their pleasure will so far
divest themselves of all Religion and reason, as to take from their hands so
brutish and Atheistical maxims.

The Praelats decline the judgment of counsels.
He concluds with a wish of a general counsel, at least of all protestant
Churches for to condemn all broatchers of seditious principles. Ans. All true
covenanters go before him in that desire, being confident that he and his
fellows as they have declined al ready the most solemn assemblies of their
own countries, upon assurance of their condemnation; so their tergiversation
would be als great, if they were to answer to an oecumenick Synod. The Praelats
overthrow the foundatio^s of Protestant Religion.
What (I pray) would the Warner say in a counsel of protestants for the
practice of his party pointed at in his last words? I mean their purging the
Pope of Antichristianisme, of purpose to make way for a reconciliation, yea for
a return to Rome, as this day it lies under the wings of the Pope and
Cardinals. The Praelats are still peremptory to destroy the King and all his
Kingdoms if they may not be restored.
Also what could they answer in a Christian counsel unto this charge, which is
the drift of this whole Book, that they are so far from any remorse for all
the blood and misery, which their wickedness (most) has brought on the former
King and all his Kingdoms these eleven years, that rather then they had not
as the Covenant and general assembly in Scotland destroyed as an Idol and
Antichrist, they will choose yet still to imbroyle all in new calamities? This
King also and his whole Family, the remainder of the blood and Estats in all
the three Kingdoms, must be hazarded for the sowing together of the torn
mytres, and the reerecting of the fallen chayres of Praelats. If Bishops must
lie still in their deserved ruins, they perseveer in their peremptory
resolution, to have their burials sprinkled with the ashes of the royal
Family and all the three Kingdoms.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
GOod Reader, the Authors absence from the Press the whole time of the
impression, and the Printers unacquaintance with the English language, has
occasioned not only many mispunctations and literal faults, but also diverse
grosser Errata such as the following which thou art entreated to mend with thy
Pen:

Page 4. lin. 23. for had read has. page 9. lin. 8. for Provincionall read
Provincial. p. 11. l. 30. for whereby r. where. p. 15. l. 19. for pairt r.
part. p. 20. l. 19, for can r. does. l. 30. for potestant r. Profestant. page
22. l. 19. for these r. the. p. 23. l. ult. for over r. or. for trusted r.
trustee. p. 27. l. 4. for impatien, t r. impatient. l. 18. dele, and. p. 28. in
marg. for commissarie r. commissaries. l. 14. for and r. or. l. 29. for chardge
r. charge. p. 31. l. 1. for chardges r. charges. l. 25. for citation r.
irritation. p. 32. l. 10. for praecipies r. praecipices. p. 35. in tit. of
chap. 7. for paritie r. part. p. 36. l. 2. for scandals r. scandal. p. 37. l.
2. for benefiter. benesice. p. 38. l. 10. for nation r. soldier. l. 11. for
their souls r. his soul. p. 48. c. 8. l. 4. dele Ans. p. 49. l. 18. for Warner
r. Doctor. p. 51. l. 13. for the r. his. p. 52. l. 16. for treasure r. Bishop.
p. 55. in tit. of chap. 9. for their r. the. p, 56. l. 31. for Christ r. Christ
his. l. 32. for point blank to r. point blanck. contrare to. p. 59. l. 1. dele
and. l. 1. for unpoureth r. vapoureth l. 17. for where r. here. p. 65. l. 5.
for continues r. continue. l. 6. for are r. is. p. 66. l. 3. for to r. so. l.
9. for warned. r. warmed. p. 67. l. 16. for in. r. to. p. 68. l. 5. for or. r.
which. l. 16. for last. r. nixt. p. 70. l. 18. for lest. r. best. l. ult. for
null the Church and r. the very being of. p. 71. l. 1. for Reformed r.
Reformed Churches. p. 73. l. 23. for charge r. chair. p. 74. l. 6. for service
r. service book. l. 28. dele, and. p. 75. l. 16. dele, and to the gift. p. 76.
l. ult. for haths. r. has. p. 78. l. 24. for doszen r. dozen. p. 82. l. 5. for
inprints. r. imprints. p. 84. l. 9. for complanit r. complaint. p. 85. l. 7.
for aside ever r. aside for ever. l. 16. for sinshews r. sinews.

AKOLOYTHOS OR A SECOND FAIR WARNING To take heed of the SCOTTISH DISCIPLINE,
In vindication of THE FIRST, (Which the Rt. Reverend Father in God, THE Ld.
BISHOP OF LONDON DERRIE Published A. 1649.) Against a schismatical and
seditious REVIEWER R. B. G. One of the bold Commissioners from the REBELLIOVS
KIRK IN SCOTLAND To His Sacred MAJESTY K. CHARLES the SECOND when at the
HAGE, BY RI. WATSON Chaplane to the Rt. Hoble. THE LORD HOPTON.

HAGH, Printed by SAMUEL BROUN, English Bookeseller. 1651.

To the R. Honorable. the LORD HOPTON Baron of Straton, etc. One of the Lords
of His Majeties most honorable Privy Council.
Mr LORD:
Upon discovery of a late motion in some sheets, I found my book to have
been hitherto but in a trance, which receiving as I thought, (but knew not from
whence) a mortal wound before it appeared in the encounter, I gave over long
since for down right dead and buried in the press. When it recovered spirits
enough to crave my hand, I could not deny it so small a courtesy as to help
it up. In that it looks not so vivide and fresh complexioned as heretofore it
might, it shares but in the ordinary effects of such misse-fortune. If
resuming what it was speaking a twelve-moneth since, be censured for
impertinencie to these times, and (it may be) laughed at by some for
prophesying of things past the possibility of their success, the fault may be
theirs that disordered the leaves when well suited, and the failing not mine,
who undertoke not against all changes of minds, or alterations of counsels, or
preventions of causes running on then visiblie to the same issues I assigned
them in my conjecture. But these exceptions, My Lord, though they clip the
fringe, neither unshape, nor shorten the garment I intended as the proper guise
for Scottish Presbyteric to be seen in the very same with that wherein the Rt.
Reverend Bishop of London Derrie had well clad her, soon afterward not onelic
undecentlie discomposed, but rent in pieces by the rudeness of an angry
fury, one of those sixc evil spirits that haunted (in the night of sorrow)
with both tempting and torrisying apparitions, His Royal Majesty and your H.
H. at the Hage. From whose praevailing violence no rescue could be offered but
by repelling the tempest of his language, wherewith he thought to keep all
Antagonists at a distance, and by blowing in his face the fire and stinking
sulphur of his breath. If your Lordship please to pass a little through the
smoke, and take no offense at the smell which in a near approach will be found
to be little of my making, Truth and reason will be beter discerned in a
readiness to entertain you, as some longer train of Authoritic had likewise
if Fathers and Councels in this pilgrimage of ours had been, to a just number,
within my reach, and some later Writers at the pleasure of my call. The stand,
or at least some impediment in the march, of these Bloody Presbyters, which
this forlorn hope will, in some likelihood cause for a time may by your
Lordship, unpraejudic'd, be taken for an hapie augurie of the absolute defeat
unquaestionablie to follow, if occasion require, by a greater strength, and
that under the conduct of beter experience in these polemical affairs. In the
interim though I humblic crave the honor and power of your patronage (whereof
from your integrity and constancy in Gods cause and the Kings, I praesume), I
assume not the boldness to constitute your Lordship any partic in the liberty
I take, beyond forward expressions, to declare what may be thought some
singularity in my sense. If any small Politician, whose conscience is squared
by no religion at all but what plainly lies in the image worship of his
temporal designs, will be (which I must look for to be) quaestioning the
prudence of my speeches, I thank God he has no privilege to give judgment
against the sincerity of my thoughts. I can no longer conceal, My Lord, how
much I am troubled to see our Churches diffusive charity mistaken, the
precious balm, which she ever liberally poured into the wounds of her
neighbors, cast by some of their hands like common oil upon her domestike
flames purposelie to consume her; And the skirt, she often spread over their
nakedness, cut of, with an unhandsome intent to laugh at her shame, had she
not an under garment of innocence to praevent them. To behold, after so many
years cantonizing our Religion amongst Protestant Congregations of different
opinions, (reconciled in nothing but, or nothing more then, in a negative to
the Papist) our selves, in the end, at a sad loss for protection (or indeed
free permission) from any, now neceslitated to seek it. This makes me so many
times in this discourse turn her away from all new names and professions
arising whether from protestations or Covenants, to the unconsoederate
Catholic Christianity among the Ancients where she is sure to have the safest
sanctuary of truth for her doctrine and practice, though she can expect no
armed assistance from the dead to maintain the distressed Members of her
communion. If this must be interpreted a schismatical inclination, let me be
left in my hold upon the horns of this altar, while others rise from their
knees to sit down, out of good felloship, at the Tables; and drink of all
waters they care not what, so draw'n from a cisterne of the Reformed, forsaking
or vilifying, for the time, that clearer Crystal fountain of their own.
Whereas would they enter, as they are quaestionlesse obliged, an unanimous
resolution to demand every where the public exercise of their canonical
devotion, they would either, upon the grant, reap more comfort in continuing
the worship of their Fathers, or, upon unworthie denial, more reason to scruple
at such a facile conjunction with them, who disclaiming their prayers can not
be thought serious when they praetend an harmony in that faith by which they
are exhibited unto God. And (to put your Lordship in mind of a late instance
delivered on good credit) who maligning our persons, and mocking at our
calamities in their Schools, are very unlikelie so to alter their minds as to
turn their Barbarous reproach into any brotherly kiss or Christian welcome,
when they step but the next door into their Temples. I confess, My good Lord,
this Magisterial advice may beter become the mouth of some Elder Pastor, who
is likely to have more sheep wandering from his fold then he who can scarce
properly be said to have had any in his charge yet none such, I hope, has
reason to take amiss my modest endeavor, while he is otherwise employed, to
recover those I find straggling within my call. It being upon due consideration
to be feared, that after some few years (if there must be yet more of our
miserable dispersion) with out an universal industrious circumspection of young
and old, as we have broken our pipes, we may throw away our whistles, and fold
up our time with our arms in a comfortless discourse about the flocks we
once had which now alas are got into other pastures; Invite strangers to fight
for our Churches while our own Congregations are instituted to forget the
holiness in the separation of such places, the sacred distance of the meanest
from worke-or warehouses, and the fairest from Piatz'as of pleasure or
Exchanges for their bargains. If what I speak, My Lord, be truth, I shall not
hearken to them that may tell me it is miss placed, my conscience suggesting
that the climate and season has too often been heretofore neglected; If false,
I have a sponge as ready as ever I had a pin to wipe out all but my shame,
which shall be set forth, at your Lordships pleasure, in an English sheet,
though it never will be brought unto the Scottish stool to do its penance. In
attendance on which sentence, if neither your Lordships approbation nor pardon
must be expected, I stoup down to acknowledge my self, as well in submission
to your censure as execution of your commands:

MY LORD, Your Lordships Most humbly devoted servant RI: WATSON.

D. Hieron. Praefat. in Lib. Esdr. Legant qui volunt; qui nolunt, abjiciant.

Horat. -- quae nivali pascitur Algido
Devota quercus inter and ilices;
Aut crescit Albanis in herbis
Victimae, Pontisicum secures
Cervice tinget --

AN ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE
HAd Mr. Baylie contained himself within the limits My reason for refuting his
Epistle.
of an Epistle, I had there left him to canonize his Living Lord and all his
family, and with what dexteritic he pleased to rubb his honorable head piece
into a good conceit of his Review. But since the great Diana in his book, so
gloriously bespangled with the counterfeit Alchymie of the late Scottish
Story, is lead hither to be magnified by any superstitious inadvertent reader,
and his Lordships hand made use of only to hold the candle, by the false light
of his name and pretended virtues the better to commend Her Godesse-ship to
public view; I can not pass by without looking in to see the sight, and spend
my verdict upon the motions that attend it.

And that His Lordship may not be mistaken to stand altogether for a shadow, I
first cast my eye upon the potent Lord John, and must plainly tell his admirer
The Rewiewers vanity in giving titles inconsistent with the praesent condition
and practice of his Lord.
Mr. Baylie, he had better deserved the honor of this title, if he had
employed his power, as he was in duty and by oath obliged, in the vindication
of His Majesty, and His Royal Father, of ever blessed memory, as he has most
dishonourablie and impotentlie against them both. Nor is it much for his credit
in the head of this Epistle to be styled one of His Majesty's Privy Council,
and in the heart of His Kingdom to be one of the public conspiracy against
him, of a Lord justice general to become a special Injusticiarie in his
country.

The Reviewers long experience of his sincere zeal, etc. argues him to be none
of the late illuminates, and gives us some hopes the he has proceeded upon the
dictates of his conscience, though unhappilie erroneous: long habits The Earl
of Cassils no late Illuminate.
though at first contracted by the perverseness of the will, by perpetuity
becoming very essicacious in imposing fallacies upon the understanding, so that
he which does ill may hereby be as well persuaded that what he does is good, as
he that often tells a lie has at length himself believ'dit to be a truth.

His rigid adhaerence to the praetended rights and privileges of his Country
being professed haereditarie, takes off some what from the personal imputation,
No credit for his samilie to be commended by Buchanan.
yet with all demonstrates that it is not all blood Royal which runs in His
Lordships veins, nor it may be all blood Noble, having so ample testimony
from him, who had always some dregs of the Common thoare in his ink and
whose power is cankerd with envious invectives against them, that have not laid
their honor in the vulgar dust, and levelled Majesty as well as Nobility
with the people. Whose Ghost will not thank the Reviewer for calling him,
Prince of Historians, being so little enamourd with titles of that nature, Very
Improper to style Buchanan Prince.
that he accounted them, where they were more properly due, Legitimi regni
gravissima pestis. Praet. ad Dial. de jur. Reg.
the filth of flaterie, and the plague of all legitimate praerogative.

His exemplarie practice in publike-private duties is indeed some what
singular, my selse having seen him very zcalouslic penning down such slender
(to omit what I might call in the Reviewers language praeter The Reviewers
sermon divinttie.
and anti-scripturall divinity, as was not fitting for any Novice or
Catechumen in Religion to own, much less for so grave a Theologue to preach,
and so well exerciz'd an adultist to register for his use. I commend beter the
exemplarie practice of the Reviewers brother Presbyter, who seemed to take a
sound nap in the mean time, hoping, it may be, to be better inspired in his
dream.

This He may well count it an advantage to have the E. Cassils his judge.
potent Lord, thus qualified and brought up to his hand, I can not blame Mr.
Baylie for choosing him to be his patron, (who discernes with his eyes and
decernes by his dictates) who being judge and party, both will quaestionlesse
do right like a Lord Justice in the business.

The An honor for the Bp. to be called by the Rev: unpardonable incendiaire.
praejudice the Reviewer would here at first cast upon the person of the Bishop
will advance his own reputation but a little in high way Rhetorike, not
advantage him one whit with any of those judicious and aequitable comparers he
expects; who being able to instruct themselves, upon these many late years
experience, that what Mr. Baylie calls that Church and Kingdom is only a
praevalent party of Schismatikes and Rebels, what adhaerence to the sacred
truth of God an obstinate perseverance in an execrable covenant, which has
tied up the hands of many a poor subject from the enjoyment of all the just
liberties the established laws of Scotland hold out to him; will look upon
the Bishop as a courageous affertour of Gods truth, the Churches purity, the
Kings supremacy, the subjects liberty, and if for that condemned by an
unanimous faction in both Kingdoms, will commend his zeal, reverence his
name, and rank him with the prime Fathers of the Church, who so soon
endeavored to stop that deluge of misery wherewith Britanie and Ireland have
been most unhapilie overwhelmed.

For the dirtie language he uses here and otherwhere extreme saucy spirit,
stigmatized incendiarie, etc. I desire the Reader to take notice I shall sweep
it The Rev's uncleanlie language.
out of his and my way, yet if he thinks it may serve his turn, as well as
the garlike heads did Cario and his master in the Comoedie, the Printers boy
shall throw Aristoph. Plut.
it by itself at the back side of my reply in a piece of white paper, that
he may not soul his fingers.

What the Reviewer calls Boldness was prudence and seasonable caution in The
active boldness of the Scottish Presbyterians in Holland, etc,
the Bishop to praesent his book to the eminent personages and in this place,
observing the indesatigable industry of Mr. Baylie and his brethren of the
mission, very frequentlie in their persons, perpetually by many subtle and
active instruments they employed before and after their coming hither,
insinuating into the hearts and affections of all people here, of what sex or
condition soever, in Courts, Towns, Universities, Country, praepossessing
them with the Justice of their cause, the innocence of their proceedings, the
moderation of their demands, the conformity of their practice and design to
the praesent discipline and Government of the Church and presbytery in these
Provinces. And great pity it is that all people, nations and languages have it
not translated into their own dialect, that a discovery of this grand
imposture may be made to them who are so insolentlie summoned to fall down and
worship this wooden idol of the discipline, and threatened the aeternal fiery
furnace if they refuse it.

In the next Paragraph the Reviewer draws Cerberus like his threeheaded
monster out of hell, The three headed monster in controversy
Discipline, Covenant, and unkindne's to our late sovereign.

-- [ Sen. Her. Fur.
Novos
Resumit animos victus, and vastas furens
Quassat catenas.] --
His The Scottish Discipline vrey different from that in Holland and France.
Apology for the first, being the conformity I mentioned principally with the
Brethren of Holland and France, whom he would very feign flater into his
party, and make the Bishop whether he will or no fall foul upon them, whom
His Lordship has scarce mentioned in all his tract: And I having no reason not
desire to enlarge the breach shall say no more then this, (because some what he
will have said) That if their discipline harmoniouslie be the same
particularly in those extravagancies His Lordship mentions, (which to my
knowledge they deny) and for alleging which, they are little beholding to Mr.
Baylie, they are all alike concerned, yet having as learned Apologists of their
own, when they find themselves agriev'd, will in their own case very likely
speak their pleasure. No Reformed Church calls regular Episcopacie
Antichristian.
In the interim I must require his instance where any Reformed Church has
declared regular Episcopacie which we call Apostolical, Antichristian.

What particular persons of Mr. Baylies temper may have published must not
pass for an Ecclesiastical decrce. And if all, even in those Churches he
mentions, might freely speak their mind, I believe that order would have
their Christian approbation as it is in any reformed Countries established.
Many emincnt persons in those Churches have approved of it Vindic: of K. Chapter p.
125.
some such relation was made not long since about certain Divines of the
Religion in France, and some that came from other parts to the Synod of Dust.
And Apost. Instit. of Episcopacie.
I can acquaint the Reviewer with the like piece of charity bestowed by P.
Melin in the letters, that passed from him to Bishop Andrews, beside what Mr.
Chillingworth (as I take it) has collected out of him and Beza in favor both
of name and thing, though not to the same latitude we extend them. And (which
will not be altogether impertinent to add) I do not remember I have heard
that Causabon and Vossius, no obscure men in the French and Dutch Churches,
were at any time by their presbytery excommunicate for becoming limbs of the
English Antichrist, Praebendaries of the Archiepiscopall Church of Canterbury
with us. But if the Reviewer here begin to cant, and distinguish Episcopal
declinations different from Episcopacie.
between Episcopacie and Episcopal declinations, (for that indeed is the
expression that he uses) I must ingenuouslie acknowledge that there may be
some practical declinations in Episcopacie which may be Antiapostolical and
Antichristian, beside and against the line of the Word, the institution of
Christ and his Apostles; but I know none such in the Churches of England,
Scotland, or Ireland, if there have been any they are not our rule, and by his
own then must not be stated to be the controversy between us. The
Presbyterian aberrations which Presbyteria aberrations. the same with
Presbytery.
the Bishop has observed, are for the most part taken from the crookenesse of
the Discipline it self, which in the very Acts of their Assemblies, he finds
not so straight as to run parallel with the word of God, or practice of the
true Catholic Church, and whether what His Lordship cites to that purpose be
calumnious imputations or no will best appear in the procedure of our
discourse.

But the Reviewer takes it ill that Didoclave, Gerson, Bucer, Salmasius and The
praesent concernment greater to reveal the Scottish Discipline, the refute old
adversaries of Episcopacie.
Blondel were not rather replied to, then the mysteries of the Kirk Discipline
revealed. This poor trick of diversion will not take. If what has been writ
in the behalf of Episcopacie stand firm notwithstanding these or any other
storms that pass over, it requires no such frequent reparations. The holy
cause indeed will shortly need such auxiliaries as these. He does well
therefore to call for them in time. Sr. Claud Somays likely to be no great
friend to the Discipline.
And yet it may be the imcomparable knight will not be charmed by a little
mercenarie breath into the rear of a distressed beggarlie engagement. He has
been since better informed of many fraudulent practices in the Kirk, and so
well satisfied about the state of our affairs, that Mr. Baylie is little
pleased (for all his sugar candi'd commendations) with the earnest he has
allreadie given to employ his pen and pains about a better subject for the
future. And it is a mere fiction, what he so confidentlie averres, of He offe
red no dispute with the Kings Chaplains about Episcopacie.
Sr. Claud Somayi's offering to dispute with the Divines by a Person of honor
about the King, a person of reverence, then not far from him having told me
that His Majesty knows not any thing of the buisinesse, nor did the Divines
about him hear of any thing to that purpose. Therefore let his person of honor
come out from behind the curtain, and vouch his credit to be such as quolibet
contradicente we must believe him: when he appears in his colors and makes
good any such offer as is mentioned, I presume I may say that no apprehensions
of trouble and hazard will deter such judicious and learned Champions from
entering upon any just and reasonable vindication of truth. In the mean time
they do but the duty of their places in their Royal attendance They
transgress not the duty of their place by informing the Kings conscience
about.
(which the Reviewer calls the Court artifice and their trade) if they watch
the seasons and distribute the hours of the Kings opportunities, wherein
privatelie (to avoid the importune intervention of other civil business, not
to decline I know not what contradiction, which they are not in that case
reasonably to expect from their modest fellow servants of the laity, and I
hope there are no Clerical Disciplinarians there about) to instill into His
Majesty's tender mind how unsafe it is for his soul, and how little for his
honor, to desert the Holy Church, that is the Episcopal doctrine and
government which came into the world with Christianity it self, has for 1500
years enjoyed a joint haereditarie succession, The Primitive Doctrine and
Discipline.
and aequi-universall diffusion with the same, to join with a crew in a
Northern corner of rebellious Covenanters, if you will have it so, for ought
hitherto can be judged enemies to God, to his Father, and to Monarchy it
self, if he will take it upon his Father or Grandfathers word. To put him
sarther Eikon Basilike cap. 14. Praeservation of the Church.
in mind that his Martyred Father said, There are ways enough to repair the
breaches of the state without the ruin of the Church, (it is the Episcopal
Church that he means) To instruct him that he may as conscientiouslie pardon
the Irish as the Pardoning the Irish and tolerating their Religion.
Scots, and reward with a limited liberty of their Religion; and what other
gracious encouragements he pleases, the first fruits of their voluntary
submission to his government, without imposing the slaveric of any covenant, or
conditioning for a toleration in his other Kingdoms. And this to be (as it is)
in reference to a Parliament to be convened so soon as the state of that
Kingdom will admit. To assure him that this is very consistent with
conscience, honor, Eikon. Basilike. conscience, honor, reason, law.
and all Good reason, and for ought they know, repugnant to no law, yea, to
link the soul of the most sweet and ingenuous of Princes (too sweet, too
ingenuous indeed to have to deal with the rough-hev'd Covenanters of the
mission) with those Inclining his mind to the Counsels of his Father.
Golden chains let down from heaven, and reached out by the hand of a tender
hearted father to his son, in those peerlesse Counsels which the most prudent
advice in the last Testaments of all his praedecessours can not parallel. To
tell him then, That his neck Cant. 4 4.
is like the tower of David, builded for an armourie, whereon there hang a
thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.

The Bishops Eikon Basilike penned wholely by K. Chapter 1. not a syllable of it by
the Bishops.
unl^ckie foot, as he calls it, is visible only in Mr. Baylie's margin, As
close as he and others follow upon the sent, not the least tracke in e'ikon
Basilike will in the end be found by them, nor by the whole pack of
bloud-hounds other where.

But to be sure here as well as in 100 Pamphlets beside is the foul Scottish
Presbyterian paw, which besmeared His Royal Majesty while he lived, and would
now spoil that precious ointment, and cast as ill a savor as it can upon his
sacred memory being dead. Not the Bishops, God not they the supporter of the
Matyr'd King.
but God, it may be sometime by their subordinate Ministry, strengthened our
Royal Sovereign to his last, in that which the lamp of natural reason, the
leading star of Catholic Antiquity, the bright sun in the firmament of the
Word and above all, that inexpressible light streaming from the spirit of God
revealed to him to be the safe sanctuary of truth. Not the Bishops, but the
The hard-hearted Scottish Presbyterians.
Presbyterian Scots hardened their hearts to thrust their native King out of
their protection, and with out any compassion did drive him from Newcastle to
Holmebie the fatal praecipice to K. Chapter 1.
Holmebie, which appears to be the fatal praecipice where he fell. And these
same men continue after his Endeavors to make it such to K Chapter 2.
death to cry loud in the cares of his son to take that direct path to his
ruin, rather then root or branch, or slip shall be left of the Praelatical
Clergy, whom they would feign have lie like dung upon the face of the earth,
and make a fat soil to pamper the Presbyterian in his lusts.

Their His best way to praevent it is consorting with his Fathers book.
gathering together His Majesty's papers, (if they must needs have the honor
of causing them to be presented in a book, with out a page or syllable of
their own) was but binding up that bundle of myrrh which should lie all night
in the Virgin breast of his Royal son, who maugre all the malice of his
enemies, has that beloved for his comfort. That fall Wherein is divine wisdom
and Counsel.
of ungracious dew, as the Reviewer Diabolically calls it, came from an higher
region then the Bishops. It was the judgment of God given to the King, and by
him his righteousness to the Kings son. It is he that here comes down like
rain into this fleece of wool, this most soft, sweet, and ingenuous of
Princes, and in gentle drops waters that precious piece of red earth by his
praecepts. And may this dew so prosper with him, that the Ps. 72.
following words may have their accomplishment in his reign. In his time may
the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace then and afterward, even so long
as the Moon endures. May his dominion be (as it ought) from the one sea to the
other, and from the flood to the end of that alter orbis, that little world of
his Kingdoms divided by the flood from the greater. May they that dwell in the
Wilderness of error contest no longer, but kneel before him and his enemies
lick the dust of his feet.

But by the way it is worth Gods providence in ordering his commendations of
this book to proceed out of the mouth of the Revicwer.
the readers observing, and however causelesslic praejudiced, may invite him to
be conversant in that most excellent book, which in the midst of that gall
that drops from his pen, whose heart and hand were bent to blot it out of the
opinion of men, has by the providence of God such a Crystal stream of
commendation to the world, for Elo^ution, Reason, Devotion, for Imitable
essays of piety, wisdom, patience, and every virtue confessed; And he that
will not be swayed with one word without reason, has his Majesty's sense from
the mouth of his enemy, about the danger of the Covenant and the faction that
stands for it, And may take it for the timous burning of a dying martyr, and
have a care that among too many serpents and so few doves, his innocence be
not swallowed with the rest.

What follows may be worth His Majesty's notice, The Reviewers scaesonable
advertishment to the King.
being the assertion of no other man then Mr. Baylie, not long since a
pretended commissioner for the Covenant. That the same hand that penned the 27
th. Chapter in the book entitled Eikon Basilike, (which he calls Episcopal,
but His Majesty knows very well to be Regal) did it on purpose to separate
him for ever from all his covenant subjects. And how K. Chapter 1. no Presbyterian
in heart nor tongue at Newcastle and the Isle of Wight.
near that came to the heart, language, and writings of our late Sovereign,
let them who were best acquainted with his carriage and most intime affections
at Newcastie and in the Isle of Wight speak their conscience. For the two
former we have more authentike ear testimonies then the Reviewer, and the last
is demonstrative out of all the papers that passed from him. To lay aside for
the time those against which Mr. Baylie is, more maliciously, then
ignorantly, praejudic'd. His several His papers to Mr. Henderson against it.
printed letters to Mr. Henderson speak his sense about Presbytery at
Newcastle, and some what more at large may in due time, what he thought of it
at the Isle of Wight. These, with other undeniable evidences, may render the
Reviewer a mere Sceptike, if not rather a knight of the post unto the world.

How it concerns Kings when they take in hand Pallas target to have the face
of No Bishop No King.
Episcopacie on the bosse, King James that had most of her wisdom, could best
tell. The experience whereof being too dear bought by his Martyr-sonne, and
commended in his Testament to our Sovereign, the Praelates need not take up
the old statuaries cunning to contrive it. To be sure Ovid. Met. lib. 5. fab. 1.
this both Perseus, or Presbyter, here paints a Gorgons head, on every page of
his book, and twists every line with a serpent, hoping to make stones and
stocks of his readers, who must submit to his authority in silence, and stand
fixed in what antike postures he assigns them. What ever some may do out of
ignorance and weakness, we hope the providence of God will keep the King out
of the Scottish Presbyters hands, and the breath of his mouth blow all such
flies and lice out of his quarters.

And thus much shall serve by way of answer or paraphrase upon what the
Reviewer has brought in apology for the Discipline of the Kirk.

In the next place he becomes a nimble The Reviewers false profession in
public contrary to conscience and vulgar knowledge.
advocate for the idol worship of the Covenant. Where I am glad to find him
acknowledging any such thing as reason framed by the University of Oxford
against it, having, not long since, heard this consident aver, (without a
blush as I take it) in his chamber-conventicle at the Hague (where not any one
that was present but knew what he said to be most notoriously false, except a
poor 'sillie creature or two that might be decoyed in upon design) That not
any thing hitherto had been objected against the Covenant, whereas he could not
be ignorant then, more then now, that this, with many other learned and
rational tracts, had been long since published against it, and for ought I know
must stand unanswered to this day. Which affected falsitie so amused me and
others at that time, that had not some prudential motives restrained us, we
must have offered him some affront in the place. And at this it so praejudiceth
me against his credit, as I believe not a line in his book for which he brings
me no beter authority then his word. What he spoke then he has much ado to
refrain from printing now, only mollisies The same speech now printed in
effect.
it with his canting about the matter. To this day, he says, no man has showed
any error in tbe matter of the Covenant. I am sure not any clause in its
literal or mystical sense has escaped the discussion of those acute
Antagonists it has found: and what this chemical matter should be, that is of
so subtle an extraction, I can not guess. For the forming and taking it he
praetends a necessity their adversaries imposed which necessity was nothing
else but No necessity for the Scots to enter into a Covenant which is.
their own just jealousies and fears that an uncertain multitude, the
necessary instruments, and indeed sole slaves to do the work, could not be
kept constant to the cause with out the awful superstition of an oath. Which
false fire is pursued with a thunderclap from the pulpit, whence damnation's
daily threatened to the infringers. And being thus driven into an airie castle
which these engineers have fortified by the Mathematical subtlety of their
words, he says, neither fraud nor force shall reduce them, for they fear
forsooth No oath of God but the Devil.
the oath of God. Which God is no other then that Baal Berith, that Jupiter
Foederatus, to whom the Israelites made a shameful desection after Gidcons
death, Judge. 8. 33. 'Ethekan e'autois ton Baal diatheken, so the septuagint
renders it. They set up to themselves Baal the Covenant that is the false God
or Devil of the Covenant. And yet this Mirio puts it to the quaestion, and
seems to wonder Why any that love the King should hate the Covenant, the whole
No wonder why the lovers of the King are no Covenanters.
design and practice of which has been so apparentlie destructive to his
Royal Father and all the loyal subjects that he has. Nay with all it is too
well known, how many true The Cheat of the Covenant.
lovers of the King, but too deceitful lovers of themselves, who, through
fear or covetousness, hoping to praeserve their estates and liberties, have
been consigned into this courteous Covenant, and then by their jealous or wanton
masters, have been stripped naked, turned out to beg their bread, and regaine
their souls and credit as they could. So that this straight tie can in some
cases we see play fast and loose, and the strictness of it, whereof we have
had so sad an experiment, will be found only by the hands of the holy
leaguers (for such we know were the newnam'd Independents at first) to bind
Religion, Majesty, and Loyalty to the block, and then lay the axe to the
root of them all, and stifle them from repullulating if they can. Therefore
they that manage the conscience whether of Court, or City, or Country, do
well if they possess their Religious votaries with a particular full sense of
the inevitable misery that will follow them if they be catchd in this noose
and advise them to whip all such saucy beggars, such Whying Covenanters from
their gates.

The next task of the Reuiewers Engineer-ship is to draw an out work about
the open The Scot-Presbytirian open unkindnesse that is treason against the
late King.
unkindnesse (treason prettily qualisied in the term) against the (observe he
says not our) late King, which he makes of so large a compass, that all the
Presbyterian credit he can raise will never be able to maintain it for an
hour: which this skillfull officer foreseeing, despair puts him first upon a
salie, where the Ghosts of Wicklisfe, and Husse, and Luther, and with a brazen
piece of falsehood, his Disciples are draw'n out to assault his dangerous enemy
in his trench. For (which he knows Bishops in other Reformed Churches.
as well as I can tell him) there are other parts of the Reformed world beside
England, and those of Luthers Disciples, that keep up Episcopacie The Reviewers
in constancy.
to this day. And forgetting in part what he has said allreadie and minding
less, what he shall babble otherwhere about the business, he tells us here
it is the violence of ill advised Princes, which when he pleases, he makes the
Policy of the Bishops themselves that has kept up this limb of Antichrist,
he means the Episcopal order in England. Since the first Reformation whence
has come the perpetual trouble in our land the History of the Schismatical
Puritan^ will sufficiently satisfy any man that will search. And how the
Church and Kingdom are now at last come so near the ground the Disciplinarian
practices will evidence. But the Scottish Presbytery that gave the first kick
at the miter, and has since lift up the other leg against the Crown, may
chance to catch the fall in the end, having now much ado to light upon its
feet.

Having K. Chapter 1 never justified the Scottish contests.
made his retreat he begins to endeavor the maintaining of his masterpiece by
degrees, and tell us, Their first contests stand justified this day by King and
Parliament in both Kingdoms Ans: And must so stand, I say not jufied, till
King and Parliament meet once again in either to consider, whether with out a
new ratification by their favor, your after contests make not a just
forfeiture of their gracious condescension to your first. His Majesty of ever
blessed memory has told you His charity and Act of Pacification sorbids him
to reflect on Eikon Basilike Chapter 13.
former passages. Which argues some such passages to have been as were not very
meritorious of his favor. And though his Royal charity may silence, it does
not justisie your contests by that Act.

The borders of Scotland being as well His Majestics as yours (though you keep
to your Presbyterian The King may bring an army to the Scottish borders.
style, which affords no propriety to others then themselves, and yields very
little community to Kings, the King, our borders) I hope it was free for him to
move toward them as he pleased. If your resistance to the Magistrates he
deputed made him for the security of his person come attended with an army
for his guard; or if the rod and axe could inflict no paenal justice by virtue
of the judge's word upon a banded company of miscreants at home, and therefore
sent abroad to crave the regular assistance of the sword; no laws of God nor
your Country dictates any just or necessary defense, which is nothing but an
unjustifiable rebellion: Nor can Dunce law Alawe above Dunce law.
so justify your meek lying down in your arms, but that, if the King would
have made his passage to you with his sword, you might have justly been by a
more learned law helped up with a halter about your neck.

The novations in Liturgy and Canons contrary neither to the laws of God nor
Scotland.
Religion were not such a world, but that two words, Liturgy and Canons may
compass it. What was in them contrary to the laws of God has a blanke
margin still that requires your proof, and that any were to the laws of your
Country will never be made good, having the King and Lords of the Counsel, I
mean those of your Kingdom that did approve them.

The power in The Reviewers brag K. Chapter 1. gave the Scots too easy conditions.
your army to dissipate the Kings is but a little of Pyrgopolynices breath. The
easy conditions given you to retreat may be attributed to His Majesty's mercy
and averseness from blood, not to his apprehension of your power.

The Kings second coming toward you with an army He had good reason to raise a
secound army against them.
was upon no furious motion of the Bishops, who had no stroke in his Council
for war, but upon the fiery trial you put him to by that many flagrant
provocations, wherewith you and other incendiaries nearer home daily environed
him, who fearing the precedent accommodation by peace might afford respite for
a farther more particular discovery of the principal actours in and
contributers toward the late war, and expose many considerable brethren to a
legal trial, notwithstanding the agreement contracted; impatient ambition
having allreadie been too much impeded by observing the easy conditions you
mention made the first breach, and according to the right account first raised
a military power, which His Majesty had very good reason to suppress. The
success you had by your first impression upon part of His Majesty's Army at
New-bourne, and your easy purchase of the Town of New Castle was not such as
cleard the passage to London, The Scots success at New bourne opened not a
passage for them to London.
without the farther hazard of which you were too well paid for your stay in
Northumberland, and instead of a rod that was due, you carried too honorable a
badge at your backs of His Majesty's meekncsse, when the second time you
returned in peace.

What passed after your packing away The Pr. Scottish Rebellion copied by the
English.
to the raising of the new army you speak of you may read and blush, if you
have any grace, in the former part of His martyred Majesty's book, if you have
none, you may, as I believe you do, laugh in your slovenly slecve to see your
prompt scholars come to so good perfection, and copy your own rebellion to
the life. The Bishops then were little at leisure to look abroad to any such
purpose, being happy if they could get an house for their shelter from the
threats and stones that flew very thick about their cares, the rabble rout at
London by that time being well informed what effectual weapons stones and
stools, and such like as surie on a sudden could furnish, had been against
black gowns and white sleeves at Edinburgh before.

That any army could at that time be raised, when the Kings K. Chapter 1 his
raising an army a sign of divine providence.
Forts, Magazines, Militia, Navy, were seizd into the hands of your Rebel
brethren, was a special mark of divine providence clear in so happy
success, as he that ran might then have read their ruin writ by the fingar of
God had not the black cloud of our sins eclipsed that light, blotted out
that handwriting, and shour'd down vengeance upon our heads.

That such earnest and pitiful entreatics The Rebels faint in their faith
notwithstanding the revelations they pretend to.
should be made to strengthen the arm of flesh, by Gods people, in Gods cause,
after such divine revelation that this was the appointed time wherein Christ's
Kingdom was to be exalted on earth, that the Saints should flourish, laugh,
and sing at the downefull of that man of sin, etc. Is a note me thinks that
spoils all the harmony of the rest.

That upon such earnest entreaties the Scots The Prerb. Scots coming in no
condition of the peace
were obliged to come in is not to be found among all those easy conditions
made and their double former returning in peace.

Their fear of a third Their guilt made them fear a third war.
war to pass over their brethrens carcasses to themselves is a strong
argument of their guilt, that their advise and some other assistance had passed
over the late agreement made between His Majesty and them to promote that
horrid rebellion against him.

That so many intercessions Their work of supererogation in interceding.
with the King for a moderate and reasonable accommodation had been used by
them, was a relic of Popery they kept notwithstanding the roformation they
had made, and they did truly supercrogate in that work, no law of the three
Kingdoms (I take it) making them umpires between the King and his subjects,
nor is i^ yet revel'd to the world what divine authority they had (as was
pretended in their Remonstrance) to come in the name of our Lord and Master
Their Remonstrance.
Jesus Christ, to warn the King that the guilt which cleav'd so fast to his
throne and soul was such, as if not timely repented would involve him and his
postcritie under the wrath of the everliving God.

For how moderate, how reasonable They mediate for no reasonable accommodation.
accommodation they mediated appears in the 19 propositions, to the substance
of every one of which their unreasonable brethren adhaered to the end.

That they were at any Were never slighted nor rejected.
time slighted and rejected is a mere calumny of the Reviewer', he would have
told us when, and where, if he could. That al they asked was not granted, Were
justly denjed.
was upon unanswerable reasons, which His Majesty rendered in his public
Declarations about the Treaties, etc.

That they and their fainting Covenants the common road for faections.
brethren were so easily persuaded to enter into a Covenant together is no
great mervaile, His Majesty tells them. Solemn leagues and Covenants... are
the common road used in all factions and powerful perturbations of state or
Church... by such as aim to subdue all to their own will and power, under the
disguizes of holic combinations.

The express articles in the Covenant, for the praeservation of Royalty, etc.
are spun so fine, and woven so thin, as that white veil can not hide the face
of that black rebellious devil that is under it.

Whereof they being conscious that had been very well acquainted with the
mystery, no less then an whole Remonst. about the Treaty in the Isle of wight.
army together, conduct us to the perfect beholding the sweet countenance of
this late Baal Berith as he lies. We crave (say they) leave to believe that an
accommodation with the King, in the way and terms you are upon, or any as all,
as the case now stands, that shall implie his restitution; or shall not provide
for his subjection to trial and judgment, would first not be just before God
or man, but many ways evil. Secondly, would not be safe. 1. The Covenant
engaging to the matters of religion, and public interests primarilie and
absolutely (mark that) with out any limitation, and after that to the
preservation of the Kings person and authority, but with this restriction,
(mark this too) viz. In the preservation of the true religion and liberties of
the Kingdoms. In this case, though a Cavallier might make it a question, yet
who will not rationallie resolve it, That the preceding matters of religion and
the public interest, are to be understood as the principal and supreme matters
engaged for, and that of the Kings person and authority as inferior and
subordinate to the other. 2. That where persons joining to make a mutual
covenant, if the absent parties shall oppose it and the matters contained in it,
surely that person excludes himself from any claim to any benefit therefrom
while he continues so refusing and opposing. So that you see notwithstanding
the express articles for The Covenant destructive to all the Royal line.
the preservation of Royalty. His Majesty may be brought to his trial, and
all his posterity too, when the holy brethren can catch them, be murdered at
their own gates according to the express sense of several articles in the
Covenant for maintenance of religion, and liberty. And what unkindnesse was
here in the Scots to their King? Besides, whosoever will take the pains to
compare the particulars in the Scottish Remonstrance which they brought in their
The charge Against K. Chapter 1. taken out of the Pr. Scots Remonstrance.
hands when they came in upon the Covenant, with those in the accursed Court
proceeding against His late Royal Majesty may be able to do Dorislaw, Steel,
Cook, etc. some little courtesy in their credit and plead for them that they
drew not up, but only transscribed a charge brought long since from Edinburgh
to London. And yet what unkindnesse was here in the Scots to their King?

There is yet one thing more whereof upon this mention of Remonstrance and
Covenant I can not but advertize my reader having but lightly touched The
Presb. Scots wicked Impostours, no messeangers of Christ.
upon it before. That whereas the Scots in their Covenant confess before God
and the world many sins whereof they were guilty, and for which they desire
to be humbled. Viz. That they had not as they ought valued the in aestimable
benefit of the Gospel. That they had not labored for the purity and power
thereof; That they had not endeavored to receive Christ in their hearts (mark
that) nor to walk worthy of him in 'their lives; These men tell the King in
their remonstrance, That they come in the name of their Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, to warn him about the guilt of I know not what sins they there heap
together upon his soul. A very likely story to believe, That Christ had sent
them into England with this covenanting paper in their hands; who had shut him
out of doors very lately, and would not receive him into their hearts.

Notwithstanding all the pretended glorious success, obtained more by The
Kings party not subdued when His Majesty left Oxford.
the name then exploits of the Scottish army, the opposite party was not so
fully subdued, but that the multitude of garrisons, (beside Newarke which
might have cost them dear) surrendered after His Majesty's leaving Oxford make
a great flame in the Burning bush which your zealous friend John Vicars has
kindled.

You will hardly persuade any your judicious comparers of this your preface
with the many treacherous practices you had used, that His Majesty in the The
King not necessitated to cast himself upon the Scots.
greatest necessity would not have chosen rather to have cast himself into
the merciless yet more mercisull arms of the sea, then without the strongest
deliberate engagement into the perfidious and more fluctuating army of the
Scots. Nor yet had all your underhand oaths and promises prevaild for the
unhappie credulity of a most pious and prudent King, if some better credit in
all likelihood, had not interposed it self, which it may be was more deceived
then it deceived. Therefore your story about London, Lin, Holland and France
is a greater circuit then his Majesty took in his designed journey to Newarke.
He had promised all reasonable satisfaction before.
The promise of satisfaction that carried him thence to New Castle might have
long before been his conduct to London if Religion and Reason might have been
permitted to go along which him.

That he gave not what you expected, that is to say his Royal soul to the
Devil, his old oaths might very well hinder him, for I pray tell me why a King
His Religious adhe rence to his old oaths.
as well as a Rebel may not fear the oath of God.

It is not unlikelie that the prime leaders of the English army were at that
time weary of your company, who filled the best of their quarters, and did
least of your service, Nor that you were out of heart as well as reputation by
the signal victories to a mitacle all most obtained against you, by, not your
companion good Sir James Grahame, but the Thrice renowned Marquess Montrosse,
whose proceeding had been most successful and happy, and may they still be
for His Majesty's affairs.

If there were such divisions in Scotland, what could better compose them then
the personal presence of the King? but this was not according to the The Kings
presence might best have composed the divisions in Scotland.
Kingdoms liberty meant in the third article of the covenant, In the
preservation of which, that is, so far as you thought fit to make consistent
with which, and in the defense of what they call the true Religion, which you
took for granted he never intended to complie with, you had fworne to defend
the Kings Majesty's person, and that is one of the forenam'd express articles
to that purpose. The hazard of a war weighed heavier in the balance of your
counsels then the hazard of his Royal person in the hands of his
irrecoucileable enemies, forgeting that the ^orke of righteousness in
performance of your promises would have been a more lasting peace, and the
effect of Isai. 32. 17.
that righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever.

The sectarian Army which you scarce durst have called so at that time, had
otherworke then to go into Scotland but that your hollow-hearted professions
His garrisons surrendered upon the counter. feit professions of the Pr. Scots.
to the King, who was in no very indifferent case to make sure conditions of
advantage to himself, made him order the surrender of his garrisons into their
hands. So you saved His Majesty from the rack to bring him to the scaffold,
And you with your Brother-Presbyters escaped the like torture then, but if you
go on to stretch your conscience till it crack, we shall see as well the
punishment as the guilt of that murder glowing at your heart.

After two such accidental confessions wherein your Army demonstrativelie
showed themselves either false foolishlie credulous or cowards at best They
obtain no terms satisfactorie to the King.
you reckon up several conveniences of His Majesty's being in one of his houses
near London, when it had been ever before pretended to the poor deluded people
that he was to be brought to his Parliament in London. And this you did upon
the faith of that Parliament, which you say kept up a sectarian Army against
you. A very good argument to prevail with you for their credit. Upon such
terms as should be satisfactorie to the King, particularly mentioned in the
paper deliverd to the King by the Commit of Estates upon the 15 of May 1646.
and noted in that of June 8. to the speaker of the House of Peers, subscribed
By his affectionate friends and humble servants, Lauderdail, Iohnston, Henry
Kennedie (your own potent good Lord, etc.) That if His Majesty should delay
to go about the readiest ways, and means to satisfy both his Kingdoms,
they would be necessitated for their own exoneration to acquaint the Committee
of both Kingdoms at London that a course might be taken by joint advice of
both Kingdoms, for attempting the just ends expressed in the solemn league
and Covenant By which His Majesty was to bring satisfaction to them and you,
not (as you say) to receive terms satisfactorie to himself. Wherein because
he made not what have was required, you exonerated your self of all the malice
you had unto his person and made an end of his days, which was just the end
you aimed at in the Covenant.

This being the true case, you ask, Whether it were any injustice? Yes, to
imprison his person by confining him to an house, and to weaken his power Their
injustice, unkindnesse imprudence
by robbing him of his garrisons, Whether any unkindnesse? Yes, to give up your
native King, who you confess cast himself on your protection, to them who
were so far from affording him any of his palaces near London, that it was
death for any man to harbor him in his house. What imprudence it was, let the
best politician of you all speak, because ablest to judge; Or the worst, who
by this time can evidence, how besotted you were to your utter disrepute and
destruction; What advantage at that time you had to lay the fairest color upon
the foulest fact that ever you committed and win the world, by an aftergame,
into an high opinion of your trust; What, to gain the length of your line in
the liberty of Religion or laws; And, as for wealth and honor, you might,
upon such a merit, in all likelihood, have had, what the vastest ambitious
Helluo could ask, or three luxuriant Kingdoms could yield you. Whereas now
you have ripped up your false hearts, and throw'n your guilt in the face of the
sun; so that the sound of your rebellion is gone into all lands, and your
treachery travailes in a poverbe even to the ends of the earth; Your Religion
has many times since struggled for life, which the mercy, or temporizing
subtilitie of your sectarian enemy has preserved, and your laws have taken
their liberty from his sword; He deteines at this time the wages of your
wickedness in his house, and your honor not long since kissed his foot, and
by four Commissioners humbly waited on him to his doors.

But you come to a closer question, Whether the deliverie of the Kings person
were a selling of him to his enemies? Ans: It may be such for all that you
Their deliverie of the Kings person was a selling him to his Enemies.
say against it. Your Masters are not always wont to pay your arreares upon
single service, I hinted even now that your miscariages of late have cut you
off a good sum that is behind, which by Ordinance of Parliament is to be
disposed otherwise.

Let the capitulation have been in reference to what it will, and the Act of
what you call the English Parliament exclude the disposal of the King; we know
that was the subject of many papers that passed between you, which were penned
with so much collusion and cunning, that any broker might see a bargain was
driving between crafty merchants, till, having clapped hands, the one brought
his rich commodity to Holmebie, and the other paid his money at New Castle.

The unexpected evil (for I must alter the number and admit of none but the
They might have prevented the murder tha^ followed.
murder of the King) that followed, which no mortal eye could foresce any
mortal heart might fore scare, and the well affected brethren have prevented,
if they pleased. The Armies rebellion is very nonsignificant language from your
pen, unless figurativelie expressing the vengeance of God upon that rebellious
city, which with her golden cup had made the Land drunk, and the Nations mad
with the abundance of her wine. Ier. 51. 7.


What you call destroying the Parliament was but the plucking up and throwing
out of the way that rotten root, the stock and fairest branches whereof had
been cut down by the keen axe of a violent vote long before.

How ready these Scots (which the Reviewer must vindicate) were to the They
were not ready to the utmost of their power.
utmost of their power to have prevented the mischief in the murder of the
King, and what hazard they ran of what was dearest to them appears by their
have to come in to Duke Hamiltons party, and the large contributions they gave
toward the raising an army to that purpose. To make good the proverb. Murder
will out, the next words implie the Reviewers confession. The hard measure they
had often received from the King stuck then in their stomakes, and An old
grudge the reason why they were not.
would not out till now, with their malice impostumated in his blood. That they
did not in time, and unanimouslie stir to purpose for that end, they are
indeed to answer it to God, who were the true authors thereof. And who they
were let the Scottish pulpits (I mean not their Presbyters) speak out. The
innocence of the Church is not cleard in the following treatise to be so much
as Pilates, they can not wash their hands in it, nor their mouth. They made the
S. Matthew. 27. 24.
tumults they never asked what evil he had done, and this Royal bloudwill be
upon them and upon their children.

But here comes up a second part of their venomous vomit (for though The Kings
not granting all demands.
they cast the temptation upon the serpent, they charge the original sin upon
the King) The King gave not his good subjects satisfaction by granting all
their demands which they found most necessary and due, This they say [by the
mouth of the Reviewer] was the cause of the many miseries, and if there be any
connection, was the cause why they stirred not in time, and what is the meaning
of this but Caiphas's expedit? It is very expedient very necessary he die for
these people, and (thanks good Presbyter Scot) pay this debt of satisfaction
in his blood Which conclusion is no sooner dispatched, but like very logical
Rebels, they fall presently on making a new syllogism, and prepare a second
argument of the axe. The very same cause ties up this day the hands of
Covenanters -- could They bear the like grudge against K. Chapter 2.
they have (that is they can not have) the young King to join with them in
their covenant, to quit his unhappie Bishops, to lay aside his formal and dead
liturgy and the satisfaction to his good subjects which they find necessary
and due; He has drawn some what beside his limbs from the loins of his
father; though the serpent has not reached him the fruit of the forbiden tree,
he has transmitted as much malignance in In libro Cap. 1*
the bark. Ergo when they get him into their hands (which God forbid) it is but
talking a little with the Pharisees and Priests, taking the money according to
the covenant, They have made the premises and may then, sit at home with their
hands in their pockets, being well assured the conclusion must follow, quia
expedit, It is very expedient another man, because another King (which the hand
of heaven powerfullie prevent.)

To draw him into the net, this decoy ducke courts His Majesty with more The
Reviewers politic staterie.
truth then good meaning; for he puts it into a parenthesis I'observe, that
when hereafter it shall be left out, the Scottish Reviewer and Remonstrances may
not jarre in their expressions. [A lovelie, hopeful, and promising Prince, for
all natural endowments, as this day breathes in Europe, or for a long time has
swayed a Scepter in Britaine] And yet this lovelie Prince without taking the
Covenans etc. shall not breath nor sway the scepter in Scotland.

With which and some other ungracious principles a nest of these unluckie
Northern birds did lately besiege him, not in his cabin, [for his fathers
work lay upon their hands, when he was there they wanting then the iron
instrument to cut the silver cord of his life] but in his Royal bedchamber at
Ecclesiast. 12. 6.
the Hague. And going home, it should seem by the weeping cross, they and the
good people, because they can do no more, sit down with mournsull eyes, till
occasion be administered that by Dunce law (which holds as well against the
son as the Father) they can do no less then lie down in their arms for
their just and necessary defense. But they hold here and it is time I think^,
for they have transgressed too far the bounds of an epistle.

CHAPTER I.
The Scots bold address with the Covenant to K. Chapter 2 Their party
inconsiderable. The Bishops method, language, and matter asserted. The
quaestion in controversy unawares granted by the Reviewer.

WHile Six walking Images, the pretended Commissioners The unseasonablenesse
of the Scots coming to the King at the Hague.
of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, that is to say, a selected pack of
the most zealous disciplinarian faction, which had fairlie wrought the
destruction of both, were, with the greatest impudence that ever was heard of,
pressing into His Majesty's sad and most disconsolate retirement at the Hague,
when he held back the face of his throne, and had spread his cloud upon it,
When his face was foul with weeping, Job 26. 9. Job 16. 16.
and on his eyelids the shadow of death; While, with the highest cruelty that
could be, instead of condoling his most lamentable afflictions, beyond the
tyranny of Jobs comforters, they were going about not only to lay open in
his sight, but to thrust violently that bloody axe (the Covenant I mean)
which had cut off his Royal Fathers head, into his hands; This reverend and
resolute Prelate steps in between them and the Court, throws in their eyes the
guilt not only of their late actions, but of their old Antimonarchical as
well as Antiprelaticall government it self, not so much hoping to amuze them,
or stop them in their progress to the King (whose adamantine face, and
elephantine feet, he knew would break through all the briars and thorns that
the hand of truth could cut out of that Northern wilderness of error, and
lay, though never so thick, in their way) as to set the mark of that beast in
their forhead, which destroys root and branch of Religion and Laws, of Regal
and Apostolical government, yea and of the liberty of the people, that all
well affected to any of these or themselves might have seasonable warning to
get out of their way, or gather strength to hunt this wild monster out of the
world.

Which accurate Remonstrance of the Bishops carrying with it the highest
authority of their Assembly acts provincial and general, of The seasonable
success of the Bishops Warning.
the concurrent sense in the writings of many their deified Divines prevailed
with all impartial and advertend persons to bring this glittering Godesse of
the Scotsh discipline to the touch, to discover all the dirt and dross whereof
every limb of her is made, and reduced many, her before incautious worshipers,
to a better practice of their duty, and opinion of the Catholic truth. So
that the shrine trade being very likely to go down, and the craftsmen's
gain to fail, this Demetrius, as it hapens, at a distance from the great
company of his brethren, advises only with one of his tribe and 3. or 4.
the idolatrous worshipers of his imaginations, and cries aloud in print Magna
est Diana, Great is Diana of the Scots. yea, so great he makes her in the very
first page of his book as if she were Queen of heaven and earth, no other
divine providence but hers able to recover, as he speaks, the woefully
confounded affairs of the King, and no other nations hands upon the earth but
the Antiprelatical be the instruments to effect it.

Whereas they are at this time the most inconsiderable faction in His Majesty's
Dominions, being kept at a bay by the present tyranny in England, having such
distractions and divisions among themselves, The Scottish Presbyterians an
inconsiderable partic.
so intermingled with a Royal and Independent party, that let them talk or
write what they will; they can make no muster roll of their own strength, and
durst they speak out their desires, or could their guilt permit them an
assurance of security and protection, they would with all their hearts take
sanctuary in the person, as well as hitherto they have done an abused
authority from the name, of their King, and cast themselves with their
covenant, and their claims, to all former concessions, even touching their
discipline, at his foot. But desperatione ultima in furorem animus convertitur,
instead of that they turn despair into madness, hoping only for some
miracle to be wrought by the hand of God, that they may have company in their
ruin. Naturali quodam deploratae mentis affectiu morientibus, gratissimum Sen
Con^rov. Job 8.
est commori. But we are told the hopes of such hypocrites shall perish, That
they shall be cut of, and their trust be but a spiders web.

Having done his cry, he begins to chop logike with the Bishop, complains of
his method, though most apposite to the purpose, The Bishops method apposite to
his matter.
calls for Scripture, Fathers, Reason, as if disciplinarian practical instances
required the strength of any of the three, unless the virtuous precedents of
Father John of Leyden, or Kniperdolin should come in, as they may in judgment
against the Scots. He admits of the His proose ^o by tenets
Bishops proofs (and I am very glad he does) but as by tenets, belonging little
or nothing to the main question: Whereas if The overthrowing the rights of
Magistrates to convocate Synods, etc. Chapt. 2. Subjecting the supreme to their
censures. chap. 5. Chcating him of his civil power in order to religion. chapter
7. be but by tenets; Their challenging this exorbitant power by divine right.
chapter 8. That the exercise of it is hurtful to all orders of men. chap. 12.
Belong little or nothing to the maine questions about the discipline, it should
seem we must climb heaven for the height of the controversy, and see whether
it will suffer God any more then the King, to sit sure in his throne, and have
the supreme government of the world. The heap of calumnics he mentions is a
faithful collection of historical narrations, which requires not the
credulity of the simple, but the search of sedulous people, if distrusted, who
may take the other books in their way, and satisfy themselves about what
passages he pretends to be detorted.

If any of the Bishops allegations are coincident with them in Lysimachus His
allegations confirmed by others.
Nicanor and Isachars burden, they have two witnesses at least to quit them at
the bar, and need not stand to the mercy of Judge Baylie for their pardon.
Whatsoever were the sufferings of the authors Mr. Corbet and Mr. Maxwell the
Reverend Archbishop of Towmond, truth and integrity ought not to be danted,
The hand The Reviewers rash and uncharitable judgment about the ends af Mr.
Corbe^ and Archbishop Maxwell.
of heaven is not always guided by the mouth, nor Gods judgments discernd by
the eye of the Disciplinarian brethren, though most commonly we hear of no
less then the murder of the best men, when they make themselves dispensers of
his punishments. I am credibly informed that Mr. Corbet was murderd by the
Irish, the Archbishop, stripped naked and left desperately wounded, but by Gods
mercy recovered and since died a natural death. What spirit it is that has
cosind Mr. Baylie into this uncharitable belief of Gods strange punishments in
their ends, or rather framed contrary to his conscience this rash judgment in
his mouth I leave to the Christian reader to conjecture. Had the like befallen
any couple of his brethren, he would have writ with their blood some red
letters in the Calendar, and made them currentlie pass for two Martyrs of the
discipline. If what the Bishop and they have jointlie published be fully
aswered by Mr. Baylie in his book printed at London, Edinburgh and His vanity
in mentioning the frequent impressions of his book.
Amsterdam, because the weight of the press adds every time more strength to
his arguments, for I know not else to what purpose he mentions the several
impressions) he might have saved this labor of Reviewing, and published a
fourth editon of it at Delfe.

After so much praejudice the Bishop is beholding to you for his hearing, and
since you have tasted the sweetness of his spirit, and sobernesso His language
more bitter then the Bishops and his have greater to vent it.
of his language in his first page, you do well to spit out the bitterness of
your own in a mad epistle before your book.

If any regard had been wanting in his Lordship to the passages of Scripture
whereupon you build your Antiepiscopal tenets, the quotations would have been
some what more numerous in your Review. That no reverence should be required to
the harmonic of the Reformed he takes care No regard wanting in the Bishop to
Scripture nor reverence to th Reformed Churches.
in the third paragraph of his book where he says, he hopes there is nothing
whereof he convicteth you but will be disavowed... by all the Protestant
Churches in the world, which it should seem they may do and yet agree with you
in the maine of your discipline, for you called all those but bytenets even now.
That they do so beyond a non admission, to a rejection of our Episcopacie as
Antichristian (between which as I take it there is some difference) I desire
you to tell us where.

What respect the Bishop bears to the Civil Magistrate and laws, appears
best by his vindication of just authority to them both against Nor respect to
the Magistrate and laws.
your disciplinarian encroachments. His Lordship does not forget by what
authority your discipline is established though the extravagance of your
practices stands not justified by that which you pretend to. If your rule does,
it does not quit it self of censure, in reference to its reception otherwhere,
because vested with the power of a civil law in Scotland; nor is that law
unalterable when a future Parliament may take into consideration the
inconveniences that accompany it. The Bishop need not be grieved* being as
ignorant as your self (and you are enough, as King knowing as you would seem)
that His Majesty does not at all question the justice, because he does not the
legalitie of these sanctions. Therefore his Lordship may think on, and speak
on when he pleases more about this bussinesse, and yet vouch with out a mask
loyalty in his face, nor (for ought you draw from him) need his veins be so
empty, nor his stomach so sharp set as to eat his former words, much less
be so desperate as to burn his whole book, the consistence of it with his
toughts, and professions laying no slander upon the King, and his Royal Father
of ignorance, and injustice, the one having The Bishop no slanderer of the King
nor his Royal Father.
established, the other offering to establish by your civil laws such a
Church discipline as is mentiond, both having done it upon most unreasonable
importunity, without any known inclination to, or approbation of the same,
Farther, what a slander this would prove, upon your grounds (beyond the
irreverence toward any actions of a King) which is haled hither in a forced
consequence by the cords of your malice may be guessed by the Royal Father's
confession in his solitude. If any shall impute my yiedling to them [the Scots]
as my failing, and Eikon Basilikon chapter 17.
sin, I can easily acknowledge it; but that is no argument to do so agai^e,
or much more For the Royal son, His Majesty now being. you say, he has not
yet gone beyond an offer, therefore His Martyred Fathers The Reviewers
seasonable advertissement about the Kings late offer, to the Scots.
poenitential acknowledgement of his failing, and sin joined to your
seasonable admonition, That there can be no such actual concession, but upon
the peril of ignorance, or buge injustice, except he ownes it as well to be the
religious dictate of his conscience, as a poltike indulgence upon necessity of
state, may probably move him at leisure to deliberate, and whatsoever he shall
determine to do in this, (wherein God direct him for the best) as well for his
own sake, as the saftie of his Kingdoms make him cautious hereafter how the
importunity of the mission gets ground upon his goodness, when all his grants
shall be so publikelie registered as conscientious acts, and, by such barbarious
pens, delivered to posterity as sealed with his soul.

The Bishops presumption in that which follows is none but what No r^sb
presumption in the Bishop.
from the grounds of modest Christian charity may be raised, viz. That a
knowing and a just King (such as your own character renders him) will
acknowledge that contrary to the dictates of his conscience, which is proved
contrary to the laws of God, and man, And this may be proclaimed, if not
prohibited without being his Confessor or taking it from the Clerk of the
closet in any whisper. Nor does your mist^ust of reports bear authority
enough, to make His Majesty's conscience pass for Presbyterian, no more then
that for a command, or imposition by law which was by your petitionarie
violence ravished from his passive innocence into a grant. So that you see in
the very beginning you stumble at a straw, and being to find somewhat worse
in your way, you were best life your legs higher in your progress.

How much the Disciplinarian Scots have contributed from the The Scots
endeavors to impose their discipline upon England.
beginning toward the alteration of Religion in England, is too large a story
to be inserted in this dispute. Their old account the Rt Reverend Archbishop
Bancroft cast up in his Dangerous positions, and English Scotizing Discipline.
their later arreares ruu very high in the history of our times, beginning with
his religious and learned successor, The loss of whose head is not more to be
imputed to the peoples clamours, then the Scottish papers. Whatsoever they did
before, I hope they can not deny themselves to be one of the horned beasts,
which together with their English brethren make the supporters of the
Presbyterian Rebels scutcheon in the Covenant. This in their remonstrance upon
their last inroad into England, when their fainting brethren with the cause
were giving up the ghost, they tell the King plainly they shall zealouslie and
constantly in their several vocations endeavor with their estates and lives
to pursue and advance. This pursuance was against the King and Bishops, which
with the Convocation of divines are the true and full representatives of the
Church of England. The assembly of Divines were but locusts and caterpillars
brought together at Westminster by a Northern wind. The laws of England
convocate no such creatures nor in such a manner. King and Parliament were mere
names, had then, and there, no real being, and so no breath to such a purpose,
nor those in the two Houses afterward more then the heads on the top of them in
any politic capacity to ordain the abolition of Episcopacie. Beside, what
the Assembly did deliberate and debate, poor mechanike people it is very well
known they did as daily laborers, and sacrilegious hirelings, spend the
thread of their time in your service, and paid the price of their souls for a
sequestration or two the Covenanting brethren's pillage of the Church. So that
if they began the song, you know by whom they were paid for their pains, and
if they danced not after your pipe, poor scraping wretches they came at your
call, and how soever you were in a medley together, to be sure your Covenanting
Devil had got you all into a circle, and will better distinguish you when he
calls to you for his re^koning. But, by your favor good Sir, His Majesty kept
out, K. Chapter 1. in no barmonie with the Prc^byterians.
and for the very three years you mention told you plainly he would make one
in the practike harmony of the Catholic Church. That permission (for it was
no more) necessity extorted, and though he could not at that time get you all
into Bedlam, he thought in thrce years you would pipe and dance your selves
weary and then be content to give way to a better solemnity of the Cathedral
music to come in. In the mean time estates and lives engaged in the
advancement of the Covenant by the sword, the end thereof being to setle
discipline, was meddling with and imposing upon our Church. Quod erat
demonstrandum.

The Bishop you see gives a shrewd guess who they are you endeavor All
Protestants implied to be Erastians as well as the Episcopal by Mr. Baylic.
to brand with the name of Erastians, and how all Protestans Churches, even
such as are not Episcopal, must be beholding to you for that title because they
come not up to the rigor of your Discipline. Wherein Erasttus slaterd the
Magistrate to the prejudice of the just rights of the Church, concernd you
as well to prove as to mention, and then to have draw'n a parallel of the like
flaterie in the Bishop. Your doubting argues you ignorant or negligent, and
confirms my belief that you have travailed as little in Erastus's doctrines as
his ways, and gone no farther then the title of his book. What His Lordship
asserts about the supremacy of the Civil Magistrate, and Ecclesiastike
jurisdiction derived from thence is but what he and all his brethren have
sworneto, and not one of the late Bishops retracted who claimed Episcopacie by
divine right, nor were they at daggers drawing with that horrible word Erastian
Caefaro-papisme, having a far more monstrous creature, called
Scoto-Presbytero-Papisme, to encounter. Our laws are the same as well to the
latter as the elder Bishops, and if their subjection to them must be accounted
such an error, the next pedlars pack that you open we may look to find
Christianity bundeli'd up into a sect. The Bishop has more charity in him
then to become an accuser of his friends, and so much ingenuitie as to hear
your sense, not only speak his own about their writings, which when you
bring in any particular instance showing them to join with the most rigid
Presbyterians in opposing Erastus about the Magistrates power, you may look
for your answer

Here the Reviewer, I can not say for want of a pare of spectacles The Reviewer
not acquainted with the late controversy between us and the Papists.
(for who is more blind then he that will not see) is pleased to over look
the whole body of the Bishops charge against them, and instead of quiting
himself to any purpose, recriminates only upon other men's scores, having, as
it seems, been very slenderly acquainted with the late controversies between
the Papists and us, and not sounded the depth of the question, as it was stated
by our later most learned writers, particularly that most glorious martyr the
Right Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury with the rational and subtle Mr.
Chillingworth, who between them having cleared the well of that dirt which
defiled commonly the fingars of them that went to draw water at it before,
made the face of truth appear at the botome to any that came impartiallie to
behold it. But the Bishop mentioning nothing hearebout, I have no authority
farther to enlarge, being obliged only to put Mr. Baylie in mind that in his
next Review he give account to the world. Why the Scottish Presbytery comes not
into the harmony of all Protestants both Lutharans and Calvinists, who give
unto the English Episcopal Church the right hand of fellowship and why he and
his later Brethren out do etheir forefathers, who durst not condemn her either
as defective in any necessary point of Christian piety, or redundant in any
thing that might virtuallic or by consequence overthrow the foundation. The No
Canter-burian design but what was forged at Edenburg.
Canterburian design was forged at Edinburgh into a pass for the Scots to
come over the borders. The Prelatical party might charitablie wish, but never
rationallie hope to see all Christian Churches united in truth and love, so
long as the perverse Presbytery confines all Religion to it self. For
whatsoever the blew caps came in, we know when they went out they carried many
vvainloades of somevvhat clse beside the spoil of the blacke-caps
reconciliation with Rome, and so long as such booty is to be had, they want
more power, then will, to set up a new controversy in England. But while they
are thinking of that, I must put them in mind of what we have in hand, and
notwithstanding Mr. Baylies pretense assure him King James, who had trouble
enough with them, makes good upon his own experience, that every nicitie is a
fundamental among them, and every toy takes up as great a dispute, as if the
Holy Trinity were questioned...De Basilik. dor.
minimis Politiae Ecclesiasticae quaestiunculis tantum excitant turbarum ac si
de sacrosancta Trinitate ageretur.

As touching your answer to the last charge, you cunningly omit The Scots
heretofore gave no so bad language to the English Bishops.
what is found in the letter, a word at least of approbation to the office of
Episcopacie, in that Bishops are called guides, or leaders of Christ's flock,
wherein a superintendence, Prelacie, or precedence is own, they being Pastorum
Pastores, for by the flock there is mean'd the inferior Ministry, not
Laity, otherwise that text of St. Peter is unfitlie applied, Feed the flock
of Christ, which is committed to your charge, caring 1. Pet. 5. 2
for it not by constraint e'piscopountes mi a'nagkastos [e'piscopountes is
being Bishops over it] where a'nagkastos must relate to the Ministers who were
constrained to wear the cap, surplice, and tippet, or else be deprived of all
Ecclesiastical function as your Assembly complains at the very beginning of
the letter. Yet had they writ no more then you produce, and had been of the
same mind with you now, it would follow necessarily that you acknowledge
several members of Antichrist Ministers of the word, reverend Pastors and
brethren of the Kircke. Which give me but under your hand in your next. My Lord
of Derrie I presume will use you, as his professed brother very kindly, and
trouble you no more about that business. I must add this; Mr. Knox, as
futious otherwise as he was, before Queen Elizabeth's time when as your
Historian relates in his life, K. Edward VI. offered him a Bishoprike, he
resus'd it with a grave severe [yet not so severe] speech saying the title of
Lordship and great state had quid commune cum Antichristo, somewhat common with
Antichrist, he said not the office of an English Bishop was Antichristian, nor
his person a limb of Antichrist himself.

What the same Assembly said or did about the Archbishop of Though they acted
enough against their Bishops at h^.
St. Andrews was in the midst of their freanzie, when, as by their actions may
be judged, they had already made good what they threatened, and were become
subjects or slaves to the tyranny of the Devil. Whose title their successors,
have these last ten years renewd, and paid a greater homage then ever, to that
Lord.

What you suppone is a grant of the question, That some 80. years ago the
Scots might admit the Protestant Bishops tolerable in England, the law being
still the same upon which they are founded, and if their practice be not, which
is more then you prove, whatsoever it may detract from their persons, it
derogates no thing from the continuance of their office. Neither has your
inspection been so accurate of its nature, but that like unskillfull
physicians, ye have cast away that balm of Gilead whereby the health of the
daughter of Gods people must be recovered, Ierr. 8. 22.
and like ignorant simplers, have throw'n over the hedge for a noxious ^eed
that Sovereign plant which God ordained for the perpetual service and sanitie
of his Church.

As for those crimes which you mention, though you will never be The crime^
alleged not the grounds of K, Chapter 1. his concessions against Episcopacle in
Scotland
able to make them good against the Reverend Prelates of any the three
Kingdoms, yet for shame say not for those you got the consent of the King to
condemn, kill and bury in your country the sacred order of Episcopacie in
that Church. His Majesty having not expressed the least word or syllabe to
that purpose. The most that ever he yielded was this. For it should be
considered that Episcopacie was not so rooted, and settled there [in Scotland]
as it is here [in England] nor I (in that respect) so strictly bound to continue
it in that Kingdom as this: for what I think in my judgment best, I may not
think so absolutely necessary for all places, and at all times. Not so
rooted and settled, not so absolutely necessary implies no act of everting the
foundations both of Religion and Government etc. nor can such an act be so
pleasing to Kings, nor that order, which is wholelie employed therein, win so
much upon their affections and judgments as to make them profess to the world
they think it best, as you see our King of blessed memory has done.

When England thereafter, as you term it, did root out that unhappie plant,
they danced after the Scottish pipe, though England was neither in that
Episcopacie in England not put down by a legal Assembly, and Parliament
thing, called an assembly, nor in any full and free Parliament that did it.
They were but a few rotten members, that had strength enough then to articulate
their malice in a vote, but have since given up the ghost being cut down by
the independencie of the sword, and their presbytery with them, for a Stinking
weed throw'n over the hedge, or Severu's wall, into Scotland, where they, and
their blew-bottle brethren are left to lie unpittied on the dunghill together.
The rest of the ReformedChurches otherwhere did never cast out, what they never
had, such an happy plant as regular Episcopacie in their grounds, those that
have (as some such I have told you there are) carefully keep it. The one part
has been more wise in their actions, the other more charitable to us in their
words. Let the Scots applaud, or clap their hands when they please, there is an
act behind, the plays' not yet done.

CHAPTER II.
The Scottish Discipline overthrowes the right of Magistrates to convocate
Synods, and otherwise to order Ecclesiastical affairs.

THe Bishop does not forget his challenge about the Magistrates right in The
Reviewer knows not good logike when he meets with it.
convocating Synods. But if Mr. Baylie's eyes be too old to see a good,
argument in an enthymem, let him take it out of an explicit syllogism, which
may fairlie be draw'n out of His Lordships first and second paragraph in this
Chapter.

MAJ. That Discipline which does countenance the Church to convene within the
Magistrates territories, whenever, wheresoever they list: To call before them
whomsoever they please, etc. does overthrow the Magistrates right to convocate
Synods. to confirm their Acts, etc. MIN. But this new Discipline does
countenance the Church to convene within the Magistrates territories,
whenever, wheresoever they list, etc. Ergo, CONCL. This new Discipline does
overthrow the Magistrates right to convocate Synods, etc.

The Major his Lordship proves from that known Soveraignite of power wherewith
all Princes, and States are endued; From the wariness of the Synod of Dort,
Can. 50. From that decree out of Ench. Cand s. min. Synods ought to be called
by the supreme Magistrate, if he be a Christian, etc. From the power the
Emperors of old did challenge over General Councels; Christian Monarchs in
the time of Popery over National Synods; The Kings of England over their
Convocations: The Estates of the United Provinces. From the professions of all
Catholics and Protestants in France, very particularly and liberally the
State of Geneva, where the ordering of all Ecclesiastike affairs is assumed by
the Seigniorie.

The Minor, he takes for granted, is known out of all the proceedings in the
Presbytery; which from time to time have thus convened, and convocated
themselves, and therefore His Lordship only intimates it in his first
paragraph, yet afterward proves it in part by an Assembly, meeting when it had
been prohibited, and sitting after it was discharged by the King, which the 20.
Presbyters did at Aberdene Anno 1600. And all this with the Reviewer, is to
forget the challenge, because he has forgot his logike, and the new light has
dazeld the eye of his old intellectual faculty to discern. The truth of it
is, this was a little too hot for Mr. Baylies fingars, because it makes such
clear instances about the Synod of Dort and Geneva, wherein they differ from
the Scottish Presbytery, which he will not own because he every where denies,
and therefore takes no notice of it as he goes.

Nor can any ignorance of the way of the Scottish Discipline be imputed to the
The Bishop not ignorant of the way of the Scottish Discipline.
Bishop, who produces, so numerouslie, the practical enormities thereof, and
strikes at the very foundation as infirm, because contrary to the known
laws and lawful custom:, the supreme Magistrate dissenting and disclaiming.
For what he pretends to have been unquestionablie authentike by virtue of
Parliament Acts and the Kings consent since the first reformation, I have
otherwhere successivelie evidenced, up as far as the unhappie beheading of
Marie Queen of Scots in England, (to which the rest may be hereafter annexed)
to have no other strength then what rage and violence could afford it. The
power which he says The Reviewers Sophystrie.
every man in Scotland gives the King, without controversy, to call
extraordinary Assemblies when he pleases, takes not away, in its have, the
maine part, of the Bishops objection, implying no negative to this. That the
Presbyteric, has often extraordinarily assembled without the Kings leave, nay
against his command, nor will they be checked in that rebellious license by his
power.

What the Bishop means to speak of the Kings power in choosing Elders, etc.
The Bishops meaning about the Kings power in choosing Elders.
Mr. Baylie might know, but that still he has no mind to take notice, That in
the former paragraph His Lordship spoke of a seigniorie, a Civil Magistrate at
Geneva, to which at the end of the year are presented the Elders, and by that
continued or discharged. The Civil Magistrate in Scotland has no more power
in placing or displacing, (which before was called continuing or discharging)
the Elders, then in the election of the Emperor, whose inhaerent right he
conceives to be as good there as at Geneva, therefore if the laws do not
expresselie provide it, they are such, he thinks, as tend to the overthrowing
of that right. This His Lordship means as part of that he was to prove, being
a clause in the title of this Chapter.

Your closing with the Parliament, which the Bishop has not mentioned,
Ecclesiastike laws.
is but to beget a wonder by making an hermaphroditc of the question which
before was but single in your sex. You are not so united, but that I can
untwist you, and, though against your will, consider, in this case, the
Presbytery by it self. The making of Ecclesiastike laws in Scotland (as for
England it shall not be here disputed, as desirous as you are to be wandering
from home) was never, in justice, nor with any Kings content, referred, so
absolutely, to Ecclesiastike Assemblies, as not to ask a ratification from
the crown. What the The head of the Church.
Bishops mind is about the head of the Church will be clearlie rendered when
just Authority demands it, but His Lordship thinks not good to be catechized
by every ignorant Scottish Presbyter, nor give answer to every impertinent
question he puts in.

If your fingars itch to be handling the extrinsccal power in the Minister
derivative from the supremacy of the King you were best turn over Erastus and
the learned Grotius, after which I guess we shall hear of you no more. Your
Assemblies are Arbitrarie but at Assembies are the Kings arbitrarie Counsels.
Royal pleasure otherwise then as by your covenanting sword you cut of their
relation to the King and his great Councels. So that your Kings were willing to
accept, and had good reason to assume, more then ever you would give them.

How you robbed them of their right by your multiplied rebellions see
Scotish-Presbyterian self conviction in my Epitome of your story. The Bishop
had reason to instance in particulars.


If the Bishop had left this matter in general, your hue and cry to be sure,
had gone after him for particulars. His reasoning stands not to the courtesy
of your indulgence, being grounded upon the Acts of your Assemblies, whose
backs had been long since broke with the weight, of no peckadillos in
disputing, but high and mighty villainies in rebelling, had it not the strength
of the whole lay Presbytery to support it. Though by the way I must tell you,
The failings of your officers may be taken as natural to, and inseparable from
your office, when, having been so noto riouslie public, they pass without
your censure, or dislike. So that this mote, as much as you miskenne it, will
prove a beam in your eye, and of such consequence in this argument, as you
will scarce find the way through the most heinous particulars that follow.

The first of which lays such a block in your way, as you can The Assembly
contest with the King about his command.
not step over, till you have as good as acknowledged one of the principal
articles in that charge. You confess His Majesty did write from Stirling to
the General Assembly at Edinburgh 1579. that they should cease from concluding
any thing in the discipline of the Church, during the time of his minoritis.
And how well you obeyed it, we may collect by what follows. Upon this desire
[dutifull subjects would have taken it for a command] the Assembly did
abstain srom all conclusions [that we shall see presentlie] only they named
a Committee to go to Striveling for conference with His Majesty upon that
subject. Any man that is acquainted with your Assembly logike will know that
this clause with the only, if it pass not for a conclusion, caries the force
of two praemises with it; And he must be very ignorant in your story that has
not found all your conferences with your Kings to have been contests. Whether
this was so or no, I leave to the discretion of the reader, when he sees what
you say followed thereupon. Immediately a Parliament is called in October. 1579.
And in the first Act declares and grants jurisdiction unto the Kirk.... And
declares that there is no other face of a Kirk, nor other face of Religion,
then is praesentlie, by the favor of God established within this Realm, And
that there be no other jurisdiction Ecclesiastical acknowledged within this
Realm, then that whilke is and shall be within the samen Kirk, or that which
follows therefra concerning the praemises. Now let us lay all this together.
The young King is resolved to have no meddling with the discipline, yet no
sooner does he see your Commissioners sweet faces, but immediately a
Parliament is called And in that Parliament your Discipline must have the
primacie In the Acts; And that leading Act must not only establish what you
have at hand, but, upon the engagement of Regal and Parliamentarie power,
purchase all future possibilities of your pleasure, and give your invention a
patent to play the wanton. There must be some witch craft sure in your
Committee, and (by your relation) a magic spell to retrive on such a sudden,
the Kings wandering affections to the Discipline.

But when I find His Majesty professing, that after ten years of age Conf.
as Hapt. Court. And. Melvin Epist. ad Th. Bez. 1579. K. I. and his Nobility
against the Discipline. Vindic. Epist. Hieron. Philadelph The Reviewer and his
brethren agree not in their story. Duo folia dilac erata and in ignem conjecta.
you never had his heart. A brother of yours lamcnting that for five years
before this you had had a perpetual conflict with the Bishops, and ever got the
worst. That most of the Nobility, upon several interests, were at this time
bent against you, I am at a loss for the Kings liberty, as much as for some
other concurrent due authority, in this Act, and read nothing but your
violence in these proceedings. But let us see how you and a namelesse friend of
yours agree. He tells us the letter that Dunkenson brought to this Assembly
had otherguede contents.

That the King only quickened your dispatch in consultation a. bout some head
of the discipline, and preparing your unanimous result for the consent of the
Parliament that follows.

The Kings jealousy of your meddling with these affairs he seems to
anticipate by two years of your account and if there were any such thing,
whereof he doubts, he says the King was better informed of the truth. He
farther complains of two whole leaves about this business that were rent out
of your public records. that ever since left posterity in a cloud this was
done in the year 1584. which he calls the hour of darkness. You say the
authentike Registers are extant, and ^onvince the Bishop to be heir of
falsehood. Error cau^ qua coepit eat All the truth that I can pick out of this
confusion is, That the King was disaffected to the Discipline; That the
Assembly did not obey his command nor answer his desire with their silence;
And that what consent you say, he gave in Parliament soon after, was either
forged, or procured by constraint. What follows concerning your rigor to the
Papists, and many orthodoxe Christians comprehended in that title, is easily
credited. But you should have done well to have set down the names Dominorum
Consilii ex quornm deliberatione proclamation ^as made, and then we should have
known how near they were of kinn to your faction. Some body tells us, That
the Ministers did deliberate, and Buchanan did act [according to G^or. Con. De
duplic. stat. Relig. apud Scot. lib. 2.... ministri cu omnia ex suo suorumque
arbitrio pendere, savente and annitente imprimis Buchanano, cerncrent, etc.
the maxims of loyalty he published.] That the Kings name was to it, and what
else you pleased, is not much to be doubted, when you had got his person in
your power. For how short a time you could keep his inclination to the
Discipline, which was proclaimed, ap pears out of your story of an Assembly
man's penning. How cordiallie peremptory the king was in his command, and how
forward in subscribing whatsoever is in the Act for the short Confession of
faith; And what good effects it wrought among the people, you may take notice
out of His Majesty speech in the Conference at Hampton Court, wherein he
shows how ridiculous the thing was, and the person that drew it up. I think
it unfit to thrust into the book every position negative...according to the
example of Mr. Craige in Scotland, who with his I renounce and abhor, his
detestations and abrenunciations, did so amaze the simple people, that they not
able to conceive all those things, utterlie gave over all, falling back to
Popery, or remaining still in their former ignorance. These are the Kings
words about Mr. Craige the Author, and his Confession, K. 1. his dislike of
the short Confession. Many unjustisiable praciices about it. Vindic. Epist
Hieron. Philadelph. Archiepis. Fan, S. Andr. Pa. 1 77
which you may compare with the Act, you pretend to at your leisure. The
approbation of the Assembly was but the harmony of a faction, such being
excluded as were not prejudged approvers or, if praesent, overaw'd by a
praevalent party in their vote, as much as other Ministers abroad, by
Philadelphi Vindicatours confession, in their consent. Quis credat quenquam,
qui rem sacram administrabat...ausum fuisse calculo suo non probare. Or if they
were free and did approve it, they did it in that sense that many Orthodoxe
persons did swear or subscribe it...in eam confessionem jurasse neminem
Presbyteriorum regimini alligat. Which King Chapter 1. in his large Declaration
tells you to be consistent with Episcopa^ie, it unqu-estionablie true. Or it
may be the register of your approvers was handled as the roll of subscribers,
wherein were a great many more names then had been hands... add Episcopos nunc
sedentes and magnam partem Archiepis. Fan. S. Adr.
Ministrorum subscriptiones illas inficiari. The opposition Of the Kings
Commissioner it may be was engrossed in the two leaves torn out of your
public records, if not left out as impertinent to the proceedings of that
Assembly. If he gave a passive consent by his silence, it was in conformity
to his Masters subscription and command which you mentioned. The direction of
His Majesty for the 50. Classical Assemblies was specializ'd by your power
which did direct him. The crecting of them was with no intent to pull down
Episcopacie, as may be, in effect gathered from your words. For if they remain
to this day, the same stood while the Bishops were in power as subordinate
chapters or consistories unto them.

These some Noble men, you speak of, were most of the Nobility, Epist. ad
Theod. Bez. The reason upon which the Nobility maintaind Bishops.
Pseudo-Episcopatu.
as your Brother Andr. Melvin does acknowledge... reluctantibus nobilium
plerisque. And these did not now erect, of new, a titular Episcopacie, but
maintained that which had been legallie established. And this they did, not
only to hold fast their Ecclesiastical revenue, but upon other more
conscientious grounds, as he ingenuouslie confesses. Viz. To keep the state of
the Kingdom entire from being rent in pieces; sublato enim Episcopatu [Il'e
leave the lie for his heirs to lick up] regni statum convelli. To praeserve
Majesty due to the King, constitutis Presbyteriis regiam Majestatem imminui
And, by asserting his right to some Church revenues, to prevent the utter
exhausting of his exchequer... bonis Ecclesiasticis... restitutis Regis
aerarium exhauriri causantur.

That the Nobility enjoyed so much of the revenue, beside what The Presbytery
the Cause of the Nobilities kceping the revenue of the Church.
was paid in to the King, came upon the perpetual divisions raised by the
Presbytery in the Kingdom, which perturbing ever the establishment of the
Episcopal order, and voting them to have no more right to the means then they
had to the office, the learned at least and prudent Nobility having better
assurance that neither power nor means belonged de jure to the brethren of the
discipline, it is not unlikelie, till the controversy should be ended, they
framed a kind of plausible argument to continue the steward ship in themselves.
Yet in the mean time, by your leave, they Episcopacie more then titular by the
Covenanters acknowledgement.
did effectuate more then a title to this and tul^han Bishop: And this kind of
Prelates pretended right to every part of the Episcopal office, and exerciz'd
much more then you mentioned. Which having been made good against you in
several volumes, I shall only bring an undeniable argument, by producing
confitentes reos, the whole pack of Covenanters of all orders and qualities,
as well Ministers, as others, Who in their public bill or Complaint, upon which
an Act of the Presbytery of Edinburgh passed October. 24. 1638. have these
Words. Whereas the office of a Bishop (as it is now used within this Realm)
was condemned by the book of policy, and by the Act of the Assembly holden
at Dundee, Anno 1580. Whereof these are the words; For as much as the office of
a Bishop (as it is now used, and commonly taken within this Realm) has no
sure warrant from Authority, etc. Hence I argue thus. The office of a Bishop
now used in the year 1580. and the office of a Bishop, now used in the year
1638. is ex confesso the same. But the office of a Bishop 1638. consisted in
the power of ordination and jurisdiction: Ergo so did the office of a Bishop
1580. And as much is implied by the Act of that Synod which condemns
expresselie the power as well as the title of Bishops, and that with reference
to the persons of the Bishops then living, that had executed this power, and
were to lay it down or become excommunicate. Therefore you show us but the
half face in your discovrse about their voting in Parliament, Into which
employment they crept not, but came upon considence of better authority then
any general Assembly could give them, as shall be proved hereafter,
particularly in the case of Rob. Montgomerie Archbishop of Glasgow whom you
name. That there was some debate takes of somewhat from the Kings forwardness
in commanding, subscribing and directing in special. That he showed his good
satisfaction, I believe not, when you publish it with a blancke Reviewer. But
the Warner The Bishop too courteous in passing over 27. years story mean,
base, and abject persons, who were never any way remarkable as ^en of great
gifts Decl. of His Majesty's Counc. Imperfect policy alterable at the Kings
pleasure.
here jumps over no less then 27. years time, etc. Ans. The Bishop
undertook no continued history of your Disciplinarian rebellions. Therefore
in passing over 27. years he saved himself a trouble, but has done too great
a courtesy for you, unless you were more thankful for his silence. Though
indeed this signal rebellious Convention of a few stubborn ignaro's at
Aberdener shows to what an height and maturitie of mischief your other
sucking Conspiracies had come to; if Royal presence had not been at hand to
suppress their growth and nip these black boutefeus in the bud. That King
James at that time was by his English Bishops persuasions resolved to pu^ down
the general Assemblies of Scotland, is disavowed in words by public
proclamation, bearing date the 26. September. and in act by appointing one to be
holden at Dundee the last Tuesday of Julie. Yet if he had, with the grave
advice and consent of his three Estates, your Church lanes and constant
practice must have struck sail, as it afterward did, unto the supremacy of
that power. Himself telling you, That no Monarchy either in Civillor
Ecclesiastical policy, had then attained to that perfection that it needed no
reformation; Nor that infinite occasions might not arise, whereupon wise
Princes might foresee, for the benefit of their St^es, just cause of
alteration. For what immediately follows, take His majesty's answer out of a
Declaration penned with his own hand.

As to the nature of their particular privilege in holding of Assemblies, they
The Privilege of Assemblies limited.
have in this their last praetended Assembly broken the limitations of that
privilege that is clearlie set down in the first Act of the Parliament in
the 92 year, which is the latest and clearest warrant for their Assembly. For
there it is specially provided. That as We give them license for holding of
their Assemblies once in the year or oftener as occasion shall require (which
proves that all their power only proceeds from us) so must it not be convened
without our own prasence, or then of our Commissioner, nor no day, nor place
set down for the next Assembly, but by Our, or our Commissioners appointment,
except we be not pleased neither to go in our own person, neither to send any
for assisting the said Assembly. And how these limitations have been observed
by them at this time, let the world judge, first in not only refusing the
praesence of our Commissioner, but most contemptuously and injuriouslie
barring the door upon him, and next in setting down the dies of the next
Assembly without either his privitie, or consent.

The letter which His Majesty's Commissioner Sr. Alex: Strayton of Lowrenston
The Legal proceedings against the Aberdene Assemblers
offered you know was a missive from the Lords of the Council, not addressed to
them as to an Assembly, and therefore no such capacity required to their
receiving it. His Majesty's letter to the Commissioners of the general
Assembly signifying his pleasure to have the appointment of this meeting
deferred, and no new indiction to be made without his consent, having been long
before delivered, and the substance of it by them communicated to the several
Presbyteries of the Kingdom. In contempt whereof these persons assembled at
Aberdene, where, the day before they sat down, was a publication at the
mercate Cross of a charge to the contrary from the Lords of the Council.
Beside, they had not, His Majesty tells them. any warrant to hold a new
Assembly, without the praesence either of the Moderatour of the last, or of
the ordinary Clerk of the Assembly. As for their dutiful demeanor
afterward, That they rise immediately after the reading of the Missive, Mr.
Baylie knows to be absolutely false, Howsoever, the naming a diet for the
next meeting Was against an express clause in His Majesty's letter, which by
the Council is called a Rebellious, and traitorous misbehaviour.

For the trouble that followed hereupon, if by the counsel of Archbishop
Bancroft, that could not be pernicious, because the proceeding against them was
legal. They were called before the Lords of His Majesty's Council; had liberty
given them to entertain lawyers, and make their defense, which proved a
Declinatour disclaiming all subjection to His Majesty, and His Council; This
Declinatour was repelled, and they were found to have unlawfullie convened; His
Majesty commanded that the ordinary course of justice should proceed.
Whereupon Six of them were presented upon panel at Lynlithgow before His
Highness Justice being the ordinary Judge, who had joined to him a great
number of Noblemen, etc. Their indictment grounded upon the first statute in
May 1584. Two of Their obstinacy.
their Procuratours, and Counselors at law, not being able to persuade them to
a course of humility, did upon their obstinacy refuse to plead for them,
Indeed Six, or seven of them, touched with the open discovery made by the
Kings Declaratour upon humble submission were dismissed, and sent home to their
charge. See more particularly of all these in the Declarations of K. James,
and his Council 1606.

The next instance of the Bishops, Viz. Their abolishing the chief festivals
of the Church, the Reviewer can not justify to any purpose The Church
festivals abolished in Scotland by no just Authority.
either from the authority, or the time. For first this great Council of
Scotland were but a parsel of the rebel Nobility that had of late deposed,
and persecuted the poor Queen Dowager to the death, And now having the young
King and Queen at as great a distance as France, at the same rate order the
affairs of the Church as they had the policy of the State. The charge they
gave the Assembly brethren dated the 29. day of April 1590. (the sum whereof
is so formallie placed in the front of the Discipline) was upon procurement by
themselves, It being ordinairie with them, when they had any new device on
foot, to extort some pretended authority by their letters. Therefore it is but
a mock obedience by service not only offered, but obtruded. Nor was it so
pleasing to them, whom they here own for their masters, but that after many
days perusal, it was with dislike, and scorn rejected by diverse. Those that
signed it had no power to ratify it, no more then just before, the Confession
of faith, which they were feign to send over into France. And how their Act, or
promise in secret Council, dated the 27. of January, was illuded from time
to time, Knox relates, and very much laments in his story. For the time, there
was no such Parliament intervall as required the diligence of the Council of
State: for what they called a Parliament, though none, was but new lie
dissolved, when presently consultation was had how the Church might be
established in a good, and Godly policy. The reason of which haste was lest,
the young Queen should come over, and interpose her Royal authority in this
great Council of State, as she did afterward, and rejected the Discipline, for
all the Act of State that had passed on it, demanding How many of those that
had subscribed would be subject unto it, and her Secretary telling them. That
many subscribed in fide parentum, as children are baptized.

Those days which Mr. Baylie calls here fond seasts, out of the The primitive
Christians observed thom
book of Discipline and that farther abominations, were not thought such by
the Primitive Christians, who were strict in the solemnity of such times. And
if the writings of the ancient Fathers, and the Godly, and approved laws of
Justinian the Emperor might be admitted, as once they were offered, to decide
the controversy betvixt us, we know what Would become of this part of the
Discipline. The authority of the Orat: of the Protest. of Scotl. to the Q.
Reg. 1558.
Church, warranted by the holy Scriptures is sufficient to justify them and
us in this observance. Nor were the Scots so fallen out with these
abominations, but that they let them stand in the Calendar before their
Liturgy, etc. And there were a people in Scotland which, in the Bishops days,
did celebrate those feasts, Therefore ever since they have not showed such
ready obedience to that direction of the Discipline. See the Bishop of
Brechen's defense of the Perth Articles.

Your farre-fetecht comparison accidentally improves the Bishops knowledge by
a seasonable experiment, Who finds the Disciplinarian barbarismes in Scotland
as monstrous as any he ever read of in Iapan, and your nullities in religion as
many as Vtopia has in policy, or nature. If your thoughts had not been
rambling so far for recruits to your malice, you might have been furnished
with truth nearer home, which His Lordship brings unto your door. As fine as
here you make your self for the triumph, out of every wing you pluck, you
will by and by be at a loss for your victory, and must then wear your blew
cap without a feather. For (that you may know The Bishop not mistake^ in the
Scottish Chronologic.
my meaning) His Lordship can afford you no such pretty thing as the
antichronisme you lay hold on. He says not, That statute of treason wa^ in
being in the year 1580. And his Printer you might see, had done him so much
right as to set a number 4. years older directly, against the place where it
is mentioned. His Lordships words are these Which ridiculous ordinance was
maintained stiffelie by the succeeding Synods, notwithstanding the statute,
That it should be treason to impugn the authority of the thrce Estates.

The plain sense whereof is this, The succeeding Synods to the year 1584.
maintained it stisfclie. And not only they but likewise the succeeding Synods
afterward, notwithstanding the statute then made, That etc. Yet, not to be too
literal, That there should be three Estates, to whom your brethren presented
their Assembly Acts as they did, by the King and them to be confirmed, even
before the year 1580. and yet, That to impugn the authority of the three,
estates or to procure the innovation, or diminution of any of them, should have
no statute nor law to make it, at least interpretative, treason, is a piece of
politikes that Iapan nor Vtopia, will never own, nor any man that is civilized
in submission to government believe.

The business of appeals we are to meet with in the chapter following, and so
far you shall have leave to travail with the counterfeit credit of that
untruth.

What you make here such a positive consent of Lundie the Kings Commissioner in
that Assembly, even now went no farther then a suspense in silence, where all
you found was, That it appeared not he apposed. And how that might be I there
gave you my conjecture. In the next What kind of Presbyteries were erected by
K. James and his Commissioners, and to what purpose.
Assembly 1581. the Kings Commissioner Caprington was not so hasty to erect
in His Majesty's name Presbyteries in all the land. The business was this, The
King sends him, and Cuningham with letters to the Assembly at Glasgow, to
signify, That the thirds of the Ecclesiastical revenues, upon the conference
had between his Commissioners, and those which they had before sent from
Dundee, were not found to be the safest maintenance for the Ministry, they
having been so impaired in twenty years before, that nothing of certainty
could appear; That thereupon had been drawn a diagrame of several
Presbyteries, whereby a division of the greatest parishes was to be made, and a
uniting of the less to the end that the Ministers might be with more
aequalitie maintained, and the people more convenientlie assemble'd, That His
Majesty had determined to sent letters to several of his Nobility in the
Country to command their meetings, and counsel here about. This he did not
till the next summer, nor was any thing effected diverse years after. The
conventions of the Ministry were Bishops to praeside in them.
to be moderated by every Bishop in his Dioecesse, who was, by agreement, to
praeside in the Presbyteries with in his limits. So that the modelling
Presbyteries was only for settling a convenient revenue upon the Ministers,
and so far was it from abolishing Episcopacie, that the Bishops were to have
the managing the affair.

It would not have cost you, nor your printer, much pains to have put in what
hapened before the year 1584 The opposition against Declar. 15^2. The abuse of
the Kings indulgence by the Presbyters.
your abuse hereof by the Bishops Montgoinerie and Adamson; His Majesty's
discharging by proclamation the Ministers conventions, and Assemblies under
pain to be punished as Rebels, publishing them to be unnatural subjects,
seditious persons, troublesome and unquiet spirits, members of Satan, enemies
to the King and the Commonwealth of their native Country, charging them to
desist from preaching in such sort as they did viz. against the authority in
Church causes, against the calling of Bishops, etc. removing, imprisoning,
inditing them, etc. Which put you upon the desperate attempts of surprising and
restraining His Majesty's person, whereof otherwhere. So that the King, you
see, had very good preparatives to purge his Kingdom of such turbulent
humors, before Captain Stuart put him in mind to make use of that physike.
Which Captain James The E: of Arran no wicked Courtier.
was no such wicked Courtier, when the saints in behalve of the Discipline, set
him up to justle with Esme Stuart Lord Aubignie for the nearest approach unto
Royal favor.

This Parliament 1584. was summoned with as loud a voice as any other, and was
as open as the sun at Edinburgh could make it. Nor was Captain Stuarts crime
about it such as to denominate his exile the vengeance of God, which was
wrought in the eyes of the world by your rebellion. Nor his death by
Dowglasse's high way murder, avenged His blood revenged.
afterward in alike terrible destruction and that in Edinburgh high street,
where sanguis sanguinem tetigit: blood touched blood, though I dare not, as you
do, judge for reward, nor divine such ambiguous cruelties for money, being no
Priest nor Prophet, as you are to the heirs of those bloody soulders in Micah
[chapt 3.] I dare not say that it either was the fingar of God, though he
employ not the hand of his power to restrain them.

Rev.... these acts of his Parliament the very next year were disclaimed
Bishop Bancroft Dang. Posi^ b. 1. Gibsons bold speeches to the King.
by the King, etc. Ans. They were not disclaimed the 21 of December the next
year, when James Gibson being questioned for dis loyal speeches about them
before His Majesty and his Council, very impudentlie told the King, he was a
persecutour for maintaining them, and compared him to Jeroboam, and threatened
he should be rooted out, and conclude that race. His confidence was in the
return of the banished Rebel-Nobles, who forced all honest men from the Court,
possessed themselves of His Majesty's person, and acted all disorder in his
name. This was the regular restoring of Presbytery, Which to say was never
more removed to this day, in that sense, you must speak it, is to abuse the
ignorance of some new convert you have got in the Indies, who it may be, at
that distance, know not that Bishops had the visible Church government in
Scotland, for about theirtie years together, since that time.

Rev. The Warners digression to the the perpetuity of Bishops in Scotland,
etc. Ans. The perpetuity of their order in that Kingdom is no disgression
Perpetuity the Bishops in Scotland.
in this place, where His Lordship shows your practical contradiction in
pulling down Episcopacie with one hand, and yet seting it up, though under the
name of Superintendencie, with the other.

The sequestring their revenue, and altering their names, and pruning off some
part of their power, he takes to be no root and branch ordinance, for the
deposition of their office, or utter extirpation of their order. This he
asserts to be the greatest injury your malice could ever hitherto bring about,
and therefore goes not one step out of his way to let you know. That Bishops
have been perpetual in your Church, Nor do you out of yours (but keep the same
path of truth you began The Reviewers long reach for the antiquitic of
Presbyters.
in) in acquainting us with the antiquity of Presbyters, who, it should seem
are terrae filii that sprung up in Scotland, like so many mushromes, the next
night after Christianity came in: Though he that is read in your opinions and
actions, will take it for granted that you must pay the acknowledgement of your
Presbytery to the Sanhedrin, and your sects conversion to the jews.

If you will impudentlie crowd it into the company of the first... facile est
credere Victorem Pontisicem...in Scotia reperisse multos quos salutaribus undis
expiaret alios quos Judaizantium in fe^erat error. G. Con. De dupl. stat. Rel.
apud Scot. lib. 1. Multi ex Britonibus Christiani savitiam Diocletiani
tiementes ad eos [Scotos] confugerant e quibus complures doctrina, and vitae
integritate clari in Scotia substiterunt, vitamque solitariam tanta sanctitutis
opinione apud omnes vixerunt, ut vita sanctorun cellae in templa commutareniur.
Ex eoque consuetuao mansit apud posteros, ut prisci Scoti templa cellas vocent.
Hoc genue Mona^horum Chaldeos appellabant mansitque nomen, and institutum donec
Monachorum genus rocentius in plures divisum ectas eos expulit Buchan. Hist.
lib. 4
Christians that came into Scotland, you can not deny but that for some part
of the Centuries you speak of, it was confined to the monks colls, never came
to clamor at the Court, and the poor Culdiis, with a great deal more
humility and piety, then the Covenanters, carried it in their cowles.

Rev.... and after the reformation there was no Bishop in that land. Ans. The
reformation you mean, began the day before, or after the Greek Calends, and
if you will help me to an account of the one, I shall know how to order the
era of the other. Many years confusion there was of Popery, Presbytery and
Superintendencie. The reformed Episcopacie could never get ground till King
James set it forward, and then it went not far before it met with your violent
encounter by Sword, and Covenant, which never suffered the crown nor Miter to
stand long unshaken, till both were held up by the Arms of England, and the
Kings person secure at a distance to command you. That ever such a thing as
reformed Presbytery according to the Canon in your Discipline, had the free
positive consent of King, and Parliament (without which it can not legallie
pass for the Religion of your Kingdom) I deny to be visible any where in
your story.

Rev.... till the year 1610. Ans. That year did indeed complete the Episcopal
power, which King James had by degrees piouslie, and industriouslie promoted
many years before.

Rev.... When Bancrost did consecrate three Scots Ministers, etc. Ans. A
brother of yours tells us they were consecrated by Bishop Abbot: As evil as
their report was the men were not so bad, as their names need be in charity
conceled. They were John Spotswood, Andrew Lamb, and Gawin Hamilton, Bishops of
Glasgow, Brechen, and Galloway. Who enjoy now their reward in heaven for the
r^viling they had on earth, it being for Gods sake and his Church] according to
our Saviors promise, St. Matthew. 5. 11. The first was a man for zeal to the
Church, fidelity to the King, prudence in Government, and constancy under
affliction singular, and inimitable, and indeed for his excellent gifts onelic
hateful to the Disciplinarians, though especially because he through long
experienec was of all Scottish men best acquainted with and ablest to detect
their cross ways to the King and all Sovereign Magistracy. He died
piouslie, and peaceably at Westminster in the second year of this rebellion,
and was buried in the Abbey Church. The second was a great and assiduous
preacher, even when he was blind through extreme age, He also died in peace,
and with the good report of all, except these calumniatores, who hold that no
Bishop can be an honest man, and whose invention is so rich of nothing as
reproaches against better men then themselves. The third was a reverend
Praelate of great parts, and singular learning, a most constant preacher who
lived in peace, and died in his bed.

Rev.... that violent Commissioner the Earl of Dunbar. Ans. His violence did
not carry him beyond his Commission, and because he executed that upon the
rebellious Aberdene Assemblers, and would not take off some of his kindred or
acquaintance who were in the jurie, that deliberatelie cast them in their
verdict, nor intercede for their stay in Scotland, being desired; you here meet
with him at the Synod of Glasgow. Which being at large proved legitimate in
every circumstance required by law, is in vain condemned as null by your
faction. Nor was it corrupt in any more then three members of about 140. who
being rotten drop of from the close union and harmonious suffrage of the rest.

Rev:... got authorized in some part of the Bishops office. Ans. I hope
Episcopacie entirely authorized in the Synod of Glasgow Vind. Epist Hitr.
Philadelph.
you will not deny that Bishops were authorized to ordain in this Synod. And
into how many particulars their power of jurisdiction was branched your brother
very pitifully complains... jurisdictio in omnibus offendiculis, sive in
doctrina, sive in moribus... Armantur... potestate exauctorandi ministros,
suspensionis censuram irrogandi, excommunicationem decernendi, etc. you may
read the rest, and then tell us what part of their office was left out.

Rev. Superintendents are no where the same with Bishops, much less in
Scotland. Ans. That they are aequivalent to Bishops is evident by the
Superintendents aequivalent to Bishops.
conformity in their offices, and power. The particulars whereof His Lordship
recites out of the fourth and sixth heads of your 1. Book Discipl. To which upon
my Review I could add some more, if those were not enough. Their ambulatorie
commission, was no other then our Bishops ambulatorie visitation. If your
onclic in the time before have any influence here, and exempt them from all
duties in their visitation, but preaching the word, etc. you cut of three parts
of their injunction in the Discipline. If they were only, as you say, for a
time, it concerne^ you to tell us where they ceased, and deny there were any
since, or ever shall be more but upon some future new plantation in your
Churches

Being pressed about obtruding your Discipline, you tell us. For the
E^clesiastike Presbyters not to have Synods as often as they list, nor do in
them what they please.
enjoining of a general Assemblies decrees a particular ratisication of
Parliament is unnecessarie. Which holds not where the particular decrees of
your Assembly transgress the general intent of that Act whereby you are
authorized to meet. That relates to the times and matters to be treated of. In
the former you are limited to custom, or praescription. In the later to the
doctrine, and discipline received. Which are therefore ratified in such Acts
together with your Assemblies, Presbytery and Sessions, that obedience might
be rendered upon the visible conformity of your decrees, and injunctions to
that rule. But to make any Act of Parliament so general as to ratisie at
adventure all possible arbitrarie commamds of your Assembly to the altering of
the doctrine or discipline established, were to praecontract affinity with all
sects, and haeresies, and to enter into an implicit league, or Covenant with
the Devil about his worship, so it may be de futuro ad placitum Synodi
generalis. Let me put this case, suppose a general Assembly should, by an
Ecclesiastical decree, enjoyne the canons of that Antichristian government
against which you praetend your discipline is framed. Whether or no is that
injunction authentike upon the general A and of Parliament for their Assembling
without a particular ratification thereof? I might add how ridiculous it is
for you to make the power of your Assemblies so absolute, and yet trouble King,
and Parliament so often with your importunate petitions to pass what is fully
ratified before, and that by their own General Acts including that very
particular for which you supplicate.

The debates about the second book of Discipline I believe: But that in The
King consented not to the second book of Discipline.
the Assembly 1590. the Kings consent to it was obtaind, I can sooner admit
upon undeniable authority, then your Logike, you pretend not to the
perpetuity of His Majesty's personal praesence which was but some times, and
it should seem, not at that time of general consent. Nor is your Act for
subscription so clear in the assurance you give us that His Majesty's
Commissioner was there, you only take it for granted he was among the herd.
Nor so explicit in his positive consent, you only collect it from a clowdie
universal, and to serve your turn, honor him with a primacie in suffrage.
Wherein you are a little redundant in courtesy, there having been a time when
if His Majesty, K. Chapter 1. Larg. Declar. 1633. page 411.
or His Commissioner siting in Assembly should deny his voice to any thing
which appeared unjust, and repugnant to his laws, yet it that were concluded
by most voices, you would tell him he was bound jure divino to enforce
obedience to your Act. The case, for ought I know, stood no otherwise here in
this Assembly. Where, to discountenance the testimony you bring, you have
been told long before now, That the superintendents of Angus, Lothian Fife,
etc. George Hayes Commissioner from the North. Arbuthnoth of Aberdene, and
others were Refutat. libel. De Regim. Eccl. S^ot.
dissenters from this Act about the discipline, whereby His Majesty's, or His
Commissioners consent becomes somewhat improbable, to the authority whereof
such men as they had in prudence submitted, if not in duty by their silence.

That Statesmen in Parliament opposed it is evident. That the King ever
endeavored to get it pass, is your single assertion. Neque usquam sictum,
neque pictum, neque scriptum. If your Church did, it was for want of work, for
you told us even now, To this a particular ratisication of Parliament was
unnecessarie.

What the Bishops opinion is about the patrimony of the Church, how far, and
by whom, and what part of it may be law fully alienated, The Bishop no
hypocrite in his challenge about the patrimony of the Church.
when just occasion is given, I praesume His Lordship freelic, and faythfullie
will declare. In the mean time his challenge against the Scottish Presbyterians
is without hypocrise, and injustice, Himself and many other good Prelates
having ever aesteem'd it a fault, to call the annexing some part of the Church
revenues unto the crown a detestable sacrilege before God. Nor can Mr. Baylie
instance in any indefinite disputes, including all that has been, or shall be
given to the Church, that have hapened since the first reformation between the
Kings, of England and their Bishops. Who had they found their Princes rapacious
sequestratours, would not have failed in their duty modestly to admonish them
of the danger, yet had it, may be, abstained from calling them. thieves and
murderers, peculiar terms characteristical of the Discipline-To 1. Book Disc.
6. head which be longs not, by haereditaire right to the Presbyters.
which I think I shall do no injustice, if I assert that the revenues of
Bishops, Dcanes, and Arch-deacous, of Chapellries, Friaries of all orders,
together with the sisters of the seenes, (abstracting from the favor of
Princes) no more belong to the Scottish Presbyters, then they do to the Mufties
of the Turk. The intention of the doners having never been that such strange
catell should feed in their pastures. Nor can M. Baylie show me any law that
makes him heir to Antichrist, or a just inheriter of his lands. Beside,
methinkes the weak stomack'd brethren should take check at the meat offered
unto idols, and any silken sold Presbyter be too nice to array himself in the
rags of Rome, or be clothed at that cost that belonged to the idolatrous
Priesthood of Let. of K. Ph. and Q. Mar. Ann. 1559.
Baal. But, it may be in the heat of Reformation, they went to work with the
coining irons, which they more then once got into their possession, and with
them altered the impression of the beast. And the mattokes and shoucls. Which
other arms being wanting, they very often took in their hands, were,
possibly, only to turn up the Church land, and wherever crop had been
reap't by Antichrist, that abominable glebe went down to the center of the
earth.

What he talks about the Praelatical jus divinum, and their taking possessions
by commands from Court without a process, requires his instance, and The
Reviewer is the hypocrite.
then he shall have his answer. In the interim he plays the hypoctite in a
question: What if then, [the Disciplinarians] had gone to advance that right to
all jusdivinum, when the Assembly at Edinburgh did so April 24. 1576. Mainten.
of the sanstatie.


But he says, all the Scots can be challenged for, is a mere declaration of
their judgment and simple right in a supplication to the Regents Grace.

(...). page 10. The Disciplinarians declaration of their judgments in their
impudent and imperious supplicats.
These Scots judgment was not always in righteousness, and their
simplicity in supplicates had many times more of the Lion then the Lamb.
Witness that to the Queen Regent 1559. where they declare their judgments
freely as true and faithful subjects, they tell her, yet this is the style of
that declaration...Except this cruelty be stayed by your wisdom, We shall be
compelled to take the sword of just defense, etc....If ye give ear to their
pestilent counsel...neither ye, neither yet your posterity shall at any time
after this find that obedience and faithful service within this Realm which
at all times ye have found in us. In the assemblies supplications to the Lords
of secret Council, May 28. 1561. the second article annexed to, which was for
the maintenance of the ministry, this. Before ever these tyrants and dumb
dogs Empire above us...we...are fully determined to hazard life, and
whatsoever we have recived of God in temporal things...And let these enemies
of God assure themselves, That if your Honors put not order unto them, That we
shall shortly take such order, That they shall neither be able to do what
they list, neither yet to live upon the sweat of the browe. December 25. 1566.
They order requiring instead of Supplicating and Churh censures to the
disobedient. Their sixth head of Church rents in the first book of Discipline
runs very imperiously upon the must. The Gentlemen, Barons, etc. must be
content to live upon their just rents, and suffer the Kirk to be restored to
her liberty. And Jul. 21. 1567. They tell them they shall do it, and shall
pass nothing in Parliament until it be done. That ever any assembly in
Scotland did make any other address to the Parliament for stipend, then by way
of such humble supplication, I grant, is a great untruth. Nor were only the
birds thus petitioned for, but time after time all tithes, rents, and
whats^ever could be comprised under the patrimony of the Church, were demanded
as insolentlie as could be, which meets me every where in their story, as
frequentlie as Mr. Baylies dissembling, and falsifying in his Review.

In the last instance the Bishop denies not but there was a time when a kind
of Presbyteries was legallie approved and received, And this I They anticipate
the law in the exercise, of the Discipline.
presume he will admit to be after the Assembly 1580. About which allreadie
you have indeed alleged more untruth then you had authority to show for it. I
have given you as much as that you brought will bear. What His Lordship brings
here is another discovery. That you did erect them in your Assembly Acts, and
put them in execution, as far as you durst before any Parliament had passed
them. And Synodicallie established such, as no Parliament had passed. For this
he cites your Acts of several Assemblies, which you must either disavow,
Hieron. Philadelph. de Regim. Eccles. Scot. Epist. Iren. Philaleth. Narrat.
mot. Scotic.
or unriddle what the mistake is you impute. Unless you think good to save
that labor, and confess as well as other your Brethren, what is so manifest in
your story. The particulars of your proceedings herein, Archbishop Bancroft
long since collected in his book of Dangerous Positions: Where he shows how
you not only acted your selves at home, but sent your emissaries into England
to see the like practice there in the very face of Episcopal Government. What
other reasons, beside the recalling the Church patrimony, caused the refusal
of your second book of Discipline, I told you before. Which with the rest may
suffice to the vindication of what the Bishop premiseth in proof of the
conclusion he makes That the Dissiplinarians by their practies Their doctrine
as destructive as their practice.
have trampled upon the laws, and justled the Civil Magistrate out of his
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs. His Lordship proceeds to his scrutinie
of your doctrine, wherein if he yet be more happy, as you courteously tell us
possibly he will, I shall take you to have the spirit of Tirestas, and having
justly lost your eyesight for rash judging, to be now better at prophesying
then reviewing. Which immediately appears, by your Ovid. Met. lib. 3. sub. 4
wandering at noonday, and being at a loss for that which every man may find
in the very place cited by the Bishop. None are subject to repair to this [the
National] Assembly to vote, but Ecclesiastical persons, etc. 2. Book of Disc.
chapter 7. 2.
This His Lordship conceives to cross the Kings supremacy, which being as well
Ecclesiastical as civil, gives him a power of voting and presiding in
Assemblies. Nor was there ever act of free Parliament in Scotland, old or late,
nor any regular justifiable practice of that Church, but reserved this power to
the King, and his deputed Commissioner, without being chosen member of any
Presbytery, or made a ruling elder in a National Assembly, which your book
of Discipline calls The Bishops Super-Erastianisme the doctrine of the Reformed
Churches
the general Eldership of the Kirk. Your hypercriticizing upon his thoughts
(while the spirit of divination comes upon you) makes his Lordship no
Super-Erastian in his doctrines. Though what transscendent haeresie there is in
a moderate answer to the malice in your question, any of your aequitable
comparers may read in what Vedelius, and Paraeus (no herctikes I hope) have
published to that purpose, as the doctrine of all Ad Dissert. De Epise.
Constant. M.
reformed Churches; the one quoting Bellarmine the other Stapleton as proper
patrons of the Sub-Erastian principles in the Discipline, and Vedelius, in his
preface giving the world a caveat of the danger by the mischief it had brought
upon England and Scotland in the year 1638. How opposite they were to the
Disciplinarian language, and sense in that particular which the Bishop
remonstrates, these single propositions can evidence. Multo magu est Christiani
Magistratus non solum apprehensive, and discretive, sed and definitive de
religione judicare, Here a definitive vote is asserted to the Magistrate...ad
Magistratum pertinet judicium de religione, seu rebus fidei, and causis
Ecclesiasticis...tum formaliter, Ph. Par. Vindic. propos. 8. D. Par. N. Vedel.
De Epise. Constable M. q. 5.
tum objective. Hereby a formal judgment in religion is attributed. And this
Doctor Rivet, who, I am told, is called, and reverenced in the French, and
Dutch Churches as the Calvin of these times has vouched under his hand to be
the Catholic doctrine of the Reformed. If he had not, we are sure it was the
primitive practice of the good Christian Emperors to assume it, to whom our
conformity is requisite. Of Constantine the great, who was personally present
in the Council of Nice; and is sometimes called koinonos episcopoumenon for his
communite The practice of the good primitive Emperors.
of suffrage with the Bishops. Of the Emperor Theodosius, who in the Council
of Constantinople sifted the several Confessions of the Arians, Macedonians,
Eunomians, and as Brentius relates it, cast himself upon his knees, craving
the assistance of Gods spirit to direct him in the choice of what was most
consonant to the doctrine of the Apostles. Which epicrisis, or completive
judgment, submitted unto by the Ancient Synods, had these authoritative terms
to express it. Bebaioun, epipscphizesthai episphragizesthai, cratinein,
cratioun, epikyroun, tapepragmena, To the exercise hereof the Discipline of
your Reformed Brethren in these Countries not only admits, but craves the
presence, and suffrage of Delegates from the supreme Magistrate; without which
their Synodical Acts are not established. Quin etiam summi Magistratus delegati
sunt postulandi, ut in ipsorum praesentia eorumque suffragio Synodi Acta Har.
Syn. Belgic. c. 10.
concludantur. Nor did K. James any more in the Conference at Hampton Court,
then when in freedom. He would have done in any Scottish Presbyterian
Assembly, though he hated the name and thought of the thing, when somewhat was
propounded that did not like him, put it of with Le Roy Pavisera.

Rev. Yet the most of the prelatical party will not maintain him heerin. Ans.
Bishop Andrews will in his Tortura Torti and Bishop Field (whom your friend
Didoclave calls Hierambicorum eruditissimum) in his volume of the Church,
beside many others. And possibly those that seem to be Altar. Damasc. page 15.
opposite may be reconciled, if you have the manners to let them state the
question among themselves. The chief case wherein they [not you] instance of
Leontius Bishop of Tripolis in his answer to Constantius the Emperor may be
attended with circumstances which may terminate the dispute, if not, we must
not take it on their word, that, for that, as well as his other more regular
demeanor he is owned by Antiquity to be kanon ecclesias, as Suidas records,
The rule of the Church. However, it behooves you to cite your laws to which the
Bishops assertion is contrary, And I shall cut you short of that pompous
train which your vanity holds up in the universal of all the Princes that
have lived in Scotland, and confine you to two, (the rest being by their
Religion unconcerned in voting (though not in permitting) any Disciplinarian
decrees) King James, and the holy martyr King Charles the first, Renounced by
none of the Scottish King.
who I hope you have not the impudence to say ever made profession so
derogatorie to their right.

In what follows you practice over the fisherman in the fable, from whom you
know, that unless you trouble the water it is in The Reviewers malice not any
Prelatical principles does impossibilitate (as he speaks) the peace betwixt
the Kiag and his Kingdoms.
vain for you to cast in your net, and if you catch nothing for the Discipline
you must sterve. The whole paragraph is naught but a malicious seditious
inference of your own, whereby you affixe an odious sense to the dutiful
attributes of Royal prerogative, and your own guilt causing a trembling in
your joyuts at the thought of a scepter, you buselie creep under the protection
of the club. The name of Parliament you make but a pandar to countenance the
wanton license of your Assemblies, and the great seal you would have set to,
nothing but an indenture of the Crowns perpetual servitude to your Synods.
The Prelates Cabin divinity (which sea language you're in love with since your
voyage into Holland) came often above deck with very innocent loyal intentions
long before these times of confusion, which your Consistorian divinity has
wrought, And though you take your self to appear as ominous as Caster without
his brother in the shrowds, it fears no shipwra^ke by any storm you can
raise, nor looks through your clear prediction upon its ruin. You have not
hitherto found such a fate in your words as to produce a consequential
necessity of the banishment of Marquisses and Bishops from Court, though
divine justice may hereafter inspire our Sovereign to return this judgment
upon your heads, who are ever breathing murder, and exile into his ears. For
while such popular Sicophants, as you, are suffered to live in any Monarchs
dominions, neither can the People be secure of their peace, nor Princes of
their lives. K. James spoke it plainly, when he said, A Scotsh Presbytery as
well agrees with Monarchy, as God and the Devil. Such Reviewers who look but
half way home into the original of crowns, are clear everters of the first
foundation of Kingdoms, Conf. at Hampt. Court.
which made Kings some what more then siduciaries of the people, whose solid
peace consisted in an hur^ble active submission to their just commands, and a
Christian quiet passive obedience if tyrannically imperious. This to be sure
would keep the best part, if not the best party, from ruin, till the high
hand of heaven over balance their temporal sufferings with an aeternitie of
reward, where no malecontentment can be to come.

To the second challenged principle your answer is very slight, and
impertinent. And would I undertake a far more unpleasing employment then
Phocion had in chiping Demosthenes, for which he was called kopis ton logon, I
should make a slender instrument of your review, there being beside the
extravagancie of your railing language, your malicious enlargements in false
commentaries, diverting your Reader from the genuine orthodoxe meaning of the
text, drawing him into an intricable labyrinth of jealousies and fears, the
chimaerical brats of your own brain; which you would feign lay at other men's
doors, scare six pages in your book that are a direct answer to the Bishop,
which I can not impute to your ignorance, but your cunning, who feeling your
self held closse by the neck in the letter of your laws and Assembly Acts,
would very fame wind your self out of the controversy, or run away with it
into any Church, or Country but your own. In this paragraph the Bishops
citations prove what he intends (nor dare you, I see, deny what you are too
conscious The Disciplinarian doctrine and practice against the Kings power to
convocate Synods.
you maintain) It having never been your practice, but when you could not do
otherwise, to wait the Kings, or Queens call for your Synods. In the year
1561. Knox writes expresselie, That gladly would the Queen and her secret
Counsel have had all the Assemblies of the Godly, (that is the Rebellious
Disciplinarian) discharged. They notwithstanding make a convention, the
business comes to dispute, Mr. Secretary Leshington makes a doubt whether the
Queen allowed it or no, to whom was this answer returned. If the liberty of
the Church should stand upon the Queens allowance, they were assured not only
to lack Assemblies, but also to lack the public preaching of the Euangel. In
the beginning of your late commotions the Historian that so officioussie styles
himself the Parliaments Secretary mentions a writing published by you,
wherein Page 41.
you affirm. That the power of calling a Synod, in case the Prince be an
enemy to the truth, or negligent in promoting the Churchs good, is in the
Church it self. And that the state of the Church of Scotland at that time was
necessitated to such a course. Nor does your Disciplinarian doctrine make the
Christian Magistrate any more then your Baylisse to take up your rents, or the
Captain of your guard to defend you (Vedelius renders it in more harsh
language... faciunt ex iis [Magistratibus] mancipia, imo lictores DeEpiscop.
Constanstin M.
and curnisices Episcoporum seu Ministrorum Ecclesiae) To advance the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ....To defend it against all that would procure its hurt... To
^ssist and fortisie the Godly proceedings of the Kirk in all behalfes... To
see 2. B. of Disc. chapter 10
that the Kirk be not invaded... To hold hand as well to the saving of the
Ministers persons from injury and openviolence, as to their rents and
possessions. Finally, not a word is there in all that chapter or book that
asscribes to him a syllable of this power, So that the King may call a Synod
when, and whersoever he think sit, and if the toy take you in the head to
anticipate, or procrastinate his time, you will assemble when, and wheresoever
you please for you tell him he ought to hear, and obey your voice. And your
friend Didoclave averres this to be a business that has no absolute
dependence upon him, Non absolute, and simpliciter pendere a Christiano
Magistrat^. If when you have a mind to meet Cap. De primat. Reg.
he prohibites, that must make no demurre, non cunctandum est, non cessandum ab
officio... For this you pretend an intrinsecal power touching which I demand
what it is, when, where, and how far to be exerciz'd. What old or late
dutiful Christians did use it when any Christian King did forbid it. Who of
the Praelatical party they be that maintain it in their writings or practice,
for I know none that in either extend it to a like latitude with you. And how
many soever you have of the Papists, all the Popes are not of your side. Leo
confessing that Epist. 43.
he had not power to call a Counsel but the Emperor, nor durst Liberius call
one against Constantius pleasure. The necessity you frame of meeting for the
execution of the Discipline even in times of persecution may have reference to
an heathen Magistrate or Christian. If to the former, you do it either in
confidence of your power to resist him, in that rebellion, wherein how are you
justified? Or else you run desperately upon your ruin, which is self
murder no martyrdom, for Quis requisivit? by what praecept, or counsel is it
required at your hands? If to the later, there may be at least a sallibilitie
in your judgments, if not an obstinate perverseness in your will. Et quis vos
judices constituit? who made you, that are parties, Arbitratours? If at any
time the ancient Christians assembled, it was where no Imperial edict
restrained them. And then the learned Grotius tells you, Non opus fuisse venia,
ubinulla obsturent Imperatorum edicta. What private conferences De Imper, sum
Pot. cap. 8.
they had in the times of heathenish persecution, you know by their apologies
were voy'd of suspicion, which yours never were, but anomia ergapiria the very
shops or Laboratories of rebellion. The Church is not dissolved where
dissipline's not executed: if it were, it should Constantin. De Ario.
be, where it is, at the pleasure of the Magistrate, suspended. To imagine a
final ineapacitie of meeting, by perpetual succession of Tyrants has little
either of reason or conscience, it assaults the certitude of faith in Gods
promises, and advances infidelity in his providence. But to give you at
length your pass from this paragraph. Such as you, in a schismatical
Assembly, may, and have frequentlie in Scotland pinned the character of
erroneous upon an upright Magistrate, and a Disciplinarian rebel to save his
credit called a Royal moderate proclamation a tyrdnous edist.

The Bishops third allegation you find too heavy, and therefore let fall
half of it by the way. You have too good a conceit of your The ultimate
determination of Ecclesiastike causes by the laws of Scotland is not in the
general Assembly.
Parliaments bounty, though had they been as prodigal as you make them, it
little becomes you to proclaim them bankrupts by their favor: Their Acts were
always ratified by your Princes any which, and whom tell me one wherein this
right Royal was renounced of suspending seditious Ministers from their office,
or if cause were, depriving them of their places. It were a senseless thing to
suppose that the Bishop would deny to the Church a propriety to consult and
determine about religion, doctrine, haeresie, etc. Yet its likely His Lordship
allows it not in that mode which makes her power so absolute as to define,
consummate, authorize the whole business by her self. He has heard the King
to be somewhere accounted a mixed person, and thinks it may be that the holy
oil of his unction is not only to swime on the top, and be sleeted off at
the pleasure of a peevish Disciplinarian Assembly, but to incorporate with
their power. The laws of England have not been hitherto so indulgent of
liberty to our Convocation, but that the No more then in the Convocations of
England.
King in the cases alleged did ever praedominate by his supremacy. And the
Parliament has stood so much upon privilege, that if Religion fetched not her
billet from West-minster, the could have but a cold lodging at St. Paul's The
book of Statutes is no portable manual for us whom your good brethren have
sent to wander in the world, yet I can help you to one An. 1. Eliz. that
restored the title of supreme to the Queen, and withal provided, that none
should have authority newly to judge any thing to be haeresie, not formerlie
so judged, but the High Court of Parliament, with the assent of the Clergy in
their Convocation. Where the Convocations assent, by the sound, should not be
so determinative as the Parliaments judgment, which (right or wrong) here it
assumes.

As touching appeals (because you will have somewhat here said, Appeals to
the King in Scotland.
though it must be otherwhere handled) No law of Scotland denies an appeal in
things Civil or Ecclesiastike to the King. One yet in force enjoines
subjection unto them, the Act of Parliament in May 1584. which was, That any
persons, either spiritual or Temporal, praesuming to decline the judgment of
His Majesty, and His Council, shall incur the pain of treason. What you,
call a complaint is in our case an appeal, what taking order, is executing a
definitive judgment, without traversing back the business to Ecclesiastike
Courts, or holding over the rod of a coercive power to awe them into due
regular proceedings. I confess this the Presbyters in Scotland never made good
by their practice. Their appeals were still retrograde from the supreme
Magistrate, and his Council to a faction of Nobles, or a seditious party of
the people. Such is that of Knox, printed at large. Or which in effect is the
same. The Scottish Assemblies, when they had no power, appeald to providence,
when they had whereupon they might rely, unto the sword.

In case of Religion, or doctrine, if the General Assembly, which Court of
Delegates against neither word of God, nor aequitie.
is not infallible, err in judgment, and determine any thing contrary to the
word of God, and the sense of Catholic Antiquity, the King may by a court, of
Orthodoxe Delegates, consisting of no more then two or three (Prelates if he
please) receive better information of truth, and establish that in his Church.
Or, which often hapens in Scotland, If the Presbyters frame Assembly Acts
derogatorie to the rights of his Crown, and prejudicial to the peace of his
people, the King may personally justify his own praerogative and keep the
mischief they invented from becoming a praecedent in law. This does not the
word of God, nor any aequitie prohibit.

The judgment of causes concerning deprivations of Ministers in the year 1584
you would have had come, by way of appellation, to the General Assembly, and
there take final end; but this you could not make good within yourselves, nor
do I find, upon your proponing and craving, it was then, or at any time,
granted you by the King. Two years before, you adventurd not only for your
privilege in that... but against the Magistrates putting preachers to
silence...hindering, staying, or disannulling the censures of the Church in
examining any offender.

Rev. In the Scotes Assemblies no causes are agitated but such as the
Parliament All causes agitated in Scottish Assemblies.
has agreed to be Ecclesiastike, etc. Ans: If any Parliament have agreed all
causes of what nature soever, to be Ecclesiastike by reduction, and so of the
Church cognizance, you have that color for your pragmatical Assemblies: but if
you admit of any exception, you have for certain transgressed yourlimits,
there being no crime, nor praetended irregularitie whatsoever, that stood in
view, or came to the knowledge of the world, that has escaped your discussion,
and censure, and not been served up in your supplicates to be punished.

Rev.... No process about any Church rent was ever cognosced upon in Scotland
Process about Church rent.
but in a Civil Court, Ans. Your imperious, though supplicatorie, prohibition
1576. I allreadie mentioned. In the Assembly at Edinburgh, April 24. 1576. You
concluded...That you might proceed against unjust possessours of the patrimony
of the Church...by doctrine, and admonition, and last of all, if no remedy be,
with the censures of the Church. In that at Montrosse June 24. 1595. About
setting Benefices with diminution of the rental, etc. you appointed
Commissioners with power to take oaths, call an-inquest of men of best
knowledge in the Country about, to proceed against the Ministry with sentence
of deposition. Master Tho. Craig and the Solicitour for the Church, to pursue
the Pensiionars in Caitnes for reduction of their pensions. If in no particular
you actuallie proceeded to Church censures, It was because you foresaw they
would not restrain the corruption no more of the laity, then the Clergy, and
then your menasing petitions sometime obtein'd strength from some partial, or
pusillanimous Parliament; or when you praevail'd not, you wrapped this up with
the rest of your discipline, and put all to the process of a war. And this
was, you know, the mysterious sense of Knox's Letter to the Genesis Assembli at
Sterling Aug. 3. 1571.
method, upon good experience, praescrib'd on his death bed: First protest,
then denounce vengeance, and then to the execution thereof seek redress of
God and man. Of God by fasting as you did order for this very cause (wasting of
the Church rents without remedy) in the Assembly at St. Andrews 1582. Of
man, by rebelling, which you practiced not long afterward. With which godly
advice that saint shut his teeth, and departed if not (after a minutes
repentance as I hope) in little better peace, then he had lived.

To what follows in the Bishops charge, the legislative power they Reviewer
declines answering about the legislative power.
praetend to, To make rules, and constitutions for keeping good order in the
Kirkc. To abrogate, and abolish all statutes and ordinances concearning
Ecclesiastical matters that are found noisome, and unprofitable, and agree not
with the time, or are abused by the people. And all this without any
reclamation, or appellation to any judge Civil, or Ecclestastical, we have not
one word in answer from Mr. Baylie. Andindeed being taken up so much with his
seemings, and fallacious apparences, he may sometimes overlooke the realities
of what allegations he dislikes; for this indeed he had very good reason,
knowing the natural, and inseparable connection to be such between it and the
power of jurisdiction, that to whomsoever belongs the supremacy of the one,
upon him necessarily descends the praerogative of the other.

For the fourth objection. If the Reviewer had minded the ill consequences
Danger in asserting the divine right of Ecclesiastike jurisdiction
upon the antecedent of Ecclesiastike jurisdiction by divine right, he would
not have held that conclusion at large without professing an infallible
assurance that it is haereditarie to the Presbytery. Some danger there may be
of drawing after it an adaequate right in that ominous Episcopal order, which
with no great difficulty may be proved from time, to time to have executed
this jurisdiction he means. How soever this inconvenience he gains by it,
That, if it be such, it is indispensable, and turns all the confessed
indulgence of the Scottish Assemblies into sin for Nulli homini licet cuiquam
juris aivini gratiam facere. What divines there have been in the world of
another Hug. Groti. De Imper. Sum. Pot.
mind (which are all except Donatus the haeretikes disciples among the rigid
Papists, Anabaptists Scottish and Scotizing Presbyterians, who demand as boldly
as their Master) (Quidest Imperatori cum Ecclesia?) he may read (though I
look not that he, nor all his brethren should Scottish Donatist.
muster up abilities to answer) in the nineth chapter of the forecited famous
Grotius's book. Under the safe conduct of whom the Bishop may travail with
the truth of these contradictions about him through all the Assemblies highway
men of the Scots. That all Ecclesiastike power flows from the
Magistrate...penes Ecclesiasticos judices per Archiepiscopos and Episcopos
derivata a Regia potestate Jurisdictio Ecclesiastica consistit. That Polit.
Anglic. Ad Reg. Iac.
the Magistrate may praescribe a rule how Ecclesiastike censures should be
regulated, and in case of resistance, see them executed by his power.
Constitutum fuit eis ergon ^d krinomena para ton episcopon agein tous archontas
kai tous diaconoumenous autois stratiotas. That all the ofsicers praetended to
be appointed by Christ for Sozomen.
the Government of his Church, if they govern it not according to his, and
Apostolic example, may be laid aside, and such a kind of Governers be put in
their place as the Magistrate shall be pleased to appoint, as more just, and
upright stewards in that trust. Non frustra gladium gerit potestas, sed vindex
est in omnes male agentes, ergo etiam in eos qui circa sacra
delinquunt...Iurisdictionis enim est relegare Eliens.
(...) loco sive in locum...That it is not yet universallie, and
unquaestionablie defined that the spiritual sword, and Keys are in any other
then the hand of Christ. Nor that ever his Apostles, and Priests laid claim to
an absolutely intrinse^al right to execute the power of either Vtinam
exscindantur qui vos perturbant. Videtur non imperantis sed optantis Apostoli,
That for the sword. Sacerdos quidem officium exhibet sed nullius potcstatis
jura exercet. That he cites out of St. Ambrose for the Keys, him I cite, but
do not, being not obliged, assert any thing. Your difference herein (I mean
the power of the Magistrate) from the Warner is Donatisme an haecesie so great
as deserved, it seems, to be anathematized by the Catholic Church your
practice schism, whereby you rend your selves from the Congregations of all
the Reformed, as Vedelius has showed you, And whether it be not rebellion by
your laws, I leave to the verdict of your 15. Godfathers, De Episcopat.
Constant. M.
who gave it in to be such against your differing brethren at Aberdene.

Had Mr. Baylie in his answer, to what he calls the last challenged principle,
took upon him to alter that axiom in Ethikes, and make it, Disciplinariam call
resistance against the person obedience to the office of the Magistrate
Nolenti non fit injuria, the dispute had been only whether his authority,
or Aristotle's; should have carried it, But when he deletes the commentary upon
it, he conjures the sense into a circle of his own by such language as none
but himself, and his spirits understand, Indeed for a madman to have his hands
bound, who, were they at liberty, would do himself mischief, For a sick man
to have physike forced into his stomach, which may work his recoverie,
otherwise desperate, if his aversion be countenanced, may be courteous violence
improved to their good; But to contervene a Magistrates commands praetending
punctual obedience thereby, if not an advancement of his power: To wrest the
sword out of his hands, and disarme him for the security of his person; is a
piece of invisible justice, and a favor left by all law and reason to be
wholly at the disposal of the Discipline. But in Scotland, you say, there is
no such case, etc. Which must relate to matter of fact, or right: If to the
former, I must crave liberty to aver, That scarce any one of your Synods
proceedings was ever freely justified by the consent of the Magistrate for the
time. That most were not, I have, and shall sufficiently prove here, and
otherwhere. If to the latter, your self confess that your book of Discipline
(which includes the jurisdiction you have) could not pass the Parliament 1590.
Nor can you make appear where ever after it did with an exception only
against the chapter D^ Diaconatu.

In what follows, you pretend too much acquaintance with the The Reviewer too
bold with his Majesty.
King, to know what His Majesty controverts in his thoughts, with whom, I have
hear, your late treaty was not so particular and closse as to make what
discovery you wished, and aimed at, And what you did is not so authorized as
to strengthen your proof, His Royal, and too gracious concessions having met
with such unworthie, imprudent, refusal by persons, through habitual rebellion,
not yet disposed to their good. As touching the case which the Bishop
intimates, I can not wonder the account of it so odious as not to be met with
by your answer, since it sets in your sight the horror of your many years
sin, with the guilt of which you would gladly run into dens, and caves, or
move the hills, and mountains to cover you. In the mean time in vain you
hope to have any the an^nt Christians company, The Disciplinarians no
compartie for the Primitive Christian.
Who in times of their persecution never held public Assemblies in their
Edenburghs Imperial Cities, never armed themselves to maintain the divine
ordinance of the Discipline, Though, had they done it, little would their
praecedent avail you, the just imposition of a Christian King being very
unlike the heathen Emperous persecution. Nor was the Presbytery, that divine
ordinance of Discipline, practiced by the persecuted in the wilderness.

Mr. Baylie in this time, by his affected diversions, and devious mazes, having
run himself half out of breath, begins to think on The Reviewers cunning in
passing over what he dares not, can not answer.
the shortest way home, to find which he takes a large leap over the hedge
(and by virtue of some Disciplinarian privilege passes, two whole pages of
consequence unanswered. Perit libertas nis^tlla contemnis, quae jugem imponunt)
yet not so clear, but that one bramble has caught him by the sleeve, and, if
the truth were known, I believe, many more have pricked him to the heart, for
one of most danger I advise him to seek out a timely remedy, and stand to
the charity of his aequitable comparers for the rest. it is that sharp
quaestion which the Bishope propounds. Who shall judge when the Church is
corrupted? the Magistrates or Churchmen? If the Magistrates, why not over you
as well as others? If the Churchmen. why not others as well as you?

Mr. Gilespies Theorem. because pressing such downright rebellion he, without
any brotherly love, leaves on the shoulders of a single Presbyter, His
unkindnesse to his brother Gilespie whose theoremes are the doctrine of the
whole Presbytery
and will not afford one fingar of the Presbytery to ease him, though the
tantamout be not so unconsequential as to need a stake to help it down in a
swallow, It being very well known that if Mr. Baylie should not tantamont in
this business, the Assembly brethren would give him a drench in the Scottish
horn, and send him to grass with the long-eard creatures, as being no fit
company for the late more rational rebels in a Synod. The consequence, if it
must need be such, from one particular, denied by none, to a universal
affirmative, as strange as it looks, may be made good by the new
Disciplinarian logike, Mr. Baylie himselve having more then once professed an
identitie in the Scottish with the Reformed disciplines abroad, in the harmony
of which I find such a canon as this. Si Minister donum habet aliquid ad
aedificationem conscribendi, illud typis non Harm. Syn. Belg. cap. 1
mandabit, quin prius a class examinetur, and probetur. From the Class he
knows it takes a remove to the provincial Synod, and thence to the national
Assembly. Now if the Reviewer will not tell us in what Assembly, Mr. Gilespie
was censured, or this theoreme of his disavow'd, because it will be such a
singular case as never was heard of, Rebellion disclaimed in a Scottish
Presbyterian Assembly, otherwise then in a Catholic mist which never drops in
any particulars, he shall have the reputation of catching this unconsequence
for once. But as the Bishops says, Take nothing, and hold it fast if he can.
Beside he knows there are many other such theoremes of Mr. Gilespies upon
which the Bishop has built many high accusations, which the Discipline must
acknowledge, and must be meant to be of that number which had the approbatorie
suffrages of the Universities in Holland viz. Leyden, and Vtrecht, or else he
spoke little truth, and as little to the purpose in his Epistle. Yet to help him
to somewhat of better authority. He is desired to take notice, That the
substance of this theoreme was not declined in a protestation made (he knows
by whom) in Edinburgh Parliament 1558. In the dutiful letter to the Queen
Regent from the faithful Congregation of Christ Jesus in Scotland 22. May
1549. In another from the Lords of the Congregation, 2. Jul. 1559: In an answer
to the Queens proclamation by the Lords, Barons, and other brethren of the
Congregation 1559. In a declaration of the Lords against another proclamation
of the Queens 1559. To all these it is undeniable that the Assemblies adhaer'd,
or indeed rather the Lords etc, to them. In the Church Assemblie's supplication
28. May 1561. In the vote of the whole Assembly 1563. In the Superintendents,
Ministers and Commissioners letter to the Bishops, and Pastors in England they
write, If authority urge you farther ye ought to oppose your selves boldly,
not onclie to all power that dare extol it self against God. but also against
all such as dare burden the consciences of the faithful (they mean'd the same
opposition themselves made in Scotland) In the seventh article framed by the
Assembly 1567. Beside what was very particularly pressed by Knox in Sermons,
Conferences, letters, etc all acknowledge the sense of several Assemblies. But
all these authorities are absolet, the several ends of such speeches, and
actions being long since accomplished in Scotland. However, M. Baylie denies
that the maxim in hand was the fountain of any our late miseries, or the
cause at all of the loss of our Sovereign.

Fati ista culpa est, nemo fit fato nocens. If he had but in kindness
delivered his meaning at large, and quitted as well his independent brethren of
their bloody performance Gilespie's theoreme the rule of the late
Disciplinarian practice.
in the fifth act, as he does the Presbyterian properties that carried on the
rebellion in the four first of the Tragoedie they might have masked merrily
together in their antike disguises of innocence, and pointed out to some
silly credulous spectators the guilt of this horrid murder in the stars. But
I shall reach him a ladder, where by he may ascend to the top of this truth,
(not aninch higher then Edinburgh Cross) and what else he wants when he comes
there, to do justice accordingly as he shall be enlightened upon his own
self for his share in this maxim, and unpardonable mischief, The first step
hereof begins near the ground with the mean, and baser sort of the people,
who on the 23. Jul. 1637. when by his Blessed Majesty's command, the service
book was to be read in Edinburgh Great Church, fell into the extraordinary
ways of clapping hands, cursing, and outcries, throwing stones at the
windows, and aiming at the Bishop with a stool, Continuing this hubbub in the
streets, besetting the counsel house, whether the reverend learned, and worthy
Bishop of Galloway was forced to fly for his refuge. Their outcries being
commonly such as this. God defend all those who will defend Gods cause, and
God confound the service book, and all the maintainers of it, of whom the King
must needs be mean'd to be one, who had expressclie authorized it. Upon this
follow two extraordinary petitions, one in the names of the Noblemen, Gentry,
Ministers, Burgesses against the service book, and book of Canons, which
being not answered to their mind at Sterlin, and otherwhere, themselves in
protesting did the same thing which they had called the uproare of raskals at
Edinburgh. From protesting they mount up to covenanting, and by that engage
multitudes of people to attend them at pleasure in affronting His Majesty's
Commissioner. With whom when they came to capitulate they gave this
extraordinary answer, That they would rather renounce their baptism then
Covenant (good Christians) or abate one word or syllable of the literal rigor
of it. If Mr. Baylie has any mind to go farther, I shall desire him to step
up beyond the preachers persuading the people to arm themselves and to meet in
the streets (dutifullie) to enter^aine His Majesty's proclamation. Their
protestations against that and the rest, with such loyal expressions as this.
That if the King will not call a general Assemblic, which shall allow of their
proceedings, they themselves will. Their branding the subscription of their
own confession of faith with the most hideous, and horrible name of the very
depth, and policy of Satan. Their pulpit imprecations, God scatter them in
Israel, and divide them in Jacob, who where the authors of this scattering,
and divisive counsel, of whom (as ^range as it seem) the King again must be
principal. Their grand imposture in Michelson a maid, about whom their
Ministers cosin'd the people into an implicit faith that she was inspired by
God, and while the vented their devilish rebellion in her fits Rollokes
blasphemous praetense for his silence, That he durst not speak while his
Master was speaking in her. Another having these words in his Sermon. Let us
never give over till we have the King in our power. Another, That the sharpest
war was rather to be endured then the least error in doctrine or
discispline. Their maintaining this position among the rest. That Nec enim
dissimulabant foederati, nimis diu apud Scotos regnatum esse Monarchis, nec
recte cum illis agi posse Stuarto vel uno superstite Hist. M. Montisros.
it is lawful for subjects to make a Covenant and combination without the
King, and to enter into a band of mutual defense against the King and all
persons whatsoever. Their laying open the true meaning of their protesting,
Covenanting, Arming, etc. That Scotland had been too long a Monarchy and that
they could never do well so long as one of the Stuarts was alive. Their
raising an army for their extirpation, and meeting K. Chapter 1. to that purpose
in the field. Their renewing and continuing, the war when their first design
had been obstructed by His Majesty's unexpected, unwelcome grant of their
demands. Their reasonable dealing with the King when he unhappilie made their
Army his refuge, by cheating his pious facility of his strength, and
delivering up his naked person to their fellow Rebels, upon conditions little
coulorable in words, not at all justifiable in substance, and sense, Their
laying chains upon His Majesty, when a prisoner, and linking his crown with
iron propositions. Beside what was acted at Derbie house and otherwhere in the
dark, and not improbablie agreed on at C^nthia's midnight Revells, when
Cromwell was in Scotland. And all this under the fallacy of exstraordinarie
resisting, reforming.

And now let Mr. Baylie look not up to the stars, but down into the depth
of hell, where that maxim was hammered before ever Gilespie filled it over, and
see whether it were not the fountain of all our miseries, and the cause of the
loss of our late Sovereign.

The quaestion that follows about defensive arms (though there No defensive
arms for subjects.
has been no such thing as a free Parliament, and without freedom it is none)
I return on himselve, and demand Did ever his Majesty, or any of his advised
Counselors, I add, Did ever loyal Parliament in England, or Scotland,
declare, or intimate in what cases, how extraordinary so ever, they thought it
lawful? I retort this. The unhappiness of the Disciplinarian Presbyters did
put the seditious part of the Parliament on these courses, which did begin, and
promote all our misery And were so wicked as to the very last to endeavor to
break the bands asunder of reason, justice, honor and a well informed
conscience, wherein His Majesty professed to the world the hand of God, and
the laws of the land had bound him. The peaceable possession of His Majesty's
Kingdoms Episcopacie no obstruction to His Majestics peace.
depends not upon his Clergies conditionate consent to have Episcopacie laid
aside. A handful of Scots, with an hypocritical Assemblies be^ediction in
their knapsackes, could they hold their wind when they got over Tweed, and
swell up to the picture of Boreas in the face, would not be mistaken for
probable Vmpires or overruling Elders, in the quarrel. Nor can Mr. Baylie
possess any prudent men of the loyallay party, that, that order obstructs the
King from his happiness. Why it may not be laid aside the unanswerable reasons
in the 9. and 17. chapters of Eik. Basil. His Royal fathers book will
abundantly satisfy any man, that will rest in what he can not deny. Where he
will find enough of such devout Rhetorike, and Religious logike as this I must
now in charity be thought desirous to praeserve that Government in its right
constitution, as a matter of Religion, wherein both my judgment is sullie
satisfied, that it has of all other the fullest Scriptures grounds, and also
the constant practice of all Christan Churches, till of late years the
tumultuarinesse of people, or the factio^siresse, and pride of Presbyters
[Reviewe that Mr. Baylie] or the covetousness of some States, and Princes gave
occasion to some men^ wits to invent new modells, and propose them under
specious titles of Christ's Government, Scepter, and Kingdom (which are the
Scottish titles as I take it) the better to serve their turns, to whom the
change was beneficial. The reasons that convinced the Royal Father have so
confirmed the Royal Son His Majesty now being, that Mr. Baylie dares not say
(what he so praesumptuouslie intimates) that he ever asked the consent of his
Canterburian Praelates to the alteration of that government. If, without asking
they spontaneouslie spoke their conscience in due, season, there was little
boldness in it, and as little in printing, which has been often as much, and
more at large, in volumes about the unlawfullnesse of See the le^rned and
judicious Digges upon this subjects.
subjects taking up of arms, where Parliaments have unanswerablie been proved
to be such, though the name of tyranny is very unhandsomelie, unjustie,
maliciously used in this case, and let him speak out if he means to
attribute it to the King.

CHAPTER III.
The last appeal to the supreme Magistrate justifiable in Scotland.

THe Bishop considered that the Kings supremacy is the same in Appeal in
Scotland from a General Assembly neither irrational, nor illegal.
Scotland, as in England, and upon that grounds the aequitie of ultimate
appeal. The altissimo either of the Parliament, or Assembly puts them not
above the capacity of Courts, and so makes them not coordinate with the King.
What allayes you have for government I know not, and therefore can not close
with you in the term, till you give me an undisputable definition of the
thing, which you call a moderate Monarchy, and tell me in what part of the
world I may find it, I know of none any where yet that inhibites appeals to
the Kings person, If the Empire may be the standerd to the rest, the learned
Grotius, that had better skill in the laws, then you, or I, says. That in
causes of Delegacie semper appellasio conscssa fuit ad Imperatorem, si ex
Imperiali jussione judicatum esset, aut ad Iudicum quemcunque, si ex judiciali
praecepto, which holds good against your general Assembly, if that judges
earegali jussione, and that it does so is clear from your Assembly Act, April
24. 1578. wherein it petitioneth the King to set, and establish your policy, a
part whereof is your Assembly judication. That it is, for the most part,
ordered to the King in his Courts, is not any way to confine his power, but to
free him from frequent impertinencies, and unseasonable importnnities of
trouble, or, it may be, a voluntary, but no obligatorie, Royal condescension,
to avoid your querulous imputation of arbitrarie partiality, and tyranny in
judicature. Therefore you injure the Bishop by converting his assertion into a
negative confession, As if when he says it is to the King in Chancerie, he
must needs acknowledge. It can be neither to the King out of Chancerie, nor to
him there but with collateral aequipotential ^ssistants. Whereas your friend
Didoclave complains that our appeals are ever progressus Altar. Damascen.
^b unico ad unicum, wherein, whether he mean'd an aggregate, or personal
unity, I leave you to interpret. That an appeal is not permitted from your
Lords of session, or Parliament in Scotland, is because whatsoever is
regularlie determined there receives its ratification from the King. But if
one, or other in their session without him, should determine a case evidentlie,
undeniablie, destructive to the rights of his crown, or liberties of his
people, whether His Majesty may not admit an appeal, and assume his coercive
power to restrain their license, I think no loyal subject in Scotland will
controvert, As touching your Assemblies, King James tells you, It is to be
generally observed that no privilege, that any King gives to one particular
body, or state within the Kingdom of convening, and consulting among
themselves (which includes whatsoever they do when they are convened, and
consulting) is to be understood to be privative given unto them, and so the
King thereby depriving himself of his own power, and praerogative, but only
to be given cumulative unto them (as the lawyers call it) without any way
denuding the King of his own power, and authority. This His Majesty alleged
against the Ministers at Aberdene, whom he accuses not only of convening,
but acting after they were convened, He particularly mentions their setting
down the dies of the next Assembly, and His Council adds their end^vour to
reverse, and overthrow all those good orders, and godly constitutions
formerlie concluded for keeping of good order in their Church. If you allege
that His Majesty's Commissioner was not there, then you grant me their acts are
not justifiable without him, And that all are not necessarily with him, I
argue from the language of the Commission, whereby they meet, which limits them
thus secundum legem, and pra^im, against which if any thing be acted, upon
appeal the Kings praerogative may rectify it at pleasure, if not, any judge
may praetend to be absolute, and then the King must be absolutely nothing,
having committed, or delegated all power from himself. What civil law of
Scotland it is, that prohibites appeals from the General Assembly, you should
do well to mention in your next, I know none, nor did King James think of any
when he cited his distinction from the Scottish Lawyers, as well as any other.

Where an Assembly proceeds contrary to the laws of God, and man, Which is
not impossible, while it may consist of a multitude, men neither the best, nor
most able of the Kingdom, the Bishop thinks an appeal to a legal Court of
delegates constituted, by a superior power, might be neither unseeming, nor
unreasonable. The law of old never intended they should be the weakest of all
Court; Where it has so happened, by your own rule, page 22. The Delegates,
not Delegacie, are to be charged. Such heretofore in England as employed
mercenarie officials, for the most part, were mercenarie Bishops, and if they
had been cut to the core, would have been found, I doubt, Disciplinarian in
heart, though Episcopal in title. The Scots way of managing Ecclesiastical
causes is not more just, because more derogatorie to the right of the King, And
the late Martyred King found it not more safe, and therefore told Mr. Henderson
plainly the papacy in a multitude 3. Paper An. 1574
might be as dangerous as in one, and how that might be Gualter writ to Count
Vnit-glupten in a letter. Emergent hinc novae tyrannidis cornua, paulatim
cristas attollent ambitiosi Ecclesiarum pastores, quibus facile fuerit suos
assessores in suas parts attrahere, cum ipsii inter hos primatum teneant. He
might have found the experiment of it in Scotland. Nor can it be more
satisfactorie to those rational men, with whom the Bishops arguments are
prevalent, beside what else may be effectually alleged against it.

Allthough the two instances, the Bishop brings, for stopping appeals were
accompanied with so many treasonable circumstances, as might have enlarged his
chapter into a volume, and deleted the credit of a Scottish Disciplinarian
Assembly out of the opinion of all the Cristians in the world; Yet His
Lordship thought good to furnish his reader with better authority from the
second Book of Discip. ch 12. which shall here meet you again to crave your
acquaintance. From the Kirk there is no reclamation, or appellation to any
Judge Civil, or Ecclesiastical within the Realm.

The reputation of the two Reverend Archbishops Montgomerie, The Rebellious,
and insolent disciplinarian proceedings against the too Rt. Reverend
Archbishops Montgomerie, and Adamson.
and Adamson depends not upon the sentence of a turbulent, and envious Synod,
much less any single malicious Presbyter in a pamphlet, with whom we know it is
crime heinous enough to be a Bishop, and shall not want his vote to make them
excommunicate. Their manifold high misdemeanors are mentioned in the censure
of the Presbytery of Striveling, for admitting Montgomerie to the temporalitie
of the Bishoprike of Glasgow, and his own for aspiring thereto. Assembly
1587. And of the other for taking the Kings commission to sit in Parliament
1584. In the last Act of which his commission is printed to register ^his
guilt. The principal of their evil patrons among the wicked Statesmen (I mean
next under the King, to whom you yield that praerogative at least) is said to
be the Earl of Arran, Answ. to the Prosession and Declar. made by Marq.
Hamilt. 1638.
who deserves that character for being second, at that time, in His Majesty's
favor, and he is said by your brethren to have taken them into the Parliament.
So that, lay their commission, and Earl Arrans courtesy together (which
without the other had implied the pleasure of the King,) they took not,
without authority, upon themselves as you said) the Episcopal office, nor
place in that Parliament.

Whether the pride, and contempt of the Prelates, or Presbyters were greater
may be judged in the case of Archbishop Montgomerie, by the Assemblies Vindic.
Epist. Hier. Philad.
slighting not only His Majesty's letters, but Messengers such as were two
Heralds at Arms, His Master of Requests, who in the Kings name inhibiting
their proceedings they send him word by Macgil Supplicum libellorum Magister.
Se posse salvo Regis imperio de causa tota cognoscere.
they can salve their obedience, and yet go through with the business,
Setting up Durie, and Belcanqual, two Edinburgh Ministers, to rail against the
E: Lenox, and when they are accused, quitting them by their Ecclesiastike
praerogative. Putting their scholars at Glasgow in Arms, and occasioning
bloodshed in resistance of the Principal Magistrates of that place, against
whom they afterward proceeded His Majesty summous them to his judicature at
St. Andrews, they send their orators instead of coming themselves. The King
exchangeth a promise of security, for theirs of suspending the censure. They
admit the condition, but collude with His Majesty, leaving an underhand power
with some select brethren, to give sentence, as occasion should serve. When
they get loose they contest with his Majesty by a serpent-supplicate, which
when it creepes at the foot, wounds to the heart. Tell him boldly he plays
the Pope^ takes a sword in his hand, more then belongs to him. The Earl of
Arran demanding who dares subscribe such a paper; Andrew Melvin answers
undauntedlie for himself, and some others, for have snatcheth the pen out of a
scribes hand that was near him, writes his name, and exhorts his accomplices to
do the like. By letter to His Majesty they show how far His Majesty had
been uninformed, and upon mi^nformation pr^judg'd the praerogative of Jesus
Christ, and the liberties of his Church (what becomes of the Kings, when this
is pleaded?) They enact, and ordain, that none should procure any such
warrant, or charge, under the pain of excommunication. Where K. James did
acknowledge the aequitie of the Church proceedings in these cases I desire to
be informed, I am sure K. Charles 1. many years since ^arg D clar. page 308.
has writ, That they did wickedlie, and that which they could not do. And
that it is a very reproveable instance. Which to have been ever his fathers
opinion, I have under the hand of one of the most learned, knowing men, and
eminent historians in your Kingdom, As likewise Marg. not upon Potest. of the
Genesis Assemb. at Edenb. Cross December. 18. 1638.
that they did never confess their crimes, nor renounce their Bishop-rikes
etc, but that they were most cruelly persecuted by that firebrand of schism
in the Kirk, and sedition in the state, Andrew Melvin and his subscribing
Associates, and made so odious to the people by their excommunication, that
they suffered most grievous penury, and in the end were sterved to death,
which did not quench the malice of their merciless enemies, who after their
death continued persecuting their names, and memories, making them infamous by
false supposititious recantations, whereof they themselves were the authors,
and publishers. Others, that acknowledge a word, or two to this purpose, that
drops from Archbishop Adamson, say he did it, when set on the rack by his
hunger, being feign to beg bread of his enemies, who, glad of the occasion,
sold their charity by weight, for his self seeming-conviction, and when they
had it, being too greedy to Quioccasione laeti palinodiam ^i per vim
expressam, sed in - numeris a se locis inter-polatam typis publicarunt.
gain damnation to themselves, did sophisticate every syllable with a lie.

The Bishops in their Declinatour against the Assembly of Glasgow, (if you
remember well) appeal to no general Assembly, otherwise then as it shall
pleace His Majesty to constitute it, and personally be present, or by his
Commissioner, without whom, they acknowledge no authority it has. They
refer it to His Majesty to call one to repair their injury, by way of
humble desire, or direction, no way derogating from; nor impairing his
separate, absolute praerogative, The Bishops Appeal not derogatorie to the
Kings personal Pr^rogative.
to redress all personally, if he please. Their expressions relating to
Royal power in this particular are such as follow... So that they praeventing,
and not proceeding by warrant of Royal authority... May we not therefore
entreat my Lord Commissioner His Grace, in the words of the Fathers of the
fourth General Council at Chal^don, Mitte for as superfluos. For discharge of
our duty to God, to his Church, and to our sacred Sovereign, lest by our
silence we betray the Church is right, His Majestics authority, and our own
consciences... And we most humbly entreat His Grace to intercede with the
Kings Majesty, that he may appoint a sree, and lawful General Assembly...
to whom [Dr. Rob. Hamilton] by these praesents we give our full power, and
express mandate to praesent the same in, or at the said Assembly, or where
else it shall be necessary to be used, (where is that Mr. Baylie?) with all
submission, and obedience due to our gracious Sovereign, and His Majesty's
High Commissioner. All which are clauses assertive of His Majesty's supremacy
over General The Reviewer mistakes the scope of the Bishops warning.
Assemblies, and implie his power to take cognizance of their demeanor.
Though, after all this compliance with your method, and countenancing a seeming
pertinencie in your arguments; I must seasonablie put you in mind that you are
very much mistaken in the Bishops meaning, and here, as otherwhere, maintain a
blindeconflict which your self. For allthough His Lordship often take
advantage of your Assembly proceedings, as contrary to your laws, and
justifiable establishment of the Ecclesiastike power in your Kingdom; yet,
where there is a concordance of your practice, with your rule, if accompanied
with inconvenience of state, incroachment upon that just praerogative, which
Monarchs otherwhere do, or may, assume, if destructive to that liberty of the
people, which is given them by the Gospel, and Christian freedom sealed to
them in their baptism; if disagreeing with the primitive practice for the
first five, or six hundred years after Christ you lie open to the force of
his arguments, though you ward the blow from falling upon your Church in its
own peculiar, as constituded in your Country. For his Lordships endeavor is
not only (though in part) to show how tyrannical your discipline is to your
selves, but how praejudicial, and destructive it may prove to us in England, if
(through want of caution, or a facile yiedling to your insolent attempts,) way
should be made for you to propagate what you call the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
but is indeed the tyranny of Satan, and the second practice of Lucifers
ambition, (To banish Gods Anointed from the earth, since he faild in his
project of turning God himself out of heaven) and we be ensnared in the like
Presbyterian slaverie with the Scots. Therefore you see he entitled his book,
A Warning to take heed of the Scottish Discipline, etc. And were it not, that
you would clamor in vour next pamphlet, you were unanswered, this
advertisement might pass, with any rational reader, for a refutation of, at
least, half your book.

If I should prosecute you with the many appeals that have been made before
the Bishops declinatour of the Assembly at Glasgow I know you would run to
your cover of complaints page 20. of your book. What others have been since
will be brought to yourremembrance in such a flying roll as the Prophet
Zachary, mentions (unless a Chapter 5. v. 1.
gracious pardon be given you upon vour knees) when His Majesty shall by Gods
assistance have power to chastise your rebelling, cursing, covenanting,
excommunicating, imprisoning, murdering, decreeing, the confusion of his Royal
family, and three flourishing Kingdoms in your Assemblies.

CHAPTER IV.
Seditious, and Rebellious Ministers in Scotland seldom, or never censured by
the Assembly.

HEre Mr. Baylie lays faster hold upon the title, then the Bishops evidences
in the Chapter, and because sedition, and rebellion Sedition, and rebellion not
censured by the Discipline.
are charged home to the conscience of the Presbyters, and their usual
indemnitie imputed to the Discipline, he would feign step over these public
enormities, to personal vices; against which (by his leave) the Ecclesiastike
rigor is not such, but it can admit of very frequent indulgences, and many
times convert the guilt, or shame of such heinous transgresions, to the glory
of their Gospel, and a more certain sign of the sinners election by grace,
according to John Knox's divinity after proof made against Paul Meffane. The
treason of Hift. of Reform. 4. book.
Judas, the adultery of David, and abnegation of Peter, did derogate nothing
from the glory of Christ's Evangel, nor yet the doctrine which before they had
taught, but declared the one to be a reprobate, and the other to be an
instrument, in whom mercy must surmount judgment. Nay, if they find it
advantageous to their discipline, these declamers against adultery, and blood,
will make religious applications to any, as they did to Murray their
Regent-bastard and murderer (to say no more of him) whom they made the greatest
saint upon the earth, and the most eminent patron of their Church. That your
pulpits have been perduellionis plaustra, the common stages for sedition, and
treason. I have made appear upon an old item somewhere else. And because you
had not enough of them for the last old Comaedie you were to act, how you did
mount it in halls, schools, and other Scottish Presbyters mounting in halls
schools etc.
profane places, is delivered unto us upon Royal authority in his late
Maejsties large Declaration 16^9. Where is to be found such loyal doctrine as
this. One in Edinburgh, upon his Majesty's urging subscription to your own
Confession of faith, said It was an Italian, and a devellish device, first to
make them renounce God, and perjure themselves, and then afterward there was an
intention to destroy their bodies; and so that this subscription imported no
less, then the destruction both of their bodies, and souls. Rollocke did as
much upon a seaffold in publishing a wicked, and rebellious protestation,
Another, That though there were never so many Acts of Parliament against the
Covenant, yet it ought to be maintained against them all. And Andrew Cant since
charged His Majesty thus to his face, Awake thou lump of clay, thou wast not
sleeping, when thou gave cut the blondie commissione to James Graham. Of all
which I desire Mr. Baylie to name one that suffered any censured from a Synod.
what privilege these, or any other scandalous crimes had in England, or
Ireland, the High Commission, and Civil censures can clear. But the Reviewers
conscience can tell how many such took shelter under the wings of the
Covenant, who were threatened process, if they subscribed not, and, having done
it, passed for very zealous, pious brethren in the cause. Their names, and
infirmities, if Mr. Bay^lie has not, I have charity to conceal, Or, if I had
not (could their ordination be justified, and they accounted of our
brotherhood) I should think my self obliged to it under the penalty of the
55. Canon of the Council of Carthage. Episcopus accusatores sratrum An. 436.
Ancient Canons against Ministers accusers of their brethren.
excommunices and si em^ndaverine vitium, recipiat eos ad communionem, non ad
Clerum. If he bear'd the like reverence to Antiquity when he speaks so
broadlie of the Bishop of Derric, he might bethink himself of the 57 Canon.
Clericus maledicus, maxim in sacerdotibus cogatur ad post^andum veuiam, si
noluerit, degradetur, nec unquam ad officium, absque satisfactione, revocetur.
And to give His Lordship his due interest in the prudent provision of the
Church, I direct the reader to that in the Council of Constantinople, De
accasatoribus Orthodoxorum Epis^oporum non admittendis, which is to be found in
the edition of Chr. Iustell, where he shall see by how many clauses Mr. Baylie
is excluded from being admitted to enter any accusation Reviewer no competent
witnsse against Bishops.
against him, first, by the Religion he professes, adjudg'd as bad as heresy
by the ancient Canons for decreeing in conventicles against the authority of
Bishops, antisynagontas tois kanonikois hemin episcopois... And whether upon
the several grounds that follow, an Oecumentical may not reject him, hoos
kathybrisanta tous kanonas, kaiten ecclesiastiken lymenamenon eutaxian, as a
reproachful despiser of Canons, and a bane to the eutaxie of the Church; let
any of his aequitable compare^ consider. Yet, I think, I shall break no canon
by retorting his quaestion, his acts being so public, and himself
autocatacritos, convinced under his hand in his book, Did the Reviewer never
hear of a Presbyterian, sibb to Mr. Baylie, who to this day was never (but may
be in good time) called to any account for flagrant scandals of such crimes
(even the same the Bishop mentions) sedition, and treason, which (as well in
Scotland, as in any other Kingdom) are punishable by the Gallows? These
crimes, above any, deserve civil cognizance, from which as free as the Scottish
Churchmen have been, I dare undertake to prove out of their story, That there
was hardly ever Synod in Scotland (Presbyterian I mean) but was guilty of
Rebellion, or blood, having ever made their covenants with death, and their
agreement with hell having made liet their refuge, and under salshood bid
themselves as they did Isai. 28. 15. So that Mariana, and his diseiples,
whether in Italy, or Spain, or all the world over, can not in aequitie have
laid such devilish doctrines, such public murders of Princes, and Nobles to
their charge.

Foedus umbrarum perit. As constant a Covenanter as you are with He will not be
at peace and charity with the dead.
the living, I see the holiest league can not chain up your furious malice
against the dead. Your naming Bishop Aderton, For his sin, and that blessed
Martyr the L. of Canterbury for his patron, speaks you a son of neither
Christian charity, nor truth, If Presbytery had been as old as the Council of
Nice, I perceive your saucy fingars would have snatched the libells out of
Constantines breast, and your zealous tongues, that are made seven times hotter
otherwhere, would have runn the hazard to lick the Bishops faults out of the
fire. I wish you had helped me to a better bargain of your silence, and not
forced me to give you this, which I am ^oth to part with, in exchange for your
blabbing That if all be true that is in print (which for your credit I hope is
not) Your Discipline had no other then a Sodomite for its patron, some think
you may take your choice of French, or Scot.

How this abomination has been propagated with your Discipline, (though by it
no Disciple) I leave them to relate, who, to shame you into some speachlesse
civilitie, have had reason to be your Domestike observers, if they can frame it
by chaste language in a riddle. Yet because your Presbytery shall gain no
credit, if I can help it, by any counterfeit innocence, I will return you a
line or two^ in Latin, which may inform you that such an ill weed has grow'n
even where the sharp sickle of the Eldership has praetended to cut down all
wickedness before it. Hoetamen dissimulare non possum, Gualth. Epist. Erast.
Aug. 3. 1570.
in Palatinatu nulla prius seandala tam atrocia incidisse quam ed sint quae
seniorum illic constitutorum culpa acciderunt. Et quis, obsecro, eos postea
feret correptores, qui sceleratissimum hominem Siculum Sodomitam, and cundem
pestilentissimum calumniatorem (you inherit at least the upper half of his
qualities) impune elabi passi sunt, ne ad Iudices legitimos traheretur. If you
name Bishop Aderton in your next, you will force me to break the bond of
modesty with my Readers, and make me lay this horrid scene nearer home. If you
will show your self a better Christian, or Scholar, and strengthen your
arguments with the ruins of Bishops doctrines, where you find them, and not
rake up the rubbish out of some few sins, or lapses in their lives, you may
write your pleasure, and without a blush expect the like ingenuitie on this
side.

Pseudon syncolletes...leptotaton leron hiereus, Excuse me sir, if Aristophanes
Nor speak any truth of the living.
at praesent furnish me with no more honorable titles to salute you by, for
your ingenuous meritorious demeanor in the next paragraph. Wherein you are
pleased to pervert all that the Bishop mean'd innocentlie, and writ
temperatelie, and sacrifice your soul to the Father of lies to gain the
countenance of your 'brethren in Holland. Historical truth I hope is no
slander. Nor can it be their shame to keep peace in their Churches, and turn
seditious incendiaries out of doors. But while you plead for these your own
brethren among them, (the rest holding not that point of your discipline) what
respect you bear to their vigilant Magistrates, whom you tax for putting out
of their cities men zealous in their doctrine, pressing the true practice of
piety, etc. I leave to some interpreter to tell them. But my self shall tell
you, by the way, that they join not with you in rejecting our Episcopacie, as
Antichristian Name you what book of theirs, or person of any note that has
done it. I am sure since you, and your English mates fell to work with root,
and branch Spanheim, their great divinity professor in Leyden, held up his
hands, and wished that all had been such as Archbishop Vssher, and Bishop
Morton, and then the order with such Spanheims speech about English Bishops
men he acknowledged would pass here well enough. So that it should seem in the
rest there wanted only a conformity in some such thing, as Calvin's opinions
to qualify them for a tolerable communion with the Dutch. What their zealous
Ministers have preached for practice of piety, suppression of haeresie, and
schism, the Bishop is far from The Kings book of recreations far short of
what other Reformed Churches tolerate on the Lords day.
calling, or accounting any crime. But because you crowd into their zealous
preachments, the sanctification of the Sabbath Day in your Judaical sense, If,
they pressed it in the rigor of your discipline, their auditors use a large
practical license to confute them. To pass by their weeklie Sabbath mercates,
and many public faires, one of which you, and I met with at the Hague, I could
have showed you there the dancing on the ropes (if not a dutch stageplay for a
need) and many other pretty sights, to which you were invited with sounding of
trumpets, and beating of drumes, which is their business at this instant in
another part of the reformed Provinces: where I am I can tell you of several
recreations I have observed (beside playing on the ice Vindic. Chr. Philaed.
objected against the Ministers of St. Andrews that were spectatours) which I
little thought on when the poor praelatical Clergy, not many years since, were
cursed with Presbyterian bell, book, and candel, for approving a narrower
toleration in our Country. Our persecutions have helped us to this, and some
other experience, whereby we shall be hereafter enabled to unmaske your
adventurous impudency to the world. Whether the stream of Presbyterian, o^
Praelatical ermons have run clearer from contempt of pictie from silence,
flaterie, etc. may be seen by him, that will look into these last 12 years
current of the times. If the vigilant Bishops, such as their Lordships of
Derrie and Down, purged their channels from the filthy doctrines, and
rebellious Blaire and his companions justly banished.
obstructions of Blaire, Leving stone, Hamilton, Cuningham and others, they did
it for the more even passage of pure Primitive reformation. The zeal of these
men was eating out the foundation of Gods house, and their swelling waters did
overflow the banks of government, where they came. Their impious doctrines
made them first be turned out of Scotland, where Blaire had been before
expelled the University of Glasgow by the Professors for teaching his
scholars, K. Chapter 1. larg. Dec. 1639. page 324.
in his lectures upon Aristotle, that Monarchical government was unlawful,
(the lawfullnesse whereof Mr. Baylie accounts part of the Prelates profanitie,
and errors.) Upon the like misdemeanour the same justice overtoke them in
Ireland, but at a time, as it hapened, when Christ's Covenanting,
Antimonarchical Kingdom began to be reedified in Scotland which wanting such
bold pieces to supportit, and their blasphemous treasonables sermons to cement
it, they were very heartlie welcomed, and praeferred to places of greatest
eminency in that Church.

What a singular difference there is in the point of exemption from secular
jurisdict on between the Geneva Discipline, and yours the proceedings The
Discipline. in Scotland different from Geneva.
in the next paragraph will show. And what person convict of, or notorious for
those crimes, that you reckon was ever priviledg'd by the spiritual Court, you
are to mention. Your generals are air, the Bishop craves no favor of your
extraordinary charity to conceal.

The Declaration 1584. might be penned by Mr. Patrike Adamson and yet be King
James's, If his Majesty declined the acknowledgement thereof the year after,
when your Rebels had seized upon his person King James Declaration 1584.
at Sterlin, that may very well be imputed to his fear. Nor was that the
only negative subscription, you extorted from your prisoner that year, who,
when at liberty, afterward, with the same hand, blotted out that which, when
you had the guidance of his pen, you had forced him to write against his own
inclination, and sense. If Mr. Adamson prosessed upon his death his repentance
for lies, and slanders (to which we have a contrary tradition from some that
were praesent) he did no more then your great Declaratour Buchanan for his that
were opposite to the other, And how both these sort of, lies that carried
contradictions could proceed from the same spirit, or their repentance have the
same grace, and truth to reform it. I leave to your discerning spirit to
reconcile, or, if you find them different, to distinguish. What the Bishop
asserts, Mr. Camdens faithful register will justify. Ministri nonnulli in
Scotia e pulpitis, and per circulos Reginam indignissi^is Part. 3. An. 1684
calumnus insectati ipsi, Regi, and Consiliariis asperrime obtrectarunt, and
coram comparere jussi fastidioso quodam contemptu abnuerunt, quas^ pulpisa a
Regnm authrritate essent exempta, and Ecclesiastici non Principi^i mperio, sed
Presbyterio subessent. Your Ministers rail against, Queen, King, Council with
contempt, and seorne, deny appearance upon summons, stand upon Ecclesiastike
privilege, are not censured by the Assembly, and what is that but protected?
and what both but as much as the Bishop out of the Declaration praetends to?

What nullitie in the law of your country you plead, can be taken The Bishops
consequence good from Commissaries to Civite Magistrates.
for no answer to the Bishops second proof, who tells you, the same reason may
exclude as well Magistrates, as Commissaries, because they have no function in
the Kirk, and they are so excluded out of the 11. chapter of your 2. book of
Discipline, which providing that all abuses may be removed, and dependances of
the Papistical jurisdiction abblished, regulates all by the Eldership of the
Church, and in silence robs the Civil Magistrate of his power. The strength of
which argument you wave, as you do the 3. instances that follow, and scowre up
an old rustie piece of Logike of your own to fight with your shadow; The
Bishops consequence holding good. That it those, which have no function in the
Kirk, are not to be judges to ministers, no jurisdiction remains in the
Civil state whereby Ministers may be punished. In England the Commissari^, and
official were no ordinary judges to depose, and excommunicate at their
pleasure: what reservations there were, and how limited was their power, your
friend Fucus ad fallendum simpliciores, vel potius illudendum Ecclesiis page
404. Altar. Damase.
Didoclave will acquaint you. Which integrity, and prudence he calls a fucus,
and fallaei^, because he had found no such native beauty of holiness in his
Church, no such downright dealing in the discipline. The jurisdiction of
Commissaries was reestablished in Scotland in Ecclesiastike causes, to as great
a latitude as formerlie, by act of Parliament at Edinburgh June 4. 1609.

Presbyterian Assemblies are easily satisfied about any delinquencie against
Kings. And had not K. James at this time been absolute, and the brethren in
fear what should become of their Euangel, they had not proceeded so far as
they did in Gibsons case. That many passed The Assembly juggling in Gibsons
case.
at other times with less notice, nay with their authority to maintain them,
I have showed frequent enough out of their stories. Delinquents of the
Episcopal party could get no such opportunies for absence. When Gibson came
about, he praetended not only his fear for an excuse, but his tender care of
the rights of the Church. This, because more pertinent to the quaestion, Mr.
Baylie overlookes, as he does their purging him of his contumacie without
acquainting his Majesty, which the Bishop urges. He were better betake
himself to some other trade then that of reviewing. Two, or three such surveys
will loose the Discipline more ground, then Didoclave, and any other his
unanswered Champions ever gaind them. That no trial of Gibsom fault was
perfected though a fugitive was a testimony of their forward duty to the
King. Others (beside the Bishops by the Synod of Glasgow) have been
excommunicated at as great a distance for their loyal expressions, and actions.

The Bishops fourth proof I perceive has much troubled the Reviewers eyes,
osper ta suk epi tous ophalmous. Mr. Blackes case may very The Bishops relation
of Mr. Blackes case vindicated and enlarged.
well seem odious, Odit, quod metuit, It turns his stomach so much that he
finds not confidence enough to wipe of that filth, which was spit upon the
reputation of the Discipline by his speeches. He is better imployd with his
sieve, and his scissours about divining how his Lordship came by so many
particulars of the story; but the guilt of his conscience makes his hand
shake, and so all his witchcraft falls to ground. For the Bishop, to my
knowledge, may have his warrant for that relation somewhere else, and, for
ought he knows, recourse to some vocal oracles of that time, beside some such
registers as have not been raced by the sword of the Disciplinarian spirit, nor
cancelled by the Clerk of the Assembly in the dark. Though that large, most
excellent volume compiled by the Rt. Reverend Arch Bishop having, not long
since, happily escaped the Scotish' Inquisition, may hereafter be a printed
monument of the Disciplines shame, an aeternal disgrace to the Rebellious
Presbytery, and his credit, for all the Reviewers calumnies, a lasting pillar
to support the faith of all posterity, that shall read it. Yet to take Mr.
Blackes story from his hand, out of the register of truth, the Doomsday book
of the Discipline as it lies.

-- Veniat invisum scelus,
Errorque, and in se semper armatus suror.
If the Kings countenance were changed, his conscience was not, which, by his
own confession, so soon as ever his judgment was in the bloome, took check
at the Religion, as well as at the Rebellion in Hamp. Court. Conf.
the Assembly, professing with our faviour that though he lived among you, he
was not of you.

That you make no medium between Presbyterian, and Popish, is a piece of old
Synodical malignancie, which the trial of the orthodoxe party in these times
has made out of date, since being rejected, and banished by the one, they
neither find, nor sue for reception with the other, (saving into a toleration
of their asyle) but by the hand of the Almighty are held up in their
constancy between you both: Yet your fears were not groundless, when the
Religious King went about to establish such public worship, as would have
informed ignorance in a discovery of your error, and draw'n of all your
conscientious, and rational disciples. His Majesty's civil favors to some
Papists, were not so strong evidences of his change as to wind up your
Ministers to such a free warning, nor gave them license to make such rebellious
applications. If that be the use it is time for Kings to search better into your
doctrine, and see whether the toleration of that have not been the great sin
of our age, which has pulled down such judgments upon their heads.

This grace inyour pastor is that, which abounds by continuance in sin. Romans
6. 1. Ephesians. 6. 16.
And this faith is nothing like St. Paul's shield, being beaten by the Assembly
into a sword, whereby they endeavor to subdue Kingdoms, but have no such
commission as had Samuel, and the Prophets. Mr. Blackes denial was too faint to
absolve him, and his honest hearers, if conform Hebr. 11. 33.
to their English brethren, might perchance be so wrapped in their night caps, as
their negative testimony could not be very current. When he showed himself so
willing to be tried by all the world, he little thought who might pass upon the
verdict. All the heathen had condemned him for the murder of morality, and he
had met with a scurvie pack of hardhearted Godfather among the Papists. A
brother of yours confesses that somewhat Black had said, though he has no
great Nescio quid nec quando, sed multo ante Vind. ep. Philad.
mind to take notice, what, nor when. He complains of Rutherfort his accuser
because obliged for private courtesies, who deserves to be commended for
praeferring public duty, and in that appears to have been one of the most
honest hearers there. The Courtiers can not be blamed for intending to stop the
mouths of such Ministers, as laid the Devil with his bairnes at their doors,
and put them in afright that they should afterward be charged with keeping all
the black brats of the Assembly. The advice of the Brethren was adjudg'd
treason by the law of Scotland produced against the Aberdene Ministers, and
your Edinburgh Bibles have not one text to justify that appeal. The words
laid to Mr. Blackes charge I hope will be confessed to be truly seditious. All
the quaestion you make is whether he spoke them or no, which though doubtful
(as it is not, being proved before the Assembly who gave this reason for his
exemption from punishment, They knew not with what spirit he was overruled)
must be acknowledged a matter of L. 1. c. The od. de Relig.
civil cognizance (because no point of religious) as well as the punishment, if
proved. Constat Episcopos and Presoyteros forum legibus non habere, nec de
aliis causis... pr^eter religionem posse cognoscere; The Brethrens reason, or
rather mis-apprehension must not be made the measure of the laws. If the King
yeided so much toward an amicable conclusion, what can justify the Presbyters
in continuing the breach? who, say what you will, were bound to subscribe a
band for that silence which was required, Pessimus est mos suggestum in scenam
vertere, and dulcis^imam Euangelii vocem in Comaediam veterem. What the learned
Grotius De Impersum. Potestcirc. sacr. cap. 9
enlarges upon this subject, I will not transcribe, but call upon you to
answer, being that which I assume to make good upon the same texts and proofs
he produces. The truth was you durst neither have advised Black to appeal,
nor your selves have showed such contumacie to the King, but that you had felt
the pulse of the people, and made it beat high in your behalf. This your
brother confesses Nam co repore summa^ fuit Ecclae concordia and authoditas ut
aulici ab ea, tametsi Regia gratia niterentur, timerent, Vindic. Ep. Chr.
Philad.
though in Gypsy language, calling it the great concord, and authority in the
Church, such as made the Courtiers to tremble, though never so much in favor
with the King. Which concord, when so magnified in your story, we know, was
ever a covenant to rebel, and awe the King as well as the Court by your usurped
authority of the sword. Yet whatsoever is your practice, and profession, by
sits; sometimes you are more serious (though seldom more loyal) and the result
of your council apparels it self in such a sentence as this Our obedience
binds us not only reverentlie to speak, and write of our Sovereign, but
also to judge, and think. Which if the Edinburgh Ministers had practiced, they
had not come under that severe sentence pronounced against them for raising a
dangerous mutiny among the people.

If I would, like you, turn diviner, I might easily guess out of what Let to
the Q. of Engl. Iul. 16. 1561.
un printed register you have that pretty legend, that follows, which yet is
not so decently dressed as to make good the chaste credit of the discipline.
Who was this villain? By whom was he Suborned? Avillaine. They suborne,
without particular instance of either, will not pass upon public faith. If
the Commotion was innocent, why not approved? If not approved, how appears it
to be innocent. The best way to have quit the Ministry from being authors, or
approvers, had been to be censurers, but here they could keep silence without a
band.

I can not yet let go this singular story, my duty forbids my charity any
where to favor you with my silence. And because you are so praejudic'd against
unprinted traditions, I will give it you for the most part out of some printed
registers I have met with.

King James, desirous to set off his Court with what luster he could to
foraigne Ambassadeurs, had, in a provident magnificence, retrenched The
Ministers guilty of the tumult. December. 17. 1596.
some allowance formerlie issued for his Courtiers attendants, and contracted
their tables to enlarge his own entertainments. For the managing of this, and
somewhat else concerning his revenue he had appointed eight officers of State,
where of some were Papists, but of known intergritie. The Resormado Courtiers,
by way of scorn called these Octavians, and made an easy impression into
their Ministry by suggesting, that they had a design to introduce Popery,
and subvert the whole discipline of the Church. After private conference, a
fast, for the smiting with the fist of wickedness, soon after was kept at
Edinburgh. Balcanqual preaches, and spares neither, King nor Council in his
virulence, infuseth all the unpleasing particulars, he could think of, to
imbitter his Satyr, humbly beseeches the Edinburgh Citizens at a certain
hour to meet in the New Church, tells them how much it concerned their
reformed, Euaugel. His reservednesse sharpend their expectation, and caused
their punctual assembling almost to a man, where they found their Ministers in
a formal Synod, having chosen a violent Presbyter, Mr. Robert Bruce, their
Moderator. Here Mr. Blackes sufferings were aggravated: and the Kings violating
the praerogative of the Church. One Watson comes in, and adds oil to the
flame, remonstrates his late repulse at Court, and denial of access to the
King, being sent with some Rebell-supplicate from the Brethren. The Moderator,
with as much malice as my be, comments at large upon every instance in a
speech; Makes it Gods cause, and engages the people to assert the liberty of
his Gospel, if not by petition: by power. Some Commissioners are sent to the
King, then in the Tolbuith, who, receiving some check for their unjustifiable
proceedings, come back with their angry account to the Assembly. One
Alexander Vasius
Vaux being (as the Presbyters had praedesign'd) mounted up above the
congregation by a pillar, with stretched out arm cries, The sword of God and,
of Gideon, bid them to follow him in the vinaication of God, and his Church.
They take it out of his mouth, and in confusion clamor, Arm Arm, for God,
and the Church. They do accordingly, and rush violently into the streets
beguirting the place where His Majesty was. Mr. Thomas Hamilton afterward
Earke of Haddington takes an halberd in his hand, and with some of his friends
keeps the multitude from entering. Alexander Hume of Northborvick, for the time
Provest of Edinburgh, and Roger Mackmath (whom the King ordinarily called his
Baylisse) raise what power they can upon a sudden, the honest Hammermen come
in to their assistance, They demand first whether the Kings person be in
safety, and then by a mixture of fair words, and menaces make the rowt quit
the place, but not their riot, for they by, and by rallie in the Mercate place.
The Captain of the Castle turns some canon upon the Town, and by that
military argument praevailes with rhem to disband. The King is safely guarded
to his palace at Halyrud House. For all this Brucc sends abroad his writs, to
call^in the Nobility to their succor, some of whom had in zeal abetted the
late tumult. The Lord Forbes paid his sine for going into the street, The Lord
Hamilton has an invitation to be General, and should have had his commission
(from the Synod no quaestion) if he had signified his acceptance. He very
nobly, and loyally delivers up his letter to the King, and detects the
Rebellious project of the Discipline. Some of the Ministers are sent for, and
convicted, obtain pardon of the King, but no actual oblivion from any his good
subjects, who ever after detested that disloyal sect, and branded the 17. day
of December with the indeleble infamy of that prodigious attempt.

How like this looks to an half hours tumult or petie fray, How Ignorant
were the People, how innocent the commotion, How free the Ministry from being
authors, or approvers; Let the Reviewers aequitabl^ tomparers determine.

CHAPTER V.
The Discipline exempts not the supreme Magistrate from being excommunicate.

TVatim agis. The Bishop argues about excommunicating Kings, and you answer
about censuring officials, that pronounce sentence for The Rev. impertinencie
or cunning in altering of the state of the quaestion.
non-payment of money, wherein yet you are not more impertinent, then
malicious: For you know well enough that sentence was not executed for that,
but for obstinacy against the power, and commands of the Church, Wherein if
any officials inconsideratelie proceeded, it must not bring in quaestion the
more deliberate prudence of them, that made the constitution to that purpose.
The rash praecipitancie of the Scottish Presbyterian rule, and practice, though
many times very reprovable in the later, I sinde not here in the Bishops
allegation, nor of what magnitude the sins are, for which they excommunicate,
though we have known a desertion of the Brethren in conspiracy against their
Prince, or a glance through Let: of the Congreg. to the Nobles of Scotland 1559.
their fingars, an interpretative neutralitie, has been made the great sin,
and threatened with this censure. Neither the Praelatical party, nor any
orthodoxe Christians in the world come into your communion in the point of
excommunicating their Kings, nor comprehend them within the object of their
Discipline, by which, though they have kept the sons of the Church in a
filial awe, yet ever reserved a paternal privilege for their Kings, the
Nursing Fathers of the same Imperatoria unctione to^stur poenitentia. And the
learned De Imper sum. Po^, cap. 9.
Grotius assures us that the Kings of France for many ages have expresselie
challenged this exemption for themselves, No po^sint excommunicat^i.

Rev... did never so much as intend the beginning of a process against their
King, etc. Ans. Christian prudence admits no such charitable glosses
Disciplinarian intentions never better then their words
upon the Scottish intentions, where is no color of ambiguitie in their words.
In which if the King be a man, or a Magistrate, he must be necessarily
included, and made subject as well to Church animadversion, as admonition. If
Mr. Baylie has a perspective for the thoughts of all his praedecessours, he
may enjoy the pleasure of such spiritual reviewes, or revelations to himself,
but can have no demonstrative evidence to propagate the like confidence among
others.

True causes of citation of Princes to an Assembly is the peculiar language of
the Discipline, no such truth is implied in this truer text of Scripture, Where
the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto Eccles. 8. 4.
him what do thou? The beginning of the next verse is not the Scottish
Assembly, in answer to that quaestion. What these true causes have been, I
have partly manifested out of their story, their own Registers justifying No
thanks due to them for not excommunicating their Kings.
their successive meekness, and indulgence; wherein though no King may be
found excommunicate^, (because their spiritual sword wanted luster, and
brightness to strike such amazement into Princes, as to make them let fall the
temporal one out of their hands) yet not any one of them has there been since
the Assemblies were possessed of their infernal commission, but have been
personally threatened, imprisoned, deposed, or murdered, and they should have
tasted the meekness of the Discipline in them all, if the season had served,
and they could have caught, or kept them in their power; Against which
universal experience whether Mr. Baylie's single word may be taken for the
future security of His Majesty, and his successors, I submit with silent
reverence to be debated in their Council.

Rev. We love not the abused ground, etc. Ans. We are as little in love with the
Reviewers affronting of Kings, as they with, what he calls the Warners The
Ancient Fathers quit peccant Kings of all humane censure,
flatering of Princes. To the quaestion he so magisteriallie propounds. St.
Ambrose, notwithstanding his Act to Theodosius, makes answer upon that speech
of David cited by the Bishop, and adds the reason in such language as Mr.
Baylie will not hear from any Canterburion-Praelate, Quod nullis ipsi [Reges]
legibus tenebantur, quia liberi sunt Reges a vinclis delictorum. The same is to
be found in Isiodore Pelus: And Tertulian to this purpose many hundred years
before Presbytery was hatched. Sciunt [Imperatores] quis illis dederit
imperium... sentiunt Deum esse solum, Apos. Gent. adv.
in cujus solius potestate sunt, a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi, ante
omnes, and super omnes Deos, homines. And because the Reviewer calls this
doctrine Episcopal, let him take St. Hieroms note too by the way. Rex ipse
[David] and alium non timebat. This Catholic doctrine praeserves the Majesty
of Princes, de jure, inviolable from the insolencle of Assemblies. Where the
abuse of it spurs them on to any dangerous praecipi^es, they are to stand, or
fall unto themselves. The poor oppressed people would many times work out
their deliverance by prayers, and patience, if the outrageous Presbyters did
not thrust them down, and with the hazard, if not destruction of their
persons, dash all civil government in pieces.

CHAPTER VI.
Kings may sometime pardon capital offenders, which the Disciplinarians deny.
As they do their Royal right to any part of the Ecclesiastike revenue.

WEre your reasoning as methodical as the Bishops, I should not be so in every
Chapter at a loss to find out more to what, then The Bishops reasonning not
unconsequential.
what to answer, having hitherto met with none, but Socrates's three dark
principles in your book, to chaos touti, kai tas nephelas, kai ten glottan,
confusion, clouds, and tongue: which among them have made such a mist in your
own eyes, and such a clatering in your ears, as you Aristoph^ Nubes.
can neither see, nor hear a good logical argument brought before you. We,
that are above this disturbance, and at a distance, observe his Lordship laying
out the doctrine of your Discipline (for so I Will speak for once) received by
you all, and then illustrates it by your practice, wherein if he had room
enough, he would muster up so many particulars as with an, etc. might conclude
an inductive universal. Though the other way of acconsequential arguing has
been thought tolerable in Mr. Baylie (no Doctor as I take it) as not long
since in his uncharitable mention made of Bishop Aderton, and his slander
against the two reverend Bishops of Down, and London Derric.

The Ministers rigor, and vindictive pleading has ever multiplied Blood the
seed of the Discipline.
in Scotland the widows, and fatherless, the deadly feuds having been ever
continued, and received by them, when they saw it tend to their advantage, so
that the blood shed by murderers of their making may be truly aesteem'd, the
seed of their Church. Which duly considered, demonstrable in their story,
should deter any cautelouc Christian from their communion, who, by that
partaking in their guilt, can exspect from heaven no benefit of his prayers,
Gods curse in the Prophet concerning them nearer, then any ministry in the
world, When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, yea
Esai. 1. 15.
when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: Your hands are full of blood.

The history of that time, though very partiallie, and falselie related Mercy
Gods attribute, and so the Kings.
by the Reviener, were it not, can not justify the insolence in their
discipline, wherein they do not occur to the inconvenience praetended, the
impunitie of murder procured then by some importunate and powerful
solicitours, but despightfullie scratch out the image of God in his Anointed,
and pull down his praerogative attribute of mercy, which has a season of
privilege above justice, if that pass with Mr. Baylie, for any of his works.
What I mean I collect from this clause. In the fear of God we signify unto
your Honors, that whosoever (...). Book Discipl. 9. head.
persuades you that ye may pardon, where God commands death, deceives your
souls. and provokes you to offend Gods Majesty. where not only the act of
impunitie is condemned, but all power to pardon in any case denied. Which God
never practiced himself, nor exacted in the rigor from his Kings. Beside, the
case has been known, when the Presbyters Presbyters solicit pardon for
murder.
themselves became the powerful sollicitours to the King, and drew a pardon
for murder from his hand against his heart, as they did from K. Chapter 1. for Mr.
Thomas Lamb, a preaching brother, who stabbed a young man of Leith with a
poniard betwixt Leith, and the Abbey of Haliryd House upon the Lords day in the
afternoon, in the time of the Assembly, and Parliaments sitting. To whom the
King, used this speech Ministers must be pardoned though slaughterors. (...)
other men must suffer for a words speaking, reflecting upon one Mr. John
Stuart, who suffered for saying that Argile had spoken about deposing the King.
How they professed their Church to be reformed by the murder of David Rizio,
and the King called a weak man because he would not vouch it, I have showed
more particularly in their story. Yet I hope Mr. Baylie (who is too rigid)
when he comes next in the Rebell-Commission, will be no sollicitour for any act
of oblivion. That if the King gives not what satisfaction they find
necessary, and due, he, and the other bloud-hounds will articulate their cry
into justice, justice, or lie down in their arms to execute it themselves
even upon His Majesty himself (for he has allreadie encircled him, within
the object of the Discipline) may be fairlie collected from hence, as from what
he told us in his Epistle.

That you may preach unto Rigor to be preached etc. under non^ but implous or
n^ligent Magistrates; so ex^ommunication for impunitie.
Magistrates, that according to Scriptures murderers ^ught to die even Erastus
will grant you, Yea that in some cases you may rebuke, exhort, admonish,
threaten, denounce judgments, as well as preach promises according to the
examples of the Prophets. But he puts you in mind that this they did only
under impious Kings, no David's, no Salomons, no more must you assume this
liberty, under Iame's, and Charle's, pious, prudent, and just Kings. If you
should have an unhappie occasion to exercise it under other, you must go no
fa^ther, no excommunication which is ordered in your Discipline. He calls for
your texts, he answers your arguments, he helps you to instances of Ioab,
whose murder could not safely be punished, of Absalom, whose, for some reason,
was neglected. He demands whether these men, went not into the Temple nor
communicated in the Sacraments with this impunitie about them. I have no way to
be rid of you, but as Mr. Seldom, they say was of the whole pack of your
clamouring brethren at London, who laid Erastus book open before them, and bid
them answer him. Which dismounted their tails, and put a gag in their mouths,
so that I hear he was never troubled with them afterward.

E. Huntley's case has been carried to the mint, and comes now out with a new
stamp of the Assembly at a loss till their Father behind E. Huntleys case
wholly minted in the Assembii^
them scatters his kindness among his prodigal sons, and bids them lavish
out his inexhaustible stock of calumnies, as they please. What the Bishop has
granted you about the guilt of the three Lords, I have no commission to
retract. What you aggravate about E. Huntley's apostacy, and, after seeming
repentance, frequent relapses, does at the worst, but argue his adhaerence in
heart to the Romish religion. This added to his banding with the King of Spain
(which you prick into some blanke papers subseribed with his hand, and the
rest taken out of Dr. Kerre's pocket, as he was shiping over, upon your
excommunicating, and banning; and pick out of some other, such as little could
be made of at that time, when it should have been most advantageous) is not
enough to justify that rigor alleged by the Bishop. The truth of what
follows shall be left to the ingenuitie of your judicious and aequitable
comparers, by laying your relation to that of more authentike historians, whose
record is this

Bothwell, after many murders, and misdemeanors, having broke prison,
endeavors to get the King, and Chancellar Maitland into his power, to which
end he sets fire to both their chambers, and by violence makes his entrance
into the Queens. For this, some of his accomplices were hanged, the Kings
proclamation, published against him, prohibites any man to harbor him. The
Earl Huntley, upon the Chancellars entreaty, raises some power to surprice
him, with which he besets Earl Murray's house, where Bothwell was entertaind,
and Murray in defense of him slain. For this soon after was E. Huntley
Bothwells notorious crimes.
imprisoned till having put in caution to appear at a public trial, he had
his liberty given him to go home. Murray's friends had not patience to wait
the leisure of the law, but work revenge upon all advantages they could get.
Bothwell having been this while concealed in England, enters Scotland in arms,
and assaults the King in his palace at Fawlkland, but, being beaten off, makes
another escape. The Assembly, failing of the success they hoped for in
Bothwells attempt, praevaile for the banishing of Papists, and confiscation of
their goods, Bothwell, finding no good welcome in England, gets away, and
gains a private opportunity by his friends to be secretly conveyed into
the Kings chamber, where he begs his pardon upon his knees, and obtaines it,
yet the next day makes a tumult in the Court, and caries away diverse of the
Kings servants; The King (which may seem strange) for the safety of his
person, was feign to put away his friends of greatest trust, the Chancellor,
Treasurer, Baron Humes, etc. but within a month repents him, appeals to his
Nobles, and by their advice, recalls them, yet permits Bothwell to depart. The
Ministers are angry that the Papists are not persecuted by fire, and sword.
They assemble without the Kings order, and call together the Barons and
Burgers. Bothwell enters again with 400. Horse as far as Leith; makes
proclamation, summons all in to defen'd religion, and put away evil
Counselors; sends it to the Synod at Dunbar, which favored it; The same day
he marches against 3000. of the Kings forces near Edinburgh, faints in his
business, and gets away to the borders; Queen Elizabeth sets out a
proclamation against him, yet presses the King for proscription of Papists;
The Lords are but few that meet, and express some reluctance at it. The
Ministers, and Burgers are many, which vote it, take their arms down out of
the windows, etc. Argile is sent against them, and beaten; The King draws
toword them, and permits three of Huntley's houses to be pulled down, Huntley
escapes to his Aunt in Sutherland, thence into France.

These were Huntley's notorious crimes, and multiplied outrages which cried up
to the God of heaven; Out of which let the world judge what reason the
Ministers, those merciful men of God, had to give such warning and cry to the
Judges of the earth, to shed his blood. That appearance with displayed banner
against the King in person, should be made an article against him by Mr.
Baylie, a loyal peaceable assertour of ten years armed rebellion in three
Kingdoms: I dare not adventure my spleen to discourse on but in Mr. Baylies
language, hope by his good advise, the Prelates will no more Lull' Princes
asleep in such a sinful neglect of their charge, but break off their slumber
by wholesome, and seasonable admonitions from the word of God, such as that
Prove. 10. A wise King seatercth the wicked, and brings the wheel over them.
Or what other texts, their Lordships better know applicable to the most just,
necessary chastisment of schismatikes, and Rebels.

About E. Angus, and Errol, you think your self not concerned to make answer
because your brother Presbyter Mr. Rob. Bruce, gave R Bruce's speech against E.
Huntley
King James leave to recall them, but with this considerable sentence, against
E. Huntley. Well Sir, you may do as you list, But choose you, you shall not
have me, and the E. Huntley both for you. Pretty humble souls, who can weigh
down the chiefest Earls in the ballancing of a state.

In the next paragraph, you dawbe with untemper'd mortar, such First fruits
etc. witheld from the King as much by the Presbyters as Pope.
as can never keep the Kings right to any Ecclesiastike revenue, and the claim
of the Discipline together. For having comprehended in the patrimony of the
Kirk all things [without exception] given or to be given to that, and the
service of God; All such things as by law, or custom or use of Countries have
been applied to the use, and utilitie, of the Kirk. 2. book Disc. chapter 9 And
called them thieves, and murderers [without exception of persons] that alienate
any part of this patrimony. 1. books Disc 6. head you are the innocent dove
that, here bring us news, That the Church never spoyld the King of any tithes,
while those birds of spoil, your forefathers, have left him, neither ear nor
straw to possess. But to deal with you at your own weapon in your words. If
the King never had any first fruits, then, as the Bishop says, you are the
Popes, that withheld it, and by you, that were the Reformers, was that point
of papacy maintained; If he neither had, nor demanded, to what purpose took
you, such pains to obtain in favor of the Church to have it declared in
Parliament, That all benesices of cure under Praelacies shall in all time
coming be fee of the first years fruits, and fifth penie, and the Ministers An.
1587.
have their significations of presentation past, at the Privy seal upon His
Majesty's own subscription, and his secretaries only, without any payment or
caution to his Treasurer for the said first fruits, and fifth penie?

About tithes, you say, His Majesty, and the Church had never any controversy
Contradiction about tithes. page 57.
in Scotland. How agrees this with your Declaratour in his appendix to the
maintenance of your sanctuary? When the minor-age of a good King had been
abused to the making of a law, whereby the most of these rents, first fruits,
Tithes, and the lands belonging to Bishoprikes were annexed to the crown, the
Church very earnestly do labor for restitution, and never gave over till
these laws were repealed.

If you review your records, you will find in the year 1588. Patronages.
that you had a plea with, which you call an earnest suit to, His Majesty
about patronages, and such considerable opposition, as put you upon inhibiting
all commissioners, and Presbyteries to give collation, or admission to any
person praesented by authority from the King. And [to omit many] a greater you
had before with the Queen. Anno 1565

The Nobility, and Gentry were more beholding to your impotencie, then
patience for peace. What gracious men yon have showed Presbyterian rebellion,
and tyranny.
your selves, since your Rebell-Parliament got that incumbent power into your
hands, your congregations would speak if they durst, whom you feed with the
bread of violence, and with that you cover them as a garment. So that whether
the Presbytery be not as good patrons of the people, as they are vassals to
the King, need never more be quaestion'd in Scotland.

Whether by the wickedness of Praelates, or Presbyters the King, and Rejoicing
at the sequestring the Church patrimony.
Church were cousin'd of the tither, will appear by them, that bragged most
when they were most endangered by the sequestring the other patrimony from the
Church, which I find to be the Presbyters that could not keep council but
boasted they had given a seasonable blow unto the Bishops. Qui jactare non
dubitarunt se Episc. plygin kairian inflixisse.


That legitimate power in the Magistrate the Bishop pleades for King James
never declared to be a sin against Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, nor did ever
the patrons of Episcopac^e oppose it. That changeling you here substitute in
the room calls you Father by the ridiculous posture in which it stands, your
friend Didoclave Aitar. Damasc. p. 3.
had more ingenuitie then to infer a claim to the power of preaching, and
celebrating K. James anti-presbyterie.
the Sacraments upon the power of jurisdiction over Ecclesiastical persons
derived upon the King from his praedecessours in England, and given them by a
statute. Verba statuti de jurisdictione, non de simplici functionum sacrarum
administratione intelligenda esse quis dubitat. The well grounded consequences,
which you call Castles in the air, will hereafter batter your Presbytery to
the ground, when Princes shall retract their too liberal indulgence, take a
courageous resolution to claim their own, and rely upon Gods providence to
maintain it. King James had given you the practical meaning of his wise
sentence, seven years before he spoke it at St. Andrews. For, as you may very
well remember, when His Majesty had put down your Presbytery by the head,
your Ministerial office was with the exercise of your halls, having, to the
time of your late rebellion, no other, then an ambulatorie Euangel, no
Disciplinarian legallie tolerated to officiate, but such as would conform to
the canons of the Church. If the King had said, Egonon possum erigere Ministri
caput, the heads of the Aberdene, and Edinburgh Ministers might have confuted
him upon the gates, but that his mercy [without the Synodical censure of
impunitie] interposed in that dispute. As great an enemy as His Majesty was
to such Erastians, as the Bishop, I am sure he was no friend to such Donat^sts
as you, unless infestissimus No Dona^ist.
host^ be significant to that purpose. He said, you were the persidious, bedlam
knaves among the preachers, my dictionarie Ep. lector. Aitar. Damascen.
will help me to no fiter English for his Latin, persidi, and sanatici
nebulones inter concionatores; And you, or your profession he Georg. Con. De
Dupl. Stat. Relig. apud Scot. lib. 2.
often styled Calvinistarum Satanismum, a sect of lapsed spirits among the
Calvinists, whose malice had metamorphoz'd them into Devils.

CHAPTER VII.
The Presbytery cheates the Magistrate of his Civil power in ordine ad
spiritualia.

THe Bishop begs no belief of his Readers, beyond what he Their latitude of
scandal. 8. 9.
brings proof out of your Discipline to prevail for. When you have made all
offenses, more, or less scandalous, like the Prophet in Hosee, you become the
snare of a fowler, and with this counterfeit call catch all the unclean birds
in your net. If the Bishops Official takes notice of more civil causes then
your Presbytery, the quality, and number had been Worth your noting for your
Readers satisfaction. To strengthen your evidence, I consulted with Didoclave
your brother Scout, whom I find to have made no such numerous discovery, and
I take him to be altogether as strict, and able an inquisitour, as your self.
That capital offenders, whom the Magistrate has spared, should be
excommunicated, is disciplinarian Malefactors pardoned not to be
excommunicated.
censure, which no society of regular Christians ever inflicted; Nor can any
ingenuous Divine deny such, access to the holy table, if otherwise qualified
then by their impunitie. He must distrust either the prudence or piety of the
Magistrate, conceiving him either too liberal of his pardon to a person showing
no remorse for his fault; or impious in countenancing instead of cutting off,
an obstinate malefactor with his sword. Erastus himself (whom you rail at so
often) puts in this caution (which Beza approves of) for whatsoever he has
asserted in his book. Quod meminisse te velim etiamsi non semper adjeccro.
That the person you admit be supposed to understand, approve, embrace the
doctrine of the the Church, with which he desires to communicate; That he
profess an acknowledgement, and hatred of his sins (he adds not from your
stool of repentance (That a murderer, adulterer, blasphemer, thus pardoned,
thus poenitent, thus supplicant for the seal of the Sacrament, should be, to
fill up the amphitheater of any proved hypocritical, popular presbyter, made
the sundays sport, or spectacle to the people, No Scripture commands it, no
orthodoxe Church ever practiced it, no law of Scotland imports it. If you
suspect his repentance to be but counterfeit, and his humble address, a
religious imposture; you may discourse with him in private, lay open before him
the heinousness of his fact, deter him by the extremity of the danger, tell
him if he disccrnes not the Lords body (which he can not through the black
unrepented guilt of that sin) he eats judgment, he drinks damnation; But
all this pertaines ad Consilium, a term used among the ancients in cases
somewhat conterminate with ours, to ghostly council, no spiritual execution,
ad legis annunciationem, non jurisdictionem, to the terrible declaration of the
law, to no jurisdiction or legal exercise of your power. Beside, here I must
put you in mind of what I otherwhere prove, and is undeniable. That your
excommunicating faculty is not originallie in your Assembly, but derived to
you from the supreme Magistrate, with an implicit reservation of his own
privilege, to remit it at pleasure, it being no ^ure divino discipline, I hope
(for if such, what becomes of those Churches that use it not?) The malefactors
exemption from this, without quaestion, accompanies his largess of civil
mercy, and he stands acquitted from all spiritual, as well as temporal,
punishment: For to suppose the Magistrate takes him from the jailer, to deliver
him to Satan. exchangeth his shakles for chains of darkness, his prison for
hell, is inconsistent with reason, or charity, and gets no more faith, then
such a cruel sentence has the face to ask my opinion of its justice. The
learned Grotius tells you, how John a Bishop of Rome became intercessour to
Justinian the Emperor in the behalf of poenitent delinquents, that were
separated from the union of the Church, asscribing to him the authority, and
honor of their restitution to the communion thereof. Which argues him, and his
Presbyters, (if you admit him not to be single in his jurisdiction) at that
time to have had no independent Discipine, to cross the Emperors power, to
have been no countermanders of his pardons. That the Magistrates in Holland
have very often commanded the Pastors to their duty in these cases. And that,
by an old law in England, the Kings pleasure was craved before any of his
servants could be excommunicated.

Fraud in bargaining, false measures, etc. the Bishop takes to be matters False
measures, etc. matters of civil cognizance.
of civil cognizance; He finds them called abomination to the Lord, not any
where such scandals to the Church, as to require public satisfaction. What
Ecclesiastike rebukes are due, he thinks may be given by particular Ministers
in their several charges; without a summons before a Consistorian judicatorie.
Die Ecclesiae was no praecept of speed; There were two or three errands to be
done by the way; The offended brother has, after conference, a private
arbitration praescrib'd him: Nor does it appear that, in cases of this nature,
our Savior singed him a warrant to fetch his adversary to the Church, not a
word is there that does authorize the Church to command him out of the Court,
to anticipate, or aggravate the civil censure by the Reviewers Ecclesiastike
Rebukes.

The Bishop speaks of Presbytery in the institution, makes no The Reviewers
30. years experience no argument of Presbyterian henestie.
instance of it in the practice; I Will take no man's word for disciplinarian
honesty throughout 30. years trading. The saints, after that rate; will not
be readieat Doomesday to give up their account of compassing the earth, and
getting in their inheritance annexed to their dominion, which they will have
founded in grace; If the Presbyteries, wherein all that time you were
conversant, were no merchant adventurers, took no share of the purchase, they
have kept some Jubilee to lease out their indulgence; Or it was, not unlikelie,
a piece of your Kirke-policie to connive a long time at all petie larcenie,
knowing who at length would be caught in the great cheat, the 200000. pound
sale of damnation to their brethren, and yet keeping back whole viols of
vengeance, and wrath unto themselves.

For the many causes of Ministers deprivation, cognosced upon in your
Presbyteries, you have the good liking of neither Papists, nor Prae Their
Canons not the same with those of the ancient Church.
lates, who find no canon, that gives commission to such a mungrel socitie of
lay-Clerical Presbyters to take away, what they have no power to confer. If I
give, but not grant, your usurped tyranny a privilege, by many years
rebellious precedent, to cognosce of such cases, I must except against clipping
of canons; the coin that bears the Majestike image of the Primitive Church,
such as is the 67. in the fourth Council of Charthage, Seditionarios nunquam
ordinandos Cl^ricos, sicut nec usurarios, nec injuriarum ultores. The first of
the three Victorem Romanum Epum circa annum Dui 200. legimus Coenae usu^
interdixisse injurias condonare nolentibus Th. Erast. these. 7.
had met with your vertous Fore-Father Knox in the Castle of St. Andrews, and
saved all the mischief we have reaped by his call from abetting the murder of
Cardinals, to rebelling against Princes, renting the Church, and the
Commonwealth into Congregational, and Covenanting parties. The last, which was
your injust praetense, if not in your banners, at least in the Remonstrances,
which you brought in your hands when you invaded England (Canons holding as well
for depriving, as ordaining) had rid us of all the rabble of Rebellious
revengefull Presbyters without a stroke. For the business of usurie, I shall
not draw up my charge till I discover the Scottish Presbyterian Cantores; Yet
you were best have care (whatsoever becomes of the ancient Canons) that you be
not too severe in depriving for that, lest you get a rebuke from your brethren
abroad, who, it may be, desire not to shake hands with you in that point of the
Discipline.

The Bishop neither took out, nor put in any causes of Churchmens deprivation,
but merely transcribed, what he thought more No canon against rebellion, nor
deprivation of rebellious Ministers.
concerned a Civil Court, then a Synod. If he had been at the charge of
reprinting all whereof your book of Discipline makes mention, he must have
left an etc. to bring up a reserve (though you will not own it) of preaching,
penning, practizing, schism, sedition, Rebellion against moderate, just, and
pious Kings, as well as what your Assemblies were solicitous to prohibit, under
the term of Schism, or Rebellion against the Kirk. For the first, and last
of the three sins you draw out (because you will have the pleasure, at least,
of licking your lips at the naming) His Lordship knows no Bishop, nor Doctor
Presbyters as peccant as Bishops.
but may find a namelesse Scottish Presbyter to give place to. If he should be
mistaken (which he has not so much reason to hope, as charity to wish) he
sees in St. James the guilt of murder aequivalent Chapter 2. 11.
to adultery, and made as great a transgression of the law; He hears of
Isaiah's triel in Scotland, which deserves the same wonder, 29. 9.
and cry of the Prophets. Ye are drunken, though not with wine, ye stagger,
though not with strong drink, etc. And, since your last return out of England
beholds sitting at Edinburgh, as well as London, the great whore [instead of her
blew] arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and decked Revel 17.
with gold, and precious stones, and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand
full of abominations, and filthnesse of her sornication; And upon the forhead
of the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, a name written with a beam of the sun, Mystery, Babylon
the Great, The Mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth. For the third
sin of gluttony [which you will have produced, because in your canon, though
not much for your credit that your excessive gossiping comes to be cognosced by
your Church] all Bishops, and Doctors may freely bid desiance to your sect,
of whom so many are so often known to be as fed horses in the morning, and
though you flatter your selves into a conceit that the noise is not heard, are
neighing as much as those in Isai. So that you may in due time have, what you
better 5. 9.
deserve, the same curse with the Priests in the Prophet Malach which will
spoil your reviewing and singling out other men's 2. 3.
crrours, or secret sins to the shame of Christianity among the Nations,
when your selves are spiloi, kai momoi, the principal spots, and 2 S. Pet. 2.
13.
blemishes that are in it. God may corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your
saces, soleunitatum stercus, even the dung of your solemn feasts, and you,
more likely then they, may be taken away with it.

The Bishops third challenge mounts somewhat higher then your answer, which
pleades only for preaching upon texts, concerning Their exercing civil
jurisdiction
the Magistrates duty, and resolving, from Scripture, their doubts, both which
reach up only to a judgment of direction: but his Lord^hip cites the clause
in your theorem, which makes difficult cases between King, and people subjects
of cognizance, and judgment before the Assemblies of the Kirk, And this, he
says, rises to a judgment of jurisdiction. Your second book of Discipline
is more modest in language, though as mischievous in meaning. The Ministers
exerce not the Civil jurisdiction, but teach the Magistrate how it should be
exerciz'd according to the word; whereas if you take cognizance of, and
pronounce judgment in, these difficult cases, Or call before you such as may
be more easy, but should be heard otherwhere; this is no other but exercing
civil jurisdiction, as spiritual as you make it. If you, with the terror of
your excommunicating Maozin, overaw the Magistrate into a servile submission to
what you praescribe, this I take to be no teaching, but commanding, and instead
of resolving by deliberate advice, and Christian moderation, cutting in sunder
with this sword of your spirit (no word of Gods) the knots, and perplexities of
his conscience.

What doubt-resolvers you are commonly between Master, and servant, Their
eoconomical superintendencie.
husband, and wife, your licentious demeanor in many families may inform us,
where (it is too well known) you have made your selves judges of the trivial
oeconomical causes in the hall, and dispensers of, or with, more private duties
in the chamber; So that, they say, the good man has many times met with a
consistorian censure at his table, and, if not with a Presbyter a Presbyterian
prohibition in his bed: I believe you mistake preaching Praelates, and Doctors
for some babbling Puritanical Pastors, and Lecturers in England, who have made
these things, their care, and gone about them, as the uncontroverted parts of
their Ministerial function. The Bishops negligence herein was the silent
reverence he paid, which you owe, to Majesty at a distance; And His Lordships
modest declining domestike curiosities, a civil diversion from that, wherein
the word is so clear, as to need no interpreter, and the Husband or Masters
authority so absolute, as admits no superintendencie to praedominate.

Your license to preach personally against Princes, I find given to your
Forefathers in an answer to the Queens proclamation 1559 Preaching
personally against Princes. Knox: Hist. Lib. 2.
Your tradition still continues the same, touching which (for brevities sake) I
must again send you (as I can not too often) to the famous Grotius. De Imper.
Sum. Pot, cap. 9.

What the Parliament propon'd to you about the late engagement, Their
proceedings in the late engagement.
included no such great scruple of conscience as to long for the comfort of
your resolution, nor was that, when they had it, the star by which they
steered their course, in the business. They knew your violence [call'd zeale]
to be such, as would force an entrance into the hearts of many poor people,
which, when it sindes emptic, swept, and garnished for better ghests, would
call in 7 wicked rebellious spirits St. Matthew. 12. 43.
to possess them. This epidemical mischief they endeavored to praevent by
acquainting you with the plausibilitie of their enterprise, and if they could
have praevailed for either your consent, or silence, they should have the less
need, they thought, to look back in the prosecution of their design. What
conjunction soever you found to be at that time driven on, I can assure, you
there was a clearlie malignant party on this side, that found themselves
separated, and who trembled at the hazard of their religion, and the persons of
them, that were to be most eminent instruments of its praeservation, when they
saw such a solemn outward compliance with oaths, and Covenants, and with a
Committee of Estates, that declared so at large for the former joint-interest
with England, against the Liturgy, and established Declar. Iul. 21. 1649.
religion in our Church. Yet their warning against it made no other noise then
sounding of their bowels in compassion to the King, whom they desired to have
by any means, delivered out of the hands Isai. 63. 15.
of the merciless Independent, and a tenderness toward their sweet, and
ingenuous Prince, who with his loyal and generous Nobilitie^, they feared might
be deluded, and fall into the hands of the dark mercenarie Presbyter, the
orthodoxe, untainted party being not intermixed in such a visible number, as
seemed likely to secure them from that danger.

The Congregational supplications were naught, but your Consistorian jugglings:
Your selves sowed the wind in some whispering Assembly instructions, and then
reaped the whirlewind. in tumultuous petitions from the people. So that your
own spirit first raised the storm, and then wrapped it self in a mistie
multitude for concealment. That the States of the Kingdom sent several
express messages for that end, viz. to receive an Assemblies replic in a
Magisterial Declaration against their proceedings; in pulpit banning, and
cursing; in Clamourous seditions, and, as you could make, militairie
opposition, I can not get within the compass of my faith, and take it to be
such a salving of conscience as none but a Scottish Classical Casuist will
profess, beyond what any Jesuit in ordine ad spiritualia will challenge with
all the rebellious circumstances, that accompany it. For that filthy
conclusion you cast upon the Bishop, we know as well as if we had seen it drop,
that it came from the corrupt praemises in your head. In the case you produce
His Lordship ties not up the tongues of Gods servants, but concludes the
counsel of the wicked to be deceit, Gods law not to be taken from your
preaching, nor his Covenant Prove. 12. 5. Ps. 50. 16.
any more from, then in your mouth. To apply your general to the particular in
hand, The war you thought unlawful, because it proclaimed liberty to the
captive, and the opening of the prison to His Isai. 61.
Majesty that was bound; And the law in St James, you had no reason to submit
to, who may, not uncharitablie, be thought to have 2. 11.
resolved upon a connivance at, or collusive neutralitie in the murder, that
was otherwise visiblie to follow. The greatest impiety, and injustice, I know,
was in it (as exquisite as you are in casting the fashion of uncertain evils)
was the advancement of your Covenant in the Van. And, if for that, the Engagers
were to expect nothing but the curse of God, I am sure they deserved no
anathema from your Kirk. If your doubting Nation be put in the scales with
your resolving Nation that engaged, I believe we must give you at least a
grain or two to make it aequiponderate. They, that stated their souls by the
council of your Assembly, stayed behind to praevent all recruit, and oppose
the retreat of their more loyal Country men upon a possible misfortune. For
the lawfulness whereof they had somewhat, worse then silence, from the
(miscalled) servants of God, though, I am sure, no authority from his word.
When Religion, and Royalty lay panting under the talents of most cruel
Rebels, the Civil business of war was by the other birds of prey
unseasonablie disputed. What concerned the soul in it, had the clear sunshine
from Isai. 8. 20.
the law, and the testimony to warm, and quicken it, That the Assembly spoke
not according to this word, was because there was then no light in them, the
lamp of the wicked was put out.

What the Church declared in their public papers to the Parliament Prove. 13.
had very litlie of modesty, or truth. It bound up your engagement in so many
knottie conditions, as had made it sure enough for vindicating the wrongs the
sectarians had done, when the only injured persons were excluded out of their
share in the promised success. To expect reason by Christian, and friendly
t^eaties from them that you acknowledge had bid adieu to Religion, and
Covenant, when your zealous selves, praetenders to both, never offered any
heretofore, was like the fine-spun thread, or Covent garden paper Ianuar. 6.
and 29. 1649.
you put in afterward between the axe and the Royal head it cut off: If the
good people in Scotland were so willing to hazard their lives, and estates;
what good Pastors were you that held their hands, and forced then to sit
still. By whose cunning, and misperswasion the engagement was spovled, or
impeded in the stating, we require no farther evidence then from your
pamphlets, By whose rash praecipitancie, or somewhat else in the managing (if
it may not be ascribed to the fortune of the war) is a mystery yet not
perfectly revealed. The number was large enough, though the most religious, as
you call them, were absent, and the armies courage. I think had not been much
greater by their company. The lies spoken in hypocrisy 1. Tim. 4. 2.
did but cauterize the conference of the wretched people that stayed at home.
The lethargy, called peace, which they slumber in for the time, may hereafter
break out into an active war, to the ruin of the Assembly spirits that
seduced them. The three reasons the Bishop touches upon, as the principal, may
be the test for the many more that went with them. So that we shall not need to
rake in your dunghills for the jewel that you promise, which, when we have
found, will not yield one grain of faythfullnesse in your Church. They, that
foretold the destruction that followed, were not unlikelie the instruments to
effect it. If the Kings friends should not march till the Assembly Zedekiahs
put on their horns, though his person be more righteous, we look his success
should be little 1. Kings. 22.
better then Ahabs, and the Independent Syrians pushed no otherwise then in
mockery and sport, while his loyal subjects should be too seriously scatered
on the hills as sheep that have no shepherd to enfold them. If the misbeliefe,
and contempt of whom you call the Lords servants, and the great danger, unto
which you make religion be brought, were the only losses sustained in the
last armies misfortune; let those workers of iniquity perish, that to the
ruin of souls, endeavor to repair them. What griese of heart, or
repentance, has showed it self in those persons, you say, contributed to the
spoiling but must mean, unless you condemn your selves, such as were forward
in promoting that design, whether in a politic hypocrisy, or (which can
hardly be rationallie afforded then) a misguided sincerity, will find it to
be poenitenda poenitentia, and a hard retreat from the guilt, and shame of that
botomlesse penance you praescrib'd them; unless their judgment be, as their
sin, the same with his who sold his birthright, as they theirs to their
liberty, for a morsel of bread, a poor inconsiderable temporal subsistence,
and may find no place of repentance, Heb. 12. 16.
though they secke it carefully with tears. Should all the Disciplinarian
hands be cut off, that were not held up to the agreement of bringing, by a
warlike engagement, the Sectarian party ^in England to punishment, David
Lesley would have but a left handed army, and His Majesty might rely upon
half his security as well for his crown, as his religion. They who, to gain
their arreares, so easily, I must say traitourouslie, parted with that Royal
person, are not to be credited as men so unanimouslie resolved, with hazard of
lives, and estates upon his rescue. Nor can any man, whose faith as not
resolved into air, and so, ready to engender with the faint breath of every
dissembler, believe that they would with such hazard make a long march to the
Isle of Wight, who would not, with less, conduct His Majesty, a day, or two
from Holmebie. But had you been at that trouble, and had Victory strewed roses
in your way, when you should have with pleasure regained the rich purchase you
went for, I preceive you had been at a loss for a chapman, and a great
uncertaintie where to dispose it until you had got one. For first you talk of
bringing the King to one of his houses to perfect the treatit, Then of bringing
His Majesty to London with honor, freedom, and safety, Next of bringing him
to sit in his Parliament with what honor, and freedom himself should desire;
And all these with in the extent of a few lines, which make three degrees of
doubt in the Saints, even after their debate of that matter, and universal
agreement, not to be quaestion'd. But let us suppose the last, and best of the
three in your purpose, and your avaunt Curriers on horseback to hasten it: I
see you are pleased to call them back with a quaestion, to which I pray tell
me where the Lords servants, or loyal subjects of Christ's Kingdom ever made a
like. Yet you shall have your answer by and by, though you show not the like
civilitie to the Bishop, who seems to state his quaestion thus. Whether when
the Parliament, and Army of Scotland had declared their resolutions to bring
His Majesty to London, etc. without conditioning for a promise of security,
for establishing (at best a controverted) religion, any legitimate full Church
Assembly ought, an illegitimate imperfect Clerical combination or Conventicle,
could in ordine ad spiritualia, declare against the engagement; call for the
Kings hand, seal, oath, to establisp a cut throat covenant to the ruin of his
person, and posterity, Religion, Laws, Liberty, Monarchy, and whatsoever
His Majesty was, by a solemn oath, and indispensable peswasion of conscience
obliged, with the hazard of life and Kingdoms, to maintain.

In answer to yours take this. The Parliament, and army of Scotland in
declaring their resolutions, etc. did what they ought, and that according to
your own principles, for you had the security of His Majesty's Royal word
[more then once] for establishing your Religion in Scotland, according to the
treaties that had been perfected between the two Kingdoms; If you intended the
like courtesy to England, your Parliament, and Army, had it consisted of none
but the Saints, were in no capacity to take it, being no part of the
principals concer'd in the benefit, nor deputed by England to capitulate for
it, Therefore their rescuing His Majesty's person out of the Sectaries hands,
had been the untying of his, and putting him in a posture to give; The bringing
him to his Parliament in London, where likewise your own Commissioners resided,
had been the seting him in sight of such as were to ask, and receive. Which is
the same kind of Logike you used in your answer to both Houses of Parliament
upon the new propositions of peace, and the 4. bills to be sent 1647. Where I
find your opinion, and judgment to be this, That the most aequal, fairest,
and just way to obtain a well-grounded peace is by a personal treaty with the
King: and that his Majesty for that end be invited to come to London with
honor, freedom, and safety. For which you offer 6. reasons. 1. The sending
of your propositions without a treaty has been often essayed without
success... Of those propositions this ever was one, To promise security for
establishing religion, And what better success could now be exspected? 2...
His Majesty's proesence with his Parliament must be the best, ^if not the
only ^remedie to remove our troubles. This remedy the Parliament, and Army
intended to help you to. 3... Without a treaty or giving reasons for
asserting the lawfullnesse, and expedience of the propositions to be
praesented, they may be aesteemed impositions. This proposition was to be sent
without a treaty, being neither lawful nor expedient for the many reasons His
Majesty had formerlie rendered. I remit the Reader to your paper for the rest,
and a great deal more of self contradiction (with somewhat worse,) which one
of the new English Lights has discovered in his answer. But Scot. Mist.
dispelled.
you shake of that like an old serving-man which had done your drudgerie in his
youth, and bestow your liverie on the Parliaments praecedent, which providence,
believe me, will save you but little. Your argument's this: The Parliaments of
both Kingdoms in all their former treaties ever pressed upon the King a number
of propositions, Ergo, The Church may desire the granting of one. I should be
too courteous in casting up the numerous account of their rebellions aequal to
their propositions, and keep out but a single unity for you. I shall choose
rather to tell you (cautioning first for the falsehood in the fundamental
hypothesis) That in cases of treaty the Church of Scotland is subordinate to
one, and therefore has no adaequate conditioning privilege with the
Parliaments of both, Kingdoms, especially in her peevith state of opposition
to both Secondly, This proposition desired, is the Trojan horse into which all
the rest of your treason's contrived, there being no fraudulent possibility,
Eccles^astike, nor Politic, which your Sinon Assembly has not cunningly
lodged in the belly, the winding entrails, the maeanders, of the Covenant.
Your clause in the parenthesis, when the bolts are off, and set at liberty,
tells us your meaning is this.

Let the Kings person, and children continue imprisoned, His Queen, Prince,
etc. banished, His revenue sequestered, his life be irrecoverablie endangered,
rather then those of the Scottish Presbyterian party (for the rest you can not
excommunicate out of your nation, though not in your covenant) should run the
hazard of their lives, and estates; Which was the true result of your debate,
and agreement. That you heard no complaint, when many of the thirty
propositions were pressed, was, because your ears were stopped against the
lamentations of every English Jeremic that wept for the slain of the I crem.
9^1.
daughter of his people, being such an Assembly as the next^verse describes
you. That an out cry, as you call it is made when only one proposition is
stuck upon, is because that one streightneth the bands of your wickedness,
lays heavier burdens upon the shoulders Isai. 58.
of innocence, and will not let the oppressed go free; And then Gods Prophets
are called upon to cry aloud, not to spare, to lift up their voice like a
trumpet, etc. This one was that, the yiedling to which would most of all have
violated His Majesty's conscience, and in reference to which he tells you it is
strange there can be no method of peace, but by making war upon his soul. Yet
let the case be disputable, and your tender excusable, at least in respect of
the time, which you say was not to be before His Majesty's rescue, but only
before his bringing to London, etc. If so, why was not His Majesty first
rescued, and delivered out of the hands of the Sectaries, and then your
proposition insisted on? The Bishop tells you the reason out of Humble advice,
Edenb. Jun. 10. 1648. viz. lest his liberty might bring your by gone
proceedings about the league, and Covenant into quaestion. All honest
Christians, and loyal subjects [though heathen] are of the same belief with
his Lordship, and whatsoever is their opinion in general, expect that you
prove the innocence, or justice of conditioning in this particular with your
confessed captive King. Concerning the absolute soveraignitie of Kings you are
other where answered, and if not satisfied, may find more work made you by
the famous Grotius, whose book was manifestly penned against you, and your
usurping brother-Rebells of England, and bids defiance to all your Didoclaves,
Buchanans, and Brutus's of both nations, till replied to. But away with your
counterfeit inclination to treaties, which you ever abhorred like death,
fearing in that peace, there could be no peace for your wicked selves, and
therefore gave public thanks to God for delaying your torments in the
disappointment of that at the Isle of Edenb. 12. May. 1649 postser.
Wight, as well by your plots, and devices, as by the Sectaries armedforce. The
holiness of this religious proposition was but the blind under favor of
which you stalked, and made safer approaches to His Majesty's murder, by
another, never hitherto repeald, immutablie designed; Nor are there many of
your public papers but forespake the destruction of his Royal Person, and
Family unless he submitted to the tyranny of your terms, and whether that
had quitted him as much from your judgment, as it assuredly had from his
supremacy, and crowns, may be guessed by the experiment he made in his first
too full, fatal concessions, which your own Parliament Acts have registered
completelie satisfactorie to the demands or desires of all sorts of people in
Scotland, which too indulgent paternal, goodness having turned into poison,
you regorg'd in his face by a foreigne invasion, and a base mercenarie
rebellion till, like evening wolves, you rent in pieces, and preyed upon his
person in the dark. The proposition I mean is that, for which one of your
sectarian Scotti^h mist Dispelled
brethren calls God, Angels, and Men to judge of your dissembling in pressing a
personal treaty, when His Majesty formerlie desiring one, you told him, There
having been so much innocent blood of his good subjects shed in this war by
His Majesty's commands and commissions,... you conceive that until
satisfaction, and security be first given to both his Kingdoms. His Majesty's
coming to London could not be convenient, nor by you assented to. What
satisfaction you mean, we know by your Discipline, which makes murder
unpardonable, and then I pray, what security could be taken, but his life? If
the granting this one proposition you stand upon, concerning Religion, and the
Covenant, had draw'n after it (as it seems by your silence) the satisfaction
for blood, and security for your peace. We may clearlie conclude your Religion
was Hendersons Prophecy Pap. to K. Chapter 1. Iun. 3. 1646. Esih. 4. 12.
murder, and no resting Canaan for your Covenant but in His Majesty's death.
Which in effect was thus foretold him by that bold Henderson. My soul trembles
to think, and to foresee what may be the event, if this opportunity be
neglested. He would not use, he said, the words of Mordecai to Esther, because
he hoped beter things. Whereas if his hopes faild him, we may well argue he had
used them, as you do, that survive him, in your endeavor that he, and his
fathers house should be destroyed.

But that you take confession to be the Doctrine of Antichrist, you Pre^yters
De^aring against Parliament debates.
might, without an ironie, put an ^ce to your own being criminous, to the
purpose, in declaring against the Parliaments debates, which if therefore
needless, and impertinent, because you think, or will have them thought to be
so, the Great Council you make but a subordinate Eldership, or Class to the
supreme Assembly of your Ki^ke. You are not always so modest as to keep your
distance from your English Parliaments affairs; We have for many years found
you like loving beagles, upon eithers concernment, so closely coupled in the
slip of your Covenant, as if, when the game should be lost upon eithers
default, you meant to be trussed up together for company. If it be proper to
have any King in Scotland, the proper place of debate about his negative voice
is as well a free The Kings negative voice proper to be debated in a Scottish
Parliament.
Parliament there as in England. If your laws admit not of that, they admit of
no King, whose Regalitie consists in that, nor has he any legislative
authority without it. It is the argument of your own Commissioners, who use to
fetch their Syllogismes from the Assembly, therefore you that made it are best
able to solve it. Their, or your, words are these. The quaestion is where in
his [the Kings] Royal authority, and just power does consist. And we affirm,
and hope it can Ans: to both Houses upon the new propositions and the 4. bills
1647.
not be denied, That Regal power, and authority is chieslie in making, and
enaciing laws, and in protecting, and desending their subjects, which are of
the very essence, and being of all Kings. And the exercise of that power are
the chief parts, and duties of their Royal office and function. And the
scepter, and sword are the badges of that power. Yet the new praeface compared
with other parts of these new propositions takes away the Kings negative voice,
and cuts off all Royal power, and right in the making of laws, contrary to
the constant practice of this, and all other Kingdoms. For the legislative
power in some Monarchies is penes Principem solum... in other... by compact
between the Prince, and the People... In the last the power of the King is
least, but best regulated, where neither the King alone without his Parliament,
nor the Parliament without the King can make laws... which likewise is clear
by the expressions of the Kings answers, Le Royle vent, and Le Roys' avisera;
So as it is clear from the words of assent when Statutes are made; and from
the words of dissent, that the Kings power in the making of laws is one of the
chiefest jewels of the cronne, and an essential part of Soveraignitie... somet
mes the Kings denial had been beter then his assent to the desires of the
Houses of Parliament... If I had transscribed all, the Reader had found the
argument more full. Out of this, compared with what you write, he may rest
assured, that in declaring at that time against the Parliaments debate (which
in truth was vindicating the Kings negative voice) you were resolved against
Regal Government. And whatsoever since you have published in a mock
proclamation, had your Covenanting brethren kept their station in England, the
Crown and Scepter, if not condemned to the coining house, had been kept
perpetual prisoners in Edinburgh Castle, whither with funeral solemnity you
have carried them; nor had there been any Royal head, or hand kept above ground
for their investment, while your Rebels could catch them, and procure sword,
or axe to cut them off. But to follow you in your tracke. If your laws
admitted not absolute reprobation, by a negative voice, they did praeterition
by a privative silence, which was all together as damnable to your Parliament
bills, they being made Acts by His Majesty's touch with the top of his Scepter,
and those irrefragablie nulled which he passed by.

In what follows, you show more ingenuitie, then prudence, by acknowledging
the ground whereupon you built your censure of Why opposed by the Presbyters.
this debate in Parliament as needless and impertinent, because of the power
it might put in the hand of the King, to deny your covenanted propositions.
But alas you graspe the wind in your fist, and embrace an any cloud within
your arms, and, like some fond Platonike, are jealous over that jewel you
never had. The King of blessed memory told you, when he spoke it to your
brethren, He would never foregoe his reason as man, his Royalty as King.
Though with Samson Eic. Bas. Chapter 11.
he consented to bind his hands, and cut off his hair, he would not put out
his eyet himself to make you sport, much less cut out his tongue, to give you
the legislative privilege of this voice. That you, at best, sit in Parliament
as his subjects, not superiors, were called to be his Counselors, not
Dictatours; summond to recommend your advice, not to command his duty. And
what pretty puppets, think you, have you made your selves for so many years
together to the scorn of all nations, when you so formallie propounded to His
Majesty to grant, what you profess he had never any power to deny.

What comes next is one of the many springes you set to catch cocks, but your
luck is bad, or you mistaken in your sport. I see The Kings affirmative voice.
if you were to make an harmony of confessions, you would be as liberal of
other men's faith, as of your own. What the belief is of the warner, and his
faction about the absolute affirmative voice of any King, you had heard more at
large if you had fetchd your authority from any line in His Ld. book for that
demand. Yet to keep up your credit (that you may not mount to no purpose). I
will bring one who, in spiritualibus at least, shall take off this sublimate
from your hands, and pay you with more mystery of reason then you have, it may
be, found in any other of the faction. Nulla in re magis ciucescit vis summi
Imperii, quam quod in ejus sit arbitrio quaenam religio public exerceatur,
Hug. Grot. De Imper. Pot. cap. 8.
idque praecipuum inter Majestatis jura ponunt omnes qui politica scripserunt.
Docet idem experientia, Si enim quaeras cur in Anglia, Maria regnante, Romanae
Religio, Elizabetha vero Im^rante Evangelica viguerit, causa proxima reddi non
poterit nisi ex arbitrio Reginarum. Going on in the Religion of the Spaniard,
Dane, Swede, he tells you ad voluntatem dominantium recurretur. Though I shall
only give you this quaestion in exchange for your language of concluding, and
impeding. If Parliaments have power ad placitum to conclude, or impede any
thing by their votes, what part of making, or refusing laws is to the King?

If the Bishop had challenged you for nominating officers of the army, you are
not without some such parrot-praters abroad as No such vicitie need be used
about mominating ofsicers. Chapter 4.
can tattle more truth then that out of your Assemblies. Nor need you be so
nice in a matter so often exemplified in Knox, and his spiritual brethren, who,
as appears manifestly by their leters, etc. Were the chiese modellers of all
the militia in their time, and His Ldp. having showed you when your pulpit
Ardelios encouraged the seditious to send for (though in vain) L. Hamilton by
name (and Robert Bruce dispatched an Express for him) to be their head. You
are here charged only with not allowing such as the Parliament had named,
because not so qualified as you praetended. That the State ever sent the
officers they had chosen, to do over all the postures of their souls, to
discipline either their men or affections before you, and to have your
Consistorian judgment of their several qualifications and abilities, is more I
confess then hitherto I have heard of, That you put it to the last part of
your answer (relating to no part of the quaeltion) was but to show what you
bear in your arms; That, as plain as you look, the cross on the top of the
crown is the proper emblem of your Assembly, whom no civil matter can
escape, having a birthright from Christ (or deputation at least) to overrule
both his Kingdoms upon the earth. Your Ifs and Ands about the necessity of a
war, in that moment of time, when the British Monarchy Lay gasping for life,
demonstrates The Presbyters destructive demurres.
what good meaning you had to praeserve the Person, or Government of Kings. The
constant proof of that integrity you required in the officers, must have been
the covenant-proofe of their rebellion, and wickedness, which, if blemished
from the beginning of the wars with no religious, nor loyal impression, no
sincere piety toward God, nor real duty to the King, had marck'd them out for
your Mammon Champions and Goliahs, men most likely to make good the interest,
you aimed at. This you were before practicing in England, where your Sectarian
Masters, that had set you on horseback, mean'd not to take your bridle in
their mouths, and be rid by your ambition to their ruin. Though you advised
them fair for it in your Papers March 3. 1644. requiring to have the officers
in their army qualified to your purpose... men known to be zealous of the
reformation of religion, and of that uniformitie. Which both Kingdoms are
obiiged to promote, and maintain, etc. As in September, the year before, you
told them you could not conside in such persons to have, or execute place, and
authority in the army raised by them, who did not approve, and consent to the
Covenant. Which I sinde by one, well acquanted with your meaning, Scot. Mist.
disp.
interpreted thus. You desired to have zeaious hardic men out of the North,
whose judgment about the Covenant, and treaty had concurred so as to
introduce your Nation to be one of the Estates of England, to have a negative
voice in all things, who would have pleaded your cointerest with the Parliament
of England, in the Militia of the Kingdom, disposal of places and officies of
trust, etc. Having faild there of your cointerest with the Parliament, you
strain here for your cointerest with the King, and would have the commanding
power of his militant Kingdom in their hands, that should have held His
Majesty like a bird in a string, which if he once stretched for recovering his
own just liberties, or his peoples, they could have plucked him in to clip his
troublesome wings, or cage him at their pleasure. The firmness of your
Covenanting Commanders to the interest of God, the Dispeller reveals in his
experience of their striking hands with hell, in cursing, and swearing,
plundering, and slealing, which might have sill'd the hearts of the people (had
your poison not been administered under the guilt of wholesome advice) with more
rational jelausies, and fears then any by past miscariages, of them whose
design at that time was very hopeful, and honorable, otherwise then as it
carried the fatal praetext of your Covenant before it.

To let the world know how long your mystery of iniquity has been working in
the bowels of the State, the Bishop alleges ancient The Reviewers
impertinencie in the success of the Spanish Merchants.
praecedents of So. years standing, from more impartial, more credible
relations then those in yourRomance, falselie entitled, An Historical
Vindication. What you shovell in here about treacherous correspondence with
Spain, is but an handful of sand without lime, adhaeres not at all to the
Inquisitours troubling the Merchants in their religion, nor that to your
admonishing the people to be wary in their trade; nor all at all to the truth
which the Bishop tells you was a Synodical Act prohibiting their traffic
under the rigid poenaltie As. Dund. 1493.
of excommunication, which, all the art you have, can not melt into a friendly
advertisement. Those of the Merchants, whom (you say) the Inquisitours seduced,
required no relaxation; Nor were the rest so persecuted as to be discouraged in
their trade, when they petitioned the King to maintain that liberty, where of
your spiritual chains had deprived them. Therefore all your courteous mediation
was but a disguised Imperious prohibition, whereby you checked the King, and in
ordine ad spiritualia took it for granted, you mated him, by the Merchants
weak submission, to your Censure.

Could we but once take it your Church in agrieving fit for her The
Presbyterian zeal for the 4. Commandment bypocritical cover for their breach
of the rest. Prove. 11. 9.
own so public profanesse in the daily breach of the 5, 6, and other
commandaments that follow, we would tolerate her zeal though not commend her
discretion, in her will worship, and superstitious nicitie touching the
violation of the fourth. But when we find her enlarging her conscience to
laugh at rebellion, murder etc. We guess her crocodiles tears to be more out
of design then compastion, and her mouth open for the destruction of them,
that are not, through knowledge [of her hypocritie] delivered. The profanation
of the Sabbath is not so in conjunction with a Monday mercate, but that a
Saterdays, journey, with some sixpeenie loss, or a Sunday nights watch, and
labor might separate them. Your holy supplications were leven'd with
Iudaisme, which had not the Bishops in Christian liberty eluded, as your
advantage might lie, the Parliament might have next been importund to
Dositheus's folly, to erect a rediculous statuarie Sabbath in your Country.
Though I hear all were not so hard hearted as you make them, but that Patrike
Forbes Bishop of Aberdene did translate the mercates (which are none of the
least) in his diocese to wednesday, as the provincial records of that place
will testify, From the obstruction made Recreations resections to fit us for
spiritual duties.
by the rest to your petitions, you cannot infer, what you have formd in a
calumny about their doctrine, and example on that day. What sorts of plays
(which were not all if you reckon right) the most emminent Bishops either used,
or tolerated, were such as consisted with, and spirited, the Dominical duty of
public and private devotion, wherein they had the authority and praecedent of
otherguesse Christians, then any scottish Assembly praecisians, and seconded
with reason, such as hitherto, you never seriously, and solidelie answered. If
they endeavored to make the Sunday no Sabbath; they did it in a far better
sense, and on better grounds then Rob. Rob. Bruc'es motion to alter the Sabbath.
Bruce could have changd it, as you know he endeavored, to Wednesday or
Friday, and Lent from spring, to Autumn, on purpose to privilege the pure
brethren' in the singularity of their worship, and free them from a profane
communion (though not in the time) with Papists, and Praelates. If the Bishops
had a design to advance their Kingdom by such old licentiousness, and
ignorance as this innocent liberty might be feared to reduce; We know to whom
the Presbyters somewhere are beholding, at least for their Sabbath policy,
though The Bruc'es Sunday toleration not so large as the Reformed Church's
abroad.
they think good to enlarge it, beyond Episcopal sports, and plays, to
public mercates, to brewing, fulling, grinding, carrying beer, corn, dung, and
indeed what not? except opening whole shops, and wearing old clothes; For
redressing which I do not find your compassionate prayers to god, or advice
to them, (which I remember you used) so effectual as to make any amendment, or
gain any proselytes to your circumcised severitie. Therefore, till you
praevaile I pray let the Bishops be troubled no more with what all your flintie
faced malice can not appropriate to the times, or places of their government.
What has been granted since you cast them out of the Parliament, was by them;
that had no more power in one sense to give then in another to deny. Yet had
all your demands meant no worse, then you spoke in that about the due
sanctification of the day, you might have let them sit still, have had the
Souters your friends reconciled, and made a better mercate of those Royal
concessions, which met too far (unless your gratitude had been greater) your
unlimited reguests.

For the challenge that follows, The Bishop knows so well the history The
monsirous impiety of the Presbyterians in prosecusion of their ends.
of that time, that he is feign to leave a mass of horror unstampt in his
thoughts, conceiving it incapable of any due impression by his words. And
whosoever shall look upon Scotland at that time, shall find it to be nefandi
conscium monstri locum, a place that had bred such an hideous monster, as
neither Hircania, Seythia; nor any of her Northern sisterhood would foster.
Not long before, when the Queen was great with child of that Prince, to whom
you profess so much tenderness soon after, not valuing the hazard, of that
Royal Embryo, you hale her Secretary, her principal servant of trust from her
side and murder him at her door; Because the King would not take upon him the
praerogative guilt of that cruel murder, according to the instructions you had
given him, you find him useless must have him too dispatchd out of the way,
which was done, though not by the hands, by the known contrivance of Murray in
his bed, his corpse throw'n out of doors, and the house blow'n up with
gunpowder where he lay. To get a praetense for seizing upon the young Prince,
you make the Queen and E. Bothwell (because her favorite) principals in the
murder of his father, possess the people with jealousy; of the like unnatural
cruelty intended to him. Having got the Royal infant in your hands, you not
only null the Regencie of his mother, vou work all the villainy you could
think on against her person in his name, and make him, before he knew that he
was borne, act, in your black or bloody habits, the praevious parts of a
matricide in his cradle. In order hereunto the Queen (as you say,) was declared
for Popery, which requires some Presbyterian Rebel glossarie to explain it,
there being no such expression to be found in the language of any orthodoxe,
loyal Christians in the world. In this conjuncture of wickedness, that no
other way of safety was conceivable for your Protesting, and Banding religion,
but a continued rebellion, no other to make sure of the infant King for your
prisoner, the Kingdom your vassal, but by such a grand combination in treason,
may be granted at sight of your several praeceding desperate exploits. For this
end your General Assembly might crave conference with such of the secret
Council who were as public Kebells as your selves. That your advice was mutual
whose end and interest was the same, is not to be doubted, saving that we may
observe such godly motions to spring first from the virtuous Assembly, as you
confess touching this. Your call was in much more have then good speed, and
your considerable persons convened a great deal more frequentlie then they
covenanted. Argile, that did, slept not well the next night, nor was he well at
ease the day after, till he had reveald your treason to the Queen Knox tells
you, That the people did not join to the lords, and diverse of the Lib. 5.
Nobles were adversaries to the business. Others stood Neuters, The slender
party that subscribed your bond began to distrust, were thinking to dissolve,
and leave off the enterprise a confessed casualtie gave up the Victory, with
the Queens person, unhapilie into your hands. This mixed, and extraordinary
Assembly had little sincere, 1560.
or ordinary manners to call that a Parliament, which was none, having no
commission nor proxy from their Sovereign and to make it one chief article
in their bond, to defend, or endeavor to ratify those Acts, which their
Sovereign would not, when the lord St. John carried them into France. But they
persisted in the same rebellious principle, professing in terminis that tender
to have been but a show of their dutiful obedience And that they begged of them
(their King and Queen) not any strength to their Religion, which from God had
full power, and needed not the suffrage of man etc. They are Knox's words,
which, were there no Lib. 3.
other evidence, are enough to convince any your aequitable comparers. That the
just authority of Kings, and Parliaments in making Acts, or laws is in
consistent with the Presbyterian government. Which is the sum of the
controversy in hand.

No secret Council, especially, if in open rebellion, can empower an Assembly
to issue letters of summons when their Prince's public Assemblies have no
power to summ^n contrary to the Kings proclamation.
proclamation disclaimes it. The greatest necessity can be no color to that
purpose, Though, what srivoulous ideas of great necessities the Presbytery can
frame, we may judge by their late procedings in our time. Your religion, and
liberties seem then to have been in no such evident hazard, as you talk of; if
they were, you may thank your selves, who had the Royal offer of security to
both, the Queen only conditioning, and craving, with tears the like liberty
of conscience to her self The life of the young King was daily, indeed, in
visible danger from the hands of them, who had murderd his father, and ravished
the crown, or Regencie from his mother, but who they were I have told you. In
such an ambiguous time men of any wisdom, other then that which is carnal, and
worldly, and so folly before God, would have betaken them selves to their
prayers, and tears; men of courage, and piety would have waited the effects
of providence, and not so distrust fully, deceitfullie peic'd it with their
own strength. From such lovers of Religion, as contest, covenant, depose,
murder; as rage, ruin, proscribe, excommunicate, Libra Reges, and Regiones
Domme Cantic. 8. 6. 7.
Good Lord deliver Kings, and countries from them all; Fortis est, ut (...),
dilectio; jura sicut infernus amulatio, Their love is strong as death, in the
letter: their jealousy is cruel as the grave; The coals thereof, are coals
of fire, which have a most vehement flame; No waters of widows or orphans
tears canquench it; No floods of innocent blood can drown it. It Is not
unlikelie the Praelates resolution may be, That when a most wicked company of
villains had deposed two Queens and killed one King; endeavored to smother
the spotless Majesty of a Royal Son with the foul guilt of their injury
done to his Gracious Mother, which they cast enviouslie upon his name: And
after these to draw a Nation, and Church, under the airie notion of a true
Religion, never establishd by Law of God norman, into a Covenanting Rebellion:
And a free kingdom under a legal Monarchy into an illegal oppressive
tyranny. That in this case there ough to be a general meeting of Church and
state, to vindicate Majesty, laws, liberty, and provide remedies against
such extraordinary mischiefs. That the Presbyterian Scots never were, nor
will be of this opinion, I take your word, and believe it. Take this supplement
with you That E. Bothewell Contradi^iion.
should kill the King to make way for Popery, and Murray before endeavor to
hinder his marriage with the Queen, under a praetense of a design by that then
to bring it in (which history relates) will cost some pains to reconcile
Errors and abuses in Religion, the The Assemblies can reform only according
to canon, not the canon.
ordinary reformation whereof is referred to your Ecclesiastical Assemblies,
are such only as appear to be peccant against the ordinary rule or canon by
just authority established; But that the Canon it self should be alterable at
the pleasure of subjects in a combined Assemblies declining their subordination
to a superior power in King, and Parliament; and making them selves not only
absolute to act, but supreme to praescribe, is contradictorie to all law, and
aequitie nor can any necessity countenance it. What you find wrong in the
Church, according to your method, must be no other, then that, which had been
formerlie decreed in some of your Assemblies, which must implie a fallibilitie
in their application of the rule; This error when you go about to rectify
from the word of God, you may chance to have no clearer evidence then your
praedecessours, nor the people assurance, that your eyesight is better. So
that, for ought they know, one blind Assemblle may lead another by the hand
and both with their followers fall into the ditch. Beside It may so hapen, that
religious Acts, answerable to the word, may be offensive to some wicked
Assembly, that have not the fear of God before their eyes, These if they have
the power, to be sure they want not perverseness to abolish, for which I find
no cautionarie restraint in your discipline. For, after you have praetended to
rectify if upon your dissembling petition a following Parliament refuses to
ratify that you have power to abolish, and establish what you please, I find
every where confessd by your faction. And this indeed, as you say, is your
ordinary method of proceeding in Scotland, but in no other Reformed Country,
who every where attribute to the Magistrate an Architectonike power in the
Church, and but a ministerical, or instrumental to any Synod or Assembly,
Videlius, and other your brethren of note on this subject making you
Bellarmines papists, though when your Kings, stand publikelie in opposition
against you for the maintenance of their right, it is quaestionable whether his
most plausible reasons will as well privilege you in his doctrine. The legal
method of England you know well enough is otherwise, and therefore can not ad
mit of your Discipline without altering the fundamental laws, the most
essential part of gouverment in our kingdom.

The three foolish, and unlearned quaestions that follow tell us you 2. Tim. 2.
23. 24.
are in the mind to gender strises, rather then according to Saint Paul's
counsel, follow righteousness, faith, charity, or peace. To the first I
answer. Christians of old, before the Emperial laws for paganism were
revoked, Ancient Assemblies reversed no Civil laws. Eusebius.
were more or less hindered from embracing the Gospel, according to the zeal,
rigor, remissness or clemency of the Emperors that reigned. Those that
obeyed not their commands, suffered their punishments, resisted no powers,
reversed no laws. Nay, its as high a trial as can well be instanced, when
Maximilian, and Diocletian publishd an edict to demolish their Churches, and
burn their Bibles, because one was found that in great in dignation tore the
paper in pieces, being condemned to die, all Christians that heard it approved
the sentence, and commended the justice of the pagan Magistrate in his
execution. To the second thus. The ecumenical and National S^nods of the
ancients Reformed no haresies ^ith out the Emperor.
had ever the praesence or authority of the Emperor, without which they
reformed no haeresies nor corruptions in religion. Who by ratifying their
canons did cancel all the laws of state, which did protect those errors When
this could not behad but with praejudice to religion, the Emperors them selves
being draw'n in by the haeretikes to their party, they only declared their
different opinion, submitted to censure, were disspersed in exile, nor did they
countermand by the terror of excommunication, and cursing, but when summond by
the Emperor to rectify any abuses in the Church. This may be seen in the time
of Constantius addicted to the Arians. To your third I answer thus. The civil
laws in Britanie, I mean for our part in it, whereby Popery was established,
were annulled by the King, whom we make absolute in that power. If the
reformation begun by Hen: 8. be thought clogged with any seeming violence,
sacrilege, or schism (which some ties on his conscience Henry the eight's
reformation the occasion not the original of ours.
that required a more deliberate solution, and some indirect passionate
procedings give the Papists a kind of coloural argument to object) I see not
how you are justified that imitate it, nor we bound to sustain the
inconveniences that attend it, who may fairlie make the reign of K. Edward our
epoch, and from him, in his first Parliament, fetch our authority for the
change. On your side of Britain, I find naught but a continued rebellion in
the reforming party Scottish Presbyterians from the beginning s^hisme.
(as you mean it) till K. James grew up to a judgment of discerning and some
resolution of restraining: Nor till that time (though I hope well of many
thousand persons under a Presbyterian persecution) can I in reason quit the
praevalent part of your Church from a succession in schism. For Germany and
France I have no more to do at this time to be their judge then their advocate,
seeing no where His Lp. joining with his brother Issachar in impleading then
for rebellion. All you can logicallie collect is such a major as this. They who
reform according to the Presbyterian Scottish met^od by abolishing Acts of
Parliament in a surreptious or violent Synod, by framing Assembly Acts for
religion, and giving them the authority of Ecclesiastical laws, without or
against the consent of the Magistrate cheat the Magistrate of his civil power
in order to religion. If you will needs be assuming in behalf of your brethren
in Germany and France, they must put you to prove it, or quit them selves of
your conclusion as they can. In the mean time I see your pasture is bad that
you turn your catell so often grazing abroad. For the fool in the next line
you send to the Bishop, I guess it may be his mind to have him returned by
the creature that caries None but they have declared Bishops and ceremonies
unlawful.
his brother Issacha^ burden, expecting a wiser answer by the next paper
Mercury you employ; which can not be without bringing to light that law that
praeauthoriz'd the Ministers protestation against the Acts of Parliament 1584.
And that Act of Parliament since the null Assembly of Glasgow yet standing in
force that made Bishops and ceremonies unlaw full; The former, beside the
contradiction it caries with it, devolving the legislative power upon the
Kirk, which according to you can keep the Parliament in awe not by petitioning
but protesting, and so ratify or null all laws declared at her pleasure; The
latter, beside the long perseverance in sin it imputes to the Latin and Greek
Churches, as well before as after the corruption in either, the late warmness
to all Reformed Churches abroad, which never hitherto in any National Assembly
declared regular Episcopacie and ceremonies unlawful, outdoing the very Act of
abolishing which his Majesty in Parliament ratified with reference to no
unlawfullnesse, but inconvenience, and retracted that too in his too late, yet
seasonable, repentance afterward. Though for what His Lp. objects, were there
too after Acts of Parliament to ratify the substance of what the Kirk
repraesents, no one of them thereby justifies the circumstance of Ministers
mutinous protesting against laws made in hours of darkness, upon what
misinformation soever, which is treason against man and excusable by no formal
obedience toward God. This for the Bishop to publish, being one of the
Governers of that Church which strangers plot what they can to seduce into the
same rebellion, with their own, is no contemning of law, but discharging his
conscience and duty in his place.

By the next story the Bishop will gain a more perfect discovery of your
resembling those grievous revoiters in Jeremie, who walk with slanders, being
brass and iron; Who bend your tongue like a bow for lies, and Chapter 6. 28. Chapter
9. 3.
yet, when the true case is known be accounted by Solomon but a fool for your
labor. In King James's minority who stole his name (though they ner had his
heart) to act by it the most unnatural oppresion of that most gallant Queen his
virtuous and gracious mother, Capt: I. Siuart vindicated.
to murder and banish many noble assertours of the reformed orthodoxe religion,
and laws, appears upon public record in your story. This one Capt. James
Stuart very nobly with standing your divellish temptations to have him
maintain a distructive dissension at Court with Esme Stuart. E Lenox, a
faithful subject and most deserving favorite of the Kings, and improving that
little interest you helped him to, to a more Christian conjunction in love and
loyalty, and a double vigilancie over the Kings person exposed too often to
your treacherous designs, is unlikelie to have any better character at your
hands then what you commonly give to persons of such sidelitie and honor. His
advancement to the titles and estate of E. Arran and Chancellar of Scotland,
was partly in reward of his guardian care over him whom somewhat else beside
sickness had made unfit for the management of either. Yet were not these taken
by force But on free session, then desperate; to whom if the King were nearest
in blood (not to mention a third which your zealous professors commonly find
him) his Majesty had a double title to his lands, and a power undisputable to
dispose of the Chancellars office at his pleasure. What beside Capt. James's
unheard of oppressto is (which dirt his zeal for religion contracts when it
passes through the unclean channel of any Presbyters mouth) troubled the
Nobilities Patience the reader may find somewhat more truly and impartiallie
related not only in the Apocriphal histories of the two Rt. Reverend
Archbishops of Canterbury and Saint Andrews; but even in the Canonical
tradition of Philadelphs Vindicatour, who praemiseth some repulse your Church
Delegates had about their querulous petitions; A difference that fell out
between E. Lenox and Gowrie about some point of honor, to revenge which he
calls Murre, Glame and diverse other disquiet discontented spirits into a
confaederacie, whom you call a number of the prime best affected nobiiitie,
which improper title he more ingenouslie declines in a piece of Rethorical
ignorance, putting his hand more modestly before his eyes, as loath to look
The treason at Ruthuer.
on their sinful rebellious demeanor. Qualcscunque fuerint plerique eorum non
multum laberabo... qualis quisque little suerit nescio: applies the blind man's
speach' in the 9. of Saint John. to the authors of the miracle in this change;
And beside the mere boast and no violence you rejoice Saint Iam: 4. 16.
in, confesses diverse of the Kings servants were wounded among the rest
William Stuart, the news whereof brought Capt. James thither. Who was not
chaced away by their strong breath, but clapped up into a castle by their power,
the Kings guard being before removed from him, and His Majesty taken by Gowrie
and his conspiratours into custody; The E. Lenox banished into France, where
with in a short time he died, whether by grief principally, or his sickness,
he defines not, He adds, That the Heads of this faction sent the Abbot of
Paslet to your Assembly at Edaenburgh for their approbation, who what soever
they did afterward, at that time only thanked God for deliverance (viz from
the imminent instice of the law to which most of their Members were liable)
durst not approve the business, or appear to do it at least; put up a
non'sense petition to God, praying him it were well done after it was done, and
whether well or ill then unalterable by their prayers, or indeed by devine
power, whose omnipotency is not limited when denied to make good moral
contradictions, to pleasure an hypoeritical Assembly; He speaks nothing of
the Kings sending to his Council or judicatories to declare the act of the
Lords convenient and lawdable, for which he expected no reasonable man's
credulity nor patience, unless so far as to spit it back into his face:
Nor yet of His Majestics entreating the Assembly, but of their sending
Delegates to him. The answer he gave them, if any, or such as the Vindicator
has helped us to, is much different from yours, and though not extorted by the
terror of death, which may well be suspected by the successive treasonable
attempts of the same Gowrie and his son afterward, gives little approbation of
the fact, being only his acknowledgement of a blessing from God for
delivering his person and the Commonwealth from mischief, by which doubtless
he meant the happy praeservation of his life. So that I again appeal to your
aquitable comparers, what historical truth we are likely to have of your
penning; when seting one Disciplinarian brother against another, without
consulting unprinted records, we can confute you line by line among your
selves. The letter His Majesty sent to Q. Elizabeth was forced. Regem invitum
compulerunt, says Camden, where by he allowed no more that act for good
service, then he would have done a thief for taking but his purse, when he
might likewise have had his life, But to proceed. Capt: I'ames shortly after
crept not in, but was called, Revocatur Aranius says your brother. Therevenge
(whether obtaind by him or no) was but the justice of the law, executed with
little severitie upon any, but moderated by the mercy of a gracious King, and
tenderd to all upon submission. But traitourous Assemblies giving universal
allowance for possible misfortunes, had ever an aftergaime of treachery in
reserve. Therefore the Ministers running at this time into a voluntary exile
was upon the apprehension of their guilt, and diffidence, even in the word of a
King for their impunitie if not rather a design to make His Majesty secure,
and so to praepare for the treason at Striveling that followed few months
after, where not only Capt: I ames was chased away, but the Kings life
endangerd, for which Gowrie very justly paid his own. These their actions
were ratified by no Parliament but a party, nor stand they justified by any
butsuch as were the actours. The action at Ruthuen being with the advice of the
three Estates Assembled in Council judge and published to be treason in
December 1583. And not only M. Baylie declared a Traitor, but all they that
disclaim not his book which justifies that treasonable attempt, by Act of
Parliament 1584. cap. 7.

If the Bishop had traced your Assembly rebellions by their annual succession,
and not jumpt from the year 84. to 48, he might have made it 58. before he got
up to your Articles of Striveling. You have not hitherto kept such even pace
with His Lp. as that you can with credit say your self weary. If you speak
in good earnest (as I observe you in some journeys short winded) I despair of
your company in the 64. years travel still behind, for which I thought to
call upon you hereafter. In the mean time, since I meet with you at
Striveling, I will take you by the hand, till I bring you in sight (supposed
you are not peevishlie bent to walk blind fold) of the praecipice you tend to
in your entrance upon the justification of that article which referres the
work of Reformation abroad in England and Ireland to the determination of the
General Assembly of your Kirk. If you wet your foot by the way you may
thank your self, the Bishop opens no sluice, only turns that stream of
choler upon you, which you on the least occasion let go like a torrent upon
the Pope and his Conclave of Cardinals at Rome. The sraud used to allure you,
if any, was pia sraus, a devout slight to bring you into the concent of the
primitive Christians, and the violence offered by the English praelates was
only with the sufferance of heaven, which they S. Macth: 11. 12.
thought peradventure to take by the force and fervencie of their prayers,
which they often put up for your conversion from schism, and for your
communion in religion with themselves. If a god'lie The King can not be said to
invade the Presbyter: Consistory.
Kings conscientious command, with the mature advice and fre subordination of
the Reverend Fathers of your Church, be no less then invading your
Consistory, the Bishops flood of choler ran somewhat too gently in as king
you whether old Edinburgh were turned new Rome, whereas he might have, in
reason, demanded whether your Presbyterships be not so absolute as to
barracadoe your brazen gates, and not suffer him that has the keys of hell
and death to come in. Whatsoever Rev: 1. 18.
was the yoke and by whomsoever imposed, between that and your contented
compliance (without any violence or invasion no quaestion) with the earnest
desires of the well affected in England, you should in honesty have left some
vacant room for a more ingenuous impartial hand to insert the time of taking
of this yoke from your hard necks, with the several Acts of Pacification that
followed it; And that clause in the public Act of Parliament wherein the well
affected in Scotland professed His Majesty parted a contended King from a
contended people; And then have put it to your ae suitable comparers what
travail and pains it concerned you to take in purging one the leaven of
Episcopacie and in the English and Irish Churches, when you should have been
purging the leaven of malice out of the Scuts. The managing of which great and
good work became such a Parliament to instruct, and such an Assembly to
undertake, who study that destruction which, Prove: 24. 2. c. 27. 20 Tert: De
Praeser: advraeser haeret. c: 42.
like hell is never full; and so the eyes of such men are never
satisfied...have magis gloriam Captant si stantibus ruinam, non st jacentibus
elevationem operenjur, quoniam and ipsum opus little non de suo proprio adificio
venit, sed de veritatis destructione. The Arminianisme and Popery whereof
Doctor Laud Arch-Bp. Lauds Armenianisme and P^perie the doctrine. of scripture
and the Fathers.
stands convicted, has had several appeals to Scripture and Fathers, which is
as much as you can show us for your Creed; his Tyranny, to the laws and
highest authority in our Church, aequivalent with the most your discipline can
praetend to A conviction of these I dare promise you will not stand long with
out an answer. In the interim, while your Northwinde is set to drive away the
first and the latter rain dropped down fron those clouds of heaven, the
Apostles, and Prophets, and successors to them both, to make good Solomon's
similitude, the Bishops angry countenance is seasonablie, though ineffectu
allie bent against your backbiting tongue. Your discoveries are your unskilful
Prove. 25. 23.
mistakes of rocks for firm land; your disappointment delays of Gods work,
who will in his own time accomplish it, And though too great a number in the
Christian flock follow such as you for their bellwether or leading ram, they
will fly as fast from you when they epsy you in your proper shape to be a
wolf. Photinus was served so who had a great deal more wit, learning, and
eloquence to seduce them. Nam erat and ingenij viribus valens, and doctrinae
opibus excellens, and eloquio praepotens, says Vincentius; yet this doom
befell Advers: hares: cap: 16.
him soon after; quem antea quast arietem gregis sequebantur, cundem deinceps
veluti lupum fugere coeperunt.

What is answered by you before, is replied to and aggrovated. The two stories
that follow have those authors whose truth is more current with you then
Spotswoods, though his hereafter will show it self more valide then yours or
any others whatsoever. The former is penned at large by John Knox, enough in
conscience to render him the author of that sedition here mentioned. Hesayth
not Ariote under praetense of taking Priest at Mass.
his zealous hearers understood of a Priest at Mass and immediately brake in,
but consulted how to redress that enormitie, and by agreement appointed those
to wait on the Abbey who, you say, with violence brake in and sez'd upon his
person and Mass clothes. That Madam Baylie, your Namesake, Mistress to the
Qucenes Dountibures as he scoffinlie calls her posted out with deligence to the
Comptroller the Lard of Pittarrow...cried for his assistance to save her life
and the Queens Palace; That he took with him the Provost and Baylies; That
Armstrong and Cranston were summond to sinde surety to underlie the law the.
24 October. for a fore thought felony, praetended murder, and for invading the
Queens Majesty's Palace of Halyrud house, and spoliation of the same. That he
writ to the brethren in all quarters, requiring their assistance Abetted by
Kno^ and improid to a rebellion.
on the day of their trial. That his letter was intercepted and sent to the
Queen, whereupon he was summond before the Queen and Council; That when he made
his appearance. His clients the Brethren of the Town followed in such number,
(...) the inner Close was full and all the stairs even to the chamber door
where they sat; That he confessed his v^cation of the Queens leiges etc. That
if in that he had been gniltie, he had often offended since he came last in
Scotland, demanding (Sawcilie) what vocation of Brethren had ever been to that
day unto which his pen had not served, That he told the Queen, If her Majesty
complained that this was done without her Majesty's commandment, so had all
that God had blessed within the Realm from the beginning of this action,
meaning the Presbyterian Reformation; That he was a watchman both over the
Realm and over the Church of God gathered within the same; by reason whereof
he was bound in conscience to blow trumpet publikelie so often as ever he saw any
appearance of danger either of the one or of the other. This Act, thus related,
the Bishop will have (what you can not disprove) to be a huge rebellion, not
only in the Actours, but also in John Knox, who was praesent, if not in
person, by full consent and approbation. To break open the Royal Palace to
bring any delinquent to trial is according to no law but what your Rebellious
Assembly has framed. That this Priest saying Mass within the Liberties of
the Court did contrary to law (the Queen having ever reserved that privilege
to her family) remains yet to be proved. You Vit: Eliz. (...). ^563
did the like to the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, which Camden tells you was
permitted by law, and, though you had Murrays authority for it, accounts you
no better then Rebels for your pains... Servidi Ecclesiae Ministri, Moravij
authoritate suffulti, vim facerent impune sacerdoti, qui missam in aula (quod
lege permissi^m erat) (do you mark it) celebrarat.

John Knox's confession (which I gave you under his hand) may be the harbinger
to lodge credit enough to the next story that follows in any man that knows
what superstitious observers your Assemblies have been of all the principles
and praecedents he gave them; Nor need you be so coy in taking upon you here
the defense of their Convocating the people in arms, which you are forced to
do other where (as well as you mince it into god'lie directions and
conscientious advertisement) and upon less colorable occasions approve it
every where when done. Though Mr. Spotswood's testimony can not be refused in
the particular evidence he gives in, yet I Will be confined for once to your own
brother in Evil that confutes him. When Assemblie's summoning the people in
Arms upon the trial of Popish Lords.
his Grace relates the Ministers commanding the people to arms. Your brother
plays the Critike upon the word, but grants the matter in controversy between
them, and justifies it from the danger that was at hand from the Popish Lords
whom he makes Conspiratours with Spain. Hortate sunt (nam jubere aut imperare
non poterant) quod ^um in tanto periculo constitutae essent and respublica, and
Ecclesia, illus, vitio vertendum non est. When his Grace says planilie, The
King praefixed a day for their trial, the menacing libells put up in the name
of a national Synod, the tumultuarie meeting of the faithful deferred it, and
made the only remedy a necessity of his remitting their exile. Your brother
denies not one clause of all this, but only moderates the terms, and
enlarges in some particular circumstances that aggravate the fact, viz. That
they appointed a fast this I hope was done by the Assembly) That they moved
the King to appoint a day for their trial, and the Barons those of Perth not to
admit them, which advice or injunction they followed till they had received
letters from the King, which because they obeyed the brethren took pet and
arms for the defense of religion (by whose advice let any man judge) That the
King commanded the Conspiratours to submit themselves in a small number to a
judical proceeding. That upon the 12. of November they met at Edinburgh; The
Conspiratours plead by their lawyers etc. Propound their conditions; The King
declares in a speech the inconveniences very likely to follow if the Lords
were not restored, That an Ast of oblivion was voted, which offended the
brethren. What Seditious Sermons and actions ensued appears undeniablie in
your story. Let this be compared with the Bp of Derries relation. That the
King was forced to take arms, come upon a fatal necessity by your rebelling
when your importunity praevaild not. How far he pursued them. What acts of
grace he afterward vouchsafd them you there fore conceal because it confutes
what your imperfect history imports.

CHAPTER VIII.
The divine right of Episcopacie better grounded then that praetended in
behalf of Presbytery.

HAd I any hopes to keep you in your wits when you were revived, I would here
sprinkle a little cold water and pity upon your faynting spirits, who any man
may see are giving up the ghost by your grasping and catching at what you find
within reach, and not liking the looks of that spirit which appears ready at
hand to conduct you, would have, you care not whether, Antichristian Bishop or
Papist to secure you. His Lp. having remonstrated at large your exorbitand
power, here summarilie shows how by the divine right you praetend to, this
sore is incurable, your selves incorrigible, and how Princes must necessarily
despair of recovering or keeping thairs, while Christ's Kingdom is yours, and
you have Christ's Scepter in your hand. The stream of divine Rhethorike and
reason he brings for it, you and your Company, whom the prophet Isai.
Describes to be a troubled sea that can not rest, whose waters cast up mire
Isai. 57. 20
and dirt, hope invisiblie to swallow. To which if Mercurius Aulicus must be
initled Let Britannicus be more properly to yours, whom I have often heard to
be a Common lawyer, but must now take him for some classical divine, since you
have graced him so much as to serive most of his matter and language into your
book. How unhappie soever you make the Bishop in this challenge, as in the
rest, he caries fortune enough in his argument to confute you.

-- Misero cui plura supersunt.
Quam tibi faelici: post tot quoque funera vin^et.
Those of his brethren who stand for the divine right of the Discipline of the
Church, do it chieflic in reference to that power of order and the distinction
they find of Bishop from inferior Presbyters in the Power of order and
jurisdiction.
text. They that draw in the other power of jurisdiction, relate only to what
they find practiced by the Apostles, or by God in them, going under the name
of excommunication and the keys How many circumstancials must pass for
substancials, when determind by the judicatories of your Church, and be made
adaequate in divine right to the general rules to which you reduce them need
not here to be numberd, being scatered every where in this discourse, and very
obvious to the Reader in your story. But in answer to what the Bishop objects
of geting both swords spiritual and temporal into your hands, the one
ordinarily by common right, the other extraordinarily; the one belonging
directly to the Church, the other indirectlic; the one of the Kingdom of
Christ, the other for his Kingdom in order to the propagation of religion and
(to let the Papist a lone whom, out of what mystery I know not, you very
often, me thinks call to your assistance) I pray name one of his Lp's learned
brethren that ever writ for it what concessions have passed from the elder
Edward and Elizabeth Praelates of England, or what from the later Erastians, as
you style them, in diminution of the jus divinun^ of Episcopacie desends not to
the jus humanum in your sense, there The midd, le Apostolical right of
Episcopacie.
being^ middle Apostolical right participant of both, enough to constitute an
immutabilitie in their order, whatsoever change their jurisdiction may admit of
at least such as they find aequivalent to the communicating of women,
baeptizing of infants, observation of Sunday; which when you bring arguments to
unfixe, you may with greater confidence treat against Bishops wherein those
friends His Lo. has about the King are so perfectly instructed that they
laugh at your silly stra^agems to pervert them being such as, if at any time
they repraesent to His Majesty as you earnestly desire, will thereby, no
quaestion confirm his pious resolution in the continuance of that holy order
especially since the maxim you build upon, That conscience is bottomed only
upon a divine right, they find ruind by Saint Paul in his doctrine Conscience
not bottomed only upon a divine Right. Romans 1. v. 2. chapter
and practice, who convinces the heathen upon the right or principles of
nature, and argues from the testimony of conscience they had sufficiently
bottomed upon the work of the law written in their hearts; Nor had he ever
converted any of the nations without divine revelation antecedent, I mean in
them as well as in himself (which had made less effectual and pertinent the
ministry of the Gospel) if no moral arguments had obliged their consent. How
far this is applicable to Episcopacie (though were it not, it is to your
argument against it) I am not here to discuss only intimate I may that in
proportion it is possible as much to a sacred, as civil, Monarchy (I mean
not coordinate) and the later, had it not the law of God has the language of
nature importunate to commend it I will trifle with you no farther in this
matter, but lay down this conclusion which you may take up to what advantage
you can. That in a thing Alterations unsate and sinful while conscience is
doubtful.
ambiguous, such as you here seem to give, if not grant, Episcopacie to be,
since no command of God nor warrant from scripture enjoynes or tolerates the
change: since no Apostolical nor Christian Church for so many hundred years
before that single city of Geneva began it, since neither that nor any other
besides ever acted or at least publikelie avowed what change you demand in the
many particulars that have been, and shall be, inserted in this dispute, to the
inevitable subversion of Regal government; to the confusion of Christian
subjection in the enjoyment of just liberty; to the plain praejudice of
Parliament privilege in three dominions; to the seting up of much spiritual
and carnal wickedness; some grave reverend Divine might modestly speak a
word in season and say, His Majesty's conscience can not at the best but doubt,
and doubting ought not by the law of God and rule of reason to resolve on it.
Which indeed is the substance of his Royal Fathers printed profession. That he
found it impossible for a Prince to praeserve the state inquiet, unless he had
such influence upon Church men and they such a dependence on him The reasons of
K. Ch 1. against a change. Peace.
as might best restrain the seditious exorbitances of Ministers tongues etc.
And this is only to be had in that government, which was one bottom for his
conscience... That since the first age sor 1500, reares not one example can be
produced of any sotled Church, wherein were many Ministers and Congregations
Antiquiti^. Universality.
which had not some Bishop above them, under whose jurisdiction and government
they were. This was another bottom for his conscience. To which such a divine,
as I spoke of might add (with a due reserve of all humbly revence to, and
most unshaken confidence in that Holy Martyr, and his most pious hopeful
successor our gracious sovereign now living.) That he who for any politic
end suggested, or necessity most fond'le praetended of the subtilest
presbyterian of you all, shall adventure to take himself off from this
bottom, when Iudaisme or Turcisme (some part of your mixture) shall be alike
plausible praetended as more advantageous to his purpose, may be feared to
befound not well settled upon Christianity it self, but fall from it and throw
away one or both Testaments of Scripture, which upon the universal The
considerable approach of Church discipline to doctrine. Paternal government.
tradition of the Church (as the other upon the Cathoike practice of the same)
he first rationallie received as the word of God, though afterward he found
other motives prompting a belief of it to be such, which at last be had
superinduced by (what too many vainlie praetend to) the instinct or plerophorie
of the spirit, His Majesty likewise found most agreeable both to reason and
religion that frame of government, because paternal not magisterial etc. Which
was a third bottom for his conscience. Nor did he think it any point of
wisdom or charity, where Christians differ;...there to widen the differences,
and at once to give all the Communion with Christians.
Christian world (except a handful of some Protestants) so great a seandal in
point of Church government etc. of which wisdom and charity, the gifts of the
spirit of God, he made another very good botome for his conscience; Let Mr.
Baylie read the rest of that most excellent divine chapter, (...). chapter 17.
and answer it if he can.

The maine ground of the Bishops discourse being wilfully mistaken by the
Reviewer, his structure is weak about the Warners conscience. And the Kings
advantage. His cordial beli^e of the divine right of Synod^ Ius divinum of
Presbytery srustrates all treaties, excommunicates all Christians threatens
all Princes.
and Presbyteries, together with that of the Reformed Churches, which the
Bishop shows to be different, may come from a private spirit that misinformes
them, and then is no good interpreter of Scripture, nor any sure praecedent for
Christianity throughout. Their strict and inseparable adhaerence to his error
(beside that it antidates all treaties null, without an effectual complinance
against conscience and honor) excommunicates all the world but themselves, and
excludes them from all hope of fellow ship with this new select society of
Saints, who, could they multiply into a number large enough to fill the circle
of their ambition, and had they every one a drop Isai. 40. 23. 24. The
Reviewers perverting the Bis^ops doctrine.
of Scottish rebellious blood in their veins, would no longer labor the
conversion of Kings, but take Gods angry work out of his hands to bring their
Princes to nothing... and be the whirlewind themselves to take them away as
stubble.

He that looks not through Mr. Baylies glass of vanity and lies, can never
be able to view the Bishop clasped so close with the elder Praelates impairing
the divine right, nor then, with the consequence he makes, about the legal, or
expedient mobilitie of Bishops. Therefore as the ambition, greed, revenge; so
the dissimulation in conscience is his, who can not but know what texts
himself uses to c^te for the divine right of Presbytery, and what the Bishop
expresselie says, that the same may with much more reason be alleged for
Episcopacie, and more consonable to the analogy of faith. The agreement of
sundry Praelatical divines with Era^us is here impertinent^ mentioned. What
correspondence the Bishop holds, with them has been too often all-readie
acknowledged, and maintaind. Mr. Baylies urgent, illogical inference obliges
the Bishop neither in ingenuitie, nor reason to untie the bonds of the Kings
conscience, which his own assures him God has bound, if not by the hands of
his son, by those of his Apostles and their successors through all
Christian, ages and Churches. Nor can his Lp, from the principle you press,
demonstrate any security to His Majesty from offending God in the change. Nor
yield satisfaction to his doubts. If Erastus's Royal right (which you so often
have inveighd Erastus's Royal right abused in a Sophisme.
against) may be used as a sophisme to delude the King into your presbytery,
(...). I pray, by your favor, let it stand as it is, a better argument to
confirm him, if he needs it, in Episcopacie. Yet that either here, or
otherwhere this Royal right is induced by His Lordship to ratify the order, I
say not to actuate the Jurisdiction of Bishops, I can not find upon my
reviewing, and must therefore desire a point by your oculat fingar to direct me.

Were not the Presbyterians more obstinate in resuming their errors, then the
Bishop forward to recapitulate his proofs, his Lp. had spared a good part of
this chapter, though the receiud rules of method required it. Weak, and
naughty are hackney answers, which, if spurrd too often, and reason holds not
up by the head, are likely to lay Presbytery in the dirt. Your Judgment of
his revenge is according to your practice, who, poor, impotent creatures, like
worms, or flies, by corruption, and filth support an useless corpse to defile
that hand, that crusheth you to the death. The praelatical integrity makes
good the praesent disadvantage of their fortune, and their evidence in proof,
before any aequitable comparers, will praeserve still the principate in,
dispute. Major est [sinon fortunae] ratio, quam Sen: De Clem: l. 1. c. 20.
ut tali solatio egeat, minifestiorque vis quam ut alieno malo opinionem sibi
virium querat. Your Canterburian challenges were but Scottish Iigges made
only for mirth to a rude multitude in confusion, the one very inconsiderable
in music, the other flat, if any thing, in the harmomie of truth. If the
principles of Praelacie unavoydablie bring back the Pope, the practice of
Presbytery unquaestionablie goes before him, and makes The consequences from
Episcopal principles not such as praetended
his Papacy hold it by the train. The Patriarchate of the ^est, and primacie
of Rome flows never out of the fountain of Episcopacie, but when some
ignorant Presbyter is turning the cock, or tampering with the spring.

Those English Praelates, that so freely gave away the Patrimony of Saint
Peter etc. were some singular Executours of Constantinus Donation; yet in that
nothing so liberal to the Pope, as the Presbyters are covetous, and griping the
common inheritance to themselves who, since his refusal that had the profer in
possession, take the mock spirit at his word, fall down and worship, and then
under the S. Matthew. 4. 9;
counterfeit of dominion in grace, entitle them selves not to Italy al^ne, but
to all the Kingdoms of the earth.

What difference there is in number, or nature between the ceremonies
Difference between us and Rome bout ceremonies.
they us d, and those in Rome will appear best by comparing their ritual with
our rubrike, and Canons. The ornament of sacred historical pictures, the name
of altars, and the adoration of God in uniformitie before them, have the
ancient Christians innocent praecedent to commend them, when commanded, or
Countenanced by our superiors in the Church, and to vindicate them inus from
the superstition, and idolatry you impute so liberally to Rome. When the
Praelates, and Papists cope in the controversy there are several other
ceremonies they stick at. That these are the worst, as religiously put in
practice by the Bishops friends, requires more then your old see saw to
confirm it. Adoration of, or to the altaris that, which I never heard professd
by their mouth, nor read yet dropped from their pen. For me, let them that own
it recant it, and if none such befound. Let the mouth of him Prove. 10, 31. Real
Praesence and corporal disserent. Hist. Mot.
that speaks lies be stopped, and the sroward tongue be cut out.

The real praecence of Christ in the Eucharist on the altar, as I take it, was
never denied by our Church, a corporal never asserted by her, nor any of the
Bishops friends, that I have heard of (though the 21. objection against our
Liturgy in your history of the Synod os Glasgow implies it.) The
justification they held was fetchd far beyond Tren^, and if they that went
for it were not able to distinguish between Justification. S. Matthew. 13^45 Free
will.
Saint Paul's works and Saint James's, they were very unfit to trade forthat
pearl, bad merchants for the Kingdom of heaven.

Their free will was held no paragon of nature, but a privilege by grace,
which delivered them from the fatalitie of the curse, restoring them in some
measure to a liberty of choice; And, unless you will fetch back Tatians
error, make one God for the law, another for the Gospel, so long as the ten
Commandments oblige us, we have Deuteronomy. 30 19.
as well as the Israelites of old, heaven, and earth for our record, that life
and death are to this day set before us, and, by the merits of Christ, the
grace of having them in the free election of our will.

Their final apostacy was seldom, or never entitled to Saints, or, if Final
Apostasice.
so, with caution enough to praevent calumny. They asscribed ever an
infallible praescence to God, an immutabilitie in his knowledge; But to make
him so peremtorilie, antecedentlie, spontaneouslie, irrespectivelie
praedestinate a certain number of men, called Saints before their resurrection
from sin; so irresistiblie operate by his power, as to praevent all
possibility of backsliding, offending, or, being fallen, forcibly raise
them, reenstate them in native innocence, and his favor; they found consonant
to none, dissonant from diverse positive texts, in, or inferences from
Scripture. such as these. Let him that stands take heed lest he fall, which
excepts 1. Cor. 10. 12. Phil. 2. 12.
no more the last hour or moment of life, then the first in the exercise of
reason... Work out your Salvation with fear, and trembling. (...) importing
an earnest endeavor unto the last against final apostacio, not impossible; And
the reason in the next verse A quaestion about David's case.
implying an hazard of the energie of grace, which only supports a Saint from
his fall. I demand yea, or no, a direct answer to this. Whether if a Phineas
had come and taken David (...) in the act with Bathsheba, the point of his
spear had been assuredly blunted, or his hand held by an Angel from heaven.
Whether, if so, this extraordmarie miracle had not been wrought in order to the
accomplishment of somewhat praefix't to the oeconomie of Gods Royalty upon
earth in his person? Whether the like case or capacity can in such be
reasonably supposed incident to all that you call Saints, and what security
they have from all casualties, all attempts in the very moment of sin to
destroy them? The general promises can be no protection in such cases, and some
it may be, are not so general as to be made applicable to all, which, well
scanned, incline to the peculiar concernment of them, to whom they were made,
and of whom only they seem to be ^ean'd. But in points of this nature
whatsoever the Warners friends have avowed, your exception against them is the
same with that against the express words of the Church, in the Assembly at
Glasgow 1638 draw'n from what she professd. That insants baptized have all
things necessary to salvation. This you may Rubrike in the consirmation.
take as the sum of that which the Bishop knew to have been with much
moderation, and reason often answered to your sore challenge. Your slight
replies thereunto being indeed but squibs, and crackers for children to sport
with, had not the arms of sinful men, and the Kings artillery been
rebelliouslie used, as a more unanswerable argument to force them.

The following position His Lp. nowhere will dispute, nor does laugh a^. That
Christ, as King of his Church, has appointed laws for, and governers of the
same. Who, and what these are, in the general Saint Paul has left Christ as
King of his Church appoints laws etc.
in his letters to the first Christians, which they, and their successors have
kept for us that come after. He takes you for usurpers, and tyrants, who cross
to these laws, for pride, and filthy lucre, make your selves not only Lords
over Gods heritage, but commanders of subjection from Kings 2. b. Disc, ch 1.
Pro Rege Regum, and Domino Dominantium H. Grot.
presbyteria nobis, and Synodos supponentes. The consequence hereupon, That
Acts of Synods must be Christ's laws, where Synods make themselves Dictatours
of his pleasure, and repraesentatives of his person, is no other folly, then
what the Logical rules of Relatives praescribe us, which, if your Sophistry
decline, I must refer the Reader to the like expressions so frequentlie used
in your public papers, in the several contests that Knox had with your Queens
and their Councels in defense of your discipline; And; to come somewhat nearer
in your very praeface before the book it self, where your Reformed Kirk is
called the spouse of Icsus Christ, the rules of her discipline in the language
of Scripture The Lords laws and commandments...the heavenly proportion of
divine discipline; And at last compared to the book of Gods covenant, that lay
hid in the Temple. Under the name of which Discipline, we are admonished, is to
be understood. Beside the two books, the Acts, Constitutions, and practices
agreed upon, and recorded in the Registers of the General, and provincial
Assemblics etc. And a brother plainly asserts, That your Discipline in the
general (which we deny to have any other authority then your votes) is as
immutable, as the Scripture.

I find you now here such a Master of Rhethorike, and language as Hane none
magis licet Ecclae mutare quam mutare licet ipsam scripturam V indic: Eplae
Philad.
to take your judgment in comparing of styles. If the Bishop has borrowed the
Jesuits invectives, or any from the Pagan philosophers, he could not beter
bestow them then on you, that are neither good Protestants, nor Christians. His
declamations against your noveltie will be regarded by such as take
universalitie, and perpetuity for two discretive marks of Christ's Kingdom,
and government, which must not be limited to a rebellious schismatical Centurie
in one Country. The antiquity, you boast of, is founded upon as great a
mistake of the Gospel, as was the sadduces of the law, you both err not
knowing the Scriptures. Yet, that being your plea, I will urge the Bishops
argument no By whom his Seepters is to be swayed.
farther concerning the change, and difformitie of your discipline (which may
be proved in particulars not twice romov'd from your essentials themselves) but
appeal with you to Caesar, who calling to his Council the Primitive Fathers
the most public spirits, most unbyassed Interpreters, may, by the tributarie
assistance, if his Majesty please, of as many B^hops, or Doctou^s, as
sectarian Presbyters, after a fair schelastike discussion, discern the truth,
decide the controversy, and, according as he finds Christ's scepter was swayed
among Catholic Christians, by deputation of one part, or other, Vincent.
Lyrin: advers: haeres cap. 14.
abolish the Rebel Usurper at his pleasure. But Annuneiare [or imperare]
aliqued Christianis, Chatholicis praeter id quod acceperunt, nunquam licuit,
nusquam licet, nunquam licebit. To declare, or command a belief of divine
right, in that which has not been received in Gods Church, never was, no where
is nor, will it at any time be law full.

Your dearth of matter renders you taedious in the rest of the paragraph,
English Episcopacie out done by the more for ward Presbytery.
and the course fair wherewith you entertain your reader, flesh, blood, and
limbs of an English Bishop, makes you suspected here to have been at a stand,
to have laid your spiritual scribbling aside, till you went to market, and
fetched these carnal expressions from the ^ambles. My Lord of Derrie, and his
friends, in citing authority, and pressing reason for their order have dealt
so farilie, and wrought so effectually, as for all the stripping your sleeves
and the other hocas pocas tricks that he tells you of, you will find no
cleanly conveyance of your Presbytery into the heads of any your judicious
comparers, nor will their ears be chained by your brazen hypocrisy to
maintain it. Your too curious anatomy of English Episcopacie, touching which
you interrogate, will only countenance them in a demand, not otherwise
intended of a Scripture warrant for Scottish Presbytery, as such,
disciplining, excommunicating, deposing, I shall do no wrong if I add what I
prove, justifying and praising God for the death, if not the murder of Kings,
renouncing the name, but acting every one a double part of a lord in
Parliament; not only voycing in, but imperiously overruling all Acts of
State, all elections of principal officers, in order to conscience, for
praevention of scandal, and keeping a lower Commission Court in every Town,
and parish; forcing every Bayliffe, and provest to be your creature; A
Presbytery bold'lie ordaining without a Bishop, and gulling the people into a
foolish conceit of Gods call in them, when it is their lying spirit that has
praeposless'd them, For let the people call, or praesent whom they will, if the
learned (the privilege of B. Discips. 4. head.
which title every covie of Dunces challenge to themselves) judge the person
unable of the regiment, he is set aside, and they forced to take (without
violent intrusion they tell them) whom the superintended Council offers to
instruct them: A Presbytery exercing all jurisdiction without any appeal from
themselves; A Presbytery feeding their flocks like swine with grain, and
hu^kes, such divinity, as every brewer, or hogheard can help them to, never
leading them through the g^een pastures of the ancient, learned, and devout
Fathers, nor to any other waters of comfort, but such as the very fountain
whereof the foot of schism, or rebellion has troubled. This is Scottish
Presbytery in practice and such they would have it in law too, if they could
with all their Scripture collusions but once corrupt. His Majesty's judgment,
or by their sharpe-pointed swords, and two edged tongues affright him from a
well grounded resolution, into what his Royal Father esteemed it, a faint
servile, ungodlie, and unkinglie consent.

The treasure you call, for has hitherto had God for its defense, who has
made known, and distributed those talents in Scripture, The treasure thereof
to be found as well before as after the years 800.
which maintained the little family of the Church, and discharged the itinerant
Gospel of that time. The greater mine has been often discovered by them whose
divina virgula has stouped, and put them upon the search of the vein that
carried the Episcopal government through the 800. years of your account. Your
soon-shot bolts in many frivolous quaestions have been better feathered with
many wise men's answers, and for all the horned impudence you hold out, returned
very often upon your heads, one of whom I shall send you Dr. Ierm. Tailor.
to, who (not to derogate from the happy endeavors of many others as well of
the learned Laity, as Reverend Clergy) has alone anticipated, and fully
with much acuteness, and judgment answered almost every particular you
object. Showing that Christ himself has made the office of Apostle or Bishop
distinct from Presbyters; Given them power to do some offices perpetually
necessary, which to others he gave not: Asof Ordination, and confirmation; And
superiority of jurisdiction; Bishops, by virtue of their office, more then
called, observed as Lords, in a more sublime sense, then you mention; And
commended to the service of Kings; Saint Chrysostom, and others employed in
Embassies; Saint Ambrose a Prefect, and Dorotheus a Chamberlain to the
Emperor; Many of them Councellers to Princes, and Judges as well in ordinary
secular affairs, as Chanellors in extraordinary by appeal; Treasurers at
least of the Church revenue, and undergoing what ever civil charge the
conscientious favor of Princes put upon them, which was not in gradu
impedimenti ^lericalis; Bishops with sole power of ordination, and
jurisdiction, otherwise then as they thought good to call into their
subordinate assistance, or deputed Presbyters in their Dioceses. Of officials,
and Commissaries I think he makes little mention, because he bends his
discourse against all interest of Lay elders; yet I do not think he would
deny that Civilians, such as are our Officials, and Commissaries, might be
instrumental to the Bishops, especially having some learned Presbyter
authorized in cases, to which the others lay property extends not; Bishops,
when necessity may require, using solitary ordination, which is good in
nature Can. 2.
rci, as may be taken for granted by that Canon of the Apostles, which as it
enjoines no more then one Bishop, so makes no mention of any Presbyter, which
it had quaestionlesse done, if of absolute necessity to the business; Bishops
ordaining not with the fashional, but canonical assistance of any two
Presbyters that they please, by choice of their, own chaplains or others,
where are many, or taking any two that chance otherwise to be near; Bishops
principal pastors of their whole Dioceses, and when commanded, or countenanced
by the King to wait at Court, not obliged to feed their flocks in their
persons, which they do by many learned, and religious proxies, themselves in
the mean time feeding by word, or sacrament, or ghostly counsel, the great
shepherd, whose Royal soul is worth 10000. of the peoples. All this in effect,
and a great deal more then your Parkers, or Didoclaves could have answered,
has this one learned Doctor defended, as known long before the Pope gave
over to say his creed, which he did surely, when he became the Antichrist you
call him.

I could go up yet once again, and help you to a third turn from the top of
your demands, Show you that the Warner, and his friends give The Praelates
still of the same mind they were.
the King the same assurance, that erthey did, that what they stand upon as
unalterable in their order has Scripture, and Antiquity for its warrant* That
upon the conversion of England to Christianity, the Ecclesiastike government
there constituted, was not Antichristian; That a Bishop there is not a Lord in
Parliament by virtue of his office (as it may be to resolve spiritual doubts he
ought to be) but by Declar. B. 2. Dang. Posit.
the Baronie and call which the favor of Kings has annexed unto it; That in
Scotland, when it was decreed that Bishops should have no voices in Parliament,
these your selfe-denying men desired of the King that such Commissioners as
they should send to the Parliament and council, might from thence forth be
authorized in the Bishops places for the Estate; That not many protestant
English Bishops have been High Treasurers, not many Chancellars, some that have
you have little reason to find faultwith; That they are not bound in law to
devolve all jurisdiction etc; That all which in practice did it, are not to be
condemned, where they found able and honest men to exercise it in their names;
That those, which err must not praejudice the care and deligence in government
of the rest; That solitary ordinations were very rare, and therefore not to be
objected as so common; Nor did half the Bishops live at Court, nor most that
did half their time. All these particulars could I enlarge on, but that I
believe the Reader satisfied with the execution done before, and has some what
else to do, then to stay to see you stripped.

In what follows you take a great deaie more, then is given you, naming that a
donation from the Court divines conscience, for which Not the Court but City
Divines divest Bishops.
the City Divines, chiefly of Edinburgh, and London, forced the temple of God
by such sacrilege to furnish the two tabernacles of robbers, that then
prospered too well in England, and Scotland. That Royal Saint that, upon, this
most impious violence, yielded, up so great a portion of his Ecclesiastike
inheritance, the Bishops avile employment, Archbishops, Archdeacons, with the
etc (which might have been better spared) did it in angusto comprchensus, not
upon any compunction of conscience. Sed difficulter, sed subductis
supercilijs...and vix exeuntibus verbis, And had not his paternal affection
prompted him, to what your unnatural disobedience little deserved, he had given
you not only panem lapidosum, as Fabius was wont to call a gift very hardly
bestowed upon an hungry beggar, but pro pane lapidem, without Sen: De Benef.
lib. 2 cap. 7. S. Matthew. 7. 9. 46. 17.
our saviors censure, a stone instead of that bread, which was never ordained
to stuff the insataite stomach of every gaping Rebel that called for it. Yet,
whatsoever you had, was, you know, but for a triennal experiment, which being
exspired, in the year of liberty, that was to succeed, according to Gods
pattern in Ezekiel, if you could then praetend no better title then you had
done, it was to return to your Prince, and the inheritance of such an
inseparable right to be his sons, who of your adversaries gave this
unseasonable advice I know not, nor who have acknowledged, and recanted for
errors those divine truths ordained for peace, but encountered with troubles,
and their abettours exposed to susteime the envy, and obloquie of the world.
Therefore alas its in vain for you to invite them to come nearer, to hang
out like a dead cat in her skin, unless you mean to have every one of them
moral the rest of the fable with an (...). But to leave off speaking The
Reviewers detestable ingratitude.
in parables, I desire the reader in plain English to mark the base
ingratitude of an unworthie Presbyter. In that, when a most ingenuous
peace-desiring Prince (for him he means when he speaks of his Praelatical
adversaries) invaded by audacious importunity, encompassed with all external
visible necessity, placing himself upon the very pinnacle of Christi-an
charity, shall yield all that the softest, gentlest Casuist can indulge (and
that upon such conditions as, how easy soever, the perfidious contractours
little think to make good) he must be argued with upon the ominous advantage of
hi^ own gratuitie, and praetended from his adventurous kindness to be
demonstrativelie convinced to give up the rest of that which rebellious
license, schismatical singularity, and degenerate malice have now so divested
into a new creature, as neither law, custom, nor honor can call that English
Bishop which religion instituded and reformation confirmed. But a crou'd of
guilty conjured malefactors presses shame and the proverb to nothing, so
that ingratum si dixeris nihil dixeris. Seneca knew it who had studied the
point and experienced the practice. Pudorum tollit multitudo peccantium, De
Ben. lib: 3. cap. 16.
and desinet esse probri loco commune maledictum. But to send you back some of
your own logike and language; If this naked bird which you so pleasantly play
with, be a new creature because the feathers are plucked, then you must confess
that old creature revested with those Euaugelical beauties and Royal graces
which once it possessed, to be that known true English Bishop that in honor,
law, custom, if not in conscience (which I need not suppose) is to be
inviolablie maintained, when it shall be made to appear, as it may very
easily, and has been very frequentlie, that such an order not much
differentlie fashioned and habited, ever was and ever is to be in the Christian
Church,

To make good the mutual toleration indented for between your sectarian
brethren and your alltogetheras sectarian selves, you closely decline the
warners confidence which avowes those texts of Scripture you wrest against
Bishops, with as much color of reason and more truth the Independents may urge
against Presbyters, being resolved, since you find they can make you their
province at pleasure (if not command a transmigration of your Euangel) to argue
no more against them then to fight. The triumph you make in two painted
Syllogismes is very improperlie placed before the victory, where though you
ride like a George on horseback in a pageant, you will pass for no beter then
a dumb show, and with your wooden lance be mistaken by none, but children and
fools, for that primitive armed Saint that killed the dragon. If you cast not
your texts in a couple of better molds, your workmanship will bear as The
texts of scripture against Episcopacie discussed.
little the image of Gods word, as your selves do of the reasonable men that he
created. Were His Lp. at better leisure his great promises would reengage him
in more necessary employments then answering every silie Presbyter in his
folly; but his Acolythus and servant (if not because he has taken up so much
of the similitude allreadie) will for once, and it may be oftener, follow
Solomon's advice Prove. 26. 4. and 5.
in the next verse, seeing you so very wise in your own conceit.

The first text you are meddling with is Ephesians: 4. 11. whence your imaginary
argument, not to be denied adoration, is this.

Maj: All the officers that Christ has appointed in his Church, for the
ministry of the word, are either Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors or
Doctors;

Mi: But Bishops are none of these five, Ergo.

You plead custom for the free unquaestionable passage of your major, which
you must give me leave to obstruct, first excepting against the improprietie of
your terms (being such as may evacuate your argument) the Ministry of the
word, when the Bishops discourse is about the regiment of the persons to whom
the word allreadie is ministered, Secondly, demanding to have it under Saint
Paul's hand, whether the offices he mentions of Apostolate, prophecy etc were
by Christ's institution for the personal perfecting of Saints in a Church
established, and not as the word seems rather to signify. Pros ton
Catartismon toon hagioon for jointing or knitting new Saints to the Church, new
members to the body of Christ in the propagation of his gospel, so aedisying
the body of Christ by the work of the Ministry, which in the next verse
seems to end in the unity of faith, that is the general conversion of nations
to Christianity. Thirdly, whether this enumeration of the Apostle's be
universal, to which (...) find more particulars added 1. Co. 12. 28. and among
them dynameis and Kyberneseis. Powers and governments, the former of which
(that you may not cavil about superinfused gifts) he makes as much personal,
or persons, as that of Apostle, prophet, Teacher, verse: 29. Besides that he
expresselie calls the Elders of the Act. 20.
Church of Ephesus Bishops, and tells them they were instituted by the holy
spirit, which we know came down to fulfill the promise by the mission of the
son, and so they must pass upon account as officers appointed by Christ.

Three fifths of your Minor thus you prove. Bishops are not Apostles,
Evangelists, nor prophets, because they are confessed extraordinary and
temporary, Bishops ordinary and perpetual. To which I answer. First, That
Bishops Beshosp are. Apostles. Lib. advers. haeres. cap. 32.
are Apostles in their ordinary power of ordination and jurisdiction, though
not in their extraordinary of working miracles, speaking with diverse tongues
etc. And this Tertullian has said above 1300. years since, who, arguing with
the haeretikes about succession, bids them turn over their records, and show
that their first Bishop was an Apostle, or Apostolical, because personally
ordained by one of them. This the Apostolical Churches could do, as that of
Smyrna shows Polycarp, because placed there by Saint John. That of Rome
Clement, because ordained by St. Peter. And such Bishops as these he calls
Apostolici seminis traduces. If they be Apostolical grafts, good Mr. Baylie,
from what tree think you were they taken, and of what may they, without
arrogancy, bear the name? Other of the Ancients called Timothy Bishop of
Ephesus an Apostle, among whom what enterfeering there was of these two terms
you may read in Theodoret upon 1. Tim.

Jn the like sense may they be said to be Euangclists, (as well as in May be
called Evangelists.
the Revelation they are called Angele) who praeside over the preaching of the
Gospel, and publication of it to them that have not heard, Euangelion and
Kerygma being the same. H. Grot. Proleg. ad Matthew.


And they either are, or should be, Prophets, in one kind according to Saint
Ambrose, Scripturas, revelantes, the ablest interpreters of Scripture, or
speakers of mysteries in the spirit to aedification, Should be prophets.
exhortation and comfort, though not foretellers of things to come. Nam
quicquid latet, sive id futurum est, sive praesens mysterium di^itur. In 1.
Cor. 12.


The reason why your adversaries pitch upon the fourth is, to decline your
trivial objections against the other three. H. Grot. Why Pastors.


Your syllogism that labors to prove Bishops no Pastors has no doubt but a
certainty of falsehood in the major which your argumentum a paribus comes some
what improperlie to make good, you having spoke of a confessed imparitie but
just before. But for once a bargain no bargain pactum non pactum sit, non
pactum pactum quod vobis lubet. It would be a rare invention, surpassing
Aristoles Logike, if, without a reserve, you could get a conclusion to creep
out of a single proposition, for take it on my word your luck is bad in
majours, which whether you play at even or odd are all pariter falsae sick of
a disease, and this here left desperate without any remedy to recover it.

No Apostle, you say, is superior to an Apostle. This is contrary to what one
Walo Messalinus (whom under another name you mistake to Apostles superior to
Apostles.
be your friend) has frequentlie asserted. That they were primi and secundi,
majores and minores, The second and less subordinate in spiritual power to the
first and greater. This he gathers out of Theodoret and others. The greater he
explaines to be the twelve, the less, those deputed by them for teaching and
governing. Nay, he discovers a third order inferior to them both, of which was
Epaphroditus, subordinate to Saint Paul, who himself was but minor Apostolus,
being none of the twelve. So that here being three degrees, I tell you from him
what I might from others, or with them rather collect from the text, That an
Apostle is superior to an Apostle.

As much might besayd for Evangelists, whereof four were principal, or, if
not, it is because they were by their office of the lower Evangelists
Coadjutours.
class, or Coadiutours to the Apostles. Such were Titus, Timothy, Apollos
etc. Saint Hierom says all Apostles were Evangelists, but not all Evangelists
Apostles. And so likewise that all pastors were Doctors, but not vice verse.
The learned Grotius, That Doctors, were Bishops or Archbishops rather, the
same with Doctors Bishops. haeres. 75.
those called Metropolitans afterward. Pateres Kai didascaloi are Epiphanius
titles for them. To prove majour and minor prophets under the new Testament is
needless till you answer what I have brought about Apostles, or strengthened
the majour in your argument which I absolutely deny. And besides remit you to
a learned Doctor Dr. Tailor Episcop: assert.
who proves the word Pastor to be the Bishops peculiar among the Ancients, and
frustrates that imparitie from which you argue.

Your second reason out of Saint Matthew and Saint Paul has a little
Philosophical Soul and form in the majour, but no divine one in in the minour,
and so, according to your similitude in the moment No power of Ordination in
the Presbytery,
of removal or separation must perish. The first text 1. Tim. 4. 14. puts no
power more then approbant or assistent of ordination in the Eldership, and a
Bishop is as much a Presbytery and no more a Presbyter (I mean in your sense
of diminution) then Saint Paul, who seems to make that act of ordination
solitary and personally his own 2. Tim. 1. 6. And the Greek Scholiasts say
the Elders here were Bishops, excluding interminis all presbyters from that
power o^ gar hoi Presbyteroi echeirotonoun ton Episcopon say both Theophylact
and Oecomenius. For the word which you will needs have to be classical not
personal, perchance somewill say it may denote the order, or office, the
Episcopate they mean, and be put figurativelie here for the single person, of
the Apostle, comparing these words, together meta Epitheseoos toon cheiroon tou
Presbyterion, and dia tes epithescoos toon 2 Timothy 1. 6.
chciroon mou. But let it be what it will, the power of ordination must
continue in the Bishop, so long as Christians keep to the New Testament and
Fathers, and fetch us not a fifth Gospel, or some newer Apostle from Geneva. No
power of Jurisdiction in the Church.


That the second Saint Matthew. 18. puts the power of jurisdiction in the Church
is gratis dictum, and your authority not so great as that your autos ephen.
will be able to carry it. First therefore you are required to prove, that
excommunication, the act of jurisdiction you mean, is here at all intended;
and not rather no more then the three degrees of fraternal correption, the
highest whereof is that elegsis enoopion pantoon, a rebuke before all. 1. Tim.
5. 20. Vt qui non potuit pudore Salvari, Salvetur opprobrijs says Saint
Hierom, he says not damnetur or eijciatur censuris. That he which could not be
saved by private shame might by more public reproach. Secondly, That the
Church here was a judicial Assembly called to that purpose, or if met to
other, that a formal process was brought before it; And that they were not
rather some greater number then the two or three witnesses, upon what occasion
soever met together, which may very well be called Ecclesiae with out the
signal meaning of the word. Coram multis Lib. Musar. keta Koinon Justin: and
tunc multis dicendum est in Saint Hierom. Nor is it likely a deliberate
judgment in Court (into which a Christian Congregation, converted) should be
after process in hazard to be slighted or neglected by one Member delinquent
ean paracouse. Nor that to be such which relates rather to the person of the
plaintiff then Judges estoo soi. Let him be unto thee... Thirdly, If it be
such a Congregation or Church as you would have it, whether the complaint were
to be repraesented to them in general, and not rather in their hearing to their
superintendents or praesident above them. Epi toon tes Ecclesias proedroon
demosiseoson to ptaisma says Theophylact. Fourthlie, That sit sicut Ethnicus
and publicanus, Let him be unto thee as an heathenman and a publicane is
undoubtedlie a sentence commanded to be pronounced by those superintendents or
that Church; or an injunction, rather then permission, to the party injured to
have no farther familiarity or friendship, to have no more to do with him
then with heathen and publicanes, a voluntary declination of whose company
was no scandal to the charity Christians professed, and any civil office out
of common humanity left arbitrarie, and not censured if tend'red. Fiftlie,
whether binding and loosing verse. 18. Be asserted Confirma. These. lib. 4. c. 5.
with reference to this Church, and not rather to the Apostles, as your friend
Erastus will have it, or more probably to any party against whom the
trespass was committed. Potestatem tribuit Apostolis says Saint Hierom. Vu
garmonon hosa lyousin boi hiereis eisi Celymena, De Verb. Dom. hom. 15.
all' hosa kai hemets hoi adiketentes and Theophylact. And si Fratrem habes pro
Ethnico and publicano ligasti illum in terra: si correxeris fratrem, solvisti
eum in terra Sainr Austin, which seems to be the John Morell excommunicated
for this doctrine.
proper meaning of the place. After all which I expect you should make some
apology for your brethren abroad that in the year 1563. Sept. 6.
excommunicated John Morell the Frenchman for writing this doctrine, burned his
book, and interdicted under a great poenaltie the reading any copy of it that
might escape them.

The third 1. Cor 5. appears not evidentlie to put the power No power of
jurisdiction in a Company met together
of jurisdiction in a company of men met together, Theophylact taking it for a
modest condescension in Saint Paul to join the Corinthians with himself,
whose solitary power was absolute. Hiname doxe autades, Kai autous
proslambanei Koinoonous And the context importing the sentence, such as it was,
to be but declarative in them them by the vertual praesence of the Apostles
spirit; and judicial in Saint Paul, who had passed it before ede Kekrika says
he verse. 3. Though it will trouble you to prove that here was any jurisdiction
Delivering to Satan what.
exerciz'd, delivering to Satan being probably but a desertion of the party
peccant, using no intercession in his behalf, but leaving him naked for Satan
to assault him with corporal torments, which prodigious punishment was usual in
those times. Excommunication it can not be, because it limits his censure to
the destruction of the flesh, deprives him not of the Sacraments, the want
whereof is destructive to the spirit. The twelfth verse adds no strength to
your argument, the sense seeming to be only this. I have nothing to doc to
judge them that are without, but leave them to God: I have to doc to judge them
that are within worthy of deliverance up to Satan. And ye judge them that is
deliver them up when ye are gathered together, and my spirit. As he, had said
verse. 4. So it is Saint Paul's spirit that is principal in this jurisdiction,
and the company of men met together but his delegates or assistants,
convocated at his pleasure.

To Your assumption I likewise answer. That the Bishop is as much the Church as
Saint Paul in this case, and has as much of the ordinary power transmitted to
him.

So that you see it requires not the Doctors learning, but the search of his
Acolythus and servant to satisfy you, if you will be, with antiquity and
reason. Which being done you may send more scirptural arguments against
Episcopacie by your brethren of the next Commission. Touching those you have
brought allreadie, you need not be so confident in calling for their answer
unless they were somewhat better. The visible leisure is, in none but such as
you and your Why Blondel etc. are not answered.
courteous Disciples in England have procured to be imprisoned in several
goales of both Kingdoms; others having business enough by shifting from one
place to another to secure their persons and save their lives, from your
cruelty. The poor prisoners have few visible helps to that purpose. If you
will find courage or conscience enough to undertake their free access to the
Fathers and other authors that are visiblie necessary to that purpose. I have
enough left still to assure you in the name of them that have more learning
then they boast of, that whatsoever becomes of your punie Clerks Master Parker
and Didoclave, (who may be easily turned of with some careful quotations and
references to a multitude of books allreadie printed) Master Blondels magazine
of antiquity shall be seized on, and what in it is upsie Scotch (which is not
all) for the presbytery Somais fare well to the Presbytery.
you brag of, shall in spite of your power be rescued for the true owners,
that is, the Bishops. For your meracle of learning, the most noble Somais, we
wish he may work more such wonders as he has of late, and send his petie
advocate a new blew bonnet at parting trimmed with a distick, beginning if he
pleases Ille ego qui quondam -- for his fee.

Were public masters of fact as mysterious as the intrigues in your The
Scottish presb. may be contracted out of their own story. Revel. 20. 12.
spiritual Iunto; and Consistorian Caballs, some Endor oracle must perchance
have been consulted and one of your black guardant Angels been
superstitiouslie worshipped, or ceremoniouslie waited upon for revelation. But
when the books of the dead are before their day opened by your hands, and
their works of darkness registered by your pens, the warner may every where,
without an ironie, proclaim his knowledge in your story as great as his
strictest search, and as certain as your rash consession could create. King
James's 55. K. I.'s 55. quaestions non plus'd them.
quaestions so troubled the Scottish divines, that they finding their plea of
divine right and immutabilitie of their discipline to be disputed, the Perth
Assembly indicted principally for that purpose: to divert the King, if not
otherwise to praevent his multiplying such problemes (to which David Blackes
process and the business about the banished Lords may be annexed) they raised
a desperate sedition on the 17. of December, which allreadie is discoursed on.
Their (if you mean the Synods) answer was not so round but that they first
protested and parlied about their privilege at the conference with His
Majesty and the Estates; required time to return, reason, vote and resolve in
all points. If thereafter the propounders were speachlesse in the business, it
might be because the Synod carried it for the King, and determined the problemes
in his sense, which (for ought I know) is that the Bishop means by yiedling
the bucklers without any opposition. The manner and time might very well
perplexe them being in a free Synod, and meeting with their bold contestation
for David Black. Nor were they troubled only at the Erastian and Praelatical
Counselors about the King, but at Patrike Galloway and James Nicolson, of late
Saints but now it should seem become Apostate presbyters in the Synod. The
quaestions put by the King were not captious and carping at the parts of Church
discipline, but a just controversy raised about the whole, fairlie propounded,
freely discussed, deliberatelie resolved, to the satisfying his conscience,
and silencing schismatical scruples for the future. I have often told you no
statutes of Parliament nor Acts of any but factious Assemblies authorisd your
Discipline, though were it ratified (as you would have had it) by any other,
set your jusdininum Episcopacie recovered ground in Scotland.
aside, and fetch not your praecedent from the Medes and Per^ans, a power
aequivalent to that which did it might reverse it.

The visible Church in your country at that time was not so far from
yeildino to Episcopacie, but that your brother confesses the cranie was then
made by which it afterward crept in, though I am at a loss for so much day
light in your story, as to see the year when legallie it was thrust out.
Perhanerimam (says he) ad essentialia ipsa externi regiminis impetendum,
Vindic. Epist: Philadelph.
and extruendum Episcopatum aditum sibi patefecerunt. You can not deny but
that it brought them thus far on their way, to the title of Praelates and
voting in Parliaments. Wicked states men at that time bears the same
signifiancie with Court Divsnes and evil Counselors at this, and so does the
most able and faithful Ministers with the Men of God that are Covenanters in
this age, of whom every man's experience can frame a character enough to scare
away his credit to the reputation you would give them. There need no question
be preposed when the Bishops were by full authoritier einstated in part of
their unquaestionable right; To a great deal more in the year 1606. When by
Act of Parliament their government was styled the ancient and fundamental
policy... Declared that they being the Third Estate had been indirectlie
Whence they had not been legallie ejected.
abolished... That it never had been mean'd by His Majesty and His Estates
that they should any ways be suppressed: That they had been only brought
into contempt and poverty... That His Majesty with express advice and
consent of the said whole Estates in Parliament do repone, restore and
redintegrate the said Estate of Bishops (it says not to their order) to their
ancient and accustomed honor, dignitees, praerogatives, privileges etc. This
was completed in the year 1610. when a kind of Episcopacie was set up as
near the primitive pattern as the growing reformation would bear in the
Assembly of Glasgow excepting the two Members I told you of, no otherwise
corrupt then as it may be flie-blow'n by your breath, and tainted by your
naming; under which not the Church but the Kirk of Scotland did heavilic
groan, as it always does when it has not liberty to vent sedition in the
pulpit, and act rebeilion in the field which the best and most learned of your
preachers, the Aberdene Assemblers, practiced in part, and wished well to the
rest Anno 1606 till the year 1637. when if they had met with an English
Pharach for rigor as they did with a Moses the meeker man of the two, he would
have appointed ^e masters that should have took away the straw, and spoiled
their design of fiering the house: set them making of brickes and building him
treasure ^ties, while they were pulling down temples and r^uning Palaces; he
had kept them from soaking of the yoke of Ecclesiastike and Civilegovernment,
and brought divine justice to their doors while they brought him to bear the
burden of a most inhumane, most unjust judgment at his own; praesaerv'd his
Children and subjects from sighing and hanging their harpes upon willowes in a
strange Psalm 137.
land, while they sat, under our vines, and keept us out of the shadow of our
own fig trees; cut up the root, while he lopped the branches, struck off the
head while he clipped the ear; cast out of Britain, what with regreet of
conscience he tolerated in Scotland, himself then and his Church had continued
like a treeplanted by the water side Psalm. 1.
and had brought forth more fruit in due season His leaf had not withered, and
whatsoever he had done had in all likelihood prosperd. But he has overcome
them if not in doing, in suffering being more then conqueror, and when those
briars and thorns are bundled up for the fire he shall have given Revel. 2. 7.
him to eat of the tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.

CHAPTER IX.
The Commonwealth is a monster when Gods Soveraignitie in the Presbytery
contradicts the Kings.

THe Reviewer all this while having made a poor shift to save the credit of the
Kirk, and spent his time in sewing a few figleaves The Reviewers slender shiss.
together to cover the shame of a sinful disobedience against Gods command in
the Civil Magistrate, which every puff of wind rends in pieces and scaters
before the face of innocence and truth; he here tries his skill to patch
contradictions together... pergit pugnantia secum Frontibus adversis
componere... and makes a parti colored coat for his two headed monster which
may as well, in time, out do the seven-headed dragon, if more crowns and
scepters can befound wherewith to invest it, as it has allreadie the
hundred-handed Giant, in pulling down as many powers and dominions as it could
reach; metamorphozing the Paradise of Kingdoms into the forest of
Commonwealths; and changing men that should be good subjects into scorpions, or
in serpents Regulos, such serpents and cocketrices Icr. 8. 17.
as will not be charmed into any obedience.

The Presbyterians ministry under Christ, being a tyranny over Christians,
The Preshyterians, not Praelates coordinate two Soveraignaties in one state.
quits them not of coordinating two Soveraignies in a state, Nor does the
Praelates maintaining an hierarchy in the Church make them at all guilty of
that fault since the former acknowledge no superieur in Ecclesiasticis but God;
and the later attribute as well a spiritual as Temporal supremacy to their
King. The spiritual Lordspip, Domination etc the Bishops exercise over his
subjects in his name but the Presbyterians theirs in the name of the Prince of
all Kings, whose Minister he is as well as they, and call all opposition against
them a war against Jesus Two Kings in Scotland.
Christ. Nay, rather then fail, when they can catch His Majesty in a closet,
Andrew Melvin shall tell him he must know he lies at their mercy, Public Rex,
nos parcimus tibi, That there are two Kings in Scotland, fac. memineris
duosesse in Scotia Reges, one of the Church (which must have the praecedence
too) and another of the Commonwealth. That by his leave (which is, to say,
without it) they must meet at their pleasure, and have a care of the Church,
whereof he is no head but a Member, no nursing Father, as the Scripture vainlie
calls him, but the elder son or at most brother of the Kirk: And that this
is spoken with good authority too, summa cum authoritate, shall the
Vindicatour publikelie print that all may know it. The contrariety of
commands, when issuing from Masters aequallie to be observed, can not but breed
distraction in the servant, and where Ianus has not a twoo-fac'd generation,
must needs much unfixe him in his advertence. Christ's particular and
extraordinary commands, if all, Not God only but his Anointed likewise to be
obeyed.
to all, and at all times to be published with out special commission, oblige
not his Ministers publikelie, imperiously to prohibit others of his anointed,
which may be mistaken to contradict them If they unhapilie fall out contrary
one to other, the holy Scriptures no where command so to obey God, as
activelie to disobey, that is, to rebel against the man that is their King.
The Reverend Warners opposition here to the Presbyterians maintains no such
subordination of the Church unto the state as makes her servile in performance
of unjust commands. And where Christ is found ruling in this case. He St.
Matthew. 26. 25. St. Luke 9. 23.
bids Saint Peter put up his sword, and all his Disciples to deny themselves,
take up their cross daily and follow him, When the Presbyterians have as
clear a Commission to prohibit festivals, to assront Ambassadous, proclaim
fasts at such times when their Kings solemnize feasts, as the Apostles had for
the publication of the Gospel, and teaching in the name of their Master that
sent them: Let them apply the text in the 5. of the Acts, and (I hope the
Reader makes, the incongruitie none of mine) disregard the High Priests
commands of a disterent Religion, and obey God rather then man. The contrary
ways taken in Scotland by Church and state (so King or Queen may he accounted
head Contrariety of Commands very frequent in Scotland.
or Member of the later) have not been so rare, if the History of your four
last Princes be reviewed. Against three of whom Pope Knox personally and in
his Synod made very frequent opposition, which he bragges of in print. I shall
not need to number your rebellious Acts and papers against the fourth.

In the possibility of such cases, which you tenderly admit, your modesty
being great to acknowledge the fallibilitie of Assemblies, the common rule of
humane direction's very good, had it been not only known by you, but
followed. The difference upon disobedience to either is not fairlie
repraesented temporal inconveniences in seditious tumults, to the hazard of
life, often befalling men by the displeasure of the Church, And by terror or
force a rescue from punishment legallie to be inflicted, contrary to the good
pleasure of the state.

Your interdiction of festivals viz. Our Saviors Nativitie to be observed, and
Bishops to sit in Parliament, when summoned by the King, seems in your sense
to implie no contrariety of command, and are therefore slighted as impertinent
objections The other two you The Revicwers fallacy
speak to, but not answer. Not the former but in a fallacy somewhat like that
which Logicians call of composition and division. The Magistrates that were to
attend the French Ambassadors being not excepted in your indiction of the
fast, but included with the people, and yet (as excusable) divided by you in
the observance. The truth of Church ce^sure intended can be no calumny, the
Major and Aldermen being cited and convented for their feasting, nor had the
process fallen to ground but through the prudent delays interposed by the
King, I must here put you in mind that your Brethren in Holland indict no
fasts but by the Magistrates consent, and your discipline being praetended to
be the same, you could not do it at this time, when the King commanded
feasting without coordinating Soveraignities, or which is worse, abolishing
his, to ordain your own.

In your answer to the later instance, you must cut the tails of Humble
petitions etc full of threats.
your humble petitions and remonstrances, which were tipped and turned up with
defiances and threats, under the notion of portents to the Kings person and his
family; And throw your covenant into the fire which engaged the takers in
pursuance of your contrary commands by opposing Acts, and Persons of state
too, beyond a declaration of their dislike. The watchman in Ezekiel (whose
example you counterfeit, and whose authority you abuse) was to warn when God
brought the sword upon a land: not to arm nor remonstrate when he sent it out.
The falsehood The Churchchasing and exeommuniting for the late engagement.
of your Church-chasing and excommunicating persons in the late engagement,
were it any, could at most be fayd but to be antidated by the Bishop, we since
daily conversing with such persons who live not very comfortablie in these
parts, yet dare not return home; And your public papers ranking them in 4.
classes or divisions, excluding them out of places of trust or power, censuring
them to sackcloth, banishing, excommunicating all that repent not for their
active loyalty as a sin. The Bishop charge no man with detracting from the
freedom of the Parliament that engaged them, He only anticipates by his
answer such a probable praetense. In the place whereof since you frankelie give
us the advantage of your confession, in your next you must show upon what sure
grounds you protest, preach, warn, declare against the power of the Kingdom
in a sree Parliament, in public Iudicatories, and armies, which you confess
you did in your paper May 11. (as I take it) 1649. As likewise how your
declaring of, became censuring in judgment, and your dissatisfaction
transformed into a sentence.

The heapesof untruths, when your spectatours wipe their eyes will The untruths
are the Reviewers.
be easily discerned cast on your side of the way. So that they will not
wonder at your falsifying Histories of old times, when the relation of your
latest known practices, is by your fiery tongue branded with the ignominy of
a lie. The generation you speak of, who keep up their credit according to the
rate of too many men's idleness or in advertence, can draw no clearer pedigree
then from your Synod, whose words can no more weigh with truth in the balance,
then their teeth whence they are lightly flow'n can with the Silesian boys
endure the touch.

CHAPTER. X.
No concord between Parliament and Presbytery.

THe harmony betwixt your Presbytery and Parliament, when any, is discors
concordia, and but still music at best, such as once was made between Parma
and Placentia by the concurrent identitie of the capital leters in their names.
So that when their Duke writ himself Dux P. P. and no more their ambition was
silenced about prioritie in his title. And if we look any farther into yours,
we are encounterd canina litera, wish that mastiue leter, which it may be,
mystically snarles as much against the name, as your power assaults the
authority of the other. And when you take upon you the writing both at large,
your humility and Courtship is such as here, ever to give praecedence unto
your selves. Your constitution must be looked upon as no other then a
caelestial quintessence. Your end known to be compassing a temporal as well as
a spiritual tyranny, and your daily practice, subduing, swaying both scepters
of Jesus Christ's. The Praelatical learning, you see, takes no higher flight
then the next instance to prove the conclusion in hand. And he whose faith must
be forced to credit such unanswerable arguments has indeed little or no common
sense or reason in him, but mistakes snow to be black because he lives in a
dungeon, goes upon hot coals, and feels not his benumbed seet to Prove. 6. 28.
be burnt: the light in him is darkness because of his evil eye, and quantae
tencbrae: how great is that darkness. S. Matthew. 6. 23. What perpetual
iarrings has been between you I have otherwhere showed, which never failed but
when you tampered with the strings and tuned both instruments to your ear.

I see the late engagement often served up is enough a lone to take off The
Rev. ears not for hearing of the late engagement. Ps. 69: 23. The 8. desires
of the Church neither just nor necessary.
your stomach; yet that insipide colewort must be set upon your table, while
your table contimues a snare to eatch your selves withal, and that bill of
fare, though but one dish repeted till it choke the rebellious guerts of the
Assemblies your paper of eight desires contained 8. very insolent demands, in
place of that submission which the Parliament sent for, I can not say expected.
What justice and necessity may be in them was not at any time by you, nor by
any at that time to be expostulated to the retarding that more just and
necessary design. If the Parliament counted upon any, it reckoned withal the
satisfaction it had rendered, Wherein it had been rather too lavish then close
handed, and promised more upon the necessity then thought on, then some
conceived in justice or conscience could he performed. Security upon oath
under hand and seal the Bishop tells you were harder terms then an Usurers to
a Bankrupt, and it may be you took His Majesty for no other, having gotten
(though by no morgage) his kingdome^ in your possession. And knowing what he
had contracted with God before, you would not part with them but upon the
surest interest of his soul. If the quaestion were not for the thing, that it
should seem you took for granted. And then what methodical, and scrupulous
traitors do you blazon your selves to be, to leave him languishing in a
jail, while the order and some particle of the security must be thought an.
The qualification of the persons to have the managing of the war being
approved by the Parliament, the highest Court in the Kingdom, no law intimates
an Assembly or Indicatorie competent to reverseit. So that the Bishop has
sufficiently informed himself that the knot of the differtnce lies only in
some bulrush, which you The Chapter of Scotland has no liberty to declare against
King and Parliament.
look for to little purpose; And having attentivelie read your public
declarations, draws out of them no groundless conjecture, but an infallible
assurance that no History mentions such Pharisaical Rebels upon the earth.

The Warner knows very well that what you call the liberty of the Church is
in truer language the license of the many schismatical hypocrites that disturb
it; who by long custom of blaspheming God in gilded rhetorike, and a
spiritual figure, translating his holy word, but perverting the sense to
sinful ends in public declarations, have withdraw'n poor people from their
duty to their King into such fears and confoederacies as the prophet Esai had
in the place that you cite warning from the Lord with a strong hand, and
instructions not to walk in. The three Graces you brag of had too many
snakes dangling about their ears to be mistaken for other then the three
infernalfuries which they were Your humility was pride and arrogancy to the
height, attributing more to your private fancies, then to the public counsels
of a free parliament, the undenied repraesentative of the Kingdom. Your piety
was but the will worship of your own imaginations that you chaileng'd: And
your wisdom craftiness; wherein you will be taken in the end, and by your
froward counsel Job. 5. 13.
carried headlong to your destruction. The visibilitie of this might encourage
the Engagers to run any adventure, rather then to follow you in your ways.
Such of them as since the disaster have crouched to an acknowledgement of their
loyalty for an error, are poor Spirited fools that have their eyes only
in the ends of the earth; are never likely to be in the number of them who
obteind a good report through faith in Prove. 17. 24.
their sufferings, nor receive the promise, of some beter thing that God had
pro vided for them. Did an Angel from heaven blow his trumpet, and proclaim
Heb. 11. 39.
God speaking in your declarations, the Warner and his party were bound to
stop their ears. Or if the Prince of the power of the air should Ephesians. 2. 2.
clothe such wicked language in lightning, or pervert some Boanerges to speak
it in thunder, by terror to work in children of disobedience, we have Saint
Paul's praescript to pronounce a double anathema against him, Accursed, Accursed
let him be and in submission Gal. 1. 8. 9.
to God in his messenger the Apostle such men of gallant spirits should we be,
as in a Christian constancy or Roman if you will have it, rather to perish
with this last breath in our mouths, then by hearkening to counsels or walking
in ways so palpablie pernicious to Church and state, with the ruin of both
let the breath of our nostrils, the Lament. 4. 20.
Anointed of the Lord, be taken in their pits. If the margin and text of your
following paragraph were not so near neighbors, in my have I Contradiction
between the Revic. margin and text.
might chance to have made no comparison, and so escaped the contradiction
between them. No offer to stopthe leavic in the one, and opposition so coldrife
and small in the other, will I think be reconciled by no logike but that which
makes degrees vary species, or argues from The levy was offered to be stopped.
the third to the second adjectand according to the vulgar proverb, makes that
not to be at all which is little or nothing to the purpose. To the substance of
your answer. By inquiry I find your oppsition as hot as your fervent zeal
and abilities could make it, and if your actions drew in the same yoke with
your words, you that sweated it out in earnest beseechments, exhortations, and
threats, sat not still to see the effects of your papers, but armed your
selves to the work of retardment, if not to the retracting the design. Some
few lines in a Declaration and warning from the Commission of your General
Assembly, are enough to keep the Bishop from ignorance, and a transscript of
them as they lie to discharge him from the malice you impute... We do
earnestly beseech and exhort all who live in this land, that as they tender
their solemn obligation and oath both by the National Covenant, May 11. 1649.
and by the solemn league and Covenant, and as they love the honor of Jesus
Christ and the Gospel...Nay, as they wish to eschew the heavy wrath and
indignation of the Lord, That they do not give any countenance, nor connivence
to these wicked men in their wicked way, much less to join with them in
counsel or in arms. And because it lies upon us to be faithful in our
station, therefore as we have allreadie given warning unto these men that
unless they do speedily destst from their evil way and repent, that we will
proceed aganist them with the dreadful sentence of excommunication...if any
shall hereafter join with them, we will be necessitated impartiallie to
proceed against them with the highest censures of the Kirk... If this be
coldrife and small opposition, what tall fellows are you when you are warm? I
Know nothing you could well do beyond it, unless with C. Caesar you would be
so mad as in Homers language challenge Jupiter to an encounter em' anaeir', e
ego se, which you are likely enough to do, if it succeeded with him as Seneca
Supposed. Non puto parum momenti have ejus vocem ad incitandum conjuratorum
anlmos Lib. De Ir. cap. ulr.
addidisse. The Army gotten up so numerous and strong, (which the Commanders
thought sooner expedient, and had sooner levied but for you,) was probably
able to have done what service they professed; but the aversion of the hearts
of the Church declaring it self in diabolical curses and supercilious
discouragement, divided the hearts and enfeebled the hands of a faint people.

It was a strange sympathy in the hearts of your yeomen that in the midst of
their fright made them flee to the same corner of the land. Their consciences
are not commonly of such a tender touch, but when scarified by their Clergy.
So that it will be no calumny to conjecture what spirit gave them wings, and
directed their flight to the rebellious meeting at Mauchlin moor. Their growing
number, and abiding there in a body for the security of their persons, made
no party for, nothing toward the deliverance of the Kings; and their danger
being only to be forced by the Parliament to go soldiers into England for
that purpose, the quaestion is what violence was therein offered to their
conscience, and, if any, by what law or praecept, divine or humane, the
Assembliecan countenance them in arms, though but in a defensive posture to
withstand it? In which had that part of the Army that suddenly came upon them
cut them off, it might have stood for an act of civil justice, more then
military fury, kept the rest in peace, and much conduced toward an after
security to themselves The communion at Mauchlin laid to the public. Fast
appointed in termiuis for the apostacy of the Parliament, might occasion some
of your Ministers coming thither to as good a purpose as his to the Kirk of
St. Andro, who prayed to Almighty God, that he would carry through the good
cause against all his enemies, especially against Kings, Devils and
Parliaments. Colored clothes and pistols were no proper accoutrement for your
Ministers ^in arms.
Kirke-men wherein to celebrate the Sacrament of Christian charity and peace.
Nor were they the good instruments with the people to go away to run away they
might be afterward) that had lead them in bands and troops into the battle.
For Presbyterian Scottish Ministers to protest against any rebellion wherein
they act, needs no eagle eyed Parliament man to discover it at the bottom as
a piece of effronterie very Not cens. by the Commissioners of the Kirk.
common among them and proper to their profession, which is very ridiculouslie
diss mbled in this case, when diverse of them were taken prisoners, fighting
desperately for the cause, complained of to the Commissioners of the Kirk,
who were so far from inflicting any censure; or giving them admonition, that
they approved what they had done, and justified them in the fact. Which I see
here you dare not ex professo, but fawlter in your judgment about the meeting,
pleading the security of their persons as a fair apology for the yeomens a
biding in a body, and yet mentioning the Ministers protestation, which is
little beter then a condemnation of their convening and fighting in the field.

The Bishops parallel betwixt the General Assembly and Parliament casts S.
Pet. 2. 16. v. 13. Presbytery makes Parliaments subject to the Assemblies.
the cloak of maliciousness upon your own shoulders in the abuse of your
liberty, whereby you refuse to submit your self to the ordinance of man^ sor
the Lordssake, otherwise then as it is ratified in your Synods for when the
Presbyterians lay the authority of both Courts upon a divine foundation, they
make themselves the chief corner stone, usurping the proper place of Jesus
Christ in the one, and of his anointed in the other, telling him and all
Magistrates (among whom Parliaments are to be numbered) he ought to be subject
to the Kirk spirituallie and in Ecclesiastical government... that be ought to
submit himself to the discipline of the Kirk if he transgress 2. Book.
discipl. 1. chapter
in matters of conscience and Religion. So that when they talk of obedience sor
conscience sake to their lawful commands, they take cognizance what is
conscience and law, and at their own arbitrament many times oblige subjects on
the same principles to rebel, calling this the justifiable revenge of the
Magistrates contempt against the authorite of God resident in them. The Bishop
mockes not at Ministers that carry themselves at the Ambassadors of Christ,
that deliver not more then is in the Commission or instructions they received;
but thinks they have no privilege above the Angels, who are not dominantes
but ministrantes spiritus. That they are a flame rather to warm indiscreet
zeal and Heb. 1. 14. Ps. 104. 4.
devotion, then consume in the fervor of violence and passion. That God
rarely tempers brimstone with the breath of his messengers, That he sets the
time, and names the extraordinary case, when Ier. 14.
his words shall be fire in the mouths of his prophets, and his people woe d
that it should devour them. He likes you should judge according to the rule of
Scripture, so you follow that rule, and keep in subjection to good laws. He
commends your caring for life aeternal, not your leaguing and covenanting in
order to that for the death temporal of your brethren. He judges you according
to the rule of Scripture to be shamelcsselie impious that counterfeit a care of
life aeternal, whither bloodthirstie Presbyters are never likely to enter, but
have a portion with their fellow hypocrites otherwhere. That make holy
Sripture not only of private but perverse interpretation, and God the author
of all the wickedness you act by the authority of his word who boast of an
Ambassie from Christ, when who so blind as these servants, who so Isai. 42. 19.
dease as these messengers (you say) he sent? who are lead by a Spirit that
does the works of the flesh from top to botome mentioned by St. Paul Galat. 4.
Who would gull the world out of all but a form or property of religion; who
make your selves not Ministers but Masters of Christ, commanding imperiously
the spirit he sends down; who make a trade of Scripture, and for wordlie gain
parsel out eternal life to whom you please.

The second part of the Bishops parallel, I see, puts you to a stand, and
Ministers power with the people dangerous if seditiouslie bent.
the quaestion What shall be made?... argues you some what suspended in your
thoughts whether as much should be made of it as you mean, and the people
commended for obeying their Ministers (how seditious soever) more then their
Magistrates that command them. If all the power such Ministers have with the
people be built on their love to God, what pity is it that rebellious
structure should have such a religious foundation? When it rises high he is no
good states man that does not demolish it, knowing that what God and conscience
constrain not, but persuade, to employ to his good, the Devil without any or
with one that is erroneous may tempt them to aedifie to his ruin. It is not
amiss Th. Cap^nel. eap. 18.
said and applied by him that writ of the spanish Monarchy Pri^um instrumentum
bone imperandi, lingua est; secundum vero gladius. The sword is but the left
hand instrument in the governing Kingdoms: The tongue, of the preacher is
dextra terribilis, that of the right hand that teaches terrible things, that
by the menace of death, which the sword Ps. 45. 5.
can not reach to, keeps subjects in obedience to their Sovereigns. Therefore
when once it has a power with the people such as that of St. ^psis
Cardinalibus and P. P. maxformidabilis fuit, diremita aut unyt principes and
subditos suos arbytratu.
Bernard it had need be endued with the spirit of Saint Bernard, sor there is a
tongue. Quae conterit spiritum, the perverseness wherein is a breach in the
spirit Prove. 1. 5. 4. And the proud men in the Psalmist, promise themselves a
victory over Princes by the tongue, We will praevaile Who because they are the
men that ought to speak, just like you, deny all supremacy. Their first
language is this. Quis dominus, Who is Lord over use. The Politician I spoke of
has a discourse worth your reading, wherein he shows you how Maliomet stirred
up the people against Heraclius the Emperor. He says as much for Calvin your
protoplast, which whatsoever may be apologiz'd for him, I Ps. 12. 4.
am sure is inexcusable in Knox and you that are the workmanship of his hands.

This made Charles the good so prudent and resolute, who being become too
unhapie in nothing more then in suffering your Babel building to be finished in
Scotland, when he beheld the like work of your fellow Rebel Architects in
England, would not exclude himself Eik: Bas: cap. 17.
out of doors, nor part with that power whereby he might best restrain the
seditious exorbitances of Ministers tongues, who with the keys of heaven have
so far the keys of the peoples hearts as they praevaile much by their
oratorie to shut in and let out both peace and loyalty. While the Warner
scosfes at your threats his meaning is to have deluded people to scorn them
and know in your words that the thundrings of (the Scottish as well as) that
Roman Antichrist are but vanity and ^inde. To tell them in a figure that hell
and St. Liturg. p. 87.
death are no more in your keeping then the jail in the prisoners that walks
abroad in the streets with his shakels about him, but must render himself at
the end of his covenant: The Praelates proclamation of such Atheism as this is
a printed copy out of the original writ by the V. 18.
fingar of God in the 10. S. Matthew. Whereby is to be banished out of the hearts
of the people all fear of them which kill the body but are not able to kill
the soul, for all their kirke-bulls and censures that threaten it. To the
quaestion you close with I answer, That Satan has driven allreadie the first
instruments of his Republike in Britain into a very narow room in the North,
where Cromwell and other his more useful instruments at praesent, are likely
to keep them, till, if God neither convert nor by a miracle otherwise confound
them his work being done he may lash them with whips of their own making,
topt' with Serpents heads, and Scorpions tails, and at last deliver them to
the worm that shall not die, cast them into the fire that shall not be
quenched, Isai. 66. 24
and make their stinking memory an abhorring unto all slesh.

The third part of the parallel has been in every particular justified, and
were more instances requisite to evidence the truth, they might be a
numberless number of such imputations as you are never able to refute.

The charge which the Bishop subjoines is not so poor but that it enricheth No
in haerent right in Courts to nominate Commissioners for intervalls.
his proof with the best argument of your spiritual supremacy. The daily
practice of the Parliaments of Scotland, such as have been of late and
heretofore when your Reformation took place, constitutes no right, confirms
no power os nominating commitees for intervalls. Nor is there any inhaerent
right in Courts to nominate interreigning Commissioners but by Royal favor in
such as (except their intertearming vacations) are perpetual and standing, not
called by fits ad placitum Domini Regis, no not in the Parliament it self.
Which (to omit other proofs) was the ground of this clause in their Act of
oblivion 1641. That the peace to be now established may be inviolablie observed
in all time to come, It is agreed that some shall be appointed by His Majesty
and the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, who in the interim betwixt the sitting
of the Par^ments may be careful that the peace now hapilie concluded may be
tontinued etc.... And it is declared that the power of the Commission shall be
restrained to the articles of peace in this treaty; As likewise of that fatal
Act for perpetuating the last black Parliament in England, which had probably
ne^r been required if it might have nominated a Commit of state (that idol to
which it now sacrifices, in blood) to sit till the next summons upon any
inhaerent right in that Court. For the Iudicatories of your Church. I am tired
with telling you that no law of the Kingdom does privative authorize them to
meet, their Assembly being illegal without the King or his Commissioner,
neither of which are to come upon course or at call. And their power of
appointing Committees has as often been quaestion'd (and how often is that?)
as it ever was executed without or against the positive consent or command of
the King or Queen for the time. And truly the committees in the times, os your
late troubles were the Ambuscado wherein you lay closely in wait to disturb
both Church and state, while your armed body in Parliament retired. Whose
frequent meetings were forced no otherwse then by the incessant zeal in their
Members to persecute Religion and loyalty. Whose diversion from their
particular charges (for attendance on the public rebellion) was joined with so
great fascherie and expense to fulfill their lusts at other men's cost, Which
with all their heart they will in Sempiternum continue, if fear of their
necks make them not at length slip out of the collar: or their gray hairs and
withered carcasses (after many a surfeit) call them not to some other account,
or their Chief in whose service they made these necessary meetings pay them
not their necessary wages in pertusum sactulum, into a bag full of holes,
which Haggai 1. 6.
shall never be filled, no more then was the measure of the iniquity they
acted.

CHAPTER XI.
The Presbytery cruel to particular persons.

IF King and Parliament be (as they may very well) incenced against the The
Presbytery a tyranny over the consciencies of thepeople.
Presbytery at sight of the Bishops reason, more then out of sympathy with
him in his anger, his warning has taken in part the effect that he wished and
aimed at. Yet in vain shall they vindicate all just authority to themselves,
if the people be kept in a servile observance of a tyrannous discipline, and
pay their blind obedience to the Kirk. Therefore the Warner excedes no bounds
in his rage, but en largeth his bowels of pity to them, who for the most part
having disarmed their souls of that judgment which should dictate their
freedom from Church censures upon acts indifferent, or sinful in an inferior
degree, their due submission to an arraignment of thoughts only in the Court
of a poenitent conscience, or hereafter before the tribunal of heaven, where
sits the only Judge of hearts, the discerner of perverse inclinations; expose
themselves naked to the boundless fury of merciless Reviewers; to the sharp
scrutinie of malicious Inquisitours; to the arbitrarie sentence of most sinful
Judges, and therefore most suspicious surmisers. The Bishop mentions Censures
upon slight grounds.
no faults but such as toward which your Discipline mentions no favor limited
to the privacie of the care. Nor yet do all those give occasion for that which
you take to show the infinite extent, the interminate divisibilitie of your
power. In the book that he cites is the greatest Scot. Lit.
censure of the Church praescribed, and more methodicallie then mercifully
showed how a small offense or sclaunder may justly deserve excommunication by
reason of the contempt and disobedience of the offender. Page 60. And lest any
should think that the osfenses named are not so heinous as that of the
Corinthians incest (whence you take your pattern and Saint Paul's authority for
your process) you give such to understand that mercy and favor may rather be
granted to any other sin then to the contempt of wholesome admonitions, and
of the just and law full ordinances of the Church. Page 80. Which if (as you
say) it never procured the smallest censure, you have been a great deal too
profuse of your pardons, Where you profess your obligations so great to the
performance of the commandment of God. Or, if you think it not such may be
justly required by any Erastian to render a reason, why that ignis fatuus,
that foolish spirit Romans 8. 15.
of bondage walks in your Discipline from generation to generation, while they
laugh at the calamitic you threaten, and monk when your fear comes Prove 1.
26.
upon the people. But he that knows you will never mistake you for such meek
lambs in this mimike disguise of lions, when he finds you as well preying as
roaring. And how any, the most charitable man will have just cause to complain
of your rigor, let your aequitable comparers judge observing with me but one
passage of multitudes in your form, that one which speaks you the most savage
petitioners that ever invocated the name of Spiritual cruelty in the prayers
of Presbyters.
Christ, whom you humbly beseech (for fear his mercy that is written to be
above all his own works, should be above that of yours, the inhumanitie you
are about) that whatsoever in his name you pronounce in earth (meaning the
sentence of excommunication, though but for susspicions and jealousies, if not
confessed to be as real faults as any Sc. Lit. p. 196.
peevish brother shall construe them) he Would ratify the same in heaven.
Which can not be paralleld in the Turkish Aicaron, nor among all the
superstitions rites and cruel offices of the heathen per formed to the most
bloody, most insatiate of devils, who does nothing else but go about seeking
whom he may devour. Where as if this be your slacknesse 1. Pet. 5. 8,
wherewith sectaries charge you, which you are soric you are not able to
refute. it should seem you are sorry there are no more hells then one, no
plurality of souls in your single Impaenitents, no imaginable protraction of
punishment beyond aeternitie for the execution of your censures. The Sabbath
recreations, which the Bishop says are void of Our Sabbath recreations shorst
of those in other Reformed Curches.
scandal, are likely to be, at most but those mentioned in the book of
toleration so much decried by the brethren of your faction; among which were no
stage plays, nor, in my memory, any allowed to be acted on Sundays, and so
not frequented by his friends.

The greater license on the Sabbath Kirmasses you slide over without any of
that zeal, which His Lordship prophesies, though your self have been a
spectatour of it in these Countries, So that in your own words (which I am a
frayd will too often be mistaken for mine, and bring upon me the imputation of
a sloven) If the Aposteme in your lowest gut had not changed places with your
brains your words had been wiser and your unsavourie breath (which you too
often eructate) somewhat sweeter. The debate among some of your sect. Whether
in Scotland or no, which is not expressed, about starch and cuffes, may very
well pass upon the credit of the Warner that asserts it, and your putting him
upon the poofe makes me guess you are not in a readiness to deny it.
Howsoever we know the curses of the Laundrie have been through two or three
descents a traditional legacy to the brethren Trivial debates, and; articling
against habiss.
of your order in England for the counterscuffles they made about the former.
And the debate on the later has produced an injunction to your Society
somewhere else to cast away those little idolatroue rags, which could scarce
be taken for any relics of Rome, and their gloves too, it may be upon better
reason, lest the cleanliness of their hands might beget a jealousy of some
superstition in washing them before their public officiating, on their
unhandsome distributing of the word. What little latitude of discretion you
allow and how your superiors must be your slaves or pupils in the attire
as well of their bodies as sules is evident by your preaching and articling
against the apparel even of the Ladies of Honor and that waited upon your
Queens Knox Hist.
Majesty three sundry days when she rode in great state and solemnity to
the Tolbuith in Parliament time Ao. 1563.

Of the second oppression, which the Bishop objects you give up a very
imperfect account, leaving the greatest weight to he as heavy as it The same
fault under a different formalitie not to betwice punished.
can upon the head of your Synods in calling the Magistrate fool for his
mercy, and knave for his briberie, which you only suspect because he is not
as rigid as your selves; In enjoining public satisfaction after the Defendant
has given it at an assize etc. What you bring is little to the purpose, and, if
it were, has been packt away with its answer long a go Wherewith yet if gou
will not be satisfied, you must be set to reviewe Erastus and answer him. When
he tells you, of old no notice was taken of your double formalitie viz of crime
and scandal, so as to subject the delinquent, for the same fact, to the censure
of two distinct Courts, Civil and spiritual. He calls Lib. De Fid. and Op.
cap. 2.
ad raucedinem usque for one text or example in Scripture to justify it; He
proves out of St. Austin etc. That the Church used the spiritual sword only
when the temporal was not in Christian hands. He puts you to make good your
maine consequence. That if the Magistrate does not his duty, an Assembly,
Court is required to constrain him, or as you Liturgy speaks, to admonish
him, and that too, as the Bishop urges when he has discharged it according to
his Judgment Offenders quitted to be admitted to the H. Sacrament without
public satisfaction in the Church.
and conscience. From your proceedings of this kind His Lordship draws 3.
observations, which you cannot deny, and yet dare not acknowledge, and
therefore say nothing; but work in a whimzie of his excursions upon his own
friends, not any of whom approve the injustice, the irrationalitie, much less
imitate the cueltie of your practice. The Popish Praelates are not so near
allied unto the Doctor, nor do they need to be taken into his protection: The
English are, and can vindicate themselves against you for admitting to the
holy table with signs of repentance, without Ecclesiastike public
satisfaction, murderers that are either quit by their jurie, or have their
pardon sealed by the King, whores that either are spared out of hopes of
amendment, or have had the whip at Bridewell, and thieves burned in the hand at
Newgate or saved by the benefit of their Clergy; And this upon beter grounds
then the Presbyters deny them communion with those, who as much as they make
up their mouths, dare not take up a stone to cast at them. The Doctor knows
his own meaning, and plainly speaks it. And they must be very ignorant or
worse that are not of his mind, or rather of St. Paul's which I take to be
this. That when a man shall without visible hypocrisy say, be has examined
himself, he is not to be again examined by the 1. Cor. 11.
Class, but may eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, That when he has
judged himself, he should not be judged; That when he is judged, he is
chastened of the Lord, not condemned and executed by the Kirk. Your
interrogatorie or argument a minore ad majus in case of Scandal is defective
until you render a just definition of scandal applicable to all where in your
discipline does instance; After which having made your scale of degrees, your
antecedent requires your proof viz. That small, scandals are to be purged away
by that repentance that here is in quaestion between us. Had I ever read of any
Presbyter in The Scottish practice touching Excommunication little lose rigid
then their Canon.
Scotland what I have of Fabian once Bishop of Rome. That he was chosen by the
extraordinary descent of a dove upon his head. I might charitablie hope sor
some spirit of meekness among the brethren of the Discipline, and have some
little credulity that the want of gall in any one of the number might qualify
the exuberance and overflowing biternesse in the rest; But when I meet with
such tragike Histories of their implacable fury, and see every where their
unjust judgment running down like a torrent, and their unrighteous rigor
like a mighty stream; I can put little trust in the slender bank of Master
Baylies professions in behalf of his Presbytery, from whom expect as little
mercy as truth, and as little Christian righteousness as peace. The Warner can
not be ignorant of your Scottish ways, while his eyes are open to read them in
your books, or his ears to hear them in very credible reports. He that lives
in Scotland, and never sees the execution of that censure, must betake
himself to the mountains, and converse in some corner with those creatures,
who know as little of excommunicating by, as they ever did of communicating with
a Church. For the 47. years halcion days that you have seen (of which from
your birth which you so superstitiouslie mention you must give us leave to
abate at least one or two, as praegnant in knowledge and as quick an
Intelligencer as you could be in your cradle, and about 30. of 40. more,
wherein the cursed black cowes had short horns, the Presbyterian severitie
being regulated by the Bishops, who carried the badge of clemency as well as
innocence on their arms the great city you lived in must be taken for the
only bright Mercy seat in your Country, while the sun of righteousness
did never arise otherwhere, but turned his face away from it as a land of
darkness, full Ps. 74. 21.
of cruel habitations. As touching the two censures you acknowledge, had the
profanesse in the papist, and the horrible scandal in the Praelates been
priviledg'd as much in the punishment with a proxy, as, they say, the more
true and more horrible scandal in a brother of the Commission, the rod of that
fury had passed upon the backs of the fools in your City; as for the luftie
Presbyters delinquencie (I have heard your excommunication was executed upon
the Nodie-Innocents in his parish. If you go no farther then Saint Paul's
command 2. These. 3. 14. You should denounce no public excommunication in the
Church, but diates epistoles scmeiousthai, by private leters signify his
fault. You should have no company nor familiarity with him that he may be
ashamed, not forbid every man to sell him bread, that he may be sterved. You
should admonish him as a brother, not count him as Sc. Lit. p. ^00.
an enemy, commanding him to be reputed as accursed and delivered to the
devil. Much less should you arrogate the praerogative of God, Master John
Guthrie Bishopp of Mur^ay.
if not a greater, in visiting the sin of the father upon the children, such
it may be as hate you not, denying them baptism till they come to be of age
etc. And, to show what good Angels you are, after sentence pronounced, you
dismiss not the Congregation before they have The following in convenients to
be charged rather upon the Church then state.
sung with you the 100. Psalm, a Psalm of exultation whereby as much as may
be, you rejoice at the confusion of a sinner. Nor is your reserve of little
kindness very constant in permitting the excommunicate the company of them
that are tied by natural bonds unto him, when the sharpness of your censure
cut' these bonds, withheld this indulgence from Master John Guthrie Bishop of
Murray, to whom, when he lived in Angus you denied the comfort and conversation
of his brother though a preacher of a parish thereabout.

For the inconveniences that follow, how powerful has been the influence of
the Church upon the State in such Acts of Parliament as are made consequential
to their Acts of Assemblies may be guessed by the frequent servile submission
to the tyranny of their papers. In the Parliaments where your Princes were
ever praedominant it can not be thought they would ratify an Act so
destructive to their own strength in the diminution of their subjects, as to
set the Quia a ^empore quo us lagatus est capnt gerit lupinum, ita quod
abomnibus inter fici possit and impune Bracton.
heads of wolves upon the shoulders of men, and for such trivial faults as the
Bishop mentions antecedent to your censure, with leters of horning expose them
to be worried by dogs. For this cruelty may your Church be deservedly
challenged, and that by Proelates, who gave no such customarie allowance to
their officials to excommunicate as appears by the caution in the Canon 1571.
Nullus horum, nec Cancellarius, nec Commissarius, nec Officialis in cognitione
causarum proced^t usque ad serendam sententiam excommunicationis, nisi tantum
in causis instantiarum. And in the Canon 1604. If the delinquent made his
appearance, and after process was to be censured the official was nor to
pronounce the sentence but the Bishop nullam ejusmodi sententiam pronunciari
volumus praeterquam per Episcopum etc. Nor were the civil inconvenients like
those after leters of horning. And how easily all for great crimes was
commuted for, your brother Didoclave complains at large. Where as you run
again from the severitie in your laws to the clemency in your practice
(though that be no answer to the Bishop who presses upon your Canon) your
diverse late years cruelty, which still is continued confutes you in the face
of the world. In which if your sentence took place in heaven as it does to
their confusion on earth, so many have paid the price of their souls for
observance of the first and fifth Commandments, their duty to God and
obedience to their King. Your parenthesis that hooks in the greatness of
sins is convict by the slight pecoadilloe forementioned. And the length of
your process shall be cut short by one instance in the forenamd Bishop
Guthrie, who was never so much as admonished by a brother, nor summond by a
messenger unless to yield up his house to Rob. Monroe, being carried to
Edinburgh not to have trial, but to hear that sentence had passed upon him
before he came.

In the case of fugitives your Discipline makes no distinction not arbitrarie
between the contumacious and timorous. And he that stands to Cruelty toward
fugitives.
your account shall come short of his reckoning on mercy, if your flying roll
can reach his soul at a distance as well as to be sure it shall consume the
timber and stones of his house that's at hand.

CHAPTER XII.
The Presbytery a burden to the Nobility, Ministry, and all Orders
whatsoever.

You know what Constantine said concerning the Arians... The Presbyterians as
outrageous as the Arians.
Christ, Christ, Kyrie, Kyrie, ti depote hemas to lesterion hosemeran
titroskes He complaind that when their heinous crimes whereof they were accused
had wounded their heads, and the deformity of Shame spread over their faces,
their violent boldness stood fiercely in opposition to the truth, They wept
not in Sorrow, but roared in madness Brychatai epipriusa ten odonta Rescript
ad Arium and Arian.
with a grinding of their teeth. The Presbyterians I see by many passages in
this chapter want neither impudence nor rage to outface and rail as much as
any haeretikes whatsoever, when once their discipline is touched to the quick.
The Praelatical malice seems no way exorbitant by this supplement of the
Bishops, wherein his just indignation chaceth all the remaining eccentrike
motions of these planets, these ftaires that wander from the fixed beauties in
the firmament of the Church. If you can but find patience, or your stomach
will serve you to return to your own vomit and lick up your language the
air will be cleansed which was become unsavourie only by the uncomelinesse
of your speech. The Noblitie and Gentry in all Presbyserie more oppressive to
the Nobility and Gentry the Praelaccc.
parts of Britain have had too long and unhapie experience of the difference
between the fatherly counsels or friendly correction of Bishops (whom
Religious Princes in honor of their function have dignified with the title of
Barons, and privilege of Peers) and the unsufferable insolences of
Presbyters, whose peacockes tails that train it daily in the vulgar dust,
and sweep together the raskalitie of the people, are poudlie spread and fanned
in their faces. Those in England, (which were none of the best) that refused no
hazard to shake off that easy yoke which was laid upon them by the hands and
institution of Christ, have broke their necks in their have, and you see their
honor buried in the grave. The Scottish Nobility that lead them the way,
having served almost a double apprentiship at the trade, alas groan for their
freedom yet dare not ask it from him, whose mercy they fear must not be so
injurious to justice, as after so many rebellions and murders especially that
unpardonable parricide) to redeem them from bondage and to quit the for feit of
their lives and estates. Therefore they choose rather (unhapie choice between
necessity and nothing) to renew their slaverie, Were the British Bishops set
down again and (which they may be in beter earnest then you mean it) well
warmed in their repaired sees, as they would look to receive a filial respect
so they would doubtless repay a paternal Christian care of the Nobility and
Gentry in their charge; Those that heretofore did not (if any did not) had no
natures nor principles befitting their dignities, and till they have changed
what they had for such it is pity, if they survive, they should be reenstated.
You should do well to name those that set their feet on the necks of the
greatest Peers, but withal to set down how long they could keep their
footing there when a just appeal had been made to the capital power that was
above them. If the public ^oo scandalous license of any peer, how great
soever, received at their mouths a friendly rebuke; If after that his
untractable confidence in sin some legal restraint or fatherly chastisement
at their hands; when Gods impartial and irrespective commandments are altered;
when Christian laws that are consonant repealed, they may be then, and not
till then discharged of this duty, and visited by Master Baylie (when he
shows his commission) for their arrogance in the exercise of any oppression or
tyranny in their Courts.

In the pretty piece that follows Master Baylie has played the The Reviewers
counterseit of Presbytery inverted.
part of Pauson the painter in Plutarch, and artificially draw'n the
Presbyterian horse in his full career, giving as he thinks every limme its due
proportion to grace him in that posture; But when, with Pausons customer, we
turn the table and lay the beast on his back, his design is spoiled, and
that uglie spectacle of a foundered jade draws contempt and laughter from all
judicious passengers that behold it.

That every small Congregation in Scotland can furnish your Elderships Wisdom
piety, and learning not so common in Elderships.
with wise, pious, and learned men by the dozen, will never be credited till we
get some Historical assurance that when all good parts, piety, and prudence
were divorced from Canaan Athens and Lacedaemon they made a voyage to Scotland
to court the wild affections of the Presbyters in the North.

For the double portion of discretion and learning in your Classical The
Nobility and Gentry abused when chosen Elders.
Presbytery, which draws in by fifteens the Nobility and Gentry you run
the adventure of losing a beter inheritance, if you take St. Paul's to mean
that in the leter (as you sometimes tell us when you are angry with Court and
our Academical Clergy) Not many wisemen... not many noble 1. Cor. 1. 26. But
it is in truth your own carnal wisdom not so much to add worth, as to
arrogate power to, and make absolute the authority of your Consistory, that
in other men's names you may Lord it over not only the Common people but the
Senate as he told some of your kindred that had searched every secret corner in
your spiritual house. Consistorium ut dominari Schulting Steinwich Hierarch
Anacris: Lib. 2.
possit Senatui asciscit pro senioribus Consutes, Senatores and Optimates...
Where if persons of quality be wanting to complete your number, you go^ to
plow with an ox and an ass, yoke a Count and a Cobbler together, while your
prickeard Pastor keeps the goad in his hand to quicken their dull pace and
drive them into Rebellious Covenants and so to their D^ut. 22. 10.
shame and destruction. The Judge in our Officials Court is to be no petie
mercinarie lawyer, but a Doctor that has approved his skill in our Doctors
at law more sit judges then unstudied Nobles or Gentlemen.
Civil laws before one of our learned universities, and thereby supposed to
have beter abilities to judge then any Nobleman, Gentleman, Burgess, one or
more, except some select persons who by study may have attained to some
excellence in that faculty, wherewith neither by birth nor education they are
known to be ordinarily qualified, unless Dame nature in Scotland has some
faeminine molds in every parish for your Elders, or some Seraphical fathers to
breed their children by the rod or institution of the Spirit. But to return to
our Doctor. From his single sentence appeal may be made to a Court of
Delegates consisting of a number the most learned, and in humane opinion the
most upright lawyers in the land. Which can be taken for no miserable relief,
being the highest Court constituted by the authority of the King where if not
His Majesty in person, his immediate Commissioners are Judges.

Your twice a year Synods seem somewhat unnecessarie if intended Synods not to
besummoned to receive lay appeals.
principally for receiving appeals, your Classical Presbyteries consisting of
persons (as you praetend) of such sincerity and honor, and somewhere (as I
remember) Didoclave tells us they have little work which, if well examined,
hapeneth not so much by reason of the aequitable proceedings in inferior
judicatures, as from the assurance which persons oppressed have to meet with
the same measure from the same men that are the Members of your Synods, who
know well enough how to gratisie one another in the mutual ratification of the
particular sentences passed before. The Primitive Synods found other work,
praeserving in their Provinces the purity of doctrine and uniformitie in
practice, trusting Bishops in their Dioceses except in singular cases with the
censures of persons and redress of grievances. Yet whatsoever convenience may
be in it our Episcopal twice a year visitation may parallel. If the chief
Noblemen etc have decisive voices in your Synods, they gain that privilege by
their birth or estates to neither of which is inseparably annexed wisdom,
pietis and learning, the three gifts or spirits you require in your Judges. How
far private instructions and interests praevaile with your Presbyteries in
their elections to exauctorate all the good qualifications in the competition
of Candidates, the records of your Edinburgh Tables at the beginning of this
Rebellion can justify: Though were their Honorable heads gaged and concluded
capacious to hold no less then a tunn of wisdom and learning, and their arms
clasped upon the embrace of the whole sisterhood of zeal, virtue, and grace,
with all other abilities requisite to your Elders, your Presbyteries full
approbation and choice could not authorize them to suffrage in a Synod, whereto
of old they had no admission, but as in the Second Council of Orange, when sent
thither by the King. I shall not insist upon the comparison or disparitie
between them and inferior Civil Court Judges, in whom no parts are wanting to
the execution of their place in whose choice the Canon of their institution is
observed All hopes of redress by appeal from your Synods to a General
Collusion and violence in the choice of Members for the Assembly.
Assembly are crushed in the shell by your underhand violence in election of
Members, and praelimitation of them that are chosen in their votes. You
remember the seven private directions sent to your Presbyteries before the
Assembly at Glasgow 1638. the fourth of which was. That such as are erroneous
in doctrine or scandalous in life, be praesentlie processed that they be not
chosen Commissioners, and if they shall hapen to be chosen by the greater part,
that all the best affected both Minicters and Elders protest, and come to the
Assembly to trstisic the same. By this trick you not only prae^udg'd or
praecondemn'd the legal freedom in choice, but caused to be process'd all
suspected to be of a different sense from that which you praedesign'd or
praescrib'd to the Assembly. Thus the Presbytery of Edinburgh put very many
of their Ministers under process, beginning with Master David Michel, their
proceeding Master David Michel. Lord of Dun.
against whom His Majesty's Commissioner could not get deferred until the
meeting of the Assembly. Thus the Lord of Dun chosen Lay Elder for the
Presbytery of Brechen by the voice but of one Minister and a few Lay Elders,
was accepted, and the Lord Carnaegie L. Carnaegie.
a Covenanter too, but somewhat more moderate, more lawfully chosen by the
voices of all the rest was rejected. There was another paper of instructions
dated August 27. 1638. which is mors in olla, the Collaquintada that spoils
all the pottage you bring us in this parapraph, the Second of which is this,
Order must be taken that none be chosen ruling Elders but Covenanters and those
well affected to the business, so that parts for judgment, wisdom, piety
etc are no considerable qualities in your Members of Assemblies, when the
Covenant and good inclinations to the bus^nesse (of rebellion) can be found
though but in Idiots and Atheists. The multitude of Burgesses and Gentlemen is
so great Why so many Burgesses and Gentlemen.
to some such good intent as this, that you may praeponderate the Parliament in
your laike votes, and anticipate any just exception they can make against your
Acts. The ground of their admission in your first reformation was a defect of
Clergy, which, when once supplied, had for 40. years possessed all the places
till exchange was made at your Glasgow null Assembly to do the work in hand.
The prime Nobility are not always the men, but such among them as are first
in popular opinion, and for that in your favor. Your choice The laity to have
no decisive voice.
of them is many times illegal, when to serve your turns you call them from
one Presbytery to another. Yet when all is done, you can plead no praecendent
from antiquity for any more then a declarative consent, no definitive sentence
no decisive voice, the subscriptions in the Ancient Councels, distinguishing
the Clergy and Laity in this manner. Ego N. definiens subscripst. Ego N.
consentiens subscripst. Those that at any time had greater privilege, (if the
words cited by your Bishop of Brechen must needs give it them) Gloriosissimi
edicunt and Gloriesissimi Iudicos dixreunt, were special Commissioners sent
from the emperors Perth Proceed.
not from any Presbyteries, as he tells you, and more to this purpose which you
may answer, as likewise what the Reverend Bishops objected in their
Declinatour, about Theodosius the younger, Pulcheria the Emperesse, and
Martinius in the fourth General Council of Chalcedon. Master Andrew! Ramsey
undertoke an hard task upon the top of his stool offering to prove the
lawfulness of Lay Elders Master Andrew. Ramsey.
by Scripture, Antiquity, Fathers, Councels, and the judgment of all the
Reformed Churches. And therefore, when His Majesty's Commissioners offered to
bring one into the pit that should encounter him, the cock crowed no more,
and, with the Brethrens good liking the controversy ceased. Till afterward, on
good occasion, a Member offering to prove there was no such thing in the
Christian world before Calvin's days, the Moderatour learnedlie confuted him,
saying, His father while he lived was of another mind. The E. Argile, E.
Argile. The King or his Commissioner has little power in Assemblies Protest of
Genesis Ass. Nov. 28. and 29. 1638.
who was surprised, as he said, at the sudden rupture of this Assembly, held
the Members a little while by the ears with his argument of convenience,
telling them. He held it sit the Assembly should consist of Laymen as well as
Churchmen; Take this with you. Your Assembly Ministers are chosen by the lay
Elders your Moderatours some times are laymen, a course not justifiable by law,
praecedent, or reason. The Kings Majesty's person, or in his absence his high
Commissioner is there only (you tell him) to countenance, not vote in, your
meetings, and proesides in them for exernal order, not for any intrinsecal
power. So that when you go on calmelie in your business he finds little to
do without Domitians flie-flap, of more use by far in a summer Synod then a
Scepter among you which you often times wrest out of his hand, and continue
your meetings after he has dissolved them. You can deny him or his
commissioner the sight of public papers brought into the Court (which liberty
the meanest subject may challenge.) And twhen he has any thing to object
against suppositions, or, at Nov. 28. sess. 7.
best suspicious Registers, the E. Rothes can tell him boldly in your names he
must speak it praesentlie if at al, and because he does not you E Rothes.
wait no longer; but, proimperio, vote them to be authentike. Beside, to
deminish as well the Kings state as authority, you send Assessours, or
Assistants to your Elders, and invest them with power aequivalent to his
Council This meeting thus disordered sits too long by a mon^th when no more,
and Assembles, too often when but once in a year. The number of such Members
no more hinders an appeal, Necessity of appeal.
then a multitude of Malefactors can sentence a necessity of becoming their
followers in doing evil. Their wisdom is such as his Exodus 23. 2.
to whom, a wiser man tells us, it is a sport to do mischief.

Their eminency like Saul's, head and shoulders higher then the common Prove. 10.
people in Rebellion, And their honor somewhat like Absoloms mule, bears them
up to the privilege of the great oak in the wood 2. Sam. 18. 9.
for their hanging in beter aequipage then their fellows. So that beside the
justice there is an absolute necessity of appeal to the Parliament, or in that
to the King from himself to himself, who sits there as supreme, here in no
other capacity but of your servant. Which is Pap. of 10. prop. before M.
Hamilt arri^.
far more justifiable and necessary then vour appeal from both Parliament
and Assembly to the body of the people, which I tell you again is the final
appeal you make when Assemblies are not modeled to vour mind. 1638. Why
Knigts and Burgesses so numerous.


The number and qualification of Knights and Burgesses is therefore large and
as great in your Assembly as Parliament, that your power may be as large and
great in the State as the Church, and the Nobility sit in one by election,
because they sit in the other by birth, and so in a condition to unite the
counsels of both according to the instructions of some few Presbyters that by
Sycophantike infinuations have got possession of their souls and by their
Spiritual Scepter dominion of their suffrages. Headie zeal, craft, and
hypocrisy got in commission or Covenant together, we find by experience can
fit them to judge in Ecclesiastike affairs, when age, wisdom and piety are
sentenced. If ^he hundred choice unparliamentarie pastors make up the odds of
some absent Noblemen, it should seem you and the Nobility are even pares cum
paribus, Peers alike in your honorable Assembly. Which they must not
disdain, since Christ himself, I mean not his Anointed, (that you take to be
out of quaestion) goes but for a single Elder or Moderatour at most. So
Cartwright and his Demonstratour cajoles them together, when he says, If they
(the Princes and Lib. 3. demonst. c. 14.
Nobles) should disdain to join in consultation with poor men, they should
disdain not men but Christ himself. So that Christ being in his name made
your Assembly Praesident or Prolocutour, the King in his Commissioner your
protector, the Nobility your aw full subvoters or suffraganes, I see nothing
wanting can conciliate a tyranny to your Presbytery, nor keep your foot of
pride from trampling as basely as may be upon the people. But not to forget at
last what you set in the front as first to be answered. The Presbyterian
course, as you, or I more truly, have described it, is not much more ready
then the Praelatical, because the benefit of appeal is to be had ordinarily
but once or twice in a year; not much more solid, because most of your Judges
can reasonably be thought neither good Civilians nor Casuists, not much more
aequitable, because, as you order them, many more of the laity then Clergy.

In the second hurt your Nobility sustain, the Bishop looks, not upon the
judgment of foreigne Reformed Devines (you do not say of Churches) nor yet on
their practice, which I have known some time a great deal too saucy with
Princely Patrons, but upon the aequity of the thing, upon the privilege our
Nobles in England enjoy, and the right yours have to the same by many years
praescription and the laws of your land.

The first will be found if the original be searched. The right of patronage
being by the due gratitude or favor of Kings and Bishops The original of
patronage.
reserved to such as either built Churches or, endowed them with some
considerable revenue, as likewise for the encouragement of others to propagate
means and multiply decent distinct places for Christian conventions. Hoc
singulari favore sustinetur, ut allectentur, La^ci, invitentur, and ind^antur
ad constructionem Ecclesiarum. The exercise hereof Coras. Glass.
in Justinian is expressed by the terms, Epilegein or onomazein, which
signifies an addiction or simple nomination, to stand good or be nulled at the
just pleasure of the Bishop, and therefore accounted no spiritual act in the
Patron, but a temporal annexed to that which is Temporale spiritualli annexum.
Altar. Da^asc:
spiritual in the Bishop, and therefore not simonaical as your brother
Didoclave would have it. Nor is there that absurd^ie he mentions of arrogating
to one what belong to all the Members of the Church, as is praetended, but can
never be proved, Nor that danger in transmitting this right from one to
another, if the care of the first patron des^end not with it, which defect the
care of the praesent Bishop must supply. Nor is it requisite he should be a
Member of the same parish to which he praesents, since the Bishop is head of
the same diocese to whom, That this is contrary to the liberty of the
Primitive and Apostolic Kirk, to the order which Gods 2. B. Disc. chapter 12.
word craves, and good order, is only said but not argued in your Discipline,
no more then by you when and to whom it became a grievance. Your patience in
enduring it goes for no heroical virtue, being peevish enough soon after the
Act of annexation had passed, as appears by your carriage in the Assembly at
Edinburgh 1588. and turned into a Rebellious Conspiracy, allthough painted
with the name of a Parliam^nt that now at last (because it could not at first)
has taken it away.

The Nobilities loss of their Impropriations and Abbey lands is very
considerable, when they bethink themselves upon what false pleas, and to what
unconcerned persons they must part with them. Touching which as Sycophantike as
is the Bishops accusation, he will not abate a sig of his right for the
Presbyters answer, nor I a leter (take which he will) in exchange for his name.

Pl. in Carcu^ A. 5. sc.
Aedepol nugatorem lepidum lepide hunc pactu'st...
Calophanta est qui honest quidem loquitur, sed ^ujus facto ab oratione
discrepant.
Calophantam an sycophantam hunc magis esse dicam nescio.
That the whole generation of the praelatike faction (as your style it) did
hyperbolize in zeal against that which they call sacrilege, is an argument
they were all true bred, no bastard children of the Church, not so mean
conditioned as to sell their spiritual birthright for potage. Were your title
as good, (which can appear to be nothing but your rough hands, and red souls
with the blood of the Martyrs of your own making,) Genesis 25. 25.
we should commend so far as we act our selves your struggling as well for the
inheritance as primogeniture. But when we compare our professions or evidences,
and find our brethren to say that the benefactours and founders of these
Ecclesiastike possessions were true Christians, though mistaken, we think, in
Par. Alciat etc.
many matters of doctrine and worship; yours that that they were Members of
Antichrist undoubted Idolaters and haeretikes; Ours The Praelates title to
Impropriations and Abbey lands beter then the Pre^byters.
that the Churches which they endowed were Episcopal, such as we continue them
or to our utmost endeavor it. From which you degenerate, schismaticallie
separating, and arming your selves with all resolution and rage to demolish,
(beside what other advantage we may use of a nearer union and uniformitie in
religion, more consonant to the mind of the doners, at least if such as your
malice does render it, little thinking it may be to have it so unhapilie
retorted in that which is the chief drift of all your rebelling and
covenanting) when we think of no other restitution but by the possessours
consent, when it may be transferred to us by the same supreme hand that
conserr'd it on them, out of which you no sooner get opportunity and power but
you violently ravish it; calling Princes and nobles sacrilegious robbers while
they overpower you and deteine it; I believe all our Religious and prudent
Nobility will unanimouslie grant our plea more just, our proceedings more
moderate, and when God shall if ever, touch their consciences (not we the skirt
of their estates and livelihoods) with an humble fear that such an inheritance
withheld from such a Church, may be sacrilegious indeed; with assurance that
if it be so it is sinful; they will not value their lands at so dear a rate,
as to pay their souls for the purchase, but with courage and confidence in a
blessing from God to be multiplied on their undevoted temporal possessions
return them to him (the King I mean) from whom they received them, and be
beter content that Episcopal Christians then Presbyterian counterfeits should
repossesse them. But if such of them as are not persuaded in conscience they
are obliged to restore them upon the arguments we bring (which would never be
convictive if our plea were no beter then yours) shall adventure to leave the
suit depending till the Court of heaven give final sentence upon it; at their
peril be it, the Praelates and their followers use no violence nor course of
law here below to put them out of these their possessions, no threats but those
against sacrilege in Scripture, fearing this may be such, no activitic but
that of a swift charity to catch. hold of their souls and snatch them out of
the snare when they find them devouring the bate, and to put them ante vota,
before vows upon making inquiry, or if post vota to retract them. Therefore
such of the Pro. 20. 25.
Nobility and Gentry as were wakened hereby to take heed of their rights,
were best have a care they slumber not in the wrong, and take Solomon's counsel
intended Prove. 16. 8. Beter is a little with righteousness, then great revenues
without right. But (which requires the Readers advertence) for you here to call
those the rights of the Nobilitce and Gentry, The Reviewers praevarication. 6,
head. Chapter 9.
which so many Assemblies have declared to belong jure divino to the Church,
which in your first book of Discipline you tell them they had from thieves and
murderers, and hold as unjust possessions, or indeed no possession before God;
which in your second you hold a detesiable sacrilege before God; For you to
twit the Praelates with violence and threats, who are bound in John Knox's bond
not only to withstand the merciless devourers of the Church patrimony...
but to seek redress at the hands of God and man; April 24. 1576.
That declare the same obligation upon you to root out of the Kingdom S^.
Decl. 1642. Append.
as well the monster of sacrilege as that of Episcopacie, and so as well the
persons of most your Nobles as the Bishops; For you to object a ^ourse of law
and activitie, who by incessant demands and praeter legal devices never gave
over till the laws that annexed lands to the crown were repealed. For you to
brag of your last Parliament's con^irmation of titles, because your last
Assembly power could not reach beyond the destruction of patronages; What is
this but apertlie Sucophantein and calophantein, to fawn and accuse, dissemble
and destroy, Prove. 26. 28. 129. 5
flater your with mouth, while you spread a net for their feet and work the
ruin of their persons and estates?

If Noblemen once abase themselves to be Elders of every ordinary Noble Elde^s
^lighted by the Clergic.
Presbytery, it is not to be doubted but evey ordinary Presbyter takes
himself for their fellow if not their superior, which they find to their
grief, Therefore all or most respect that they give to their gracious
Ministers, is alas a little Court holy water cast on the flame of their zeal, a
sacrifice made for their own security from your ton^ues and pens, and from
the arms of the people that serve you^ warrants often times in tumults upon
their persons, For the hon^ur, on pay them they are feign, like wretches to
morgage their conscience, See (...) of the Congreg. to the Nobil. of Sc. 1559.
those that do not, gain the honorable titles of Traitors of G^d, are
cashiered your company, and then pass for no (...) honorable heathen,
publicans and sinners. If they becom^ (...) hmen between a single Presbyter and
a Prince, when he (...) with his I require you in my name etc. Before every
charge, (no very humble form as I take it) they ^all be called abusers of the
world, neutral livers a^ their pleasure, if not shedders of Scotch blood. And
some that draw on themselves their Prince's displeasure for a Rethorical
liberty used in their behalf, shall be paid for their pains with the
honorable essay of men sold unto sin, enemies to God and all godliness, the
L. Sempils L. Sempil. Lib: 2.
reward which he had from John Knox as this grateful Presbyter has registered
in his story. They that bridle the rage of their Princes, (the phrase usd) as
occasion serves, will not stick to halter the heads of their Nobles, if they
will neither lead nor drive, but molest the progress of their Presbyterian
designs. Your Historical Vindication I hope is no new named Logike, to prove
negatives of fact; your detraction from the credit of many irrefragable
authors Calderwoods rediculous reverence of Bruce's ghost Cuj^s anima, si
ullius mortalium, sedet in coelestibus. Ep. Ded. ad Aitar. Dam.
that Historize that insolent speech uttered by Bruce, looks more like a
calumny then their relation to a fable. And yet such a superstitious reverence
is paid by your fond brother Didoclave to the memory of his name, that he
could be content to pin his faith on his sleeve, and hang his soul at his
girdle. Anima me^ cumanima tua Bruci, si ex aliena ^ide esset pendendum, and
were there to be but one privilege of aeternal residence in heaven he thinks
neither Patriach nor Prophet Apostle nor Martyr, no, nor the Virgin Mary her
self were likely to carry it from Bruce. Which compared with King James's
opinion of him as a perfidious madman that had a whirligigge in his head,
delivered after to many experiments of his rebellious zeal, and frantike
restivenesse, is enough to condemn both saint and votarie to some bedlam
purgatory, before imposture can fix, or facility of fancy find these new
imaginary lights among the stars.

Your following invective is writ with Arrius's quill, and by such Manias
Calamo Constant: in Rescript
scribbling you gain the title that Constantine gave him, patroctonos
epi^iceias, discovering your self to be a parricide of aequitie, murdering
truth in your relation, and justice in your parallel. His Lordship takes
himself not concerned in this case to recollect 800. years History of
Europe, to pick out of the piety and humility of many Reverend Bishops the
pride and passionate errors of some few; No^ has he malice enough, with you;
to make that the nature of Our Bishops contest not with King and Nobles.
their office which has been some little monstrositie of mind, by ill habits
accidental to their persons. Beside, what among the Papists the nobiliti^ by
birth of many Bishops concurring with the received dominion and large revenve
of their Spiritual p^aeferment; may elevate their thoughts, and enhaunce their
own opinion of themselves, if impa^donable, adds little to the condemnation of
ours, which partake in little with them but their titles. The universal
supremacy, which the Pope arrogates as well over Kings as Bishops, may puff up
a little Cardinal, that is near him, in his purple, and possess him with a
conceit that he may Write himself companion to a King, whom he thinks (but is
mistaken) obliged, in Spiritual humility, to lie prostrate at his holiness
foot, and kiss his slippe^. But the same Kings soveraigntie in Ecclesiastici^
at home secured him from all such con^estation with his Bishops, Though, had it
not, the argument from a Cardinal in Rome to a Praelate in England will hardli^
find a topike. Those in Scotland take themselves as capable of honor Their
prae^dence, and place near the Throne.
conferred upon their order as their Popish praedecessours; Nor are such legal
establishments (if not of right) of Princely favor to becast away in
complement, Nor were they to make an unnecessarie distance out of form, when
the material meaning of their vicinitie to the throne, was the near
concernment of their counsel to the King. Orthodoxe Monarchs, as well as
Papists, having doubting consciences, and orthodoxe Bishops as good abilities
to resolve them. I have not heard they crowded much; or quickened their pace to
get the door of the Earls etc. Their Provincial that with much humility and
respect unto their H. H. took it, was lead to it by the hand that had exalted
them or their progernitours. But for the reason of praecedence, which I guess
to be your meaning, you were best review the Heralds office and reform it.
Poor podants are not to be reproached for making a little diocese of their
Schools (Priests being charged to make such of their houses) and from the
experimental regiment of boys raising their abilities, by honest endeavors,
1. Tim. 3. 4. and 5.
to the meriting an higher Episcopate of men; Nor their conscientious demeanor
in that office to be aesteemed the arroganci^ of their order, if it move Kings
to commit the white staves to the crosiar, and great seals to be under the
keys of the Church. The most Offices of state.
capricious of them all, and most contentious for the honor, (which I think
were none but such as did you too much service when they had it) were many
strains below your Presbytery of Knoxes, Brucesetc. Who have contested with
Kings for their Scepters, which with white staves and seals they brought under
the pedantike jurisdiction of their rod. Never have Bishops so ru^led it as
many base borno Presbyters with the secret Counsel. To whose Consistories all
Courts of Justice were feign to do homage and the greatest Lords of the land,
become subordinate Elders to the parson of their parish. It Is not so long that
yet it can be forgoten, since a most violent and malicious man How the
difference hapened between the E. Argile and Bishop Galloway.
called the Goodman of Earlstounne, a client of the E. Argile for interrupting
of divine service, forceable overturning the Communion Table in his Parish
Kirk, th^eatning and abusing the Minister with many other such enormous
crimes, was fined (but the fine never exacted) by the High Commission and
confined for a season. The E. Argile complained of his hard us^ge to the Lords
of Counsel, and informed against the Bishop of Galloway that he promised to
him somewhat, which he had not perf^rmed; The Bishop denied the promise, and
gainsayd what the Earl alleged, whereupon said the Earl, If you say so it is
as much as if I li^. The Bishop modestly replied, I do not say so, but I
beseech your Lp. to call your self beter to mind, and you will find it as I
say. This is giving the lie because he would not take it on himself, and
ru^ling with a great Lord, because he would not be ru^led out of a just
vindication of the truth, and yield his consent that a Counsel Table should
approve turning the communion table out of the Church. The Reviewers should do
well to bring in his accounts fuller, when he reckons with Bishops for braving
of Noblemen.

All Presbyterians are heterodoxe to all good Catholic Christians, with whom
Episcopacie is so necessary a truth, as next to the divine institution,
Presbyterians heterodoxe.
Universality, Vbiquitie and perpetuity can render it. Confingant tale
aliquid haeretici... nihil promovebunt, Could your invention seigne such
authority to Presbytery, yet your doctrine would Tert. De Praeser, cap. 32.
diversifie you into a sect. What the Bishops following words clear, shall not
one whit be clouded by any obscurity in my reply, though the strongest
eradiations that come from them would sink themselves silentlie in the deep,
played you not the malignant Archimede (though no such exact Mathematical
Divine) to reflect them into a flame that may set the ship of the Church on
fire about our ear^s some coals of this fire I shall heap on your head and
cast back into your bosom, which if you mean not to quench, you may blow up
to what fa^ther mischief you think good.

The Apostles were Bishops, who did, undoubtedlie delegate the 1. No Ordination
but by Bishops.
power of ordination to none but such as were constituted Bishops by them to
that purpose.

This power appears not undoubtedlie to have been exerciz'd by 2.
any but Bishops in the History of the Scripture.

This power was exerciz'd canonicallie by none but Bishops in the 3.
History of the Primitive Church According to the second canon of the
Apostles. Presbyter ab uno Episcopo ordinetur, and Diaconus, and reliqui
Cleri^i.

The laying on of hands of the Presbytery, both in Scripture and 4.
Ecclesiastike story was only for external form, no intr^secal power, the
efficacy of the act being in the Bishops benediction, which I never find
attributed to the Priest. As in the third Canon of the fourth Council of
Carthage, Episcopo eum benedicente, nowhere benedicente Presbytero. Therefore
your friend Didoclave is feign to acknowledge Aitar: Dam. cap. 4
a great difference, Magnum discrimen, between St. Paul's imposition of hands
and that, at the same time, of his Presbytery; whatsoever is mean'd by it. Nam
per impos^tionem mannum Apostolorum Deus conferebat charismata, non autem per
impos^ionem mannum Presbyterorum, distinguishing in the ordination of Timothy
between dia and meta, the former relating to Saint Paul, the later to the
assistent Priests. Which is another interpretation of the tex^ then you were
pleased to make of it chapt. 8. So that I see the brethren agree not upon the
point.

Succession through the lineal descent of Bispops from the Aposiles, and
ordination 5. No comfortable assurance but from Apostolical succession and
Epis^opal ordination. De Praeser. cap. 32.
by the hands of Apostolical Bishops have been ever used as strong arguments to
uphold Catholic Christians in a comfortable assurance of their Ministry as
lawful. And haeretikes have been p^essed by the ancient Reliquos vero qui
absistunt a principali successione, and quocunque loco colligunter s^cspectos
ha^ere etc.
Fathers with the want of nothing more then these to justify their profession.
H^c enim modo Eccl^siae Apostolicae census suos deferunt, says Tertullian And
Irenaeus before him joines the gifts of God required in the Ministry, if he
meanesnot the sacraments with the Apostolical cession of the Church. Vbi igitur
charismata Domini posita sunt, ibi discere oportes veritatem, ^pud qu^s esi ea
quae est ab Apostolis Ecclesiae successis etc. The Presbyterians praetending
divine institution, must likewise prove such an uninterrupted succession, or
evidence their new extraordinary mission, otherwise they can minister little
comfort less assurance of their calling to be lawful. The former they can not
do for Saint Hierom's time at least, who makes ordination a propriety of the
Bishops. Quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus quod Presbyter not facit?
where a friend of theirs fails them when he says, ad morem jusque si^ae
aetatis respexit. That he had respect to the custom and Walo Messal.
canon of his time. Nor can they do it for above 200. years uncertain story
after Christ, in which they have as little light to show their Presbytery was
in, as that Episcopacie was out, which they would feign persuade us to take
upon their word dispensing with themselves for the use of unwritten tradition
to so good a purpose. If they will plead an extraordinary mission, they
should do well to name the first messenger that brought the news of their
Euangel, and what miracle he wrought which might serve him for a leter of
credence to us, who it may be otherwise, shall be no such superstitious
admirers of his gifts or person. 6.


That therefore the orthodoxe Ministers must want the comfortable assurance of
their undoubted ordination in the Ministry, which words yet bear a much more
moderate sense then that you give them viz. That they may very Kakos hermeneus
antochrema eikon te kai andrias esti tou diabolou. Reser: ad Ar.
well know and be assured that their calling and ministry is null, the
distance being (as I take it) not so indivisible between the negation of one
assurance to the position of the other. Such a malicious interpreter bears the
image and may stand in Constantines opinion for the statue of him who is the
father of calumnies, and cares not what p^yson he casts to spot other men's
names, and crack their credits ta tesoiceias ita motetos deleteria apheidos
proballon, as true of an Aerian as Arian.

Your divination about the deleted words will succeed in some The Praelates do
no^ annull the being of all Reformed Churches.
strange disoverie by and by. In the interim you set too sharp an edge upon
the doctrine of the Bishops friends, and do act violence where it may be they
intended not so much injury as the ut most extremity of justice, allthough
they held the axe in their hand in Christian charity disputing the sentence,
not so hasty to execute it, (or beyond it) in the rigor, and cut off at one
stroke the Clergy from their calling, and so many, ^ay societies of Christians
from the Church. Until (...) meet with some particular more forward instances
then I know of, I shall answer for them to the Churches of France, Holland,
Zwitzerland and Germany, as Pope Innocent writ to the first Council at Toledo,
about the ill custom of the Bishops ordination in Spain That it is very
requisite somewhat should be peremptorily determined according to the true
primitive tradition might it be without the disturbance of so many Churches.
For what is done, ita reprehendimus, ut propter numerum corrigendorum ea quae
quoquo modo sacta^ sunt non in dubium vocemus, sed Dei potius dimittamus
judicio. We so dislike it as not to startle so great a number of delinquents
with our doubt, but refer the judgment to God who stands in the
congregation Ps. 82. 1.
as well of Presbyters as Princes, and is a Judge as well among Ministers as
Gods. The Sophisme of the Jesuits, because so popular, should They use not the
Sophisme of the Jesuits.
have been refuted, or else not recited. allthough the ^imilitude it brings
runs not upon all four even with the doctrine of the Bishops prime friends.
Some of whom I believe will acknowledge there may be resident many Members of
the true Church, where are no true Sacraments, being well praepared to receive
them when they may have a true Ministry to dispense them. That one of the two
Sacraments is true, though not This word duly was left out by Henderson in his
recit^l of K. Chapter 1. words to this purpose Answ: to 1. pap. Ep. 7. Ad. Symrn.
1. Pap. ^o Henders.
duly administered, when, in case of necesstie, by lay hands, where is no true
Minist^e to do it, which may consist with that of B. Ignatius if applied, to
this purpose, Ouk exon esti choris tou episcopou out baptizein, out
prospherein. Exon at most but illegitimating the outward visible act; not
nulling the inward invisible grace, That the other's effectual, when had but in
voto, if it can not in signo, through want of any or (which is as bad) a
lawful true Ministry to make it. In the third clause I hope you will shake
hands with the Jesuits and them. Where is no true ordination, there is no true
ordinary Ministry, or lawful Priesthood as His late Majesty called it. As
for the fourth the Bishops friends, whatsoever they may, do allay it thus.
Where are no Bishops can be no comfortable assurance of a true ordination, And
so in whatsoever reformed Country are no Bishops, being no true Apostolic
ordination, no comfortable assurance is had of a true visible Church in the
public administration of the Sacraments, though Heb. 7. 25. 26.
they hope well the invisible Members have an invisible true Priesthood among
them, or such an high Priest as being himself hol^e, harmelessc etc is able to
supply what their Presbyters want, able to save them eis Romans 14. 23.
to panteles very completelie, and make intercession for them who sin in
submission (out of more good meaning then faith) to their discipline, who can
give no comfortable assurance that Saint Paul's rod or St. Peter's keys everwere
committed to their charge. Those of the Reformed, which I hope are not all, i^
any, that concur, if you mean covenant, like your selves, under praetense of
self praeservation (being endangerd by nothing beyond the frequent ineffectual
power of good advice, and plea of Apostolic example) with ^eigned words to
make merchandise as well of Bishops as Kings, and like the insolent Abaddons at
Edinburgh and London, to assault their persons and then abolish their order,
declare themselves such as Saint Peter's false teachers or worse because more
public in bringing in damnable haeresies, denying the Lord (at least in his
Ministry, which they call Antichristian) and (what they have allreadie in
part) bringing swift destruction upon themselves.

Your officious informer that drew the curtain and made the discovery The
Reviewers malic^ in publithing what the Bishop had deleted and perverting it,
of what the Bishop deleted, had little good manners, though, it may be, not so
much malice as you in your uncharitable (not so fortunate) conjecture. A
dangerous question being mistaken when called a true judgment, and doubting
whether it be within the pale, not actuallie excluding all Reformed Ministres
etc. out of the line of the Church. Remorse of conscience has commonly
antecedent evidence of science, putting all out of question and doubt, without
which the vanity or pusillanimitie of repenting had been little commendable,
how condemnable soever had been the iniquity of erring. What His Lordship left
behind unscraped out, does not show his mind only, but the mind of all good
Catholic, orthodox Christians. And why his fear to provoke should incline him
more to delete the following expressions, then his care for their comfortable
satisfaction had moved him to pen them, I know not. Nor need I be curious to
enquire the reason of a line blotted in his book more then if I had seen it
expunged in his papers being not concerned to give account for more then was
his pleasure to have published. Though, were all the Protestant Churches (what
they are not) They may be doubted to be un-Christian that call us
Antichristian.
as unconscionablie cruel to us as the Presbyterian Conventicle of the Scots, I
see not why, in reference to the Religion we profess, it should be more unsafe
why more unseasonable (since they give, I hope, the same liberty they take]
out of a pious solicitude to have a union of both, some what ambiguouslie to
unchristen them, then they out of malice, to make an aeternal separation, very
affirmativelie anti-Christen us in all the peevish pamphlets they put out. So
that whether stands upon the more extreme pinnacle of impudence and arrogance,
the Praelate that doubts your being in a Church visible true for succession and
Apostolic ordination, or the Presbyter that denie^ our being in any but what
is visible false by a Satanical Priesthood and Antiapostolical investiture, let
your aequitable comparers impartiallie decide. The The Church of Rome not most
true.
Praelatical tenet is not to aver the Church of Rome, as she stands this day
etc to be a Church most true, who praeferre that of their own for a truer, and
condemn many Canons in the Counsel of Trent. That they h ld she is true in
respect of undoubted succession and Apostolic ordination (our business now in
dispute) so much concerns them, as the truth of their own derived from that
Nor can you deny, what you so shamefullie dissemble, that in the retrograde
line your last Priest (for a last there must be, unless you have been
Autochthones or Autorani ^i rather, coaeternal with tho Priest that is in
heaven) had his ordination, and you thereby succession from them; and so both
prove as Antichristian as ours. An easy way of salvation in the Romish
Church, is no second tenet of the Praelates, who meet with her stumbling upon
Nor has she the most easy way of salvation.
many errors in doctrine and worship, going somewhat about by Lymbus Patrum
and Purgatory, whereas we think if she walked with us, she might have a more
easy and shorter journey to heaven. Yet withal knowing that the ways of God
are anexichniastoi not to be tracked Romans 11. 33.
and his judgments anexcreuneta not to be searched; we dare not damn at
adventure all that go with her, (no more then you can assure a ship to be
sunk so soon as ever you lose sight of her sail,) but leave the issue to him
who is great in Counsel, and mighty in work, Ier. 32. 19.
whose eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every one
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings. The
separation from Separation from her in many things needless.
her, Which they hold to be needless is such as that which you fondly make
about copes and surplices, Church Music and festivals and that came not in
with the Counsel of Trent. That which is made upon higher points, (though not
yet, God be praised, in the highest of having one Lord, saying one Creed, using
one baptism in substance however different in ceremonic) they impute to them
who kept not their station in conformite to the Primitive Christians of the 5.
or 6. first Centuries, with whom a reunion not only may, but ought to be much
desired on just conditions, and that which is, continued, rather then the
division made greater by our fruitless compliance with morose and humourous
Reformers, whose preaching being not with entising words of man's wisdom, they
tell us of aspirit, which can not be the same En apodeixei pneumatos ^ai
dynam^os. 1. Cor. 2. 4.
with Saint Paul's, because thereof they never gave us any demonstration, nor of
any power but the sword.

Could your bold praecedent privilege or excuse me in comparing, judging,
censuring or approving, the public transactions of our Royal Sovereign, I
should with much modest and innocent freedom profess more justifiable,
according to Christian Religion and prudence, His Majesty's late graces and
securities granted unto the returningconfederated Irish; then any like future
concession unto the persisting, covenanting Scots: They gratefully accepting a
limited toleration of their public worshp to those of their own division in
that Country; you endeavoring to extort an absolute injunction of yours in
all His Majesty's dominions, denying liberty of conscience, so little as to his
family or person. They only A^tic. 1.
craving in much humility, a freedom from being bound or obliged by oath to
acknowledge the Ecclesiastike supremacy in the King, you arrogantlie binding
by solemn league and covenant (wherein so much is implied) Him and us to
attribute it to the Kirk. They renewing in the oath of allegiance their
recognition of Royal right; and swearing, without restriction, their defense of
his person etc to the uttermost of their power, you by proclamation admitting
Febr. (...) 16. 9. Artic. 3.
him to the exercise of his power, but in order to the Covenant, And
covenanting his defense no otherwise then in the desense of (what you call) the
true religion and liberties of the Kingdoms. They subjoining in that oath
their best endeavor to disclose to His Majesty etc all treasons and
traitourous conspiracies etc. You having not a syllable to that effect in your
covenant, lest you should be obliged to betray your selves, who are resolved to
continue principals in such practices against him and his Royal family to the
last, They charitablie forgeting all revenge against any of His Majesty's
party that had fought against their confoederacie; you cruelly combining,
expresselie to bring to public trial all such as had been any way
instrumental opposers of your Covenant. They embracing in the arms of
Christian communion, their quondam enemies, now fellow subjects of a different
religion, you baselie butchering them with unexemplified cruelty 1. with your
material sword, axe, or halter in their bodies, your civil in their estates,
your spiritual (what may be by your excommunication) in The Presbyterian Scots
more bloody then the Irish.
their souls. The aggravations you bring against His Majesty's agreementare,
First, That it was with persons so bloody which as it can not be wholelie
excused in them, so ought it of all men least to be objected by you, whose
religion has passed from the Castle of Saint Andrews to the House at
Westminster in a red sea path, made for you neither by Moses's rod, nor Eliah's
mantle: under the conduct of no civil, no prophetical power, fenced on both
sides with blood of different complexions, the blood of Popish and orthodoxe
Praelates, the blood of Princes addicted to several Religions, So that Chapt. 4.
God doubtless will have a controversic with you, who as the Prophet Hose
speaks, by swearing and lying have broke out into rebellim, and blood touches
blood. The blood of the Cardinal has touched the blood of the Archbishop. The
blood of Queen Mary the blood of King Charles, and more then that, which you
may hear of otherwhere Touching the cruelty of the Irish I remit you to what
our Royal Martyr has writ with much Christian indifference. Chapter 12. of E^:
Buo^. where you may take notice principally of these clauses. I would to God
the I^ish had nothing to allege for their imitation against those whose blame
must neede^ be the greater by how much protestant principles are more against
all rebellimagainst Princes then those of Papists... I believe it will at last
appear that they who first began to embroyle my other Kingdoms (and who,
(...) pray you were they) are in great part guilty, if not of the first leting
out. Yet, of the not timely stopping those horr'd, essusions of blood in
Irland. To omit what ^is Majesty intimated before, That their oppressive
fears rather then their malice engaged them, and you know how profuse you are
of blood when you treat of the doctrine of self praeservation. Secondly, you
are Whose Liberty of religion was limited.
troubled at the full liberty of Religion he granted them, which if you er saw
the articles, extended no farther them the remission of poenal statutes. not to
the restitution of Churches and Church Livings, but what they had then in
possession, not to any jurisdiction but what they exerciz'd at that time, for
which an express caution was taken in the very first article of the treaty.
And in the last but one their Regular Clergy were restrained to their
pensions, and confind to the praecincts of their Abb^ys and Monasteries, which
are explained to be within the Walls Mures, and ancient fences of the same. No
charitable benefactour having liberty to exercize one maine point of their
Religion, by laying a foot of land unto their Convents. But had it been as full
as you f^ncie i^ (because you make your own case many times the same with that
of your brethren abroad) I pray directly answer me, Why a Papist may not have
as free liberty as a Jew? And Whether, according to your conscience be more
Anti^Christian a Cloister or a Synagogue? Thirdly, You object the Arms,
Castles, and Places of trust saffer in the hands of Papists then Presbyterians.
prime places of trust in the state he put in their hands. Whereas if the case
were politicallie disputed, Whether the Militia were safer in the hands of
Papists or Presbyterians. I believe the former would carry it upon the greater
security (though not generally the greatest) they give in their principles,
and the greater experimental assurance in many places of trust they have often
rendered Princes in their discharge. And had the prime Castle and place of Trust
in that Kingdom been theirs, and no arms nor command in the Army been the
others (a tolerablee freedom of religion being granted them) it is not
improbable that Noble Marquess last year had either not been forced to hazard
a siege for his reentrance, or at least not betrayed into an inevitable unhapie
necessity of retreat, What they demanded, or had the 9. Article of agreement
will inform you. That upon the distribution, conferring, and disposing of the
places of command honor profit! and trust... no difference should be made
between them and other his Majesty subjects. (Here Is no exception against
Malignants nor persons disafected to the cause) but that such distribution
should be made with aequal indifferency, according to their respective merits
and abiliues. By which qualification all disloyal demeriting persons are made
obnoxious to a just exception at any time. Those that continued in possession
of His Majesty's Cities, Garrisons Arti^. 29.
and within their quarters are to be commanded, ruled and governed in chief
upon occasion of necessity, as to the Martial and militaire affairs, by such
as His Majesty or his chief Governer, or Governers of that Kingdom for the
time being should appoint. And where any garrison etc. might be endangerd by
restoring to their possessions and estates the Litizens, freemen, Burgesses,
and former inhabitans, they were not to be admitted, but allowed a valuable,
annual rent for the same, as in the 7. Article was provided touching those of
Cork, Youghall, and Dungarvan. Finally in all that ag^eement no condition is
found, That His Majesty or His Lieutenant should be governed by a Popish
Parliament at Dublin when it might be in Civil, nor by a Clerical council or
Assembly at Kilkennie in Ecclesiastical affairs. Fourthlie, That the King
gave Kings cannot ratisie too well what they promise, if just... Sed qui
juramentis sudunt sicut pueri astragatus Pet. ad. Alter. Dam.
assurance, of his endeavor to get the articles ratisied in the next
Parliament of England, was to ratify at praesent their confidence in him, for
which he can not be blamed, unless you would have Kings sport like boys with
changeable knots in their treaties or (what you scornefullie charge them all
with when you think on it) like children play at checkstone with their promises
and oaths. That His Majesty did this of himself, is false, if mean'd
exclusive of his Council. That he did it without a Parliament, which he could
not have, and before it, which his urgent necessities could not stay for, is
justifiable by that law which will never plead for your pardon. Salus populi
suprema lex. Nor is that current law contraire to any standing law in such an
exigence as his unless there be one (as there is none) that injoines him to
follow the misfortune of his father, to let the Presbyterians Parliaments not
be stayed for in extremities if they can not be called at present.
bind his hands from laying hold upon any advantageous assistance from the
Papists, till his head be cut off by your bloody Executioners the
Independents. Therefore whatsoever passed in this agreement, if persuaded by
the gracious party, no faction, of the Praelates, they exonerated their
conscience, if opposed by them, they were no antagonists to their duty; if
with moderation and patience heard, their passionate zeal did not so transport
them as to reject salvation from God, when he gives it by the hand of Papists
unto their-King. Who think it neither loyalty nor prudence rather to deliver
him up to the hazard, if not assurance, of the axe, then he should by such
means be delivered from the peril of the sword. The Kings inclination toward
covenanting protestants has never hithe^to made such an uglie appearance The
King never expressed his inclination to Covenans ers.
as to scare them in a dream or a waken their art and industry in a furi^.
Nor have you heard, I believe, His Majesty complain that his sleep was broake
by their midnight disswasions. If in sermons by daylight they laid before him
the mischiefs that lurk in your Covenant they did but bring him a message
from his Fathers Ghost who it, may be heard the lowed cries of those tongues
that had took it, as he passed from the skaffold to Ahrahan^s bosom. Or were
sent from some other Ancients that were dead to tell him more truth then he
ever will hear from the Scottish Interpreters of Moses and the Prophets. That
temporal death with any misfortune ought much rather to be embraced His
Kingdoms ruin rather to be embraced then his souls.
then the loss of his soul in the hell of the Covenant they could not beat
too often in His Majesty's head, unless they infalliblie knew his Martyred
Fathers instructions to be engraven with the point of a diamon'd, or
unchangeablie set as a seal on his heart. And where as our Savior assures him
the whole world can be no proportionable profit for that damage mentioned in
the 16. S. Matthew. the ruin of his three Kingdoms need never be grudged in so
good an exchange as he Verse. 26.
afterward speaks of. Though His Majesty's conscience (or such of his Council
as looked well about them) could not hitherto tell him he has been by any
necessity tempted to one of those two immediate extremities, between which
providence ever maintained a visible pass (it may be none of the easiest) nor
ought is it but sloth and Athiesme (except some treason may be in the
composition) that would scare him with fancies of prodigious monsters, worse
then Solomon's lion in that way. Your forsooth, with a seigned lispe and a
courtesy, will win your Mistress (the Covenant) no favor in Prove. 26. 13.
wisemens eyes, who can not be caught with such red and white painting and
patches as where with you so often praesent her. Since their dear bought
experience has tought them that her crown of pride can as little brook a
society with the Goddess Regalitie, as Prelacie. Nor does she oblige in
sense, how fair soever she speaks, her takers to less in their station, then
to the abolition of them both.

If I conceived my self in danger, instead of answering, I would cut out your
next paragraph and wear it for an amulet or special More learning under
Episeopacie then Presbytery.
guard against magical enchantments, having read that things most rediculous or
filthy are the best security that can be in such cases. That you should
appeal to Reason and Experience for your Judges of Presbyteries praeeminence
before Episcopacie in learning, honor and wealth, who stand self condemned by
the frequent invectives you with your partisans make against the vain
philosophy, which is the sciential learning, of Prelatical preachers, against
the dignities of Praebendaries, Archdeacons etc. Against plurality of their
livings, which doubles their revenues, is as if you were practizing with your
pencil upon the first verse in Horace; Poetry, rather then disputing by your
pen in divinity or Logike with the Bishop. The Severest of your H^mano capiti
cervicem pictor quinum.
Trial before ordination is about cutting to the root some Hebrew word, and
corrupting it in the sense; graffing some young vowel upon an hopeful stock,
or in oculating with a prick to make it bring forth fruit pleasing to your
taste, though, in all likelihoo'd, never intended by the Holy Spirit that
planted it in the Bible. Your all sort of learning here, called gifts utterance
and knowledge in your first book of discipline, were it not reduced, as it is
in your liturgy, to tatling The Bishops trial before he ordains more serious
then the Presbyters 4-head page 14. they propose him a theme or text to be
treated privatelie, whereby his ability may the more manifestly appear unto
them.
half an hour beside a text, would put his Lay, if not his Clerical, Judges
to a nonplus when they were to give their verdut of his parts: And though here
you talk of disputations upon controverted heads, and there of the chief
points of controversy betwixt you and the Papists, Anabaptists, Arrians etc.
We know what discouragements you give your young students about looking into
Schole Divinity, the most authentike Ecclesiastical History, and Fathers,
without which they are proper champions for such an encounter. It is not David's
sling, but in David's hand, and with David's God to guide the stone which goes
out often that, without other weapons, can make these Goliaths fall upon their
saces to the earth. Our trial is personnallie by the Bishop or his Archdeacon,
unless in his absence some other learned Minister be appointed. We have
nothing to do with lay Elders nor people in the examen, who have no interest
by the Catholic canon in the election. Peri tou me tois ocklois epitrepein tas
eclogas poiersthai toon mellontoon Cathisasthai cis hieratcion is the 117. by
Iustells account. Our practice is seldom so remiss as yours, if our rule be
more, it may be imputed to the necessity of that time, when learned men, I
mean reformed, did not swarm in a number aequal to the cures to be served.
Against which what you argue in your own case 1. Book: Discipl. may be replied
to as in ours. 1. That the Bishop His Deane, and Canons, 4. Head.
or Cathedral Clergy, may supply the imperfections of others in his Diocese
(for if the lack of ablemen be real, your straight and sharp examination may
disparage by discovering the infirmities, not one whit enable your Proponents
or expectants for their duties) 2. The raritc among the Gentiles in the
beginning of the Gospel was recompensed with the extraordinaire diversity of
gifts. 3. Unpreaching Ministers are no idols, having ears to hear what the
Church praescribes Neither judge we that the Sacraments can be rightly Mistred
by him in whose mouth God has put no Scrmon of exhortation. 1. B. Disc. 4.
head.
and mouths to utter, as her prayers for, so her wholesome doctrine unto the
people. But what, I can not pass by since it meets me in the way. That
efficacy of the Sacraments, as well as power of the word, which you call of
exhortation, should be limited to the abilities of the Minister. And as the
Papists directly, so we by inference, be disabled in both, I think will help
you to a share in the Jesuits Sophisme, whereof we latclie discoursed, and set
you upon the pinnacle of arrogance and impudence, who hereby unchurch the
greatest part of Christians, and contract this Sovereign excellency to your
selves. Your Latin disputations when they come by course among the ignorant or
younger fry of your Ministry, do but multiply haeresies, and make them now
and then, in their heat, blaspheme God more learnedlie then in their weeklie
exercizes and Sermons. As occasion shall serve, I may help you hereafter to
more instances then one The Papis^ical Priests have neither power nor
authoriti^ to Minister the Sacraments of christ Jesus, because that in their
mouth is not the serm^n of exhortation Ib. 9. head.
of the like practice among some of your brethren abroad, where every
beardlesse boy (for with such your Presbytery every where abounds) has
liberty to talk (for I can not called disputing) upon the highest mysteries
the Trinity, Praedestination etc. As considentlie, to the shame of your
religion, as the gravest Doctor can determine in the chair. What of this may
be tolerable among the learned, super rotam materiam, Is little beter then a
form, and little decency in that, which approves not much, improves less the
abilities of the longest liver among you all. Our aequivalent to this (let it
be what it will) in our Archdeacons Visitation, your friend Didoclaves turns
off with a jeer, making as if the abilities of our Ministry were inquired into
after they were constituted leaders of the flock. Primum cre^tur du^ores
gregis, deinde siunt discipuli, where as it is principally to discern the
advancement by study of what abilities they had at their ordination, whereby
the election of rural Deanes may be regulated, and persons known that are
enriched by gifts befitting Alter. Damasc. Schot^ hetcr^doxe divines not
comparable to the Orthodoxe English.
them to be Bishops. Your experience shall not draw me into an unnecessarie
comparison between our English Clergy and the French or Dutch Divines, whose
ordination, you are not ignorant, has been impeached by their adversaries
(whether deservedly or no they are to look to) and their abilities resolved
just like yours, into an effusive readiness of words. But I bid defiance to
you and your Countrymen of the Discipline, to show me among you all, a Law'd,
an Andrewee, a Montague, a White, to whom the English you name must give the
guerdon of learning (which I bele^ve Reynolds carried Admittunt ad Ministrium
indignis^emos sartores, subulcos. and infimad^ faece homines, modo sint
togodaedali etc.
not at Hampton Court Conference) unless Perkins had more in his Chain of
p^aedestination, or Parker in his silie Arraignment of the Cross. But how
solid and singular soever was their learning, their defection from the
doctrines and practical praecedents of so many years standing among Catholic
Christians makes their faith in many things, and their good parts
comparitivelie in all, but as chafe to be blow'n away with the wind, and the
memoire of them to be winowed by our breath that the truer grain may be
visible in Gods Church. Avolent quantum volent pallea levis fidei quo^unque.
Assltu tentationum, eopurio^ mass a frumenti in horrea Domini reponetur. It Is
well your C. Schulting. Hier. Ana^ris. Lib. 1.
conscience can be enlarged in some little charity toward any of our Bishops,
though we may be justly jealous of this kindness, and fear (if we heard
their names) it may be placed upon persons inclined to your interest, rather
then commended to your good opinion by Tert. De Praescr. c^p. 1. Quod non ideo
scandalizarioport^at, quod qui prudentissimi odificen^ in (...).
their m^rit. But whoso'er they be you mean, we know you never prike any in
the list of the learned but the best read men in Synopis's and systems in
Common place books, and Centurists, or general lie in your select Reformed
Fathers, whom, in a fallacy, often times you persuade your Disciples to be the
more proper men because standing (you tell them) upon the shoulders of the
ancients, when, if set on even ground, the longest arm they can make in true
learning and eloquence, will not reach half way up to their girdles. But to
proceed in some answer to your quaestion. The Warner therefore speaks to you
of ignorance, because your Presbyteri^ parts with the greatest incentives and
encouragements of study; Therefore ^shops ^ded by the Reviewer to be suspected.
of contempt, because it quits those dignities which give praecedence to their
persons, and draw reverence to their function; Therefore of beggerie, because
it diverts the Ecclestastical revenue, and makes you but stipendiaries of the
people. Of this very conciselie, yet fully has his late Majesty admonished
you Chapt. 17. of E^x: Bu^. (...) (...) how the cause of ignorance, contempt
and begge^y.


He that surveyes impartiallie the multitude of good Livings and other Clerical
praeferments in England which might serve as a supplement to the bad, will
find little reason for any, none at all for the greatest part of our Priests I
mean those that had a title, that were eidi^ cheirotonoumenoi (as it is Can.
6. Council. Chalced) to be begarlie and contemptible for their want, especially
since those Pluralists, you confess were searce one of twenty that lived in
splendor at Court^ or were Nonresident Provision under Epi^ in England against
the beggerie etc of the Priests.
in the Country. Such as were apolelymenoos ordinat, ordained at large,
without title to any benefice or cure, the Bishop was charged with them till
provided for. And they that complained of their poverty had no cause, there
being as you tell us, such plenty in his palace. The ignorance of our Clergy
(which it may be was not incomparable if we bring yours into the light) was
never greater then when Calvin and Knox had some heirs and successors that
crept into the praelacie, Puritanical Bis^ops make an ignorant ^lergie.
degenerating from the austeritie of their Fathers, who because they loved not
the office, never mean'd to discharge it. Yet could dispense in their
conscience with the title and lawne sleeves into the bargain, that under them
they might take the revenues of our Bishops^ But when and where we had Austins
and Chriso^, Lawds and Andrews's never cloud was dispelld with the rising sun,
so as ignorance at their asscent in the Ep^scopate of our Church. And they that
heard not of the great study in these Pr^lates to remedy the evils, brought
in by the other, are such as Zecharie speaks of that imagine evil against
their brother Cho. 7. v. 10. 11. 12.
their heart, refusing to hear^en, and pulling away the shoulder, and stopping
the ear that they should not hear, and making their hearts as an adam^ that
they may not etc. Those some that were most provident, you mean (I think)
most penurious in their families, were those I told you of that made a trade of
^ieir proeferinents, and would dispense with any thing among the putitans but
their purfes. Such as those soms other that I named, as they were apter to
teach, so were they known to be of Our Bishop no Pur^haser by his parsimonie.
beter behavior and given to hosp^a litie, the requifites of a Bishop and
accomplishments of ours, whose parsimonie or providence for hu samilie was not
that which advanced him a sumine to make a purchase. If the su^plusage of his
^evenue could do it in a cheap and plentiful Country, J know not who have
beter title to it then his heir. Though as I am informed, where I may trust
(meeting with a professed enmity against his office, whatsoever reserve of
kindness was for his person.) This great purchase, you mean, was the
recoverie of lands sacrilegiouslie taken and detained from the Church, in the
purs^ whereof, as he spared no endeavor, so it should seem he was well
rewarded with success.

Allthough prating and praying non sense in the Church may well pass for a
paraphrase on that which the preacher calls the sacrifice of fools, Yet (...)
nowledgelabour or conscien^ s^wed in Presbyterian preaching.
I wish that were the worst which Presbytery brings when she sets her foot in
the House of God, and not another * of bewitching rebell^ mentioned by Samuel,
or treacherous. K. K, which the prophet Habakkuk calls Sacrisicium sagenae, the
sacrifice to the net or drag, making men as the fisher of the sea, as the
creeping things that have no ^uler over them 1. Habak. 14. In whose praying or
preaching (whereof doubtless ^les 5. 1. 1. Sam. 15. 22.
we had the quintessence sent us by the Reviewer and his brethren ^f the
m^ssion) what knowledge there is beside that conning of texts of the
Concordance helped them to; What labor but of the lips and the lungs, neither
matter nor method requiring their studi^; What conscience, when no doctrine was
proved but by Scripture wrested, I am sure not to the salvation of the hearer,
and I fear to somewhat worse of the speaker, I leave to the testimony of any
knowing, attentive, ingenuous person that at any time was there. And for my
self, that was sometime seting aside all animositie and praejudice, I will in
the word of P^iest profess that I found none. But what else in the place of it
is best known to God and my conscience, and letit be to the world to be that
which makes me tremble to think of their danger that shall adventure their
souls in the botome of such hypocrisy and ^gnorance. To the calumnies which
this railing Rabshekal casts on our Church, I answer 1. That a read service was
all the Reading Ministers useful and justifiable in our Church.
exerciz^ of few, and why it may not be of some, as well as a read chapter and
Psalm is of many where the Discipline takes place I know not. Since care is
taken that where they read no necessatie preaching is wanting. Since none that
are not in orders may read it the office of prayer in the Congregation being
as much a Clerical p^oprietie as the ordinance of preaching. Since all that are
have thereby no commission to go preach in your sense; and why they may not
go p^ay and administer the Sacrements, con^erring with and catechizing the
ignorant according to their talent I see no reason. Ite and praedicate sending
not all the Disciple^ up into a pulp it to make an hour or two's continued
discourse. Nor had Nations ever been converted, nor Christians improved and
confirmed, if praedicate had been no otherwise ordered, not one of an hundred
having abilities to draw arguments out of sermons convictive of their
judgments, nor all Presbyterians so good Logicians as to frame them. And he
that yields himself up to be carried with the stream of their words and wind
of their fancies, may ^ave as many changes in faith as their are points
different in Christianities compass, being like a child Clydoni^omenos and
peripheromenos, as St. Paul speaks, tossed to and sro, and carried about..., by
Ephesians. 4 14,
the sl^ight of men... who are many that lie in wait to deceive him. Secondly,
Your first Reformers made the same use of Readers as we do of un preaching
Ministers, and continued them as long as necessity required, nor shall we any
longer, if you can furnish us with as many learned preachers as we have
pulpits, and them with stipends where are not tithes but impropriate
proportionable to their abilities and pains. To the Churches where no
Ministers can be had praesentlie must be appointed the most apt men that
distinctlie can read the Common prayers and the Scripture^ says your first
Book. Disc. It was the late labor of no Praelates of ours 4. Head. for
Readers. Preaching without book approved by our Praelates.
(...) disgrace prca^hing without book, who ever respected and cherished men
whose praesence of mind and memoire served them to deliver gravelie and
readily what they had at leisure deliberated on, and for the true benefit of
their hearers digested into the clearest method, and a dorned with selected
significant language before they came into the pulpit. Those who having taken
that pains yet wanted the other ability not in their power, or some little
confidence That within book ^ot to be disparaged.
to command it in public, they were at least to excuse, and condemn such
itching ears as would hearken unto no sound doctrine but when taught after
their lusts and luxurious desires, more for their pleasure then their use. That
they disparaged those of your tribe was no wonder, who like your self (that
go for one of the best) consulted little before hand with their books or
thoughts, only wh^t their tongues like their knives for a meal, with which
so they cut out bread for them selves, they cared not what contemptible
fragments they cast among the people. Of their best kind of speaking We may
say as Seneca of one not much unlike it. Hae^ popularis [oratio] Ep^st. 4. Lib.
1.
(...) very, movere ^bam, and inconsultas aures impe^ rapcre, tractanda^se non
praebet auser^ur... multum haebet manitate^ and vani plus sonat quam vales. It
has a great deal os vanity and emptiness in it, more sound then substance,
you may read the whole epistle, and learn I Will warrant you to preach better
by it if you afslect it. For praying The Liturgy why read.
without book (all though without a command it may be indifferent, and you can
bring no more for it then for praising and you sing not all without book as I
remember) they thought best a conformity with Catholic Christians, whose
liturgies were ever read in their Churches, and that I guess (besides some
decency it seems to carry with it) because they had great variety of prayers
in the exhibition of which a constant order was to be observed, between and in
them some variety of gesture and ceremonious worship, for direction in which
they thought humane infirmity, subject to mistakes, might have cause some
times to consult by a glance the rubrikes every where inserted. As for you that
have naught else to do but to turn over the tip of your tongue what comes
next in your head and up the white of your eyes, as if the balls were run in to
look after the extravagant conceptions of your brains a booke's of no use,
though I wish we had one of all the profane and vain babbling amongst you, that
we might make such unskillfull workmen asnamed; 2. Tim. 2. 15. 16.
and show our selves approved as well to the world as to God. The Praelates
never cried up our Li^urgie as the only service of God. Who think him served
in some other Churches that have it not. Their opinion of it as a most
heavenly and divine piece of writ, does those holy men that comp^ld it but
the same justice which a beter comparison will then yours of it with the
Breviarie and Missal of Rome. Your pains had A parallel of it with primiti^e
(...) beter then with the (...).
not been lost in a parallel of it with the solemn services disspersed in many
parts of the Bible; with the Greek and Latin Liturgies where they are not
interlin'd or corrupted with any superstition or idolatry of Rome. That you
have made does but magnisie her and oblige you, had you any Christian charity
or justice, to thank God for praeserving so much of his word and worship in
her service what the Bishop intends when effected, will warrant our Church,
upon your principles, in most parts of her L^turgie; when showed consonant to
the most public sormes of Protestant Churches, though it is hard for Fathers to
ask advice or borrow authority of their children, and for Ancients to hear
wherein Job was mistaken. That with the young men is wisdom and with the
shortness of days understanding. The Praelati^al Dociours not yet so much for
pr^aching a^ Presbyterians. 9. head.
King and the many well minded men, I believe were never deceived by our
Doctors, who I can not think ever affirmed they were as much f^r preaching in
their practice and opinion as the Presbyterians. So much as to set aside
praying for sermonizing as your (...). Book Discipline does, telling us. That
what day the public sermon is they could neither require nor greatly approve
that the Common prayers be publikeli^ used. I require the name of any that said
the life and soul of the Liturgy was preaching, without Verbi praedicatio de
bet esse quasi anima li^urgiae. Alter. (...) Dam. (...). 10. Ibid. 1 sa. 56. 7.
which it could not be entire in its parts: That he must never go in and out
of the, House of God without ringing his bells (a fit alussion) the nord of
exhortation Interpratation and praeferring the nams given the Temple by some of
the ^ewes Domus expositionis, before that by God Domus Orationis. Though it may
have been the fruitless practice of some, to quit themselves, as they hoped,
of the disreputation you brought them as ignorant and lazi^, to preach somewhat
more often then formerlie, till they found their ringing the bells was to scare
the people from Church, and doubling their pains reformed not their opinions
nor reduced them to their duties. They that prayed without book before Pucrile
est ut mi^i vid^ur aliter fa^ere Ibid.
and after their sermons came not up to the Presbyterians opinion, that it is a
childish thing to do otherwise. Nor to their practice, To bawlke the first and
second service of the Church. What they either assirmed or did in this kind
might bemore to show your gr^sse ^ifsimulation at all times; in making if such
a difficult business to talk then to personate their own in this of their
affliction, which, when you have brought them to the lowest, shall never seduce
them so to decline the en^ie of the people, as by profaning the House of God,
sooth them Gal. 5. 10.
in their e^rour, styling those aivine ordinances which in your manner or
frequencie of use (being both without praecept) are but humane Canons and Acts,
and for most part in the matter consist of strise, s^ditions, and haeresies, the
works of the ^lesh, or the Devil that dictates them. So that you may see, if
your eyes be not full of somewhat else while you are sp^rting yourselves with
your own deceivings, their tenet remains the same that it w^, and themselves
ready enough in this season, as unfi^ as you think it, to ring as lowed a^
you will in the ears of the world, That for Divine service in public, people
need no more but the r^oding of the Liturgy. Divine Service.
Which is beter furnished with pious petitions, occurring to all visible
necessiti^s (and for others emergent the Church keeps a reserve, and in due
time ever affords a recruit) then any set or extemporarie prayer that er came
out of Presbyters mouth. 2. Sermons Careful Chris^ians will find little l^isur
e on week days to hear sermons.
on week days (if not festivals, whereon a commemoration of Saints d^parted is
necessary for Historical instruction, and for imitation exemplarie) man belayd
aside by Christians that have no more time to spare from their honest callings
then they ought to spend in the application and practice of what they heard on
the Sunday; in meditation upon God, his attributes and works etc in the
serious examination of their lives, and very particular s^rutinie of their
actions, secret, public, good, bad, indifferent or mixed, in sorting or
parselling their sins of mission, commission, weakness praesumption and in
private repenting, weeping, praying, praising, In conferring closely with
holy men, chiefly their Priest and pastor of their souls, laying open
before him their doubts, distractions Quantum ad crimina quae su^ declarata
Ministris abillis' qui petunt con^ aut consolationem, relinquimus conscient^s
Ministr^rum etc. Disc. Eccl. Reformat. Regni Franc. Can. 25.
infirmities and perverse inclinations and Invisiting the sick, strengthening
the weak; considering the poor and placing charity with prudence; condoling
with and comforting the afflicted; Composing controversies, reconciling
differences, designing and enterprising Heroicke exploits for the just
advancement and honor of the King, and public advantage of Country, City or
Parish whereof they are Members Finally, acting all (of which these are not
half) that concerns them in their public and private capacity. And when all
is done, not before, in what leisure's redundand, let them in Gods name, call
for a weeklie or daily sermon, and (where the Priest has discharged as much
more of his duty, and finds in himself abilities to compose such an one as
with confidence or rather conscience he can speak it) let them have it. 3.
That Sundays afternoon Sermon is well exchanged for catechizing children,
instructing them in their principles of Religion and acquainting them with the
doctrine and discipline of the Church, to which they ought to adhaere when they
come to their choice at years of discretion which is the custom of some
Presbyterian Churches abroad and either has or should have been tongue since of
the Scots. 1. Book: Disc: Before Catechizing beter then preaching in the
afternoon found.
noon must the word be preached and Sacraments ministered, and afternoon must
the young children be publikelie examined in their Catechism in the audience of
the people. 4. That on the Sunday before noon sermon is very convenient (abuses
being redressed) and must be while and where enjoined. Yet in Nations converted
to Christianity by the preaching of the Apostles 9. Head.
or Apostolical men, and so fully confirmed as no reasonable fear may be of
their apostacy, since the infallible spirit is not Forenoon sermon con venient
but not absolutely necessary See Hook. Eccles. Pol. 5. Book.
cooperative with all, if with any, and where, as among the Presbyterians, the
noxious spirit of delusion in the mouths of very many preachers, it is far
from being necessaire to salvation, that care must be had lest it bring
damnation to the hearers. 5. That where some learned Scholars, or honest
industrious Ministers, not at pleasure, but public appointment, on festivals
days make a sermon, or have an oration (for little difference need be about the
name, and it may be it were beter to have less in the thing) it would be short,
not Sermons not to exceed an hour.
exceeding an hour, according to the Court pattern, which is likely to be the
best in the Kingdom, and for the most part has come nearest the most approved
example of the primitive Fathers, as may be seen by their sermons and homilies
that are exstant. And it should seem Presbytery, as well as Episcopacie, has
found some inconvenience in Sermons that were longer which produced the 34.
Canon in the Provincial Synod at Do^t 1574. Ministri (...) anim^ lo^gis conci^,
quas ultra horam non extendent. 6. That spirit and life for adification, As
little li^e and adifaction in Scripture ill interpreted a^ in Rhetorike without
it.
since extraordinary super infusions were rare, have been heretofore
attributed to such discourses principally wherein the Canon of Scripture has
been interpreted by no private enthusiasme, no partial addiction to one man's
opinion how eminent soever for his gifts or good life, but by the Catholic
tradition of the Church, that is the consent of most holy men in it throughout
all ages and places as much danger having been from the Jews (and may be now
from Iudaizing Scots) by bad gloffes, as from haeretical Vin^, Lit, adv. hare^.
cap (...) (...).
Christians by Rhetorical discourses on Scripture...Hoi de c^ peritimes, dia
toon theioo^ graphoon. hapei exegourtai cajo^us proserehomenous
apatoosin...Hai^eticoon de paides dia tes chrestologias cai euglo^ttias...But
what spirit or life has been found in flat lectures consisting of
noncohaerencies, 5. Ciril. Hicrosol. catech. 2.
haesitancies, tautologies etc (notwithstanding all the gapings and groans or
other aretifices used to put them ofs for divine ex^tasies and raptures) let
them speak that were aedified, which I was not, I assure you, by What I heard
from you and the brethren that brought the Scottish Euangel to us in this
Country. 7. Though Reason of bidding prayer before Sermon. (...). cap. 16.
the Canon bestrict, the practice was not, so much as at Court, for bidding
prayer before (for after Sermon that for Christ's holy Catholic Church and the
Collects appointed, are not such, if you remember) some it may be knowing his
Majesty's mind, which now i^ published, That he was not against a grave,
modest, discrect and humble use of Ministers gifts even in public...the beter
to fit and excite their own and the peoples affections to the praesent
occasions. Those that took themselves obliged to keep to the leter of the rule
were satisfied as well in the reason as lawfullnesse of the command. Being
therefore well assured that the Lords prayer is, as the Fathers call it, oratis
legitima, a complete prayer comprehending the sum of what petitions soever
were fit to be praesented to the Father, (which none knew beter then the Son)
That the people might be informed what at such a time they are to ask, and
what, asking in faith, they might hope to receive,! the Minister commands them
in the name of that particular Church to which they are to submit in all
public duties or so renounce her communion, to pray for her after Christ's
holic Catholic Church, for the King and his Royal famili^ His Council, all
inserious Magistrates etc. And because after the L^tanie and so many several
prayers relating differentlie to those particulars he mentions, it is neither
necessary, nor convenient at all, to doubt the time in repeting or
paralleling the forms (...) he calls upon them to join with him in that short
prayer which very effectually comprizeth all can be asked, saying Our Father
etc. But as touching the Church; limitation of us to the Pater V^t non
inveniamur discordes in ingressu ad preces ante concionem faciendas, visum ^uit
utile uni^ormibus verbis uti...Concio etiam ^etur uniformiter verbis Marc. c.
6. No prayer for the dead in our Can^n.
noster before, and her approving the Gloria patri etc after the sermon, I see
no more in it, then in the 33. Canon of that Council of Dort which I even now
mentioned Praying for the welfare of souls departed (a controversy yet
depending between Protestants and Papists) has ever impudentlie and falselie
been attributed to that Canon on purpose to delude poor people so rashly
opinionated of their Presbyters that told them so, as they thought it
derogatorie to their credit to search the truth; Or so grossly ignorant as
unable to distinguish between praying God for the welfare of, and praising him
for the exemplarie lives of and the heavenly reward conferred on the souls of
the Saints departed. Wherein nothing need be argued when those of a seeptical
conscience will not be convinced, and those that are praejudic'd will not be
reformed, and to such no more is to be said, but si decipi volunt decipiantur.
For private prayer, if personal, the Praelates never hitherto praescribed any
form, leaving people to themselves who are private to their own wants, and to
the direction, not injunction, of their Priest. But if congregational, though
but in Parlour or Closet, no color can be brought why an house should confute
a Cathedral, or extemporarie non sense take place of the ancient and well
advised prayers of Holy Church.

You can not be more loath to confess then I am hard to believe The Church of
Scotland has had a liturgy not only for help but practice.
that you ever were guilty of more conformity to ancient Christians in your
public worship then opinions; Yet when I consider what establishment our
Religion received in Queen Elizabeth's reign, and what advancement your schism
unhapilie had by her miss placed assistance, I can not satisfy my self how
in policy or conscience a Princess so famed for devotion and wisdom could
profess and prosecute such seeming contradictions, and without some humane
assurance of your conjunction with her so liberally contribute toward your
praetended reformation to the utter demolition of her own. Therefore upon good
inquiry, I am feign to lay my dissidence aside, and have where withal to
confirm the Warner in his belief, discovering first your negative
Remonstrances and renunciations Knox Hist. 1. B.
of Rome coincident with (though more violent and particular then) ours; Your
superintendents aequivalent to our Bishops; And which as all in all, upon
Buchanans record, your subscription to a community with us as well in
Ecclesiastike as Civil affairs. This your Maintainer of the Sanctuary tells
us was done in the year 1^60. in the infancy, or before it rather, in the
first conception of your Discipline. Yea, two years before that not long after
your Lords and Barons professing Christ Jesus had subscribed your first
Covenant in Scotland, they convene in Counsel, conclude on several heads
whereof this is the first. ^t is thought expedient, advised and ordained, That
in all pari^hes of this Realm the Common prayer be read weeklie on Ib. B. 2.
Sunday, and other Festival days publikelie in the parish Churches etc. In the
first oration and petition of the Protestants of Scotland to their Queen Regent
this was the first demand... That they might meet publikelie or privatelie to
their Common prayers in their vulgar tongue. And that this may not be set to
the account of your Temporal Lords, or some imperfect Members of your Clergy,
because I. Knox your Holy head was 1. B. 9. head.
at this time disjointed from that sanctified body, the same care is afterward
taken for Kirkes in your book of Discipline it self without any intimation of
your purpose to tolerate it onclie for help and direction, being a form
praescribed, as liable to the peoples superstition as ours, otherwise then as
you approved the omission of it Decl. Chapter Sc: Prae^. The hypocritical use, of
the Common prayer book in Scotland.
on public sermon days. And your Maintainer says, without doubt it was the
very book of England. Your Church having none of her own a long time. I would
not have you mistaken, no more then you would have the Bishop, whom you so
carefully inform (I fear against your conscience) as if I imputed this to
you for any more then a politic compliance, to effect your own ends by Q.
Elizabeth's arms, which being in a good part accomplished you altered your
Liturgy both in substance and use, changed our prayers for worse, and those
you neither injoined by law, nor supported by the generality of your practice.
Thus from petitioning forCommon prayer to your Queen you came about at length
to condemning it among your selves. This for the History of your hypocritical
conformity with us to work your own design, and inexcusable defection from
us when that was done. Touching your feigned approbation of set forms for
rules, and for use in beginners, I am to ask you 1. What institutions their
can Set forms of no use to beginners that pray by the spirit.
before improvement of supernatural gifts. What forms for progress in
extraordinary graces 2. If there be such why they serve not as well for the
benefit of tongues as utterance, and whether the Apostles before the day of
Pentecost had any praeparative to that descent of the spirit upon them, if they
had not (the difference of persons not diversifying the donation where or to
whomsoeverGod intends it) why we are to look about for helps unto this
purpose? 3. Whether this sword of the spirit can not as well cut the tongue as
pierce the heart? Whether God can not without helps as well indite words as
matter, and make the tongue become the pen o^ a readi^ writer. That The gift of
prayer in the Pater No^ter.
your set forms were published only for Ministers that are beginners thereby
endeavoring to attain a readiness to pray in their family, not in the
Church. I take for an evasion scarce thought upon before now. The gift of
prayer which you take gratis without a proof, I can afford you to be
^rdinarilie no other then the form which Christ bestowed upon his disciples.
The use of that has ever hitherto been continued by their successors in the
frequent repetition of the words, and analogy of all their enlargements unto
the sense. The greatest comfort that can be had by this is in a cheerful
submission to the judgment of that Church in whose communion I adventure my
salvation, and the greatest liberty in the exercise of her words, which in
Christian humility and common reason I am to conceive more apposite then mine
own. Herein I rest the beter satisfied, when I see my common 5. Iud. v. 13.
adversaries in this duty so to fluctuate in their senses, and like raging
waves in a conspiracy to shipwrake others, breaking mutuallie Presbyterians
divided about pra^er. Hist. 4. B.
themselves by the uncertain violence of their motion, and so in the end
forming out nothing but their shame. Master Baylie renouncing as well forms
composed by themselves, as praescribed by others. Master Knox praescribing such
a se^ prayer unto himself, and so praemeditating the words he was to speak,
that when quaestioned he could repeat what er he said. Their brethren abroad
sometime strictly enjoining a form compiled by others Omnes Ministri unans
formam publicam in Ecclesia precandi tenebunt...ideoqu^ alia forma brevi^r post
Synod Holland. and Zoland 1574 Artic. 38. Herm. Synod. Belgic. cap. 11.
concionem recitanda composita est. At other times leaving their Ministers to a
liberty of a set prayer composed by themselves, or one depending on the
dictate of the spirit. Minister pr^ces vel dictante spiritu, vel certa sibi
proposita formula concipiet The 4. wrongs that are praetended from our Liturgy
to redound upon A Giver, A Receiver, A Gift, and A Church, being Relatives in
this business are inseparable by nature, and must fall to ground with the
falsitic of the supposition upon which they hang: But what injuries are
multiplied upon all by the extemporarie license of Presbyters in their prayers.
Our Blessed Sovereign. The injuries by extemporie prayer; F^x. B^ cap. 16.
K. Chapter 1. has enumerated, the affectation, ^mptinesse, impertinence,
rudeness, con^usions, flatnesse, levitie, obscurity, vain and ridiculous
repetitions, the senclesse and often times blasphemous expressions, all these
burdened with a most taedious and intolerable length...Wherein men must be
strangely impudem and flaterers of themselves, not to have an iusinite shame
of what they so do and say, in things of so sacred a nature before God and the
Church, after so ridiculous and indeed profane a manner. Nec potest tibi ('it is
Master Baylie I mean, S^n. Ep. 40 (...). 1.
who has been guilty of most in my hearing) istares contingere aliter quam si
tepudere desieris: perfrices fron^em oportet, and ipsete non audias. But I
refer him to the rest of what K. Chapter 1. Briestie but solidelie has 5. ^, of
Ec^l. Pol.
writ, and what more at large Master Hooker, to whom I may challenge all the
Scottish Presbytery for an answer.

So great a cloud of witnesses encompassing the Scottish Presbytery, and giving
in evidence against her as the mother of mischief too many years in three
Kingdoms, your arm is too weak to lay aside the Heb. 12. 1.
weight of those wicked actions that must be charged on her back, and the
sin of sacrilege Royal that so easily b^sets her. The Parliament of
Scotland, sure The Parliament of Scotl. in no c^pacitie to demand after then
urder of K. Chapter (...).
^quivocates in denying that they have stripped the King of his justrights (I
speak to His Majesty now reigning His ^ather having unanswerablie argued for
himself) because they never hitherto acknowledged him invested with any but
the name, to which bare inheritance they knew him borne without the charity of
their breath, and which he must have had without their sounding trumpet,
proclaiming this for their alms as hypocrites in their markets. But to come
close to you. This Parliament of Scotland, had it been such, as it was not,
upon the murder of the ^ather ought to have been stripped of all it self, then
no just rights, (no more but such as a deadman has to his robes) and being a
breathless carcass could require nothing at the hands of the Son. The
courses to which he was stirred up and kept on, out of natural duty, by no
factious advice, were (howsoever they succeeded) praeservative of his Fathers
and himself, and destructive to no people but the workers of iniquity that
with their own hands plucked down misery upon their heads. The bloodshed
brings Ps. 51.
bloudguiltinesse upon them that first opened the vein, from which he had no
need to be purged with hysope that was clean, nor washed, whose conscience, in
that particular, was whiter then the snow. Yet Ha^ak. 1. 13.
being by your scarlet Parliament imputed to him, (whose impure eyes can b^hold
nothing but iniquity in others, and whose wicked mouths are wide open to
devour the man that is more righteous then themselves) the satisfaction they
required could be in order to no exercise of his Royal government, nor dare
they take any by the rules of your Discipline, which must have blood for blood,
but a slavish subjection of his life and erowne to sentence without mercy,
which had been, though fewer in number, yet as full in your meaning, and as
effectual aequitable, demands. Allthough this be a reply unanswerable to your
praetense. Yet I must not leave you without discovering your diminutive Review
changes the words of the Procl. The original of the oath for security of
disscipline.
forgerie in Parliament Proclamations, putting parts of his Royal Government
where they the whole without exception. His name portract and seal being not
his, when new stamped, and set to public writings by your hands then in actual
rebellion against his person. The security to your Religion and Liberties
required, were first enacted for an aequitable demand onclie by a Convention of
Rebels at Edinburgh 1567. who had been partly solicited, partly scared into
a dubious consent with, andby a Tra^terous Assembly, (who had in vain posted
away four Caitiffe-Cursitours, miscalled Commissioners, to the more loyal
Lords delated for the Hamiltons, as likewise to the Neuters, to depose their
Queen, and clog their future Princes's succession with this K^. Do^ Row. Craig.
(...). Hist. B. 5.
impious condition. That all Princes and Kings herea^ter in this Realm, before
their Coronation shall take oath to maintain the true Religion now prosessed
in the Church of Scotland, and suppress all things (even their souls and
consciences) contrary to it, and that are not agreeing with it. This I take to
be the fundamental law your Proclamation reflects upon, foralas the other
foundation of your solemn league and covenant lies not fathom deep, a
stripling of twelves years old can reach to the botom; and evert, both, when
he calls for that invisible law of God, which approves much less enjoines this
praerequiring satisfaction from a King, For it Dial. De Iur: Reg^ ap. Scot. The
choice of a King originallic not justifiable in any perpl.
is not Maitlands idle concession to Buchanan in his cursed dialogue upon
Homers authority, That there was a time when men lived law less in Cottages
and caves, and at length by consent took a justisiable course of creating a
King unto themselves that will reduce Royaltic to popular restrictions. Such
stuff as this may be put off among Pagans that will hearken to the fable of
Cadmus, and be won into a belief that the serpents teeth were sowed in so
good a soil as that they all sprung up proper men of whose race we might have
had some at this day, if they had betoke themselves to the election of a King,
when for want of one they fell to civil dissensions and destruction of
themselves. I demand as a Christian, and as much mighta ^ew. Who was the first
King! Whether he was not instituted by God? Whether not with a decree touching
primogeniture in the right of succession, by the first borne to propagate his
authority and office? Whether any people in the world, more or less in a
body lawsullie assembled, have been at a loss for a King to command them? and
what law beside that of nature which if such as Saint Paul describes it, is
somewhat hard to distinguish from an original law of God, (and yet shall be
sequestered from our praes^nt dispute) constituted them in a full capacity to
choose one? Who? When? Where? Cum sit and ordini naturae conscnta^eum, and ^bus
prope omnium gentium Historijs tes^sicatum.
Open Buchanans pack, as big as it is, begirt with no less then the cingle of
the world, and with out Ambiguons peradventures, or ass^mations involved in
quaestionable circumstances, lay me out one clear instance to this purpose and
when you have, purchase a parallel among your selves. Transmigration of
Nations, Navigations of discovery, designed or contingent, New plantations
upon necessity or pleasure, Spontaneous secessions, though by supreme
authority approved; Relegations and exiles, Extinctions of lines. Finally
whatsoever to be thought on that can separate a medley of men from a set^ed
societe, or make an Anarchie among People, will when De Iur Reg.
all are combined, I believe, little disorder me in my hold. So that to use the
words of that valiant General, or take the Kings from his mouth. You declared
him to be your King, but with such conditions and proviso^s M. M^ntr. De^. 1650
as robbe^ him of all right and power. For while you pr^ctend to give him a
little, which he must actept of as from you, you spoil (...) of all that power
and authority which the law of God, of Nature, and of the Land has invested
him with by so long continued de^cent from his famous praedeccssours. For the
nature of your Abolition of Episcopacie will not give the scott satisfaction
demand, the abolition of Episcopacie, which you confess to be a great one (so
great indeed as not to be granted but with a devastation of his conscience, the
Praelates were very unworthie of their miters, if they pressed not his Majesty
(were it necessary where is so free an inclination) to deny you, though they
know well enough, were your great demand yielded, you have one no less behind,
security of liberties, and when both were had (which God forbid they ever
should be) your cruelty and guilt would admit of no less after-satisfaction
from him for England, then from his Father for Scotland, nor your raging Devil
be otherwise satiated then with his blood. Therefore the advantage you take of
his denial (though you confess upon other men's importunate instance) makes
your Praedestinarian Godships no less peremptory in the immutabilitie of your
decree, to form Commonwealths of Kingdoms, and according to you Divinity the
means being as unalterablie destined as the end, you resolve what you can (and
do well to tell us so) that he and all his family shall perish.

-- Levia sed nimium queror Sen. He^, fur.

Coclotimendumest, regna ne summa occupet
Qui vicit ima...
For you that thus capitulate with Kings, have nothing next to do but to
article with God. Presbytery admitting no Rival Regent, much less any
superior, will make way to its solitary supremacy by ruin.

I terruina quaeret, and vacuo volc^
Regnare mundo. --
Your patient surplicate^ were your Hage papers, which most inquisitive men
have heard or seen before this time. Wherein you tell His P. Iun. 1. may 22
Majesty his denial will constrain your people... to ^oe what is incumbent
unto them, we know what you mean, that fatal word being scarce to be met with
but having Rebellion and Murder at its heels. Your Henders. 1. Pap. to K. Ch,
(...)
Evangelist of the Covenant did not cant it to his Father, but said plainly
Reformation may be (though he wished it not) left to the mul^de whom God ^rreth
up [to kill and slay without quaestion] when Princes are negligent, as they are
when they yield not their aequitable demand^, grant their patient supplicates,
lay their heads on the block, and (not do but) suffer as they would have
them. Laesa patientia fit furor, Even in such meek men as you, patience upon
denial can become fury and supplicates after some continuances commands.. And
then he may have an offer of his or their Kingdom, as you think fiter to
style it, but it must be with a resignation of his crown, their Lives and
estates shall be Oretenus for his service, when aurium tenus they are up to the
^ares in a good bargain, taking money with one hand, and delivering him up
with the other; which is the issue to be expected upon the grant, and nothing
worse can be feared (nor that if well thought on) from the denial of your
demands. Therefore, to conclude, no misery of King nor people should be so
impolitikelie declined as to be desperately embraced. And till the essentials
of Scottish Presbytery be changed, which are undisputablie destructive to all
Monarchs that come among them, true Praelatical hearts can not be truly
considerate or loyal, if they be not obstinat^ in this persuasion and belief.
1. B. Disc. 9. head.


The place cited, to which you send us for a view of your tender care in
providing the parents consent to the marriage of their children, gives us a
Nature robbed of her Praerogative by Prosbyterie
full prospect of your tyranny over Nature, whose throne is usurped, whose
praerogative trampled down, and her Paternal Princes enthralled to the
dominion of your spirit. For your public inhibition of private mariage^ there
mentioned, is not so much to carry the stream of childrens obedience to their
Parents and Curatours, as to make sure that the water go no^ by your mill,
that due homage be paid to the consistorian powers that are above them.
Therefore in some cases (and we know not which you except) it is said. The
Minister or Magistrate to whom, (though not you, your Discipline gives the
praecedence and praedominance) may enter in the place of parents... may admit
them to marriage. For the work of God ought not to be hindered etc. This Inclina
tions to marry not all ways devine motions.
work of God is there called the touch of the heart with desire of marriage, As
if all hearts so touched had Gods hand laid upon them, and the Scotsh climate
were so cold as all natural or carnal inclinations were frozen until fire came
down from heaven to dissolve them. As if then, good souls, they were melted
in a minute, and had outrun the bounds of all self moderation, all rational
persw^sion, all love martyrdom in a passive submission to the just rigor
orunjust wilfulness of cruel parents contradicting their sudden affections
and amourous violence, For if these Flames warm by degrees at a distance
Consent of parents.
(and some danger draws on of being scorched without screening) their duty
should prompt them to withdraw in due season, and repraesent to their parents
the first sense they find of that heat, the increase of content or comfort
they take in it, and with their approbation farther cherish these desires, or
upon their dislike in gratitude and justice to their sufferance of many infant
troubles, and elder petulancies, endu^e a little hardship for their pleasures.
For to change the allegory, if children first set sail of themselves, and
then call to their parents at ^hoare for leave to take shiping, this mock
respect would relish more of scorn then good nature or duty. And as well may
they bid adieu to relations, as when before a strong gale of wind look for
anod or waving hand to encourage that course wherein they themselves are
steering, and necessity carrying then not to be resisted. Yet no other is that
honor which your Discipline says they are bound to give to their parents, the
parts whereof you make these. To open their affection. To ask their counsel
and assistance how that motion... may be performed, it speaks not of asking
pardon for entertaning it before approved. (...) in Scripturis determinatum sit
and jure Civili de consensu parentum; In Ecclesiastic^ tamen curijs obtinet jus
Papale Canonicum qu^ definitur consensus parentum dehouestate non de
necessitate Et quod Matrimonia debent esse libera, and non p^ndere exali^ no
arbitrio Assert: Pol. Christ.
You know the Civil and Canon law are divided, that standing much upon the
necessity, this only on the decency or honesty of having the parents
consent. A friend of yours, that is hugged for his pains in opposing our
Church, presses hard the coincidence of the former with the determination in
Scripture, and objects her concurrent practice with the later To tell you how
Lib. 2. De Regn, Christ.
Bucer plays the strict Civilian in this business, whose authority is very
oracular when for you, would it may be render him but a private opiniatour now
against you. And as little might it avail to produce the Acts of your Brethren
in Holland, who seem to declare for a necessity in their provincial Synod.
Nemo proclamabitur de contrahendo nisi priu^ attulerit testimonium de consensu
parentum, No more then a convenience in their National, and that determinable
by their Presbytery when controverted... Siquis autem irrationabiliter in his
causis and refractarie se gesscrit, sic quod nullo modo vellet consentir^...
presbyterium constituit quid in talibu^ casibus sit saciendum. In this division
you do well to quit your selve of all wonted interest, and appeal even from
Scripture it self to the Tribunal of reasen and a quitie. Where yet you will
scarce get your hearing before you prove that the anthoritie of Parents is to
be restrained by the many times unreasonable (though lawful and honest)
desires or motions in their children. As if a Kings daughter should be taken
with a beggar borne under an hedge. With which instance your Presbytrie is
scarce to be trusted, who it may be, are ready enough to justify the match by
the eminency of his virtues, to which they may beter dispose daughters then
distribute crowns, saying Regna virtuti, non generi deberi. Epictetus that was
a very good Master of his reason, gave this general rule unto his disciples.
That all obligatorie offices are measured by the relative habits Dordorac.
1574. artic. 81. 1578.
of the persons. He begins with the Father as most absolute in his power, all
whose injunctions and actions are to have an active or passive obedience from
his children. Pater estin; hypagoreuetai epimeleisthai, para^horein hapantoon,
aneches^hai loidorountos, paientos If you talk to him, as The injury done to
Parents by Presbytery not justisiable in reason. Buc^an.
Bishop, to the of a cruel ^arent, abusing his autgoritie etc. He will tell you
Nature has not tied you to a good father, but a father, and your duty must
bepayd him in his natural capacity, not moral ^ete oun pros agathon patera
physei okeiothes, alla pros patera. There is indeed some what in humanity it
self, which may be called the ^ice of a father to his son. To moderate
sometimes his autocratical power by affection, and run his iron heart into the
same molds with the softer metal of his childrens at least not t make it the
hammer and anvil whereby to Ta catheconta hoos epipantais schesesi
parametreitai.
fashion youth to the humourous morose sevetitie of age. It was upon some such
advantage that Pamphilus argued in the Comoedie. Hoccine est humanum factum aut
in^oeptum? Hoccine officium Patris?... Pro ^eum atquchominum, quid est, si non
baee contumeli^ est? Vxorem decreverat dare sese mihi hoaie, nonne oportuit
praes^isse me ante? nonne prius communica^um oportuit. Yet afterward Simo
contrapones his improper choice of a match Enchir. c. 37
misbeseeming him, against custom, law, and his duty as a s^nne. Adeon
impotenti ^sse anime ut praeter ^ivium M^rem atque legem, and sui voluntatem
Terent Andr. act. 1. Sc. 5.
patris. Tamen hanc habere cupiat cum summo probro? ^n sine Pamphilus convinced
in likelihood by his reason, made a filial exemplarie submission in our Case.
Ego me amare han^ fateor, si id peccare est, fateor id Act. 5. Sc. 3.
quoque. Tibi Pater me dedo. quidvis oneris impone, impera. Vis me uxorem
ducere? han^ amittere? ut potero feram. Yet among Christians, when such
submission's not found from a frenzy of love which will take no advice from
Nature or Reason, I confess the Magistrates and Ministers shall do an act of
charity in their mediation with his father by complying with to cure him of
his madness, and restore him to his senses. But when their Discipline makes it
an act of power and jurisdiction, 1. B. 9. head,
and that as much, if not more, concerning the Minister as Magistrate, I take
it to be very emp^ie of oequitie, as full as the Reviewer thinks it, and see
not where, after the Scottish mode, any Church or State does practice or approve
it. In the behalf of them that do, he is to repair the breach of the 5.
Commandment by the disobedient child, or show us where in (...) is particular
it was dispensed with. No obedience due to parents requiring a injust mar^,
In case of sin I confess a just apology may be made. As if the Father
would admit of none but an incestuous marriage, or, to save his estate, with
one in open rebellion against the King; The child must not obey, nor yet is
bound where is fear of incontinencie, to live single. The supreme Magistrate
ought here to take the place, and do the office of the parent. And the
Minister must execute all lawful commands of this Kind in his function. But if
the case be so rare of the child's complaint? and not heard of in an age, the
Dawbers of the Discipline might have saved this patch; and need not have fould
their fingars with such untemper'd stuff, as having neither Scripture nor
reason in its mixture, was never intended to cement any building of Gods, nor
the corrupt a^ections of wilful children to be called his work. Yet that the
R^ader may neither be unsatisfied nor deluded (as he will be very often if he
observes not your fraud in mistating the case) I must admonish him that the
Bishop's may be frequent though yours be rare. His Lordship objecting your
admission to marriage the parent gainstanding. And you reponing an authoritative
Sentence to enforce consent. His addition about compelling the parents to give
portions was fastened upon your practice not your canon. Your railing Ep. S.
I^d. v. 9.
ac^usation, an impudent lie which Micha^l would not bring when disputing with
the Devil, will as little grace, as strengthen, your controversy with a better
Angel of the Church. In such matters of fact truth can be justified no otherwise
then upon inquiry, whereby will best be discovered he^ faithful witness; and
the false one too that will ^tter lies. Yet in the place alleged your canon
ordering out of the text, Prove. 14. 5. 2. Cor. 12. 14. 1. Tim. 4. 8.
without quaestion a dowry to a daughter that is defloured, he that at a
distance has any good opinion of your conscience will praesume your care can
be in justice no less of her who you say, has committed no such filthiness
before, but kept the Virgin-ornament that commends her to your super-paternal
powers to be made a bride. The passage against sparing of the life of
Adulterers (which you here substitute in the Poenitent Adulterers not to be put
to death. S. John. 8. 2. Cor. 12 7.
room of a beter answer to the other) is not so consonant to the law of God,
as dissonant from the milder Gospel of Christ, who neither as K^ong commanded
stones to be cast at the poenitent brought before him nor as Priest retracted
by excommunication his signal mercy showed in her dismission. A Presbyter may
have a thorn in the slesh as well as a Praelate, allthough for want of Saint
Paul's spirit he will abate no measure of his pride in revelations And if he
take it out to no better purpose then to thrust it in othermens sides, (if he
look not to it) will prick his own fingar, in his have. The falselie
praetended authors and lovers of so severe discipline make it as little
consistent with Christian liberty hypotaxein and doulagogein, to discipline
their bodies and subdue them by Apostolical correction, as to subject their
spirits, according to Apostolical doctrine, to just powers ordained by God, And
a piece of tyranny they count it to chasten and mortify (which by praecedent
they turn into reproose) ever since David did it that was a King. For want of
which (whatsoever they fancy of I know not whose biting and spurning) the
Presbyterian Iesuruns have kicked as much as before, nor since this great
severitie was threatened, could they have the face to expunge the clause that by
their own confession occasioned it, and still stands thus in their book..
Whoredom, sornication, adultery are sinne^ most common in this realm. 1.
Book. Disopl. 9. I Head.


The Bishops warrants for clandestine marriages were not without this
particular caution against spoiling parents of their dear children. Quod
parentum, modo sint in vivis, vel alias Tutorum sive gubernatorum suorum
expressum The Bishops cautelous in their warrants for clandestine marriages.
consensum in hac part obtinuerint. And how abundantly otherwise was provided
let your brother Didoclave bear witness. If their mercinarie officers
prostituted to their profit this indulgence granted upon very good reasons to
noble personages, whose praecontracts, or impediments if any, were not very
likely, and it may be not so fiting to be discovered, upon publishing their
bannes) this In nuperis constitndinibus anni 1603. videntur praesules Anglicane
abunde cavise Alter. Dam. c. 70 Ao. 1588 Schulting Reprehens. Synod. Middelb.
The Revieners s^amelesse denial of aknow'n truth about impeding civil
proceedings. Contr. E. pilam Philadelph.
can fairlie be charged neither upon the Bishops order, nor their persons,
unless you would have them ubiquitarie in their Courts, and omni-praescient in
the actions of their instruments. Their after-dispensations with marriages
without warrant I hope are not culpable, except you would drive them to a
necessity of divorce. Among them whom you call brethren heretofore those of
Middleburgh did invalidate all private marriage. About which their adversaries,
though consenting in the substance, call upon them for a text of Scripture,
which I never heard was hitherto produced.

If he that fixes his eyes upon the sun, till the strength of the beams and
luster put them out, should declare before the witnesses of his misfortune that
he never saw the least glimpse or brightness of that luminarie, he were more
to be credited then Master Baylie in his gross selfe-confounding denial, that
ever any such matter was attempted in Scotland as drawing civil causes upon
praetense of Scandal unto a Synod of Presbyters, or that he ever heard alleged
by their adversaries their impeding or repealing any civil proceedings.
Whereas the first has been proved allreadie by the Bishop out of the very
words in their discipline; And the two other objected in numerous instances by
most, if not all the adversaries that have published any thing against them. By
Archbishop Spotswood in the different cases of the Bishops Montgomerie and
Adamson, A Melvin, Black, the spanish Merchants etc. So that in general he is
feign, to allege against them in this language... Ministrorum eo crevit
insolentia, ut non contenti sua functione, lites and reo^omnes (what and who is
here excepted?) a^ suum tribunal revo^are niterentur, concilii publici (which
is more then the meanest civil Court) placita reseindere, Ordinum decretis
(which rises high (qu^e ad slomachum non sacerent intercedere, etc. Which is
worse then Synodical impeding or repealing, populum cmnem contra hostem in
armis paratum esse jubere. And which includes all in all. Nibil denique erat
quod islos fam severos censores essugeret. The Answerer by leter... How
inconsistent Presb. Government is with Monarchy objectts their interposing in
a case of debt between J. T. and P. T, determined by the Lords of Session;
Their discharging Monday mercates against leters Patents under the Great Seal,
professes that like infinite instances might be produced, and one more of them
he brings with the several circumstances about a decree and judgment obtined
by Master John Grahum. In general your judicial Usurpations are censured by the
Author of Episcopacie and Presbytery considered. Whereof he brings no
particulars because he says no body can be ignorant that has looked into the
known stories of this last age. Some what to this purpose is in him that writ
the Trojan Horse... unbowelled. K. James's Declaration against you in the case
of the Aberdene Ministers is in print. Beside many other of this nature that I
have not seen, or do not think on. Where Master Baylie has slept out all
this noise, J can not guess, if above ground. So that a less the Curtisan
Bishops may pasle away unquaestion'd with a few innocent prohibitions in their
pockets, when the Traverse is draw'n and the Palliard Presbyters discovered in
multitudes at the business, heaping up such loades of repeales and
protestations, as crush all iniquity into scandal, and make Civil Courts,
Parliaments Council and King responsable for their sentences to the Synods.

The next injury against Masters and Mistresses of families as it stands in
Public ca techizing of Masters and Mistresses indecent.
your discipline (not as you subtilie, yet vainlie, advantage it) is criminal,
at least so far as it is a transgression of Saint Paul's rule, which requires
all things to be done euschemonoos and cata taxin, decently and in order, 1.
Cor. 14. 50. Whereas for them to be brought to such a public account, who at
all other times, without personal exception, are constituted instructours of
their children and servants, is not eushemonoot; it caries little decency with
it, it too much discountenanceth their authority, it levels their natural and
politic Dominion for the time. nor have those different lines as they are
draw'n in your Discipline, such a just symmetrie, as to produce an handsome
feature of one person: It is not cata taxin, ta^e it in what sense you will, no
man will say there is a due order observed, nor any such praescription in
Christ's Holy Catholic Church. The same Apostle that gave particular directions
in the case made no canon for this. An antecedent examination he appointed, but
the Ancients 1. Cor 11. 28. Lit. Chapter c. p. 215.
interpret it more of the will and affection then the understanding and mind.
Or ^f he meant it of both, he made every man judge of himself (as you do when
he is praesent at the ministration of baptism) that had before renderd a
reason of his says to the Church, neither Presbyter and inquisitour of course
nor parishoner a witness of his unworthiness and ignorance. Ourh heteros ton
hetecon...all' a^tos beauton says Oecumenius which put Cajetan upon the
thought that confession was not at this time required, for which he is taken up
by Catharinus. And Chrysostom referres us to a text in St. Paul's 13. 5.
second epistle which tells us what discovery may put the examination to an
end. Examine your selves whether ye be in the says. Omnem prolationem
quaerendi and inveniendi credendo fixisti, hunc tibi modum statuit sructusipse
quaerendi, is intended, I believe, as a gloss upon it by Tertullian. So that
the knowledge how to pray was no praerequisite of St. Paul's. Nor De Praeser. c.
10.
can we hear from him that the ignorance of other your disciplinarian articles
exclude a man more from the Sacrament of the Lords If they know not how to pray
neithern berein their rightcousnesse sands or consists, they ought not to be
admitted to the Lords table.
supper then from the communion of Saints and Christianity he professes in
his Creed. Beside it is easy to conceive what discouragement it brings upon
such good Christians as hunger and thirst after this spiritual nourishment of
their souls, and how much it derogates from that reverence Antiquity rendered
to this Sacrament and the high degree of necessity they held often to
participate hereof by such clauses as this. All Ministers must be admonished to
be more careful to instruct the ignorant then ready to serve their appetite,
and to use more sharp examination then indulgence in admitting etc. Which has
a different sound from the earnest cry of the Euangelical Prophet Isai 55. 1.
and the free invitation made by the High Priest of our profession in the
Gospel S. Luke 14 you accounting profanelie the loss hereof no more then the
miss of a meal, and the disappointment no other 1. Book Disc. 9 head. Ibid.
Excommunication of the ignorant without warrant. Ibid.
then depriving an hungry appetite of a diner. Our Fathers of old were
otherwise minded, and excommunicated those that were peevishlie averse, not
those that (being engaged in no penance) humbly desired the benefit hereof.
Aposlrephomenous tea metalephin tes cucharistias cata fina ataxian toutous
apobletons ginesthaites ecclestas. was part of a canen at the Council of
Antioch A. 341. I could add, That you declare not what may pass among you in
the Master and Mistresses answers for the sum of the law, what for the
knowledge wherein their rightcousnesse stands, without which you say they ought
not to be admitted. So that the sharpness of your examen and acceptance of
their answer being arbitrarie, much room is left for private spleen,
antipathie and passion no justifiable causes of separation from this community
of Christians, and therefore made the ground of inquiry and cognizance
Exetaues^ho de me micropsyc^a e philoneikia e fini toiause aedia tou episcopou
aposynagogo egegenentas.
in every half years Synod by the Nicene Father, that such partiality might
not be tolerated in the Bishops, But whereas you excommunicate the parent and
Masters for negligence when their children and servants are suffered to
continue in wilfultignorance. Why not as well the God Fathers and Pastors whose
subsidiarie care should not only be restaurative but praeventive? Why not
such aged women as are not teachers of goodthings, That the young women be
sober, love their husbands and children etc. Tit. 2, 3? Why not all those in
whom the word of Christ should dwell richly in all wisdom, and they teach and
admonish one another Col. 3. 16. Which being a like duties of the Text alike
require your inspection, nor does it appear any more that you are left to a
liberty Can. I. Chr. Iustel. Familievisitations commendable as well in
orthodoxe Priests as Presbyters.
of discrimination in your censure, then that for any of these defaults you may
exercise it at all. Your family visitations, if sincerely intended for the
inspection of manners and conversations is commendable, if done with the spirit
of discretion, moderation and meekness. When this was practiced by the most
conscientious Priests of the Episcopal party (your knowledge whereof to deny
by oath would look little beter then perjurie) it was calumniated by many of
your brood for gadding and gossiping, defamed by some for more sinful
conversing. And when the generality of them (the Episcopal Clergy) remitted
the frequencie of preaching, the study for which they found inconsistent with
this more necessary more beneficial catechizing the people, it was nicknam'd
suppressing the word. And when at such times as the sacramental solemnities
they entered into any private spiritual communication (though advised by the
Church) they were put to purge themselves from the imputation of Popery in
practizing auricular confession and injunction of penance. Your order and
practice is to keep off from the holy Table not such only as conjunctive are
grosselic and willfulle, but divisive (intoo strict a sense) grossly or
willfullie ignorant. Touching which allthough their negligence is inexcusable,
and their dullness pitiable, yet that your act of cruel jurisdiction is
justified by no divine command nor Catholic example. If never any for simple
ignorance were excommunicated in Scotland. You must be rebuked for
transgressing your rule and failing in your duty as your Kirk pleases thus
to declare it. In sufferable we judge Ib. Disc, 9. Head.
it that men be permitted to live and continue in ignorance as Members of the
Kirk.

Whether greater tyranny were exerciz'd in the High Commission Courts Riot in
Scotland to get down the High Commission.
or your Consistories, your aequitable comparers by this time, are not to
seek. What excess on your side has been evidenced is here resumed only to
aggravate your flood of boundless cruelty by the many heads from which it
issues, and the cataracts it powers upon the poor people in every parish. The
Bishops played indeed the Rex in that their Court, because they acted in it by
authority and deputation from the King. But you and your Brethren played the
Rebels to the purpose, when you first rioted, then rebelled and covenanted
before, er you supplicated to suppress it. K. Chapter 1. by his grace and too
fluent charity praevented the violence intended by your Parliament, though he
found no thanks nor yet acceptance at your hands His proclamation being
rudely encountered with a rebellious protestation read Iarg. Decl. The Kings
palace and Parliament fallen with that in England.
by Iohnston. The King and Anticlerical Parliament in England that alas joind
hands in a manner, yet searce agreed, to throw down the other about their ears
(without which the Praelates had no power, less then no reason (if it might
be) to let it fall) have not only covered the poor Bishops with the ruin of
that Court, but since hands and hearts were divided, the laborious Lords and
Commons, without him, have pulled the Fabrike of both Houses, and of Monarchy
upon themselves. The Congregational Eldership, a thing wheresoever More comfort
because less rigiour in the reformed Elderships abroad.
more to be jeerd at and less endured then a Commission, is enjoyed with so
much more comfort among other of the Reformed then in Scotland, as we are eye
witnesses of less authority and rigor in it. And while I am writing this
Reply one of the Reformed Presbyters, your Countreyman ingenuouslie confesses
to me that he thinks in his conscience the present Kirk tyranniem Scotland
(he speaks it indeed rather of the practice then rule) is far beyond what
ever could be alleged against our Bishops, or the Pope. And that if he and
others of his mind took the constitution of that government every where to be
the same as it is executed in Scotland they would not continue a day longer in
that communion. The laws of ^se Scottish Elderships taken out of Holy
scripture can not be very Partic^ (...) many cases. Their Acts of superior
judicatories do not, can n^ (...) ^pecific interpretative Scandals, nor in all
occurring pofsibi^ proportion corporal punishments, or pecuniarie mulcts, in
the arbitrament of which lies the tyranny of this petie Aristocratie, and most
ridiculouslie many times used in cutting haifethe hair, shaving beards etc. as
before now has been objected by others that having I believe seen it, better
know it. In the abuses by such censures, and difficulty Answer by Letter.
of some cases, when appeal is made to a Synod, the Bi^op tells you (which you
observe not) that the shortness of its continuance can afford, the condition
of the persons will afford little relief. Your dozen of the most able pious
plow men in many parishes, with an unexperienced illiterate Pastor praesiding
in their Council are no very reverend Judges in many cases. And what pitiful
creatures they must be of necessity Many of those in Scotland have very unfit,
unable Judges.
in some places may be guessed until this quaestion be answered which is sent
you from another Countreyman of yours an honest able Divine. Whether you have
not heard of C^untres Churches in Scotland, especially amongst the Saints of
Argi^e, where not three, hap^e not one in the whole parish could read.
Amphictyonum consessus. A very honorable bench. A Senate that no doubt would
strike greater amazement (but upon other reasons) then the Roman if any
foraigner should behold them. In that you say the Episcopal way is to have no
discipline at all Episcopacio want no aequivalent in Discipline.
in any congregation, you are somewhat more hard hearted then your brethren,
Who acknowledge some of the functional rubbish of your Temple building, Elders
and Deacons, upon the shoulders of our Church wardens, Sidemen and Collectours,
part of whose charge is to observe manners, inquire out ill livers, admonish the
scandalous, Oeconomis testibus Synodalibus and Collectoribus in Ecclesiastcke
paroeciana rudera quaedam functionum diaconorum and seniorum relicta vel potius
imposita sunt. Alter. Dam c. 12.
and praesent them to the ordinary. To direct them in this duty the Bishops
articles are disspersed, and an Audit held of their account at every
visitation. The officials pleasure regulates not their information, which is to
be as impartial as an oath can make it. His conscience commonly is not to
large, though his learning and wisdom be of greater extension then the Elders.
What power he exercises is by law and custom. In correctionis negotijs alia
quidem sacient omnia (excommunication is more niselie and conscientiouslie
excepted) quae de jure possunt and solent fieri. Constit. 1571 To the
Presbyterian tenderness of meddling with domestike infirmities some what is
said allreadie which the Answerer by leter thus avoucheth. It is certain that
a foolish man revealing foolishlic his faults to his wise, the zealous wife
upon some quarelling betwixt her and her husband, has gone to a good Minister,
revealed what was told her, and the honest impertial Minister has convented
the man, charged him with his sin, and made him confess satisfy, and do
penance publikelie. Here the flagrant scandal was only the fire or fury that
broke out of a weak woman's breast Synodales aestes, quos sidem eavocant, qui
in inquestionibus morum and visitationibus adjungumur Oeconomis Oeconomi five
Gardiani Ecclesiastikae quorum minus est pro eo anno... inordinateviventes
inquirere, monere scandalosos, ordinario praesentare etc. Ibid. Ex. Aagl. Pol.
Isai 53 7.
into a pragmatical Presbyters ears, whose head is no sanctuary for
spiritual secrecies, but his curiosity the mine that under works the
foundation of private families, and palaces too (where of that of Mary Queen of
Scots may be a formidable, and lamentable example) and when jealousies fail of
material truth in the discovery, to blow them up with malicious calumnies
what they can. For suits and differences incident between Pastor and flock,
Lay Elder and his neighbor, the passion upon which perverts, and blindes the
eyes of the wisest men that are your Congregational or Classical Judges you
pass quietly by it, as having nothing to say for it.

These are the great injuries and hurts which make the Scottish Discipline,
Scandalous to all the Reformed world being proved destructive to the just
praerogative of Kings, the power of Parliaments, the liberty of subjects:
enslaving all orders of men, where it takes place, to the arbitrarie
jurisdiction of a corrupt Synod, and that commonly moderated by the usurped
Papacy of a Knox a Buchanan, a Melvin, an Henderson, such meek lambs as no
misbeleeving Jew can misdoubt, them to be fore runners of his Messiah who has
prae-inspired this good principle into their heads. To bring their Kings rather
then go themselves to the slaughter. And wheresoe'r they get power, to tear
out the throat of the thearers, and make them dumb, never more able to open
their mouths against the known Deity of their Presbytery.

CHAPTER XIII.
The Bishops exceptions against the Covenant made good, and this proved That no
man is obliged to keep it who has taken it.

IF I had not found the Reviewer a pretty round and plumpe Gentleman in black,
I might have misse-thought the habit of his Reasons why the Reviewer is so much
indined to the metaphor op a vomit Tous ischnous kai evemeas ano
pharmacevein... tous de dysemeas kai mcsoos eusarcous ca 10. 4. Aph. 6. and 7.
G. moching Compend. Insti^ Med disc. 5.
body and conformation of his parts, facilitating with some pleasure the
operation of his physike, to have enamourd him with the otherwise undecent,
metaphore of a vomit; But Hippocrates praescribing to his constitution (as J
take it) the other method for dejection of his humors, I recollect with my
self a triple cause that might at this time create his distemper, and in his
penning force out this flood of gall upon his paper 1. His late fruitless
voyage by sea might still stick in his stomach, having before been for many
years accustomed to none but land waves of his raising, the raging tumults and
madness of the people. 2. A violentagitation of his body, the six Scottish
Iehu's in zeal to the cause coaching it much too furiously about the
Country. 3. The abominable sight of his Majesty's hand to diverse papers,
denying the very subject of this chapter, the taking, injoining, or tolerating
of the Covenant. So a Doctor in the faculty nearest hand instructs me...
vomituns vulgo concitare traduntur... violenta and vehemens corporis agitatio,
insueta per mare navigatio... imaginatio and intuitus rerum abominabilium.
Beside the pleasing sent of an Irish design then in hand might offend him,
which is a fourth cause he adds and I end with, Odor rerum saetidarum etc.

As to the substance of the chapter, wherein his Lordship has taken the
Palladium of Presbytery, (without which the success of his other attempts had
been nothing) the Reviewers stratagems (for strength of reason he brings none)
are unlikelie to rescue it, The Bishop Un lawful Covenants not to be keept-Ouc
epiorkein phobo^ menous tente para ^on theoontimovian, kai ten paratois
anthropots aischynta.
is very sensible how deep the conscience of an oath sticks in men whose
hearts are not hardened against religious impressions. And how perjurie is
abhorred among heathen, who have conscientious fear of punishment from their
God, and a politic one too of shame before men. To undeceive therefore such as
fondly fancy because their hands were lift up, that their covenant's with
heaven: And because their eyelids are open, that they walk not in darkness
and the shadow of death. He brings them first the relief of several
propositions, which when draw'n out, will appear to be these. All oaths,
vowcs and ^ovenants are not binding, it being customarie among men to make the
same bonds serve for iniquity as justice and tie up secret conspiracies with
the public liguments of community and peace. 2. Those that are not
obligatoric may be broken, viz where a greater judgment solveth the fallacy
of a less or a beter conscience seeks to reduce and rectify a worse. With
what other false knots men are foolishlie Egar one omeitai, e hotan omnysin
euorkesei.
entangled he demonstrates by the slight where in the Covenant has caught
them. Their deliverance is this, if they will accept it from the hands of
unquaestionable truth, That Covenant which is devised by strangers to the
dishonor of a Nation, imposed by subjects wanting requisue power, and that as
well upon their Sovereign at aequals extorted by just scare of unjust
sufferings, is not binding. But this is that Covenant. Ergo. The majour thus
put in form the Reviewer will hardly grant, and yet dares Per hoc juramentum
spirationes and conjurationes and pleraque in iqua and aequa consirmari solent
Cardan. Terein autou ten chreian on tois anagcaiois hama kai timioir. Hiorocl
in Carm. Pythag. Prove. 30. 19. Covenants ordinarily n^inted in Scotland not in
England.
not deny, but sets his foot upon I know not what weakness and falsitie of
the Minour, the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, as he calls them)
being among the number of the first and only framers thereof. He must be
wiser then Solomon that can know the way of a Serpent upon a rock. Yet the
Presbyterian Scottish subtilitie is not such, but that we may see whence, if not
by what gyres and uncertain sinuations, it came about, and he that meets it
at Westminster may welcome it from Edinburgh, if he likes it. Leagues and
Covenants are no usual abasement of English allegiance, such copper coin has
been no where so current as since Knox was Mintmaster in Scotland, whose
original inscription With the image of his rebellion is propagated in this
counterfeit, as he that delights in such medalls may see if he compares them.
This for the thing. For the persons I deny them to be Commissioners on either
side, no King, nor Clergy legallie assembled deputing them to that purpose nor
indeed any of the Laity but Rebels. They that gave life to it, Lords,
Commons, or what you will, or wheresoe'r assemblad, were in the very act
Traitors against the King and so no part of a Parliament in the Kingdom
Whither they are called by His Majesty's writ to consult about the defense not
to covenant the destruction of the Kingdom and Church. The lawfulness of
whose constitution and authority was no farther ^cknowledged then it was
lawfully used, and in that act absolutely disclaimed, the King sending for
them only to discourse and treat with himself, not to dispose and ordain,
or enact any thing without him. Therefore these men, thus acting upon the
praecedent advice and praescription of strangers, foysted a Covenant devised by
strangers, how soever factiouslie denison'd in that Court. But how strange Nor
can such afterco^tracts devised and imposed by a fewmeni^ a declared party
without my consent and without any like power or praecedent from Gods or man's
laws etc. Eix. Ba^. Chapter 14. proque bus arduis and urgen^ nego^ slatum and
defensionem Regni ^stri Angl. and Eccles.
the advice was will appear beter by true story then probable divination,
which being sent me in a leter from one well acquainted with these affairs of
his own country. I will faythfullie communicate as it came unto my hands.

When the Commissioners came down from the Parliament with their letter
subscrived be some Ministers showing that their blood was shed like water upon
the ground for defense of the protestant relligione and the letter being red in
the Assembly had no uther answer bot this. Gentlemen we are sorry for your
case, bot there is one thing in your letter, Ye say ye sight for defense of
the reformed relligione, ye must not think us blind that we see not your
fighting to be for civil disputes of the law, wherewhith we are not acquame.
Go home and reconcile with the King, he is a gracious Prince, be will
receive you in his favor; You can not say it is for the reformed relligione,
since ye have not begun to reform your Church, ye had thryven better, if ye
had done as we did, begun at the Church, and thereafter striven to have gotten
the civil sanction to what ye had done in the Church, we can not meddle bet
wixt his Majesty and you.] Few days after, Sir W. Ermin, Anglie
concernentibus... Cum Praelatis Maguatib. etc. colloquium habere and tractatum.
The extract of a lettershewing by whom the Covenant was devised.
Master Hamden with the rest were invited by some of their friends to make a
new address to the Assembly, their friends in the Assembly (after a second
desire of a more gracious answer) propounded this. [Will ye join in covenant
with us to reform doctrine and discipline conform to this of Scotland and ye
shall have a better answer,] Sir W. Ermin and the rest answered (that they had
not that in their instructions, bot thanked the Assembly and said they would
represent it to the Parliament of England) the friends in the Assembly told
them [there would be much time loosed ere they could go to the Parliament for
their resolutione and thereafter to return to Scotland and draw up a solemn
league and covenant the danger was great and they were not able with all their
forces to stand two months before the Kings army bot we shall draw it up here
and send up with you some noblemen gentlemen and Ministers that shall see it
subscribed,] which was done.

To proceed your Rebel -Parliaments desires, beside what may be The Rebels
desires were impositions.
gatherd from your papers, were not, as I have heard, very humbly praesented
by the persons many times that brought them, And when your smoothest language
is glossed upon (as best it may be by your rude military Interpreters at more
distance your negative will not hinder them of being impositions rather then
supplications. Religion and liberties in all the three Kingdoms were very
sufficiently secured by the laws. Scottish Presbytery is no religion but
rebellion in the principles, and the libertic taken by it is license befitting
no subjects, and therefore not to be desired of a King. For which if such a
covenant or oath is but one malne piece of security (as you confess) I leave
to be judged if any judgment can comprehend the other maine pieces of
vassalage, for your safety, you yet farther expected from the crown. An
authority to crave many leaves a liberty to refuse, and be of no sufficience
Nullum privilegium Parlamenti concedi potest propr^ditione felonia aut ruptura
pacis. 17. Ed. 4. Rot. Par^um. 39.
to impose upon the subject so long as during the contenuance of the
Parliament. Nor can you show that uncontroverted law which gives validity to
an ordinance controverted by the King, who assumes no power of politic
imposible concessions, such as treason, felony and breach of peace are by name
with us, and covenanting is such when against the Kings consent.

The last part of the demonstration is too true, and so far dishonorable as
it blazons the cowardice of men well principled in their religion to God and
loyalty to their King, who for the benefit of a little fresh air out of
prison, and a titular interest in an estate, the revenues whereof must be
excis'd, contributed, fifth parted, twentieth parted and particulated into
nothing at the pleasure of the blew-apron'd The Covenant dishonorable to the
English.
men in the City, and Committee plowmen in the Country, would desperately
cast their souls into the guilt and curse of a covenant which they utterlie
detested, and their persons into the slaverie of proud, sinful unreasonable
men, whom before it may be they fed with their charity and commanded. The
nullitie of this oath upon The nullitie of it.
the difference of heart and mouth, is demonstrable, The very taking it being
so far from obliging to be kept, as it subjects them to the judgment of God,
because not done in truth nor in righteousness. Isai 48. Nec vero ultra quam
conse^sum est juramentum operatur secundum ipsum, quae tunc actul deficit in
substantia, desiciente consensu, quem defectum juramentum minime supplet Say
the lawyers. And he that swears to commit sacrilege Joan. Gutierrez De Iuram:
^onfirm. part. 2. cap. 2. ex Alciat. The Reviewers. Abominable falsehood.
and murder is as much bound by his oath, which I would feign hear Master
Baylie dictate from his chair against them when they tell him, Iuramentum non
est vinculum iniquitatis. The especial aggravation which he draws from the
Bishops ground is as especial a lie, and as evident a falsehood, as ever came
out of the mouth of man, and an irrecoverable shame to the whole Presbytery.
That a Minister, Professor, their great champion and commissioner should utter
it, when not only the penalty of two pence has been threatened, but of
sequestration and imprisonment has been executed upon thousands, and beside
these, (because some particular must be instanced) upon near 100. fellows of
Colleges in one week banishment out of the University of Cambridge, this I
can best justify being one of the number. Which was a leading case to Oxford,
when in their power, and the Iudic. Oxon De sol. lig. seci. 2.
fear of unjust suffering they threatened, her first argument against their
covenant. Therefore let us leave the dishonor we were speaking of where we
found it, upon the head of our Nation in part, who degenerated so far as to
take a covenant from the hand of strange rebels no otherwise their brethren
then in the in quitie of maintaining hypocrisy and license, both which they
see with their selves now in thraldom to Atheism and a mercenarie sword, And
bear about them the mark of Gods vengeance in the sight of us who survive to
magnify him in his justice, saying, Iustus Dominus in omnibus vijs suis and
Ps. 145. 1. 7.
sanctus in omnibus operibus suis.

The Bishops second demonstration need be no beter then the first whereby
Covenanters take the Discipline for Christ's institution.
you are convicted, as bad as it is, you dare not venture upon half of it, but
like a cunning old rat that has before been caught by the ta^le in a trap,
will be nibling at the bait, but not enter too far with his teeth for fear
his head go for it next. This makes you so tender of dealing with the majour,
which if not well cautioned why doc not you deny it or attacke it on that side
which you guess weaklie guarded? You pervert the minour, though little to your
advantage. The Bishop says not that in the Covenant you swear the lately
devised discipline to be Christ's institution, but that you gull men with it, as
if it were so imposing upon them the strictest oath to engage their estates and
lives in the praeseruation and propagation of it, which is as much as can be
required for Christ's institution or Euangel, a title as strange as you make it,
often given your Discipline which allreadie I have touchd at. Yet because here
you so confidentlie put us upon the words of the Covenant, somewhat not much
unlike what the Bishop imputes I find in the praeface... having before our
eyes the glory of God, and the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ... whereby I charge your meaning to be the Presbyteriall
Government of your Kirk, if not, I require you plainly to deny it, and to
send me this proposition subscribed by your hand. The plat form of Discipline
to which we swear in the Covenant, is not Christ's institution. Especially
since your General Assembly 1642. has said. That the Reformed Kirkes do^ hold
without doubting their Kirk officiers and Kirk Government by Assembles higher
and lower etc to be jure divino and perpetual. Your brother-Presbyters Ans. to
the Declar. by the Parl. angl. Aug. 25. Let. to the Genesis Assemb. S. Iul. 22.
it. 4. Vindic. Ep. Philadelph. Protest of the Noblemen, Barons etc. 1638.
in England. That Presbyterian Government has just and evident foundation both
in the word of God and religious reason. And the praeface to the English
Directorie telling you, That their care has been to hold forth such things as
are of divine institution in every ordinance. Were it not to tire out my
Reader, I could show this to be your language ever since your Discipline was
framed, and thought so necessary a truth that your denial must make Christ not
so wise as Solon or Lycurgus, if he left it as a thing mutable by men, or now
after so many ages of his Church to be put to the vote in their Parliaments and
Synods. So says a friend of yours in these words. Equidem non novi, neque
credam Christum, qui Dei sapientia suit, remp. suam que omnium est
perfectissima, arbitrio stultorum hominura religuisse agitandam... quod ne
Solon quidem aut Lycurgus aljusve quis pium Legislator pateretur. For that and
the rest of your religion your Confession of faith says. That you are
thoroughly resolved by the lord and spirit of God, that only is the true
Christian says and Religion pleasing God etc... Gods aeternal truth and ground
of your salvation... Gods undoubted truth and According to the word of God, a
more dubious and frivolous limitationing the Covenant then heretofore in the
oath for Episc^pacie.
verity grounded only upon his written word. Nay afterward you protest and
promise with your hearts under the same oath etc that you will defend the Kings
person and authority in the deferse of Christ's Euangel and liberties of your
Country, which is (or if it be no speak) the same with Religion and liberties
in your league. Besides all which otherwhere you blasphemouslie compare both
your confessions with the old Testament and the New. That which follows
wherein you moderate the first article of your Covenant, imposing an endeavor
to reform only according to the word of God, with out introducing Scotes
Presbytery or any other of the best reformed, unless it be found according to
that pattern, though it served to palliate all blemi^hes and deformities that
were in it; To invite possibly, some well meaning people into your
fraternity, who like harmless bees relishing that sweetness, little thought
what poison they left behind for other venomous insectiles to suck out; To
furnish others withan excuse (a petiful one) for using so bad means to so good
an end and when it undeniablie proves the contrary (the same it may be they
intended) cry they were mistaken though now they can not help it; Yet it may
be showed to be a dubious 1548. Ministri Regia authoritate compulsi aut
subscribere Epali tyrannidi, aut in carceres aut ex^lia abire. Multarum
ministrorum tuncse prodidit imbecillitas instauratae Ecclae tyrannidi homonymus
subscribentiam adjecta limitatione anbigua vel potius futi^i nempe secundum
verbum Dei etc. Ep. Phil. Vind. ^o. Gutiervez De Iu^am. Con^mpar.. 1. ^p. 71.
Su^. 5.
and frivolous limitation, the same commendation your friends gave it when
translated into an oath tenderd in behalf of Episcopacie by the King, First
infirming that member, and so far disinabling it from bearing part in the matter
of an oath, as subjection is required unto the reforming power in a Church.
Secondly, Quitting all that swore it of their engagement every moment, if they
see clearlie, or judge erroneouslie, your reforming Principals to digress from
that path. Thirdly, either supposing your reformed religion in Scotland to be
allreadie conformed to that pattern, or else enjoining to swear
contradictions. Lastly, If leaving every man to judge what is according to the
word, and to endeavor according to that judgment, imposing an oath productive
of confusion there being as many minds as men, scarce two united in one
touching Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and government. The first might be
illustrated and argued from the fallibilitie and uncertaintie in the Reforming
power, a maimed Parliament and an illegitimate Assembly then si^ng, whom I
could not be assured to have the spirit of God so illuminating their minds, as
whereby jointlie to judge the same reformation according to Gods word.
Secondly as uncertain should I be, seting aside all partiality and passion,
that they would declare what they so judged, against many of whom, if not the
most having a well grounded praejudice, whether just or no matters not if not
known to me) I could not swear de futuro a conformity to their acts. In
which cases wisemen advise us to abstain...Ten apochen tou omnynai prostattei
peri toon endcchomenoon, kai aoriston tes ecbaseoos echontoon to peras.
Hierocl. in Carm. Pythag. and Iurant presumitur certioratus and deliberatus
accedere ad actum super quo jurat, says the Lawyer. The second is strengthened
s^fficientlie by your words which oblige the Covenanter no farther then he
finds your great work proceeding according to Gods word. The success whereof
if no beter then in your Discipline and the Directorie, will keep no man in his
Covenant, Gods word praescribing many parts of neither. The Third is evident
from the very clauses in the article, where first an oath must be taken to
praeserve the reformed religion in Scotland, which if not according to Gods
word, is contradicted in the next that enjoines reformation only according to
the word. And if it be then that is it wherewith a uniformitie must be made,
and yet you tell us there is no such word, nor any such matter in the Covenant,
About the last let every man speak his mind as freely as I shall mine. That
I See Surv. of the praet. holy Disc.
hold no Presbyterian government, Scottish or other, according to Gods word That
I have read of much dissension among your selves in former times, and heard of
some in later. That all Papists; all orthodoxe persons in the Church of England
are jointlie for Episcopacie in the order, as according to Gods word and
separatelie for it in the jurisdiction and discipline, neither holding all
parts of it exemplified in the word, and so not applicable unto it, and both
not the same extensive particulars in the ordinance and exercise of the Church.
Besides such as you call Socinians, Sectaries, and separatists, whether Vid.
Discus. Eccles. Disc. Rupel. edit. 1584.
individual or congregational. All which having distinct opinions of Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and Government according to the word, if not concentred in
the sense of the House or Assembly but left to their several endeavors, are
sworn among them to delineate a pretty implicated diagramme of a Church. But
for a farther answer to this article of your covenant. I remit you to the
solid judgment of the University of Oxford. As likewise to that of several
learned men in the University of Cambridge, who joined in one mind, and
published their refutation of the whole treacherous league A. 1644. Only I
must add what persons of knowledge and integrity say they will make good.
That your Covenant came into England with some such cl^use as this. We shall
reform our Church in doctrine and Discipline conform to the Church of
Scotland. Whereof Master Nigh and his Independent friends fairhe cheated you,
making that be rased out and this inserted which we treat of. By which trick
they have packed Presbytery away, and yet plead with you in public, That
they still keep the Covenant and go on to reform according to Gods word.

The second ground of the Bishops demonstration is no evident error, it being
The Covenant how the same with that of K. 1. 1580.
an evident truth, That the principal Covenanters, Noblemen, Gentlemen and
Ministers in Scotland protested to Marq. Hamilton His Majesty's Commissioner
1638. when it was objected that their Covenant with their new explication was
different from the sense of that 1580. because it portended the abolition of
Episcopacie. That it was not their meaning quite to abolish it, but to limit
it, holding out in the most material point an identitie between them. That they
assured many who made K. Ch: (...), Larg: decl^. 1639: page: 177:
the scruple, and would not have come into their covenant, unless they had so
resolved them. That they might swearc the same confession, and yet not abjure
Episcopal government, which the three Ministers in their first answer to the
Divines of Aberdene positivelie affirmea. That thus they abused many, with an
appearance of identitie in the matter and similitude in the end. And themselves
frequentlie confessed that this Covenant was nothing but that general one
applied to the particular occasions at that time. It is as certain that the
Covenant of the Rebels in all the three Kingdoms 1643. was held out at least
to them in Scotland that took it, to be the same with that they took before,
otherwise then as it must be again applied to a conjunction with their
brethren of the other two Kingdoms. Nor was there any other new emergent
cause, nor was that one for any new Covenant (and you are not to multiply
solemn oaths and Protest. ag. Kings Proclam. 1638
Covenants, you said, without necessitic) Nor is there in this the sense of any
one clause that is not in the other as it concerned your own Nation. And the
enemies with their practices, against whom and which you framed it, you
profess to be the same, though now increased, in your praeface. All which have
elements enough, beside an airie sancie, to make up your gross error or
affected falsehood in denying so demonstrable a truth. Yet that notwithstanding
this imposture How it differs from it.
there is a real difference in the triplie respect which the Bishop speaks of
was never hitherto denied (as I know) by any Episcopal writer which are many
that occasionallie have mentioned it. So that his Lordship cuts not his own
vine but your fingars that will be meddling with his work, for which he may
expect and will have due thanks from his friends that rightly understand him.
For how soever indeed that short confession was at first not only draw'n up
by the Kings command, nor freely subscribed with his hand, but obtruded
violently upon him being devised by a party of seditious malecontented
Noblemen and Courtiers (made such by the Clergy that were worse) against Esme
Earl of Lenox, who they hoped by this test would be discovered to be a Papist,
Yet the King made a very good virtue of necessity, and since he must impose it
first upon his familieand afterward upon his subjects, being supreme could and
did it in his own sense, though it may be, oppositie to theirs that made it,
the ambiguitie of the words tolerating both. To which, in that sense, he
praefixed his Royal authority, whereas your later Covenant in yours was
absolutely against his sons. That in his sense was for the laws of the
Realm, the praeservation of Episcopacie, This against them for its utter
extirpation. That to maintain the religion established, which he did to the
uttermost of his power. This to its destruction which it is in effecting,
though it spoils in the casting that golden calfe you intended to set up. So
that the words themselves which do not more flatly contradict the Bishop,
then they are contradict by your works, are not so express for the Kings
authority, the law of the realm and religion established, and wherein they
are, such an abstruse meaning have they, as he that takes your league is ouos
agoon mysteria. the dull creature that ignorantly caries all the mysteries of
your iniquity on his back.

In the next paragraph is nothing but a branch or two of your former
Epiphyllides taut csti kai stomylmata chelidonoon momseia.
wild discourse, and therein a nest of small birds chattering what we often
hear to no purpose, or never to less then here having no significancie at all
in answer to the Bishops Memento, which recognizeth Q. Elizabeth's indulgence,
to whom your praedecessours scraped and whined for military assistance and (to
say no worse) undeservedlie had it without imposing the Discipline os England.
Whereas you to use the words of K. Chapter 1.) are not to be hired at the ordinary
rate of auxiliari^s E^x. Bu^. Chapter 14.
[much lesfe borrowed or bestowed] nothing will induce you to engage till those
that call you in have pawned their souls to you. The Discipline and Liturgic
(which you quarrel with some times because different from the English) was
obtruded upon you by no other crast and force then a plain legal injunction,
Deliberated on from the time of K. James's investiture K. Chapter 1. Larg. dec^. p.
15. etc. The English Discipline long since settled by law in Scotland, and the
Liturgy there used
in the crown of England, approved in a general Assembly at Aberdene 1616.
(the Liturgy I mean, the Discipline having been received long before) read
publikelie in the Kings chapel at Haly-rudhouse ever since the year 1617. not
only without dislike but with frequent assemblies of the Council, Nobility,
Bishops and other Clergy, Judges, Gentry, Burgesses, women of all ranks. In
several other places in the time of K, Chapter 1. The alterations (which were not
of such moment as to be met with opposition, were partly made generally
approved by the Bishops and principal Clergy in Scotland, who in the exercise
of it were injoined to proceed with all moderation, and dispense with such for
the practice of some things contained in the book, as they should find either
not well persuaded of them, or willing to be informed concerning them, or did
hope that time and reason might gain a beter belief of them. How The Pr.
Scottish never so in England, but obtruded. Mot. Brit.
otherwise your Discipline was obtruded upon the English, what free long and
deliberate choice they used (beside the sighs and groans of many pious souls
hurried into prisons or disspersed in a miserable exile) your own Scots Cushi
shall bear witness. Who, out of no ill meaning to your cause, reveals the
truth of your tyranny from the beginning... That upon your second coming in it
was, when some of our Nobles took occasion to supplicate for a Parliament,
which the King scarce durst deny for the Scotch army, nor the Vix audebat rex
eis de postula^o abnucre prop^r Scotos etc. p. 28.
perpetuity of it afterward for no other reason... That when it came to arms
the Scotes could not sit still in conscience and honesty whereupon they sent a
Commissioner from their Synod to the English Parliament 1642. to move them to
cast out Bishops, Then others to the King at Oxford to sign all propositions,
which because he would not do, they resolve to assist their brethren against
him, whom they call the common enemy. The formalitie of an invitation was used
to this purpose, but their inclination and resolution had passed before. And
indeed your Assembly 1642. confessed an obligation Vocatio^em lubenti animo
amplectuntur ut pote adidem prius proclives. page 4.
lay upon them to encourage and assist so pious a work, but not as you do
here only out of brotherly concernment, but for security of yourselves,
because without it you could not hope for any long time to enjoy your own
purity and peace, which had cost you so dear.

The Bishops following grounds, which he makes good to be de monstrative, do
not therefore betray the weakness of because they Answ. to the let. sent by
the Ministers of Engl; Aug. 5. Ps. 62. 9.
add strength to the praeceding. What wind is in them you follow too fast
after, and feed as greedily upon as Ephraim on the East, which turns to the
same bad nourishment in you both, increasing lies and somewhat else which you
may read Hose 12. 1. And were the softest hand insensible of their substance,
they would praeponderate your answers which are as deceitful upon the weights
as he that made them, and allsogether lighter then vanity it self. For not a
proposition is there in prosyllogisme or syllogism that is seems you can
deny, though you scarce any where show ingenuitie to grant. For the second,
which you think so hard to prove let it be adventured thus. He that by
covenant disposes The power of the Militia is the Kings.
of himself and arms contrary to the established laws, which by the Kings
right in him he is obliged to maintain, disposes of them against that rights.
But every Covenanter disposes etc. For the established laws enjoine him to
defend the Kings person without limitation or reference to religion, at least
not to fight against it, which the Covenant by your practike interpretation
does oblige to. Where the power of the Militia resides His Ma^esties
unanswerable Declaration for the Commission of array will best satisfy you.
And himself tells you truly it is no less his undoubted (...). Chapter 10.
right then is the crown. In the exercise of it though the Parliament be not
excluded, yet their power is never legallie considerable but when they are, as
the body with the soul, in stain conjunct^ with the King. Defense of liberties
has no law to arm them against praerogative, nor is there a cause imaginable
impowering them to take up arms against a partic countenanced by the Kings
praesence which can be according to no law but what is called such by
rebellious people that offer violence to Royal right. If any such there be, let
us have but one impraegnable instance and we'll shake hands. I believe you are
not much in love with that old custom of the Frisians, long before they became
Presbyters, who chose their Earl carrying him upon their bucklers, and crying
alowd, Haecest potestas Frisiae. You can now adays H. Grot. lib. DeAnciq.
Reip. ^atav.
beter indoctrinate them according to the custom of yourfaction, when
praevalent, which is to admit no new King but at the swords point and there to
keep him, crying after this manner, or somewhat like it, in your proclamational
libells, Haec est libertas Presbyteriales Scotiae. Yet your Commissioners when
in the mood can praesent Answ: to both Houses 1647.
the hilt to his hand, and argue with both houses, as they did upon the new
propositions, why the power of the militia should be in the crown asking. How
King^ otherwise can be able to resist their enemies and the enemies of the
Kingdom, protect their subjects, keep friendship or correspondence with their
allies... asserting that the depriving them of this power roots up the
strongest foundations of honor and sasctie which the crown affords, and will
be interpreted in the eyes of the world to be a wresting of the scepter and
sword out of their hands. So that the Bishops friends may take from yours
as well as from him the same demonstrable conclusion he laid down, And this for
all the Kings acknowledgement, which was never any of the Parliaments joint
interest in his authority against his person, which is the true case though
you shamefullie conceal it. Nor did His Majesty so put the whole Militia in
their hands as to part with his right when he bound his own from the exercise,
Nor was he sure he was not or might not seem to be perjured for his courtesy
(which all Kings will not hazard) though he laid the guilt or dishonor at
their doors, whither God has brought allreadie a portion of their just
punishment that constraind him, saying. I conceive those men are guiltic of the
enforced (...). Chapter 10.
persurie (if so it may seem) who compel me to take this new and strange way
of discharging my trust by seeming to desert it, of protecting my subjects by
exposing my self to danger or dishonor for their safety and quiet. Therefore
what thoughts he had of your parties meddling with the Militia may be best
judged by his words. How great invasion in that kind will state rebellion in a
Parliament, when there is any (as there was none, at that time nor since) shall
be told you when the Bishop gives you occasion to demand it. Or if you can not
stay so long, I must send you again to the judicious Digges to satiate your
too curious and greedy appetite of such fare as will not well be digested in
many stomachs. To the nulling yourCovenant by His Majesty's proclamation you
say nothing because it separates him from the party to which you attribute all
malignance, and you know you can not securely meddle with him but in a crowd.

In the Bishops second demonstration we must be beholding to you for giving
what you can not keep with any credit which more awes you then conscience. That
where the matter is evidentlic unlawful the oath is not binding. The
application of which up to your covenant will be justified when brought to the
touch by Gods law or the Kingdome's. But you first summon it before reason,
which helps you with no rule. To lay aside what might be otherwise rectified,
were there cause for it. Nor any evidence that the burden of Bishops and
ceremonies was so heavy as to press you into the necessity of a Covenant.
This his Bishops and ceremonies no burden.
Lordship need not offer to dispute, since the King ever offered a regulation of
that order and those rites by the primitive pattern wherein it otherwise
differed then in a necessary, innocent compliance with the politic
constitution of his Kingdom. And the Church had rendered See Treat. of Cerem.
besore Com. prayer book Hookers E^l. Polit. Dr. Tail of Episc.
all rational satisfaction as well for the ceremonies retained as those
abolished. And both by particular men most eminent in learning and judgment
had been unanswerablie maintained in every grain or scruple that could be
quaestion'd or complaind of. Yet the praesent government, how light soever, is
burdensome especially to men that look for advantages by the change, And the
worst of men can seem as serious in complaint as if their virtues had been the
only martyrs to cruelty, and the very common hackneyes for oppression.
Bishop Andr. let. to M^lin. etc.
Quid reliqui habemus praeter miseram animam came out which a sad sigh from
Catiline before his bankrupt Comrades, who had left no such subject for
rebellion to thetoricate on, if their lives had been as good pawnes in the
midst of their prodigality as their lands. This your To parona^i bari tois
h^pecoois. Th^c. Salusi. Bell Catil.

Parliament can not reform without the King.


method of reformation, whereof the Bishop complains for which you plead
custom, fails not only in the manner but of the power, the most material
requisite to effect it. And the high path way is not so ordinary as you can
name the Parliament that ever trod in it before, We in England having no such
custom, nor indeed any where the true Churches of God as to alter religion and
government without the King. To your quaestion which ever shelters fraud in
universals, I particularly answer and to our purpose 1. That the Houses of
Parliament are not to begin with an ordinance for a covenant or oath,. to
change the laws of the Realm to abolish the Discipline of the Church and the
Liturgy lawfully established, by the sword (which are the Bishops words)
before the Kings consent be sought to that beginning, much less when his
dissent is foreknow'n of that and all proceedings in that kind 2. An ordinance
of the Lords and Commons (without and against the King) is no good narrant to
change such laws during the fitting os the Parliament. 3. No law nor lawful
custom of England debarres the King by dissenting to stop that change. Until
which three assertions be refuted in law, it will be needless to debate the
qualifications and exceptions, which can be none of moment in this case against
the Kings consent requisite to turn an ordinance into a law. But you take His
Majesty's concessions to have praevented all can be said in the praesent case.
Behold you that kindled the sire in his breast here compass yourselves Isai.
50 11 The concess^ons of Chapter (...). not so ^arge (...) praetended.
with the sparks of his consent which charity would have suffered to exspire
with the breath that brought them forth, or buried in his ashes which they
made* Yet can not you walk by the light of this fire unto the full
accomplishment of your ends, His successor being not yet conveighd into any
such place as Holmebye or Carisbrooke Castle K. Chapter 2. not obliged to confirm^
them.
where you would ^ave him, some such fatal haereditarie confinement being the
fairest apology (if any) when he should subscribe so many of your
unc^nscionable desires, and write after his Father in the extremity of
misfortune, who as little intended what himself accounted his failings for his
copy, as he desired his undeserved miseries should be a patrimony transmitted
to him by your hands. As to the obtaining of what is lacking, your way is not
so fair, in which visiblie lies the same Scripture, Antiquity, law, reason,
conscience and honor, which heretofore hindered your journey to the end of your
hopes, the obtaining His Majesty's plenarie consent. Who did not agree to, if
you mean approve of the rooting out Episcopacie in Scotland. That he gave so
much way to such wild boares as were in your Presbytery to do it, he
afterward repented, and you rewarded him not so well, as that his Royal son
should be encouraged to purchase sorrow at so dear a rate. 2. He was not
willing allthough he yielded to have them put out (...). Chapter 17.
of the House of P^ercs in England and Ireland, out of a generous scorn of
your uncharitable susspicion that he would have them there only because he
was to make use of their votes in State affairs. 3 He divested them of civil
power, hoping to persuade such as your Lay Presbyters, by the objections ma^e
against them, out of the Ecclesiastical which they more irrationallie usurped.
4. He joined Presbyters with them for ordination, Ibid.
because he found it before seldom administered without them. But he never made
them coordinate in, nor aequiparticipant of that power. He joined them sor
spiritual jurisdiction; as being a fit means to avoid... partialities incident
to one man. And tyranny which becomes no Christians, leaft of all Churchmen.
And thirdly to take away from them the burden and Odium of afsaires, which was
a courteous diminution in such times. How sacrilegiouslie you roh the Temple of
Memory of the pillar he set up in the period of your Treaty, and erect in the
place an impious calumny of his abolish^ng Episcopacie totallie, name and
thing will be seen by part of his inscription or ultimate answer to the Rebel
Commissioners paper about the Church. The words are these... His Majesty Nov.
18. 1648. at Newport. K. Chapter 1. Immov^able from Primitive Episcopa^.
does again clearlie professle, That he can not with a good conscience consent
to the total abolition of the function, and power of Bishops, nor to the entire
and abf^lute alienation of their lands, as is desired, because he is yet
persuaded in his judgment that the former is os Apostolical institution, and
that to take away the later is sacrilege... And if his two Houses shall not
think fit to recede srom the strictness of their aemanas in these
particular^, His Majesty can with more comfort cast himself upon his Saviors
goodness to support him and desend him from all afflictions, how great soever,
that may besall him, then sor any politic consideration, which may seems to be
a means to restore him, deprive himself of the inward tranquillity of a
quiet mind. And some of his last words were. I am firm to primitive
Episcopacie, not to have it extirpated, (if I can hinder it) He said indeed
(...). Chapter 17. Answ. Nov. 18. 1648 Newport. Nov. 20.
that by his former answer he had totallie suspended Episcopal government for
three years, and after the said time limited the same in the power of
ordination and jurisdiction. Which the Commissioners he dealt with so little
thought Tantamont to a perpetual abolition, that they said it met not with
their fears, nor could praevent the inconveniences which must necessarily
follow upon the return of Bishops, and the power which he reserved to them
after that time. For that a Bishop so qualified as qualificd as ^is Majesty
expressed should rise again then they declared wholly in his choice unavoy
dable by Parliament, if they agreed not. But behold a pretty piece of
aequivocation (called Antichristian Iesuitisme by these Rabbi Presbyters of
old) to draw their dull Commissioners out of the mire and as good as ink for
ivorie to wash them clean. His Majesty suspended it till he and Vna opera
ebur atramento candefacere postules. Pl. Mostel. The Reviewers sophistry.
his Parliament should agree. All and every one in both Houses had abjured
Episcopacie by solemn oath and Covenant and so in no hazard ever to agree with
him. Ergo He must either agree with them, that is like wise abjure, which is
abolition, or coutinue perpetuallte his suspension which is Tantamont unto it.
This is very well ordered, especially if you call to mind somewhat else that
was conditioned for viz. That twenty Divines of His Majesty's, nomination
being added unto the Assembly were to have a free consultation and debate,
whence it might be determined by His Majesty and his two Houses how Church
government etc should be settled after the said time or sooner if differences
might be agreed. A very free debate when all demonstrative reasons should be
forespoken to be silenced by an oath. And a very conscionable treaty, That a
faction in both Houses should be (without the restitution of the rest that were
beter tempered) the men that should continue siting not only 3. years but
300. if they could live so long, because sworn not to yield a syllable of
their own terms. Yet because you think your self so witie in your
sophistry letme ask you. What assurance these all and every one in both
Houses had to be immortal, If they were not, what you have that the new elected
would be Covenanters and if they were not, by what law they could have been
excluded the Houses whither they should be sent as Repraesentatives of their
Electours. If admitted and so reasonable as to hearken to a possible result of
the Divines debate in condemnation of Presbytery, and vote according to it,
what then were likely to become of your perpetual abolition, or the Tantamont
unto it. Such measure may you have if ever it come to treaty between you and
your sectarian brethren now siting in one House, who having a^ much abjured
Presbytery that praetends for Royalty by the engagement that has renounced
it, as you Episcopacie by the Covenant, may they condition for their own
confused Jndependencie three years and as much longer as till you and they
agree, and may they tell you that can never be because they are engaged and in
no hazard to reerect the roten stools of English Scotizing repentance, and the
corrupt classes of your Presbyters, which the same sword has ten times more
justly cut down then it set them up. But I see your full and formal consent
finds no such good footing in your fallacy, and therefore falls at length to
a possibility of defect, which you praesume with much facility to have
supplied His Majesty that now is has much to thank you K. Chapter 2* much
beholding to the Reviewer.
for, that at the first you will make him as glorious a King as you made not
his Royal father but after so many years experience of his reign. That being
at liberty not only in his person from your prisons, but in his reputation
from the clogges of those calumnies you cast upon the guiltnesse innocence of
his Praedecessour you will advance him beyond all those sufferances that were
Solemn praeparations to his murder, and in primo imperij momento, as in ultimo
you did before, hold him by the hair, only not as yet permit the Independent
hand to cut his throat, until forsooth he has taken breath to supply that
wherein his too scrupulous too pusillanimous father fainted, And then crown
him with ribbons and flowers for the fater sacrifice of the two by the giving
up his honor and salvation beyond a life, the only lean oblation of Charles
the first.

But may His Majesty say you, easily supply what his father travaild for, He
can no^ so easily, will not so readily grant what his Father denied.
without satisfaction to the uttermost limits of reason and conscience, beyond
the farthest excusable adventures of any Praedecessours in his three Kingdoms
or out of them, hazarding, almost to despair, his memory with pious
posterity, especially at that distance as shall not repraesent distinctlie
every angle of the necessity he was driven to, and his soul to no other
assurance of pardon then what the integrity of his repentance (not so
infalliblie haereditarie as his miseries) and his glorious martyrdom afterward
helped him to? Would he think you so readily but for a whisper of pernicious
counsel in his ears, pass by unregarded his fathers charge to persevere in
the orthodoxe religion of England, and hearken to the Devil of Rebellion whom
he knows (...). Chapter 27.
well enough though turned into a Angel of Reformation? Can he so easily, after
three or four weeks conference at the Haghe with two ignorant Presbyters, and
but twice as many leaden headed Laikes, have his reason convinced, and his
consience satisfied, which is Royal Father could not in so many years
conversation with the ablest Divin^s, and devout consultations had with the
Living God himself by his prayers, and his dead, Yet livelie oracles of the
Holy Word in his watches? Or would he so readily, without it, give up his
Fathers invincible reserve to the irrcparable injury of the Church, his
people, and his heir or successor in his Kingdoms? Was he required and
entreated by Ibid. Ib ib.
Charles the first as his Father and his King (in case he should never see his
face again) not to suffer his heart to receive the least check against or
disaffection from, the true Religion established in the Church of England. And
can he so easily, even while that precious blood has dyed his garments in
purple, and being the Defender's of the faith speaks the same language and
calls every morning he puts them on for the same vengeance as Ibid.
once did the firstborne, of the faithful cast such requests and requisites
behind him, quit the true Christian guard he is charged with, and desert all
his constant subjects that must persevere in their religious profession
according to the purity of our canon? Will he, rather then want, wear a
crown which is not wortb taking up or enjoining upon such dishonorable Ibid.
Chapter 17.
unconscionable terms? And will he so readily bear the infamous brand to all
posterity of being the first Christian King in his Kingdom who consented to
the oppression of Gods Church and the Fathers of it, exposing their persons to
penvrie, and their sacred functions, to vulgar contempt? Will he Chapter 14.
so easily because his treasure exhausted, his reven^e deteind, be tempted to
use such prosane reparations, if not acting, consenting to perjurious and
sacriligious rapines? Or will he so readily instead of huckes give holy things
Ibid.
unto sivine, and the Church's bread, not only the crumbes of it, unto dogs?
This his Royal Father durst not for fear a coal from Gods alter should set
such a sire on his throne and his consience as could hardly be quenched; Nor,
in all likelihood, will this ever obsequious son (whom you call I hope in
expectation of no such concessions, the most sweet and ingenious of Princes)
unless such furies as you fright his conscience away, while his tongue
doubleth in an uncertain consent, having from your pens and practices nothing
but insuperable horror and inevitable destruction in his sight. Where in if
ever you unhapilie praevaile, may the same Royal tongue be seasonablie touched
with a coal of a beter temper before the unquenchable fire of despair catch
hold of his soul, or that of vengeance of his throne. May it call for the
fountain of living waters to ^r. 19. 1.
wash away the blood of his slame subjects whose souls lie under the altar
crying aloud for judgment, and quaestioning its delay. May that ountaine
derive it selve into the head and heart of this otherwise innocent King, and
day and night flow out at his eyes in torrents of tears for himself (in no
soloecisine) the Virgin Father of his people. Rev. (...). 14. 17.
And may at last his robes be washed white in the blood of the Lamb, and God
wipe away all tears from his eyes.

Having paid, in duty, this conditional devotion, which I wish as frivolous
and needless, as your praesumption is malicious and unlikelie. I proceed to
vindicate the Bishops discourse, which J can not see how in sense may be said
to fright the Kings conscience by asserting his right and undeniable
praerogative the sinews whereof you would shrink up into nothing. The
Legislative power is not here stated The King supreme Legislatour
or determined by his Lordship only the King called supreme Legislatour,
which he is, What comment tries have been made of it, to the praejudice of the
right and custom of Parliaments, shall be spoken to when you tell us which of
his brethren, and what in their writings it is you mean. No right nor custom
can be adjusted to them in your case, which is vowing to God, and sweating one
unto another to change the laws of the Realm etc. by the sword, without and
against the King, different Answ. to both Houses 1647.
from the sense of your Commissioners, who would have the Legislative power,
as well as the Militia to be the Kings. For that power that can not constitute
can abrogate no laws, But they will tell you in constituting the King can not
be excluded, And we infer that no more he can be in repealing. If your mind
serve you to engage farther in this dispute you were best answer the learned
Grotius 8. chap. De Imper. Sum. Pot. to which I promise you my reply. The
Bishops pro^ not injurious to Kings Lords nor Commons.


In the next place, as if you were moderating a matachin dance, from seting the
King and Parliament atoddes, you turn both their faces and powers against the
Praelates, whom I do not find His Lordship putting in competition with the
King about the right of making laws, but aggravating the injury done them by
your party in the Parliament, and appealing to their conjcience with what
justice they could covenant against the rights of a third order of the Kingdom
without either their satisfaction or consent. If the whole Repraesentative of
the Kingdom have thus priviledg'd the Bishops, one lame part can not deprive
them of it. Their prioritie and superiority has been so ancient (...). Chapter 9.
that no Lords no Commons would scruple at it, but such as likewise at the
original supremacy of their King; And therefore you may know the bill against
their privileges was five times rejected in the upper House the beter Court of
honor of the two, and when the sixth time it was carried by a few voices, it was
when the most honorable persons were forced to be absent. Their share in the
Legislative power has been so great, that since any was allotted them your
forefathers never heard of a law made in Parliament without them. The King may
pass what he pleases, and what he does so is a ^an. The two Temporal States
with his ba^e name without his power, can make none, nor yet having it as they
account it derived from his Regalitie, not his person. Ius enim serendarum
legum, sive generalium, sive sp^ciaiium, samma H. Grot.
poteslas communicare alteri potest, a se abdicare non potest. What one orth'
other pass to the injury of persons fundamentallie concerned, be it law, can
not be justified in conscience, which is all J take to be urged by the Bishop.
But what would you have said if there had been such a law in behalf of
Episcopacie in England as there has been in spain. That no King could reigne^
(which is more then a Parliament sit and vote) without the suffrage of the
Bishops? Which made Ervigius upon the resignation of Bamba, that turned Monk
call a Council of Ano. 681.
them at Toledo, to have a confirmation of his crown. And the time has been
in England when a difference fell between Edward and Ethelred about succession
to K. Edgar and a devolution of it unto Lnd. Aur. Peras.
the arbitrament of the Bishops. The humble protestation of the twelve Bishops
rudely menaced and affronted did not pronounce the laws and acts after their
recesse null and of none effect in derogation to the praerogative of the King
either solitary or in conjunction with what persons soever he pleased to make
his Legislative Council; but in saving to themselves their rights and interests
of siting and voting in the House of Peers, the violation of which they
conceived to invalidate a Parliament at least without the Kings passing a
rescissorie Act and an Act of new constitution. Because in law and practice it
is usual to any who conceive themselves praejudg'd (even in those things where
Acts of Parliament pass against them) to protest, Which, if you remember, were
the Sea True Repraesent of the Proceed of the Kingd. of Scoth. since the late
Pa^is. etc. page 31. 2. Book Dis^ipl. 7. Chapter
words, and part of a long plea to another purpose (though upon the same
advantage of the Bishops right in Scotland) used by those your Countrymen that
alike intended their ruin, but could not colourablie offer at it without the
Act anext the constitution of the Parliament. Whether the Bishops being a third
order of the Kingdom, and by that craving their share in the Legislative
power, be more humble then the Presbyters who take themselves to be absolute
without King and two states in making all Ecclestastike laws, and against King
and two states in abrogating all civil statutes and Ordinances concerning
Ecclestastical matters that are sound noisome and unprofitable, and agree not
with the time... And censuring, punishing all persons, King and Parliament not
excepted, I file up with the other references to your aequitable comparers, let
them be the Lords and Commons you here plead for.

You may choose whether you will grant what the Bishop takes as demonstrable.
That his brethren had harder measure from the thing called King and Parliament,
then the Abbots and Friars from Henry 8. When The Reviewers bei^fe is no
confes^n of the Bi^hops.
he divested them of their estates, Your consecutorie Beleese has no article
made up out of any of the Bishops words, Who though he could not keep
intruder, out of his palace and possessions, means to have no such troublesome
inmates in his mind. And since you have sequestered him from his gardens,
keeps out of your reach a Tarasse to exspatiate in his thoughts. He commends
your eyes that can see so distinctlie such Platonical Idea's as never had
existence, yet when you draw too near commands you to your distance with the
same answer that Bacchus did Hercules in the Comoedie for all his club. Meton
^mon oikei noun, echeis gar oikeian.

The Bishops last reasoning is as sound as those before, and in all is
Aristoph. Ran.
there a connection of those parts which any demonstrative integral Scottish
Presbyt^rie is that meant in the Covenant though dissembled.
can require, To your first impeachment by quaestion I answer. That article of
the Covenant bears the seting up of the Scottish Presbyterian government in
England which is for a uniformitie in both Kingdoms, if taken with the next
that extirpates praelacie viz. Church government by Bishops. For when Praelacie
is down, I pray what remains, according to your principles, but Presbytery
to set up? As for Scottish Presbytery, you have often told us it is the same
with that of all Reformed Churches. And if altogether be not according to the
Word of God, after so many years Synods, Conferences, and Letters, what blind
Covenanters you are to swear a league of life and death upon the like or more
uncertanitie of future discovery by a few unskilful persons whose petie
phantastike lights put together must be made a new imaginary milkie way
surpassing in a fermed singularity of splendor any among the greater and
truer luminaries in the firmament of the Church. But I have allreadie showed
how in vain you aequivocate about that clause, which has cost your friend
Rutherford and others so much pains. What the oath of supremacy imports is
evident by the words in it. (The Which detracts from the Kings suprema^ie.
variety of senses to catch advantages like side winds in paper sails which
are subject to rend in pieces being the poor policy of Presbyters that dare
not stand to the adventure of plain dealing) supreme Governer of this Realm
etc. As Well in all spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes as temporal.
Which the Bishops you see conceald not, though you grat^e your self with the
observation only of the other title supreme head, and accept his explication
of it, which yiedling you in your contracted sense (that might securetie afford
him more capital privileges without encroachment upon Christ or his Holy
Curch) supreme Governer takes in what your Presbytery will never grant him,
all power imperative, Legislative, judicial, coactive, all but functional,
imediate and proper to the ordination or office of the Minister, which, for
ought J know, if he find an internal call (...) a supposition drawing near a
possibility then likelihood and assurance to have a double portion of Gods
gracious power and assistance in both administrations, he not only may, but
must exercise as did Moses and Melchisedech, saving that without a divine
institution in this spiritual function his supremacy exempts him not from
submitting his head under the hands of holy Church and taking our Saviors
commission with the benediction from her month. That Scottish Presbytery is a
Papacy the Bishop requires not to be granted upon his word, but to be taken
before Public notaries upon your own the political part whereof consists in
the civil primacie which (at least by reduction) you very considentlie assume.
The Bishops contradiction, which is searce so much as verbal, will be easily
reconciled by the words of the oath which he reflects on, and his argument good
against you, until without reserves, limitations, or distinctions, you simply
acknowledge the King supreme over all persons in all causes, which would be a
contradiction to this clause in your book of Discipline. The po^er
Ecclesiastical stoweth immediately from God and the Mediator 2. B Dise. 1. Chapter
Jesus Christ and is spiritual, not having a temporal head in the earth, but
only Christ, the only spiritual King and Governer of his Kirk.

Lasthe, No Presb^terian is there in Scotland but counts it sacrilege to give
the King what belongs unto the Church. And whatsoeu'rit is Statutum
Parliamen^ ^sse solum quida^, and cvilem appr^ ^sse tantum Christiani Prin^pis
ofsicium subjectionem suam Christ^ and Ecclesiae debitam tesianus Phil. Eplae
^ind.
they quit in Ecclesiastike causes is not unto the King, but to King, and
Parliament, and the power in both when it informs an Act or statute called but
accessorie by the Aderdene Assemblers, and (that we may no longer doubt whom
they account supreme) duty and subjection from the Prime) which though spoken
by them but of their meeting, must be meant of all causes consultable in their
Synods, and is as sensibie a truth as words without ambiguitie can render it.

Our of all which has been said it must necessarily follow, that your
Covenant has all the good qualities computed which needs no arithmetical
proof by weight or measure, the praemises over being coextended, with, and
counterpoiz'd by, the conclusion. What you rathlie, if not praesumtuouslie,
pronounce of the Bishops judgment does but vilisie your own. Qui cito
deliberant sacile pronun^iant. Had you brought a judgment to the contrary of
any learned Casuist to whom his Lordship appeals, or any Divine of note in
Europe, which he calls for, your answer had been somewhat more serious and
solid, But here your oracles of learning are all silent. We sinde it not
avowed by your especial brethren of Holland and France, by no approbatorie
suftrages of Leyden and ^trecht...Omnium flagitiosorum a^que facinorosorum
circum se tanquant stipatorum catev^ habet. A guard is has, but a blake one,
such as Catilines Foraigae Presbyterian^ashemed to justify the Scottish
Covenant, The Scottish Pr. never seriously ass^rib'd any good intention to the
King.
league, and how can it have beter, wherein is sworn a conspiracy as bad?

The Bishops following vapors meeting with no suneshine of law or reason to
dissipate them, will not so vanish upon a little blast of your breath but that
they will return in showers of confusion upon your head. Your secret will to
asteribe good intentions to the King has by some of your pack been very
stra^gelie revealed in their expressions touching Kings, whoss very nature they
have declared originallie antipathetical to Christ. This Didoclave avowes as
planilie as he can, And when objected by His Grace of Saint Andrews with your
proverbial, yet mystical appendix of their obligation to the Creatuor, not to
Christ the Redecmer for their crowns, is so slovenly answered by Philadelphs
Vindicatour, as any man may read your good will Nature insitum est omnibus
Regibus in Christum odium Altar. Dam. praet...Cosque Deo Creatori non
Redemptori imperium accepnm debere non obseure praedicarunt. Refut Epil. (...).
Siquis non obscure praedicavit...Non long aberavit Vindic cjustd...Non solume
longinquo non impediens, connivens, vel plenariam potestatem...concedens...sed
^oram intuens and talis facinoris asspectu delectatus.
in his words, and measure the sense of your Synods by his lines, your good
opini^n of the intentions of K. Charles 1. (Beside what you imputed to his
Praelates) may be guested by what, sometimes in print you have assirib^ unto
his person. An unworthie fellow, your Country man that comes running in have
with the message of your good meaning in his mouth, says; His infamous and
Barbarous intentions were executed by ^eathing his sword in the bowels of his
people; And this not onctic himselve not impeding, conniving at, and giving
full Commission for, in Scotland and Ireland, but in England looking upon with
much delight while it was done. And that so fair were negotiations and
treaties from retracting him, that it was in public declared he says not
byany Praelatical party) that he would never defist from this enterprise of
persecuting Church and Commonwealthso long as he had power to pursue it.
Concerning the good intentions of Charles the second, beside what jealousies
you express by the scrupulous conditions in your proclaemation, your Haghe
papers are instancies of your willing asseriptions, which call his answer
strange whereby the distance is made greater then before, and far less
offered for religion, the Covenant, and the laws and liberties of your
Kingdom then was by his Royal Father even at that time when the difference
between him and you was greatest...So that it will constrain you in such an
extremity to do what is incumbent to you. I have allreadie told you the usual
consequences of that cursed word, and what good intentions you are in hand with
when you utter it. Tyranny and popery are twins engendered between your
jealousy and malice, to which Independenc^e is more likely to be the midwife
then Praelacie, and if by that hand they get deliverie at last, will besure to
pay Presbytesie their duty when they can speak. The painted declarations
caries beter sense to them that rightly understand them, which I am sure is
not prajudic^d by any paraphrase of the Bishops. Though agere pocniuntiam. Be
good council where well placed 'yet egisse non paniundum requires it not. If
the con^ience of the Court continue to be managed by the principles of the
Pr^lates, the hearts of the mist understanding shall, if they will be satisfied
withal moral and siducial assurance to have that Religion praeserved which
shall by reason and authority, as well divine as humane, in every particular
justify it selse against all right or left handed sects and factions guilty
of superstition or prosan^sse, and those laws observed which appear now to
have constituted the most indifferent mno^uous government in the world. Whereas
if the conscience of the Court be deluded once into Presbyters hands it will
need none of our angry wishes to be made sensible of the change, when to be
sure, it must take religion, like a desperate patient, from a sullen physician
in doses of Covenants and propositions not to be disputed, and like a bedlam
have laws given it with a whip.

The Bishop drawing toward the end of his discourse puts all the The Reviewer
dares not speak out to the Bishops quaestion about taking arms for religion.
controversy upon trial by that quaestion which if once categoricallie
answered would spare much oil and ink for the future, giving the Magistrate
to know that it is not the pen but his sword whereby this difference must be
decided. But these spiders of Presbytery will as well be spinning webs as
spitting poison, though so thin as cannot conceal the uglie shape of their
souls, nor that bay which contines the intrinsecal venom of their cause.
Though had they the reputation of no beter Artists then Master Baylie, the
Pallas of Praelacie need not enter on the encounter, but that of Magistracy
might in scorn more then envy, tear such wicked work in pieces before their
face, and in justice mixed with some little mercy to beget repentance -- Vide
quidem. pende tamen improba, dixit Mot. 6. fab. 3. The ambiguitie in the
Covenanters words leaves religion to the liberty of their conceits.
execute Arachne's condemnation in the fable upon the authors. Of the
multitude of untruths which the Reviewer, here recriminates upon the Bishop,
(that we may by one take a judgment of the rest) the want of charity is very
unjustlie made the first, which he should have done well to have supplied in
himself, and not so senselesselie to intimate a non realitie of religion in
those reverend Fathers, who, beside the visibilitie in their practice hereto
fore, and of their Christian patience in being Martyrs and Confessors for it
of late, ever made a profession of that faith which was consonant to Scripture
as interpreted in the primitive purest times of Holy Church. Whereas the
censure his Lordship makes of the Presbyterian phantasme is principally
because in their very covenant appears no reformation intended but according
to the word of God, without mentioning any rule or authority for the
interpretation of that word, beside their own humors and conceits. And the
example of the best Reformed Churches, which Se short Causes. begin.
best must be that which seems so unto them, whether the rest yield to it as
such or no, if indeed they mean any, as it may be well thought they do not,
but themselves, who are so superciliouslie Nulla unquam gens in quovis
seculo... Opus Resormationis feliciore prudentia animo and suecessu
administravit, quam Scoti in sua patria Mot. Brit. Ver. Custin.
singular from them all, as they disdain to hear of a inclioration to be had
from their example, and such Tyrants over us as they give us no other law nor
reason but their pleasure for the reformation they impose, speaking to us in
the language of the Pelagians to the Catholics. Nobis authoribus, nobis
principibus, nobis expositoribus, dam^ate quae tenebatis, tenete quae
damnabatis, reijeite antiquam fidem, paterna instituta, Majorum deposita, and
recipite, quaenam illa tandem? Horreo decere sunt enim tam superba, ut mihi non
modo adfirmari, sed ne reselli quidem sine aliquo piaculo posse videantur. The
second untruth he says is. That Covenanters bear no ailegeance to the King
but only in order to Religion, which notwithstanding is the particular
limitation in the Covenant, and when all was granted them but a particle of
that by Charles I. they denied to return to their allegiance without it. And
the Crown of his successor, our gracious Sovereign, still hangs out of his
reach by that thread, which their proclamation tells him in effect shall for
ever keep it off till he consent. To the third I reply. That the Rebel
Parliaments Vincent, advers. haeres. c. 14. Their allegiance conditional.
verbal denial makes the Bishop speak no untruth, who will tell them as the
King himself did, That his person was invaine excepted by a parenthesis of
words, when so many hands were armed against him with swords, and the Canon
knew no respect of persons. The praetenses of a Popish Praelatical, and
matignant faction are wiped away by His Majesty in that chapter, to which I
require a Scotich reply. The fourth is grounded upon a very They fight against.
false supposition, which sometimes they will not grant us, nor should (...).
Chapter 9. Their Creed in words the same with ours but not in sense.
we (though too many have out of mistake too often) grant it them, viz. That
saving Bishops and ceremonies, the religion of Scotizing Presbyterians and
Catholic English Christians is the same, where as there is near, if not
fully, fundamental difference in the acception of several articles in our
Creed, (so that though we say the same words, we can not truly be said to be
of the same belief) in these at least, Christ's descent into hell; The Holy
Catholic Church; The communion of Saints; The forgiveness of sins, Besides
several other accessorie tenets, where in we think they detract from the
mercy, if not the justice, of God, reveled in Christ and the ordinary use of
his graces restored by our reden^ption, without respect of persons, unto men.
But if here, for their pleasure, they will have the true Church and counterfeit
Kirk be the same otherwise then as they are differenced by the corruptions of
Bishops and ceremonies, why tried they not the experiment of purging these with
the alteration of the rubrike and their persons, without change of the Liturgy
for a Directorie, and the abolition of their office, As their great Pope
Henderson once confessed in the Earl of Henderson and the Reviewers speeches
about Bishops.
Arundel's tent, when General in the North. That Bishops might have been
tolerated in Scotland if their persons had been such as they ought. And the
Reviewer himself. when he wondered why the Doctors of Aberdene would not
subscribe the covenant, being asked by a friend of his if he thought
Episcopacie and the articles of Perth unlawful made this answer, He never
thought, nor ever would think them so. Whence may be conjectured their modest
meaning to be this. That had the Episcopate in Scotland been seasonablie
entailed to their tribe, so far as they could have hindered what they pretty
well promoted, their covenanting tables at Edinburgh had been taken down, and
no army raised to purge Malignants out of the Kirk 5. The Reviewer says,
Religion and liberty no good pretenses for taking arms.
their arms were taken for defense of just liberties, whereof religion was but
one. But then it was one, and that the principal, or else when they had the
Militia granted them to defend the rest, why stood they upon that, which is an
argument that merely for that, were there nothing else in controversy, they
might as well take, as keep up arms But what shuffsing was in this business
has been discovered by another. Simons's Vindicat p. 30.
That about liberties Master Digges has learnedlie consuted. Nor will the
Reviewer and all his accomplices be able to instance in any one law of the three
Kingdoms that justifies the subjects against the supreme power in defece of
any liberties by their arms. Saint Austin and all good Christians were of
another mind. Ita a plebibus Prin^ipes, and a servis domini serendi sunt, ut
sub exercitationc tolerantiae sus^ineantur temporalia and sperentur eterna.
Which I therefore cite not, as if I took it to be the Covenanters case, who
did, and might have continued to enjoy all just liberties without any such
defense, Yet had they not, they should have pondered many beter politic
maxims among the heathen such as this in Plutarch cheironeinai monarchias
paranomou polemon emphylion In Brut.
and that of Pliny in his Panegyrike. Quanto liberate dis^ordi servientibu^
s^tilius, unum esse cui serviant.

The other horn of the Bishops dilemma is as sharp, and it need be no sharper
then the former, The danger whereof makes the Reviewer keep his distance, first
not daring positavelie to assert the lan fulness of taking up arms for
religion. And then muffling himself in his cloak, invaine hoping he shall not
by this argument de gored unto the quick. His spitting Atheism in the face of
Reason the native image we bear of God, will set no wiseme^ on gaping for
extraordinary revelat ^s nor his false translating the Bishops sense into mere
apprehensions and uncertain conceptions make him, or theirs of his mind,
worse then Pagan Secptikes in Religion. His Lordship I believe, grants no such
postvlate as the The Scottish Presbyterians as enthusiastike as the Anabaptists
and no more excusable by their religion for taking ar^es
Reviewer seems to look for. That every Scottish Man is a Moses, and every
persecuting Presbyter, before Gods ju^gemen's have humbled him to his
conversion, a Saint Paul. He conceives their Cat^chisme or Directorie can pass
for no Pentateuch nor Ap^al Epissles and say^h they beg the qu^ that take it to
be the Gosp^. He argues, That in asserting the lawfu^lenes of taking arms,
they justify the Ird^pendents that supplanted themselves, whose new light
s^ines as much like that from Moses's face as they Presbyterians new doctrine
sounds like the oracles he received in the mount. That the Anabaptists in
Germany were no more Enthusiasts then the Anabaptists in Scotland, who null
the powerful operation of the sacrament, and for ought we know, may be nulls
in the missionarie power to administer it. That John of Leyden and his crew
could not be more mad then John Knox and his, nor could they have less reason
for their military proceedings. His Lordship is so far from placing the
sum of Religion in every simple apprehension, that he desires the authority
of the Chuch should take place of his conceptions until the truth, if
different from that doctrine, which is unlikelie were sealed to him by some
internal impression of Gods spirit. What every man is persuaded in his
conscience to be divine truth he would have him praeferre before other men's
apprehensions of a contrary religion. Yet if that persuasion be dissonant from
what was generally among the primitive Christians, he would not that he should
mistake himself to have a singular infallibility, nor a transscendent
commission, above that of Christ and his Apostles, to take arms and force all
men to his belief. The most certain truths, even these divine ones Faith no^
so common, if such as commonly defined.
in religion, if His Lordship does not, which I did not ask him, I do think
to be in many men that praete^d to that supernatural grace called faith, were
uncertain conceptions, or inadvertent praesumptions, finding few so
considerate of their very principles in Religion as to build them upon any so
much as that subordinatie moral certanitie they might do with good endeavor,
fewer live so devoutlie as without it can reasonably suppose God miraculouslie
infuseth his revelatious to assure them. Therefore though all the truths of
Christian Religion, wherein controverted, are revealed from heaven. Yet I
think we are to look a great way back for the persons by and unto whom,
immediate inspirations being now adays very rare, nor do we live much like
the holy mortified men that were wont to have them of old. You know what Saint
Ma^tin told the Devil when he appeared Sulpit. Sever in vita.
arrayed like a King, and would be taken for Christ come in triumph upon the
earth. Ego Christum, nisi in eo habitu formaque qua passus est, nisi or^
stigmata proforensem venisse non credam. He would not believe him to be come
till he saw him in the habit of his sufferings. So when we see you qualified S.
Mat^h. 10. 16.
like his disciples, wise as Serpents not crafty as foxes, harmless as
doves, not rapacious as harpies, patient like sheep, not ravening like The Pr.
Scots must bring beter marks then ^eir ba^t words for revelations
wolves. Delivered up to Councels, not excommunicating in Synods, scourged in
Synagogues not disciplining without mercy in your Churches. Brought before
Governers and Kings for Christ's sake, not bringing Governers and Kings to
mooke-tribunals for your own. Then tell us of Divine truths, the belief of
Moses and Saint Paul's revelation from heaven, and we will hearken to you as
Angels, whom now we take to be no beter then the haereti^es who Vincet says
are ran^quaedam and cyniphes, and muscae Advers. haeres. cap. 14.
moriturae, such contemptable creatures as croking frogs, gnats, and dying
flies that would buzze what mischief you can before you leave us, and make the
ointment of the Apothecarie stink with the corruption of your writings when
you are dead; The second part of your apology is most false both thesei kai
hypothesei 1. Because subjects have no arms, while the Magistrate is in being
to hold the sword, put into their hands to defend their religion and liberties
how legallie soever established, They have only pleas by that law to claim
them, and petitions of right or aequitie to put up unto the Magistrate to
maintain them. 2. If they go beyond defending themselves in their religion
They are cut throtes of Magistrates and planters of Religion by arms.
and force others to enter into their league and covenant though contrary to
their conscience, this is no other then planting of religion by arms. And if
the difference in any point of religion be such as to state the Magistrate in a
condition to be put to death by his subjects, as it does, in your sense, when
he joines in worship with Papists and Praelates, whom you make idolaters, and
idolatry death unpardonable; this is cutting the throats of all Magistartes.
And this is maintained to be just and to have the ground of Gods ordinary
judgment by your Patriarch Knox. And to be imitated of all those that
praeferre the true honor of the true worship and glory of God to the affection
of flesh and wicked Princes. Your hypothesis Hist. Lib. 4.
is false, because the religion and liberties of your Covenant in England were
never established by law, and what was so established was never usurped by
Papists Praelates and Malignants, And if it had been, from so good a King
redress had probably been procured upon just complaint without taking arms.
To your third I reply, That the Bishop gives no judgment, makes no mention of
the Protestants Arms in France We say nothing to foraigne protestants taking
arms. till they justific yours and and theirs by yours
Holland and Iermanie, compares them not with the Anabaptists in Munster or
Sectaries in England. If you can once persuade them to espouse your quarrel,
(for which you have begged long enough at their gates by this time) or publish
a parallel between your taking up arms and their own, the praelatical party
will make no difference between you, but give alike judgment against you all.
In the mean time the maxims they give are rational and divine, and they are
brutes or Atheists, divested allreadie of all religion and reason, who
praeferre them not to the Presbyterian enthusiasmes, who give out for Michael
the Archangels revelations what counterfeit impostures Morpheus puts of to them
in their dreams.

Touching a general Council, with a wish for which His Lordship piouslie
concludes, No Covenanters go before him, nor will set one step after The
Praelates decline not the judgment of Councels.
him in that desire, who most uncharitablie make three parts of four in the
Christian world Antichristian, and so no constitutive members of such a
meeting. An occumenicke Synod of Protestants would un doubtedlie condemn them,
which is most shamefullie praejug'd to approve of the rebellion and murder in
their Covenant. Nor can their Principals, in honor, be silent at such an
horrid impious praesumption publickelie printed and imputed to them. The
Bishops ae his brethren have declined no solemn assemblies of their own
countries. those so called were factious schismatical conventicles illegallie
gathe^ed and composed of such mushromes as how numerous soever, durst noe admit
of twenty Praelatical Divines into debate, lest they should be squeezed into a
little spungie earth and wind (their originals) having no substantial worth or
abilities to support them. You need not pray the Warner to speak unto the
question you put, since you have his answer before hand without asking, viz.
That its worth the enquiring (even in such an Oecumenicke synod) whether the
marks of Antichrist do not agree as eminentlie to the Assembly General of
Scotland as to the Pope. He mentions some that plainly do, and means, it may
be as much of all the rest. To the charge in a Christian Council they would
answer. That they are able to evidence before God and the World, That all blood
and misery drawn from, and brought upon, the former King and his Kingdoms
must be cast upon the Covenant and General Assembly in Scotland, who will
never cease to embroyle all in new calamities untile they be destroyed. That if
this King and his whole family resolve not to prosecute Gods cause, which the
former did with much Christian courage unto the death, they hazard the tearing
their crowns into more pieces then the miters, and the demolition of their
thrones beneath that of the Praelates chaires, To conclude all. The Reviewers
Presbyterian cruelty, may by Gods providence be restrained.
breath, though violent enough, becomes in vain so definitive, as to
perpetuate persecutions against the providence of God, whom the Bishops look
upon as a potent Protector of Kings, and a merciful repairer of the breach
made in his Church by their own ruins. Their resoluti^, may be justly
peremptore to persevere in their opinion of the Scottish Presbyterian cruelty
to be such That as they, have burjed their Bishops alive, connived at, and if,
not countenancd, the Massacring their Kings; so their endeavor will not be
wanting to scater the ashes of the Royal family and three Kingdoms on their
graves, Though their consistorian fourmes, and repenting stools with other
luggage be next cast into the flames first kindled by themselves. The mysteries
of their religion being murder and dead monuments such as never made those
heathen the sum of whose devotion Clemens of Alexandria Admon. ad Gent.
comprehended in two words. (...).

FINIS.
Errors to be amended.
Epist. Ded. page 3. line 18. Read, she or her Ancients. Ans. to Ep'Ded. p. 2.
l. 8. for common shore, r. com. fewer. Ibid. l. 9. for power, r. paper. p. 3.
l. 6. for and, r. etc. p. 6. l. 16. for comfort, r. confort. l. 38. for
burning. r. warning. p. 7. l. 18. for both, r bold. l. 36. for must. r. most.
p. 8. l. 20. r. deceitful lovers of themselves there are. p. 9. l. 35. r. two
or three such words as. p. 11. l. 32. for late, r. babe. p. 16. l. 13. for
Reviewer, r. Reviewes. Acolut. p. 8 l. 13. for own, r. owned. p. 13. l. 30. for
otherguede, r. otherguesse. p. 19. l. 37. for literal, r. liberal p. 20. l. 8.
for apposed. r. opposed. p. 21. l. 15. it delcatur. p. 22. margin, for
Chaldaeos, r. Culdaeos. p. 26. l. 10. for then, r. they. l. 11. for all r. a.
p. 29. l. 1. for Hierambieorum, r. Hierarchicorum. l. 25. for buselie, r.
basilie. p. 31. l. 30. for in that, r. and that is. l. 41. for anomia
ergapiria, r. anomias ergasteria. p. 37. l. 17. for stake, r. stick. p. 38. l.
19. for acknowledge, r. acknowledged. p. 40. l. 2. for reasonable, r.
treasonable. p. 45. l. 19. for Vnitglupteu, r. Vuygeastein. p. 48. l. 36. After
Ecumenical, add Council. p. 53. l. 37. for asgle r. air. p. 59 l. 24. for
acconsequential, r. unconsequential. p. 60. marg. for to excom. r. no excom. p.
60. l. 29. for too rigid. r. to rigid. p. 64. l. 32. for halls r. heels. p.
68. l. 20. for triel, r. Ariel. p. 72. l. 11. for then, r. them. p 73. l. 3.
for as, r. is. p. 78. marg. for vicitie, r. nicitie. p. 80. marg. for 493. r.
1593. p. 81. l. 34. r. (though but in the time) Ibid. marg. r. The Bishops
Sunday toleration. p. 48. l. 10. pro libra, r. litera. Ibid. l. 12. for jura r.
dura. p. 85. l. 19. for papists, r. pupills. l. 33. for its. r. in. p. 86. l.
14. for coloural, r. colorable. Ibid. marg. r. Scottish Presbyterian
reformation from etc. p. 87. l. 7. for latewarmnesse. r. lukewarmnesse. l. 13.
for too. r. 100. p. 88. l. 1. for session, r. cession. l. 14. for Murre, r.
Mar. marg. for Ruthuer, r. Ruthuen. p, 92. l. 21. for servidi, r. fervidi. p.
94. l. 9. for scrive. r. transscribe. p. 57. l. 1. for then, r. them. p. 101.
l. 39. for superintended, r. superintendent. p. 11. for masters, r, matters.
marg, for contracted, r. confuted. p. 117. l. 14. guerts. r. Masters. p. 121.
l. 6. for indiscreet, r. in discreet. p. 122. marg. fuos, r. suo. p. 126. l. 9.
for on, r. or. p. 127. l. 31. r. from whom I expect etc. p. 142. l. ^9. for
cession, r. succession. l. 40. for successis, r. successio, p. 145. l. 40. for
Autoraniei, r. Autouranici. p. 148. l. 39. for and r. etc. p. 149. marg. for
sudunt...astragatus, r. sudunt astragalis. p. 152. l. 35. for pallea, r.
paleae. for Affltu, r. Afflatu [with no point before it] p. 127. marg. for
togodaedali, r. logodaedali. p. 153. marg. for odificentur in rumam, r.
aedificentur in ruinam. p. 155. l. 41. for manitates, r. inanitatis. p. 157. l.
16. for if, r. it. l. 41. for mission, r. omission. p. 159. l. 40. for doubt,
r. double. p. 162. l. 14, for forming, r. foming. p. 163. l. 1. for too, r. so.
p. 165. l. 13. susplicates, r. supplicates. page 169. l. 6. r. to the Bishop.
page 175. l. 83. for to, r. so large. Ibid. marg. for a estes quos sidem ea
vocant, r. testes quos sidemen vocant. for minus, r. munus, p. 177. marg^for
spirationes, r. conspirationes. p. 175. for many leaves, r. may leave. p 180.
l. 5. for quae, r, quia p. 181. l. 26. for quis pium, r. quispiam. p. 182.
marg. for homonymus subscribentiam. r. homonymoos suscribentium. p. 185. for
momfeia, r. monscia Aristoph. p. 187. l. 38. for up to, r. unto. p. 188. l. 14.
for which, r. with. p. 191. l. 14. for guittnesse, r. guildesse. p. 155. l. 15.
for fermed, r. feigned. l. 34. for near, r. nearer a possibility then
likelihood, p. 157. l. 13. for fair. r. farie. marg. for Cosque, r. Eosque. p.
198. l. 11. for bay, r. bag. l. 35. for inclioration, r. melioration. marg. for
vide, r. vive. for se short causes, r. see short conses. p. 200. l. 40. for
Anabaptists, r. Abaptists. p. 201. l. 16. for were, r. mere.

TO THE READER.
I Am necessarisie to advertise you, That if you be notvery conversant in the
Rd Bishops Warning and his adversaries Review before you enter upon my reply,
you will in the end be as unsatisfied about the true state of the controversy,
as all the way offended at the incohaerence of the paragraphs or periods in the
book, there being, to ease the Printer, not much to advantage me, very little
inserted that mine relates to, which notwithstanding is penned as if you had
the other perpetually in your sight. The credit I claim to have given to
several historical circumstances of a Country, which I yet never saw,
wherewith I could not be furnished from printed books, is upon the sufficient
assurance I have of the fidelity and ability in such persons as are natives,
whom I consulted as oracles in many cases, and received their answer in no
dark ambiguitie of words; But laid down positivelie in their papers, which if
their indifference had been the same with mine: I should have published with
their names, whereby to put out the envious man's eye and keep curiosity from a
troublesome impertinencie in inquiry. I shall make no apology at all to you
for my engagement in the dispute, having allreadie done it where more due. I
shall briefly this for some tantologie, much indecencie and levitic in my
language, Desiring the first may be imputed to some necessity I was cast upon
by the Reviewers frequent repetitions, and some difficulty to recollect what
expressions had passed from me with the sheets, most of which I was to part
with successivelie as I pennd them at several distances of time and place
reteining no perfect copy in my hands. The second is that dirt which did
stick like pitch unto my fingars while I was handling the foul Review, and so
has defild my book. The third came from no affectation to be facetious, for
which I am little fitted, yet thought I might as well sport it as a Divinity
Professor in his chair, who having it seems, made have to the second
infancy of his age, or reassumd his first, would never, it may be, have been
at quiet, unless I had rocked him in his cradle, or played a little with his
rattle. The strange misse-takes many times introduced by his ignorance of our
tongue that in my absence praepared all for the press are rectified with
references to the pages where. Which amendments in favor of your self as well
as justice unto me should be at first transplanted to their several colonies by
your pen. The Greek leters that have lost their grace by the Latin habits
wherein they are constrained to appear, being crowded here and there out of
all significancie and order, and so left at large, have their authority made
good to the full sense of the commission they brought with them, every where by
the English Interpreter or Paraphrast when you meet them. Which intimated, I
have no greater courtesy to crave from you, if one the Revievers impartial and
aequitable comparers, then to hearken to truth and reason, and to signify what
you find here dissonant from either, which I promise you shall be acknowledged
or amended Adieu.

Your R. W.

A Table of the Chapters.
CHAPT. I. THe Scots bold address with the Covenant to K. Chapter 2. Their party
inconsiderable. The Bishop's method, language, and matter asserted. The
quaestion in controversy unawares granted by the Reviewer. Page 1. II. The
Scottish Discipline overthrowes the right of Magistrates to convocate Synods,
and otherwise to order Ecclesiastical affairs. 10. III. The last appeal to
the Supreme Magistrate justisiable in Scotland. 41. IV. Seditious and
Rebellious Ministers in Scotland seldom or never censured by the Assembly.
47. V. The Discipline exempts not the supreme Magistrate from being
excommunicate. 57. VI. Kings may sometime pardon capital offenders, which the
Disciplinarians donie. As they do their Royal right to any part of the
Ecclesiastike revenue. 59. VII. The Presbytery cheates the Magistrate of his
civil power in ordine ad spiritualia. 65. VIII. The divine right of
Episcopacie beter grounded the^ that pratended in behalf of Presbytery. 93.
IX. The Commonwealth is a monster when Gods Soveraignite in the Presbytery
contradicts the Kings. 113. X. No concord between Parliament and Presbytery.
116. XI. The Presbytery cruel to particular persons. 124. XII. The Presbytery
a burden to the Nobility, Ministry, and all Orders whatsoever. 130. XIII.
The Bishops exceptions against the Covenant made good, and this proved. That no
man is obliged to keep it who has taken it. 176.
An Alphabetical Principal Table of the Contens.
A.
THe Disclplinarians rebellious proceedings in their persecution of Arch. Bp.
Adamson. Page 43 Poenitent adulterers not necessarily to be put to death. 169
Little aequitie in the Reviewers debates and treaties. 190 Alteration in
Religion or Church Government unsave and sinful while conscience is doubtful.
95 They may be feared to be unchristian that call us Antichristian. 145 Trivial
debates among Scottish Presbyters about apparel. 125 The Reviewer dares not
speak out to the Bishops quaestion about taking arms for religion. 198 That
and Liberty no justifiabie praetenses for taking arms. 201 The Pr: Scots that
did, no more excusable then the Anabaptist in Germany. ^00 They are planters
of their misse-named Religion by arms. 202 K. Chapter 1. had just cause to march
with an army toward Scotland Ans. to Ep. Ded. 9 The Pr. Scots had none for
their invading England. Ibid. 11 Their General Assemblies Disobedience to the
Kings command, 1^79. 12 The incohaerent excuses thereof. 13 The rebellious
Assemblers at Aberdene 1605. 16 Appeals in Scotland to the King. 32 And so the
ultimate of them every where elce. 41 The proceedings against them no other
then legal. 17 Wherein the E. Dunbar carried himself impartiallie and nobly.
23 Assemblies summoning the people in arms upon the trial of Popish Lords. 92
Collusion and violence in the election of Members for Assemblies. 133 Why so
many Burgesses and Gentlemen in them. 134. 135
B.
TReason by statute to impugn the authority of Bishops, being one of the
three Estates. 19 Bishops perpetual in Scotland. 21 The calumny against the
three Bishops consectated by the Archbishop of Canterbury refuted. 22 How the
Difference hapened between the E. Argile and the Bishop of Galloway. 141 Our
Bishops contest not with King and Nobles. 140 Their praecedence and place near
the throne. Ibid. Officies of State. 141 The Antiquity, etc. Of Bishops
justified very judiciouslie by Dr Ier. Tailor, Whose book is an antidote
against the poison of all the Reviewers objections. 102 Bishops Apostles. 106
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors. 107 Doctors. 108 Bishops and Ceremonies no
burden. 187 The Bishop of Derrie's prudence, no boldness in the publication
of his book Anf. to Ep. Ded. 2 Very seasonable. 1 In it His Lordship is no
slanderer of the King. 4 Blackes rebellious case. 53 Baleanqual, Bruce and
other Ministers guilty of raising the tumult. 56 Blaire and his accomplices
justly banished out of Ireland. 51 Bothwells notorious crimes. 61 Bruce's bold
speech to the King about E. Huntley. 63 The Bishops appeal in the Assembly at
Glasgow not derogatorie to the Kings personal praerogative. 45
C.
CAlderwood's ridiculous reverence of Bruce's ghost. 139 E. Cassils demeanor
Ans. to Ep. Ded. 1 Canons infirming the Reviewer to be an aceuser of the
Bishop. 48 Public catechizing of Masters and Mistresses indecent. 171 Not very
necessary before their receiving the Sacrament. Ibid. The Kings Chaplanes use
no Court artifice, but what becomes such reverend worthy persons in their
places Ans. to Ep. Ded. 4 A proposition of trial to be made whether Christ's
scepter must be swayed by Bishops or Presbyters. 100 The difference between us
and the Church of Rome about ceremonies. 98 Jurisdiction of Commissaries. 52
The Kings Commissioner how off ronted in Pr Sc. Synods. 134 Riot in Scotland to
get down the High Commission Court. Which was not so tyra^nical as the Pr.
Consistory. 173 Wherein is more rigor then other where among the Resormed
Churches, 174 The adventurous concessions of K. Chapter I. extorded by the
necessity or difficulty he was brought to. 104 K. James's dislike of the
Scottish short confession. Many unjustificable praetices about it. 14 Conscience
not bottomed only up on divine right. 95 Contrariety of commands at the same
time ordinary under Scottish Presbytery. 114 The Reviewers fallacy to salve
it in the case of the French Ambassadors. 115 His ignorance of the true stated
controversy between us and the Church of Rome. 8 His cunning in altering the
true state of that between the Bishop and himself as in many places so. 30 K.
Chapter 1. invaded not the Scottish Consistory, his condescensions leaving them
contended. 190 The Reviewers uncharitable interpreting Mr. Corbets's end a
punishment from God. 3 Particulars about framing the English-Scotish Covenant.
The persons by whom etc. 177 How dishonorable it is to the English that
approved it. 179 The Reviewes's abominable affected falsehood in defense of it.
180 His impudence in preaching at the Hage that nothing at all had been
objected against it. Ans. to Ep. Ded. 7 How destructive it is to the Royal
line. Ibid. 12 How the same with that of K. James 1580. 183 How it diverse from
it. 184 Foraigne Presbyterians ashamed to countenance it. 196 The ambiguitie of
the words in it leaves religion to the liberty of their conceits, that take
it. 198 Covenants unlawfullie taken are more unlawfullie kept. 177 The
Praelates docline not the judgment of Councels. 202 No inhaerent right in
Courts to nominate Commissioners for intervalls. 123 Spiritual crucltie in the
prayers of Scottish Presbyters. 125 Their temporal cruelty, as much as they
praesume, may by Gods providence be restrained. 203 The Court conscience will,
if the experiment be tried, soon find the difference between the Episcopal and
Presbyterian Clergy. 197
D.
NO defensive arms for subjects. 40 Court of Delegates neither unbeseeming,
not unreasonable. 43 K. James's Declaration 1584. How by His Majesty
subscribed. 51 The Pr. Scots imprudence as well as injustice etc. in delivering
up K. Chapter 1. to his murderers. Ans. to Ep. Ded. 14 The old grudge that mor'd
them to it. Ibid. 15 The same newly conceived against K. Chapter II. Ibid. 15 The
difference between Us and Scottish Presbyterians is more then in Bishops and
ceremonies. 199 The Sc. Discipline omits what the ancient Canons had among the
cases of Ministers deprivation. What it has conconcernes more Presbyters then
Praelates. 67 It plays the tyrant over the consciences of the people. 124
Divine attributes profaned in asscribing them to the Discipline and Assembly
Acts. 100 Covenanters missetake the Discipline for Christ's institution. 180 No
legal establishment in Scotland of the first book of Discipline. 18 K. James's
consent to the second book of Discipline how improbable. 24 They anticipate
the law in the exercise thereof. 27 The English Discipline long since setle^ by
law in Scotland and our Liturg there used. 16 That of the Pr. Scots obtruded
upon England. Ibid. Divine right pleaded for Presbytere frustrates all
treaties. 96 Episcopacie wants no Discipline aequivalent to that in the Scottish
Presbytery. 175 Our doctrines about real praesence, justification, free will,
final apostafie, praedestination, breissie touched. And a quaestion propounded
about David's case. 98. 99 Dowglasse that murdered Capt. I. Stuart killed in
Edinburgh high street. 21
E.
OUr Episcopacie not reputed Antichristian by other Reformed Churches. Ans. to
Ep. Ded. 3. 50 K. Chapter I. suspended the jurisciction of Episcopacie in Scotland
for no crimes. No full and free Parliament that voted in down in England. 9
Episcopacie no obstruction to the Kings peace. Why it may not be laid aside.
40 What right it has to become unalterable. 94 The reasons of K. Chapter I. well
bottomed. 95 Some particulars about the history of Scottish Episcopacie. 111
Abolition of Episcopacie is not that which will ever give the Pr. Scots
satisfaction. 165 K. Chapter I. in his largest concessions yielded not unto it. 188
The asserrours of the Magistrates just power miss called Era^ans by the
Reviewer. 6 Erastus's Royal right of Church government can not untie the Kings
conscience if straightened. Nor is that only it the Bishops praetend to. 97
The Sc. Discipline exempts not Kings from being excommunicate. 57
Excommunication not mean'd by delivering up to Satan. 110 Ignorance no ground
for the execution of it. 172 The Scottish Presbyters practice touching
excommunication little less rigid then their canon. 227 The inconveniences that
follow to be imputed rather to the Kircke then State. 128 Impunitie no good
ground for excommunication. 61 The Kings pardon quitting poenitent
malefactors. 65
F.
Scottish Presbyters much too busy in private families. 175 Faith not so
common, if such a grace as ordinarily it is defined. 201 Church Festivals not
legallie abolished in Scotland. 18 Cruelty toward fugitives. 129
G.
GIbson's insolent speeches unto the King. 21 The Assemblie's juggling in his
case. 52 Gilespie's theoreme for resisting Magistrates disclaimed by no
Assemblies. The substance of it the sense of many. 37 The King why concerned to
be cautelous in his grants to the Presbyterian Scots. 5 The Bishops Office
entirely authorized in the Assembly at Glasgow 1610. 23
H.
THe proceedings against D. Hamilton's late engagement discussed. 70. 71. etc
115. 117. etc. Mr. Henderson's speech of Bishops. 199 E Huntley's case truly
related. 61
I.
K. James a greater Anti-Presbyterian then Anti-Erastian. 64 The Praelates
title to Impropriations and Abbey lands beter then that of Presbyters. 137
Presbyterian indulgence in cases of sedition and rebellion. 47 Their monstrous
ingratitude for the too liberal graces of K. Chapter I. 104 The Kings concessions
to the Irish more justifiable then the other could be to the Scottish
Presbyterian demands. 146 The Pr. Scots endeavors to impose their Discipline
upon England. 5 The Assembly at Westminster having no power to authorize it. 6
Many of the Presbyteries in Scotland have very unfit and unable Judges. 174
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical sloweth from the Magistrate. 34 Sc. Presbyters
usurp Civil jurisdiction. 69 No power of jurisdiction in what the Reviwer
miss interprets the Church. 108 Nor in a companic mot together. 109
K.
THe election of a King not originallie justifiable in any people. 164 K. Chapter
I. not inclinable, though by counterseit promises praevail'd with to cast
himself upon the Presbyterian Scots Ans. to Ep. Ded. 12 His writings not
interlined by the Bishops. The Reviewers commendation of them unawares Ibid.
(...) K. Chapter II. has expressed no inelination to the Covenant. If any
praeventive disswasion of His Majesty's from it has been used by the
Praelatical pattie, it was a dutiful act of conscience and prudence. 149 His
Majesty can not so easily, will not so readily grant what his Royal Father
denied. 191 Scots Presbyterians never seriously asscribed any good intentions
to K. Ch, I. nor. 2. 197
L.
MOre learning under Episcopacie then Presbytery. 150 The King supreme
Legislatour. 193 The Bishops share in making laws as great as any one of the
three Estates. Ibid. Our Liturgy why read. A parallel of it with primitive
forms fiter then with the Breviarie. 156 The Church of Scotland has had a
liturgy not only for help but practice. 160 The Presbyterians hypocritical
use of it. 161
M.
THe Magistrates definitive judgment in Synods owned by the Reformed Divines
both Praelatical and Presbyterian. 28 Sc. Presbytetie will have Magistrates
subject to the Kirk. 120 Presbyters why against clandestine marriages. 166
Consent of Parents how to be required. Ibid. No obedience due to them
commanding an unjust marriage. 169 The Bishops cautelous in giving license for
clandestine marriages. 170 Gods mercy in praeserving Archbishop Maxwel
falsified by the Reviewer. 3 The business about the Spanish Merchants
sophisticated. 80 Sc. Presbyters controllers in the Militia. 79 The power of it
in the King. 186 Pr. Ministers rebellious meeting at Mauchlin moore. 119 They
exceed their commission. 121 Their power with the people dangerous to the
government. 122 Their rebellious proceeding in the persecution of Archbishop
Montgomerie and Archbishop Adamson. 43 The murders and other prodigious
impieties acted by the Sc. Presbyterians in prosecution of their ends. 82 The
scale of degrees whereby they asscended to the murder of K. Chapter I. 38 Which
might have been foreseen by their propositions, never repealed. 76 Murder may
be pardoned by the King who has been petitioned in that case by the
Disciplinarians themselves. 60
N.
THe King's negative voice justified as well in Scotland as England. 77 What is
the power of his affirmative. 78 The Sc. Presbyters gave the occasion and
opportunity for the Nobles to get the Ecclesiastike revenue. The Episcopacie
more then titular they kept up. 15 Presbytery more oppressive to the Nobility
and Gentry then Praelacie. 130 Noblemen why chosen Elders. (...) 131 Where
such, how slighted by the Presbyters. 139
O.
SC. Presbyters assume the arbitration of oeconomical differences. 68 The
Officers appointed by Christ in his Church need not be restrained to the number
of five. Nor those taken to be the same the Presbyterians would have them. 106
The Officials Court a more competent Iudicatoric then the Classical
Presbytery. 132 No power of ordination in the Presbybyterie. 108. 142 No
comfortable assurance but from Apostolical succession and Episcopal ordination
which Presbyterians want. Ibi. The Sc. Presbyterians trial before ordination
more formal then truly experimental of ability in the persons. 150 The
qualification different from that required by the Bishops. 152 The original of
the pretended oath taken by the King for security of the Sc. Discipline. 163
P.
THe Sc. Assemblies decrees to be ratified by Parliament. 24 As those of our
Convocations. 32 Presbytery makes Parliaments subject to Assemblies. 120 The
Parliament of Scotland in no capacity to make demands after the murder of the
King. 163 Presbytery has no claim to the Church patrimony given by
Episcopal founders and benefactours. 25 Their disputes with Princes about
Church revenue. 63 The original right of patronage in Lay persons. 136 Peirth
Assembly 1596. 111 Provision under Episcopacie against the poverty of such as
are ordained. 153 The Praelats still of the same mind rhey were about the
rights and privileges of Bishops. 103 Reason of bidding prayer before sermon.
159 In the Canon form is no prayer for the dead. 160 Set forms of no use to
beginers that pray by the spirit. 161 The gift of prayer in the Pater Noster.
Ibid. Presbyterians divided about prayer. 162 The injuries by extemporarie
prayer. Ibi. Presbyteries when, and how, erected in Scotland Bishops to
praeside in them. 20 Christianity at its first entrance into Scotland brought
not Presbytery with it. 22 Fallacy in the immediate division of religion into
Presbyterian and Popish. 53 No authority of Scripture for the many practices
of Scottish Presbytery. 101 Little knowledge, labor, or conscience showed in
Presbyterian preaching. 154 Scottish Presbyterians beter conceited of themselves
then of any other Reformed Church to which yet they praetend a conformity in
their new model. 198 K. James's speech concerning Scottish Presbytery. 30 How a
King may, and when, exercise the office of a Priest. 195 Sc. Presbyteries
process for Church rents. 33 The same fault under a different formalitie not
to be twice punished. 126
Q.
K. James's 55. Quaestions. 111
R.
REading Ministers useful and justifiable in our Church. 154 The Praelats do
not annull the being of all Reformed Churches. 143 Though they have no full
assurance. 144 The Reviewers speech of Bishops and Peirth articles. 199 The
Church of Rome true, though not most true. 145 A rigid separation from her in
many things needless. 146 Assemblies can reform only according to canon,
not the canon. 84 The Primitive Christians reformation different from that of
Sc. Presbyterians. 85 That of the Church of England began rather at K. Edw. VI.
then Henr. VIII. 86 The Parliament can no^ reform without the King. 188
Resistance against the person of the Magistrate can not be made inobedience to
his office. 35 Reviewer willfullie missetakes the scope of the Bishops book.
45 His barbarous implacable malice against the dead. 49 A riot under praetense
of taking a Priest at Mass. 91 Abetted by Knoxe with his confessed interest in
many more. 92 The Pr. Scots must bring beter marks then their bare words for
revelations. 201
S.
FOraigne Presbyterians tolerate more liberty on their Sabbath then the
Bishops on our Sunday. 50. 125 The hypocritical superstition of the Sc.
Presbyters in the sanctification of their Sabbath. 81 Offenders quitted to be
admitted to the H. Sacrament without public satisfaction in the Church. 126
False measures etc under color of scandal not to be brought into the
cognizance of the Church. 66 All civil causes are brought before the
Presbytery under the pretense of scandal. 170 The Pr. Scottish party
inconsiderable. 2 They gave beter language to our Bishops heretofore then of
late. 8 Careful Christians will find little leisure on week days to hear
many sermons. 157 Sermons not to exceed an hour. 158 Those that are Rhetorical
may be as useful as many meerlie Textuarie. 159 St. Claud Somais no
Countenancer of the late Kirk proceedings Ans. to Ep. Ded. 4. 111 The Sc.
Presbyterians coordinate two Soveraignities in one State. 113 Two Scottish Kings
at one time avouched by A Melvin. 114 Capt. James Stuart vindicated at large.
87 Superintendents aequivalent to Bishops 23 Imperious supplicates from the
Presbytery. 26 Rebellion the subject of most. 165. 179 The Kings supremacy
impaired by Presbytery. 27. 195 Placed upon the People. 29 Scottish Presbytery
overthrowes the right of the Magistrates convocating Synods. 10. 30 Synods
where the Magistrate prohibited them. 31. 36 Receiving appeals not the
principal end of calling Synods. 132 Noblemen to have no suffrages in them but
when sent thither by the King. 134
T.
THe by-tenets of the Discipline. 3 The Texts of Scripture urged against
Episcopacie, for Presbytery, answered. 105.etc. The Presbyterians treason at
Ruthuen. 88 At Striveling. 89
V.
Family visitations commendable as well in orthodoxe Priest as Presbyters. 173
The Reviewer much in love with the uncleanlie metaphore of a vomit. 176
W.
ACcording to the Word of God a more dubious and frivolous limitation in the
Covenant them heretosore in the oath for Episcopacie. 181
FINIS.

