Bloody Newse from the North AND The Ranting Adamites Declaration concerning
the King of Scotland, with their new League, Covenant, and Protestation; their
denying the great God of Heaven, and burning his sacred word and Bible; the
name of a new God by them chosen, and his Speech and promise unto them; their
new Law, and grand Court; their Arraignment and Trial, and a Copy of the
several Articles and Indictment; with the several sentences to be inflicted
upon diverse offenders, together with their names: Also, a bloody Plot
discovered, concerning their Resolution to murder all those that will not turn
Ranters; put in execution at York, to the astonishment and admiration of the
Reader, that shall diligently peruse this ensuing Subject, never before heard
of.

Published according to Order.



LONDON, Printed by J. C. 1650.

The Ranting ADAMITES, DECLARATION, etc.
SIR,
SInce my last of the 2d. of this instant, here has happened a great and
bloody Theater in York, the manner thus: At the sign of the Star in Stonegate,
there lately met a great Company of new Ranting-Adamites, who having solac'd
themselves for the space of an hour, in a most inhumane, satanical, and
luxu^^^us way, man and woman together; at last, they came to this Diabolical
resolution, ^^at each man's wife or woman's Husband, that denied their just and
lawful Princi^^^s of Ranting, for the holding of all things in common, should
be massacred, and that (...) those who would not ^oncu^ with them, should be
immediately expelled, with bloody ^^ult, was soon put in execution; for upon
the dissolving of this infernal Crew, one (...)r. Smart, living at Fowforth, a
mile from the City, repairing home to his house, and came to his wife, and
asked her, whether she would turn Ranter; she replied, no, (...) Husband, their
ways are soul damning: whereupon he immediately stob'd her to (...) heart,
with his knife, and presently fled; but a Hu-and-Cry is sent after him to^^rds
Hull and Scarbrough: Another of these bloody villains coming from one of ^^eir
infernal meetings, has also killed his wife, and ^wo Children, at Pontefract;
upon committing of which act, he was apprehended, and received sentence at York
to brhanged: Since which time all possible care has been used for preventing
their meetings, and the Prayers of many hundred Saints have not been wanting
for their Conversion; insomuch, that they have proved effectual, and about 500
are come in to the Gospel Light again, who have taken a League, Covenant and
Protestation, to stand (...)s to the ways of truth, etc. But there are some
few, that walk still in the ways of darkness, who burn the Bible, and say
there is no God, but Pluto, by reason that he appears to them in several
shapes, telling them that they may live as they list, for that there is neither
God nor Devil, that will punish them; some of these at a late meeting in
Cony-street, forsooth, would needs seem to be for Monarchy, and declared, that
they held themselves bound, to yield all due obedience and loyalty to Charles
the II. (...) youths indeed, to serve 2 Masters; for although the last be not
able to give them any thing for their service, the first will pay them home one
day, which is all at pr^sent from.

Your obliged Servant, SAMUEL TILBURY.
York 9. Jan. 1651. Sir, I have sent you here enclosed, a Copy of their
develish Judicatore, containing the sum of their Diabolical Law, and strange
Indictments, viz.



Enter the Jury all together. Williamson. Come Goody Hull, you are a woman so
discreet, able knowing and well grounded in this business, that I must pitch
upon you for the forewoman.


Goody Hull. I would willingly do any thing for the good of our Town, according
to my ability; but unless we of the Jury be authorized to inquire o^ all
misdemeanors within the whole Town, as well as of this particular busines^ for
my part I shall refuse to do any thing at all.


Will. That which Goody Hull speaks, I conceive to be nothing but just and
right in equiry: therefore I desire you that are here to be sworn of the Jury
to proceed accordingly.


Horwood. Call Goody Hull to the Book.


Horwood She is on Sir.


Will. You shall swear that you will diligently inquire, and true present men^
make of all such misdemeanors within this our Town of Lippuck as shall come to
your knowledge, your Fellow council, and your own you shall truly keep you
shall not present any thing for hatred, malice, or evil, will you? You shall
not any wise connive, nor pass by any thing out of respect to any person or
persons whatsoever: And you shall enquire respectively of our selves, as well
as others, and in all things you shall present the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, etc.


Hor. Goody Hull.


Will. Come the rest.

Jur.
Goody Hayes. Goody Norwood. Goody Mashall. Goody Ayling. Goody Houndsam. Goody
Hull sen. Goody Hewes. Goody Briager. Goodo Tribe. Goody Tribe. Goody Horwood.



Crier. They are all on Sir.


Will. The same Oath that Goody Hull the Fore-woman has taken on her part,
you, and every of you shall truly observe, and keep on your parts, etc.


Crier. Count these.


Crier. It is needless Sir, for I can tell how many there are on them.


Will. Be there twelve?


Crier. Nay, I cannot tell whether there be just 12. but I am sure there is a
develish crew on them, there cannot choose but be 12. or 13.


Will. Well, come, Horwood make a noise.


Hor. O yes, O yes, O yes, The Judge of the Court does strictly charge and
Command all persons to keep silent, while the Charge is giving.


Will. Gentlemen, and you good women of the Jury, I am at a very short warning
put upon this business, therefore I shall appear the more unable to express my
self. But I thought it better that my imperfections should appear unto you,
then the work to be left undone, therefore I shall only give you a short
Charge, and leave it to the Juries grave wisdom and discretion.


Sergeant. None of your short Charges, if you charge them at all, you must
charge them home.


Will. Peace, Peace.

1. You are to inquire of the business between Mother Dutton, and Mother Slade.
The first ground, and the cause of their first falling out: What words passed,
and whether they were slanderous. If one called another whore, that will bear
no action; but if one say I will prove thee to be a whore, that is actionable,
and ought to be here presented.

2. You are to inquire of the differences between Mr. Pamer and Mother Slade.

3. and lastly, you are to inquire of all, both of Customs, Privileges,
Misdemeanors, and defects whatsoever: If any man have married a wife in our
limits, not being sufficient in privity, he is to be put away from her. If any
man have been married the space of two years, and have not gotten his wife with
Child, you are to present him; for his name is to be turned into Fumbler(...)
Hall, there to be entered and recorded. And if any such person have so laid for
the space of 7. years, then he is to be branded in the forehead with the
likeness of a Rams head, and to find sureties that he shall live contented a
Cuckcold ever afterward* And many other things of the like ^^^ure, which I
shall leave to you of the Jury, and desire you to go together, and agree of
your present (...).


Vanish the Jury. Sergeant. Sir, you have done very well, I did not think that
you could have undergone the business with so much gallantry and readiness, at
so short a warning.


Enter the Jury with their Presentiments. Crier. Stand by, make room for the
Jury.


Will. Are you agreed on your presentiments?


Jury. Yes.


Will. Who shall say so for you?


Jury. Our Fore-woman.


Will. You are content we shall amend foreign and false Latin, altering no
matter of substance.


Jury. Yes.


Williamson read the presentiments.


Imprimis. We present Mother Slade for calling Mother Dutton Jade, for w^
cannot find that ever she was jaded.


Item. We present Mother Dutton, for saying Mother Slade was found against a
Gate, with, etc. We cannot believe it to be true, for a woman of so great
experience would have chosen a better place for that purpose.


Item. We present Mr. Pamer, for calling Mother Slade Rotton-arst whore we
think it a great abuse: For if her Arse had been rotten, it could never have
endured one quarter of the brushes it has received within these few years.


Item we present Goody Slade, for being drunk no less then 3 times in on^ day.


Item. We present Mother Dutton, for cheating her Daughter of her Sweetheart.


Item. We present Master Pamer for filling his Wine-pots little more then
hal^^full.


Item. We present Mr. Pamer for buying low-priz'd Wine at London, and selling
it at the best price, enough to poison people in the Country.


Item. We present the said Mr. Pamer for exacting on his Customers, in buying
Brush Fagots at about 18 pence a hundred, and selling them at two pence (...)
piece.


Item. We present the said Mr. Pamer, for cheating his Customers in stinkin^
Tobackco.


Item. We present the said Mr. Pamer for exacting on his Tapster for Beer (...)
that it makes him fill his Juggs not above half full.


Item. We present the said Mr. Pamer for abusing his Hostler, in making clean
the Stables, and setting him about other work, and now and then getting
twopence by the bargain.


Item. We present the said Mr. Pamer for keeping two doors to his house, that
when the Mayor of the Town is drinking with his friends, his wife comes for him
in at one door, and he runeth out at the other.


Item. We present Goody Hull junior, for scolding at her Husband when he comes
home from the Alehouse,


Item. We present Will. Hull junior, for kissing Goody Norwood at times
unseasonable.


Item. We present old Slade for a notorious Wittal.


Item. We present Goodman Horwood to be a thin-jaw'd Fellow, and a
disparagement to our Corporation.


Item. We present Richard Hayes for an intolerable long Nose, that when he goes
to kiss his wife, their two Noses meet before their Bodies are within a spet
and a stride one of the other.


Item. We present Goody Tribe for not keeping clean her nose, for it drops into
all things she medleth withal.


Item. We present Mr. Christmas for meddling with his betters, in attempting to
obtain Mr. Pamers Daughter, and very grossly abusing him in many other respects.


Item. We present Goody Stent for claiming more right to her Husband, when he
has been long at the Alehouse then at other times.


Item. We present Averies Daughters for rooting up the Hedge-Rowes on the
Sabbath Day.


Item. We present John Purdy for rooting out the young Plants out of his Beard,
and leaving nothing but here and there an old scrub.


Item. We present old Williamson, drivelling his doublet before,


Item. We present Julian Hull for engrossing in the Market of Hastomore,
thereby inhanching Prikes of Cherries.


Item. We present old Right to be misnamed, his name being Right, and he
crooked both in person and conditions.


Item. We present Goody Pescod for being jealous of her Husbands long stay
Goody Valers.


Item. We present Thomas Bridger for putting his Ladle into Grace Peatos pot,
and then give free liberty for any man to eat the broth.


Item. We present Goody Hudson for wearing her Husbands breetches, and nipping
his Comb to boot.


Item. We present Jesop for a pure Hypocrite.


Item. We present the said Mr. Christmas for being the greatest cause of Chr.
Pamers absenting her self.


Enter the Bailiffs with a Warrant for the Judge of the Court, r^ffling, to the
great amazement of the People. Williamson stands up.] What Is the matter there?


Horwood. Two Bailiffs come to arrest you, Sir.


Judge. A pox take them, will they never leave this trick?


Bailiffs. Come Williamson, you must go with us.


Judge. I marvail you offer to disturb me in a business of such consepuence.


Bailiffs. Ours is of more.


Judge Il give you Bail then.


Bailiffs. No Bail will hold you, we'll see now what the Goal will do. (...)o
the Bailiffs took him by the shoulders, and carried him away. So the Court
brake up, and all ended.


A Sect of Ranters of late's revived,
Who seem more innocent then ever Adam lived,
Such as will naked go, and think'c a sin
To wear a Garment, they are so hot within
With lust, that they all Clothing do disdain;
Aarons old Vestments they account profane,
Elisha's double mantle when they hear
But named, they sweat again: they naught will wear,
Not holy Lawn to keep them from the air,
Not St. John's raiment, made of Camels heir:
These Vestal Garments though they holy be,
Yet they do smell of strong Hypocrisy,
Demas must leave his Cloak, not any thing
Must here be worn, no nor a Wedding Ring,
Nor Fig Leaves, such as Adam wore long since,
When he had lost his Robe of Innocence.
The whore of Babels smock they all detest,
All Antichristian Relics with the rest.
All must be barely naked, 'cause they say
Truth it self naked goes, and so should they.
Naked as from their Mothers wombs, they wear
Nothing that covers, only skin and hair;
Thus marching naked Sister, with a Brother,
For want of Clothes they cover one another
In some dark Grange thus meet they, where it is fit
That they the deeds of darkness should commit:
The Candles are put out, because they say
They are enlightened all, and so they pray;
Here they begin, and thus divide the text,
Handling in order whosoe'r comes next.
Each Rant: his fellow-feeler chooses there,
As at the spring each Bird does choose his Peer.
And when they all grow proud with hot desires,
Thus they correct and quench the rising fires.
FINIS.

