Crumbs of Bread FOR The DOVE in the Clefts of the Rock, and the secret places
of the Stairs, Cant. 2.14.

Or HELPS to MEDITATION, On Conversion, Mortification, Sanctification, the
Christians daily walk, Communion with God, etc. With Directions for profitable
Reading the Scriptures, and good practical Books;

For a Friend, By J. T.

My Friend,
ACcording to your deserts and desires, I here present to you some broken
Thoughts, directions, remembrances, references, for the better improvement of
your Solitudes and retirements for Meditation and Reading. I have ranked them
under several heads, given you but brief hints, leaving the enlargements to
your own thoughts; what more might be required, you may supply from the
Scriptures, your Sermon-Notes, and those good books, to which I have referred
you: Each SECTION (after that you have perused the whole) affords you matter
enough for one Solitary season at the least; and when you have done with this,
you may have more, as God gives opportunity. I begin with the subject of
Conversion, Regeneration, and the first work, if it suit not your concition,
you may commend it to such as you love and know may need it. I leave it with
you as a token of my respects for you and your Spiritual concernments. God
give his blessing to it, and if it any way help you in your Meditation and
Reading, I shall desire no more then your remembrances of me at the throne of
Grace.

J. T.

SECT. I. Of Conversion, Regeneration, etc.
IT is to be presupposed in order to the improvement of the following Sections,
that as you have been under the means of Grace, so, you are indeed in a state
of Grace; if you are not, Consider,

1. That Conversion, Regeneration,

The Scriptures do abundantly prove it, John 3.3 etc. Heb. 12.14. Mat. 18.3.
Joh. 3.16. etc.

All good Reason is for it. 1. Ephesians. 2.12. Heb. 12.14 Pro. 3.3. Hab. 1.13.
Without such terms God is resolved that he will not. 4. His nature is such in
Wisdom, Holiness and righteousness, Prove. 1.7.
In order to it take these Directions.

1. Math. 16.26. Heb. 1.13. Romans 10. Romans 7. Joh. 5.28.29. Rom 3.23 Gal. 3.10.
Ephesians. 2.1, 2.3. Ephesians. 2.12. Pro. 15. 2 Cor. 5.18. 1 Timothy 1.15. Romans 3.25. Heb.
10.15, 16, 17. John 3.16. Mark 1.15.
Consider, Thou have a precious and an immortal soul, there is a God that is
Holy, Just, and Good, he has given thee his Law, and Gospel; Heaven, and
Hell, in endless eternity are before thee, death and judgment hasten a pace, a
world of sin both of nature and of life may be charged upon thee, the law is
against thee, the curse and wrath of God is over thee, thou have no hope nor
help in thy self, nor in all the creatures, and without a Christ and Grace,
and a changed state thou will be undone for ever. For thy encouragement to thy
duty, understand and believe, That God is in a way of grace and mercy; Christ
Jesus came into the World to seek and save sinners; as a surety and sacrifice
he has died, satisfied Gods law and Justice; established a Covenant of Grace
and salvation on terms of faith, repentance, and new obedience; Heb. 5.9.
Prove. 12.
makes the tenders of grace, and reconciliation in the ministry of the Gospel
to thee; has along time been calling upon thee; 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20, 21. Prove.
1.23.
is still waiting, woing, and beseeching thee to accept of him and grace: his
spirit is ready to help thee; there is nothing wanting, but thy free and full
consent, Heb. 3.8.12.15.
o continue not (as too long thou have done already) in a state of sin and
enmity, unbelief and unregeneracy, to the disappointments of Grace, 2 Cor. 6.1.
the abuse of the Gospel, Heb. 2.3. Heb. 10.29. Mark. 16.16. 2 These. 1.8.
the grief of the spirit, the reproach of the blood of Christ, and the
remediless destruction and damnation of thine own soul: Repent and believe
the Gospel, receive Christ and Grace, apply thy self unto thy duty in faith,
repentance, and new obedience, and thou shall not miscarry: Pro. 3.16. Romans
8.1, 2, 3.
thy sins shall be pardoned, thy person shall be justified, thy nature shall
be changed, thy soul shall be saved, John 3.36.

2. Understand what is required of thee, John 17.3. Pro. 3.33. Romans 10.10, 11.
Romans 1.5.


1. By faith thou art 1. To apprehend. 2. To assent unto. 3. To apply unto thy
self, and 4. To improve the discoveries made unto thee, 1. Of sin and wrath
in the Law of God. 2. Of Grace and mercy through Christ in the Gospel of
Salvation.

2. Lam. 3.40.
By Repentance thou art, 1. To search and find out the sinfulness (in some
good measure) of thy nature, and of thy life; Romans 7.13.
2. Through the consideration of the sinfulness of sin, which is the
greatest evil in it self, as against God and the greatest good; Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
the consideration of thy sad condition, because of sin according to the Law of
God, the greatest judgment in this life and that to come; Ezekiel 16.60, 61. Jer.
3.
and the consideration of the abundant grace and mercy set before thee in the
good will of God to thy salvation. 1. The death of Christ, the blessings and
promises of life and of salvation tendered to thee, Ps. 51.
to Humble thy soul with grief of heart and brokennesse of spirit. D^rt. 9:
3. To cast thy self at Gods feet before the throne of grace, in free and full
confession, in earnest prayer and supplication for grace and mercy through
Jesus Christ.

4. Romans 7. Ezck 33.11. Is. 1.16. Ezekiel. 18.31.
To set thine heart against all manner of sin whatsoever, to hate it and
abhor it, in the strength of God to resolve the utter destruction of it in
thy nature, the avoidance of it in thy life and Conversation, Romans 7.
together with all the temptations and occasions that lead thee to sin from
without, and all the corrupt motions, dispositions, workings of it that are
within, according to the prohibitions in the word, the convictions of the
spirit, and the checks of thy conscience, and this both in thought, word, and
deed. 5. Thou must be sure to give proof of all in the course of thy life and
conversation, Matthew. 3.8. Mat. 3.8.
and if through weakness and infirmity, thou be at any time overtaken, to
reflect upon thy self, Ps. 51.
and renew these actings of repentance with particular application to that
transgression, And 7. Every day, whether sin be known or not known to be
searching, humbling, confessing, praying, resolving, laboring to root out and
destroy the remainders of thy Corruption. Ps. 19.12.


3. New obedience calls thee 1. To Consider the obligation that lies upon thee
by nature and grace to know and to do the will of God. 2. Rem. 12.1. Romans 14.9.
To acquaint thy self with the mind and will of God revealed in his word as
the rule of thy dury. 3. Ps. 1. Psalm. 119. Acts 9.6. Deuteronomy. 39: Is. 56.8.
To give up thy self in the sense of thy duty and Gods mercy through Christ in
a Covenant of sincere, free, full, universal, and constant obedience: 4.
Making Christ thy strength, and the Word thy rule, Gods Glory and thine own
salvation thine end, and the spirit thy guide, and a good conscience thy
principle, to apply thy self to the exercise of every grace, Psalm. 50.4. Romans
6.12.
and the performance of every duty, which God requires of thee, toward
himself, thine own soul, and others in thy place, condition, Phil. 3.8. 1
Pet. 2.5.
and capacity. 5. Making up thy defects (when sensible of them) by presenting
thy person and thy duty to Gods Gracious acceptance, according to the Covenant
of of Grace, through the mediation of Jesus Christ:

In so doing,

And if thou would not miscarry in this great work, Caut. Luke 19.42 Mat.
11.6.
take heed (1) of delays, demurres, put offs, 2. of taking offense, at the
strictness of duty, at the low condition of Christ and Christians, and the
scandalous lives and actions of Hypocrites and professors, who shall bear
their burden. Acts 2.40.
3. of evil company. 4. Of discouragements from carnal friends. 5. Heb. 3.12.
Of an evil heart of impenitency and unbelief, 6. Of Temptations from Satan,
7. Acts 26.28.29.
Of being but almost a Christian, resting in convictions, confessions,
humiliations, vows and promises, profession, partial change and reformation,
good esteem with others; till the work be perfectly done, and thine heart
subdued unto God in Christ, in faith, repentance, and new obedience, according
to the Gospel and the directions now set before you. 8. Romans 14.1.
Of troubling your selves with needless disputes and questions about things of
small moment in Religion, or above your reach. 9. Of Spiritual pride upon the
one hand, or unnecessary calling in question your condition upon the other,
where this work is sincerely done, or Gods Grace and mercy for your pardon, and
acceptance in Jesus Christ. 10. Take heed of Apostasy and backsliding in whole
or part, to corrupt opinions and errors upon the one hand, or to sinful
practices and courses upon the other.

When this work is done, 1 Timothy 1.14 Mat. 18.3.
adore its freedom, and magnify its power, believe its constancy, and live
upon its fullness till brought to glory.

2. Be daily practicing and perfecting this blessed work, and think not that
all is done till thou getst to Heaven.

3. For further direction and thy better progress be much in Holy exercises,
Acts 9.11.
praying, hearing, meditating, conferring with good Christians, reading the
Scriptures, and Sermon notes, and good books, especially about Conversion and
Regeneration.

Some Sermons I have purposely preached on this Subject in Abington on the
several instances of conversion in the new Testament: in Exeter on Joh. 3. at
Petrocks on Acts 26.18. at Mary-steps and Edmonds on Matthew. 18.3. at
Mary-moores etc. besides collateral applications: had I been more in this work
and method, success would have been through grace proportionable.

These following are choice Books, though not all that may be read upon this
subject, get and read what you can of them. Baxters Call to the unconverted,
Baxter Of Conversion. Baxters Directions to prevent miscarrying in conversion.
His Saint or a Brute. His Sermons on Death and Judgment. His Everlasting Rest.
Whately of Regeneration. Hooker's Souls preparation for Christ. Soul's
Humiliation: with several other Treatises of his, contracted in Ambrose his
prima, or first things. Dike, of Repentance: morning Exercise at Giles, London.
Morning exercise at Cripplegate, the Sermons in them on this Subject. Ob:
Sedgwick on Rev. 3.20. his treatise of faith, etc.

SECT. II. Of Mortification.
HAving seen the Conversion of the Sinner, let us proceed to the work and
exercise of the Saint: and the first thing that presents it self to our
consideration, for the improvement of his conversion, is the Mortification of
his corruption: and therein note,

1. That there is an indwelling Body of sin and corruption that remains in
the converted and regenerated person. It is perfectly pardoned, but not
perfectly purged out, and destroyed, while in this body of flesh. See Romans
7th. per tot.

2. It is the duty and property of every truly converted and regenerated
person, to proceed in the mortification of corruption, and to endeavor through
grace the complete destruction of that body of sin that is about him, and every
branch and member of it. See Romans 6. and 7. and 8. Col. 3. Gal. 5, etc.
throughout.

R. 1. Remaining sin is remaining enmity to God and to the Christian himself,
Romans 8.7. 1 Pet. 2.11. Genesis 17.1.
and must not be let alone. 2. Conversion and true Repentance is only sincere
and true, as it intends perfection. 3. It must be perfectly done by Grace upon
us, 1 Cor. 15.50.
ere we can be fit subjects of the Kingdom of Heaven. Romans 6.6.
4. The Death of Christ intends our perfect freedom and deliverance, by
degrees, and in due time: as from the guilt of sin, and the punishment of sin,
so from the dominion of sin in our conversion, Romans 6.12. Romans 7.25. Gul. 5.26.
the abiding power of sin in our progressive mortification, and at last the
presence and being of sin in our dissolution: what Christ's death intends in its
Merit, Example, Argument, and Influence, the same should we intend in our
purpose and progress for communion with him, and conformity to him, in his
death and crucifixion.

Take these Directions for it, 1. by way of COnsideration: 2. by way of
Operation and Practice.

1. Ps. 16.8: Ps. 119.11 Genesis 39.9. Ps. 18.21, 22. Romans 7.13.
Set before thine eyes continually (especially upon the motions of sin and
temptations unto sin) the Holiness of God in his Name; Nature, Word, and Will;
his Holy Eye, his Holy Law.

2. Set before thine eyes the sinfulness of sin, and that especially in its
own nature, as most contrary to God, his nature, his will, his works, his
designs, his glory.

For this see at large Burroughes treatise of the Evil of Evils, or the
sinfulness of Sin. Dr. Reynolds of the Sinfulness of sin. etc.

3. Set before you the evil effects and fruits of sin, upon the fallen Angels,
Mankind, thine own person; Romans 6.22.
and those either already felt, or that hereafter may be feared.

4. Set before you the Blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19. Romans 6.1, 2 Psalm. Romans
7.24.
that precious blood, which is the price of your Redemption from the least of
sins.

5. Set before you the sad complaints of the Saints and servants of God because
of sin, and against their sin.

6. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Set before you the gracious promises for your encouragement in the
mortification of your corruption, Ezekiel. 36, 26, 27.
together with the promises in the covenant of Grace for your assistance in
this undertaking.

7. Set before you your own resolutions and vows against it in your first
conviction and conversion, Romans 6.3. Ps. 119.106.
renewed in times of affliction, and in Sacraments, and in Prayers put up to
God for peace and pardon.

Practical and operative Directions.

1. Ps. 4.4. Lam. 3.39.
Acquaint your selves, as with the general corruption, so with the particular
corruption in your nature: search and find them out. Examine your hearts and
lives, your dispositions, and conversations, by the rule of the Word, and Law
of God, in its purity and perfection, and by the light of the spirit of God in
its teachings and convictions: Job. 34.32
pray to God to discover you unto your selves: improve all ordinances and
providence also to that purpose: consider your Constitution, Education,
Calling, Company, and Condition in this present world: make use of the wholesome
admonitions of others skillful, and faithful, and acquainted with you, and
their observations on you; the daily motions and workings of your hearts upon
carnal and sensual objects, and upon the approaches of temptations, will
discover much unto you, if but well observed: the failings and the falls of
others read or heard, and discerned by you, may give you occasion of reflection
on your self: and strict enquiry may find out more then otherwise might have
been suspected.

2. Be much at work about the root of sin, and digging it up. Romans 6.6. Jer.
4.14.
Content not your selves with the particular branches, the lopping them off, or
cutting down the trunk it self; the root will be every day new sprouting.

3. Spare not at all your beloved sin, of which Divines speak much. It Is found,
Ps. 18.23.
they say, and known, by our special respects unto it, and favor for it, our
impatiency of reproof from Minister, or private Christian on that particular:
we most wish and desire that it were not accounted a sin: and are apt to find
out reasonings for it, to defend it, or at least to lessen our apprehensions of
its sinfulness: it returns most often upon us, with observation above any
other in particular; but not without frequent checks of conscience, and
convictions of the Spirit: it much follows us in our retirements, and when
alone, the mind will work upon it, though perhaps we are not willing to be
found in the actings of it: some say it lies down with us in our beds,
converses with us in our dreams, and rises with us in the morning: if it
distract us not in our holy duties, we owe the more to Grace restraining:
several others depend upon it, to feed or serve it. O down with this.

4. Neglect not the little creepers: they may grow bigger: Romans 7. Ps. 19.12.
their number may prove not only formidable, but fatal: the least is sin, in
its nature evil, and according to Gods law, without repentance and faith in
the blood of Christ, is damnable. They will certainly make way for greater; and
if not destroy, yet disturb your souls etc.

5. Ps. 19.13.
Infirmities, Incursions, Imperfections, must be bewailed etc. but scandalous
evils, and presumptuous sins may not so much as be thought upon without an
horror; how much less in their temptations entertained, and least of all
committed. The smallest tincture of them must be speedily washed away in the
blood of Christ; otherwise your souls and consciences will not dare to come
into God's presence.

6. 1 Cor. 5.
Contract not upon your Souls the guilt of national transgressions, either
past or present, by not mourning for them; much less by commission of them,
and communion in them: it would stain our Paper once to name them.

7. Find out and destroy the Achans, Job. 34.31 etc.
the sins for which in an especial manner God now or at any time may strike
and enter into judgment with you: the Lord direct you in that Enquiry, and
assist you in that Undertaking.

8 Let spiritual sins, 2 Cor. 7.1.
though least discerned and enquired after, have their discovery, humiliation,
repentance, and crucifixion: as spiritual pride, self love, Ps. 77.10. Heb.
3.12.
wordly mindedness, estrangement from God; and more especially your Gospel
sins, as Unbelief, Impenitency, hardness of heart, unthankfulness, etc.

9. Whatever they be, intend not only the knowledge of them, humiliation under
them, restraint upon them, correction, Romans 8.13.
or suppose some signal punishment. but complete destruction and abolition.

And for this purpose, 1. Ps 119.
get deep impressions made upon your spirits by the foregoing considerations.
2. Ps. 119.11.
Especially let the word of God be hid in your hearts, and written upon them.
3. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Gal.
5.16.
4. 1 Cor. 9.27
Make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, but rather keep
it in subjection. 5. Jer. 17.9. Job.
Be always jealous of your deceitful hearts. 6. Keep a tender conscience. 7.
A narrow watch over your senses. 8. Take heed in things lawful, lest you be
unlawfully ensnared. 9. Improve affliction to the mortification of corruption:
and 10. call in the influences of the Covenant of Grace, and of the blood of
Christ by faith and prayer. 11. Improve every Ordinance according to its nature
and tendency to mortification. Ephesians. 6.12.
12. Stand out stiffly and resolutely in the hour of Temptation, and the
stirring of corruption: then call in all your strength about you, then urge
your considerations from reason, and Scripture, Law and Gospel. Set your
selves under the eye and sight of God, let God's terrors make you afraid to sin
against him: suppose that Death and Judgment were at your heels, and that you
heard the shreekings of the Damned for those very transgressions. Behold Christ
Jesus upon the Cross as bleeding, dying, for those very sins. Urge home the
grace of God, and the love of Christ, your holy Profession, your Baptismall
vows, your Sacrament-renewed-ingagements, the mercies received, the Glory
expected, and all to shame you from it, if there be any thing of holy ingenuity
to be found upon you: at least what sin has cost you in repentance and
affliction: and that you may farther suffer, though Hell be not your final
portion. Then call in by says and prayer the help of God, and all the virtues
of the blood of Christ: maintain your ground against its first assaults, and
you have more then overcome. 13. If at any time it have surpised you, Ps. 51.
play an aftergame of Repentance, recruit your strength, improve your skill and
strength, and deliver your souls. O lie not under it, much less subject your
selves unto it, and renounce thereby as by an after-free and full consent your
Sovereign and Savior Jesus Christ. 14. Watch the more against it, and fortify
your selves for the time to come. 15. When one corruption or temptation is over
and disappointed, conclude not your work is done; there are innumerable more
behind, and while life lasts, there will be no end of this warfare. 16. Ro^.
7.24.
Be always groaning under the invincible remainders of the body of death, and
long for your deliverance 17. Take heed of Apostasy and backsliding; a sin not
altogether unpardonable, but dangerous, Hos. 14.
and that may cost you dear e're you recover. 18. Romans 7.25.
Give all the glory of your Conquests to Jesus Christ, and to the power of
grace. 19. Enjoy the comfort of Believers that keep their ground and conquer.
Romans 8.1.
For 1. you are in a state of pardon and salvation. 2. Romans 7.20.
No corruption of nature, no transgression in your life is imputed to you to
your particular condemnation, when disowned, resisted, repented of, and carried
by says to the blood of Christ. 3. The old dominion of Sin, Romans 6.14
once truly broken, shall never be recovered: you are not under the Law, but
under Grace. 1 Timothy 4.8.
4. Your particular Conflicts shall be rewarded, if through Grace they proceed
to Conquest. Ephesians. 5.26.
5. At length the body of Sin and Death shall be destroyed. 1 Cor. 12.1^.
6. In the mean time the grace and strength of Christ is sufficient for you,
and when sought by faith, humility, and prayer, 1 Cor. 15.50. etc.
it shall not be denied. 7. In Heaven there will be no sin, no sorrow, but
perfect holiness and purity, with everlasting songs of Joy and Triumph. Rev.
22.20.
Therefore (20) pray, believe, and look, and long for the coming of Christ:
even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Much of this was preached at Mary Arches, on Romans 6 6.

Read more in Dr. Owen of Mortification. Burroughes Evil of Sin. Love of Mort.
Morning Exercise at Giles and Crypplegate. Ambrose Media. Goodwins works, etc.
Reyners rules, etc.

SECT. III. Of the Exercise of Grace, Spiritual activity, growth, progress,
and perseverance in sanctification, and holy conversation.
WE have seen the Convert in his exercise and progress of Mortification, in
the next place it is meet to consider him in his exercise, progress, and
perseverance in Sanctification, and holy conversation. For in that also the
Word which is accordng to Godliness does represent him to us. See Genesis 17.1
Ephesians. 2.10. Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22. etc. Ephesians. 5.8, 9. etc. Phil. 1.27 2 Pet. 3. 1
Cor. 15. Romans 2.7. Heb. 12.14. Rev. 22.14. and reason good; Ephesians. 1.4. Titus
2.14. Ephesians. 2.10. Gal 5.15. Rem. 8.1. 1 Pet. 1. Rev. 22.14 etc. Ephesians. 1.4. Heb.
8.10. Ephesians. 5.25.
for to this he is elected, redeemed, called, anew created, and made partaker
of the spirit of holiness. This is the evidence of his Justification, the
quality of his Adoption, his way, and walk toward the Kingdom and Salvation.
This is the design of the methods of Grace toward him, the covenant of Grace
established with him, the means of Grace bestowed upon him, the word of grace
without him, the principle of grace within him. Gal. 5.15. 1 Pet. 1.14. Ephesians.
5.1. Romans 6. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Romans 12.1. Heb. 12 10 Gal. 4.19. 2 Cor. 5.14. 2
Cor. 6.17 Ps. 119. 1 John 3.3. 1 John 1.5, 6.
This, the Relations whereinto he is entered, the Profession he has made, the
sacraments of which he has been partaker, the mercies he has received, the
miseries that he has felt, the pangs of the new Birth which he has past
through, the tokens of Divine Love vouchsafed, the separation of his soul from
Sin and Sinners, the dedication of his person and all to God and Godliness,
the hopes and promises of everlasting life and blessedness, the tenor of the
Gospel, all his privileges, and particularly his union and communion with
Jesus Christ by faith, do call for all at his hands. Is. 6.3.
Besides, Holiness is no less lovely then necessary. It is in its original
the glory and perfection of all the Divine Attributes, essential in each
person of the holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; the Character of the
name, Genesis 1. Ephesians. 4. Psalm. 15. Rev. 21. 2 Cor. 1.12 1 John 4. 1 John 1. begin:
Is. 56.
nature, will, word, and works of God; the beauty of man's first Creation, the
intention of the second; the delight of God, the state of Heaven. Add, the
blessed fruits, effects, and comforts of it are no less desirable; as the
evidence of the love of God, the grace of Christ, and the communion of the holy
Ghost. How does it fit us (through Christ) for access to God, converses with
him, Ps. 50. u^^. etc. Joh. 14.21. Rev. 2.
more abundant tokens and testimonies of love and favor from him: the peace of
conscience, the joy in the holy Ghost, and the foretasts of blessedness and
glory that do attend it, who is able to express them? but we may not enlarge
in such discourses on it. It is to be supposed, that our Regenerate person is
abundantly convinced of its necessity, Ps. 110.3. Cant. 1.4.
and that he has felt its powers, and tasted its sweetnesses, and been
attracted by its beauties, and is resolved for its exercises here, and full
enjoyments hereafter, and needs only some directions for it. Accordingly these
that follow may be improved in general, and in particular

1 Get the Habit of Grace and Sanctification (infused in regeneration,) 1 Pet.
2.2. Ps. 42. and 84. and 63.
the new creature to be fed, nourished, and preserved: by the use, and blessing
of God on the use of the means of grace, by removing out of the heart
whatsoever might afflict or hinder it, weaken it or disturb it, 1 Pet. 2. Math.
13. Rev. 12.
much more what has immediate tendency to murder it and destroy it; and that
is Sin, the World, and Satan. Add faith, and earnest prayer to the God of all
grace for the renewed influences of the spirit of grace, Ps. 119.
the accomplishment of the promises in the covenant of Grace, Is. 35. Ezekiel.
36.26. Joh. 1.18.
and a liberal communication from Christ Jesus the fullness and treasury of
grace.

2. Be well acquainted with the compass of the activity of Grace: Ephesians. 5.17.
what is expected from you in your capacity, both in heart and life, toward
God, and man, and your own souls, Tit. 2.12.
the several ways of duty, and the exercises of grace, in every relation,
condition, Ps. 119
calling, time, and place, etc. especially, set the law and word of God, as the
rule of life and of the new creature before you, that it may direct you;
seeking earnestly withal to God for his Holy spirit to guide you, Ps. 43.3.
Romans 8.14.
and lead you according to his word into ways of holiness and obedience which
are well pleasing to him, and in his sight.

3. When you have sound out the will of God, Math. 6.10 Exodus 20. 2 Cor. 5.14.
2 Cor. 7.1.
and the way of duty, and the work of grace, resign your selves both soul and
body, and all that you are and have, to God, and to his pleasure: considering
his authority over you, his love to you, and his promises before you, for
acceptance, reward, and help: and as souls devoted to his pleasure, inflamed
with his love, and overpowred by his spirit, apply your selves to the exercise
of graces, and the performance of duties, without delays, demurres, Psalm. 119.
Ps. 110.3. Genesis 17.1. Ps. 119.6. Epp. 5.15. 2 Pet. 1.5. 1 Cor. 15. 1 Cor.
10.31. Gal. 6.16. Gal. 5.15. 2 Cor. 7.1. Romans 12.2.
reluctancie, exceptions, reasonings, most freely and readily, most sincerely
and faithfully, most fully and unreservedly, most exactly and accurately, most
diligently and industriously, most reselvedly and constantly.

4. In every undertaking, remember the end Gods glory, the rule Gods word, the
principle Gods Spirit, the encouragement, Gods promise, the manner, as unto God
well pleasing; and in a word, the all in all Christ Jesus, to direct and
strengthen you, Col. 170. Col. 1.28. Joh. 15.5.
and to render perfect and acceptable to God, both your person and performance
in his own mediation and intercession, without him you can do nothing.

5. In the exercise of Grace, these following are Especially to be intended,
though none neglected, As 1. Pro. 17.3.
The vital and fundamental graces toward God and Christ, as knowledge, faith,
love, repentance, Mal. 3.16.
obedience, etc. Act and exercise your knowledge, in holy and honorable, Ps.
1.2.3.
right and reverentiall, Romans 4.20. 1 Pe. 1.24.
filial and fiduciall thoughts of God; your faith on the truth of his being,
the greatness of his power, the fullness of his blessedness, the treasures of
his mercies; the infiniteness of his wisdom, but especially his Grace in
Christ, with the freeness, fullness, Joh. 14.1. Ps. 23.
firmness of his promises; the extent, power, and tenderness of his
providence, and so toward Christ. Your Acts knowledge and Faith in thoughts on
him, Gal. 2.20.
choice of him, resignations to him, dependence upon him. Ps. 84. Ps. 37. Ps.
40.8. Ps. 73. Ps. 77. Ps. 19. Ps. 31. Luk 15. Fsal. 119. Lords ^rayer. 1 Samuel
15. Luke 22. Brov. 4.23.
Act your love, desiring his presence, his blessings, his honor and glory;
devoting your souls to him, and delighting in him and in his service, etc. Act
your repentance, in Grief for sin (yea even of infirmity, and imperfection,
and that in your very graces.) Abhorrency of evil, Humiliations in the sense
of vileness and sinfulness, renewed and that howerly Conversions to him. Act
your obedience in frequent subjections unto his will revealed in his word or
works. 2. Have a special heed to the Government of the several powers and
faculties of your souls, Heb. 9.12.
their Dispositions and their operations; that all may be regular. 1. In the
sight of God, the searcher of the heart. Romans 7.
2. According to the rule of the Word, which commands not only the outward, but
the inward man. 3. Within is the principle seat of all sanctifying grace, and
from thence gives it forth its commands and influences throughout the whole
man. It is an excellent subject, and but little insisted on, the government of
the understanding, conscience, will, memory, affections etc. their proper
actings in a way of grace and duty. For your help in this, See Ball of
Godliness, something also there is to this purpose, in Penner on Conscience
and the Affections, and as I take it, in Reyners Rules, think well upon it. 4.
Romans 6.19.
What if we add to this the government of the senses, and to them of the whole
man, and all the members.

4. Look to the acting of those graces, which are next to the vital and
fundamental Graces; or, if you will, Col. 1.10. Col. 2.6.
the branches of them, and attendants upon them, that so you may abound. 1. In
every Grace; 2. In the various actings of the same Grace. 3. In the connection
of graces, and 4ly, Their actings in several cases. as Humility, Meekness,
Patience, Heavenliness, Charity, Self-denial, Hope, etc. Give all and every
grace its place and order, its time and season, its life and power, it is
measure and manner: Cant. 2.14. Cant. 4.7.
this makes a beauty spiritual and glorious in the Countenance of the
Christian, whether in the frame within, or in the form of the life and
conversation without; That within to the eye of God, that without to the eye of
God, Angels, and men.

5. Ephesians. 9. Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2.12. Titus 2.10.
Next to this, have a special respect to the proper Actings of the Graces in
your relations, public or private; these are your duties, these will be your
ornaments, will set forth the Gospel, and return unto you a gracious
entertainment (through Christ) with God, as well as man.

6. Act your graces in Common converses, those particularly between man and man
in dealing and trading, 1 Pet. 2.12. 1 Pro. 3 See Loves table of buying and
trading.
buying and selling, and all transactions: few consider the extent of the
second table, with the obligation that it lays upon them, and how straightly its
bound on by Christ and his Apostles in the new Testament, as by Moses and the
Prophets in the old.

7. Mat. 0.0.
Look to your selves and the actings of grace even in your lesser matters, Romans
13.
as your eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. apparel, recreation, etc. learn not
only, in these to do nothing sinful, but also to Act your Graces, and to
Glorify your God, and to approve your self a Christian.

6. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Dir. Labor not only to preserve grace, and exercise it, but to grow in Grace
and to Abound in it, both for the habit of grace, and for the exercise of
grace, by this you will more abundantly glorify God, enrich your evidences,
increase your comfort, and greaten your reward: 1 Cor. 15. 2 Pet. 3. Pro. 15. 2
Pet. 1. Isa. 35. 1 Pet. 2.2. Pro. 1.18.
For this you have promises in the Gospel, advantages in the ordinances, and
helps from Christ; there is a fullness with him, you have interest in him, you
may apply your selves to him, and there need no question, but you shall receive
abundantly from him: only you must enlarge your desires, and heighten your
faith, and use the means: ch^rishing the spirit, weeding out corruptions, and
exercising your graces. Be much in prayer, Mat. 25.
put in suit the promises, beg for influences; take heed of pride, and be
humble, take heed of worldly mindedness, and be heavenly, Phil. 3.20.
be not careless in duties, but servent in spirit, serving the Lord: Romans 12.
Converse much with the Scripture; warm, and enlarge your hearts with the
sense of the love of God and Christ, 2 Cor. 5. Romans 5.5. Heb. 11.
lock often toward the promised reward, keep in your eye the examples of the
best Christians, Heb. 12.1.2.
but especially Christ Jesus, as your great example; rest not in measures,
Phil. 3.10.
intend toward perfection and the state of the resurrection from the dead:
Neglect the improvement of no grace, Jude 20.21.
but especially lay out in vital graces; and for others, be most careful for
the most needful, in your capacity and condition; the like where you are most
weak: Be nothing in your selves be all in Christ: Rev. 3.2. Phil. 4.13.
This is the way to increase it in the habit; only further know, Ephesians. 1.21.22.
that as grace abounds in the heart, so it need to do in the life. 1. In the
frequent actings of the same graces, Ephesians. 4.7.
as they are required. 2. In the diverse actings of several graces, as the
case may command it, Col. 1.10.
And in the lively and vigorous actings of all. You have a reward enough to
encourage all, 1 Cor. 15.
you have ways enough to put forth all, you shall have grace of influence to
furnish all: Heb. 13.20, 21. ^ These. 1.11, 12.
you have engagements enough from the love of God, the grace of Christ, the
gift of the spirit, the promises of the Gospel, the priveledges of Grace, the
hopes of glory to provoke to all. Such things considered, and such means used,
will also serve to keep up your hearts in a lively frame of spirit, and
readiness for duty and service, this will quicken you when dull, enlarge when
straightened, and set all the wheels of your souls on going.

Lastly, Look to your standing and perseverance: 1 These. 3.8. Pro. ^ep. Heb. 6.
Rev. 2. Heb. 10. Ps. 51.
Apostacies are dangerous; some are desperate, the least is too bad though you
loose not your crown, yet loose not your comfort, your communion with God, your
evidences, your earnests, no nor your graces themselves, Ps. 51.29.
thougst in the least degrees: you may loose your Jewels, though not your
crown; and the sparks of diamonds the shings of gold, and the minute degrees of
grace are too precious to be lost. Therefore reglect not the means, Rev. 3.1.
tak^ he^a of omissions, watch against your temptation, sit (...) loose from
Christ, abate not in your exercise: here withal remember, that you stand not
by your own strength, Romans 11. 1 Pet. 1.25 3, 4, 5.
but by the love of the father, the blood of the (...), the power of the
spirit, and the performance of the promise.

For this reflect on S^rmons of regeneration, John 3. at Petrocks; Walking in
the ligh^ at Mary-Moores on Joh. 12.35. and on Phil. 3 2. last v. and Noah's
walking with God on Genesis 6 at Mary Arches, etc. you may find much more in Ball,
of Godliness: Love, of grace; Burges his Spiritual refinings: Buroughs
gracious spirit: Buroughs Conversation becoming the Gospel, and his Heavenly
Conversation. Bolton's Walking with God. T. Tailor circumspect walking, and
Bishop Tailors Holy living. Gouge Of Relative duties, whole duty of man.
Ambrose Media. Goodwins growth in grace, etc. Cripplegate Exercise, Reyner,
Henner. Reynolds life of God.

SECT. IV. Of the Christians daily walk.
EVery day has its duty in Common and ordinary, Heb. 3.
and some days in extraordinary actings of grace, and performance of duty; to
the Glorifying of God, and to the working out of our salvation: for this take
and practice these directions following: the word be your rule, the spirit be
your guide, and Christ Jesus be your strength.

1. Psalm. 5.3.
In the Morning, when you awake, lift up your heart to God; be thankful for
the mercies of the night, desire the guidance, grace, mercy, and providence for
the day; send up some Holy Ejaculations: Consider what may be most likely the
duty and temptation of the day, set your spiritual watch, engage your hearts
with God, and warm it with the thoughts of his love, and the hopes of his
kingdom.

2. Psalm. 1.2.
Season your hearts with some portion of his word, read first what may next
come to your hands, proceed then in your ordinary course for your morning
reading of the Scriptures: work what you have read, upon your heart, Ps. 5.3.
by serious meditation, and then address your self to God, as you have place
and opportunity in solemn prayer: from thence in fit season (ere the occasions
of the world fall in) discharge the duties in your family,

3. Romans 12.11. Ephesians. 6.7.
Apply your self with diligence to the duty of your Calling, in the fear of
God, with a good Conscience, depending on his presence, favor, and blessing.

4. Keep upon your hearts, Genesis 17.1.
the sense of the eye of God, that sees all, the ear of God that hears all,
and the hand of God that records all, especially the word of God that is to
rule all, and his providence to bless all: do nothing that may displease him,
do every thing according to his will, and to his glory.

5. In temporal employments and secular occasions act spiritual graces, mind
eternity, your spiritual concernments, Phil. 3.20.
send frequent, holy ejaculations toward Heaven, and so maintain Communion
with God throughout the day, and in the midst of your employments.

6. Watch against the temptations of the day, the occasions to sin, and the
first motions and stirrings of corruptions, and those either rooted in thy
disposition, 1 Pet. 5.8. 1 Pet. 2.11.
or occasioned in thy calling: 1 Pet. 5.8. and 2.11.
Take heed of sinning.

7. Take not only care of sinning, but be found (as occasion is offered) in all
welldoing. Is. 1.16. Tit. 2.12. Mica. 6.8.
Adorn the Gospel, and approve thy self a Christian by acts of Righteousness,
Justice, and Equity in all thy dealings, and withal of mercy and charity, as
it lies before thee.

8. Take care of thy words; let none be profane, Math. 12.36.37. 1 Pet. 3.10.
sinful, frothy, uncharitable, but true, and seasoned with grace, administering
grace to the hearers: use not too many words in buying and selling; hear few
stories that little concern you, and tell less. Think before you speak;
remember there is an account to be made of words, by these also thou shall be
justified, Math. 12.37.
and by them thou may be condemned.

9. 1 Cor. 10.31. Tit. 2.12.
In all refreshments of food, or recreation, be sober, serious, and spiritual.

10. Upon rovings and wanderings call in thine heart, Eccles. Prove.
and let not thy thoughts be too far dispersed, or too long disingaged from
communion with God, soul-concernments, and matters of Eternity.

11. Ephesians. 4.26.
Take heed of passions, rash anger, sudden surprisals or provocations, that may
be offered. Do no wrong: take notice of little, forgive much, forbear
retaliation in words or actions: in great affronts be not too much disturbed,
and commit events and returns to God.

12. Ephesians. 6.1. Ephesians. 5.22.
Fill up Relations with relative duties, whether as superior, or inferior, or
equal: be obedient to the commands of Superiors according to the will of God;
be respectfull, kind, and friendly to equals; be moderate, tender, and gentle
to inferiors. Do evil to none, but good to all.

13. Beware of your company: Ephesians. 5.7.11. Ps. 15.
have no more to do with wicked persons, then of necessity you must: let their
presence be your burden, and their profaneness your abhorrency: let them know
that you do not like them. Let the good be welcome, entertain them as
Christians; receive from them or give to them what may be spiritual.

Let your time be precious, Ephesians. 5.16.
and little or none be wasted; fill up all with necessary duties that belong
unto it, or find out something good and commendable to improve it. On moments
of time depends eternity: let not spiritual and temporal duties interfer, but
let each have their proper seasons; run not from thy particular calling to
exercises of the general, when unseasonable; neglect not the general for the
particular, when thou have thy freedom.

15. Let not the world, or the things of the world be too earnestly desired,
eagerly persued, 1 John 2.15 Phil. 4.11.
affectionately embraced: be thankful for, and content with necessaries;
what is more, let it be improved in the cheerful service of God, in works of
piety and charity. Keep thine heart at a distance, and loose from all, and be
contented to part with all, Heb. 10.34.
when called to it; knowing that Heaven is thine inheritance, and God himself
thy portion.

26. Observe the ways and methods of God's providence toward thee from day to
day: consider the graces to be exercised on such occasions: Live the life of
dependence on God's providence, and subjection to his will: be thankful for
his mercies, and endure his chastisements. Let extraordinary dispensations have
extraordinary observations.

17. Remember to walk with God humbly, Mica 6.8. Tit. 2.12.
cheerfully, obediently, and believingly. Carry your selves to men
respectfully, righteously, friendly: demean your selves s^berly, gravely,
prudently: bear all injuries patiently, receive all Kindnesses thankfully, do
all Courtesies readily.

18. Suffer no guilt contracted to lie long upon you, but be often examining
your selves; Ps. 19: Ps. 32. beg.
on sense of sin renew your repentance, and faith on the blood of Christ, and
return to Duty.

19. Tit. 2.13.
Do something every day toward the last, in mortifying corruption,
strengthening graces, increasing knowledge, furthering your assurances, drawing
nearer to Heaven in thoughts on it, desires after it, preparations for it.

20. In the evening of the day, Ps. 4.4.
reflect on what has past, cast up accounts, be humble for defects, repent of
transgressions, be thankful for mercies, renew your acquaintance with God as
you have opportunity in solemn duties of prayer, meditation, and reading the
Scriptures, or some good Books: perform these duties, as also your family
duties, in good season. Ps. 3.5. Ps. 4. ult. see Ps. 1 and 42. and 16.
When all is done, remember Mortality and Eternity. Act repentance and faith,
and commit your souls, and bodies, and family to God, and to his keeping.

SECT. V. Of Communion with God.
THE Convert may no^^ advance to a more especiali (...) God; and that not only
as (...) ^^iviledge, See 1 John 1.3. etc. (...) 20. Job 22.21.

R For such as have into (...) God, Romans 5.1.
access to God, accepta^^^ ^ith God are beloved of him, may (...), and derive
from him. This (...) partly presupposes, and partly requires what we have in
these following particulars, and it may be in some other.

1. Heb. 10.19, 20.
It presupposes reconciliation with God through the mediation of Christ,
apprehended by faith, answered in repentance, pursued in obedience, and
maintained in walking before him.

2. It immediately follows union with Christ, Ephesians. 2.18.
relation to God, and inhabitation of the Spirit.

3. It supposes the qualification of the person in conformity to God, Ps. 15.
and assimilations to him.

4. Joh. 14.21.
It is maintained, on Gods part, by teachings of the Spirit, influences of
grace, Rev. 3.20. Cant. 5.1. Ps. 25.14.
testimonies of Love, and earnests of his glory. On the Christians part, by
what here follows.

1. Addresses to God in holy duties, Ps. 73.28. Ps. 100.
solemn or occasional, through Christ, and by the Spirit.

2. Apprehensions of God, his glory, Joh. 17.3.
his grace, love, and goodness revealed in his word through Christ, and
applied by the Spirit.

3. Adorations of God, high thoughts of him, with humble worshippings, praises,
Ps. 100.4.
and acknowledgments.

4. Affections to God in Christ, Ps. 42.1. Ps. 63.1.
running out in love, desire, delight, and joy.

5. Ps. 36.7. Cant. 8.5.
Affiance in God through Christ in his grace, goodness, truth, faithfulness,
power, and providence.

6, Activity of grace in holy duties, Cant. 4.16.
proper, in times seasonable, in manner spiritual, in measure fruitful.

7. Ps. 16.8. Cant. 2.7.
Actual intentions of God and of his glory, and of being well pleasing to him,
in the frame of our hearts, in the course of our lives, and especially in our
holy duties.

8. Applications of his love, Cant. 1.2. etc. Romans 5.5, 6 etc.
upon the discoveries of it in his word; the shedding of it abroad in our
hearts by his Spirit, the evidence of it in his graces, and the experience of
it in his mercies.

9. Acquainting him with our necessities, Phil. 4.6. Cant. 2.14.
desires, cases, and conditions from day to day: provided it be humbly,
heartily, believingly, it may be freely, and with holy familiarity, as a friend
with his friend, a child with his father, and the spouse with her husband: and
this whatever be our distresses, and dangers, troubles, and sorrows, wrongs and
injuries wants and weaknesses, temptations and infirmities.

10. Attendance to the methods of his providence, Job. Ps. 8. Cant. 5.4.
and the motions of his spirit; with the observation of his works, and the
opening of our hearts unto his word, harkening to his whispers, sensible
apprehensions of his approaches to your souls, not suffering our selves to be
unmindfull of him, estranged from him.

11. Attributing all our mercies, and refreshments, Ephesians. 3. ult.
spiritual and temporal, with the hopes of eternal, to his free grace and
mercy in Jesus Christ: giving him the glory of all that is done before us, or
upon us.

12. Acquiescence in him as our God in Christ, Ps. 116.7.
our God in Covenant, our All in All: resting our selves in our relation to
him, Ps. 73.25.
enjoyment of him: whatever else we want, and whatever our condition be, Ps.
17. ult. Ps. 16. ult.
'till we come to glory, to see him as he is, to be perfectly like unto him,
and for ever with him. Read Mr. Strong of Communion with God, and Dr. Owen of
Communion with God. Brinsly.

SECT. VI. Of Assurance.
THat you may not want any needful directions for the hightning of your
Comfort, peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, excuse the brevity,
and take these notes of Assurance.

1. It is the ordinary, as the desirable privilege of holy persons,
mortifying corruptions, exercising graces, 1 Pet. 1.8. Ps. 36.7. Romans 5.5.
walking daily before the Lord, and in communion with him, to have comfortable
assurance of the love of God, interest in Christ, 1 Pet: 1.3, 4, 5, 6.
pardon of sins, state in grace, title to the promises, and their inheritance
in the Kingdom.

2. If it be otherwise with any, it is probable, Ps. 51. Cant. 5.2.
there are some unmortified corruptions, neglected graces, disordered
conversations, estrangements from God, or something extraordinary in the way of
God's dispensation, Is. 50.10.
the prevalency of temptation, distemper in constitution, which are to be
enquired after. However it be,

1. 2 Pet. 1.5.
Practice the methods in the former Directions with care and diligence, in
truth and in sincerity.

2. Ps. 51. Romans 16.16. Ephesians. 1.17, 18.
Beg the spirit of Adoption to enlighten our understandings, shine upon our
graces, and make the application.

3. Reflect upon your selves, your state, and your exercise, Romans 16.16. 1 John
3.19, 20. Gal. 2.20.
and comparing them with the word in the light of the spirit, your consciences
bearing witness in the holy Ghost of sincerity upon the trial, accordingly
pass the sentence for your Assurance, and make the application, cast off your
doubts, give glory to grace, and make progress to glory.

4. Where things are doubtful upon enquiry, Hab. 2. Is. 50.10. Cant. 5.
the best way is to put it out of doubt by practice, in the actings of the
graces, and performance of the duties; waiting God's time, and keeping his way,
and trusting in his mercy through Christ Jesus, till he be pleased to answer
your doubts, to rebuke your temptations, to give his spirit, and to cause the
light of his countenance to shine upon you.

5. Learn moreover not to question the goodness of the father, the merits of
the son, the power of the spirit, 1 John 5.11 12.
the truth of the promises, the probability of your interest (if any way
likely) much less the hopes of arriving safe to glory, being found in the
sincere discharge of duty, Cant. 8.7.
leaving the wilderness of the world and sin in our affection and
conversation, and leaning on our Beloved.

6. Expect not considerable measures of comfort, but in proportions of Duty,
Ps. 84.7.
and some progress made in practical Christianity.

7. 2 Cor. 1. beg. 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.
There are special seasons for special Assurances: as entrance upon, of
discharge of some great undertakings in the life of Religion, or some great
trial and exercise (suppose) of suffering: and the best is always reserved
for the needful and proper season.

8. Having gotten it, keep it, and that with humility, thankfulness, and
diligence, Jude 20, 21. Cant. 5.2.
with progress in the way where in you got it. Take heed of abusing it by
security, wantonness, or worldliness.

9. Look and long for heaven, Rev. 22.20.
there all is perfected. Most Sermons have somewhat toward this in their Uses
of Examination and Consolation: and some more especially on this subject;
search out your Notes and study them. Besides these there are diverse
Treatises: a^ Baxter's Directions. Bolton's Instructions, Sibbes his Souls
Conflict. Symonds desert^^ Souls case and cure. Roberts Evidences. Ambrose
middle things. Ford of Adoption. Cripplegate Exercise.

SECT. VII. The Life of Faith.
1. IN the life of Faith are considerable 1. the purposes: 2. the object: and
3. the actings of Faith.

1. The purposes of it are usually for justification, mortification,
sanctification, consolation, and salvation.

2. The Objects are God's love, truth, power etc. Christ's person, relations,
offices, life, death, resurrection, and ascension etc.

3. The Acts of faith are, apprehension of the object, assent to the truth,
consent to the gift, application of the whole, with affyance and working in
love and obedience, as at first in closing with Christ.

2. Romans 4.20.
The life of faith is highly acceptable with God, comfortable, honorable, and
necessary to the Christian.

1. Gal. 2.10. Phil. 3.9. Act. 3.19.
To live the life of faith for justification. 1. Renew thy repentance daily,
for commissions of sin, and omissions of duty: in sorrow, confession, and
supplication to God in Christ. 2. Romans 3.25.26. Romans 5.12. etc.
Let Faith first apprehend the grace of God; and look on Christ as thy Second
Adam, Head, Surety, and Sacrifice, meditate his perfect obedience, and his
death; therein, Gal. 3.13.
the pacification of wrath, the satisfaction of Justice, the removal of the
curse, Dan. 9.24. Heb. 10.16. Heb. 9.24. 1 John 2.2. Luk: 22. Romans 3.25. Gal.
2.20. Joh. 3.3.
sin taken away in its guilt, everlasting righteousness brought in, and a
Covenant of Grace established: see this pleaded in his intercession, and
tendered in the Gospel, sealed in the Sacraments, and to be applied by faith.
2. Apply it. 3. Assent unto it. 4. Rest upon it. 5. Speak peace to thy
conscience. 6. If the sense of it make thee thankful, cheerful, and fruitful
to God and Christ. Romans 5.1. Heb 10.2. Psalm. 103.1, 2. 2 Cor. 5.14. etc. Ram.
8.34. etc. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. Acts 3.19. Romans 7.13.14.
7. Reject the temptations of Satan to unbelief, silence the accusations and
condemnations of thy conscience, lay aside the slavisn fears of the wrath of
God, the terrors of death and judgment. And 8. Long for the public and solemn
declaration of all in the last day.

2. Live the life of faith for Mertification of sin. 1. Set home upon thine
heart the sinfullnesse of sin, Romans 7.13, 14.
and the necessity of its destruction. Be willing to it, and resolved for it.
2. Be sensible of thine own weakness and inability to perform it. Romans 7.24.
Romans 7.25. Romans 6. beg.
3. Act faith on Christ for it. 1. Let faith b^hold Christ Jesus upon the
Cross, procuring and purchasing thy freedom, Romans 7. Ezekiel. 36.26.
from the dominion, power, and presence of sin, in Gods time, and Gods way. 2.
Let faith see the promises of Mortifying and cleansing grace in the blood of
Christ established. Romans 6.9, 10. Psalm. 51.7. Romans 6.12. Romans 8.34. Gal.
5.25.26.
3. Let faith apply them. 4. Let Prayer sue out Mortifying influences from the
death of Christ. 5. Let faith set thee in the way, wherein those virtues are to
be experienced, as before in the Section of Mortification. 6 Let faith
consider, the guilt removed, the dominion broken, Heb. 12.14 2 Cor. 3.5.
the power restrained, the rest not imputed where not allowed, strength against
sin vouchsafed, and in conclusion the destruction of it.

3. Gal. 3.13, 14.
Let faith for perfect sanctification. 1. Affect thine heart with the
consideration of the necessity, Ephesians. 2.5.
excellency, and beauty of it. Romans 6.4.5
2. With the sense of thine own in sufficiency, for the acting, continuing,
evereasing of it. Ephesians. 4.7.8. Ephesians. 1.22.23.
3. Act faith on Christ. 1. Let faith look upon Christ in his word prescribing
in his life directions, in his death procuting, whatever might be needful for
it, Gal. 3.13, 14. Ephesians. 2.5. Romans 6.4, 5 Ephesians. 4.7, 8 Ephesians. 1.22.23. 1 Cor. 1.30
in his resurrection arising as your head, to quicken your souls to newness
of life; in Heaven possessing all gifts and graces, and having the fullness of
the spirit, with power to dispense it. 2. Apply it. 3. Assent unto it. 4. Make
it your choice. 5. Sue it out by Prayer. 6. Look up to him by faith, for
virtue. 7. In the expectation of his influences, apply your selves unto the
exercising of your graces.

4. Live the life of faith in Temptations 1. Let faith look upon Christ as
having been tempted, though without sin, and knowing how to compassionate. 2.
Heb. 2.18.
Look on Christ in his death, taking away the foundation of your temptations,
Heb. 2.14.
and breaking the serpents head, purchasing your redemption from his dominion,
though not disturbance, establishing the promises for your relief: Genesis 3.15.
In Heaven look on him, as interceding for you, and exalted in power to help
you. Phil. 2.9.
2. Apply it. 3. Assent to it. 4. 2 Cor. 12.8
Rest upon it. 5. Ephesians. 6.12, 13, etc.
Sue out the virtues of Christ by Prayer. 6. In his strength resist your
temptation, in the way of his direction, and putting on the spiritual armor,
using it in its place and season. 7. So doing, doubt nothing of your
acceptance, assistance, deliverance, Romans 16.20.
reward, and triumphs.

5. For Worldly troubles do the like. 1. John 16.33. 1 John 5.4. Gal. 1.4.
Let faith see Christ in his death removing the evil, which is the sting of
trouble, as the guilt of sin, the curse of the law, and the wrath of God;
procuring the graces and comforts in the promises, providence and spirit of
God: Ephesians. 1.19, 20, 21, 22.
in his resurrection and ascension, look upon him above all trouble, as your
head, assuring you of conformity to him in his exaltation hereafter, Hos. 6.
beg.
as you have with him in his humiliation here: To this ad the comforts from the
same, 1 Cor. 15.55. Heb. 2.14. Is. 26.19. Zach. 1.12. Phil. 2.9. Is. 54.5. 1
Pet. 1.5.
in Christ, against death and the terrors of it -- mutatis mutandis: the like
for the Church of God in her distresses. Follow it to his intercession, and his
government of the world by his power and providence, having a care of his
spouse in all troubles, intending only probation, Ps 73.23. Ps. 28. ult. Gal.
6.14
etc. at most correction, not at all destruction. 2. Let faith Apply this and
the like. 3. Assent. 4. Rely. 5. Perform the duties of such conditions. 6.
Confidently from Christ expect acceptance, assistance, and deliverance.

6. Live the life of faith for eternal life. 1. G. l. 3.13.
Look on Christ in his state of Humiliation as removing the hindrances, sin,
law, curse and wrath, death and Hell. 1. Purchasing the title and all
advantages; Heb. 9.15.
establishing the covenants and all the conveyances: in his exaltation
advancing toward it, entering into it, Joh. 14.1. Heb. 6.18. Col. 3.1.
and taking possession of it, not only for himself but for all believers, as
their forerunner; keeping it for them, appointing their mansions, securing
their title, Gal. 4.4.
and taking order for their Adoption, qualification, preservation, Joh. 17.24
Rev. 22.20. Heb. 11.1. Heb. 10.34
comfort here, and at last their assumption, that according to his desire,
Prayer, and promise, they may be for ever with him, etc. 2. Let faith apply it.
3. Assent unto it. 4. Rely upon it, And 5. Carry out to duty and ways of
Holiness. And 6. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
Resolvedly pass through your trials, difficulties, dangers, and deaths,
according to the will of God: Committing your souls unto him, nothing
doubting, but in the end, you shall receive the end of the faith, 2 Cor. 4.
ult. 2 Cor. 5.1. etc.
the salvation of your souls. 7. Live much upon it and the fore-thoughts of
it, it is Glorious, it is yours, it is certain, it is safe, it will be
Eternal. Christ has procured it, Christ does possess it, 2 Cor. 5.5. Ephesians.
1.14. Phil. 1.23.
the promises assure it, the sacrament seal it, the spirit is the earnest,
your graces are the evidences for it, and all your dangers and deaths do but
prepare you for it, or enter you into it.

7. Live the life of faith on Christ Jesus for faith it self: Heb. 12.2. 2
These. 1.14.
take his directions, follow his example, bottom on his his undertaking; depend
upon his fullness, yield to his methods, and expect his influences. This life
of faith is necessary, comfortable, sure, practicable, influentiall,
honorable. Study it, use it; and for further directions, I commend you,
besides your own meditations and sermon notes on Gal. 2.20. or other
Scriptures, to the reading of these Books. Balls Life of faith. Lawrence life
of faith. Cuiverwell Life of faith. Ward life of faith. Ambrose his Middle
things about the life of faith. Psalm. 9.10.
More particularly acquaint your selves with the Attributes of God, the offices
of Christ, the relations wherein he stands, his several states of
Humiliation and exaltation, 1 Cor. 2.3.
with the intentions of all and their improvements: for this, I refer you to
Sermons, on Gods Attributes and providence, and to good Books, as Preston Of
Gods Attributes, and particularly his All Sufficiency. Stock, Of Gods
Attributes. Wilkins on Providence. Gearing of Providence. Obad. Sedgwick on
Psalm. 23. and Providence. Dike on Gods Name, etc. and for that of Christ to T.
Goodwins Works. Especially Christ exalted as the object of Faith. Study it
thoroughly with the piece of Christ's heart in heaven, etc. Ambrose his looking
unto Jesus. Robinsons Similitudes, your Sermon Notes on Christ, etc. the
Lectures, on the four Evangelists in harmony on Christ. 2 Samuel 23.5.
Study likewise in order to this life of faith the Covenant of Grace, the
nature of it, the contents of it, the foundation of it in the blood of Christ,
Heb. 9.15, 16, 17.
the confirmation by the oath of God, and by sacraments; the several
dispensations of it, Heb. 1.1.
gradually revealing Christ and Grace. First to Adam Genesis 3.15. then to Noah
Genesis 6. then to Abraham several times, Genesis 12. and 15. and 17. etc. then to
the Patriarchs, to Moses, Exodus 3. to Israel on the mount Exodus 20. and 24. to
David, 2 Samuel 23.5. and in many of the Psalms, Ps 89. etc. Psalm. 2. Ps. 110.
etc. after that enlarged in choice promises in the Prophets. For Israel in
captivity, Jer. 31. Jer. 32. Ezekiel. 11. and Eze. 36, etc. So in Zach. 9. etc.
and at last the New Testament by Christ, Heb. 8. Heb. 10. read your Sermon
Notes upon this subject and those Scriptures, many of them at M. Arches and
other books, as Ball of the Covenant of Grace, Bulkly, Rutherford, Morning
exercise, Giles: Roberts, Cotton, and others. Leigh, promises.

SECT. VIII: Of Temptations:
THe best of Gods Saints and Servants may be subject to Temptations, Genesis 3.15.
and those of all sorts, not only to doubtings sinnings, Luke 22.30.31.
and such sometimes the most abominable and diabolical. For Satan is their
enemy; because they belong to God, are gotten out from his Kingdom, and are
irreconcilable enemies to his interest; Satan is an Old, Malicious, Subtle,
Powerful, 1 Pet. 5.8.
Cruel, and deadly enemy to them, their graces, their comforts, and their
persons: and God suffers it so to be, for his own glory, and his peoples good;
in the exercise and evidence of their graces, in the supports of their souls,
and experience of his favor; for their conformity to Christ, and in order to
the reward, when they overcome. Their comfort in, that their Temptations
without their consent are not their sins, Heb. 2.18. 2 Cor. 12.5. Rev. 2.10.
Christ himself has been tempted; God and Christ compassionate them, God is
with them to help them; their temptations are limited; Satan's head-plot is
broken; Heb. 2.14.
their souls shall besaved, and their conquests rewarded. Their duty is to be
acquainted with the nature of temptations, 2 Cor. 2.11 Ephesians. 6.12. etc.
to watch and pray against them, to resist them, to put on and use their
spiritual armor, to live upon Christ by Faith, and to look and long for their
deliverance. Remember Math. 4. and discourses on Christ's Temptation. Bishop
Hall: Capell of Temptations: Downams Warfare: Gouge, Robinson, and Gurnals
Spiritual armor: Dr Owen of Temptation, and Bridges, Brooks, etc. Ball of
Faith, etc.

SECT. IX. Of Divine Desertions.
GOds people may be sometimes for a time and in part deserted, Psalm. 22.1. Is.
63.17. 2 Samuel 11. Ps. 51.
as to illuminations, influences, and comforts: they may not see their way, may
fall into sin, loose much grace, want comfort, Ps. 88.6.
be sorely tempted, Ps. 8.9.
and feel sensible impressions of Gods fatherly displeasure. This is sometimes
for the punishment of their sins, Ps. 7.7. Cant. 5. Cant. 3.
and sometimes for the trial of their graces; God has also therein a design
for his own glory and their good; in preventing and mortifying of sin,
provoking to duty, enriching their experience, and for the discovery of the
freedom of his grace, the worth of his love, and the necessity of his
presence, Psalm. 22.1. Jer. 31. Heb. 8. John. 10.
etc. Their comfort is, they are not alone, they are never totally nor finally
rejected, God is still their God in covenant, and Christ is their head in
union; and the Spirit their sanctifier, supporter, if not actually their
comforter in Communion; Cant. 5. beginning.
Christ leaves sweetness behind him, and though absent yet draws them toward
him, in good time will be found of them, and in Heaven at last abide forever
with them. Their duty is to shake off security, Cant. 5. throughout.
to enquire into the causes, to hear Christ's voice, to relish his sweetnesses,
to desire his favor, to follow after him in all good means, to speak well of
him, to cleave to their Choice, to take Gods way, and to wait Gods time for
their comfort and recovery; and when they find him to be more careful to
please him, Cant. 6.
and for ever to beware of wandering from God, parlying with Temptation,
Spiritual pride, and security under Gospel enjoyment. Read Symonds Deserted
souls case and Cure. Sibbes Souls conflict. Boltons Instructions: Rutherfords
Christ's Dying, etc. And for Church-desertions in the visible tokens of Gods
presence: Read Sermons on Luk 19.42. Rev. 2.4.5. Rev. 3.1, 6. John 12.35.36.
and Cant. 5.2 etc. The Epistles in the Revelation to the Churches of Asia:
Brinsleyes Watch, Burroughes on Hosea: Cripplegate Exercise. 26. and apply to
them the foregoing comforts and counsels.

SECT. X. Of Afflictions, and Trialls.
AFflictions and Troubles, Joh. 16.33
are the lot of Gods chosen: for correction or probation, or purification, or
testimony: Heb. 12.6.
or it may be altogether. Zach 13.9. etc. 1 Pet. 4.12.17. 1 Pet. 1.5 6. etc.
Rev. 2.10. Psalm. 42. Psalm. 102. Heb. 12.6.
They may be manifold great, lasting, and sometimes inward and outward both
together. Their Comfort is; They are from God, their God, their Father, in love
though with displeasure: their good is intended together with Gods glory; in
purging out sin, Is. 26.
trying and exercising their Grace, weaning them from the world, and conforming
them to Christ: 1 Pet. 4.13.
they have special promises; God orders them, Mal. 3.3. 2 Cor. 12.9. Romans 5.5.
1 Pet: 5.6.
proportions them to strength, gives sufficient grace, sheds abroad his love,
is present with them, will preserve them, deliver them and bring them home to
Glory, 1 Cor. 4. latter end, 1 Pet. 1.5, 6. Romans Lam. 3.39. Ps. 51.
8.17. Phil. 1.29. 2 These. 1.8. etc. Their duty is (if for sin) to enquire the
cause, to humble themselves, to justify God, to return to him, 1 Samuel 15.
to submit to his will, and to seek his favor, to mind their duty, and to live
by faith. And for trials, to expect them, prepare for them, and approve
themselves in them, giving glory to God by the exercise of grace, and
submission to his will. And in Testimonies to Truth; 1 Pet. 4.12. Cant. 8.
Matthew. 16.24. Heb. 12.2. 1 Pet. 4. ult. 2 Cor. 4. ult. 2 Cor. 5. be. Heb. 10.38
2 Pet. 1.1. etc. Prove. 142.
to strengthen their faith, to inflame their love, and to manifest their
obedience, to deny themselves, to take up the Cross, to look to Christ their
example, comfort, and strength, and to refer all to God, committing their
souls to him in well doing, and to live by faith, Heb. 11. Heb. 12.1. etc.
Read Cases, Correction, instruction: Burroughes Moses choice and self denial
and courage. Hughes dry rod. Strongs Submission to Gods will: Histories of the
Church.

In sufferings see 1. That you have a good cause, and suffer not as evil doers
in Church or state see 1 Pet. 2.20. 1 Pet. 4.15, 2. A good call, Math. 10. 3.
Exercise a good conscience, Mark 5.43. and 4. keep then a good courage, Math.
10.28.

SECT. XI. Of Spiritual Retirements.
REtirements are sometimes from necessity, through the providence of God, Cant.
2.14. Is. 26. ult.
the rage of Satan, and the malice of the World, Rev. 12.6, 14. and sometime
from choice, for privacy in duty, and freedom from distraction: Math. 6.5, 6.
Improve such for meditation, prayers, reading, and maintaining communion with
God. Leave the world behind you, desire God's presence, and believe his promise.

SECT. XII. Of Meditation.
MEditation is necessary, comfortable, but difficult. Take these Directions for
it.

1. Make conscience of the duty, Ps. 1. Ps. 119.
not only occasionally, but solemnly, and frequently. 2. Take the fit and
freest times for it. 3. Lay aside for that time worldly occasions and thoughts.
4. Set your self in God's presence. 5. Begin with Prayer to God for direction,
presence, and blessing. 6. Pitch your thoughts on some suitable and seasonable
heart-affecting subject: as the excellency and use of the Scriptures: the
Attributes of God: the state of Innocence, Sin, state of nature, covenant of
grace; Christ his Offices, excellencies etc. death, satisfaction, etc. the love
of God, the love of Christ, faith, and other particular graces etc. Meditate
often of the sinfulness of sin, the vanity of the creature, the love of God,
the excellency of Christ, death, the resurrection, judgment, heaven, and hel^
sometimes. When you would meditate on these, understand first the doctrine of
them, and what is considerable in them: for that purpose read in some
doctrinall book on such a subject: and after that, by meditation, consider and
work upon your hearts to affect them: without this help you will be able to do
little on most subjects. For subjects, and books on those subjects, Dr Wilkin's
Ecclesiastes, may direct you for this use, as others for another.

7. Observe, if you can, a good method: for which see directions in books. If
you cannot follow their methods, follow David's in the Psalms. Ps. 116.5. Ps. 42.
Sometimes let it be prayerwise, sometime by way of Soliloquie, or discourse
with your selves: or take some good bock, and work what you read upon your
heart, 'till you have discerned the truth, tasted the sweetness, and felt the
power of it. The brief Notes in these Sections are intended for your help on
those heads, and are left to your inlargements on purpose: or take the
Scriptures, and meditate on what you read. 8. Keep your hearts to the work,
quicken them when dull. 9. Intend heart-work especially in this exercise, the
quickening of grace, strengthening of faith, and stirring of affections. 10.
Close up with prayer, and as opportunity is afforded, solemn, and with respect
to the subject of your meditation. Read Bp Hall's directions for meditation,
and Baxter in his Everlasting Rest; and Whites, and Ambrose in his Middle
things.

SECT. XIII. Of Prayer.
I Need not set before you its necessity and excellenny; Romans 8.15, 16.
the spirit of Adoption will reach you to cry Abba Father. Gal. 4: 6.

1. 1 These. 5.17.
Be frequent in prayer, often in solemn, and even constantly in ejaculatory,
and occasional.

2. Be fervent and spiritual. Romans 8.26. Romans 15.30.

3. Be humble and lowly. Genesis 18.27. Ezr. 9.6

4. Believing. 5. Importunate. Luke 18.

More particularly. 1. Keep your hearts in a praying frame. Ephesians. 6.18. Ps. 5.3.
Math. 6.9.
2. Mind the occasions and opportunities. 3. Prepare your self to it by
meditation. 2 Samuel 7.27. 4. Take right apprehensions of God: as your father in
heaven, as a spirit, great and glorious, but your God and Father in Christ:
take up suitable apprehensions to your occasion, as God shall direct. 5. Humble
your souls in sense of sin to be confessed. 6. Affect your hearts with the
mercies to be desired. 7. Jacob. Hos. 12.3, 4.
Wrestle with God with Arguments proper. 8. Content not your self with the
bare performance, without affection of heart, and enjoyment of God. 9. Keep
close to the duty, as near as you can, without distraction. Math. 6.7. Eccl.
5.2. Romans 8.26. Phil. 4.6. Math. 6. Ephesians. 6.19.
10. Affect not words, nor length. 11. Join praises with prayers. 12. Be not
private spirited in prayer, but remember others, especially the Church of God.
13. Take delight in this duty. 14. rest not in prayer, but in Christ, Ephesians.
3.12. John 14.13
through whom present your person and prayers unto God, with faith. 15. Look
after your prayers, Ps. 5.3.
and God's answers to them.

Read Cobbet of Prayer Gee of Prayer. Ambrose his Directions ia his middle
things. T. Goodwins return of prayer. Ford of Adoption. Cripplegate exercise.
14.17.19.

SECT. XIV. Of Sanctification of the Lords day.
1 BE settled in the doctrine of the Morality of the Sabbath. 4th Comm,
For this purpose read Sermon Notes and books, especially Cawdry and Palmer.
Shepherd and Whites appendix to his directions for reading the Scripture.

2. Prepare for it, desiring the day, Exodus 20.
composing your worldly affairs, and laying them aside in the evening before,
set your heart in order toward a Sabbath, and desire God's presence and
blessing for the day approaching.

3. In the morning awake with God, proceed to private and family duties, be
more large and solemn in them then at other times, spend intervals in
meditation, holy conference, reading, and prayer.

4. Is. 2.3. Ps. 122.1. Ps. 100.
Hasten to public ordinances, lay aside prejudices, and take care to give God
your hearts. See Burroughes of Gospel worship, and other treatises of that
Nature.

5. Lev. 26.42
If you want public opportunity, enquire into the cause: if sin be in it,
humble your souls, justify God, and accept of the punishment of your sin, pray
for pardon, act repentance with faith in the blood of Christ: lament after the
Lord. 1 Samuel 3. Ps. 42.84.63.

6. Rev. 12.14. Ps. 42.
Make up your want in private worship

1. Begin with prayer, confession of sin, and supplication for a blessing, with
praise to God.

2. Read much of the Scripture, Psalms, Old and New Testament. Meditate upon
it, draw your observations, and work them on your hearts, observe Gods
teachings, and impart them to any with you.

3. Pour out your hearts more largely in prayer.

4 Take some good Sermon Notes, or some choice book, and spend a Sermon time in
it; and suppose you were hearing it in the public congregation.

5. Close up with prayer and praises, desiring a blessing.

In intervals of time take refreshments natural with spiritual affections,
thoughts, discourses.

Let the rest of the time be spent as in the morning, in meditation, reading,
Is. 56.6. Is. 58.13.
conference, and prayer.

In the afternoon, at the solemn time, do again as in the morning.

After that, as in the intervals, reflecting on what you read, observed, and
were taught of God that day, renew your family and your closet duties, as in
the morning; and be much in Thanksgiving. Let the day be improved for God, and
with him. Keep out the world. Get some special acquaintance with God, with
Christ, and Heaven. Do good to the souls and bodies of others, as you have
opportunity, especially in your family. Bless God much for Christ, and the
work of Redemption, and look and long for Heaven. See Goodwin of sanctifying
the Sabbath. Expos. or 4th Comm. Shepherd, etc.

SECT. XV. Of Fasting and Humiliation.
1. AS necessity requires, and opportunity is offered, be often in the duty of
self-examination, soul-humiliation, with fasting and prayer.

2. Improve public days for that purpose.

3. Keep some private in your family, and in your Closet, because of family and
personal necessities. Zach 12.12.

And for direction in it, (having considered your necessities, set a fit and
free time apart, put your heart into a posture, and sought God's presence,) set
about the work.

1. Jach. 12.12. Dan. 9. Lam. 3.39.
Let your private and family duties, of daily course look toward it.

2. Sit down and examine your hearts and lives, and find out your special sins
and transgressions in every age, in every relation, place, etc.

3. Dan. 9.
Having found them out, set them home upon your hearts, in the consideration of
their nature, number, and aggravations.

4. Draw up against your selves the sentence of the law of God. Gal. 3.10.


5. 1 John 1.9.
Put your selves into the presence of God, and make large free and ingenuous
confessions of sins, both of nature and life. Ps. 51.17.


6. Get your hearts humbled under them in God's sight, and desire him to work
you to it.

7. Dan. 9.7, 11.
Acknowledge your deserts of death and damnation, and of your particular
affliction.

8. 2 Cor. 7.11
Work your hearts to hatred and abhorrency of your sin, and express it
sincerely.

9. Look upon God in Christ as gracious, Exodus 34.6
and merciful, willing to pardon sin.

10. Dan. 9.19.
Plead hard for pardon in the blood of Christ.

11. Present Christ Jesus as your sacrifice, Levit. Romans 3.25.
once offered upon the cross, ever presented in Heaven; let faith apprehend
it, apply it, and present it unto God.

12. Ps. 51.7.
Beg God's cleansing and sanctifying grace.

13. Ps. 51.13
Renew your covenant for better obedience in the blood of Christ, with a
sincere heart, and desire God's acceptance and grace.

14. Pray for the removal of the judgment, with submission to Gods will: Dan.
9.16.
effectually pray for the sanctification of it, and for support under it, with
patience to bear it: pray then too for the blessings to be desired, as it may
be for your good and God's glory.

15. Remember then your family relations, friends, those that have desired your
prayers; the needy, sad, tempted, and afflicted servants of Christ.

16. Ps. 51.18. Dan. 9. Ezekiel. 9.
Enlarge in your prayers for the whole Church, for the Land, King, Magistrate,
Ministers, and People. Confess National sins, considering your share in them,
mourn for them, strive with God for mercy, etc. wrestling with God in Christ.

17. Toward the close, confess your failings in the present duty, John 14.13,
14.
beg acceptance through Christ, and conclude with blessings. If it may be,
continue in this order, while strength lasts, but be sincere, fervent, and
affectionate in all.

18. Then read some portion of Scripture to the purpose, Ezra.
or as God shall direct, spend some considerable time in so doing, with
reflection and meditation upon what you have read.

19. Proceed again to Prayer, bewailing your defects in the duty of the day;
looking over your confessions, and making them up in renewed acknowledgments.
The like in the other parts of the duty. Ex. 33.4, 5, 6. Jona 3.6. Joel 2.15,
16.


20. Abstain from ornaments, accomodations, and refreshments, as long as you
are able, to help you in Humiliation, or to express it, and to quicken you to
prayer.

21. Is. 58.7, 10
In the close devote your selves to God; and give something, as you are able,
to the poor.

22. Be often in such duties, Dan. 10.2, 3.
as occasion requires, and while God is afflicting you or his people, walk
humbly, and lay aside your ornaments, and abate your refreshments, and be much
in prayer.

SECT. XVI. Of Spiritual feasting on Christ.
CHrist Jesus his body broken, and his blood shed, affords spiritual
nourishment, with plenty, life, and sweetness to the soul, that is interested
in him, Joh. 6.51, to 63.
and lives upon him. There is a Spiritual and a Sacramental feeding on
Christ. For the Spiritual, see Joh 6.54. for the Sacramental, see 1 Cor.
11.23.

1. As often as you can, receive and improve the Sacrament. There are many good
and Books to direct: as, Roberts, Dike, Bolton, Pemble, Bradshaw, etc.

2. When you cannot Sacramentally, see that spiritually you feed on this body
and blood of Christ. For Directions take these. 1. Romans 3.2, 3.
Consider your necessities, sins, wants, and weaknesses, to sharpen Hunger and
Thirst for Christ. Joh. 17.3.
2. Call forth at solemn times for that purpose your know ledge of Christ,
especially in his death; Zach. 12.10. Is. 53. tot. Ps. 22. Math. 27.
1 Cor. 2.3. 3. Let ^aith set a dying Christ before you in your thoughts and
meditations, with your sins, and God's wrath upon him.

4. Put in practice by godly sorrow what is set before you, Zach. 12.10
Zach. 12. while you look on him whom you have pierced: let sin then appear
exceeding sinful, because besmeared with the blood of Christ.

5. Apprehend and apply by faith the love of God, and the love of Christ in
dying for you. Gal. 2.20.
Rom 5.6, Gal. 2.2. and John 3.16. and 1 John 3.16.

6. Look upon Christ in dying as your surety, Heb. 7.22. Ephesians. 5.2.
and as your sacrifice in your name and steed. Romans 6:

7. Gal. 3.13. Romans 3.25. Dan. 9.24.
Look on Christ in his death as answering the Law, satisfying justice, taking
away sin, bringing in everlasting righteousness, establishing the covenant of
Grace, and making a purchase of grace and glory, Heb. 9.15. Ephesians. 1.14. Romans 6.6.
giving a deadly stroke to sin, and breaking the Serpent's head etc. Heb. 2.14.

8. Draw by faith all manner of virtues from him, to mortify sin, to quicken
grace, to strengthen faith, and refresh your souls.

9. Ephesians. 1.3, 4.
Be much in thansgiving to God for his Son, and adore the Love.

10. 2 Cor. 5.14.
Improve all to Argument against corruption, temptation, and the world. See
Romans 6.3. Titus 2.14. 2 Cor. 15.14.

11. 1 Cor. 6.20
Give up your selves again in an everlasting Covenant to be the Lords, to live
to him, and if need be to die for him.

12. Depend upon the satisfaction of Christ, Heb. 9. ult.
and expect the virtues of his Death, till he come again in glory, and take you
up with himself, that you may be for ever with him. Long for his immediatee
presence, and hasten to it. See Bp Tailor, Rev. 22.20
latter end of his treatise on the Sacrament.

SECT. XVII. Of reading the Scriptures.
1. SEttle your faith in the Divinity, 2 Pet. 1.19
Authority, and Verity of the Scriptures. And for that consider 1. that God is:
2. that God in his name, 2 Timothy 3.16. Joh. 1.1. etc
nature, and will cannot be known, without revelation of himself: 3. such is
his goodness (not to say his justice) that he will not expect that we should
know him, believe in him, worship and serve him, not having given the world a
sufficient discovery of himself. 4. there is no other, Act. 4.12.
but this of the Scriptures, sufficient for that purpose. Heb. 1.1. 2 Timothy
3.15, 16, 17.
5. This has been delivered from God, from time to time: and 6. is a
sufficient discovery of God, and of his will. 1. The Scriptures affirm it. 2.
Nothing rational can be objected against it. 3. The Contents prove it, it
carries selfe-evidence with it, and all divine characters necessary to it: Heb.
2.4.
4. It has been sealed from heaven by a continued series of Providence; by
miracles, by the powers of the Holy Ghost upon the first writers and
publishers, Heb. 4.12.
by spiritual and divine operations on Hearers, some to Conversion and
Consolation, on others to Conviction and Confusion. 5. It has been confirmed
and sealed by the blood of Christ and many thousand Martyrs. Heb. 9.15.
6. It is wonderfully preserved in the world; 1 Timothy 3.15
and handed in the Church from one generation to another, and is still the
same, notwithstanding all attempts to deface it. 7. 1 John 5.10
Every true Believer has the witness to it within himself, lives upon it,
Rev. 12.11
and would dye many a death rather then deny it, loose it, or the comforts of
it.

2. Be conversant with it, Psalm. 1.1, 2.
and much in reading it, hearing it, and meditating upon it. Ioh. 5.45. Ps. 1.
and 19. and 119. 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Timothy 3.15. Rev. 1.4. etc: with faith, love,
humility, diligence, obedience, constancy.

3. Read sometime occasionally, Act. 8.28, 29.
for your instruction and consolation, as you shall be guided to it by God's
spirit and providence, and your best understanding: but often solemnly, have
your set times for it in your retirements, besides the family and public
opportunities: sit close at it, be not long absent from it. Read for spiritual
refreshment as God shall direct you: be much acquainted with the Psalms, Esaias,
the N: Test: Read for particular purposes on special places: Read for the
general knowledge of the Scripture, the Bible in order; and for quantity at a
time, as your opportunity will give leave.

4. when you are to read solemnly, 1 Pet. 2.1.
lay aside sinful lust, and worldly thoughts, quicken your affections to the
duty, set your self in Gods presence, beg his spirit, take the Book in hand
with reverence, read with faith, fear, diligence, and understanding: and that
you may the better understand it, Act. 8.30, 31.
use such helps as God has afforded. 1 Consider the connection and scope,
comparing it with other places: 2. Refer it to an enquiry, when you meet with a
good Annotator, or an able Minister: 3. Pass on to what you may more easily
understand, and remember, that places concerning salvation, and the necessaries
to it for says and life, are generally plain, and easy to be understood. What
you understand, consider, Ps. 119.
that it may affect your heart, and take place in your memory, and give you
such obvious observations, as it naturally affords for instruction or
consolation: take special notice of what may increase your spiritual
knowledge, rebuke your corruption, direct and quicken you to duty, answer
temptations, and refresh your souls: and more especially, of what the spirit
of God in reading sets home upon your hearts, with evidence and power. If you
would not willingly loose the observations, set a note upon the place, and if
need be refer it to your Note-book for that purpose. When you have done,
reflect upon the whole by meditation, and commend it to God in prayer, bringing
forth the fruits of it, in an holy life and conversation.

Helps to the understanding of the Scriptures may be such as these. 1. Read
books directing you about the Scriptures, as Ambrose Middle things. Whites
Directions for Reading. Roberts Key to the Bible.

2. When you meet with a difficult place, Note it, refer it for an enquiry
when you meet with an able Minister, or a good Expositor.

3. Have some choice Annotations on the whole Bible, and on particular books:
if the English Annotations in Folio be costly, Get Bishop Halls Paraphrase, or
Deodates Annotations: For the particular books; there are several, as Caryll
on Jobe. Burroughes on Hosea. Greenhill on some part of Ezekiel. Hutchenson on
the lesser Prophets. Dickson on the Psalms. 1. Dixon on Matthew and Hebrews,
and all the Epistles. Hutchenson on St John's Gospel. Manton on James and Jude.
Jenkins on Jude. Sclater on Thessalonians. Baine on Ephesians. Bifield on
Collossions, etc. Ainsworth on Pentatench, Psalms, and Canticles, with many
others: if you cannot get all, get such as you can.

4. Acquaint your selves with the General Contents of the several books. In
Scritpure the Five Books of Moses, show the Creation of the World, and the
foundation of the Church; at length settling it on Abraham's family, with Gods
proceeding with them in Egypt, and the wilderness, under the conduct of Moses,
etc. Joshua, and other Historical Books show the progress of God and his
providence toward the Church, in several ways, and persons, and times. The
Psalms are full of spiritual Meditations: Proverbs full of instructions for
Holy Wisdom. Ecclesiastes shows the vanity of the creature. Canticles
communion between Christ and his Church, and that as some think Prophetically.
The Prophets contain not only Prophecies, that concerned the Jews and other
Nations, but many promises of Christ and Grace, etc. The Evangelists give you
the History of Christ his person, doctrine, miracles, life, death, resurrection
and ascension. The Acts show the foundations of the Christian Church, among
Jews and Gentiles. The Epistles are for the edification of those Churches, and
our instruction, occasioned mostly by Heresies and persecutions. The
Revelations, Prophetically set forth the state of the world in general, and
the Church in special, from St John's days till the end of the World.

Be most conversant in plain and practical Scripturess neglect not others
Doctrinall, or Historical. For the prophetical, especially Daniell, and the
Revelations, they are beyond the reach of famous Divines, much more common
Christians: Providence is the best expositor on Prophecies: and to a good
understanding in them, there needs much knowledge of History and Chronology, yea
the most profound and abstrusest parts of learning: only somethings in general
may be easily understood, as that such and such places concern the description
and condition of the Church, in her pure or degenerate, in her prosperous or
suffering condition; and such and such the enemies of God and of his people:
and so may be read with profit. In sum, believe the truth of the Scripture,
Adore the Majesty of God in them, acquaint your selves with their matter, make
them the ground of your faith, and the rule of your life and practice, bless
God for them, and wait till Heaven give an absolute and perfect understanding
of the whole.

SECT. XVIII. Of Reading good Books.
IT has been Gods wonderful care of his people to provide, as the Scriptures,
so good books for them; there are many such, both doctrinall and practical.
Get and read the best, but in a good method, and with diligence. 1. For Books
Scripturall: they are such as these. 1. Expositors as before: Sermons, of them
make choice. Concordances: Newmans and Cottons are large but useful, Downhams
are brief, and it may be may serve a private Christian. A Book of Scripture
references perhaps in English may be wanting, the Catechism in quarto with the
Scripture references may be a present supply till a larger may be had.
Directive, for reading of the Scriptures you had in the former Section, as
Ambrose and Bifield, etc. And for the reading of expositors; some, as the
brief Annotations must be consulted on difficulties, others, as larger
expositors may be read in order throughout, as other choice books.

Doctrinall, Bishop Ushers Body of Divinity. Downhams sum. Leighs Body of
Divinity. The morning exercise at Giles, and the Assemblies larg Catechismes
with other Catechismes, will be a good introduction, to them you may refer
your other reading. From some good Catechism understand the principles of
Religion, and then having gotten a knowledge of the heads in Divinity, proceed
to other books: observing the point of doctrine, with its proof from
Scripture, and sound reason, It Is several branches for Amplification, and it is
uses in Application. For sentences and illustrations, you may look upon them as
profitable or pleasant, but not so necessary.

For Controversall you need not trouble your self with most of that nature:
get advice for such from an able minister. For practical, there are many on
particular subjects: I have referred you to not a few. Others are on mixed
subjects: get and read the best. Such as these I would commend, besides others
you may meet with, and at present I may let slip. Shepherds sound convert and
believer, and others of his. Hookers works. Baxters, Gurnhalls, Loves, Preston,
Sibbes, Perkins, Downham, Harris, Tomas Goodwins Works, Reynolds, Symonds,
Mor^i Exercises both Ball. Read well Ambro^^ looking unto Jesus, etc.

In reading practical books, observe these directions. 1. Acquaint your self
with (...) best books. 2. With the general conte^ of the book. 3. Then read it
over in ^^der; for time, as opportunity gives lea^^ 4. Observe the principal
heads more (...) enlargements. 5. Incorproate the ma^^ter into your
understanding. And 6, the^^ get it wrought into your hearts, and upon your
affections by meditation. 7. take special notice of what particularly
concerns you, especially what is set home upon your hearts by the spirit of
God in your reading, either by way of conviction, instruction, or consolation.
8. make an end with one good book before you begin with another in your
ordinary course. Let your books be few, choice, sufficient and read them well.
Get a well chosen and composed closet of books: A fair Bible, Deodates
Annotations: a Concordanc^^ Ushers Body of Divinity: and for practic^^^ Books,
as you can procure them.

FINIS.

