LYCIDUS: OR THE Lover in Fashion. Being an Account from LYCIDVS to LYSANDER,
Of his Voyage from the ISLAND of LOVE.

From the French.

By the same AUTHOR Of the Voyage to the Isle of LOVE.

Together with a MISCELLANY OF New Poems.

By Several HANDS.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Knight, and Francis Saunders, at the Blew Anchor in
the Lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1688.

TO THE Earl of Melford, etc. KNIGHT Of the most Noble Order OF THE THISTLE.
My LORD,
THis Epistle Dedicatory which humbly lays this Little Volume at your Lordships
feet, and begs a Protection there, is rather an Address than a Dedication; to
which a great many hands have subscribed, it Presenting your Lordship a Garland
whose Flowers are culled by several Judgments in which I claim the least part;
whose sole Ambition is this way to congratulate your Lordships new Addition of
Honor, that of the Most Noble Order of the Thistle, an Honor which preced's
that of the Garter, having been supported by a long Race of of Kings, and only
fell with the most Illustrious of Queens, whose m^mory (which ought to be
Established, in all hearts can not be better preserved,) than by reviving this
so Ancient Order; well has His Majesty chosen its Noble Champions, among whom
none merits more the Glory of that Royal Favor than your Lordship: whose
Loyalty to His Sacred Person and interest through all the adversities of Fate,
has begot you so perfect a veneration in all hearts, and is so peculiarly the
Innate virtue of your Great mind; a virtue not shown by unreasonable fits when
it shall serve an end, (a false Bravery for a while when least needful, and
thrown off when put to useful Trial; like those who weighing Advantages by
Probabilities only, and fancying the future to out-poyse the present, cast
there their Anchor of Hope,) but a virtue built on so sure and steady Basis's
of Honor, as nothing can move or shake; the Royal Interest being so greatly
indeed the Property of Nobility, and so much even above life and Fortune:
Especially when to support a Monarch so truly just, so wise and great; a
Monarch whom God Almighty Grant long to Reign over Us, and still to be served
by men of Principles so truly Brave, as those that shine in your Lordship.

Pardon, my Lord, this Digression and the meanness of this Present, which to a
Person of your Lordships great and weighty Employments in the world may seem
Improper, if I did not know that the most Glorious of Statesmen must sometimes
unbend from Great Affairs, and seek a diversion in trivial Entertainments:
Though Poetry will Iustle for the Preheminency of all others, and I know is not
the least in the Esteem of your Lordship, who is so admirable a Judge of it, if
any thing here may be found worthy the Patronage it Implores, 'twill be a
sufficient Honor to,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, most obliged, and obedient Servant, A.
BEHN.

To Mrs. B. on her Poems.
HAil, Beauteous Prophetess, in whom alone,
Of all your fex Heavens masterpiece is shown.
For wondrous skill it argues, wondrous care,
Where two such Stars in firm conjunction are.
A Brain so Glorious, and a Face so fair.
Two Goddesses in your composure joined.
Nothing but Goddess could, you're so refined,
Bright Venus Body gave, Minerva Mind.
How soft and fine your manly numbers flow,
Soft as your Lips, and smooth as is your brow.
Gentle as Air, bright as the Noon-days Sky,
Clear as your skin, and charming as your Eye.
No craggy Precipice the Prospect spoils,
The Eye no tedious barren plain beguiles.
But, like Thessalian Feilds your Volumes are,
Rapture and charms over all the soil appear,
Astrea and her verse are Tempe every where.
Ah, more than Woman! more than man she is,
As Phoebus bright; she is too, as Phoebus wise.
The Muses to our sex perverse and coy
Astrea does familiarly enjoy.
She does their veiled Glorys understand,
And what we court with pain, with ease command.
Their charming secrets they expanded lay,
Reserved to us, to her they all display.
Upon her Pen await those learned Nine.
She never but like the Phosph'rus draws a line,
As soon as touched her subjects clearly shine.
The femal Laurels were obscured till now,
And they deserved the Shades in which they grew:
But Daphne at your call return's her flight,
Looks boldly up and dares the God of light.
If we Orinda to your works compare,
They uncouth, like her countries soil, appear,
Mean as its Pesants, as its Mountains bare,
Sappho tastes strongly of the sex, is weak and poor
At second hand she russet Laurels wore,
Yours are your own, a rich and verdant store.
If Loves the Theme, you outdo Ovids Art,
Loves God himself cannot subtiller skill impart.
Softer than's plumes, more piercing than his Dart.
If Pastoral be her Song, she glads the Swains
With Livelier notes, with spritelier smiles the plains.
More gayly than the Springs she decks the Bowrs
And breaths a second May to Fields and Flowrs.
If e're the golden Age again return
And flash in shining Beams from's Iron Urn,
That Age not as it was before shall be,
But as the Idea is refined by thee.
That seems the common; thines the Elixir, Gold,
So pure is thine, and so allayed the old.
Happy, ye Bards, by fair Astrea praised,
If you are alive, to brighter life you're raised;
For cherisht by her Beams you will loft yer grow,
You must your former learned selves outdo,
Tho you would the parts of Thirsts and of Strephon too.
Hail, mighty Prophetess! by whom we see
Omnipotence almost in Poetry:
Your flame can give to Graves Promethean fire,
And Greenhills clay with living paint inspire;
For like some Mystic wand with awful Eyes
You wave your Pen, and lo the dead Arise.
Kendrick.
Advertisement TO THE READER.
WHereas Mr. Higden, at the end of his Translation of the Tenth Satyr of
Juvenal, has Printed a paper of Verses, entitled Cato's Answer to Labienus
etc. without the Author's consent or knowledge; and either he or the Printer
has so altered 'em, that the Author cannot own 'em for his: This is to let the
World know, that that Copy so Printed by Mr. Higden, is false almost in every
line, and that here is in this Miscellany a true Copy of the same Verses
printed with the Author's consent, from the Original paper writ in his own
hand, and corrected by him at the Press.

Licensed,

May 13. 1687. R. L. S.

LYCIDUS: OR, THE Lover in Fashion, etc.
I Have received your melancholy Epistle, with the Account of your Voyage to
the Island of Love; of your Adventures there, and the Relation of the death of
your Aminta: At which you shall forgive me if I tell you I am neither surprised
nor grieved, but hope to see you the next Campaign, as absolutely reduced to
reason as myself. When Love, that has so long deprived you of Glory, shall give
you no more Sighs but at the short remembrances of past Pleasures; and that
after you have heard my Account of the Voyage I made to the same place, with my
more lucky one back again, (for I, since I saw you, have been an Adventurer)
you will by my Example become of my Opinion, (notwithstanding your dismal Tales
of Death and the eternal Shades,) which is, that if there be nothing that will
lay me in my Tomb till Love brings me thither, I shall live to Eternity.

I must confess it is a great Inducement to Love, and a happy Advance to an
Amor, to be handsome, finely shaped, and to have a great deal of Wit; these are
Charms that subdue the Hearts of all the Fair: And one sees but very few
Ladies, that can resist these good Qualities, especially in an Age so gallant
as ours, yet all this is nothing if Fortune do not smile: And I have seen a Man
handsome, well shaped, and of a great deal of Wit, with the advantage of a
thousand happy Adventures, yet finds himself in the end, fitter for an Hospital
than the Elevation of Fortune: And the Women are not contented we should give
them as much Love as they give us, (which is but reasonable,) but they would
compel us all to Present and Treat 'em lavishly, till a Man has consumed both
Estate and Body in their Service. How many do we see, that are wretched
Examples of this Truth, and who have nothing of all they enjoyed remaining with
'em, but a poor Idaea of past Pleasures, when rather the Injury the Jilt has
done 'em, ought to be eternally present with 'em. Heaven keep me from being a
Woman's Property. There are Cullies enough besides you or I, Lysander.

One would think now, That I, who can talk thus Learnedly and Gravely, had
never been any of the number of those wretched, whining, sighing, dying Fops, I
speak of, never been jilted and cozened of both my Heart and Reason; but let me
tell those that think so, they are mistaken, and that all this Wisdom and
Discretion, I now seem replenished with, I have as dearly bought as any keeping
Fool of 'em all. I was ly'd and flattered into Wit, jilted and cozened into
Prudence, and, by ten thousand broken Vows and perjured Oaths, reduced to Sense
again; and can laugh at all my past Follies now.

After I have told you this, you may guess at a great part of my Story; which,
in short, is this: I would needs make a Voyage, as you did, to this fortunate
Isle, and accompanied with abundance of young Heirs, Cadets, Coxcombs, Wits,
Blockheads, and Politicians, with a whole Cargo of Cullies all, nameless and
numberless we Landed on the Enchanted Ground; the first I saw, and liked, was
charming Silvia; you believe I thought her fair as Angels; young, as the
Spring, and sweet as all the Flowers the blooming Fields produce; that when she
blushed, the Ruddy Morning opened, the Rose-buds blew, and all the Pinks and
Dazies spread; that when she sighed or breathed, Arabia's Spices, driven by
gentle Winds, perfumed all around; that when she looked on me, all Heaven was
opened in her Azure Eyes, from whence Love shot a thousand pointed Darts, and
wounded me all over; that when she spoke, the Music of the Spheres, all that
was ravishing in Harmony, blessed the Adoring Listener; that when she walked,
Venus in the Myrtle Grove when she advanced to meet her loved Adonis, assuming
all the Grace young Loves could give, had not so much of Majesty as Silvia: In
fine, she did deserve, and I compared her to all the Fopperies, the Suns, the
Stars, the Coral, and the Pearl, the Roses and Lillies, Angels Spheres, and
Goddesses, fond Lovers dress their Idols in. For she was all, fancy and fine
imagination could adorn her with, at least, the gazing Puppy thought so. 'Twas
such I saw and loved; but knowing I did Adore, I made my humble Court, and she,
by all my trembling, sighings, pantings, the going and returning of my Blood,
found all my Weakness and her own Power; and using all the Arts of her Sex,
both to engage and secure me, played all the Woman over: She would be scornful
and kind by turns, as she saw convenient, This to check my Presumption and too
easy hope; That to preserve me from the brink of despair. Thus was I tossed in
the Blanket of Love, sometimes up, and sometimes down, as her Wit and Humor was
in or out of tune, all which I watched, and waited like a Dog, that still the
oftener kicked would fawn the more.

Oh, it is an excellent Art this managing of a Coxcomb, the Serpent first taught
it our Grandam Eve; and Adam was the first Cully: E're since they have kept
their Empire over Men, and we have, e're since, been Slaves. But I, the most
submissive of the whole Creation, was long in gaining Grace; she used me as she
meant to keep me, Fool enough for her Purpose. She saw me young enough to do
her Service, handsome enough to do her Credit, and Fortune enough to please her
Vanity and Interest: She therefore suffered me to Love, and Bow among the
Crowd, and fill her Train. She gave me hope enough to secure me 100, but gave
me nothing else, till she saw me languish to that degree, she feared, to lose
the Glory of my Services, by my death; only this Pleasure kept me alive, to see
her treat all my Rivals with the greatest Rigor imaginable, and to me all
sweetness, exposing their feblesses; and having taken Notice of my
Languishment, she suffered me Freedoms that wholely Ravished me, and gave me
hopes I should not be long a dying for all she could give.

But, since I have a great deal to say of my Adventures in passing out of this
Island of Love: I will be as brief as I can in what arrived to me on the Place;
and tell you, That after Ten thousand Vows of eternal Love on both sides, I had
the Joy, not only to be believed and loved, but to have her put herself into my
Possession, far from all my Rivals: Where, for some time I lived with this
charming Maid, in all the Raptures of Pleasure, Youth, Beauty, and Love could
create. Eternally we loved, and lived together, no day nor night separated us,
no Frowns interrupted our Smiles, no Clouds our Sunshine; the Island was all
perpetual Spring, still flowery and green, in Bowers, in Shades, by purling
Springs and Fountains, we past our hours, unwearied and uninterrupted. I cannot
express to you the happy Life I led, during this blessed Tranquillity of Love,
while Silvia still was pleased, and still was gay. We walked all day together
in the Groves, and entertained ourselves with a thousand Stories of Love; we
laughed at the foolish World, who could not make their Felicity with out Crowds
and Noise: We pitied Kings in Courts in this Retirement, so well we liked our
Solitude; till on a day, (blessed be that joyful day, though then 'twas most
a-curst,) I say upon that day, I know not by what accident I was parted from my
Charmer, and left her all alone, but in my absence, there incountred her a
Woman extremely ugly, and who was however very nice and peevish, inconstant in
her temper, and no one place could continue her: The finest things in the World
were troublesome to her, and she was Shagreen at every thing; her Name is
Indifference; she is a Person of very great Power in this Island, (though
possibly you never incountred her there,) and those that follow her, depart
from the Isle of Love without any great pains. She brought Silvia to the Lake
of Disgust, whether, in persuing her (at my return,) I found her, ready to take
Boat to have past quite away, and where there are but too many to transport
those Passengers, who follow Indifference over the Lake of Disgust. I saw this
disagreeable Creature too, but she appeared too ugly for me to approach her,
but forcing Silvia back, I returned again to the Palace of True Pleasure, where
some days after there arrived to me a Misfortune, of which, I believed I should
never have seen an end. I found Silvia environed round with new Lovers, still
adoring and pleasing her a thousand ways, and though none of 'em were so rich,
so young, or so handsome as I, she nevertheless failed not to treat 'em with all
the Smiles and Caresses 'twas possible to imagine; when I complained of this,
she would satisfy my fears with so many Vows and Imprecations, that I would
believe her, and think myself unreasonable, but when she would be absent whole
days, in an hundred places, she would find such probable Excuse, and lie with
such a Grace, no mortal could have accused her, so that all the whole Island
took notice that I was a bassled Cuckold, before I could believe she would
deceive me, so heartily she damned herself: Through all the Groves I was the
pointed Coxcomb, laughed at aloud, and knew not where the jest lay; but thought
myself as secure in the Innocence of my deceiving fair One, as the first hour I
charmed her, and like a keeping Cully, lavished out my Fortune, my plenteous
Fortune, to make her fine to Cuckold me. 'Sdeath! how I scorn the Follies of my
Dotage; and am resolved to pursue Love for the future, in such a manner as it
shall never cost me a Sigh: This shall be my method.

A Constancy in Love I Will prise,
And be to Beauty true:
And dote on all the lovely Eyes,
That are but fair and new.
On Cloris Charms to day I Will feed,
To morrow Daphne move;
For bright Lucinda next I Will bleed,
And still be true to Love.
But Glory only and Renown
My serious hours shall charm;
My Nobler Minutes those shall Crown,
My looser hours, my Flame.
All the Fatigues of Love I Will hate,
And Phillis's new Charms
That hopeless Fire shall dissipate,
My Heart for Cloe warms.
The easy Nymph I once enjoyed
Neglected now shall pass,
Possession, that has Love destroyed
Shall make me pitiless.
In vain she now attracts and mourns,
Her moving Power is gone,
Too late (when once enjoyed,) she burns,
And yiedling; is undone.
My Friend, the little charming Boy
Conforms to my desires,
And it is but to augment my Joy
He pains me with his Fires;
All that is in happy Love I Will taste,
And rifle all his store,
And for one Joy, that will not last,
He brings a thousand more.
Perhaps, my Friend, at this Account of my Humor you may smile, but with a
reasonable consideration you will commend it, at least, though you are not so
wise as to pursue my Dictates. Yet I know you will be diverted with my
Adventures; though there be no love in 'em that can resemble 'em to yours. Take
then the History of my Heart, which I assure you, boasts itself of the
Conquests it has made.

A thousand Martyrs I have made,
All sacrificed to my desire:
A thousand Beauties have betrayed,
That languish in resistless Fire.
The untamed Heart to hand I brought,
And fixed the wild and wandering Thought.
I never vowed nor sighed in vain
But both, tho false, were well received.
The Fair are pleased to give us pain,
And what they wish is soon believed.
And tho I talked of Wounds and Smart,
Loves Pleasures only touched my Heart.
Alone the Glory and the Spoil
I always Laughing bore away;
The Triumphs, without Pain or Toil,
Without the Hell, the Heaven of Joy.
And while I thus at random rove
Despise the Fools that whine for Love.
I was a great while, (like you,) before I forgot the remembrance of my first
Languishments, and I almost thought, (by an excess of Melancholy,) that the end
of my Misfortunes were with my Life at hand: Yet still like a fond Slave,
willing to drag my Fetters on, I hoped she would find Arguments to convince me
she was not false; and in that Humor, feared only I should not be handsomely and
neatly jilted. Could she but have dissembled well, I had been still her Cully.
Could she have played her Game with discretion, but, vain of her Conquest, she
boasted it to all the World, and I alone was the kind keeping Blockhead, to
whom 'twas unperceived, so well she swore me into belief of her Truth to me.
Till one day, lying under a solitary Shade, with my sad Thoughts fixed on my
declining Happiness, and almost drowned in Tears, I saw a Woman dressed in
glorious Garments, all loose and flowing with the wind, scouring the Fields and
Groves with such a pace, as Venus, when she heard her loved Youth was slain,
hasted to behold her ruin. She past me, as I lay, with an unexpressable
swiftness, and spoke as she run, with a loud Voice. At her first approach, I
felt a strange trembling at my Heart without knowing the reason, and found at
last this Woman was Fame. Yet I was not able to tell from whence proceeded my
Inquietude. When her Words made me but too well understand the Cause: The fatal
Subject of what she cried, in passing by me, were these;

Poor Lycidus for sharne arise,
And wipe Loves Errors from thy Eyes;
Shake off the God that holds thy Heart;
Since Silvia for another burns,
And all thy past Indurement scorns
While thou the Cully art.
I believed, as she spoke, that I had ill understood her, but she repeated it
so often, that I no longer doubted my wretchedness. I leave you, who so well
can guess, to imagine, what Complaints I made, filling the Grove, where I was
laid, with my pitious Cries; sometimes I rose and raved, and railed on Love, and
reproached the fair Fugitive. But the tender God was still pleading in my
Heart, and made me ever end my noisy Griefs in Sighs and silent Tears. A
thousand Thoughts of revenge I entertained against this happy Rival, and the
charming ingrate: But those Thoughts, like my Rage, would also end in soft
reproaching murmurs and regret only. And I would sometimes argue with Love in
this manner.

Ah, cruel Love! when will thy Torments cease?
And when shall I have leave to dye in Peace?
And why, too charming and too cruel Maid,
Cou'd'st thou not yet thy fleeting Heart have stayed?
And by degrees thy fickle Humor shown,
By turns the Enemy and Friend put on:
Have used my Heart a little to thy scorn,
The loss at least might have been easier born.
With feigned Vows, (that poor Expense of Breath,)
Alas thou might have soothed me to my death.
Thy Coldness, and thy visible decays
In time had put a period to my days.
And laid me quietly into my Tomb,
Before thy proof of Perjuries had come.
You might have waited yet a little space
And saved mine, and thy, Honor this disgrace;
Alas I languish'd and declined apace.
I loved my Life too eagerly away
To have disturbed thee with too long a stay.
Ah! could you not my dying Heart have fed
With some small Cordial Food, till I was dead?
Then uncontrolled, and unreproach'd your Charms
Might have been rendered to my Rival's Arms.
Then all my right to him you might impart,
And Triumphed over a true and broken Heart.
Though I complained thus for a good while, ^ was not without some secret hope,
that what I had heard was not true; nor would I be persuaded to undeceive
myself of that hope which was so dear and precious to me. I was not willing to
be convinced I was entirely miserable, out of too great a fear to find it true;
and there were some Moments in which I believed Fame might falsely accuse
Silvia, and it did not seem reasonable to me, that, after all the Vows and
Oaths she had made, she should so easily betray 'em, and forgetting my
Services, receive those of another, less capable of rendering them to her
advantage. Sometimes I would excuse her ungratitude with a thousand things that
seemed reasonable, but still that was but to make me more sensible of my
disgrace; and then I would accuse myself of a thousand weaknesses below the
Character of a Man; I would even despise and loath my own easiness, and resolve
to be no longer a Mark-out-fool for all the Rhiming Wits of the Island to aim
their Dogrel at. And grown, as I imagined, brave at this thought, I resolved
first to be fully convinced of the persidy of my Mistress, and then to rent my
Heart from the attachment that held it.

You know, that from the Desert of Remembrance, one does, with great facility,
look over all the Island of Love. I was resolved to go thither one day; and
where indeed I could survey all things that past, in the Groves, the Bowers, by
Rivers, or Fountains, or whatever other place, remote or obscure 'twas from
thence, that one day I saw the faithless Silvia, in the Palace of True
Pleasure, in the very Bower of Bliss with one of my Rivals, but most intimate
Friend.

'Twas there, I saw my Rival take
Pleasures, he knew how to make;
There he took, and there was given,
All the Joys that Rival Heaven;
Kneeling at her Feet he lay,
And in transports died away:
Where the faithless suffered too
All the amorous Youth could do.
The Ardour of his fierce desire
Set his Face and Eyes on fire.
All their Language was the Blisses
Of Ten thousand eager Kisses.
While his ravished Neck she twined
And to his Kisses, Kisses joined.
Till, both inflamed, she yielded so
She suffered all the Youth could do.
In fine, 'twas there I saw that I must lose the day. And I saw in this Lover
Ten thousand Charms of Youth and Beauty; on which the ingrate with greedy
languishing Eyes, eternally gazed with the same Joy she used to behold me when
she made me most happy. I confess, this Object was so far from pleasing me, (as
I believed a confirmation would,) that the change inspired me with a rage,
which nothing else could do, and made me say things unbecoming the Dignity of
my Sex, who ought to disdain those faithless Slaves, which Heaven first made to
obey the Lords of the Creation. A thousand times I was about to have rushed
upon 'em, and have ended the Lives of the loose betrayers of my repose, but
Love stepped in and stayed my hand, preventing me from an Outrage, that would
have cost me that rest of Honor, I yet had left: But when my rage was abated,
I fell to a more insupportable Torment, that of extreme Grief to find another
possessed of what I had been so long, and with so much Toil in gaining: 'Twas
thus I retired, and after a little while brought myself to make calm
Reflections upon this Adventure, which reduced me to some reason. When one day
as I was walking in an unfrequented Shade, whither my Melancholy had conducted
me, I incountred a Man, of a hauty look and mien, his Apparel rich and
glorious, his Eyes awful, and his Stature tall; the very sight of him inspired
me with coldness, which rendered me almost insensible of the infidelity of
Silvia. This Person was Pride, who looking on me, as he past, with a fierce and
disdainful Smile, over his Shoulder, and regarding me with scorn, said;

Why should that faithless wanton give
Thy Heart so mortal pain,
Whose Sighs were only to deceive,
Her Oaths all false and vain?
Despise those Tears thou shedd'st for her,
Disdain to sigh her Name.
To Love, thy Liberty prefer;
To faithless Silvia, Fame.
I knew by his words he was Pride, or Disdain, and would have embraced him; but
he put me off seeing Love still by me, who had not yet abandoned me, and turned
himself from me with a regardless scorn, but I, who was resolved not to forsake
so discreet a Counselor, rather chose to take my leave of little Love; who had
ever accompanied me in this Voyage. But oh! this adieu was not taken so easily
and soon as I imagined. Love was not to be quitted without abundance of Sighs
and Tears at parting, he had been a Witness to all my Adventures, my Confident
in this Amor, and not to be deserted without a great deal of pain; I stayed so
long in bidding the dear Boy adieu, that I had almost forgot Disdain; at last,
though my Heart were breaking to part with the dear fondling, I was resolved
and said;

Farewell, my little charming Boy!
Farewell, my fond delight,
My dear Instructor all the day,
My soft repose at night.
Thou, whom my Soul has so carest,
And my poor Heart has held so fast,
Thou never left me in my pain,
Nor in my happier hours;
Thou eased me when I did complain,
And dried my falling showrs.
When Silvia frowned still thou would smile,
And all my Cares and Griefs beguile.
But Silvia's gone, and I have torn
Her Witchcrafts from my Heart;
And nobly fortified by scorn
Her Empire will subvert;
Thy Laws established there destroy,
And bid adieu to the dear charming Boy.
In quitting Love I was a great while before I could find Disdain, but I, at
last, overtook him: He accompanied me to a Village, where I received a Joy I
had not known since my Arrival to the Isle of Love, and which Repose seemed the
sweeter because it was new. When I came to this place, I saw all the World
Easy, Idle, and at Liberty: This Village is like a Desert, and all the
Inhabitants live within themselves, there is only one Gate, by which we enter
into it from the Isle of Love.

This place is called Indifference, and takes its Name from a Princess
inhabiting there, a Person very fair and well made; but has a Grace and Mien of
so little Wit, and seems so inutile and so silly, that it renders her even
ridiculous. As soon as I arrived there, I called to my remembrance all those
affronts and cheats of Love, that Silvia had put upon me, and which now served
for my diversion, and were agreeable thoughts to me; so that I called myself
Ten thousand Sots and Fools for resenting 'em; and that I did not heartily
despise 'em, laugh at 'em, and make my Pleasure with the false One as well as
the rest; for she dissembled well, and for ought I knew, 'twas but dissembled
Love she paid my Rivals. But I, forsooth, was too nice a Coxcomb, I could not
feed as others did, and be contented with such Pleasures as she could afford,
but I must ingross all, and unreasonably believe a Woman of Youth and Wit had
not a longer Race of Love to run than to my Arms alone. Well, it is now confessed
I was a Fool, nor could I hinder myself from saying a thousand times a day;

That Coxcomb can never be at ease,
While Beauty inslaves his Soul.
It Is Liberty only can please,
And he that is Fettered is an Owl.
I found it very convenient and happy to disingage from Love, and I have
wondered a thousand times at the Follies that God has made me commit: And though
I sometimes thought on Silvia, I thought her less charming and fair than she was
before her fall; and the Humor I now was in represented her no more meriting
that Passion I once had for her, and I fancied she had lost all those Graces
for which once I loved her: In fine, I was so wholly recovered of my disease of
Love for Silvia, that I began to be uneasy for want of employing my Addresses;
and a change from so violent a Passion to such a degree of coldness, became
insupportable to one of my Youth and natural Gayety; insomuch, that I was
seized with a Dullness, or Languishment, and so great a sit of Melancholy, as I
had never felt the like; and my Heart, that was so accustomed to Love, was so
out of Humor, that it had no Object or Business for thought, that it lost all
its Harmony and Wit; it having nothing to excite it to Life and Motion, passing
from so vast a degree of tenderness to an unconcern equally extreme. I thought
it rude, ill-bred, and idle, to live so indifferent and insignificant a Life.
And walking perpetually by myself, (or with those of my own Sex, that could not
make my diversion,) I sung all day this following Song to a Hum-drum Tune, to
myself;

Not to sigh and to be tender,
Not to talk and prattle Love,
Is a Life no good can render,
And insipidly does move:
Unconcern does Life destroy,
Which, without Love, can know no Joy.
Life, without adoring Beauty,
Will be useless all the day;
Love's a part of Human Duty,
And it is Pleasure to obey.
In vain the Gods did Life bestow,
Where kinder Love has naught to do.
What is Life, but soft desires,
And that Soul, that is not made
To entertain what Love inspires,
Oh thou dull immortal Shade?
Thou Would better part with Flesh and Blood,
Than be, where Life's not understood.
These were my notions of Life; and I found myself altogether useless in the
World without Love; methought I had nothing to animate me to Gallant things,
without Love, or Women: I had no use of Wit or Youth without the fair, and yet
I did not wish wholly to engage myself neither a second time, having been so
ill-treated before by Love: But I found there were ways to entertain one's self
agreeably enough without dying or venturing the breaking of a heart for the
matter: That there were Beauties to be obtained without the hazard of hanging
or drowning one's self: I never had tried, but I found it natural enough to my
Humor and Constitution, to flatter and dissemble, swear and lie; I viewed my
self in my Glass, and found myself very well recovered from the Ruins my first
Amor had made, and believed myself as fit for Conquest, as any Sir Fopling, or
Sir Courtly Nice of 'em all. To this sine Person and good Mien and Shape, (as I
thought,) I added handsome Dressing, the thing that takes the Heart infinitely
above all your other Parts, and thus set out a snare for vain Beauty; I every
day went out of the City of Indifference, to see what new Adventures I could
meet withal.

One day I incountred a Woman, who, at first sight appeared very agreeable; she
had an Air easy, free, and Galliard; such as fails not to take at first view:
This was Coquettre, who, the very first time she saw me, Addressed herself to me
with very great Complisance and good Humor, and invited me to her Apartment,
where she assured me I should not fail to be entertained very agreeably; and at
the same time pulling out of her Pocket a Paper, she showed me these Words
written;

Let Love no more your Heart inspire,
Tho Beauty every hour you see;
Pass no farther than desire,
If you will truly happy be.
Every day fresh Objects view,
And for all have Complisance.
Search all places still for new,
And to all make some Advance;
For where Wit and Youth agree,
There Is no Life like Gallantry.
Laura's Heart you may receive,
And to morrow Iulia's prise:
Take what young Diana gives,
Pity Lucia when she dies:
Portia's Face you must admire,
And to Clorin's Shape submit.
Phillis Dancing gives you Fire,
Celia's Softness, Clara's Wit.
Thus all at once you may pursue,
It Is too little to Love two.
The powerful smiling God of Hearts
So much tenderness imparts,
You must upon his Altars lay
A thousand Offerings every day:
And so soft is kind desire;
Oh! so Charming is the Fire,
That if nice Adraste scorns,
Gentler Ariadne burns.
Still Another keep in play
(If One refuse,) to give you Joy.
Cease therefore to disturb your Hours,
For having two desires
A Heart can manage two Amors.
And burn with several Fires.
The day has hours enough in store
To visit two or half a score.
I gave her thanks for her good Counsel, and found I needed not much persuasion
to follow Coquettre to a City that bears her Name, and I saw over the Gate of
the City at my Entrance, these Verses writ in Gold Letters;

The God of Love beholding every day
Slaves from his Empire to depart away;
(For Hearts that have been once with Love fatigued,
A second time are never again intrigu'd:
No second Beauty ever can move
The Soul to that degree of Love.)
This City built, that we might still obey,
Tho we refused his Arbitrary Sway:
It Is here we find a grateful Recompense
For all Loves former Violence;
Tired with his Laws we hither come
To meet a kinder softer doom.
It Is here the God, without the Tyrant, Reigns,
And Laws agreeable ordains;
Here it is with Reason and with Wit he Rules,
And whining Passion Ridicules.
No check or bound to Nature gives,
But kind desire rewarded thrives.
Peevish uneasy Pride, the God
Has banished from the blessed abode:
All Jealousies, all Quarrels cease,
And here Love lives in perfect Peace.
This agreeable description, gave me new desire to enter into the City; where I
incountred a thousand fine Persons all gloriously dressed, as if they were
purposely set out for Conquest: There was nothing omitted of Cost and
Gallantry, that might render 'em entirely Charming, and they employed all their
Arts of Looks and Dress to gain Hearts.

It is, in a word, from these fair Creatures you are to draw your Satisfaction,
and it is indeed at a dear rate you buy it, yet, notwithstanding the Expense, a
world of People pursue 'em.

When I came into the City, I was soon perceived to be a Stranger there, and
while I was considering whither I should go, or how to address myself to these
fair Creatures, a little Coquett Cupid presented himself to me for a kind
Instructor; and to explain him, this in a word is his Character:

He is of the same Race with the other Cupids, has the same Mother too, Venus:
He wears a Bow and Arrows, like the rest of the young Loves; but he has no
Bando, nothing to cover his Eyes, but he sees perfectly; nor has he any
Flambeau: And all the Laws of Coquettre he understands and observes exactly.

I had no sooner received the little Charming God, but he instructed me in all
the most powerful Arts to please, in all his little wiles and agreeable
deceits; all which he admits of as the most necessary Recourses to that great
end of Man, his true diversion: With all which I was so extremely pleased, that
resolving to be his Votary, I followed him to the most delightful place in the
World, the City of Gallantry.

Gallantry is a City very magnificent; at the Entrance of the Gate you
encounter Liberality, a Woman of great Wit, delicate Coversation and
Complisance: This Lady gives her Pasport to all that enter, and without which,
you cannot pass, or at least, with great difficulty; and then too you pass your
time but very ill; and the more Pasports you have, the better you are received
from the fair Inhabitants, and pass your time more agreeable with the fine
Conversation you meet with in this City. Love told me this, and it was
therefore that I took a great many Pasports from this acceptable Person
Liberality. But what renders you yet more Favored by the Fair and the Young
who reside at Gallantry, is, to have a delicate soft Wit, an assiduous Address
and a tender way of Conversing; but that which best cullies and pleases the
Generality of People there, is Liberality and Complisance: This place of so
great Divertisement is refrequented with all the Parties of the best and most
amiaable Company, where they invent a thousand new Pleasures every day;
Feasting, Balls, Comedies, and Sports, Singing and Serinads, are what employs
the whole Four and twenty hours.

By the Virtue of my Pasports from Liberality, I was introduced to all the fine
Conversations and Places that afford Pleasure and Delight: I had the good
Fortune to make Parties, insomuch, that I was soon known to all the Company in
the City, and past the day in Feasting, going with the Young and Fair to
delightful Villa's, Gardens, or Rivers in Chaces, and a thousand things that
pleased; and the Nights I passed in Serinading, so that I did not give myself
time for Melancholy; and yet for all this I was wearied and fatigued; for when
once one has tasted of the Pleasure of Loving and being Beloved, all, that
comes after that, is but flat and dull; and if one's Heart be not a little
inflamed, all things else are insignificant, and make but very slight touches.

I began therefore for all this to be extremely Shagreen and out of Humor,
amid'st all these Pleasures, till one lucky day I met with an Adventure, that
warmed my Heart with a tender flame which it had not felt since my happy
beginning one for Silvia: One day, as I said, I was conducted by my officious
Cupid into a Garden very beautiful, where there are a thousand Labyrinths and
Arbours, Walks, Grotto's, Groves and Thickets; and where all the Fair and the
Gay resorted; 'twas here I incountred a young Beauty called Bellinda; she was
well made, and had an admirable mien, an Air of Gayety and Sweetness; but that
which charmed me most of all, was her Wit, which was too engaging for me to
defend my Heart against: I found mine immediately submitting to her
Conversation, and you may imagine I did not part with her so long as Decency
and good Manners permitted me to stay with her, which was as long as any
Company was in the place; nor then, till by my importunity I had gained so much
upon her to suffer my Visits, which she did with a Condescension that gave me
abundance of hope.

I was no sooner gone, but my Cupid, who took care of me, and entertained me to
the best Advantage, carried me that Evening to a Ball, where there were a world
of Beauties, among the rest one fair as imagination can conceive; she had all
the Charms of Youth and Beauty; though not so much Wit and Air as Bellinda. To
this young adorable I made my Court all the time I remained there, and fancied
I never found myself so Charmed, I fancied all the Graces had taken up their
dwelling in her Divine Face; and that to subdue one so fair and so innocent,
must needs be an extreme Pleasure: Yet did I not so wholly fix my desires on
this lovely Person, but that the Wit of Bellinda shared my Heart with the
Beauty and Youth of Bellimante, so was this young Charmer called: I was
extremely well pleased to find I could anew take fire; and infinitely more,
when I found I should not be subdued by one alone; nor confined to dull Dotage
on a single Beauty; but that I was able to attain to the greatest Pleasure,
that of Loving two amiable Persons at once: If with two, I hoped I might with
Two score if I pleased and had occasion; and though at first it seemed to be
very strange and improbable to feel a Passion for two, yet I found it true, and
could not determine which I had the greatest tenderness for, or inclination to:
But it is most certain, that this Night I found, or thought I found, more for
Bellimante, who fired me with every Smile; I confess she wanted that Gayety of
Spirit Bellinda had, to maintain that fire she raised: And ever when I was
thoughtful a moment, Coquettre (who is ever in all the Conversation, and where
she appears very magnificent and with a great Train,) would, smiling, sing
softly in my Ear this Song, for she is very Galliard;

Cease to defend your Amorous Heart,
Against a double flame;
Where two may claim an equal Part
Without reproach or shame.
It Is Love that makes Life's happiness,
And he that best would live
By Love alone must Life caress,
And all his Darts receive.
Coquettre is a Person, that endeavors to please and humor every Body, but of
all those who every day fill her Train, she caresses none with that Address and
Assiduity as she did me, for I was a new Face, to whom she is ever most
obliging and entertaining. However, notwithstanding the Advice of Coquettre, I
fancied this young Charmer had engaged all my Soul; and while I gazed on her
Beauty, I thought on Bellinda no more; but believed I should wholly devote
myself to Bellimante, whose Eyes alone seemed capable to inflame me.

I took my leave with Sighs, and went home extreme well pleased with this days
Adventure. All this Night I slept as well as if no tenderness had touched my
Heart, and though I Loved infinitely, it gave me no disturbance; the next
morning a thousand pleasant things Bellinda had said to me, came into my mind,
and gave me a new inclination to entertain myself with that witty Beauty; and
dressing myself in haste with the desire I had to be with her, I went again,
the morning being very inviting, to the Garden, where before I had seen her,
and was so lucky to encounter her; I found her blush at my approach; which I
counted a good Omen of my future happiness; she received me with all the Gayety
and Joy good liking and Wit could inspire: Nor was I backward on my part, but
addressed myself to her with all imaginable respect, and as much Love in my Eyes
as I was able to put on; which, I found, she saw with Pleasure; she had not
entertained me half an hour, but I was so absolutely charmed, that I forgot
there was a Bellaminte in the World.

Thus for several days I lived; every day visiting both these attracting
Beauties, and at Night, when I was retired, was not able to inform myself which
I liked best: Both were equally beloved, and it was now, that methought I began
to taste of true Joy; I found myself in Love without any sort of inquietude,
when I was Melancholy, I went to visit Bellinda, and she with her Gayety and
Wit would inspire me with good Humor; If I were over-prest with good Company,
and too much Conversation and Noise, I would visit Bellimante, who by a certain
softness in her discourse, and a natural Languishment in her Eyes and Manners,
charmed and calmed me to a reposed tranquillity; so that to make me fortunate
in Love, I could not have fixed my desires better: I had too little Love to be
wretched, and enough to make my happiness and Pleasure.

After I had past my time a while thus in Coquettre, this little Love, who was
my Guide, carried me to Declaration: I thought then upon the time of my first
Arrival on the Isle of Love; and how Respect, that awful hinderer of our
Pleasure, prevented me from going to this Place: I urged this very argument
Respect then made me, to my Coquet Love now, who for answer returned me nothing
but loud Laughter; and when I ask this reason, he replied, that Respect did not
forbid any to go to Declaration, but those only who knew not how to behave
themselves well there, and who were not so well fashioned and bred as they
ought to be, who go thither: And that it was a mere cheat in Respect to conduct
people to Love by Discretion, that being much the farthest way about, and under
favor to Monsieur Respect he is but a troublesome companion to a Lover, who
designs to cure those wounds the fair has given him, and, if he have no better
counselor, he may languish all his life without revealing the secret of his
soul to the object beloved, and so never find redress. But this Sir Formal,
(Respect, says Love,) is a very great favorite of the Lady's, who is always in
fee with them as a Jilt with a Justice; who manages their Fools just as they
would have 'em; for it is the most agreeable thing in the World to them, and
what the most feeds their vanity, to see at their feet a thousand Lovers sigh,
burn, and languish; the fair are never angry to find themselves beloved, nor
ever weary of being Adored. I was extremely pleased at this frank Humor of my
little Love who told me this, and without much scruple or consideration to
Respect I followed him toward Declaration, and in my way he gave me this
Advice.

When you Love, or speak of it,
Make no serious matter on it,
'Twill make but subject for her wit
And gain her scorn in lieu of Grant.
Sneeking, whinning, dull Grimasses
Pale the Appetite, they would move;
Only Boys and formal Asses
Thus are Ridiculed by Love.
While you make a Mystery
Of your Love and awful flame;
Young and tender Hearts will fly,
Frighted at the very name;
Always brisk and gayly court
Make Love your pleasure not your pain,
It Is by wanton play and sport
Heedless Virgins you will gain.
By this time we were arrived to Declaration, which is a very little Village,
since it is only for Passengers to pass through, and none live there, the Country
is very Perilous, and those that make a false step run a great risque of
falling from some Precipice: Round about rises a very great mist, and people
have much ado to know each other; of these mists there are two sorts: The one
on the side of Denial, the other on that of Permission, the first is very
disagreeable and draws a very ill consequence with it; the other directs you to
a place of entire divertisment, but I had so good a guide that the entrance
gave me no trouble at all. When I came to the Village, I found Bellimante, and
Bellinda, to whom by turns I told all my heart; and discovered all its passion
or its tenderness which was to me much better.

When to the charming Bellinda I came,
With my heart full of Love and desire,
To gain my wished end I talked of a flame,
Of sighing, and dying, and sire,
I swore to her charms that my soul did submit,
And the slave was undone by the force of her Wit.
To fair Bellimante the same tale I told,
And I vowed and I swore her fair Eyes
No Heart-Ravisht mortal could ever behold
But he panting and languishing Dys,
And while I was vowing, the ardor of youth
Made myself even believe what I swore was all truth.
I confess to you, my dear Lysander, that it was a great while before I could
make myself be believed by Bellinda, or gain any credit upon her heart, she had
a great deal of Wit and could see farther into the designs of her Lovers than
those who had not so much, or had had so many vows paid them: I perceived well
enough, I was not hated by her, and that she had not a heart wholly insensible;
so that I never quitted her till I had gained so much upon her to accompany me
to Permission, where for some time we pass our days very pleasantly; and having
so good fortune with Bellinda, I had now a great desire to try my power over
Bellimante: and where indeed, contrary to my expectation, I was not so happy:
But she went from me to Denial; and I was for that hour obliged to return again
to Bellinda, it was some time I searched her in vain, but at last found her at a
little Village, extremely agreeable. There are very few Inhabitants, but those
that are live in perpetual union, yet do not talk much, for they understand one
another with half words: A sign of the Hand, the Head or the Eye, a glance or
smile is sufficient to declare a great part of the Inclination. It is here
where the Lover takes all freedoms, without control, and says and dos all that
soft Love can permit: And every day they take and give a secret Entertainment,
speaking a particular Language, which every body does not understand, and none
but Lovers can reply too, in effect, there are as many Languages as persons.

The Governess of this Village is very charming to those that are acquainted
with her; and as disagreeable to those that are not; she is a person of a great
deal of Wit, and knows all things. She has a thousand ways to make herself
understood, and comprehends all in a moment, that you would or can say to her.

In this place, to divert, we make a thousand pretty sorts of Entertainments;
and we have abundance of Artifices, which signify nothing, and yet they serve
to make life Agreeable and Pleasant.

'Twas thus I lived at Intelligence; when I understood that Bellimante was
retired to Cruelty. This news afflicted me extremely, but I was not now of a
humor to swell the Floods with my tears, or increase the rude winds with my
ruder sighs; to tear my hair and beat my Innocent breast as I used in my first
Amount to do. However I was so far concerned, that I made it my business not to
lose this insensible fair one, but making her a visit in spite of her retreat,
I reproacht her with cruelty.

Why, fair Maid, are you uneasy,
When a slave designs to please you;
When he at your feet is lying
Sighing, languishing, and dying?
Why do you preserve your charms
Only for offensive Arms?
What the Lover would possess
You maintain but to oppress.
Cease, fair Maid, your cruel sway,
And let your Lover die a nobler way.
Who the Devil would not believe me as much in love now as I ever was with
Silvia: My heart had learned then all the soft Language of Love which now it
could prattle as naturally as its Mother Tongue; and sighing and dying was as
ready for my mouth as when it came from my very heart; and cost me nothing to
speak; Love being as cheaply made now by me as a barter for a Horse or a Coach;
and with as little concern almost: It pleased me while I was speaking, and
while I believed I was gaining the vanity and pleasure of a conquest over an
unvanquisht heart. However I could yet perceive no Grist come to my Mill; no
heart to my Lure; young as it was, it had a cunning that was harder to deceive
than all Bellinda's Wit: And seeing her persist still in her Resolution I left
her with a heart, whose pride more than Passion resented the obduratness of
this Maid, I went as well composed however as I could to Intelligence; and
found even some pleasure in the cruelty and charming resistance of Bellimante,
since I proposed to myself an infinite happyness in softning a heart so averse
to Love, and which I knew I should compel to yield some time or other with very
little pains and force.

Oh! what Pleasure it is to find
A coy heart melt by slow degrees;
When to yiedling it is inclined,
Yet her fear a ruin sees.
When her tears do kindly flow,
And her sighs do come and go.
Oh! how charming it is, to meet
Soft resistance from the fair;
When her pride and wishes meet
And by turns increase her care.
Oh! how charming it is to know,
She would yield but cannot tell how,
Oh! how pretty is her scorn
When confused 'twixt Love and Shame,
Still refusing (though she burn,)
The soft pressures of my Flame.
Her Pride in her denial lies,
And mine is in my Victories.
I feigned nevertheless abundance of Grief to find her-still persist in her
rigorous Cruelty; and I made her believe, that all my absent hours I abandoned
myself to sorrows and despairs; though Love knows I parted with all those
things in Silia's Arms. But whatever I pretend, to appear at Cruelty and before
Bellimante; at Intelligence I was all Galliard and never in better Humor in my
Life than when I went to visit Bellinda: I put on the Gravity of a Lover, and
beheld her with a Solemn Languishing Look: In fine, I accustomed myself to
counterfeit my Humor, whenever I found it convenient for my Advantage: Tears,
Vows, and Sighs cost me nothing, and I knew all the Arts to jilt for Love, and
could act the dying Lover, whenever it made for my Satisfaction.

He that would precious time improve,
And husband well his hours,
Let him complain and dye for Love,
And spare no Sighs or Showers.
To second which, let Vows and Oaths
Be ready at your will,
And fittest times and seasons choose,
To show your cozening skill.
In fine, after I had sufficiently acted the Languishing Lover, for the
accomplishment of all my Wishes, I thought it time to change the Scene, and
without having recourse to Pity, I followed all the Counsels of my Cupid; who
told me, that in stead of dying and whining at her Feet, and damning myself to
obtain her Grace, I should affect a Coldness, and an Unconcern; for, Lycidus,
assure yourself, said he, there is nothing a Woman will not do, rather than
lose her Lover either from Vanity or Inclination. I thanked Love for his kind
Advice; and to pursue it, the next day I dressed myself in all the Gayety
imaginable: My Eyes, my Air, my Language, were all changed; and thus fortified
with all the put-on indifference in the World, I made Bellimante a Visit; and
after a thousand things all cold and unconcerned, far from Love or my former
Softness, I cried laughing to her;

Cease, cease, that vain and useless scorn,
Or save it for the Slaves that dye;
I in your Flames no longer burn,
No more the whining Fool you fly;
But all your Cruelty desie.
My Heart your Empire now disdains,
And Frown, or Smile, all is one to me:
The Slave has broke his Servial Chains,
And spite of all your Pride is free
From the Tyrannick Slavery.
Be kind or cruel every day,
Your Eyes may wear what dress they please,
'Twill not affect me either way,
How my fond Heart has found its Peace,
And all my Tears and Sighings cease.
I must confess you're wondrous fair,
And know, to conquer such a Heart;
Is worth an Age of sad despair,
If Lovers Merits were Desert:
But you're unjust as well as fair,
And Love subsists not with despair,
No more than Lovers by the Air.
I Have spared no Sighs nor Floods of Tears,
Nor any thing to move your Mind,
With sacred Vows I sed your Cares;
But found your rebel Heart unkind,
And Vanity had made you blind.
No more my Knees shall bow before
Those unconcerned and haughty Eyes,
Nor be so senseless to adore
That Saint, that all my Prayers despise:
No, I contemn your Cruelty
Since in a Humor not to dye.
Having said all this with an Air of Disdain, I, smiling, took my leave, with
much less Civility and Respect than I used to do; and hasting to Intelligence,
I past my time very well with Bellinda, to whom I paid all my Visits, and
omitted nothing that might make Bellimante know I had forgot her: But at the
end of some days by a very happy change, she finding more inclination to Love
than to Cruelty, banishing all Obstacles in Favor of a Lover, she came to
Intelligence; where at first sight she made me some little Reproaches, and that
in so soft a manner, that I did not doubt but I had touched her Heart: I swore a
thousand times, that all I had done, was only put on to see if it were possible
she could resent it, and force from her Heart some little concern for my
supposed loss. At this time I had abundance of Intreagues upon my hands, for it
was not with Bellinda and Bellimante, with whom I lived in this manner; and
indeed it is impossible to remain at Intelligence and to make a Court but to
two Persons only, where there are so many of the Fair and the Young. I writ
every day several Billets; and received every day as many: I had every day two
or three Rendezvous; and one ought to manage matters very discreetly, that
neither Party might come to the knowledge of the others concern; and one ought
to be a Man of great Address and Subtilty to love more than one securely; and
though this gave me some pain, it was nevertheless an Ambaras very agreeable,
and in which I could have lived a great while; if Envy, which cannot suffer any
Body to be happy in Intelligence, had not arrived there and told a great many
things which discovered my Intreagues; so that Bellinda, with whom I had lived
there with great Tranquillity a long time, and Bellimante, with whom I was but
just beginning to be happy, were both obliged to quit this delightful place,
where we enjoyed so many happy hours; and they retired till the noise was a
little over; and with them all those who had afforded me any hope: If any one
of these had stayed, I had been contented well enough and one might have
consol'd me for the loss of the other, but in one day to lose all that made my
happiness, put me into such a Melancholy, I knew not for the present what to do
for myself; but Coquet Love conducted me to a Village, that gave a me new
Pleasure: The situation of it is mavelous, the Fields and the Groves all
about it the most pleasant in the World; the Meadows enameled with Rivulets,
which run winding here and there, and lose themselves in the Thickets and the
Woods. In going, Love said to me: In absence it is in vain to abandon yourself
to sorrow. Alas! What signifies it to sigh night and day; the Absent does not
hear us; nor can the most tender Affliction or Complaint render a Lover happy,
unless the Fair One were present to hear all his Moans, then perhaps they might
avail. There was reason in what he said, and I was pleased and calmed; and we
arrived at the same time at this Village: All the Houses were fine, and
pleasant, we saw all the Graces there by Fountains and by Flowery Springs, and
all the Objects that could be imagined agreeable; and the least amiable ones,
we saw, gave us a Joy! All the World that inhabit there contribute to
Diversion; and this place is called Amusement: Amusement is a young Boy, who
stops and gazes at every thing that meets his Eyes, and he makes his Pleasure
with every Novelty.

As soon as I arrived at this Village I thought to divert myself, as others
did; and to hinder my Thoughts from fixing on the loss of my two Mistresses,
and to banish from my mind the Shagrins their Absence gave me; withdrawn from
the fair Eyes of Bellimante, and the Charming Wit of Bellinda, and to give my
sighing Heart a little case; upon a thousand Objects I formed my desires, and
took a thousand Pleasures to divert my Melancholy: And all the time I lived at
this dear place, I passed my time without any inquietude; for every day
afforded me new Objects to give me new Wishes. And I now expected, without much
impatience, the return of Bellinda and Bellimante; nor did I tire myself with
writing to 'em every day; and when I did write, to save the expense of thought,
the same Billet served both; a thousand little tender things I said of course
to both: And sometimes, especially while I was writing, I thought I had rather
have seen them than have lived at Amusemcnt, but since it was necessary they
should be absent, I bore it with all the Patience I could; sometimes we were in
a fit of writing very regularly to one another, but on a sudden I received no
Letters at all; the reason of this was, they both understood I lived at
Amusement, and had retired themselves to the Palace of Spite: I no sooner
received this News, but I rendered myself there also; it is a place where there
is always abundance of Tumult, Outrage, Quarrels and Noise: And Spite is a
Person who eternally gives occasion of Discontent and Broil; causing People
often to fall out with those they love most, and to caress those they hate: But
the Quarrels she occasions us with those we love, last but a very short season,
and Love reconciles those differences that Spite obliges us to make: Tho it is
sometime pleasant enough to see those we Love extremely, and violently, fall
into the highest rage, and say a thousand things injurious and unreasonable,
and to swear all the Oaths that angry Love and Fury can inspire, never to see
or converse with one another again, and in a moment after to grow calm, weep,
and reunite; to be perjured on both sides, and become more fond than ever they
were.

A Lovers Rage and Jealousy
One short moment does confess:
How can they long angry be
Whose Hearts are full of tenderness?
In this Place there would be eternal War, but for a person who inhabits there,
and is always the Mediator for Peace, it is he that assists to accommodate and
bring the Lovers together. This is a very honest person, called Right
Understanding, he brought me to Bellinda, whom I found accompanied with a Man
that made her a thousand caresses, at my approach she made as if she knew me
not, which I took in such disdain, that I applied myself to Spite, with a
design to be revenged on this Haughty scorner. In this humor I made a visit to
Bellimante but found her as Implacable as Bellinda, whom no excuses, no reason,
could reduce to the temper I had once seen her; in a rage, ten times more than
I was before, filled with disdain and revenge I complained of this treatment to
my little Love, who immediately led me into a Grove, where the Beauties and the
Graces used to walk, to consult upon what return to make for my affront; from
one place to another we past on till we came to a little Thicket, on the other
side of which, by a little Rivulet we could hear, but not see, two persons
discoursing, they were women, and one seemed in a violent Rage against her
Lover, who had newly offended her, whilst the other strove in vain to reconcile
her, but she went on, vowing to revenge herself with the next object she should
Encounter that had but Wit, Youth, and fortune enough to Justify her Love, and
make her conquest glorious; her resolution agreeing so with mine, and her
manner of speaking, gave me new hope and pleasure, and a great curiosity to see
her face; I found by her Resentment she was young and of Quality, and that
alone was enough to make me resolve upon Addressing myself to her, and the
other person had no sooner left her, but I advanced toward her, with as good a
grace as I could put on, she was a little surprised, and blushing at first, but
I soon reconciled her to my conversation. I found her handsome enough to engage
me, and she was as well pleased with me as I was with her, both having the same
design which was that of revenge, and you may Imagine, our business being the
same, our entertainment was not at first extraordinary, but as my cause of
Anger was more reasonable than hers, I began to find myself to soften into
liking of this new fair one, who was called Cemena, and who, to spite her
former Lover, endeavored to be seen with me in all the public places she
could, which gave him Infinite torments of Jealousy. One day as I was walking
with this Cemena in a place where the young and the fair frequent, Bellinda and
Bellimante often passed by us, and saw us both well pleased and in good humor,
I could perceive their color go and come, and that they were as uneasy at
this object, as my heart could wish, and by their quitting of the place
immediately after, I was assured of all my hope, and believed I had gained my
Point; at the end of two or three days, one Morning walking alone in the same
place I incountered Bellimante, who happened to be attended with her Woman only,
she changed color at my approach, and would have passed me by but I stayed her
by the Robe; and said a thousand things to her that angry Love inspired me
with, while she on her side did the same, till we had talked ourselves by
degrees into reason, and good understanding. I found her Resentment to be only
the excess of Love, and all those faults are easily forgiven, I immediately
threw myself at her Feet, and made her a thousand protestations of my fidelity,
and she, in her turn, excused herself with all the tenderness imaginable, she
made me a thousand new vows and caresses and forgot nothing that might
persuade me, that all she did was by the Counsel of Spite.

Oh! how soft it is to see
The fair one we believe untrue,
Eagar and impatient be
To be reconciled a new;
When their little cheats of Love
Shall with reasons be excused,
Oh! how soft it is to prove,
With what ease we are abused!
When we come to understand
How unjust are all our fears;
And to feel the lovely hand
Wiping from our Eyes the tears.
And a thousand Favors pay
For every drop they kiss away,
Oh! how soft it is to yield,
To the maid just reconciled.
I found this accommodement extremely agreeable, and it was in these transports
the Lovely Bellimante detained me for some days without quiting her, but I
found too much Joy in a new reconciliation not to endeavor to make one also
with Bellinda; as soon then as Bellimante grew a little off my heart by so long
a conversation with one and the same Woman, I, on pretense of some affairs,
left her extremely charmed and satisfied, and hasted to Bellinda, who,
methought, was now a new Beauty; at least I found her too considerable to lose
the Glory of engaging her entirely; it is possible that both these Ladys, being
agitated with as little faith as myself, deceived me with the same design I did
them, to make their pleasure only, and tho this very often came into my
thoughts, yet it gave me no great inquietude, they dissembled well, and I could
not see it, I had the satisfaction and the vanity of 'em, that was as much as I
desired from any of the fair since Silvia touched my heart, they both swore they
loved and both feared to displease, if they were unfaithful they had a thousand
stratagems to hide their infidelity, and took a great deal of care to keep me,
which showed a value in me above all the rest of my Rivals, and I beheld myself
with some Pride and esteem for having so much power; when ever they offended me
they had all the Arts to mollify me, and who would be so critically in love as
not to be willing to be so well abused? For my part, I will not be so nice, as
to penetrat into their thoughts, to find what would but displease me if found;
but content myself with all I see and find that looks like Love at least and
good humor. Nay even in their worst I find a thousand pleasures, those of
their quarrels which sometimes happen twenty times a day, when every
reconciliation is like a new Mistress, so well they strive to please and be
reconciled.

But all these pleasures did not satisfy me, there were greater yet behind
which I had not arrived to with these fair charmers, and however I lived at
Amusement, making a thousand Amors with a hundred of the most Beautiful, still
I had a desire to subdue entirely to my pleasure these two the most hard to
gain, but now I was pretty well secured of both their hearts and yet neither
knew, they were each others Rivals in mine. They knew one another, converst,
and played and walked together, yet so discreet I was in this Amor that neither
was jealous of the other, nor suspected I loved both with an equal Ardor; when
I happened to be with 'em both I carried myself so equally Gallant that both
commended my conduct and imagined I did it to hide the secret passion I had for
herself, and so many little Arts my Coquet love had taught me I could with ease
manage abundance of intregues at one and the same time.

But as I said, this did not suffice, nor could the fires, that some more
willing Beauties allayed, hinder me from wishing and burning and persuing those
two fair persons with an Ardor that had no appearance of decay from any others
goodness to me, but in my daily visits to'em, I eternally solicited them to
suffer me to accompany them to that charming place called Favors, which is a
very Beautiful Castle raised in a Valley. I confessed to you that my Coquet Cupid
advised me not to go, for fear of attaching myself too much to a place so
extremely agreeable; the Mountains, that inviron this Castle, are very high and
full of hollow Rocks, which made the situation very sullen. The Castle itself
was delicately built, and surrounded with tall Trees, so thick that one could
hardly see the Edifice, nor could the Sun-bearns dart throw the gloomy shade;
and eternal Night seemed to sit there in awful state and pleasure: For the more
obscure this place is and secret from all Eyes, the better and more acceptable
it is to all that enter there, and tho this Valley have many inhabitants, it
appears to have none at all; because they love solitude, and, banishing all
Public society, content themselves only to be but two in company together, if
there be more they are received with a very ill welcome, for a third Person in
this place would destroy the Pleasure and the harmony. The Inhabitants of this
Castle never show themselves but to those that are very importune, and then not
every day, the Ladies that command there are many Sisters all of the name of
the Castle; and all very fair, and still one more fair than the other, and when
you visit'em you see'em not all at once but by degrees and the last you behold
is the fairest, and by the pleasure you have in seeing one, you desire to
see'em all. For there are no limits to be given to desire, and as they are
never seen by any body altogether, it happens very often that you see but one,
and you must have address and great assiduity, abstinence, and good fortune to
obtain one of these Favors; but the last will cost you much more trouble than
all the rest put together, so very fair, so very nice and coy she is: But when
once obtained she brings you to the Palace of entire Pleasure; which is
neighboring to the Castle of Favors; but I, who would very fain, at once, have
brought to this delicate place both Bellinda and Bellimante, found myself
extreme uneasy, because, as I said, only two can be well entertained at a time!
I found it against my humor and against the advice of Love to abandon all, and
retire with one only, for in decency and good manners, those, who go to this
Castle of Favors, are obliged to continue there some time; and I found, I
should be extremely shagrin after a little while with one alone; but both were
obstinate and would not suffer a third: and having been so very importune with
both, I was ashamed to repent and recant all those things I had said, to
persuade them to go, tho in my heart I was very ill satisfied I had not persu'd
the counsel, Love had given me not to go to Favors at all; he soreseeing an
inconveniencie in such a retreat, which I, with all my young desires about me
and fond of novelty, c^u'd not, so well as he, diseern, however I had proposed
it with some ardency and would not go back, but resov'd to make the best
advantage of my voyage, and would not declare my regreet till I could no longer
hinder it: So that Bellimante, yiedling to my Implorings, consented next day to
go with me to this retreat of Favors.

Accordingly the next morning we set out for this amiable place; where we
arrived, and finding myself all alone, without interruption or fear, with this
very fair Creature, I advanced to a thousand. Freedoms which she, with some
resistance, permitted me to take: I was all Joy and Transport at every advance,
and still the nearer I approached to the last Favor, the more blessed I imagined
myself; I grew more resolved, and she more feeble: and at last, I was the
Victor and Bellimante the Victim; I remained some days with her, and one would
have imagined I should have been entirely happy in this place with one so young
and fair: But behold the fickleness of Youth, and Man's nature.

Tho my Heart were full of Passion,
And I found the yiedling Maid
Give a loose to inclination
While her Love her Flame betrayed;
Yet tho all she did impart,
Pain and Anguish pressed my Heart.
Tho I found her all o'r Charming,
Fond and sighing in my Arms;
Yet my Heart anew was warming
For Bellinda's unknown Charms;
Thought, if Beauty pleased me so,
What must Wit and Beauty too?
And though next day I found myself an hundred times more in Love with
Bellimante than before, yet unless I could possess Bellinda too, I thought
myself miserable: Yet every time she charmed me anew I was upon the point of
renouncing eternally Bellinda, and sacrificing her to my Passion for
Bellimante: But I did not remain long in that Humor, but every day grew more
and more unresolved in that point; and as Bellimante grew more fond I grew more
cold; not but I had learnt to say so many kind and soft things in the time of
my real Passion with Silvia, that I found it easy to speak every day such
endearing Words as gave her no doubt of my Heart; nor was willing she should
see to the bottom of it, where she would most certainly have found Bellinda;
yet with such a mixture of Passion for herself, that it would have been hard to
have distinguished, which had had the ascendant there; only my desire at
present was the most considerable for the fair Object I had not yet possessed,
and whom I longed to Vanquish; perhaps, as much for the Glory, as the Pleasure,
though my Heart did not at this moment think so.

After some time that I had lived here with Bellimante, I made some pretext to
leave her for a little while; she, who was extremely charmed with that
Solitude, resolved to wait there my return, so that I had some pain in
contriving how I should bring Bellinda to the same Castle as I wished to do;
but it had in it many Mansions and Apartments, and, as I said, so retired from
one another, that it was difficult to come at any time together or to meet:
This consideration made me resolved, and very pressing with Bellinda, to go to
this place, assuring her of such Diversion as she never met with in any other
part of the World: She loved and was not long in persuading, and I had the
Glory to conduct her in spite of all her Wit and Gayety, to this retreat of
Solitude with me; where, unperceived, I obliged her to render me all that Love
could allow, and more than Honor would permit: And I was for some days
extremely happy, and possibly had continued so, (going from one Apartment to
another, and, like the Great Sultan, visiting by turns my Beauties,) had not a
malicious fate prevented my Grandeur and Pleasure.

It happened one day that I had sued a repetition of Favors from Bellinda; she
seeming resolved to grant me no more, repenting of those I had taken, and with
a charming Sorrow reproaching me, making me a thousand times more pressing than
before: At last her force growing weaker, her denials fainter, and my
importunities more raging; I found her yiedling, the Lilly in her Face gave
place to the Roses, and Love and Trembling made her Eyes more fair, and just
ready to render me all. We saw approaching us Bellimante, who, having heard how
I sometimes past my hours, resolved to surprise me in my perfidie; and
accordingly found us in a gloomy Arbor with all the Transports of Love in both
our Faces, which it was too late to resettle and hide from this too sensible
and jealous fair One: In vain I strove with all the Arguments of Love and
Tenderness to appease her, or, if by any thing I said, I found her inclined to
pardon me, on the other side it but served to incense and inrage Bellinda, to
whom I had made equal Vows (at her coming to that place,) of eternal Fidelity.
I am not able to express to you, my dear Lysander, what confusion I found
myself in, I divided my Heart and my Entreaties between 'em, and knew not to
which I most ardently meant 'em; I was very sensible, that while I treated both
with equal Love and Respect, that I should gain neither, and yet if what I said
to both had been addressed to any one of 'em, it would have prevailed; and I
found it easy to have kept either, if I would resolve to quit the other; but
my heart not inclining to that, or if it would, not knowing which I should
choose, made me remain between 'em both the most out-of-countenanced coxcomb,
that ever was taken in the cheats of Love, while both were on either side
reproaching me with all the malice and noise imaginable, so that not being able
longer to endure the clamor, I took my flight from 'em both, and ran with all
the force I could to a Village called Irresolution; and where Coquet Love
abandoned me saying that place was not proper for him.

The Houses of this Village are for the most part not half built, but all
appears very desolate and ruinous: It appertains to a Lady very fantastique of
the same name. She maks a Figure pleasant enough, she never dresses herself,
because she cannot determine what habit to put on; she is ever tormenting
herself, still turning to this side and to that, yet never stirs from the
place, because undetermined she knows not whither nor which way to go: And
having so many in her mind resolves to go to neither; one always sees an
Agitation in her Eyes, that keeps them in perpetual motion and fixed on nothing.
You see her perpetually, perplexed with a thousand designs in her head at once,
but puts none of them in execution.

I found myself in this place Ambarassed with a thousand confusions and
thoughts, for Bellinda and Bellimante had equally shared my soul, and I knew
not for which I should declare; nor whether the Wit and extreme good Humor of
the first were more powerful upon my heart, than the Beauty and softness of the
last, so that I was wholly unable to determine which I should quit, having the
same sentiments for one as for the other, and resolved to abandon both rather
than content myself with one: And the fear of losing one was the occasion of my
losing both, in fine I was in the most cruel incertainty in the World. And I
could not forbear saying a thousand times to myself,

When Love shall two fair objects mix,
And in the Heart two passions fix:
It Is a pleasure too severe,
Cruel Joy we cannot bear.
Too much Love for two I own,
But too little flame for one.
While I was thus perplexed betwixt these two violent passions, when no reason
could resolve me which to choose, as I was one day meditating what to do in
this extremity, a Woman presented herself to me, whose Beauty was infinitely
transcending all I had ever beheld; she had a noble and Majestic mien, a most
Divine Air, and her charms cast so great a Luster that I was dazzled with Gazing
on her; she struck me with so profound a respect at the first sight of her
Glory's, that I could not forbear throwing myself at her feet, imploring I
might be eternally permitted to Adore her; and to become her slave. When
raising me from the ground, and looking on me with Eyes more Majestic than
kind, she said to me in a loud voice.

Fly, Lysidus, this hated Place,
Too long thou'st bin a slave to Love.
Thy youth has yet a nobler Race
In more Illustrious paths to move.
Glory your fonder flame controuls,
Glory, the life of generous Souls.
Once you must Love to learn to live,
It Is the first lesson youth should learn;
Useful instructions Love will give,
If you avoid too much concern:
Loves flame, tho in appearance bright,
Deceives with false and glittering light.
But, Lysidus, the time is come
You must to Beauty bid adieu;
Recall your wandering passions home,
And only be to Glory true;
She is a Mistress that will last
When all Loves fires are gone and past.
Those words, repeated to me with an Air haughty and imperious, touched me to
the very Soul, and made me blush a thousand times with shame to behold myself
in that ridiculous state, almost reduced to the same tenderness for Bellinda
and Bellimante I had before had for Silvia; but I soon found my error and in an
instant became more in Love with Glory than I had ever been in my life.
Insomuch that I resolved to leave Irresolution and follow her. I confess at
first it gave my heart some little pain to withdraw and disingage it from so
long and so fond a custom, and I was more than once forced to parley thus with
my imtractable and stubborn heart.

Oh! fond remembrance! do not bring
False notions to my easy heart.
And make the foolish tender thing
Think, that with Love it cannot part;
Or die when e're the charming God
Forsak's his old and kind abode.
And thou, my heart, be calm and Pleased,
For better hours thou now shall see,
Of all thy Anxious torments eased
From all thy toils and slavery free,
From Beauties Pride and peevish scorns
From Wits Intregueing false returns.
It Is Honor now thou shall pursue,
Her dictates only shall obey;
Yet Beauty en Passant may view
And be with all loves Pleasures Gay,
Quench when you please resistless fires,
But make no business of desires.
Thus, my dear Lysander, following Glory, I soon arrived at the extent of the
Island of Love, and there I incounter'd a thousand Beauties, Attractions,
Graces and Agreements; all which endeavored a new, but in vain, to engage me. I
past by 'em all without any regard only sight, as I beheld 'em with the
remembrance, how once the meanest of those Beauties would have charmd me. I
looked back on all those happy shades, who had been conscious of my softest
pleasures, and a thousand times I sighing bid'em farwell, the Rivers, Springs
and Fountains had my wishes that they might still be true and favor Lovers, as
they had a thousand times done me. These dear rememberance, you may believe,
stayed some time with me, yet I would not for an Empire have returned to 'em
again, nor have lived that life over a new I had so long and with so much
pleasure persu'd.

After this I took a Vessel and put off from that shore, where, tho I had met
with many Misfortunes, I had also received a thousand joys: While it was in
view I found myself touched with some regret, but being failed out of sight of
it, I sighed no more, but bid adieu to fond Love for ever.

All you Beauties and Attractions,
That make so many hearts submit;
Soft inspirers of affection
Mistresses of dear bought wit.
To whose Empire we resigning
Prove our homage justly due
After all our sighs and whining
Dear delight we bid adieu.
After all your fond Caprices,
All your Arts to seem Divine,
Painting, Patching and your Dresses,
Easy votaryes to incline.
After all your couzening Billets
Sighs and tears, but all untrue,
To your Gilting tricks and quillets,
I for ever bid adieu.
A Miscellany OF POEMS.
To a Fair Lady, sent with a Miscellany of Poems.
FAir Charmer see how various Poets meet
To lay their several Labors at your Feet;
Whose different Fancies different Passions move,
The grinning Satyr, and the smiling Love,
And sure there is something that you may approve.
The Volume like a Landscape will appear,
Some parts less Beautiful, some Bright and Clear;
But where Defects in the Picture you shall spy,
Be pleased their want of Luster to supply,
And gild it with a Beam from your bright Eye.
To Urania in Mourning.
SEE where she sits in mourning Robes aray'd,
Like Night's bright Goddess shining through a shade.
What Charms has this fair Mourner that can make
The sable dress of Grief such Beauty take.
Dull Custom has prescribed this sad Attire,
When Sorrow reigns, and Beauty would retire.
But Sorrows self when by Urania worn,
Looks, fair and charming as the rising Morn.
Thus when descending Angels would disguise
Their bright celestial Form from human Eyes;
Their Splendour through the borrowed shape will shine,
And we perceive an Excellence Divine.
But while this lovely mourning Nymph we view,
We sigh, weep, languish, and turn Mourners too;
Yet with this difference, that while others weep
For Friends expired, and lodged in Death's calm Sleep,
A restless waking Passion makes our Grief
That never can dye, nor ever hope Relief:
Yet would Urania from her Sorrows spare
To my Distress one balmy pitying Tear;
That Charity would make me bless my Pain,
And never wish to be at Ease again.
SONG.
AS wretched, vain, and indiscreet
Those Matches I deplore,
Whose Bartering Friends in Counsel meet,
To huddle in a Wedding Sheet
Some miserable Pair that never met before.
Poor Love of no account must be,
Though never so fixed and true,
No Merit but in Gold they see,
So Portion and Estate agree,
No matter what the Bride and Bridegroom do.
cursed may all covetous Husbands be
That Wed with such Design,
And Cursed they are; For while they ply
Their Wealth, some Lover by the By
Reaps the true Bliss, and digs the richer Mine.
On Beauty.
A PINDARIC.
SAY all ye Judging wise,
Who into Nature's Secrets dive,
And can her unknown Reasons give
From whence great Beauties wondrous power does rise,
Whose Universal Tyranny
Subdues the Tributary Would, and brings
In equal Fetters Slaves and Kings,
To languish in a soft Captivity.
It triumphs over the Strong and Proud,
It calms the Stormy and the Loud.
The stubborn and the frozen Cold dissolves,
Perverts the wise Man's best Resolves.
The Genius of the Wits, and Braves imploys
In the important Subject of its Praise.
The Fool and Coward too inspires
This with prevailing Wit, that with Heroic Fires.
Judah's wise King, when he
Had studied Nature over and over,
Surveying all her hidden Store,
Even from the Reed to the triumphant Tree,
Through all the spacious Universal round,
Soft Beauty was the only good he found
Worth setting his select Affections on.
'Twas there he bounded his Delights,
His cheerful Days, and charming Nights,
On that most perfect Bliss beneath the Sun.
Beauty alone inspired him with the Theme
Of the bright Virgins of Jerusalem.
From that alone his Divine Raptures sprung,
Beauty his Business was, and Love was all his Song.
When Alexander had his Conquest hurled
Over all the yielding Tributary World,
And found no more that could afford
New Business for his Glory, and his Sword,
It Is said, He wept; but when the Persian Maid
(With greater Charms) the Hero had surveyed,
He found the toil of Conquering her much more
Than all his worthless Worlds before.
He sighed and bowed, looked pale and red by turns,
To serve her was his whole delight,
Thinks it as brave, while thus he burns
Under soft Venus, as rough Mars to fight.
And Sieges lays of Sighs and Tears,
And tells soft Stories of his Heart,
Of restless Nights, and Days of Cares,
Of Pains, and Flames, and wild Despairs,
Of bleeding Wounds and Smart,
And found that no Fatigues of War
Were half so great as vanquishing the Fair!
But oh, no Victory could so Charming prove,
As that of the dear Maids confessing Love!
David, whose harmonious String
Could Readiness infernal Tempest calm,
And by the Musicks strange mysterious Balm,
Appeased the Frenzies of a raging King;
Yet stranger Charms in the fair Hittite found,
Which kindled to a softer Fire
His cold and languishing Desire.
And struggling Virtue in strong Fetters bound,
That powerful Aid was useless now,
When yet more powerful Beauty was in view,
He found no Music could appease
The troubled Spirits her fair Eyes did raise.
The Music of her Voice did but inspire
A more tormenting Fire;
So great a Sympathy
There is between soft Love and Harmony.
In the wild darkness of Idolatry
Did Clodovaeus see
'Twas more than vulgar Light
That made the fair Clotilda look so bright,
When from her conquering Eyes
Surpised, he saw such sparkling Flames arise,
And therefore wished to know
The Spring from whence such streams of Light did flow.
Why then should I,
Ye learned Stoics tell me why?
Think it unworthy of my Name
To own a Generous and a Noble Flame,
Since Love's Almighty Power
To whom the Young, the Great and Brave,
The Wise, the Politic and Grave,
Have bowed to as their Conqueror.
What reasonable Man desires to pass
For one more great and good than David was?
Or who for Wisdom ever hoped Renown
Like wise, like sacred Solomon?
Or who in glorious Arms could ever dare
Like the famed Son of Jupiter?
Or if thou lie beneath the common Curse
Of being Bad, what than a Heathen worse;
Yet Clodovaeus by Beauties piercing fight
Was brought from his Egyptian Night,
Directed by so fair a Hand,
He could not miss the promised Land.
Then ye fond Stoics fly
Your Learned, your Dull-School Foolery,
And lay your Speculation by,
Or you are greater Fops than I.
Lay by your Books, and this believe
By charming Beauty it is alone,
That true and false are to be known,
It Is Beauty is alone Superlative.
SONG.
FReedom is a real Treasure,
Love a Dream, all false and vain,
Short, uncertain is the Pleasure,
Sure and lasting is the Pain.
A sincere and tender Passion
Some ill Planet overrules,
Ah how blind is Inclination,
Fate and Women dote on Fools.
SONG.
AH how Dull it is to love,
Ah how Dull is past Desire,
How insipidly we move
In the flames of dying Fire.
Maidens if you will be Wise,
Rather dye than lose the Prize.
Ah what Angel things are Men
Ere the last Desires obtained,
But alas are Devils when
Cold forced Kisses are but fained.
Maidens ah be warned by me,
Rather Dye than Conquered be.
To the Heroic Antonia.
Madam,
WHen first I saw your Conquering Face,
You appeared so Charming, and so full of Grace,
My Soul was into a new Wonder wrought,
'Which took increase from every look and thought.
In all your Actions all the Virtues shined,
And every Word confessed your generous Mind.
The Number of such gallant Maids are few,
Our Ages Birth has but produced us two,
The famed Astrea, and more famous you.
Thou Monarch of your Sex alone do Reign,
And their lost Glory Nobly do regain;
Thou shewst the Paths that do to Honor guide,
How to be Great without the Vice of Pride.
That vanity of a Spirit basely born,
Thy Nobler Flights thy Sexes Arts do scorn.
In thy gay Temper more true Graces lie,
Than all their boasted fond Formality.
Would they arrive at an Immortal Fame,
And at the Amazonian Glory's aim,
They must your generous Presidents pursue,
Though still alas they must submit to you.
With the learned Pen of some famed ancient Wit,
In thy high Praise a Volume might be writ;
But humbler I with Blushes do confess,
The Muses never did my Fancy bless
To dip in Helicon have no pretense,
And aim no higher than to praise with Sense;
Since at your Feet no Scepters I can lay,
Let a mean Wreath of Flowers the Tribute pay.
To Laurinda.
PRoduce aspiring Muse thy Noblest strain,
To sing the Charmer of our Court and Plain,
No common one Laurinda's Praise can fit
Empress of Beauty, Patroness of Wit.
'Twere Sacrilege this Tribute to defer,
For Wit was born and flourishes with her.
She makes Wits Court where ere she does repair,
The Muses and the Sacred Train are there.
Where ere she moves the Graces lead the way,
And just Devotion to their Goddess pay.
This is the she, whose Praise we must Indite,
Transcending mortal Verse, and common Flight.
Here then industrious Muse, and understand
The vast important Task thou have in hand.
Fetch me the Beauties of the blooming Spring,
The richest Odors spicy Gales can bring.
All Nature's scattered Glories joined in one,
A Present to the bright Laurinda's Throne.
The Smiles that did the Infant World adorn,
The fairest Luster of the Rising Morn,
The Calm, the Joy that breaking Day inspires,
When it to Anthems wakes the fether'd Quires,
The Souls of Stars are yet more pure and bright,
Abstracted Beams, and Empyrean Light.
The Pride of Halcyon Seas, unclouded Air,
All these my Muse with wondrous skill prepare
A Diadem for bright Laurinda's hair.
Desist deluded Muse, we vainly toil,
All these will prove but fair Laurinda's Foil.
In vain thou seekst abroad the blooming Year,
The Beauties of the Spring are all in her.
All Nature's scattered Glories thou will find
Already centered in her Form and Mind.
The Smiles that did the Infant World adorn,
Less bright than those that on her Face are worn.
Her Presence Joy and Summer calm, supplies,
And Day is always breaking in her Eyes,
Herself the sweetest Anthem will inspire,
And teach us to excel the fether'd Quire.
Her Charms excel the pride of Earth and Air,
No Sea-born Venus e're was half so fair.
Thus slender Muse thy daring Course is crossed.
And in the Ocean of Perfection lost.
Yet something thou art still obliged to say,
Thy grateful Offering on her Altar lay,
And own at least the Debt thou can not pay.
Seize the Occasion, and this Boon obtain
To be the humblest Waiter in her Train.
On a Lady singing.
HOw like Elysium is the Grove
When chaste Dorinda sings of Love,
It charms the troubled Soul to rest,
And makes a Calm in every Breast,
With various kinds of Harmony
She strikes at once the Ear and Eye;
So soft a Voice, and she so Fair,
Gives double sweetness to the Air.
The wretched Strephon dumb with Pain
And Grief, too heavy to complain
When young Dorinda tunes her Voice,
Forgets his Woes, and dreams of Joys,
Ah lovely Charmer be so kind
To ease sometimes a tortured Mind,
His Groans with gentle Sighs control,
And breathe a Calm into my Soul.
To Mr. W.
WHY this talking still of Dying,
Why this dismal Look and Groan,
Leave fond Lover, leave your Sighing,
Let these fruitless Arts alone,
Love's the Child of Joy and Pleasure,
Born of Beauty, nursed with Wit,
Much amiss you take your measure,
This dull whining way to hit.
Tender Maids you fright from loving
By the effect they see in you.
If you would be truly moving,
Eagerly the Point pursue.
Brisk and gay appear in Woing,
Pleasant be if you would please;
All this Talking, and no Doing,
Will not Love, but Hate, increase.
Armida: Or, The Fair Gill.
NOT Circe nor Medea had such Art,
Or powerful Charms to captivate a Heart;
Nor Syren's Voices with so pleasing sound,
Lull those asleep whom they design to wound.
For a new Conquest all her Skill she tries,
But yet by different ways to gain the Prize,
As Time and Humors fit, Her Looks appear
Bashful sometimes, and full of Virgin fear.
Then earnest and lascivious as she finds
Her Beauty work upon her Lovers minds,
When e're the bashful Youth fears his Success:
She gives the Trembler hopes by soft Address,
Advances with more sweetness in her Face,
And fires him with some kind peculiar Grace,
Sooths his fond Heart, and dissipates his Fear,
And thaws the Ice her Scorns had gathered there.
But if the God of Love infuse his Dart,
And captivate a bold and forward Heart.
Her Eyes assume their state, and her neglect
Creates a doubtful Fear mixed with respect.
Yet lest, too much of Scorn produce Despair,
Some glance of kindness in her Eyes appear,
While hardly gained she makes the blessing dear.
But still the Cloud she cunningly declines,
And fits her Looks to second her Designs.
Sometimes she seems to smother Sighs with Pain,
And calls up Tears, then turns 'em back again.
As if the softning Tide she would not show,
But that in spite of all her Pride, they flow.
And all to make a thousand easy Hearts
To weep in earnest by her coz'ning Arts.
And with the flames of Pity tempers so
The Darts of Love, none can resist the Blow.
And when she finds a Lover coming on,
Yet not so fast to be too soon undone,
There all her Arts of Languishment she tries,
Sweetens her whispering Voice, softens her Eyes,
Touches his hand as if it were by chance,
And yields herself to every kind advance.
Looks on his Eyes, then strait declines her own,
And seems to love, as not to have it shown.
And having thus proceeded in her Art,
Breaks forth, as if she could not guard her Heart.
Too long, she cries, I have suppressed my Fire,
Take all my Heart, and all Love can desire.
Thus while she softly speaks, and sweetly smiles,
And doubly charms the Senses by these Wiles,
She does a Faith in strongest Souls create,
And gains a Conquest in despite of Fate.
Ah cruel Love! the Honey and the Gall,
Which thou afford'st, do equally Enthral;
And all our Ills, and all our Cures from Thee,
Are mortal to us in the same degree:
If any of Inconstancy complain
Of broken Vows and her unjust disdain,
She faines herself unpracticed in Loves Arts,
And that she wants the charms should vanquish hearts.
And looks with such a Blushing Modesty,
As undeceives your fancied Injury.
And thus the Thorn lies hid that she does bear
Under the Roses which her Beauties wear.
So in the earliest rise of day, we spy
The ruddy Morning mingled with the Sky.
While shame and anger in her looks appear,
Both seem confusedly mixed together there
Thus in delusive Dream the time being spent,
Weary with cozenage and discontent,
Even hope itself he scarcely now retains,
But like a Hunter at the last remains,
Who having to no purpose spent the day,
At last loses the track of the lost Prey.
Such were the Practices and such the Arts,
By which she can ensnare ten thousand hearts;
Or rather such the powerful arms do prove,
By which she conquers and makes slaves to Love.
Predictions for Saturday next.
ON Saturday the twenty fourth,
(The wind fresh blowing from the North,)
Two glorious Stars their Spheres shall change,
And into other Climats range.
Then tell me, Muse, and tell me true,
What Alterations shall ensue:
Predict at least, what weather shall
Our Dark Horizon then befall.
Tempests and Earthquakes, I presage,
Shall at that Dreadful season rage.
A Cloud of dark desponding Fears,
A storm of Sigh's and slood of Tears;
And many a wretched Lovers heart
Be wreckt and torn, when they depart.
To Astrea, on her sending me a Bottle of Orange-floure Water.
Could I but half so rich a Verse invent,
As was the Cordial which Astrea sent;
My Muse herself the Messenger would prove,
Born on the wings of Poetry and Love:
But all the Muses spring can never repay
The Present my Astrea did convey.
Now, Strephon, hope, Astrea does incline
To Pity thee, since Cordials so Divine
Are only sit for hearts that bleed, like mine.
To Cloris going into the Country.
OH, tell me Cloris, tell me, why
You take delight to see men die.
And, Parthian-like, kill, while you fly.
Return, if not for charity,
At least for Pride, return to see
The Trophies of your Victory.
Can you such cruelty pursue?
And make your Eyes those mischeifs do,
Which they despise, or fear to rue?
Ah Nymph, if you persist to take
This course, and every place forsake,
As Soon as you a Lover make.
No Residence for Cloris can be found,
Since where soere she goes she is sure to wound.
SONG.
IN vain does Hymen with Religious Vows
Oblige his Slaves to wear his chains with ease,
A Privilege alone that Love allows,
It Is Love alone can make our Fetters please.
The Angry Tyrant lays his Yoke on all,
Yet in his flercest Rage is charming still:
Officious Hymen comes whener'e we call,
But haughty Love comes only when He will.
To a Lady, (whom he never saw, nor had any description of,) to prove he Loves
her.
By a Person of Quality.
BRightest of Virgins! Whose high Race and Name
Bespeaks you worthy of the Noblest flame,
Arms you with power Divine, that can dispense
Its Influence beyond the reach of sense,
Making us frame of you, as Heaven above,
Idea's of our Ignorance and Love.
Disdain not, fairest, such Devotions then
As the best worshippers offer to Heaven.
Nor think 'em feigned, since things above do grow
(Concealed and distant) more admired below.
Absence creates esteem, and makes that fire
(Which the Suns near approaches quench) aspire,
While those who do enjoy perpetual rays
Curse those bright Beams that Crown our Halcyon day.
Know then, my Passion Real is and Great,
Not such as from dull sense derives its heat,
But Sympathy; that Royal Law that binds
In a close union things of different kinds,
That secret charm of Nature which inspires
The whole creation with Harmonious fires.
Heads Cupids Arrows, guides his Roving Bow,
Extends its Empire over all things below.
Since then you know I Love, how much, and how,
If of my Passion you still disallow,
Know then the Lot is cast, the Gods approve
The Fates Decree, and have pronounced, I Love?
Song by the same hand.
SOme Brag of there Cloris, and some of their Phyllis,
Some cry up their Celia's and bright Amarillis,
Thus Poets and Lovers their Mistresses Dub,
And Goddesses frame from the Wash-boul and Tub;
But away with these fictions, and counterfeit folly,
There 's a thousand more charms in the name of my Dolly.
I cannot describe nor her Beauty and Wit,
Like Manna to each she is the Relishing Bit
She alone by enjoyment the more does prevail,
And still with fresh pleasure does hoist up your sail,
N^y had you a surfeit took of all others
One Look of my Doll Strait your stomach recovers.
But when I consider her Humor and feature,
I Am apt to suspect she is inclined to the creature,
What contrary winds in my Breast then arise,
What hopes and what fear and what doubt do surprise?
What Storms do I feel of trouble and care,
While my wishes themselves at variance are?
For sometimes I wish her more cruel, less fair,
But then I should either not Love, or despair:
I Would have her to Love too, not Amorous be,
I Would have her be coy, but kinder to me.
But should she in me this Humor discover,
She Would quickly discard her Impertinent Lover.
Sleeping on her fair hand.
IF custom those for Poets dos allow,
That once have slept upon Parnassus brow,
Why may not I to that Ambition grow,
Who Slept upon this fairer Hill of Snow.
At least in this our fancies do agree
They of their Mountain write, and I of thee.
And as they beg the favor of the nine,
To match their noblest flights I ask but thine.
To Gloriana on saying I had a tough heart.
FIrst let the Lion dread the bleating Sheep,
The winds be hushed, the Sea's and Fountains sleep.
The day's bright Empire to the night resign,
And water freez beneath the burning Line,
These contradictions sooner shall be found
Than Gloriana's Beauty fail to wound.
Allow, fair charmer, that (as you have said,)
My heart were of the toughest Temper made,
What privilege can thence to me befall,
Against those prevailing powers, that conquer all.
If feebler charms the force of Love can show,
Then how much deeper must his Arrows go
When Gloriana's Eye-brow is the Bow.
Sent with Ovids Epistles, to a fair Lady.
AIuster Present sure was never made,
Than these Epistles to your hand conveyed.
For there the Loves of Ladys most appear.
These cuplets only Strephons Passion bear.
A Passion true as theirs, more full of heart
And brings in substance, what it wants in Art.
But if in slighted Flames they ever burned
Their wrongs upon our sex are now returned
For never they their Lovers did pursue
With half that Passion that I sigh for you;
Of Love, the only Picture there you see
But have the true Original in me.
Your Justice therefore must this truth approve,
They better write of Love, I better Love.
Sent with a Basket of Fruit:
THe Streets with flowery Garlands we should croun
To welcome fair Astrea to the Town.
Officious Cupids at her feet should lay
The fairest Treasures of the Blooming May;
But now we seek the Summers store in vain,
For these Autumnal Fruits alone remain,
Which mourning Loves should to Astrea bear,
As Legacies of the departed year.
But when the little Messengers shall spy
The Charming Nymph, transported they will cry,
No more my Mates, your Winter Presents bring,
For we have found the Goddess of the Spring.
Love cannot be indifferent.
INdifference in Love? it cannot be,
It Is contradiction to the last degree?
Cool temperate Passion is an empty name,
And greater nonsense than a freezing flame:
Hope, fear, and joy may with degrees dispense,
These Passions but by halves affect our sense,
But when we love, it is still with violence.
And that dull Shepherd, who this truth denies
Sure never must have seen Astrea's eyes;
Half Beauties may perhaps half Passions move,
But She still wounds with all the force of Love:
Yet whilst such rigorous flames she does inspire,
Preserves herself Unmoved by any fire:
Who gaze upon her Charms are sure to burn,
And are as certain to have no return,
Yet never repent them of their destiny,
But count it greater Bliss for her to dye
Than in the Arms of other Beauties lie.
To Astrea, On her absence, during which I could not write.
IF e're I had a spark of the Poets flame
From fair Astrea's quickening Beams it came.
And since the meanest Writer will aspire
To call his faculty a sacred fire;
Why may not I presume that mine is so,
That from a cause so excellent did grow?
But its not strange, since it was born so high
That like an earthly vapor it should dye.
No, no, Astrea, it is my greatest Pride,
That in appearance for a while it died:
This seeming weakness proves its birth was true,
And that the noble flame was caused by you:
'Twas in your absence, that my Muse lay dead
But at the sight of you lifts up its head:
She wakes Astrea's Graces to rehearse,
And pay the tribute of a thankful verse;
So the Springs Bird, the Swallow's seen no more
When Winters stormy Blasts begin to roar.
But with the Springs return, she sings again
And takes her nimble flight over every Plain.
Yet tho the Poets fire grew cold, my breast
Retained one flame, that could not be suppressed,
A flame, that like the other did arise,
And first was kindled by Astrea's Ey's.
But, This no Absence can destroy, 'twill burn
Tho with despair oppressed and sure of no Return.
To the most accomplished Heroic, and incomparable, the Lady Antonia.
Madam,
YOur charming sex, it is true, can only claim
By native right the exalted Poets flame.
But nature has so frugally to most
Dispensed her gifts, that few perfection boast.
Beauty for one she thinks a Portion fit,
Where Beauty fails she makes amends with wit.
But where her niggard hand does neither grant,
A generous soul supplys the double want.
On all the rest her favors singly fall,
Antonia only has engrost them all.
Thus when my Muse would show herself with Grace
I bid her Copy from Antonia's face,
And when with wit she would my verse inspire,
Take from your Eyes the brisk enlivening fire.
Or if she would present an Empress part,
Than to consult Antonia's generous heart.
Oh! had Apelles, when he Venus drew
And robbed the Sex to make his Picture true,
Had the great Artist once Antonia seen,
Once viewed her Beauty and Heroic Mien,
The whole sex to his Aid he need not call
To glean the several charms --
For in your Person he had found them all.
Sent with Cowleys works to Astrea.
THe Gentle Cowley, in a mournful strain,
Once of Injurious fortune did complain.
But thought not then, that our obliging times
Would recompense his unrewarded Rhimes;
For now presented at Astrea's feet
His noble Muse her full reward does meet:
The Mistress, whose bright charms such fame did gain,
Was but a fair creation of his Brain.
And nature grieved, to see the Art of thought
Exceed the finest Pieces, she had wrought,
Resolved to try the best her Power could do,
Expressing all his fancied charms in you:
Since then in you those real beauties live,
That to those Poems such applause could give,
No wonder that I feel a flame for you,
Beyond what Cowley e're described or knew,
Think therefore, when his tender lines you see,
Your self the Mistress, and the Lover me.
To my Heart.
WHat ail'st thou, oh thou trembling thing
To Pant and Languish in my Breast,
Like Birds that fain would try the callow wing
And leave the Downy nest?
Why have thou filled thyself with thought
Strange, new, fantastic as the Air?
Why to thy Peaceful Empire have thou brought
That restless Tyrant, Care?
But oh alas, I ask in vain
Thou answer'st nothing back again,
But in soft sighs Amintor's name.
Oh thou betrayer of my liberty,
Thou fond deceiver, what is the youth to thee!
What has he done, what has he said
That thus has conquered or betrayed?
He came and saw but 'twas by such a light,
As scarce distinguished day from night;
Such as in thick-grown shades is found
When here and there a peircing Beam
Scatters faint spangl'd Sunshine on the ground
And casts about a melancholy gleam,
But so obscure I could not see
The charming Eyes that wounded thee,
But they, like gems, by their own light
Betrayed their value through the gloom of Night.
I felt thee heave at every look,
And stop my Language as I spoke.
I felt thy Blood fly upward to my Face,
While thou unguarded lay
Yiedling to every word, to every Grace,
Fond to be made a prey.
I left thee watching in my Eyes
And listening in my Ear.
Discovering weakness in thy sighs
Uneasy with thy fear.
Suffering Imagination to deceive,
I found thee willing to believe,
And with the treacherous shade conspire,
To let into thyself a dangerous fire.
Ah foolish wanderer, say, what woudst thou do.
If thou should find at second view,
That all thou fanciest now were true,
If thou should find by day those charms,
Which thus observed threaten undoing harms.
If thou should find that awful mien,
Not the effects of first Address,
Nor of my conversation disesteem
But noble native fullenness;
If thou should find that soft good natured voice
(Unused to insolence and noise,)
Still thus adorned with modesty.
And his minds virtues with his wit agree,
Tell me, thou forward lavish fool,
What reason could thy fate control,
Or save the ruin of thy Soul?
Cease then to languish for the coming day,
That may direct his wandering steps that way,
When I again shall the loud form survey.
DIALOGVE
Thirsis and Clarona,
Thirsts. HAil, Clarona, clear as Morning
In its brightest gay attire,
Love and Beauties chief adorning
Mistress of all soft desire;
Hail, Clarona, Joy of Swains,
Charmer of the Fields and Plains.

Clarona. Thirsis, often have you crowned me
In the Shady Cyprus Grove,
And your flowing sighs did wound me,
When you wept and talked of Love.
And when for kisses you have strove,
Tho I cha'ft and tho I cried,
With much ado you were denied.
But, Thirsis, if you will be true,
I can Love as well as you,
Tho once I said I would deceive ye,
Yet, my Thirsis, don't believe me.

Thirsis. Oh, Clarona, Joy attend thee
All the Gods and powers defend thee;
Sweeter are thy words, than Song,
Melting Musick's in thy Tongue.

Chorus.
Now we'll chant, we'll live and love
And welcome in the Spring.
Our Pleasures we will still improve,
In every Thicket, Shade and Grove,
With Love and Musicks trembling string.
SONG.
BEneath a cool shade, where some here have been,
Convenient for Lovers, most pleasant and green;
Alexis and Cloris lay pressing soft Flowers,
With Kissing and Loving they past the dull hours.
She close in his Arms with her head on his breast,
And fainting with pleasure; you guess at the rest:
She blushed and she sighed with a Joy beyond measure,
All ravished with Billing and dying with Pleasure.
But while thus in Transports extended they lay,
A Hansom young Shepherd was passing that way!
She saw him and cried -- oh Alexis, betrayed!
Oh what have you done -- you have ruined a Maid;
But the Shepherd being modest discreetly past by,
And fest 'em again at their leisure to die.
And often they Languish'd with Joy beyond measure.
All Ravished with Billing and dying with Pleasure.
Strephon to his three Mistresses.
SEE, fair Astrea, what your charms can do,
To make a Lover and a Poet two.
Where yours and Gloriana's Powerful Beams
With Beautiful Eliza are the Theams,
The heaviest fancy to a Height must soar,
So easy it is to write when we adore.
Each like a Planet singly and apart
Can through the Soul your piercing fancy's dart;
How strangely then must you affect the mind,
When thus in Glorious constellation joined?
Ah! too like Planets each her power employs,
Bright while she wounds; and shines while she destroys.
Each is the dazzling object of desire,
But oh! alike creates a hopeless fire.
Astrea, always Airy, Witty, Gay,
As Nymphs that by Diana's fountain play,
Against the assaults of Love her heart maintains,
And never regards the sighs of dying Swains.
In vain I gaze on Gloriana's Eyes
Already made another Shepherds prize.
One truly happy Swain injoys entire
Those precious charms for which the rest Expire.
And tho Eliza's free, I Am wretched still:
For what availes the power without the will.
How strange a fate has Love for me decreed,
For one I burn, and for other Bleed,
Die for the third, and yet with none succeed.
To the Famed Antonia, on her Dwelling.
THou Glory of the Age, best of thy kind,
An Angels fabric, and an Angels mind.
Thou, whose Heroic virtues may atone
For all the vice thy frailer sex have shown:
To more than common greatness thou were born
No scanty Glories did thy fame adorn,
Thy Soul all Man; soft Woman all thy Form.
At once his Arms possess, who thee embrace,
A Heroin Venus, and a Lovesick Mars.
All that thy sex could ever render fair
All that fond man thinks worthy of his care,
In thy bright Mind and Body centered are,
Some power Divine still dwells upon thy Tongue,
And all thou speak is one Immortal Song;
Angels and Gods of Love do listening sit,
Charmed with the Music of thy voice and wit.
A wit uncircumscrib'd by femal rules,
That nice, that dull, excuse for silent Fools.
You never speak, but like the sacred Word
It does a blessing to mankind afford;
Use and instruction it is, that never fails,
A Rhetoric, that in spite of force prevails*
Generous as nature, when first Spring she bred,
And over the newborn World her Bounties shed,
Like Heaven dispensing goodness all a round,
And thy large Soul, like that, admits no bound.
Oh had thou lived in those Illustrious days,
When Rome did Statues to vast Merits raise,
Thine in their Temples had Triumphant stood,
And found an equal worship with some God.
Fondly they now adore their Portia's name,
Who for one single wound achieved such fame,
When 'twas but female cunning at the best,
To buy the secret from her Husbands breast.
'Twas Lust of curiosity alone,
Thy undesigning valor's all thy own.
Born in thy mighty Soul, and lives and Reigns
Scorning returns of mercenary gains.
Had thou bin Portia, thou had farther gone,
And not content the great design to have known
Had helped the Generous youth the deed to do,
And amongst the number fixed thy Dagger two;
She but the indulgent Wife expressed alone,
But thou much more the Wife and Friend had shown.
And with a just disdain of Tyranny
Assisted in the noble Victory,
On thy firm faith great Brutus might rely,
Who seeing him conquered could as bravely die:
Let Rome adore recorded Portia's fame,
While Britain boast's alone thy mightier na*
SONG.
ALL Joy to mortals! Joy anol mirth on occasion.
Eternal Io's sing,
The Gods of Love descend to Earth
Their Darts have lost the sting.
The Youth shall now complain no more
On Silvias needless scorn,
But she shall Love, if he Adore;
And melt when he shall Burn.
The Nymph no longer shall be shy,
But leave the gilting Road;
And Daphne now no more shall fly
The wounded panting God!
But all shall be serene and fair,
No sad complaints of Love
Shall fill the gentle whispering Air;
No Ecchoing sighs the Grove.
Beneath the shade's young Strephon lies,
Of all his wish possessed,
Gazing on Silvia's charming Eyes,
Whose Soul is there confessed.
All soft and sweet the Maid appears,
With looks that know no Art;
And though she yield with trembling fears,
She yields with all her Heart.
On an ungrateful and undeserving Mistress, whom he could not help Loving.
Being a Paraphrastical Translation of Ovid's 10th Elegy Lib. 3. Amorum.
I Have too long endured her guilty scorn,
Too long her falsness my fond love has born:
My freedom and my Wit at length I claim,
Be gone, base Passion! die, unworthy flame!
My life's sole torment, and my honors stain,
Quit this tired heart and end my lingering pain.
I have resolved to be myself once more;
Long banished reason to her rights restore.
And throw off Loves Tyrannick sway, that still incroching power.
My growing shame I see at last, tho late,
And my past follies both despise and hate;
Hold out, my heart, nor let her Beauti's move,
Be constant in thy Anger, as thy Love.
Thy present pains shall give thee future ease,
As bitter Potions cure, tho they displease.
It Is for this end, for freedom more assured,
I have so long such shameful pains endured.
Like a scorned slave before her door I lay,
And proud repulses suffered every day.
Without complaining, banished from her sight,
On the cold ground I spent the tedious night.
While some glad Rival in her Arms did lie,
Glutted with Love and surfeited with Joy.
Thence have I seen the tired Adulterer come,
Dragging a weak exhausted Carcass home;
And yet this curse a blessing I esteem,
Compared to that of being seen by him!
By him descried attending in the street,
May my Foes only such disgraces meet.
What toil and time has this false Woman cost,
How much of unreturning Youth has for her sake bin lost?
How long did I, where fancy, led or fate,
Unthank'd, unminded, on her Rambles wait;
Her steps, her looks, were still by mine persu'd,
And watched by me, she charmed the gazing crowd.
My diligent Love and over-fond desire
Has bin the means to kindle Others fire.
What need I mention every little wrong,
Or curse the softness of her soothing Tongue:
The private love-signs that in public pass
Between her and some common staring Ass,
The Coqutes Arts her faithless heart allows,
Or tax her with a thousand broken vows.
I hear she is sick and with wild haste I run,
Officious haste, and visit Importune.
Entering, my Rival on her bed I see,
The Politic sickness only was to me,
With this and more often has my Love been tried,
Some other Coxcomb let her now provide,
To bear her jilting and maintayn her pride.
My battered Bark has reached the Port at last,
Nor fears again the billows, it has past.
Cease your soft Oaths and that still ready shower,
Those once dear words have lost their wonted Power.
In vain you flatter, I am now no more
That easy fool you found me heretofore.
Anger and Love a doubtful fight maintain,
Each strive by turns my staggering heart to gain
But what can long against Loves Power contend?
My Love, I fear, will Conquer in the end.
I Will do what e're I can to hate you still;
And if I Love, know it is against my will.
So the Bull hates the Plowmans Yoke to wear,
Yet what he hates his stubborn neck must bear.
Her Manners often my indignation raise,
But straight her Beauty the short storm always.
Her Life I loath, her Person I adore,
Much I condemn her, but I Love her more:
Both with her and without her, I Am in pain,
And rage to lose what I should blush to gain,
Uncertain yet at what my wishes aim:
Loath to abandon Love, or part with Fame.
That Angel-Form ill suits a Soul all sin,
Ah! be less fair without, or more within.
When those soft smiles my yiedling powers invade,
In vain I call her Vices to my Aid.
Tho now disdaining the disguise of Art,
In my esteem her conduct claims no part,
Her Face a natural right has to my heart.
No crimes so black are to deform her Eyes,
Those Clouds must scatter when these Suns shall rise.
Enough, fair Conqueror, the day's your own;
See at your feet Lov's Uanquish'd Rebel thrown.
By those dear Joys, Joys dear tho they are past,
When in the kindest links of Love we held each other fast.
By the injured Gods, your false Oaths did profane,
By all those Beauties that inspire disdain,
By that Loved face from the whole sex elect,
To which I all my Vows and Prayers direct.
And equal with a Power divine respect,
By every feature of a form so fine,
And by those Eyes that charm and dazzle mine,
Spare from new triumph, cherish without Art
This ever faithful, this too tender, heart.
A heart, that was respectful while it strove,
But yiedling is all blind impetuous Love.
Live as you please, torment me as you will,
Still are you fair, and I must Love you still,
Think only if with just and clement Reign,
A willing subject you would choose to gain,
Or drag a Conquered Vassal in a chain.
But to what ever conduct you incline
Do, suffer, be, what my worst fears divine;
You are, you ought, you must, you shall be Mine.
Reason, for ever the vain strife give over,
Thy cruel wisdom I can bear no more;
Let me indulge this one soft Passions rule,
Curb vexing Sense, and be a happy fool.
With ful-spread Sayls the tempting gale obey,
That down Loves-current drives me fast away.
On the Death of Melantha.
WEep, all you Virgins, meet over this sad Hearse,
And you, great Goddess of Immortal Verse:
Come here a while and Mourn,
Weave not with Rosy Crowns your hair,
Let tears be all the Gems you wear.
And shed them plentifully on this Urne,
For it is Melantha, it is that lovely fair,
That lys beneath this weeping M^ble here.
But would you know, why she has took her flight
Into the Bosom of eternal night,
Before her Beauties scarce had showed their light.
Hark, and lament her fate;
As the young God of Love one day
Sat on a Rock at play,
And wantonly let fly his darts
Among the Nymphs and Shepherds hearts.
Melantha by unhappy chance came by,
Love jesting cried, I Will make her prove
The Godhead, she contemned, of Love.
In scorn she bad him strike and did his shaft defy,
While the boy slightly threw a dart
To wound, but not destroy, her Heart,
But greedy Death, fond of this Beauteous prey,
Caught the swift Arrow as it flew,
And added to it his own strength too,
Whch made so deep a wound, that, as she lay,
In silent sighs she breathed her Soul away.
Then all the little Gods begun to weep,
Oh let your sighs with theirs due measure keep:
For fair Melantha she is dead.
Her Beauteous Soul to Deaths dark Empire's fled.
Flora, the Bounteous Goddess of the Plains,
Who in fresh Groves and sweetest Meadows raigns,
Hearing the fair Melantha dead,
Brought all her Odorous wealth to spread
Over the grave where she was laid.
Then straight the Infant Spring began to fade,
And all the Fields where she did keep,
And fold he bleating Flocks of Sheep,
Their influence lost, with her fair Eyes, decayed;
For fair Melantha, by whose cruel pride
So many sad despairing Swains had died,
Felt Love at last, but death she rather chose
Than own she Loved, or the hid flame disclose.
Speak, Muses, for you hold immortal state
With Gods and know the Mysteries of fate,
You all what ever's past or present see,
And read the unwritten Pages over
Of times great Chronicle before
Events, and time, had writ what fate resolved should be.
Tell me, what Beauty is, whose force controuls
Reason and Power, and over mankind rules:
Kings stoop to Beauty and the Crowns they wear
Shine not with so much luster, as the fair.
Beauty a larger Empire does command
Than the great Monarch of the Seas and Land.
She can the coldest Anchorits inflame,
Cool Tyrants rage, and stroke their passions tame,
She can call youth to her forsaken seat
In withered Veins and give new life and heat.
She can subdue the fierce, the proud, and strong,
Give courage to the weak, the fearful and the young.
Beauty, the only Deity, we know,
With fear and aw we to her Altars go,
And there our purest zeal of Prayers, and vows, bestow.
Sure then it only seems to die,
And when it leaves us, mounts above
To the Eternal roof of Jove,
To be a Constellation and enrich the Sky,
But should I search the spangled sphere
For Metamorphets Beauty there,
Nothing of Helen now is seen,
Nor the fair Egyptian Queen:
Or thou, whose Eyes were constellations here,
Oh then thy fate we cannot enough deplore
With thee thy Beauty died and it is no more,
Then let us give Melantha's fate 'its due;
Strew Cyprus on her Hearse, and wreaths of Yew,
For fair Melantha, poor Melantha's dead,
Her sighing Soul to deaths eternal Empire's fled.
To the NIGHTINGAL coming in the Spring.
To invite Cloe From the Tumults of the Town to the innocent retreat in the
Country.
Written by a Person of Quality in 1680.
LIttle Songster, who do bring
Joy and Music to the Spring,
Welcome to our grateful Swains,
And the Nymphs, that grace the Plains.
How the Youths thy absence mourn?
What their Joy at thy return?
For their mirth and sports are done
All the year that thou art gone,
But at thy approach, their joys
Take new date from thy dear voice.
Every Shepherd chooses then
Some fair Nymph for Valentine.
While the Maid with equal Love
Does the happy choice approve:
Underneath some shade he sits,
Where soft silence Love begets
And in Artless sighs he bears
Untaught passion to her Ears.
No deceit is in his Tongue,
Nor she fears, nor suffors wrong;
But each others faith believe,
And each hour their Loves revive.
Often have I wished to be,
Happy Damon, blessed as thee,
Not that I for Silvia pine,
Silvia, who is only thine,
But that Cloe cannot be
Kind, as Silvia is to thee.
Thou, dear Bird, whose voice may find
Charms perhaps to make her kind,
Bear a message to her Breast,
And make me happy as the rest.
[London in the Plot-time.
In the Place where Tumult dwells,
Treasons Lurk, Ambition swells,
Pride erects her monstrous head,
And Perjury swears the guiltless, dead,
Power oppresses, envy pines,
Friends betray, and fraud designs.
Fears and Jealousy surprise
Rest and slumber from our Eyes,
And where vice all Ill contains,
And in gloomy glory reigns;
Where the Loyal, Brave and Just
Are victims to Phanatick Lust,
Where the noble Staffords blood
Calls from Heaven Revenge aloud.
In this place there lives a Maid,
Bright as nature ever made.
Fair beyond dull Beauties name
Can express her lovely frame.
In her charming Eyes reside
Love, disdain, desire, and pride.
Such, we know not which to call*
But has the excellence of all.
The first blushes of the Day
Or the new-blown Rose in May,
Or the Rich Sidonian die
Wrought for Eastern Majesty,
Is not gayer than the Red,
Nature on her cheeks has spread.
Her soft Lips still feed new wish
Of a thousand fancied kisses.
Gently swelling, plump and round,
With young smiles* and graces crowned;
Her round Breasts are whiter far
Than the backs of Ermins are.
Or the wanton Breast of Jove,
When a Swan for Leda's Love.
Eyes that charm when e're they Dart,
And never miss the destined heart.
Would thou have me tell thee more,
And describe her Beauties over;
I perhaps might make a Rape
On my Ideas naked shape,
Therefore fly, you will quickly see
By this Picture which is She.
Tell her the loud winds are Dumb,
Winter's past and Spring is come,
The delightful Spring! that reigns
Sweets and plenty over the Plains.
And with shady Garlands crowned
All the Woods and Groves around.
If she see the winged Quire,
Choose this season to retire
To the shelter of the Grove,
It Is by Instinct (say) of Love.
If she see the Herds and Flocks
Wanton round the Meads and Rocks,
Thus their wishing Males to move,
It Is the Instinct (say), of Love.
If she see the Bull among
Crowds of Fem^ls sleek and young,
Fight His Rival of the Drove,
It Is by Instinct (say,) of Love.
If she see the blooming vines.
In their season, fold their twines
Round the Oak that near her grows,
Say, it is nature mixed their boughs:
Then if Instinct these do move,
We by reason ought to Love.
Tell the fair one, every day
Youth and Beauty steal away,
And within a little space
Will destroy her charming face.
Every grace and smile, that lies
Languishing in Lips and Eyes,
First he will make his prey, and then,
Leave to Death, what does remain.
Who old Time does only send
To begin what he must end.
If she ask, what hour and place,
Where and when, Time wounds the face?
Say, it is not in the Night,
Nor when Day renews her light.
In the Morning, or at noon
Or at Evening when alone,
Or when entertained at home,
Or abroad this hour will come,
But swift time is always by,
First to perfect, then destroy.
And in vain you seek a cure
Since his wounds are every hour*
Bid her view Aurelia's brow,
Naked of her Glories now,
Yet she once could charm the throng,
Conquering with her Eyes and tongue.
Now, only's left this weak relief,
(To support her years and grief,)
When she could she used her prime
And enjoyed the fruitis of time:
And where ever she professed
Love, or hate, she killed, or blessed.
While the neighboring Plains were filled
With their names she Loved and killed.
Oh, when youth and Beautie's past,
That poor pleasure that does last
Is to think they were admired,
And by every youth desired,
While the Dotage of each Swain
She returned with scorn again.
Oh then let my Cloe know,
When her youth is faded so,
And a race of Nymphs appears,
Gay and sprightly in their years,
Proud and wanton in their Loves,
While the Shepherds of the Groves
Strive with Presents who shall share
Most the favors of the fair;
And herself she does behold
Like Aurelia now grown old,
Sighing to herself she will say
I was once adored, as they!
Yet with Pleasure think, that she
Loved and was beloved by me.
Therefore bid her haste and prove,
While she may, the joys of Love.
I will lead her to a soil
Where perpetual Summers smile,
Without Autumn which bereaves
Fairest Cedars of their leaves;
Where she shall behold the Meads
Ever Green, the Groves with Shades:
Lasting Flowrs the banks shall wear,
And Birds shall warble all the year.
Where the rustic swain does ow
Nothing to the Spade and Plow.
For their Harvest, natures care
Without toil relieves 'em there,
And no differing seasons bring
Changes to the constant Spring.
In the Morn she shall awake
With the noise the Shepherds make,
Cheering, with the Ecchoing sounds
Of their Horns, the eager Hounds.
Nymphs, as well as Shepherds too
In these Groves the chase pursue.
While at their backs their flowing hair
Loosely wantons in the Air;
Gilded Quivers on their thighs,
With Darts less fatal than their Eyes.
Each the others sloth does blame,
While they seek the Heart for game.
Who, poor Fool, his Feet employs
And thr'ow Woods and dales he flys.
Over plains and Rivers bounds,
And out-flies the Winds and Hounds.
When perhaps some Nymph, whose Eyes
Makes both men and Beast her Prize,
Swifter than Camilla's pace
Soon o'retakes the winged race,
And with one bright Glance she wounds,
And his fancied hope confounds.
Who, reflecting his faint Eyes
On her Face, with pleasure dy's.
When the sports are done, they rest
Underneath some shade, and feast
On sweet Beds of Violets crowned
With sweet Roses on the ground.
Where they Garlands weave and Poses
Of Green Myrtle, Pinks and Roses:
For which grace the ravished Swains
Pay soft kisses for their Pains.
Thus they Dally till the Light
Falls behind the Scene of Night.
A PASTORAL
On the Marriage of the right Honorable the Earl of Ossery to the Lady Mary
Somerset.
In a Dialogue between Damon and Menalcas, written by Mr. Edmond Arwaker. M. A.
Damon. WHat mighty Joy affects Menalca's breast,
Who Is Ecstasy is in his face expressed?
Sure his Laurinda now to smile begins,
Or his full Ews increase his Flocks with twins.

Men. Laurinda's frowns or smiles are now despised,
Far less her favors than this bliss are pris'd.
And all my Ews henceforth may barren be,
It Is wealth enough this happy day to see.

Dam. What has this day produced to make it blessed?

Men. Joy too transporting to be well expressed!
Joys which to Damon should not be unknown,
Since they concern the lovely Celladon.

Dam. The lovely Celladon! ah courteous swain!
Repeat and bless me with that name again!
Say, what new Triumph, what deserved success,
Do the large volume of his fame increase:
Has he at wrestling purchas't more Renown
Or won some other Race and wears the Crown!

Men. He has, and justly, won a Nobler Prize,
The Dazzling Joy of all beholders Eyes,
For what can Heaven enlarge to him beside,
Now the admired Clorinda is his bride.

Dam. Clorinda, his? then for this happy day
A sacrifice of six choice Lambs I Will pay,
That Ewe with twins shall recompense thy news,
Or, cull my Flocks, and, what thou fancyest, choose,
I Am so over joy'd that should thou take'em all,
I still shall think it a reward too small.

Men. The Gods do merit sacrifice, it is true,
But the bright pair deserve an offering too;
To them we'll now an humble Tribute bring:
Clorinda you, I Celladon will sing.

Dam. It Is well proposed, and now the Song begin.

Men. Then rouse, my Muse, and let thy subject be
Gay, soft, and fair, yet lofty too as he;
To Celladon thy verse is justly due,
Thou learned thy Art, whence his first Honors grew. Killkeny School.

From his great Ancestors magnificence,
And ow'st thy growth to that blessed influence:
Then what that gave, thou must return again,
And to his service consecrate thy pen.
Young Celladon, the glory of our Plains,
Joy of the Nymphs and envy of the Swains;
Whose charming voice each melting passion moves
As gentle Zephyrs bend the yiedling Groves.
To him the Nymphs their easy hearts resign,
For him despairing Shepherdesses pine.
Serene his face, as a rejoicing sky,
And Glorious, as a rising Sun, his Eye.

Dam. Sweet, as a blooming Spring, Clorinda's face,
More sooth and clear than her own crystal Glass;
For her with folded Arms and heads hung low
The hopeless Shepherds vent their restless woe;
While over the Plains their flocks neglected stray,
As in loves maze themselves have lost the way.
But she does all for Celladon despise,
And at his heart alone, the noblest Prize,
She darts the poynted Glories of her Eyes.

Men. The God of Love had not another Dart,
Able to pierce the wondrous Shepherds heart.
Had he alone attack't the Heroic Swain
The mighty Conqueror had been captive taken,
For Calladon inured to wars Alarms
And, tho all peaceful, takes delight in Arms,
Best pleased when most exposed, with noble heat
He danger seeks and dares the hand of Fate.
Once he persu'd it to a foreign shore,
Where his great Fathers name was feared before. France.

But all the damage by that terror done
Has ample reparation from the Son:
The favor, they from his Access received,
Atoned for routed Troops and Towns releiv'd. Monts.

Not only glory did engage his Sword,
Duty unsheathed it too to serve his Lord.
When bold Rebellion did the Throne invade
With broken faith, and fortune for 'its aid. The Western War.

With early zeal the Shepherd did appear;
His valor now had found 'its proper sphere;
Called to the Battle by these loud Alarms.
He broke away even from Clorindas Arms.
Death, in the Royal cause had more, than Beauty, charms.

Dam. He left Clorinda's Arms but not her heart,
There he was still, nor thence could ever part:
That, to the bloody field marched bravely out,
And there with pious prayers and wishes fought.
While she at home was never free from fear,
For the rich venture she had trusted there;
Yet hoped him safe in her great Fathers care.
Nor could she justly any danger dread
For him who fought along with Diomed: Duke of Beaufort.

Eternal Laurels Crown that happy name,
The dear, the sweet, the noble theme of fame;
To all his proofs of Loyalty before
The glorious Hero still is adding more.
Firm to his Prince and faithful to his trust
And daring to be hazardously just:
Profuse of Life in his great Masters cause,
And better pleased with service than applause.
Some happy Muse, worthy a Theme so great,
In lofty strains thy same shall celebrate.
Whose noble blood, which no corruption stains,
Gives the rich Tincture to Clorinda's veins.

Men. While Diomede with Arms protects the Throne,
Nestor with Council does support the Crown; Duke of Ormond.

Nestor, no less courageous still than wise,
And able once to act as to advise.
Nestor, the partner of his Master's fate,
Did all his injuries participate,
When usurpation banished him the Throne,
Nestor endured not he should go alone,
His Kingdom lost, and loyal subjects few,
Himself a King in Nestors heart he knew;
The Monarchy for which he was designed
Was there preserved as thither 'twas confined.
Nor were his limits scant, for his large soul
Has 'its unbounded sphere above the pole.
One subject of such vast Magnificence
Might make at any time a Glorious Prince.
But time sits heavy on his shoulders now,
And his declining head begins to bow;
Yet still so gracefully he treads the stage,
He makes the admiring World in love with age,
Long may he cause their wonder and delight,
Long be his day and far remote his night,
The night, when he to us shall disappear,
Called hence to gild some other Hemisphear.
Excellent Prince! in whom the World does see
A Species of untainted Loyalty.
May Heaven indulge our wishes long in thee,
But if the fates deny this bliss to give,
The Phaenix will in Celladon revive:
To him our Homage we must then transfer,
As much thy virtues, as thy fortunes, Heir.

Dam. See, Swain, the Sun exalts his shining head,
Brisk as a Bridegroom from Aurora's Bed,
While, like a blushing Bride, the dawning morn
Does in her Gay attire herself adorn.
It Is time the lovely pair, like them, should rise,
And we their presence want to bless our Eyes;
The expecting World 'its patience has outstay'd,
Lets have and wake 'em with a ferinade.

A Song by Robert Wolseley Esquire
A! Blame me not, if no despair,
A passion you inspire, can end.
Nor think it strange, too charming fair,
If Love, like other flames, ascend.
If to approach a Saint with Prayer
Unworthy votarys pretend,
Above all merit Heaven and you
To the Sincere are only due.
Long did respect awe my proud aim
And fear to offend my madness cover,
Like you it still reproved my flame
And in the friend would hide the Lover.
But by things that want a name
I the too bold truth discover.
My words in vain are in my power
My looks betray me every hour.
A PASTORAL
On the Death of His late Majesty written by Mr. Otway.
WHat horrors this that dwells upon the Plain,
And thus disturbs the Shepherds peaceful Reign?
A dismal sound breaks through the yiedling air
Forewarning us some dreadful storm is near,
The bleating flocks in wild confusion stray
The early Larks forsake their wandering way
And cease to welcome in the newborn day.
Each Nymph possessed with a distracted fear
Disordered hangs her loose dishevelled hair,
Diseases with her strong convulsions reign,
And deities not known before to pain
Are now with Apoplectick seizures slain:
Hence flow our sorrows, hence increase our fears
Each humble plant does drop her silver tears.
Ye tender Lambs stray not so fast away,
To weep and mourn let us together stay,
Over all the universe let it be spread
That now the Shepherd of the flock is dead.
The Royal Pan, that shepherd of the sheep,
He, who to leave his flock did dying weep,
Is gone, ah gone, never to return from deaths Eternal sleep.
Begin, Damela, let thy numbers fly
Aloft, where the safe milkey way does ly,
Mop'sus who Daphnis to the Stars did sing
Shall join with you and hither waft our King.
Play gently on your Reeds a mournful strain
And tell in notes through all the Arcadian Plain
The Royal Pan, the Shepherd of the sheep
He who to leave his Flock did dying weep
Is gone! is gone, never to return from death's eternal sleep.
SONG.
NO more will I my Passion hide
Though too presuming it appear,
When long despair a heart has tried
What other torment can it fear?
Vnlov'd of her I would not live
Nor die till she the sentence give.
Why should the fair offended be
If virtue charm in Beauty's dress:
If where so much divine I see
My open vows the Saint confess.
Awaked by wonders in her Eyes
My former Idols I despise.
Strephons complaint banished from Sacarisa.
HOW long shall I thus live condemned to mourn
In vain my Sacarisa's cruel scorn?
For ever let these Eyes be shut to light,
Since the bright Nymph has robbed me of her sight
All other objects dull and useless grow
No more their wonted form of color show.
In glooming shades may I for ever live
Sad as my sorrows, silent as my grave.
Since Sacarisa's Eyes withdraw their light
Darkness to me is Day, the Morning Night.
No more the Sun, the Worlds majestic Eye,
Shall dart his golden Beams through the Azure Sky:
Let sullen darkness on the Earth display
His sable wings to eclips the hated day
As when in Chaos, uncreated night
Sat Brooding on the seeds of Infant-light,
And no kind Beams did on the surface play
Till the Sun rose and made a perfect day;
So till my Nymph brings back her sparkling light
Darkness to me is Day, the Morning Night.
An Elegy written by Mr. W. O. Damon, and Thirsis.
Dam. WElcome, dear Thirsis far above,
The sweetest Emphasis of Love.
More welcome than the fairest Dame
That ever crossed this awful Plain,
With all her tender Virgin Train.

Thirs. I thank thee, Shepherd, for thy Love,
But how can thou so soon remove
The Passion which enraged thy breast,
And kept thy better part from rest?

Dam. Believe me, Thirsis, for it is true
They that Love long are very few,
I pip'd, I sung, I lived in pain,
In hope the Shepherdess to gain;
Now vain my suit, in vain I cry,
I sigh in vain, unhappy me,
Condemned to such a Destiny
Only to see the once loved Deity.

Thirs. Tell me, Damon, prithee do,
Who Is this Nymph that grieves thee so,
By great Pan's all sacred name
The wildest heart for thee i will tame:

Dam. Oh my friend! she is gone too far,
Thou can not reach the charming fair:
She Is fled into the wished for place,
Where Love is acted over in every grace.

Thirs. What Is her name? I cannot contain,
My blood runs swift in every vein.
I Will ravage all the Woods and Groves,
The intreguing Court for billing Lov's:
No pains nor toil for thee I Will spare,
Come -- let me know the cruel fair.

Dams. Phillis, the Glory of our Isle,
Who charmed my Soul with every smile,
Ah she! the lovely torturing maid
H'as now my heart, my all, betrayed;
And my adoring Love with scorn repaid.
Unhappy swain! dejected and forlorn,
Ah me! how sadly am I left alone,
To envy those Transporting charms
She yields up to my happy Rivals Arms.

Thirs. I Will go --

Dam. Stay, Shepherd, it is in vain to try
To disappoint the Nuptial tie.
No, no, shes gone to make my Rival blessed,
And left her Image only in my breast.
Hence forth in Lovers tales let it be said,
That thy poor friend, thy Damon, died a maid.
While no one part of me remains with her,
But constant wishes and this humble Prayer.
Fairest of Nymphs --
May all your Glorys, like the youthful Sun,
Beam forth and in their purest luster Burn.
May all your days be as a day of bliss,
And all your sorrows close still with a kiss;
Happy the God, that succor'd your desire,
And set the Hymenean Lamp on fire:
May he, in whole blessed Arms you slumbringly,
Be sensible of the vast envyed joy,
While I who lost you lay me down and die.

A PINDARICK
To Mrs. Behn on her Poem on the Coronation.
Written by a Lady.
HAil, thou sole Empress of the Land of wit,
To whom all conquered Authors must submit,
And at thy feet their sading Laurels lay,
The utmost tribute that a Muse can pay,
To thy unlabored Song of the Coronation day.
The subject was Divine we all confess,
Nor was that flame, thy mighty fancy, less.
That clothed thy thought in such a pleasing dress,
As did at once a Masculine wit express,
And all the softness of a Femal tenderness.
No more shall men their fancied Empire hold,
Since thou Astrea formed of siner mould,
By nature tempered more with humid cold,
Does man excel --
Not in soft strokes alone, but even in the bold.
And as thy purer Blood,
Through more transparent vessels is conveyed
Thy spirits more fine and subtle do thy brain invade.
And nimbler come uncalled unto thy aid;
So the gay thought --
Which thy still flowing fancy does inspire
New, uncontrolled, and warm, as young desire,
Have more of kindling heat and fiercer fire;
Not to be reached, or praised, unless by such
As the same happy temperament possess;
Since none with equal numbers can reward thy Lays,
May the just Monarch, which you praise,
Daine to acknowledge this.
Not with a short applause of crackling Bays
But a return that may revive thy days;
And thy well-meaning grateful loyal Muse
Cherisht by that blessed theme its zeal did choose.
May thou be blessed with such a sweet retreat,
That with contempt thou may behold the great;
Such as the mighty Cowlys well-known seat.
Whose lofty Elms I would have all thy own,
And in the midst a spacious shady Throne,
Raised on a Mount that should Parnassus be,
And every Muse included all in thee.
On whose cool top alone thou shoud'st dispense
The Laws of Wit, Love, Loyalty and Sense:
The new Arcadia should the Grove be named
And for the gift our grateful Monarch famed.
Amidst the shade, I Would wish a well built House,
Like Sidneys Noble Calendar should stand,
Raising its head and all the rest command.
Its outside gay, its inside clean and neat
With all of life's conveniences replete,
Where all the Elements at once conspire
To give what man's necessities require,
Rich soil, pure Air, streams cool, and useful fire.
The fertile spot with pleasure should abound
And with Elizium-Spring be ever crowned.
When thou thy mind unbend'st from thoughtful hours,
Then should thou be refresht with Fruits and Flowrs,
The Gods and Nymphs of Woods and Springs
Shall Dance in Antique Rural Rings:
While scaly Trytons and grim Satyrs play
Such Tunes, as Birds compose, to welcome day.
Till the glad noise to distant shores resound,
And flying Birds join in the Harmonious sound.
Which listening Echo's catch at the rebound.
Here without toil, or pining want perplexed
Thy Body easy and thy mind at rest,
With all Life's valued pleasures blessed,
Thy largest wishes still thou shoud'st enjoy
Environed with delights that never can cloy.
Accept, thou much loved Sappho of our Isle,
This hearty wish, and grace it with a smile,
When thou shall know that thy Harmonious Lire
Did me, the meanest of thy sex, inspire.
And that thy own unimitable lays
Are cause alone that I attempt thy praise.
Which in unequal measure I rehearse
Because unskilled in numbers Grace, or Verse;
Great Pindars flights are fit alone for thee,
The witty Horace's Iambicks be
Like Virgils lofty strains, alas too hard for me.
And if enough this do not plead excuse,
Pity the failings of a Virgin Muse.
That never in this kind before essai'd,
Her Muse till now was, like her self, -- a Maid.
Whose Blooming labors thus she dedicates to you,
A Tribute justly to your merits due;
At least her part of gratitude to pay
For that best Song of the Coronation day.
How bad would the Ill-natured World requite
Thy noble labors if they do not write,
Who have, perhaps, been happy in this kind
To own thou'st now outdone all that they e're designed.
Sure none with malice e're was so accursed,
This to deny but will with envy burst,
Since even thy own more envious sex agree
The glorious theme had right alone from thee;
The femal Writers thou haft all excelled,
Since the first mother of mankind rebelled.
To Mr. Wolseley on his Preface to Valentinian.
By a Lady of Quality.
TO you, the generous task belongs alone
To clear the injured and instruct the Town:
Where, but in you is found a mind so brave
To stretch the bounds of Love beyond the grave?
Anger may last, but friendships quickly die,
For anxious thoughts are longer-liv'd than joy.
Yet those, whom active fancies have misled
So far as to assault the mighty dead;
Now, taught by your reproves a noble shame,
Will strive by surer ways to raise their fame.
But from our sex what praise do you deserve?
We by your help may all our rights preserve,
While others rob the Deities they serve,
For never sacrilege could greater be
Than to steal Honor from a Deity.
Such are the paths to fame, in which you tread,
You bafle envy, while you nobly aid
The helpless living and more helpless dead.
Mr. Wolsely's Answer to the forgoing Copy.
WHile soaring high above Orinda's flights,
Equal to Sappho famed Urania writes;
And feareless of an Host of byast men
In my defense draws her all-conquering pen.
While forcing every caviller to submit,
Her approbation stamps my questioned wit.
And a new way, by all the Nine inspired,
Commending mine she makes her own admired.
While that kind Balme's restoring virtue cures
The Critics bite and lasting life assures.
Delight extreme rewarding all my pain,
Spirits my genius and improves my vein.
A useful pride the unhop'd Honor brings,
Like that which from a sense of virtue springs.
While through her Sexes finer mould she pours
Thoughts of the substance and the strength of ours.
And in her draughts, graced with a sweeter Air,
The Poet borrows softness from the fair:
While with a wit that does the Age surprise,
Just as her heart and powerful as her Eyes,
My Panegyrick's fame she does intend,
Her easyer turn instructs me how to mend,
Her still-fresh flights enriching every Theme
Flow equal, like a smooth untroubl'd stream,
Whose cheerful current, without tides is strong
And through green Meadows purling glides along.
How rare is praise in fitting words expressed
With judgment heightened and with skill addressed
Those who deserve it most can give it best.
How flat and tastless is a fool's applause,
Whose want of knowledge does his wonder cause?
More fulsom is the fawning of a knave
Whose narrow mind his little ends enslave:
Whose Pen for ever fear and interest guide
Whom each his stage which like contemning Pride
All wealthy fops and prosperous villains ride;
Who can to none but fortune faithful be,
False to desert, and Prostitute as she.
But just Urania, truth and virtues friend,
Quick to discern, and sparing to commend,
Whom in-born worth above mean aims does raise
Can no more give than need such hackney Bays.
Her mind to Earth, wits rightful Sovereign came,
By Heaven instructed to distribute fame;
What Stoic soul has temper to refuse
The uncommon favors of so chaste a Muse?
While her soft strain, in which no toil appears,
With divine Music bribes our ravished ears.
And her wit varying a thousand ways
With that strong Philtre baits her powrful praise,
Her flowing lines such skilful measures bound,
The sense is not more charming than the sound:
So does her verse in words well-plac'd and chose
Her rich Invention's beauteous store disclose.
As calm Favonius with his gentle wing
Opens the Flowers and spreads the sweets of spring.
When stopped by Trees, chance into arbor weaves
His murmuring voice, some Lovers care deceives,
And breathing Roses whistles through the leaves
When thus like Here Is which no rich Rogue can share
Praise comes both from the knowing and sincere,
Just is the pride, as the delight is rare.
Like Hope, it flatters; like Ambition, warms;
And like a Lovers happy moment, charms.
When first to ease the long unpitied swain
His cruel fair confesses equal pain,
When first he sees within her kindling Eyes
A guilty care and Bashful sweetness rise.
Often when perplexed with timorous doubts unrest,
I read her praise in which my Muse is dressed
With all the grace and all the power of Poetry expressed.
Raptures so strong my happier thoughts employ,
As pain perception, and oppress with Joy.
The rich Ragoust, wit's too profuse expense,
A flavor gives that conquers human sense;
A taste too high for weak man to digest,
Ambrosia it is, on which Immortals feast,
The Fruit of life's fair Tree to Martyrs given
When ^in'd from flesh and purged of Earths dull Leaven
Their frames can bear the Luxury of Heaven.
Cease England, thy late loss so high to rate,
Here learn thy mighty sorrow to abate,
By her instructive gentle song half reconciled to sat.
Your tender moan, you tuneful Nine give over,
Lament your darling Bion's death no more.
In her loved Lays his better part survives,
He dies not all, while soft Urania lives.
Her Heaven has warmed, The Earl of Rochester, her Uncle,
with the same pleasing fires
In her like noble blood, like noble thoughts inspires.
His perishing goods to others let him leave,
To Her his deathless Pen he did bequeave;
And if my humble Muse, whose luckless strain
Was used alone of Beauty to complain
And sing in melancholy notes love's unregarded pain,
Raised by that theme, above her usual height
Could clear his fame, or do his virtue right,
How well does she the trifling debt acquit,
She whose resembling Genius shows her fit
To be his sole Executrix in wit.
On the Honorable Sir Francis Fane, on his Play called the Sacrifice. by Mrs.
A. B.
LOng have our Priests condemned a wicked Age,
And every little critics senseless rage
Damned a forsaken self-declining stage:
Great it is confessed and many are our crimes,
And no less profligate the vicious times,
But yet no wonder both prevail so ill,
The Poets fury and the Preachers skill;
While to the World it is so plainly known
They blame our faults, with greatones of their own,
Let their dull Pens flow with unlearned spite
And weakly censure what the skilful write;
You, learned Sir, a nobler passion show,
Our best of rules and best example too.
Precepts and grave instructions dully move,
The brave Performer better does improve,
Ver'st in the truest Satyr you excel
And show how ill we write by writing well.
This noble Piece which well deserves your name
I read with pleasure tho I read with shame,
The tender Laurels which my brows had dressed
Flag, like young Flowers, with too much heat oppressed.
The generous fire I felt in every line
Showed me the cold, the feeble, force of mine.
Henceforth I Will you for imitation choose
Your nobler flights will wing my Callow Muse;
So the young Eagle is informed to fly
By seeing the Monarch Bird ascend the sky.
And tho with less success her strength she will try,
Spreads her soft plumes and his vast tracks persues
Tho far above the towering Prince she views:
High as she can she will bear your deathless fame,
And make my song Immortal by your name.
But where the work is so Divinely wrought,
The rules so just and so sublime each thought,
When with so strict an Art your scenes are placed
With wit so new, and so uncommon, graced,
In vain, alas! I should attempt to tell
Where, or in what, your Muse does most excel.
Each character performs its noble part,
And stamps its Image on the Readers heart.
In Tamerlan you a true Hero dressed,
A generous conflict wars within his breast,
This there the mightyest passions you have showed
By turns confessed the Mortal and the God.
When e're his steps approach the haughty fair
He bows indeed but like a Conqueror,
Compelled to Love yet scorns his servial chain,
In spite of all you make the Monarch reign.
But who without resistless tears can see
The bright, the innocent, Irene die:
Axalla's life a noble ransom paid,
In vain to save the much-loved charming maid,
Naught surely could but your own flame inspire
Your happy Muse to reach so soft a fire.
Yet with what Art you turn the powerful stream
When treacherous Ragallzan is the theme:
You mix our different passions with such skill,
We feel 'em all and all with pleasure feel.
We love the mischief, tho the harms we grieve,
And for his wit the villain we forgive.
In your Despina all those passions meet,
Which woman's frailties perfectly complent.
Pride and Revenge, Ambition, Love and Rage,
At once her wilful haughty Soul engage;
And while her rigid Honor we esteem,
The dire effects as justly must condemn.
She shows a virtue so severly nice
As has betrayed it to a pitch of vice.
All which confess a God-like power in you
Who could form woman to herself so true.
Live, mighty Sir, to reconcile the Age
To the first glories of the useful Stage.
It Is you her rifl'd Empire may restore
And give her power she never could boast before.
Cato's Answer to Labienus, when he advised him to consult the Oracle of
Jupiter Ammon.
Being a Paraphrastical Translation of part of the 9th Book of Lucan, beginning
at -- Quid quaeri, Labiene, Iubes, etc.
WHat should I ask my friend, which best would be
to live enslaved, or thus in Arms die free?
If any force can Honor's price abate?
Or virtue bow beneath the blows of fate?
If fortunes threats a steady Soul disdains,
Or if the Joys of Life be worth the pains?
If it our happiness at all import
Whether the foolish scene be long, or short.
If when we do but aim at noble ends
The attempt alone Immortal fame attends?
If for bad accidents, which thickest press
On merit, we should like a good cause less?
Or be the fonder of it for success?
All this is clear, wove in our minds it sticks,
Nor Ammon, nor his Priest's can deeper fix;
Without the Clergy's venal cant and pains
Gods never-frustrate Will holds ours in chains,
Nor can we Act but what the All-wise ordains.
Who needs no voice, nor perishing words to aw
Our wild desires, and give his creatures Law:
What e're to know, or needful was or fit.
In the wise frame of human souls it is writ,
Both what we ought to do, and what forbear,
He once for all, did at our births declare.
But never did he seek out Desert Lands
To bury truth in unfrequented Sands;
Or to a corner of the World withdrew,
Head of a sect and partial to a few.
Nature's vast fabric is his house alone,
This Globe his footstool, and high Heaven his throne.
In Earth, Air, Sea, and in who e're excells
In knowing heads and honest hearts he dwells;
Why seek we then among these barren sands,
In narrow shrines and temples built with hands,
Him whose dread presence does all places fill?
Or look but in our reason for his will?
All we e're saw is God! in all we find
Apparent Prints of the eternal mind;
Let floating fools their course by Prophets steer
And always of the future live in fear;
No Oracle, or Dream the crowd is told
Can make me more or less resolved and bold.
But surer death, which equally on all
Both on the coward and the brave must fall.
This said, and turning with disdain about,
He left scorned Ammon to the vulgar Rout.
To his Grace the Duke of Ormond, upon his leaving the Government of Ireland.
HAve we a farther trouble yet in store,
And can our destiny afflict us more?
To lose our Prince we thought too great a blow,
And must we lose his glorious Image too?
Ireland for more than twice seven years has bin
Envied without, for being so blessed within;
While Plague, Fire, Famine, War abroad has Reigned,
This only was the safe and happy Land;
Which happiness, great Sir, to you we owe
Next to the God above and God below.
The Irish Harp, which long abused had lain,
Your skilful hand first brought in tune again.
And when some others by our King were sent
To play upon the noble Instrument,
Such was their Ignorance, or their Error such
They proved but foyles to your Melodious touch.
Into your hands then, which before it graced,
The noble Instrument again was placed,
On which a long, soft tune again you played,
When Jarring discord did all else invade,
And we rejoiced to think you would play on:
But Heavens and the Kings will must still be done,
While we submit as humbly to that power
Which can the bliss, it takes away, restore,
More we cannot have, nor do we wish for more.
Adieu then, much loved Prince,
With mournful hearts we make this Prayer for you,
Greatest and best of uncrown'd Heads adieu,
And since you must go hence --
We'll waft you over with steady Gales of Prayers,
And bear you on a Sea of humble tears,
All the Amends which for your mighty toil,
Can be returned by a poor widowed Isle.
Such now alas, She is, and never till now
That Ormonds noble house did wholly from her go,
Not leaving to support her mighty Mind,
An Arran, or an Ossory behind.
May Heavens choice blessings on 'em all attend,
And bring'em to a calm and glorious end.
Glorious and calm may all their passage be
As was the hour in which they put to Sea.
And landed, wheresoere her Ormond goes,
May England dote on him as Ireland does.
SONG.
BReak, Break, sad heart, unload thy grief,
Give, give, thy sorrows way.
Seek out thy only last relief,
And thy hard Stars obey.
Those Stars that doom thee to revere
What does themselves outshine.
And placed her too in such a Sphere
That she can never be mine.
Because Endymion once did move
Nights Goddess to come down,
And listen to his tale of Love,
Aim not thou idly at the Moon.
Be it thy pleasure and thy Pride
That wreckt on stretched desire,
Thou can thy fiercest torments hide,
And silently expire.
To Damon.
To inquire of him if he could tell me by the Style, who writ me a Copy of
Verses that came to me in an unknown Hand, by Mrs. A. B.
OH, Damon, if thou ever wers't
That certain friend thou have professed,
Relieve the Pantings of my heart,
Restore me to my wonted rest.
Late in the Silvian Grove I sat,
Free as the Air, and calm as that;
For as no winds the boughs oppressed,
No storms of Love were in my breast.
A long Adieu I Would bid to that
Ere since Amyntas proved ingrate.
And with indifference, or disdain,
I looked around upon the Plain.
And worth my favor found no sighing Swain:
But oh, my Damon, all in vain
I triumphed in security,
In vain absented from the Plain.
The wanton God his power to try
In lone recesses makes us yield,
As well as in the open field;
For where no human thing was found
My heedless heart received a wound.
Assist me, Shepherd, or I dye,
Help to unfold this Mystery.
No Swain was by, no flattering Nymph was near,
Soft tales of Love to whisper to my Ear.
In sleep, no Dream my fancy fired
With Images, my waking wish desired.
No fond Idea filled my mind;
Nor to the faithless sex one thought inclined;
I sighed for no deceiving youth,
Who forfeited his vows and truth;
I waited no Assigning Swain
Whose disappointment gave me pain.
My fancy did no prospect take
Of Conquest's I designed to make.
No snares for Lovers I had laid,
Nor was of any snare afraid.
But calm and innocent I sat,
Content with my indifferent fate.
(A Medium, I confess, I hate.)
For when the mind so cool is grown
As neither Love nor Hare to own,
The Life but dully lingers on.
Thus in the midst of careless thought,
A paper to my hand was brought.
What hidden charms were lodged within,
to my unwary Eyes unseen,
Alas! no Human thought can guess;
But ho! it robbed me of my peace.
A Philter 'twas, that darted pain
Through every pleased and trembling vein.
A stratagem, to send a Dart
By a new way into the heart,
The Ignoble Policy of Love
By a clandestin means to move.
Which possibly the Instrument
Did never design to that intent,
But only form, and complement.
While Love did the occasion take
And hid beneath his flowers a snake
Over every line did Poison fling
In every word he lurk't a sting.
So Matrons are, by Demons charms,
Tho harmless, capable of harms.
The verse was smooth, the thought was fine,
The fancy new, the wit divine.
But filled with praises of my face and Eyes,
My verse, and all those usual flatteries
To me as common as the Air;
Nor could my vanity procure my care.
All which as things of course are writ
And less to show esteem than wit.
But here was some strange something more
Than ever flattered me before;
My heart was by my Eyes misled:
I blushed and trembled as I read.
And every guilty look confessed
I was with new surprise oppressed,
From every view I felt a pain
And by the Soul, I drew the Swain.
Charming as fancy could create
Fine as his Poem, and as soft as that.
I drew him all the heart could move
I drew him all that women Love.
And such a dear Idea made
As has my whole repose betrayed.
Pigmalion thus his Image formed,
And for the charms he made, he sighed and burned.
Oh thou that know each Shepherds Strains
That Pipes and Sings upon the Plains;
Inform me where the youth remains.
The spightful Paper bare no name,
Nor can I guess from whom it came,
Or if at least a guess I found,
'Twas not t'instruct but to confound.
SONG of Basset, by Sir George Ethrege.
LEt Equipage and Dress despair,
Since Basset is come in,
For nothing can oblige the fair
Like Money and Morine.
Is any Countess in distress
she flys not to the Beau,
It Is only cony can redress
Her grief with a Rouleau.
By this bewitching Game betrayed
Poor Love is bought and sold.
And that which should be a free Trade,
Is now engrossed by Gold.
Even sense is brought into disgrace,
Where company is met
Or silent stands, or leaves the place,
While all the talk's Basset.
Why, Ladys, will you stake your hearts,
Where a Plain cheat is found,
You first are rookt out of those Darts,
That gave your selves the wound.
The time, which should be kindly lent
To plays and witty men,
In waiting for a knave is spent
Or wishing for a ten.
Stand in defense of your own charms,
Throw down this Favorite,
That threatens with his dazzling Arms
Your Beauty and your Wit.
What pity it is, those conquering Eyes,
Which all the World subdue,
Should while the Lover gazing dies
Be only on Alpue.
To the Lord Bishop of Rochester, on His History of the Plot written by His
late Majesty's command. And an Apology for these Verses called the Advice to a
Painter, by the same Author.
My Lord,
WIth humble hope your goodness will excuse
The hasty zeal of an aspiring Muse;
I with unequal pace your steps pursue,
And thought I trod securely following you,
Repenting now, like Phaeton, too late
I feebly sink beneath the Glorious weight.
And own the work for all but you too great:
The hand that rivall'd Heaven took thence its fire
Er'e he the senseless Machin could inspire;
And the rash Author would attempt in vain,
Unless he borrowed your diviner Pen;
To imitate or praise with equal flight
What only Charles could Dictate, only you could Write.
If trouble past by repetition please,
Tho meaner tongues the grateful tale rehearse,
What mighty Raptures must these Ills create,
Which bravely, as he conquered, you relate;
Our joys without our sufferings had been less,
And for the remedy, the wound we bless.
So did not Catilines defeated rage
Your much-loved Tullies daring Pen engage,
His Rome would want one Glory of his tongue,
The World a Masterpiece, and Fame a Song.
Upon the Arrival of his Excellency Henry Earl of Clarendon, And his entering
upon the Government of Ireland, Ian: 1685/6. by a M. of A.
Mart: Ep:
Phosphore, read diem, quid Gaudia noster moraris, Caesare venturo, Phosphore,
read Diem.
WHen Glorious Ormond, as beloved as Great,
His gentle course of Government being run,
With the Day's ruler in the Ocean set
And laid the burden of his Empire down.
Like Northern Mariners, our longing Eyes
A thousand times toward the East were sent,
Expecting still the same bright Sun would rise,
And bring us back the joys that with him went.
Mean while, the wisht-for blessing to ensure,
Our earthly God designed for us below,
His absence that we better might endure,
Two shining Planets did on us bestow.
Stars to benighted Travelers still dear,
Benign and Joyful, as the God of Light,
Who whensoer'e together they appear,
Quickly remove all terrors of the Night.
Ever Immortal Castor first did shine,
The Churches Angel and the kingdoms Eye,
With whom our Jove did noble Pollux join,
To share in Castor's Immortality.
The Radiant pair both now and hereto fore
Have made us safe with their united Beam.
We feared no Rocks, nor heard we Tempests roar,
Enlightened once and influenced by them.
Perhaps some noysy bug-bears of the Night
Or stalking shade, which dares not see the Day
May howl and menace and the feeble fright
And huff the timorous -- because they may.
Such empty Mormo's possibly might scare
The unexperienced Mariners awhile,
But these bright Stars such happy omens are,
As make the knowing at their threatenings smile.
For now the shining Twins about to set
Point out to us another rising Sun,
Which will the fantoms of the Night defeat
And make grim Specters from his presence run.
Not the Illustrious Ormond, whose bright ray
So long had cheered us, we desired it still.
But a new Sun will walk in Ormonds way
And all that Princes brave desire fulfill.
Sprung from a Loyal Sire! Renoun'd, and wise;
Akin to Princes and to Crowns allied:
Whom Great men Honor and whom Good men prise.
How happy are we in so blessed a guide!
Hail, Glorious light! long looked for Sun, all Hail,
Welcome as Day to Winter Passengers,
Whose warm and powerful influence will not fail
To raise our Spirits and repress our fears.
He with wise conduct and resistless Art
Will charm our foes and all our doubts will clear,
Fresh vigor and new courage will impart,
A frighted Church and fainting Kingdom cheer.
Then, Ireland, once more lift thy drooping head,
And read thy safety in thy Rulers face;
His Power which could even raise thee from the Dead
Will soon restore thee to thy former grace.
From forth an Orb of able Statesmen chose
By our discerning Monarch, wise, and just.
He Is judged most fit thy troubles to compose,
And to make good thy Princes mighty trust.
Our Churches firm support, and friend he will prove,
The Laws Instructor, Learnings Patron too,
The good will cherish, and the Loyal love,
All this, and more than this he will be, and do.
Arise then, Gracious clarcndon, and sway
That People who have longed for your Arrive
Who love your Person, and with joy obey
Even while the God-like Ormond is alive.
The Sun and you do now together get,
And give new life, new influence to men,
May you, (unlike to him,) or never set,
Or like him ever rise to us again.
A Poem against fruition written on the reading in Mountains Essay: By Alexis.
AH wretched Man! whom neither fate can please
Nor Heavens indulgent to his wish can bless,
Desire torments him, or fruition cloys,
Fruition which should make his bliss, destroys;
Far from our Eyes the enchanting objects set
Advantage by the friendly distance get.
Fruition shows the cheat, and views 'em near,
Then all their borrowed splendours plain appear,
And we what with much care we gain and skill
An empty nothing find, or real ill.
Thus disappointed, our mistaken thought,
Not finding satisfaction which it sought
Renews its search, and with much toil and pain
Most wisely strives to be deceived again.
Hurried by our fantastic wild desire
We loath the present, absent things admire,
Those we adore, and fair Idea's frame,
And those enjoyed we think would quench the flame
In vain, the Ambitious fever still returns
And with redoubled fire more fiercely burns.
Our boundless vast desires can know no rest,
But travel forward still and labor to be blessed.
Philosophers and Poets strove in vain
The restless anxious Progress to restrain,
And to their loss soon found their Good supreme
An Airy notion and a pleasing Dream.
For happiness is no where to be found,
But flys the searcher, like enchanted ground.
Are we then masters or the slaves of things?
Poor wretched vassalls, or terrestial Kings?
Left to our reason, and by that betrayed,
We lose a present bliss to catch a shade.
Unstasify'd with Beauteous natures store
The universal Monarch Man is only poor.
To Alexis in Answer to his Poem against Fruition.
ODE. by Mrs. B.
AH hapless sex! who bear no charms,
But what like lightning flash and are no more,
False fires sent down for baneful harms,
Fires which the fleeting Lover feebly warms
And given like past Beboches over,
Like Songs that please, (tho bad,) when new,
But learned by heart neglected grew.
In vain did Heaven adorn the shape and face
With Beautyes which by Angels forms it drew:
In vain the mind with brighter Glories Grace,
While all our joys are stinted to the space
Of one betraying enterview,
With one surrender to the eager will
We Are short-lived nothing, or a real ill.
Since Man with that inconstancy was born,
To love the absent, and the present scorn.
Why do we deck, why do we dress
For such a short-lived happiness?
Why do we put Attraction on,
Since either way it is we must be undon?
They fly if Honor take our part,
Our Virtue drives 'em over the field.
We lose 'em by too much desert,
And Oh! they fly us if we yield.
Ye Gods! is there no charm in all the fair
To fix this wild, this faithless, wanderer.
Man! our great business and our aim,
For whom we spread our fruitless snares,
No sooner kindles the designing flame,
But to the next bright object bears
The Trophies of his conquest and our shame:
Inconstancy's the good supreme
The rest is airy Notion, empty Dream!
Then, heedless Nymph, be ruled by me
If e're your Swain the blise desire;
Think like Alexis he may be
Whose wished Possession damps his fire;
The roving youth in every shade
Has left some sighing and abandoned Maid,
For it is a fatal lesson he has learned,
After fruition never to be concerned.
To Alexis, On his saying, I loved a Man that talked much. by Mrs. B.
ALexis, since you will have it so
I grant I am impertinent.
And till this moment did not know
Through all my life what 'twas I meant;
Your kind opinion was the unflattering Glass,
In which my mind sound how deformed it was.
In your clear sense which knows no art,
I saw the error of my Soul;
And all the feebless of my heart,
With one reflection you control,
Kind as a God, and gently you chastise,
By what you hate, you teach me to be wise.
Impertinence, my sexes shame,
(Which has so long my life persu'd,)
You with such modesty reclaim
As all the Woman has subdued.
To so divine a power what must I owe,
That renders me so like the perfect -- you?
That conversable thing I hate
Already with a just disdain,
Who Prid's himself upon his prate
And is of word, (that Nonsense,) vain;
When in your few appears such excellence,
They have reproacht, and charmed me into sense.
For ever may I listening sit,
Tho but each hour a word be born:
I would attend the coming wit,
And bless what can so well inform:
Let the dull World henceforth to words be damned,
I Am into nobler sense than talking shamed.
A PASTORAL Pindarick.
On the Marriage of the Right Honorable the Earl of Dorset and Midlesex, to
the Lady Mary Compton.
A DIALOGUE. Between Damon and Aminta.
By Mrs. Behn.
Aminta. WHither, young Damon, whither in such have,
Swift as the Winds you sweep the Grove,
The Amorous God of Day scarce hy'd so fast
After his flying Love?

Damon. Aminta, view my Face, and thence survey
My very Soul and all its mighty joy!
A joy too great to be concealed,
And without speaking is revealed;
For this eternal Holyday.
A Day to place in the Shepherds Calendar,
To stand the glory of the circling year.
Let it is blessed date on every Bark be set,
And every Echo its dear name repeat.
Let 'em tell all the neighboring Woods and Plains,
That Lysidus, the Beauty of the Swains,
Our darling youth, our wonder and our Pride,
Is blessed with fair Clemena for a Bride.
Oh happy Pair! Let all the Groves rejoice,
And gladness fill each heart and every voice!

Aminta. Clemena! that bright maid for whom our Shepherds pine,
For whom so many weeping Eyes decline!
For whom the Echos all complain,
For whom with sigh and falling tears
The Lover in his soft despairs
Disturbs the Peaceful Rivers gliding stream?
The bright Clemena who has been so long
The destiny of hearts and yet so young,
She that has robbed so many of content
Yet is herself so Sweet, so Innocent.
She, that as many hearts invade^,
As charming Lysidus has conquered maids,
Oh tell me, Damon, is the lovely fair
Become the dear reward of all the Shepherds care.
Has Lysidus that prize of Glory won
For whom so many sighing Swains must be undon?

Damon. Yes, it was destined from Eternity,
They only should each other's be,
Hail, lovely pair, whom every God designed
In your first great Creation should be joined.

Aminta. Oh, Damon, this is vain Philosophy,
It Is chance and not Divinity,
That guides Loves Partial Darts;
And we in vain the Boy implore
To make them Love whom we Adore.
And all the other powers take little care of hearts,
The very Soul's by intr'est swayed,
And nobler passion now by fortune is betrayed;
By sad experience this I know,
And sigh, Alas! in vain because it is true.

Damon. Too often and too fatally we find
Portion and Jointure charm the mind,
Large Flocks and Herds, and spacious Plains
Becoms the merit of the Swains.
But here, tho both did equally abound,
'Twas youth, 'twas wit, was Beauty gave the equal wound;
Their Souls were one before they mortal being found,
Jove when he laid his awful Thunder by
And all his softest Attributes put on,
When Heaven was Gay, and the vast Glittering Sky
With Deities all wondering and attentive shone,
The God his Luckyest heat to try
Formed their great Souls of one Immortal Ray,
He thought, and formed, as first he did the World,
But with this difference, That from Chaos came,
These from a beam, which, from his Godhead hurled
Kindled into an everlasting flame.
He smiling saw the mighty work was good,
While all the lesser Gods around him gazing stood.
He saw the shining Model bright and Great
But oh! they were not yet complete,
For not one God but did the flames inspire,
With sparks of their Divinest fire.
Diana took the lovely Female Soul,
And did its fiercer Atoms cool;
Softn'd the flame and placed a Crystal Ice
About the sacred Paradise,
Bathed it all over in Virgin Tears,
Mixed with the fragrant Dew the Rose receives,
Into the bosom of her untoucht leaves,
And dried it with the breath of Vestal Prayers,
Juno did great Majestic thought inspire
And Pallas touched it with Heroic fire.
While Mars, Apollo, Love and Venus sat,
About the Hero's Soul in high debate,
Each claims it all, but all in vain contend,
In vain appeal to mighty Jove,
Who equal Portions did to all extend.
This to the God of wit, and that to Love,
Another to the Queen of soft desire,
And the fierce God of War compleats the rest,
Guilds it all over with Martial fire;
While Love, and Wit, Beauty and War expressed
Their finest Arts, and the bright Beings all in Glory dressed.
While each in their Divine employments strove
By every charm these new-form'd l'ghts t'improve,
They left a space untoucht for might yer Love.
The finishing last strokes the Boy performed*
Who from his Quiver took a Golden Dart
That could a sympathizing wound impart,
And touched 'em both, and with one flame they burned.
The next great work was to create two frames
Of the Divinest form,
Fit to contain these heavenly flames.
The Gods decreed, and charming Lysidus was born,
Born, and grew up the wonder of the Plains,
Joy of the Nymphs and Glory of the Swains.
And warmed all hearts with his enchanting strains;
Soft were the Songs, which from his lips did flow,
Soft as the Soul which the fine thought conceived.
Soft as the sighs the charming Virgin breathed
The first dear night of the chaste nuptial vow.
The noble youth even Daphnis does excel
Oh never Shepherd pip'd and sung so well.

Aminta. Now, Damon, you are in your proper sphere,
While of his wit you give a character.
But who inspired you a Philosopher?

Damon. Old Colin, when we often have led our Flocks
Beneath the shelter of the shad's and Rocks,
While other youths more vainly spent their time,
I listened to the wondrous Bard;
And while he sung of things sublime
With reverend pleasure heard.
He soared to the Divine abodes
And told the secrets of the Gods.
And often discoursed of Love and Sympathy;
For he as well as thou and I
Had sigh't for some dear object of desire;
But oh! till now I never could prove
That secret mystery of Love;
Never saw two hearts thus burn with equal fire.

Aminta. But, oh! what Nymph e're saw the noble youth
That was not to eternal Love betrayed?

Damon. And, oh! what swain e're saw the Lovely maid,
That would not plight her his eternal faith!
Not unblown Roses, or the newborn day
Or pointed Sunbeams, when they gild the skys,
Are half so sweet, are half so bright and gay,
As young Clemena's charming Face and Eyes!

Aminta. Not full-blown flowrs, when all their luster's on
Whom every bosom longs to wear,
Nor the spread Glories of the mid-days sun
Can with the charming Lysidus compare.

Damon. Not the soft gales of gentle breez
That whisper to the yiedling Trees,
Nor songs of Birds that through the Groves rejoice,
Are half so sweet, so soft, as young Clemena's voice.

Aminta. Not murmurs of the Rivulets and Springs,
When through the glades they purling glide along
And listen when the wondrous shepherd sings,
Are half so sweet as is the Shepherds song.

Damon. Not young Diana in her eager chase
When by her careless flying Robe betrayed,
Discovering every charm and every Grace,
Has more surprising Beauty than the brighter maid.

Aminta. The gay young Monarch of the cheerful May
Adorned with all the Trophies he has won,
Vain with the Homage of the joyful day
Compared to Lysidus would be undone.

Damon. Aminta, cease; and let me have away,
For while upon this Theme you dwell,
You speak the noble youth so just, so well,
I could for ever listening stay.

Aminta. And while Clemena's praise becoms thy choice,
My Ravished soul is fixed upon thy voice.

Damon. But see the Nymphs and dancing swains
Ascend the Hill from yonder Plains,
With Wreathes and Garlands finely made,
To crown the lovely Bride and Bridegrooms head,
And I amongst the humbler throng
My Sacrifice must bring
A rural Hymeneal song,
Alexis he shall pipe while I will sing.
Had I been blessed with Flocks or Herd
A nobler Tribute I Would prepared,
With darling Lambs the Altars I would throng:
But I, alas! can only offer song.
Song too obscure, too humble verse
For this days glory to rehearse,
But Lysidus, like Heaven, is kind,
And for the Sacrifice accepts the Humble mind.
If he vouchsafe to listen to my Ode
He makes me happyer than a fancied God.

On Desire
A Pindarick.
By Mrs. B.
WHat Art thou, oh! thou newfound pain?
From what infection do thou spring?
Tell me -- oh! tell me, thou enchanting thing,
Thy nature, and thy name;
Inform me by what subtle Art,
What powerful Influence,
You got such vast Dominion in a part
Of my unheeded, and unguarded, heart,
That fame and Honor cannot drive ye thence.
Oh! mischievous usurper of my Peace;
Oh! soft intruder on my solitude,
Charming disturber of my ease,
That have my nobler fate persu'd,
And all the Glorys of my life subdued.
Thou haunt'st my inconvenient hours
The business of the Day, nor silence of the night,
That should to cares and sleep invite,
Can bid defyance to thy conquering powers.
Where have thou been this live-long Age
That from my Birth till now,
Thou never coud'st one thought engage,
Or charm my soul with the uneasy rage
That made it all its humble feebles know?
Where were thou, oh, malicious spright,
When shining Honor did invite.?
When interest called, then thou were shy,
Nor to my aid one kind propension brought,
Nor wou'd'st inspire one tender thought,
When Princes at my feet did lie.
When thou coud'st mix ambition with my joy,
Then peevish Phantom thou were nice and coy,
Not Beauty could invite thee then
Nor all the Arts of lavish Men!
Not all the powerful Rhetoric of the Tongue
Not sacred Wit could charm thee on;
Not the soft play that lovers make,
Nor sigh could fan thee to a fire,
Not pleading tears, nor vows could thee awake,
Or warm the unformed something -- to desire.
Often I Have conjured thee to appear
By youth, by love, by all their powrs,
Have searched and sought thee every where,
In silent Groves, in lonely bowrs:
On Flowery beds where lovers wishing lie,
In sheltering Woods where sighing maids
To their assigning Shepherds hye,
And hide their blushes in the gloom of shades:
Yet there, even there, tho youth assailed,
Where Beauty prostrate lay and fortune wooed,
My heart insensible to neither bowed
Thy lucky aid was wanting to prevail.
In courts I sought thee then, thy proper sphere
But thou in crowds we'rt stifled there,
Interest did all the loving business do,
Invites the youths and wins the Virgins too.
Or if by chance some heart thy empire own
(Ah power ingrate!) the slave must be undone.
Tell me, thou nimble fire, that do dilate
Thy mighty force through every part,
What God, or Human power did thee create
In my, till now, unfacil heart?
Art thou some welcome plague sent from above
In this dear form, this kind disguise?
Or the false offspring of mistaken love,
Begot by some soft thought that faintly strove,
With the bright peircing Beautys of Lysanders Eyes?
Yes, yes, tormenter, I have found thee now;
And found to whom thou do thy being owe,
It Is thou the blushes do impart,
For thee this languishment I wear,
It Is thou that tremblest in my heart
When the dear Shepherd does appear,
I faint, I dye with pleasing pain,
My words intruding sighing break
When e're I touch the charming swain
When e're I gaze, when e're I speak.
Thy conscious fire is mingled with my love,
As in the sanctified abodes
Misguided worshippers approve
The mixing Idol with their Gods.
In vain, alas! in vain I strive
With errors, which my soul do please and vex,
For superstition will survive,
Purer Religion to perplex.
Oh! tell me you, Philosophers, in love,
That can its burning feverish fits control,
By what strange Arts you cure the soul,
And the fierce Calenture remove?
Tell me, ye fair ones, that exchange desire,
How it is you hid the kindling fire.
Oh! would you but confess the truth,
It is not real virtue makes you nice:
But when you do resist the pressing youth,
It Is want of dear desire, to thaw the Virgin Ico,
And while your young adorers lie
All languishing and hopeless at your feet,
Raising new Trophies to your chastity,
Oh tell me, how you do remain discreet?
How you suppress the rising sighs,
And the soft yiedling soul that wishes in your Eyes?
While to the admiring crow'd you nice are found;
Some dear, some secret, youth that gives the wound
Informs you, all your virtu's but a cheat
And Honor but a false disguise,
Your modesty a necessary bait
To gain the dull repute of being wise.
Deceive the foolish World -- deceive it on,
And veil your passions in your pride;
But now I Have found your feebles by my own,
From me the needful fraud you cannot hide.
Tho it is a mighty power must move
The soul to this degree of love,
And tho with virtue I the World perplex,
Lysander finds the weekness of my sex,
So Helen while from Theseus arms she fled,
To charming Paris yields her heart and Bed.
SONG. By a person of Quality.
AH cruel Beauty, could you prove
More tender or less fair.
You neither would provoke my Love
Nor cause me to despair.
But your dissembling charming Eyes
My easy hope beguiles,
And tho a Rock beneath'em lys
The tempting surface smiles.
To what your sex on ours impose
My humble Love complied,
And when my secret I disclosed
Thought modesty denied;
Yes sure, said I, her yiedling heart
Pertakes of my desire,
But nicer Honor feigns this part
To hide the rising fire.
Against your mind my suit I told,
And slighted vows renewed,
Yet you insensibly were cold
And I but vainly wooed.
Then for return a scorn prepare
Or lay that frown aside,
Affected coyness I can bear
But hate insulting Pride!
SONG. By a person of Quality.
UNder the Beams of Celia's Eyes,
See the fair Shepherd panting lys,
For whom all other Beauty dys?
Him tho she burn with equal fire
She suffers at her feet to expire
Preferring glory to desire.
Dye then, oh dye, unhappy swain,
And leave her to lament in vain
The cruel sports of her disdain;
You fall a Public sacrifice
Since she will weep away those Eyes
By whose each look a lover dies.
SONG. I. by the same hand.
WHen sable night had conquered day,
And Beauteous Cynthia rose,
As I in tears reflecting lay
On Cloe's faithless vows.
The God of Love appeared to me
To heal my wounded heart,
The Influencing Deity
With pleasure armed each Dart.
Fond man, said he, here end thy woe,
Till she my power and Justice know,
The foolish sex shall all do so.
2.
And for thy ease, believe no bliss
Is perfect without pain,
The fairest Summer hurtful is
Without some showrs of Rain.
The Ioys of Heaven who would prise
If men too cheaply bought,
the dearest part of mortal Ioys
Most charming is when sought.
And tho with dross true Love they pay,
Those that know finest metals say,
No Gold will coin without allay.
3.
But that the generous Lover may
Not always sigh in vain,
The cruel Nymph that kills to day
To morrow shall be slain.
The little God no sooner spoke,
But from my sight he flew,
And I that groaned with Cloe's yoke,
Found Loves revenge was true.
Her proud hard heart too late did turn;
With fiercer flames than mine did burn;
While I as much began to scorn.
A Pastoral Song on the late King.
WHy, Phillis, in this mournful dress,
Ah! why so full of Tears,
These sighs, my dearest Shepherdess,
Suit not thy tender years.
Thy sheep lie panting on the plain
Not one of them will feed;
Thy Lambs in peircing cries complain
Whence, whence, does this proceed?
Ah, Strephon, we are all undone,
With trembling voice, she said,
The best of Men to Heaven is gone,
The great Amintor's dead.
What will become of thou and I,
Of these dear Flocks that moan,
They will be Stole, and we shall dye,
Now wise Amintor's gone?
Best blessings rest upon his Soul,
The Loyal Swain replied,
Yet let this thought thy grief control,
Pan does for us provide;
And tho the brave Amintor's gone,
Alexis does remain,
Since he is left we are not undone,
Nor ought we to complain.
In him our loss is made amends,
He Will us in safty keep
From whigish Swains he will us defend,
From the French Fox our Sheep;
Then cheer thy Flocks and weep no more,
But stop that pious tide,
With Voice and Pipe lets Pan adore,
For sending such a guide.
The Departure.
[by Damon: Nouem. 78.]
I Never knew what 'twas to mourn,
Ere the too hasty glass had run
Which measured every thought of mine:
Still as I offered at Loves shrine
My heart a bleeding Sacrifice,
The conquest of Aminta's Eyes.
Those shining objects of my Love,
How did the searching passion rove,
Over all my soul its quickening fire
Melted my heart with soft desire,
While my Aminta blessed this plain,
I never felt another pain
Than Love; which always does belong
To the gentle Amorous throng;
But now --
Oh! wonder not, great God of Love,
If the strong passion cease to move
Within my soul; Aminta's gone,
And left me here to sigh alone.
How vain does the vast Globe appear
No sweetning pleasures can live here,
While bright Aminta is not near.
No warbling notes which fill the Wood,
Nor murmurs which the streams afford,
Can raise in me that harmony
Which ravished with such ecstasy.
When the fair she approacht, each charm
Guarded my humble soul from harm,
Nothing can now transport or cheer
A tortured soul that is filled with fear;
Since loved Aminta quits the place,
Which she with Innocence did Grace.
Then will I wander to some Grove
Where I Will lament my absent Love,
And with cold Winter still complain
Till the lost spring return again.
To Amyntas,
Upon reading the Lives of some of the Romans, by Mrs. B.
Had thou, Amyntas, lived in that great age,
When hardly Beauty was to nature known,
What numbers to thy side might thou engage
And conquered Kingdoms by thy looks alone?
That age when valor they did Beauty name,
When Men did justly our brave sex prefer,
Cause they durst dye, and scorn the public shame
Of adding Glory to the conqueror.
Had mighty Scipio had thy charming face,
Great Sophonisbe had refused to dye,
Her passion over the sense of her disgrace
Had gained the more obliging victory.
Nor less would Massanissa too have done,
But to such Eyes, as to his Sword would bow,
For neither sex can here thy fetters shun,
Being all Scipio, and Amyntas too.
Had thou great Caesar been, the greater Queen,
Would trembling have her mortal Asps laid by
In thee she had not only Caesar seen,
But all she did adore in Antony.
Had daring Sextus had thy lovely shape,
The fairest Woman living had not died.
But blessed the darkness that secured the Rape,
Suffering her Pleasure to have debauched her Pride.
Nor had he stolen to Rome to have quenched his fire,
If thee resistless in his Camp he would seen,
Thy Eyes had kept his virtue all entire,
And Rome a happy monarchy had been.
Had Pompey looked like thee, tho he had proved
The vanquished, yet from Egypts faithless King
He had received the vows of being beloved.
In stead of Orders for his murdering.
But here, Amyntas, thy misfortune lys,
Nor brave nor good are in our age esteemed,
Content thee then with meaner victorys,
Unless that Glorious age could be redeemed.
A. B.
On the first discovery of falseness in Amyntas.
By Mrs. B.
MAke have! make have! my miserable soul,
To some unknown and solitary Grove,
Where nothing may thy Languishment control
Where thou may never hear the name of Love.
Where unconfined, and free, as whispering Air,
Thou may caress and welcome thy despair:
Where no dissembled complisance may veil
The griefs with which, my soul, thou art oppressed.
But dying, breath thyself out in a tale
That may declare the cause of thy unrest:
The toils of Death 't will render far more light
And soon convey thee to the shades of night.
Search then, my soul, some unfrequented place,
Some place that nature meant her own repose:
When she her-self withdrew from human race,
Displeased with wanton Lovers vows and oaths.
Where Sol could never dart a busy Ray,
And where the softer winds never met to play.
By the sad purling of some Rivulet
Over which the bending Yew and Willow grow,
That scarce the glimmerings of the day permit,
To view the melancholy Banks below,
Where dwells no noise but what the murmurs make,
When the unwilling stream the shade forsakes.
There on a Bed of Moss and new-faln leaves,
Which the Triumphant Trees once proudly bore,
Tho now thrown off by every wind that breaths,
Despised by what they did adorn before,
And who, like useless me, regardless lie
While springing beautys do the boughs supply.
There lay thee down, my soul, and breath thy last,
And calmly to the unknown regions fly;
But e're thou do thy stock of life exhaust,
Let the ungrateful know, why it is you dye.
Perhaps the gentle winds may chance to bear
Thy dying accents to Amyntas ear.
Breath out thy Passion; tell him of his power
And how thy flame was once by him approved.
How soon as wished he was thy conqueror,
No sooner spoke of Love, but was beloved.
His wondrous Eyes, what weak resistance sound,
While every charming word begat a wound?
Here thou will grow impatient to be gone,
And through my willing Eyes will silent pass,
Into the stream that gently glides along,
But stay thy hasty flight, (my Soul,) alas,
A thought more cruel will thy ^light secure,
Thought, that can no admittance give to cure.
Think, how the prostrate Insidel now lys,
An humble suppliant at another feet,
Think, while he begs for pity from her Eyes.
He sacrifices thee without regreet.
Think, how the faithless treated thee last night,
And then, my tortured soul, assume thy flight.
SONG.
REason at last has got the day,
To Silvia's yoke no more I bow,
The harder 'twas to break away,
The sweeter is my freedom now,
Yet I resolve the scornful Nymph to see,
And tell her, I Am as unconcerned as she.
But why should I a visit make,
To her whose charms I did admire,
Unless my soul her part d'ost take,
Unknowing of i'ts amorous fire?
Alas! my flames are greater than before,
For he loves most, who thinks he loves no more.
On a Blew spot made in a Ladys neck by Gunpowder, by a person of Quality.
WHat blew is that that does so charming show,
A Hill of Sapphire in a Field of Snow.
Where Loye in ambush lys to shoot his Darts,
And make a prey of the beholders hearts.
Of that fine spot what cause can be assigned,
Was it by nature or by art designed?
Nature so busy was to make your face,
In beautyfying it with every grace,
She could not mind any inferior part,
So that this needs must be the work of Art:
Powder, which first was for destruction meant,
Was here converted into ornament;
But yet retains its wonted nature still,
And from your neck, as from a Port does kill.
On Dydo.
UNhappy Dydo, all her life
As well a Mistress, as a Wife,
No sooner dys her Husband, but she flys;
No sooner flys her Lover, but she dys.
SONG.
AS the enamored Thirsis lay
With his Silvia reconciled,
whose Eyes did brighter beams display,
While the lovely charmer smiled.
With Joy transported cried, my dear,
Let us, let us, often jar,
Peace always sweetest does appear
After sharp fatigues of War.
No, said the Nymph, mistaken swain,
It Is best our quarrels to give over.
Kingdoms may jar, and close again,
But broken Love cements no more.
The Choice.
SIlvia, of all your Amorous train
The Black, the Brown, or Fair,
The wealthy Lord, or humble Swain
For whom will you declare?
If wealth or Beauty do prevail,
My claim I then resign;
If truth and love, I cannot fail,
And Silvia must be mine.
A Letter to Asfrea.
THe Muse, which fair Astrea first inspired,
Has droopt and lost its flame since she retired;
And to the feathered Poets which belong
To Groves resigns her fainting Song.
Nor is this Lethargy her fate alone
For general dullness has possessed the Town,
The Town that now can boast no crowded street,
Where none but sharp set younger Brothers meet alas!
For well they know their mirth and Wit,
Their only coin,) will not in the country pass.
Yet in a cloud of smoke over Coffee dry,
What pleasure it is to hear the Sharpers cry.
Pox of this business, that still sticks and dwells
Upon my hands and keeps me from the Wells,
But I resolve a bold escape to make,
And to thronged Tunbridg a short Journey take;
My humblest service to Eliza give,
And when your Gloriana shall receive
Your next, let my respects have then a place.
Let fair Astrea last be pleased to grace
These lines with her acceptance, and excuse
The broken Language of a dying Muse.
Since she is already drawing to a close,
To write in verse I can no more propose,
What next I send expect in honest prose.
To Mrs B. from a Lady who had a desire to see her, and who complains on the
ingratitude of her fugitive Lover.
KInd are my Stars indeed but that so late
And I stranger to a gentle fate,
If such a one I meet and chance to know,
I have not proper words to call it so,
Wondering at happiness, surprised as far
As a rough General always trained to War,
Snatched from the midst of cruel fierce alarms,
Into a thousand unexpected charms;
A joy like this, how shall I entertain,
With a heart wounded, and a soul in pain;
In my laborious enterprises crossed,
My life near Finis, and the Day quite lost.
Cleone had a Swain, and loved the youth,
Not for his Beauty but his seeming truth,
Not for a goodly herd or high descent,
(Ah that no God my ruin would prevent,)
What tho the Swain had neither Sheep nor land,
I scorned the goods of fortunes partial hand;
So generous was my passion for the slave,
Because I equally supposed him brave.
Oh! give me leave to sigh one sad adieu,
Then wholly dedicate myself to you.
I have no business here but to complain
Of all the treasons of an ingrate Swain,
Since my inhumane perjured Shepherd' s gone,
Night four seven times has put her mantle on,
And three seven times Aurora has appeared,
Since last I from the cruel Strephon* heard*
Whither he lives, is dead, or on what shore,
(Patience, ye Gods! ala I know no more,
Then why my Stars do my destruction press,
Send me your pity, bounteous Shepherdess;
That I the face of grief no more may know,
If I deserve it that could Love so low;
Consult not that, but charity and give
One tender pitying sigh that I may live:
(That I may thus make my complaint to you,)
Kind are my Stars indeed at last it is true;
Let not my rude and untamed griefs destroy,
The early glimmerings of an infant joy:
And add not your neglect, for if you do,
Cleone finds her desolation too!
Know this it yet remains in your fair breast,
To render me the happy or unblest.
You may act miracles if you will be kind,
Make me true joys in real sorrows find;
And bless the hour I hither did pursue
A faithless Swain and found access to you*
Accept the heart I here to you present,
By the ingratitude of Strephon rent,
Till then gay, noble, full of brave disdain,
And unless yours prevent shall be again;
As once it was, if in your generous breast,
It may be Pensioner at my request
No more to Treasons subject as before
To be betrayed by a fair tale no more,
As large as once, as uncontrolled and free,
But yet at your command shall always be.
To the fair Clarinda, who made Love to me, imagined more than Woman.
By Mrs. B.
FAir lovely Maid, or if that Title be
Too weak, too Feminine for Nobler thee,
Permit a Name that more Approaches Truth:
And let me call thee, Lovely Charming Youth.
This last will justify my soft complaint,
While that may serve to lessen my constraint;
And without Blushes I the Youth pursue,
When so much beauteous Woman is in view.
Against thy Charms we struggle but in vain
With thy deluding Form thou giv'st us pain,
While the bright Nymph betrays us to the Swain.
In pity to our Sex sure thou were sent,
That we might Love, and yet be Innocent:
For sure no Crime with thee we can commit;
Or if we should -- thy Form excuses it.
For who, that gathers fairest Flowers believes
A Snake lies hid beneath the Fragrant Leaves.
Thou beauteous Wonder of a different kind,
Soft Cloris with the dear Alexis joined;
When ever the Manly part of thee, would plead
Thou tempts us with the Image of the Maid,
While we the noblest Passions do extend
The Love to Hermes, Aphrodite the Friend.
FINIS.
The Table
TO a fair Lady, sent with a Miscellany of Poems. P. 1 To Urania in Mourning. 2
SONG. 3 On Beauty, A Pindarick. 4 SONG. 10 SONG. Ibid. To the Heroic Antonia.
11 To Laurinda. 13 On a Lady singing. 15 To Mr. W. 16 Armida: Or, the fair
Gill. 17 Predictions for Saturday next. 21 To Astrea, on her sending me a
Bottle of Orange Flower Water. 22 To Cloris, going into the Country. 23 SONG.
24 To a Lady, (whom he never saw, nor had any description of,) to prove he
loves her, By a Person of Quality. 24 Song by the same hand. 26 Sleeping on her
fair hand. 28 To Gloriana, on saying I had a tough heart. Ibid. Sent with
Ovid's Epistles to a fair Lady. 29 Sent with a Basket of Fruit. 30 Love cannot
be indifferent. 31 To Astrea. On her absence, during which I could not write.
32 To the most accomplished Heroic, and incomparable, the Lady Antonia. 33 Sent
with Cowley's Works to Astrea. 35 To my Heart. 36 Dialogue. Thirsis and
Clarona. 39 SONG. 40 Strephon, to his three Mistresses. 42 To the Famed
Antonia. On her Duelling. 44 SONG. 47 On an ungreateful and undeserving
Mistress, whom he could not help loving. 49 On the Death of Melantha. 55 To the
Nightingal coming in the spring. 60 A Pastoral on the Marriage of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Ossory, to the Lady Mary Somerset. By Edw. Arwaker, M.
A. 71 A SONG. 80 A Pastoral on the Death of His late Majesty, writtet by M.
Otway. 81 SONG. 82 Strephons complaint banished from Sacarisa. 84 An Elegy
written by Mr. W. O. 85 A Pindarick to Mrs. Behn, on her Poem on the Coronation
written by a Lady. 89 To Mr. Wolseley on his Preface to Valentinan. By a Lady
of Quality. 95 Mr. Wolseley's Answer to the foregoing Copy. 96 To the
Honorable Sir Francis Fane on his Play called the Sacrifice, by Mrs. A. B. 102
Cato's Answer to Labienus, when he advised him to consult the Oracle of Jupiter
Ammon. 106 To his Grace the Duke of Ormond upon his leaving the Government of
Ireland. 109 SONG. 111 To Damon. 112 Song of Basset, by Sir George Etherege.
118 To the Lord Bishop of Rochester on his History of the Plot. 120 Upon the
arrival of his Excellency the Earl of Clarendon in Ireland, by a M. of A. 122 A
Poem against Fruition, by Alexis. 127 To Alexis in Answer to his Poem against
Fruition. 129 To Alexis, on his saying, I loved a man that talked much by Mrs.
B. 132 A Pastoral on the Marriage of the Right Honorable the Earl of Dorset
and Middlesex, to the Lady Mary Compton by Mrs. Behn. 134 On desire. A
Pindarick by Mrs. B. 145 Song. By a Person of Quality. 152 Song. By a Person of
Quality. 153 Song. By the same hand. 154 A Pastoral Song on the late King. 157
The departure, by Damon: November. 78. 159 To Amyntas, upon reading the lives of
some of the Romans by Mrs. B. 161 On the first discovery of falseness in
Aminta, by Mrs. B. 164 SONG. 167 On a Blow spot made in a Ladys neck by
Gunpowder, by a Person of Quality. 168 On Dido. 169 SONG. Ibid. The Choice.
170 A Letter to Astrea. 171 To Mrs. B. from a Lady who had a desire to see her.
172 To the fair Clarinda, who made Love to me, imagined more than Woman. By
Mrs. B. 175
FINIS.

