Dr. TILLOTSON's SERMON Before the QUEEN.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, March the 8th, 1688/9.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D. D. Dean of Canterbury.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil; and Will. Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. MDCLXXXIX.

A SERMON Preached at White Hall.
MATTHEW. 5. 44. But I say unto you, love your enemies; bless them that curse
you; do good to them that hate you; pray for them that despitefully use you,
and persecute you.
THE Gospel has promised forgiveness of Sins to us upon two Conditions; That
we sincerely repent of the Sins which we have committed against God; and, That
we heartily forgive to men the injuries and offenses which they have been
guilty of toward us.

I shall at this time, by Gods Assistance, treat of the latter of these, from
the Words which I have recited to you; which are part of our Saviors excellent
Sermon upon the Mount. In which he does not only explain, but enlarge and
perfect the Moral and Natural Law, by adding to it Precepts and Prohibitions of
greater perfection, than either the Law of Moses or the Natural Law, in their
largest extent, did contain.

He forbids Polygamy, and Divorce, except only in case of Adultery; and
likewise Revenge; none of which were forbidden either by the Law of Nature, or
by the Law which was given by Moses.

And to these Prohibitions our Blessed Savior adds several new Precepts of
greater perfection than any Laws that were extant before. But I say unto you,
love your enemies. The Jewish Law commanded them to love their. Neighbor,
meaning their brethren and those of their own Nation: But our Savior, by
commanding us to love our enemies, has in the most emphatical manner that can
be commanded us to love all men. For if any were to be excluded from our
Charity, none so likely to be so as our Enemies. So that after a command to
love our Enemies it was needless to name any others; because men are naturally
apt to love those that love them.

I say unto you, love your enemies; here the inward affection is required.
Bless them that curse you; here outward Civility and Affability are required,
in opposition to rude and uncivil Language; for so blessing and cursing do in
Scripture frequently signify. Do good to them that hate you; here real acts of
kindness are commanded to be done by us to our bitterest and most malicious
Enemies. Pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you. These are
the highest expressions of Enmity that can be, calumny and cruelty; and yet we
are commanded to pray for those that touch us in these two tenderest Points of
all other, our Reputation and our Life. And to secure the sincerity of our
Charity toward our Enemies, we are required to express it by our hearty
Prayers to God for them: To God, I say, before whom it is both impious and
dangerous to dissemble; and from whom we can expect no mercy for our selves, if
with feigned Lips we beg it of Him for others.

You see what is the Duty here required; That we bear a sincere affection to
our most malicious and implacable Enemies, and be ready upon occasion to give
real testimony of it.

And because this may seem a hard duty, and not so easy to be reconciled
either to our Inclination, or our Reason; I shall endeavor to show, that this
Law is not only reasonable, but much more perfect and excellent, and the
practice of it more easy and delightful, and upon all accounts much more for
our benefit and advantage, than the contrary: And that upon four
Considerations; which I shall endeavor to represent with their just advantage,
and so as may, I hope, not only convince our Judgments of the reasonableness
of this Precept, but likewise bend and sway our Wills to the obedience and
practice of it.

I. If we consider the nature of the act here required, which is to Love; which
when it is not a mere Passion, but under the government of our Reason, is the
most natural, and easy, and delightful of all the Affections which God has
planted in Humane Nature: Whereas ill will, and hatred, and revenge, are very
troublesome and vexatious Passions. Both the devising of mischief, and the
accomplishment of it, and the reflection upon it afterward, are all uneasy;
and the consequences of it many times pernicious to our selves, The very design
of Revenge is troublesome, and puts the Spirits into an unnatural fermentation
and tumult. The man that meditates it is always restless, his very soul is
stung, swells and boiles, is in pain and anguish, has no ease, no enjoyment of
it self so long as this Passion reigns. The execution of it may perhaps be
attended with some present pleasure, but that pleasure is unreasonable and
brutish, momentany and short, like a flash of Lightning which vanishes in the
twinkling of an Eye.

It is commonly said that Revenge is sweet, but to a calm and considerate mind
Patience and Forgiveness are sweeter, and do afford a much more rational and
solid and durable pleasure than Revenge. The Monuments of our Mercy and
Goodness are a far more pleasing and delightful spectacle, than of our Rage and
Cruelty. And no sort of thought does usually haunt men with more terror, than
the reflection upon what they have done in way of Revenge.

Besides that the consequences of this Passion do commonly prove very
prejudicial to our selves. For the Revenge of one injury does naturally draw on
more, and will oblige us for the same reason to a new Revenge of them; and this
brings on a perpetual and endless circulation of Injuries and Revenges. So that
whoever seeks Revenge upon another does commonly in the issue take it upon
himself, and whilst he thinks to transfer the injury which he has received
upon him that did it, he doubles it upon himself.

Such, and so great are the troubles and inconveniences of a malicious and
revengeful temper: but there is no torment in Love, as St. John excellently
says. To be kindly affection'd toward all, to bear no grudge or ill will, no
thought of displeasure or revenge toward any man, is the easiest posture, the
most pleasant state of the Mind. So that if not for their sakes, yet for our
own, we should Love our Enemies and do good to them that hate us; because to be
thus affected toward all men, is as great kindness to our selves as it is
charity to others.

II. If we consider the qualification of the Object; it is our Enemy whom we
are required to Love. In whom though there be something that is justly
disgustful, yet there is something also that is lovely; and if we persist in
our kindness to him, notwithstanding his enmity to us, the enmity may wear off,
and perhaps at length be changed into a sincere and firm friendship.

It Is true indeed, that with regard to our selves personal enmity toward us is
one of the most inconvenient qualities that a man can have, but not therefore
the worst in it self. If we could be impartial and lay aside prejudice, we
might perhaps discern several very lovely qualities in him which hates us: And
Virtue is to be owned, and praised, and loved, even in an Enemy. And perhaps
his enmity toward us is not so great and inexcusable a fault, as we apprehend;
he is not perhaps our Enemy to that degree, nor so altogether without cause, as
we imagine; possibly we have provoked him, or by his own mistake, or through
the malicious representation of others, he may be induced to think so: And are
not we our selves liable to the like misapprehensions concerning others? of
which we are many times afterward convinced and ashamed: and so may he, and
then his enmity will cease, if we will but have a little patience with him, as
we always wish in the like case that others would have with us.

At the worst, though never so sore and causeless an Enemy, though never so bad
a Man, yet he is a Man, and as such, has something in him which the blindest
Passion cannot deny to be good and amiable. He has the same Nature with our
selves, which we cannot hate, or despise, without hatred and contempt of our
selves. Let a man's faults be what they will, they do not destroy his Nature and
make him cease to be a Man.

The two great Foundations of Love are Relation and Likeness. No one thing,
says Tully, is so like, so equal to another, as one man is to another. What
difference soever there may be between us and another man, yea, though he be
our Enemy, yet he is still like us in the main; and perhaps, but too like us in
that for which we find so much fault with him, a proneness to offer affronts
and injuries.

And there is an essential Relation, as well as Likeness, between one man and
another; which nothing can ever dissolve, because it is founded in that which
no man can divest himself of, in Humane Nature. Dr. Barrow.
So far is it from being true, which Mr. Hobbs asserts as the fundamental
Principle of his Politics, That men are naturally in a state of War and enmity
with one another; that the contrary Principle, laid down by a much deeper and
wiser man, I mean Aristotle, is most certainly true, That men are naturally
akin and friends to each other. Some unhappy accidents and occasions may make
men Enemies, but naturally every man is friend to another: and that is the
surest and most unalterable reason of things which is founded in Nature, not
that which springs from mutable accidents and occasions. So that whoever is
recommended to us under the notion of a Man, ought not to be looked upon by us
and treated as an Enemy.

Consider farther that an Enemy, even whilst he is exercising his enmity
toward us, may do us many acts of real advantage; which though they do not
proceed from kindness, yet in truth are benefits. The malicious Censures of our
Enemies, if we make a right use of them, may prove of greater advantage to us,
than the Civilities of our best friends. We can easily afford, nay the wisest
Men can hardly forbear, to love a Flatterer; to embrace him, and to take him
into our bosom; and yet an open Enemy is a thousands times better and less
dangerous than he. It is good for many men that they have had Enemies, who have
many times been to them the happy occasion of reforming those faults, which
none but an Enemy would have taken the freedom, I had almost said would have
had the Friendship, to have told them of.

But what if after all, this Enemy of ours, this hated man, prove to be one of
our best Friends? For so reconciled Enemies usually are. And if any thing will
reconcile an Enemy, Love and Kindness will. An obstinate goodness is apt to
conquer even the worst of Men. It is hardly in the nature of man to withstand
the kindness of one whom, by all that we could do, we have not been able to
make our enemy. After a man has done the greatest injury to another, not only
to find no revenge following upon it, but the first opportunity taken to oblige
him, is so very surprising, that it can hardly fail to gain upon the worst
disposition and to melt down the hardest temper. So that we should love our
Enemies, if not for what they are at present, yet for what they may be, and in
hope that by these means they may in time become our Friends.

III. If we consider the Excellency and Generosity of the thing it self. To
love our enemies, and to do good to them that hate us, is the perfection of
goodness, and the advancement of it to its highest pitch. It is the most
excellent and perfect act of the greatest and most perfect of all Graces and
Virtues, I mean Charity; which by St. Paul is called the bond of perfection;
and by St. James, the perfect and the Royal Law: because it inspires men with a
greatness of Mind fit for Kings and Princes, in whom nothing is more admirable
than a generous Goodness and Clemency, even toward great Enemies and
Offenders, so far as is consistent with the Public Good. Love for love is but
Justice and Gratitude; Love for no love is favor and kindness; but Love for
hatred and enmity is a most Divine Temper, a steady and immutable Goodness that
is not to be stirred by provocation, and so far from being conquered that it is
rather confirmed by its contrary: For if Hatred and Enmity do not extinguish
Love, what can? This is Goodness indeed; not only without Merit and Obligation,
without Invitation or Motive; but against all reasonable expectation, and in
despite of all Temptation and Provocation to the contrary.

So that to return good for evil and love for hatred, is one of the greatest
arguments of a great Mind, and of deep wisdom and consideration: For naturally
our first inclinations and thoughts toward our Enemies are full of Anger and
Revenge; but our second and wiser thoughts will tell us, that Forgiveness is
much more generous than Revenge. And a more glorious Victory cannot be gained
over another man than this, that when the Injury began on his part the Kindness
should begin on ours. If both the ways were equally in our power, yet it is a
much more desirable Conquest to overcome evil with good, than with evil. By
this, we can only Conquer our Enemy, and may perhaps fail in that; but by the
other, we certainly Conquer our selves, and perhaps our Enemy too; overcoming
him in the noblest manner, and walking him gently till he be cool, and without
force effectually subduing him to be our Friend. This, Dr. Barrow.
as One fitly compares it, is like a great and wise General, by Art and
Stratagem, by mere dint of Skill and Conduct, by Patience and wise delay;
without ever striking a stroke, or shedding one drop of blood, to vanquish an
Enemy, and to make an end of the War without ever putting it to the hazard of a
Battle.

Revenge is blind and rash, and does always proceed from impotency and
weakness of Mind. It Is Anger that spurrs men on to it; and Anger is certainly
one of the foolishest Passions of Humane Nature, and which commonly betrays men
to the most imprudent and unreasonable things. Prove. 14. 29.
So Solomon observes, He that is hasty of spirit exalts folly; Eccl. 7. 9.
and again, Anger rests in the bosom of Fools: But to be able to bear
provocation, is an argument of great Wisdom; and to forgive it, of a great
Mind: So the same Wiseman tells us, He that is slow to anger is better than
the mighty, Prove. 16. 32.
and he that rules his spirit, than he that takes a City. It is a greater
thing, in case of great Provocation, to calm a man's own spirit, than to storm
and take a strong City.

Whereas the Angry Man loses and lets fall the government of himself, and lays
the Reins upon the neck of the Wild Beast, his own brutish Appetite and
Passion; which hurries him on first to Revenge, and then to Repentance for the
folly which he has been guilty of in gratifying so unreasonable a Passion. For
it very seldom happens that any man executes an act of Revenge, but the very
next moment after he has done it, he is sorry for it, and wishes he had not
done it: Whereas Patience and Forgiveness do wisely prevent both the mischief
to others, and the trouble to our selves, which is usually consequent upon
Revenge.

IV. If we consider the perfection and prevalency of the Examples which the
Gospel proposes to us, to allure and engage us to the practice of this Duty.
And they are the Examples of God himself, and of the Son of God in the Nature
of Man.

1. The Example of God himself. The Scripture does frequently set before us the
goodness of Gods common Providence to Sinners, for our Pattern. And this is the
Argument whereby our Blessed Savior presses the Duty in the Text upon us,
Ver. 45.
in the Verse immediately after it; That ye may be the children of your
heavenly Father, who makes his Sun to rise on the evil and the good, and his
Rain to fall on the just and the unjust. The same Argument Seneca also urges
to the same purpose. How many (says he) are unworthy of the light, and yet the
Day visits them? And speaking of the Gods, They bestow, (says he) their
benefits upon the unthankful, and are ready to help those who make a bad
construction and use of their kindness. And almost in the very words of our
Savior, Etiam sceleratis Sol oritur, etc. The Sun rises even upon the most
vile and profligate persons, and the Seas are open to Pirates.

Thus is God affected toward those who are guilty of the greatest provocations
toward Him. He bestows upon them the gifts of his Common Providence; and not
only so, but is ready to forgive innumerable Offenses to them for Christ's
sake. This Pattern the Apostle proposes to our imitation, Ephesians. 4. 32.
Be ye kind, tenderhearted, forbearing one another, forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you: chap. 5. 1.
Be ye therefore imitaters of God as dear children. This temper and disposition
of Mind, is the prime excellency and perfection of the Divine Nature; and who
would not be ambitious to be like the most perfect and best of Beings? And so
our B. Savior concludes this Argument, in the last Verse of this Chapter, Be
ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect, which St.
Luke renders, Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father which is in Heaven is
merciful. So that in that very thing which we think to be so hard and
difficult, you see that we have Perfection it self for our Pattern. And this
Example ought to be of so much greater force with us, by how much greater
reason there is why we should do thus to one another, than why God should do
thus to us. Our Offenses against God are more and greater, than any man ever
was or could be guilty of toward us: Besides, that there are many
Considerations which ought to tie up our hands, and may reasonably restrain us
from falling furiously upon one another, which can have no place at all in God.
We may justly fear, that the consequence of our Revenge may return upon our
selves, and that it may come to be our own case to stand in need of Mercy and
Forgiveness from others: And therefore out of necessary caution and prudence,
we should take heed not to set any bad example in this kind, lest it should
recoyle upon our selves. We who stand so much in need of Forgiveness our
selves, ought in all reason to be very easy to forgive others. But now the
Divine Nature is infinitely above any real injury or suffering. God can never
stand in need of pity or forgiveness; and yet of his own mere Goodness, without
any interest or design, how slow is he to anger, and how ready to forgive?

And, which comes yet nearer to us, there is also the Example of the Son of
God, our Blessed Savior; who in our Nature, and in case of the greatest
Injuries and Provocations imaginable, did practice this Virtue to the height:
And all this for our sakes, as well as for our Example. So that he requires
nothing of us, but what he himself submitted to with the greatest Patience and
Constancy of Mind; in our stead, and wholly for our advantage.

He rendered good for evil to all Mankind, and showed greater Love to us,
whilst we were Enemies to Him, than ever any man did to his Friend.

He prayed for those that despitefully used him and persecuted him. And this,
not upon cool consideration, after the injury was done, and the pain of his
Sufferings was over; but whilst the sense and smart of them was upon him, and
in the very Agony and bitterness of Death: In the height of all his anguish, he
poured out his Soul an Offering for the Sins of Men, and his Blood a Sacrifice
to God, for the expiation of the Guilt of that very Sin whereby they shed it;
pleading with God, in the behalf of his Murderers, the only Excuse that was
possible to be made for their Malice, that is their Ignorance; and spending his
last breath in that most charitable Prayer for them, Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do.

The last Declaration which he made of his mind, was Love to his Enemies; and
the last Legacy he bequeathed was an earnest Request to God for the Forgiveness
of his Persecutors and Murderers.

So that if any Example ought to be dear to us, and effectually to engage us to
the imitation of it, this of our Blessed Savior should; since the Injuries
which he suffered have saved us from suffering, and the greatest Blessing and
Happiness that ever befell Mankind is due to this excellent Example: And then
with what Confidence, nay with what Conscience, can we pretend to share in the
Benefits of this Example, without imitating the Virtues of it?

Can we seriously contemplate the excessive Kindness and Charity of the Son of
God to the sinful Sons of Men, after all our bitterest Enmity toward him, and
most cruel and injurious Usage of him; and all this Charity exercised toward
us, whilst he was under the actual sense and suffering of these things: and yet
not be provoked by an Example so admirable in it self, and of such mighty
advantage to us, to go and do likewise?

But notwithstanding the power of these Arguments to persuade to this Duty, I
must not dissemble some Objections which are, I believe, in many of your minds
against it; and to which for the full clearing of this matter, it will be fit
to give some satisfaction. And they are these:

1. That this Precept in the Text does not seem so well to agree with another
of our Blessed Savior's, in another Evangelist, If thy brother trespass
against thee, Luke 17. 3, 4.
rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass against thee
seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I
repent, thou shall forgive him. Here our Blessed Savior seems not to require
Forgiveness, unless he that has done the Injury declare his Repentance for it:
but the Text plainly requires us to forgive those who are so far from repenting
of their Enmity, that they still pursue it, and exercise it upon us. Thus our
Lord teaches us, and thus He himself practiced toward his Persecutors.

But this appearance of Contradiction will quickly vanish, if we consider that
Forgiveness is sometimes taken chiefly for abstaining from Revenge; and so far
we are to forgive our Enemies, even whilst they continue so, and though they do
not repent: And not only so, but we are also to pray for them, and to do good
offices to them, especially of common Humanity: and this is the meaning of the
Precept in the Text. But sometimes Forgiveness does signify a perfect
Reconciliation to those that have offended us, so as to take them again into
our Friendship; which they are by no means fit for, till they have repented of
their Enmity, and laid it aside. And this is plainly the meaning of the other
Text.

2. It is further objected, That this seems to be a very imprudent thing, and
of dangerous consequence to our selves; because by bearing one Injury so
patiently, and forgiving it so easily, we invite more; and not only tempt our
Enemy to go on, but others also by his Example to do the like: Which will make
ill natured Men to provoke us on purpose, with a crafty design to wrest
benefits from us: For what better Trade can a man drive, than to gain Benefits
in exchange for Injuries? To this I answer three things:

First, It is to be feared that there are but few so very good, as to make this
kind return for Injuries: Perhaps, of those that call themselves Christians,
not one in a hundred. And he is not a cunning man that will venture to make an
Enemy, when there is the odds of a hundred to one against him, that this Enemy
of his will take the first opportunity to take his Revenge upon him.

Secondly, It is also on the other hand to be hoped, that but very few are so
prodigiously bad, as to make so barbarous a return for the unexpected kindness
of a generous Enemy. And this is encouragement enough to the practice of this
Duty, if there be a probable hope that it will have a good effect; and however,
if it should fall out otherwise, yet this would not be reason enough to
discourage our goodness, especially since the kindness which we do to our
Friends is liable almost to an equal Objection, that they may prove ungrateful,
and become our Enemies: it having been often seen that great Benefits, and such
are beyond requital, instead of making a man more a Friend have made him an
Enemy.

Thirdly, Our Savior never intended by this Precept, that our goodness should
be blind and void of all prudence and discretion, but that it should be so
managed; as to make our Enemy sensible both of his own fault, and of our
favor; and so, as to give him as little encouragement, as there is reason for
it, to hope to find the like favor again upon the like provocation. Our
Savior commands us to do the thing, but has left it to our prudence to do it
in such a manner as may be most effectual, both to reclaim the Offender, and
likewise to secure ourselves against future and further Injuries.

3. Lastly, It is objected, What can we do more to our best Friends, than to
love them and bless them, than to do good to them and to pray for them? And are
we then to make no difference betwixt our Enemies and our Friends?

Yes surely; and so we may, notwithstanding this Precept: For there are degrees
of Love, and there are Benefits of several rates and sizes. Those of the first
rate we may with reason bestow upon our Friends, and with those of a second or
third rate there is all the reason in the World why our Enemies should be very
well contented. Besides that we may abstain from Revenge, yea, and love our
Enemy, and wish him and do him good; and yet it will not presently be necessary
that we should take him into our bosom, and treat and trust him as our intimate
and familiar Friend. For every one that is not our Enemy is not fit to be our
Friend; much less one that has been our Enemy, and perhaps is so still. There
must be a great change in him that has been our Enemy, and we must have had
long experience of him, before it will be fit, if ever it be so, to take him
into our Friendship.

All that now remains is to make some Inferences from the Discourse which I
have made upon this Argument, by way of Application. And they shall be these
four:

Christian Religion does plainly require us to do; to forgive them, and love
them, and pray for them, and to do good offices to them, then certainly it
concerns us in prudence to be very careful how we make Enemies to ourselves.
One of the first Principles of Humane Wisdom, in the conduct of our Lives, I
have ever thought to be this, To have a few intimate Friends, and to make no
Enemies, if it be possible, to ourselves* St. Paul lays a great stress upon
this, and presses it very earnestly. For after he had forbidden Revenge,
Recompense to no man evil for evil. Romans 12. 17.
As if he were very sensible how hard a matter it is to bring men to this, he
advises in the next words, to prevent, if it be possible, the occasions of
Revenge, V. 18.
If it be possible, and as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men:
That is, if we can avoid it, have no Enmity with any man. And that for two very
weighty Reasons.

The first I have already intimated; because it is so very hard to behave
ourselves toward Enemies as we ought. This we shall find to be a difficult
Duty to Flesh and Blood; and it will require great Wisdom, and Consideration,
and Humility of Mind, for a Man to bring down his Spirit to the Obedience of
this Command: For the fewer Enemies we have, the less occasion will there be of
contesting this hard Point with ourselves.

And the other Reason is, I think, yet plainer and more convincing, because
Enemies will come of themselves, and let a man do what he can, he shall have
some. Friendship is a thing that needs to be cultivated, if we would have it
come to any thing; but Enemies, like ill Weeds, will spring up of themselves
without our care and toil. The Enemy, as our Savior calls the Devil, will sow
these Tares in the night, and when we least discern it, will scatter the Seeds
of Discord and Enmity among men; and will take an advantage either from the
Envy, or the Malice, or the Mistakes of Men, to make them Enemies to one
another. Which would make one wonder to see what care and pains some men will
take, to provoke Mankind against them; how they will lay about them, and snatch
at opportunities to make themselves Enemies, as if they were afraid to let the
happy occasion slip by them: But all this care and fear surely is needless; we
may safely trust an ill-natured World, that we shall have Enemies enough,
without our doing things on our part to provoke and procure them.

But above all, it concerns every man in prudence to take great care not to
make personal Enemies to himself; for these are the sorest and the surest of
all other, and when there is an opportunity for it, will sit hardest upon us.
Injuries done to the Public are certainly the greatest, and yet they are many
times more easily forgiven, than those which are done to particular Persons.
For when Revenge is every bodies work, it may prove to be no bodies. The
general Wrongs which are done to Humane Society, do not so sensibly touch and
sting men, as personal Injuries and Provocations. The Law is never angry or in
passion, and it is not only a great indecency, but a fault, when the Judges of
it are so. Heat of Prosecution belongs to particular Persons; and it is their
memory of Injuries, and desire to Revenge them, and diligence to set on and
sharpen the Law, that is chiefly to be dreaded: And if the truth were known, it
is much to be feared that there are almost as few private as public Acts of
Oblivion passed in the World; and they commonly pass as slowly, and with as
much difficulty, and not till the grace and good effect of them is almost quite
lost.

Secondly, If we ought to be thus affected toward our Enemies, how great ought
our kindness, and the expressions of it, to be to others? To those who never
disobliged us, nor did us any Injury by word or deed; to those more especially,
who stand in a nearer relation to us; to our natural Kindred, and to our
spiritual Brethren to whom we are so strongly linked and united by common Bond
of Christianity; and lastly, to our Benefactors, and those who have been
beforehand with us in obligation: For all these are so many special Ties and
Endearments of men to one another, founded either in Nature or Religion, or in
common Justice and Gratitude. And therefore between all these and our Enemies
we ought to make a very wide and sensible difference, in our Carriage and
Kindness toward them. And if we do not do so, we represent our Savior as an
unreasonable Lawgiver, and do perversely interpret this Precept of his contrary
to the reasonable and equitable meaning of it. For whatever degree of Kindness
is here required toward our Enemies, it is certain that so much more is due to
others, as according to the true proportion of our tie and obligation to them
they have deserved at our hands: nothing being more certain than that our
Blessed Savior, the Founder of our Religion, did never intend by any Precept
of it to cancel any real Obligation of Nature, or Justice, or Gratitude; or to
offer Violence in the least to the common Reason of Mankind.

III. Thirdly, Hence we learn the excellency Christian Religion, which has
carried our Duty so high in things which do so directly tend to the Perfection
of Humane Nature, and to the Peace of Humane Society; and, which if all things
be rightly considered, are most agreeable to the clearest and best Reason of
Mankind: So that those things which were heretofore looked upon, and that only
by some few of the wiser sort, as Heroical Instances of Goodness, and above the
common rate of Humanity, are now by the Christian Religion made the
indispensable Duties of all Mankind. And the Precepts of no other Religion,
that ever yet appeared in the World, have advanced Humane Nature so much above
itself, and are so well calculated for the Peace and Happiness of the World, as
the Precepts of the Christian Religion are: for they strictly forbid the doing
of Injuries, by way of prevention; and in case they happen, they endeavor to
put a present stop to the progress of them, by so severely forbidding the
revenging of them.

And yet after all this, it must be aknowledg'd to be a very untoward Objection
against the Excellency and the Efficacy of the Christian Religion, that the
Practice of so many Christians is so unequal to the Perfection of these
Precepts. For who is there in the Changes and Revolutions of Humane Affairs,
and when the Wheel of Providence turns them uppermost, and lays their Enemies
at their Feet, that will give them any Quarter? Nay, that does not greedily
seize upon the first opportunities of Revenge, and like an Eagle, hungry for
his Prey, make a sudden stoop upon them with all his force and violence; and
when he has them in his Pounces, and at his Mercy, is not ready to tear them
in pieces?

So that after all our Boasts of the Excellency of our Religion, where is the
practice of it? This, I confess, is a terrible Objection indeed; and I must
entreat of you, my Brethren, to help me to the best Answer to it: Not by any
nice Distinctions and Speculations about it, but by the careful and honest
Practice of this Precept of our Religion.

This was the old Objection against Philosophy, that many that were
Philosophers in their Opinions were faulty in their Lives: But yet this was
never thought by wise men to be a good Objection against Philosophy. And unless
we will lay more weight upon the Objections against Religion, and press them
harder than we think it reasonable to do in any other Case, we must acknowledge
likewise, that this Objection against Religion is of no force. Men do not cast
off the Art of Physic, because many Physicians do not live up to their own
Rules, and do not themselves follow those Prescriptions which they think fit to
give to others: and there is a plain reason for it, because their swerving from
their own Rules does not necessarily signify that their Rules are not good,
but only that their Appetites are unruly, and too hard and headstrong for their
Reason: Nothing being more certain than this, That Rules may be very
reasonable, and yet they that give them may not follow them.

fourth and last Inference from this whole Discourse shall be this, That being
convinced by what has been said upon this Argument, of the Reasonableness of
this Duty, we would resolve upon the Practice of it, when ever there is
occasion offered for it in the course of our Lives. I need not to put you in
mind, that there is now like to be great occasion for it: I shall only say,
that whenever there is so, nothing can be tied more strictly upon us than this
Duty is.

It has often been a great Comfort and Confirmation to me, to see the Humanity
of the Protestant Religion, so plainly discovering it self, upon so many
occasions, in the practice of the Professors of it. And setting aside all
other advantages which our Religion has been evidently shown to have above
Popery in point of Reason and Argument, I cannot for my life but think that to
be the best Religion which makes the best Men, and from the nature of its
Principles is apt to make them so; most kind, and merciful, and charitable; and
most free from Malice, and Revenge, and Cruelty.

And therefore our Blessed Savior, who knew what was in man better than any
man that ever was, knowing our great reluctance and backwardness to the
practice of this Duty, has urged it upon us by such forcible and almost
violent Arguments, that if we have any tenderness for our selves, we cannot
refuse Obedience to it. For he plainly tells us, That no Sacrifice that we can
offer will appease God toward us, so long as we our selves are implacable to
Men; Verse 23d of this Chapter, If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there
rememberest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave thy gift before the
Altar, and go thy way: first go and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come
and offer thy gift. To recommend this Duty effectually to us, He gives it a
preference to all the positive Duties of Religion: First go and be reconciled
to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Till this Duty be discharged,
God will accept of no Service, no Sacrifice at our hands. And therefore our
Liturgy does with great reason declare it to be a necessary Qualification for
our Worthy Receiving of the Sacrament, that we be in Love and Charity with our
Neighbors; because this is a Moral Duty, and of eternal Obligation, without
which no positive part of Religion, such as the Sacraments are, can be
acceptable to GOD; especially since in this Blessed Sacrament of Christ's Body
and Blood we expect to have the Forgiveness of our Sins ratified and confirmed
to us: Which how can we hope for from GOD, if we our selves be not ready to
forgive one another?

He shall have judgment without mercy, says St. James, who has showed no
mercy. And in that excellent Form of Prayer which our Lord himself has given
us, He has taught us so to ask Forgiveness of God, as not to expect it from
Him, if we do not forgive one another. So that if we do not practice this Duty,
as hard as we think it is, every time that we put up this Petition to God,
[Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us;] we
send up a terrible Imprecation against our selves, and do in effect beg of God
not to forgive us. And therefore, to imprint this matter the deeper upon our
minds, our Blessed Savior immediately after the recital of this Prayer, has
thought fit to add a very remarkable enforcement of this Petition, above all
the rest; For if, says He, ye forgive men their trespasses, Matthew. 6. 14, 15.
your heavenly Father will also forgive you: But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.

And our Savior has likewise in his Gospel represented to us, both the
reasonableness of this Duty, and the Danger of doing contrary to it, in a very
lively and affecting Parable, delivered by him to this purpose: Mat. 18. 23.
Concerning a wicked Servant, who, when his Lord had but just before forgiven
him a vast Debt of ten thousand Talents, took his poor Fellow Servants by the
throat, and, notwithstanding his humble Submission and earnest Entreaties to be
favorable to him, haled him to Prison for a trifling Debt of an hundred Pence.
And the Application which he makes of this Parable, at the end of it, is very
terrible, and such as ought never to go out of our minds; V. 35.
So likewise, says He, shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye do not
from your hearts forgive every one his brother his trespasses. One might be apt
to think at first view, that this Parable was over done, and wanted something
of a due Decorum; it being hardly credible, that a man after he had been so
mercifully and generously dealt withal, as upon his humble Request to have so
huge a Debt so freely forgiven, should whilst the memory of so much Mercy was
fresh upon him, even the very next moment, handle his Fellow Servants, who had
made the same humble submission and request to him which he had done to his
Lord, with so much roughness and cruelty, for so inconsiderable a Sum. This, I
say, would hardly seem credible; did we not see in experience how very
unreasonable and unmerciful some men are, and with what confidence they can ask
and expect great mercy from GOD, when they will show none to Men.

The greatness of the Injuries which are done to us, is the reason commonly
pleaded by us why we cannot forgive them. But whoever thou art, that make
this an Argument why thou can not forgive thy Brother, lay thine hand upon
thy heart, and bethink thy self how many more and much greater Offenses thou
have been guilty of against God: Look up to that Just and Powerful Being that
is above, and consider well, Whether thou do not both expect and stand in
need of more Mercy and Favor from Him, than thou can find in thy heart to
show to thine offending Brother?

We have all certainly great reason to expect that as we use one another, God
will likewise deal with us. And yet after all this, how little is this Duty
practiced among Christians? And how hardly are the best of us brought to love
our Enemies, and to forgive them? And this, notwithstanding that all our hopes
of Mercy and Forgiveness from God do depend upon it. How strangely inconsistent
is our practice and our hope? And what a wide distance is there between our
expectations from GOD, and our dealings with Men? How very partial and unequal
are we, to hope so easily to be forgiven, and yet to be so hard to forgive?

Would we have GOD, for Christ's sake, to forgive us those numberless and
monstrous provocations which we have been guilty of against His Divine Majesty?
And shall we not for His sake, for whose sake we our selves are forgiven, be
willing to forgive one another?

We think it hard to be obliged to forgive great Injuries, and often repeated;
and yet Woe be to us all, and most miserable shall we be to all Eternity, if
GOD do not all this to us, which we think to be so very hard and unreasonable
for us to do to one another.

I have sometimes wondered how it should come to pass, that so many persons
should be so apt to despair of the Mercy and Forgiveness of GOD to them;
especially considering what clear and express Declarations GOD has made of his
readiness to forgive our greatest Sins and Provocations upon our sincere
Repentance: But the wonder will be very much abated, when we shall consider
with how much difficulty men are brought to remit great Injuries, and how
hardly we are persuaded to refrain from flying upon those who have given us any
considerable provocation. So that when men look into themselves, and shall
carefully observe the motions of their own minds toward those against whom
they have been justly exasperated, they will see but too much reason to think
that Forgiveness is no such easy matter.

But our comfort in this case is, That GOD is not as Man; that his ways are not
as our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts; but as the Heavens are high
above the Earth, so are his ways above our ways, and his thoughts above our
thoughts.

And the best way to keep our selves from despairing of GOD's Mercy and
Forgiveness to us, is to be easy to grant Forgiveness to others: And without
this, as GOD has reason to deny Forgiveness to us, so we our selves have all
the reason in the World utterly to despair of it.

It would almost transport a Christian to read that admirable Passage of the
Great Heathen Emperor and Philosopher M. Aurelius Antoninus, M. Aur. Antoni.
lib. 7.
Can the Gods, says he, that are Immortal, for the continuance of so many Ages,
bear without impatience with such and so many Sinners as have ever been; and
not only so, but likewise take care of them, and provide for them that they
want nothing: And do thou so grievously take on, as one that can bear with
them no longer? Thou, that art but for a moment of time; yea, Thou that art one
of those Sinners thy self.

I will conclude this whole Discourse with those weighty and pungent Sayings of
the wise Son of Sirach, Eccl. 23, 1, 2, 3, 4.
He that revengeth shall find vengeance from the Lord, and he will certainly
retain his Sins. Forgive thy neighbor that has hurt thee, so shall thy Sins
also be forgiven when thou prayest. One man bears hatred against another, and
does he seek pardon of the Lord? He shows no mercy to a man like himself, and
does he ask forgiveness of his own Sins?

Enable us, O Lord, by thy Grace, to practice this excellent and difficult Duty
of our Religion: And then, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us: For thy mercies sake, in Jesus Christ; to whom with Thee,
O Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, Adoration and Obedience,
both now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Brabazon Aylmer.
THe Rule of Faith: or, an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. Sarjant. By John
Tillotson, D. D. Dean of Canterbury. To which is adjoined, A Reply to Mr. I. S.
his Third Appendix, etc. By Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's.

The Advice of a Father, or Counsel to a Child: Direrecting him how to Demean
himself in the most important Passages of this Life.

The True Mother Church: or, a Short Discourse concerning the Doctrine and
Worship of the First Church at Jerusalem, upon Acts II. By Samuel Johnson,
Author of Reflections upon Julian. Price 2 d.

Books Printed for B. Aylmer and W. Rogers.
SErmons and Discourses, some of which never before printed: The Third Volume.
By the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, D. D. Dean of Canterbury. Octavo.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation. In 8vo. Price 3 d.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By
John Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. In Octavo. Price 3 d.

A Sermon preached at Lincolns-Inn-Chappel; on the 31st of January, 1688, being
the Day appointed for a public Thanksgiving to Almighty God for having made
his Highness the Prince of Orange the Glorious Instrument of the Great
Deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power. By John Tillotson,
D. D. Dean of Canterbury.

Books lately printed for W. Rogers.
AN Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists Protesting against Protestant
Popery; being a Vindication of Papists not Misrepresented by Protestants.
Quarto.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
the City of London, at Guild-Hall-Chappel, on Sunday November 4th, 1688. By W.
Sherlock, D. D. Master of the Temple.

A Letter of Enquiry to the Reverend Fathers of the Society of Jesus. Written
in the Person of a Dissatisfied Roman Catholic.


