TO RECEIVE THE LORDS SUPPER, The Actual Right and Duty of all Church Members
of Years not EXCOMMUNICATE.

MADE GOOD Against Mr. COLLINS his Exceptions against The Bar Removed, written
by the Author. And what Right the ignorant and scandalous tolerated in the
Church have to the Lords Supper declared. Many things belonging to that
Controversy more fully discussed, tending much to the peace and settlement of
the Church. AND ALSO A full Answer to what Mr. COLLINS has written in defense
of Juridical Suspension, wherein his pretended arguments from Scripture are
examined and confuted. To which is also annexed A brief Answer to the
Antidiatribe written by Mr. Saunders.

By JOHN TIMSON, a private Christian of Great Bowdon in Leicestershire.

Those members of the body which we think less honorable, upon those we bestow
more abundant honor, -- That there should be no Schism in the Body, 1 Cor. 12,
23, 25. London, Printed by E. C. for Tho. Williams at the Bible in
Little-Britain, and Will. Tomson at Harborough in Leicestershire. 1655.

The Author to the Reader.
HOw weak and unable I am for the managing of the least truth, and how unfit to
appear in public in its defense, I am very sensible and filled with fears and
perplexing thoughts in my very soul, lest I should do any thing but for the
Truth, and for the peace of our unsettled Church; or should be injurious to so
good a cause, which I am drawn out (I do not well know how) to vindicate. Who
is sufficient to defend the Truth! I tremble to think how many precious and
choice Servants of the Lord, and faithful Laborers in his Vineyard, are
against me in what I publish. I reverence and esteem those of the Presbyterian
judgment above others in some considerable respects, and verily judge them
conscientious men, and such as I look upon as best qualified, for promoting the
Gospel truth, and the Churches peace. And although my returns to Mr. Collins be
somewhat round, yet I hope I do not much reflect upon most of the Presbyterian
judgment, notwithstanding his seeming to write in the name of all of that
persuasion. I do profess my study was to speak my very heart in this
Controversy, and to provoke different minds to give some stronger grounds for
their opinion and practice; assuring my self, that a great deal more must be
said against that Free Admission to the Sacrament, which I plead for, then any
of late have said, before either Mr. Humphrey or my self will be answered, and
many thousands in the Nation, (which I hope fear God) will be satisfied. I may
safely say, with a good conscience, it is more the clear conviction of my
judgment and conscience, that persuades me to appear in this controversy,
then any private interest or affectation of opinion, or spirit of
contradiction, or baseness of that spirit either ^o humor or flatter the
common multitude. I am persuaded it is the very simplicity of holy Truth which
I have undertaken to defend, leading directly to the Churches Peace and
Reformation. Truth seeks no corners, but is invincible, and entire in it self;
it may be overborn at a push, but will recover again, and vanquish all the
dark parts of man. O that we had such impartial and unbyased spirits, as to
receive all truth in the love of it! Let me entreat my Reader to weigh things
met with in this controversy deliberately; and then I doubt not, but of
whatsoever judgment he be, he will confess my principles and arguments are
rational, and much the drift and scope of plain Scriptures: And if he will but
grant me Infant Baptism, he will find it a hard task to overthrow any of my
building, as it is stated. He may see with what clearness and ease I have
answered to what is excepted against my first book, in the reading of this; and
also to what is brought in defense of Suspension as distinct from
Excommunication, as it is stated by Mr. Collins. Indeed he pleases himself
with telling his Reader my principles are both large and rotten, but if he
think to go but an inch narrower, he will find it a most difficult task to
free himself of that charge laid against the Pharisees, the making void the
Commandments of God by their Traditions: He cannot go a jot narrower, but he
must uncovenant, undisciple, and unduty those which he calls Church members; the
doing of which plucks up all that the Church stands upon, and levels Christians
not Excommunicate with the Pagan world, in point of right and actual duty of
receiving. This is so irrational that it stands Mr. Collins upon to do his
utmost to give some satisfaction therein; which if he do, he must make good
from the Scriptures those things which he so often begs;

As 1. That the Lords Supper is strong meat only.

2. A seal to justifying faith only.

3 And that every unregenerate person in the Church that receives, eats
judgment to himself more then in any other Ordinances of Word and Prayer, he
doing in each what he can to decline and avoid profaneness.

4. That a Churchmember of years, under Toleration of the Church, is no
believer or disciple under actual duty, as a Christian.

5. That to the different state of the Church, as consisting of regenerate and
unregenerate, is under different rules and duties, as to public worship.

6. That more knowledge and holiness is required to the Lords Supper, then to
Baptism in persons of years.

7. He must prove Suspension distinct from Excommunication a Church censure,
and for what sins.

8. That some baptized of years mentioned in the Scripture have been denied the
Sacrament of the Supper for ignorance, or for not having fruits of holiness
answerable to the Christian Profession; and yet allowed the liberty of all
other Ordinances in the Church as members.

9. He must prove a Pastoral or Church trial by examination of Church Members
fitness or unfitness necessary to admitting to the Sacrament, and more such
like things, before he can justly debar any from the Sacrament, more then from
the rest of Church privileges and duties: If he can make good all or any of
these things by the Scriptures, so as to take off what we have excepted against
them; then he may do something toward giving satisfaction in this
Controversy: otherwise in plain terms, I would have him to sit still, and let
others (who may think to do somewhat in order to it) put forth their strength.
For I am willing my grounds and principles should be tried to the utmost. I had
rather be put to shame a thousand times, then upon mistake in any thing I
should dissent from godly men, and draw any into error. But yet I would have
you to know, that these grounds and principles, on which my judgment is built,
have been so long received and chewed upon, and examined and tried by general
rules of Scripture and Reason, that I shall not easily be removed. For I dare
boldly say, the substance of what I write, I received not from Erastus, Mr.
Prinne, nor Mr. Humphrey; my judgment was settled and satisfied in these things
long before I heard of these Authors. And besides what reason has Mr. Collins
to charge us with this, that we are Erastus his scholars, when he finds us so
point blanck against him, in defending the Jurid^cal censures of the Church? I
cannot say that ever I read any Author that came up to my opinion or judgment
in these things in any measure, til now of late I saw Mr. Humfreys Vindication
of free Admission. So that whether my grounds be new or old, I have made but
little acquiry in respect of humane authority; this I am satisfied in, that my
grounds are such as accord with the Gospel Covenant, and the state of the
Visible Church of Christ, as it is constituted in Parents and children, good
and bad, called and chosen. And I find that men of different judgments run
themselves upon dangerous rocks of Schisms, Separations, and needless
divisions in the Church; besides their interferings, contradictions of
themselves, and detracting unworthily from Covenant Relation,
Church Membership, Sacraments, signs, and pleadges of Covenant love to the
whole Church in general. And therefore I hope, though I have endeavored to
remove an unnecessary Bar, yet it will appear that I am not guilty of that sin
and curse that Mr. Collins intimates, in saying, Was it our grief formerly,
that we had no Bar, and is it our work now to remove the Bars? yea, the Lords
and the Churches ancient Landmarks?

But who are most faulty in this? they that plead for the Churches Landmarks
and rights, or they that unjustly defraud the Church thereof, laying the Church
common with the world; judge ye: or who are most for Reformation according unto
Scripture Canon; they that press to all Scripture obedience, or they that
exempt Christians from some necessary duties of Worship; they that would have
all in the Church dealt with as members, in a Juridical way, to their
amendment; or they that unchurch them, undisciple them, and so unduty them, and
level them with the Pagan World. Mr. Collins pretends much zeal in his Epistle
prefixed to his Book; but I could wish he had more sound judgment and
knowledge in these things, to abate the inconsiderate noise he makes, and the
passion which he shows therein. First, he tells us that it was a burden that lay
upon our souls, that in the Prelates days there was no bar but one which
Su^pe^^on made. And then about six lines after, he says, the Prelatical party
may rise up in judgment against us, and say, Lord we gave the Minister
authority to keep any from the Sacrament for notorious sins; etc. First, he
says, there was no Bar, and then he says that there was a Bar; and such a one
as I think^ might have satisfied men of his persuasion. The truth is, both
Presbyterian and Brownists make such a slender thing of Covenant relation, the
ground of baptism in the Church, that it will not bear up what they should
build upon it afterward; for they make it upon the matter but a mere titular
or nominal thing; restraining the Gospel Covenant to believers only in a strict
sense, making Sacramental Seals invalid, if they do not so believe, conceiving
that if persons in the Church by their actual offending discover themselves to
be in an unregenerate state after baptism, that then they are out of Covenant,
and so by consequence have forfeited their actual right to Sacramental seals
thereof; making no difference between such and the Pagan world. But if we hold
to the Covenant made to the Church and their seed, as it was published and
declared to Abraham, and all along to the Church of the Jews, and look upon the
Christian Church as graffed into them, and equally children of Abraham by
profession of faith and Baptism, as the Jew by nature and Circumcsiion, press
all to walk up to their profession as Christians according to Gospel
observances, being bound to observe all things as the Jews were, then should we
build upon such a foundation of truth that would be immovable, and bear up as
much as we now plead for. But I have expressed my self more largely in this
ensuing discourse, and may not now insist upon the largeness of the Gospel
Covenant. In short then I conceive, that it is a very great mistake to narrow
the Gospel Covenant unto this, He that believes shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be damned.

I grant, 1. That this is a truth as taken in the usual sense, but then I deny
that it is the whole Covenant of grace made unto the Church and their seed.

2. I grant it a conditional proposition, used in the first tender of the
Gospel unto Infidels, to move them to accept of Christ, and so to bring them
into the visible Church; but I deny that this in like manner was, or is to be
preached unto the visible Church, that profess their acceptance of Christ, and
all observances appointed by him.

3. I grant that actual believing and profession of faith, was the only thing
that fitted a Pagan for Baptism, and graffing into the Gospel Church, in which
the promises of grace and glory belong to the whole indefinitely; but yet I
deny that there is any promise of grace in those words, He that believes shall
be saved; it is true, there is the promise of being saved upon condition of
sincere believing; but there is no promise in that to give a sinner grace to
believe. So that this conditional part of the Covenant in a strict sense, as it
is usually urged alone without the absolute, renders unregenerate sinners,
incapable of any good news by the Gospel, it not being in the power of any of
himself so to believe. And to make the death of Christ a seal to confirm this
conditional part of the Covenant only (as being that which the Sacraments hold
forth) is to make the death of Christ a seal to confirm a Covenant of works in
the Church derogatory to the Gospel mercy and grace. Therefore we are to
conceive of the Covenant, as it is held out to the Church by the Prophets and
Apostles, the Church being built upon both. Genesis 17. Jerem. 31. Ezekiel. 36. it is
largely laid down, and applied by the Apostles to the Church in Gospel times,
Act, 2.39. Heb. 8. Act. 3.25, 26. and 5.31. Romans 15.8, 9. 2 Cor. 6.16.18. and
7.1. compared. These Scriptures prove that the Apostles did usually apply those
old free grace promises, (with the end of Christ coming into the world to
confirm them) to the Gospel Church. But if any please to enter their exceptions
against these my notions about the Covenant, I shall be glad both of an
occasion and opportunity to insist more largely upon them. For I must confess,
I think there are not many that are very right about the nature and largeness
of the Gospel Covenant made to the Church; and that straitning the Covenant too
much occasions very much division and schism in the Church. But Reader, I will
detain thee no longer in the porch; only let me entreat a candid and charitable
conceiving of my sense, drift and end in what I have written: I would provoke
none, but leave the probability of what I have asserted from Scripture and
reason, to the consideration of all. Only this let me tell thee by the way,
That Suspension, as it is stated by Mr. Collins, I judge to be sufficiently
confuted in the latter part of this Book. What himself or any other may do
further in stating it, and proving it by Scripture or reason deduced thence, I
know not; I think whosoever undertakes it, will find it a hard task to make
this good; That some Church Members of years, and endued with reason, shall and
ought to be denied the Communion of the Lords Supper, and yet be allowed the
liberty of all other Communion in acts of worship as Church members at that
present. And though I do not in plain terms prove it an invention of men, yet
I conceive I have so removed the arguments and reasons it is pretended to be
built upon, that it does not yet appear to be the Ordinance of Christ, and so
by consequence, that it is but a Tradition of men. Jesus Christ commands all
that are Disciples, Church Members, to observe all his commands, from which
none that are baptized can be excluded without equal authority to that of
Christ. Suspension from the Sacrament only, must first be proved an Ordinance
of Christ, before any may be suspended from it. For no authority on earth can
disoblige from actual duty, but the same that does oblige to duty; I mean no
authority can do it but that of Christ, in giving the power of the keys of the
Church, to bind and loose authoritatively. To conclude, let none deceive
themselves in reading this Book, as if it were intended for defense of
promiscuous Communion; for what I intend therein is to justify a lawful
Communion in the Lords Supper according unto the rules of the Law and Gospel;
and sure that is the most pure Communion that is most agreeable to rule, as the
case now stands in our Church. Mixed Communion properly is to admit an Infidel,
Jew, or Pagan unbaptized to the Sacrament, that denies or knows not that Christ
is come in the flesh; or to admit the Excommunicate, before they have given
satisfaction to the Church by their repentance and amendment of life: If I
should plead for such a Communion, then it would reflect upon me to my reproach
and shame. But I plead not for this, but for Church discipline to reform the
disorderly in the Church Juridically. I would have the Church still to preserve
the form of all necessary duties of worship, though they cannot bring up all to
the power of godliness, as is desirable. Better to keep up Religion, though
but in the right form, then not at all. What reason can any have to discourage
from any religious form of true worship, under this pretense, that they come
not up to the inward power, which is undiscernable for the most part? Form and
power are inseparable in the true Religion, where the Lord gives his blessing.
That place of Timothy is usually misunderstood in our times: for it is clear
they had not so much as the external form of true Christian Doctrine and
Worship, but such a form of godliness as Heathens have or may have: for it was
spoken of false teachers and seducers, that usually make pretenses of a form of
godliness of their own devising, and deny or be enemies to the form of
godliness, which is according to truth commanded of God; for they are such as
resist the truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the doctrine of
faith. God never blesses false forms of worship with his powerful presence,
working grace in them that out of strong delusion have invented those forms:
but forms of his own prescribed worship, are the power of God to salvation to
whom he will. Now I crave pard^n of all sober men for this my so bold attempt,
to clash with so many able solid Divines, as I shall be judged to do. I
reverence all, and should patiently wait, and without contending submit to all,
were the Church in a settled state: but we having run into such endless
divisions and separations, it concerns every one to study and endeavor the
regaining of the settlement, peace, and edification of the whole. And I could
wish that men of ^ober principles, who have an eye at the same end, would be
more serious in weighing the grounds we build upon, and the weapons we fight
with in managing this controversy. I could wish that able and learned men
would thoroughly search and more deeply dive into this controversy; for I know
that unless a great deal more can be said against Free Admission as it is
stated then I could as yet ever hear of, contrary minds will be forced either
to yield, or else they will run themselves upon such rocks as will quite break
the constitution of our Church. But prove all things, and impartially incline
to own and embrace that which brings the fullest and nearest evidence of truth
and solid reason to thy understanding. And the Lord give us at least to see
where the truth and the Churches peace lies, and establish the same among us,
which is and shall be the prayer of him that longs to see that day,

John Timson.

The most principal things handled in this Controversy are contained in these
few questions.
1. WHether all Church Members of years not Excommunicate have a true right to
the Lords Supper or no.

2. Whether any Church Members may lawfully be denied the Lords Supper for
ignorance, and state of unregeneracy according unto Gospel rule.

3. Whether Church Members as such in relation to the Covenant, be not
personally worthy during their abode in the Church, and in that sense worthy
receivers, though otherwise they be actually unworthy.

4. Whether it is the duty of all Church Members of years to receive the Lords
Supper, as to hear, pray, read, sing, etc.

5. Whether the promises of first grace be not included in the Gospel Covenant,
which Sacraments seal: And the unregenerate in the Church be the only objects
of those promises.

6. Whether the Church is to judge of her members worthiness or unworthiness
in order to admitting to the Lords Supper more then to all other acts of
public worship.

7. Whether the Sacrament can be denied to be a converting Ordinance in the
Church.

8. Whether Juridical Suspension be an Ordinance of Christ or an invention of
man.

ERRATA.
Reader among many lesser faults which have escaped in the printing by reason
of the Authors absence, there is one great fault, page 143. in. 12, 13, 14. The
distinction there mentioned is this, Hearing of faith preached was, and is the
ordinary means of the faith of Heathens, but the whole work of the Ministry is
the ordinary means of sincere believing in the Church. And p. 239. l. 10. after
probable, supply means of instructing them in the.

Page 4 lin. 7. read unto, p. 13. l. 27. r. privative. p. 1^. l 6. r. reaching.
p. 29. l. 8. for il. r for it. p. 31. l. 12. r. Vzzahs. p. 31. l. 14. r.
answer. p. 50. l. 10. r. undvoidable. p. 64. l. 15. r. examen. p. 71. l. 1 3.
r. a knowledge. p 89. l. 14. r. propositions. p. 98. l. 12. r. leavened. p. 99.
l. 21. r. chain. p. 100. l. 27. r. visible. p. 116. l. 2. r. adjourned. page
138. l. 28. supply in, after does. p. 156. l. 9. r. uneldered. l. 30. supply of
the whole Church, after settlement, p. 161. l. 9. r. privative. p. 166. l. 2.
f. examination r. argument. p. 170. l. 2. r. irreproveable. p. 189. l. 7.
supply, an ordinance of, after give. p. 199. l. 6 dele it. p. 216. l. 3. f.
first r. fifth. p. 249. l. 15. f. power r. prevalency. p. 275. l. 21. r.
suspicion. p. 280. l. 1. f. know r. how. p. 286. l. 27. f. which r. when. p.
298. l. 32. r. to persecutions. p. 312. l. 29. r. think. p. 327. l. 8. put in
profitable, after that is, and l. 16. r. themselves.

To Receive the Lords Supper, the actual Right and Duty of all Church Members
of years not Excommunicate.
BEloved Christian friends, Although I judge that I am not as yet answered by
Mr. Collings, (there being enough in my Book to answer him and vindicate it
self from whatsoever is as yet objected against it, to the Judicious and
impartial Reader) yet with respect unto Mr. Collings, who is esteemed a
Gentleman learned and worthy according unto his title, and some profitable
labors for the Churches good. And also for the further satisfying both of the
weak and plain minded Christians: As also the confirming of those my friends,
that cordially embrace my Book, and adhere to the truth asserted therein: And
that the controversy it self may come to some clearer issue; and something
more may be discovered in order unto peace and truth, and reformation in the
Church of God: in all humility and respect unto different minds. I crave leave
once more soberly and freely to present my thoughts unto further consideration,
for I judge that Mr. Collings has been too hasty in concluding that my main
principles are rotten that I have made the ground of my discourse, by what he
has said in answer thereunto: for the truth is, he has not in the least
disabled any one main thing I have asserted, nor is willing to keep to the
question as it is stated, nor answer to any purpose, where the main stresse of
Controversy lies; but trifles about Infants, and distracted, and Pagans, and
the excommunicate, the admitting of which, a^ such, not any in our times plead
for. And therefore he might have said less to these; and more to those that
the thing in controversy concerns: namely, Whether the unregenerate, or
ignorant and scandalous members in the Church, being baptized, and of years,
not excommunicate, may be debarred the Lords Supper, they expressing their
desires to receive and proffering themselves. I answer in the negative all
along, that they may not be put by Mr. Collings seems to be offended with my
charging the Reverend Doctor with unbrotherly dealing. A thing, says he, that
my self am more guilty of; which I think is hardly so, unless the worthiness
of the person my opinion strikes at does so much the more aggravate the thing.
As for my not taking notice of Mr. Humfreys reflections as he calls them: it may
be better excused as to my self and friend, then the other can.

1. Because that part of the Book which concerned the Doctor, was finished and
gone from me toward the Press, before ever I knew of Mr. Humfreys rejoinder.

2. When I did read it over, I thought his returns (to such bitter censures and
invectives against him) were very pathetical, yet humble and melting, and well
becoming a sober charitable Christian, and fellow laborer with the other in
the holy Gospel.

3. I have heard many godly and learned in the Ministry acknowledge that his
returns are humble and charitable, and yet quick and rational. As to Mr.
Collings quotation of the two last pages of his rejoinder; I conceive that Mr.
Humfrey little thought that any would be so uncharitable as to take his
Allegorical reproof and caution in that unfeemly sense that Mr. Collings will
force upon it; there being not any Scripture incapable of a rational
application: And those that are impartial and sober, can judge no less of
that. And for those six or seven dissatisfactions of mine concerning the
practice of some Presbyterians unassociated, I know not how I should have
expressed my self more modestly, then by professing my self unsatisfied, giving
so many hints as I have clearly done against those things I charge them with.
And I am sure if the main principles in my Book stand firm, (as I think they
will for any thing yet said against me) Mr. Collings will not be very zealous
for ruling Elders, nor Suspension distinct from Excommunication, Church
examination of her members into actual receiving, nor leaving out without any
judicial proceedings.

But to the matter it self, let us see what he has said against that.

First his demand is, What it is that gives one right to the Sacrament of the
Supper, he knows the answer will be Church membership; either this alone, or
something else; if this alone, then Infants and mad men, and drunkards must
come say what they can, if they say not Church Membership alone does give a
full right, then many of their arguments fail

1. being dead, as an heir at full age: but yet it does not follow that a
child under age shall be left actually to manage his right himself in that
state, as an heir at one and twenty. We know the Apostle says it, An heir
under age differs not from a servant though he be Lord of all. Yet such is the
the consequence of Mr. Collings touching Infant Communion; if we grant them a
true right as members in point of title, and a remote right actually to enjoy
as soon as they are in a natural and rational capacity, then says he, they as
members must come, say what we can to the contrary. Although Mr. Humfrey and my
self have showed a clear difference between Infants and distracted, and the
ignorant at age in several particulars.

The one 1. not in a natural capacity, as the other is.

Nor 2. in a rational capacity, as the other is.

3. The one not so under the obligation of precepts of public actual
worship, as the other are.

4. The one not at all under the censures of the Church, as the other are: Nay
although Mr. Humfrey in his rejoinder tells them, that there is as wide a
difference between Infants and Ignorants, as between a do not, and a cannot,
(speaking of Examination, and discerning the Lords Body,) the Ignorant they do
not, but yet they ought to do, but Infants and distracted cannot, and are
excused; yet notwithstanding all this wideness in the premises, Mr. Collings
without an answer unto ours, most peremptorily enters his consent unto the
Doctors weakness, and tells us the Doctor says right, that by the same reason
we except against Infants, etc. we may except against the ignorant and
scandalous. Thus you may see, let the premises be never so different, they must
hold to their conclusion, be it never so absurd and irrational: and I would
have them to take notice that,

We do not except against Infants and distracted,

We do not except against Infants as not having a true right,

We do not except against Infants and distracted, Collings would have it) But
because self examination, and discerning the Lords Body, coming to receive, are
not their actual duties; but we judge all these are the actual duties of
ignorants, and of the scandalous in the Church, until they be excommunicate.
And as soon as Infants are grown past childehood, and come under the actual
obligations of precepts and worship, our principles incline us to as timely an
admittance of youths, that shall voluntarily desire it, and proffer themselves,
as those that oppose us. It Is certain that children in the Church,

1. Come under family instruction and correction before they come under the
Ministerial instructions, admonitions, corrections, either of Church or State.

2. That children come sooner under negative precepts, then affirmative acts of
worship; it may be a sin for that child to lie, swear, curse, steal, when at
that age it is no sin to omit public prayers, and the Lords Supper. Divines
say affirmatives always bind, but not to all, at all times; in many cases God
will have mercy rather then sacrifice, as is supposed to the case in hand. But
I could wish we might keep close to the thing in controversy. Infant Communion
is not a thing controverted in our Church. In the next place in answer to his.

Church Membership it is very comprehensive, importing no less then Believer,
Saint, etc. and therefore needs nothing else to give a true legal right
(according unto the rule) unto the Lords Supper: for all Believers, Disciples,
Saints by calling and profession, when, and whilst they were within, were
never denied the Lords Supper. It Is true a Churchmember may come under diverse
considerations.

1. As an heir at age, or in his minority, or under distraction is still an
heir, and his right to be conceived of as before.

2. So, it is in the Commonwealth, an^ evil and a hurtful subject is a
subject, and has the benefit of the laws thereof, as any other subjects of the
same kind, though never so good and profitable: so it is in the Church; the
most uncomely members are members, and have as true a legal right to the
external privileges of the Church, as any other members of the same kind,
though never so good and holy. A difference in the degrees alters not the
kind, for that whatever belongs unto a Churchmember as such, belongs unto all
of the same kind, is with out doubt. We do not find a different rule to
Church Members of the same kind; if good or bad openly offend, they ought to
be proceeded against accordingly; and neither the one nor the other should be
denied an actual external privilege of the Church, until the Church has
given out judgment against them by excommunication authoritatively; and we are
not to make any difference in the Church about members in respect of externals,
the rule being only one, and the same unto all. Members, believers, disciples,
brethren, in a large sense are as truly such in a true sense, as those are such
indeed, in a strict sense.

Hence Mr. Collings his demand, What it is added unto Church Membership
entitles to this Sacrament? is both frivolous and improper, because
Church Membership includes as much as can be added unto it, and yet does not
exclude the worst born in the Church, and under her toleration. Nor did I ever
think that any man would be so perverse (as he) to make reason and age,
additions to membership, they being but essentials to the more perfect being of
a man: for that is supposed of all that come under actual precepts of worship,
that they are reasonable men, and of years. There is the Church Membership of
Infants, and of men, and of women, yet all is but Church Membership; age, sex,
and reason, etc. are not additions unto membership: but a Churchmember is the
same with all these: Yet it is true too, that unto all actual observances in the
Church, age, and reason must necessarily be presupposed. So again, knowledge,
faith, and obedience are not additions to membership, but a Churchmember
comprehends all these, in his sense, degree or kind. And while they will
acknowledge persons in the Church Church Members, believers, disciples, etc.
they must conclude with me that Church Membership alone gives a true legal
right to the holy Supper, say what they can to the contrary: so that the vanity
of this superadding unto membership unto Sacramental right, is nothing else but
a raising a dust to blind our eyes. What Church either in the Old or New
Testament required more then membership unto this Sacrament? all that came
under Circumcision or Baptism, stood engaged to keep the Passover and the holy
Supper. When Mr. Collings can give a clear instance otherwise, I shall think my
self bound to return him thanks.

If any make enquiry what Church Membership in its rise and nature is,

It Is a relative state of persons only that have entered Covenant with God,
membership holds, and so long as membership holds, the privileges of that
estate holds. It must be an authority equivalent to the ground of membership,
that can dismember, or dispossess them of their right as members, which
nothing but renouncing the Covenant, or obstinacy continued in, under the
Churches censures, can do it.

But he goes on in his mistake, and tells his Reader, That I hold, it is only the
exercise of reason conjoined unto Church Membership gives all a right to the
Sacrament, then it follows says he, That all such who are able to exercise
their reason ought to come, and be admitted. And then asks us why are drunkards
excepted against, page 22.

Here is but the same again which is already answered, only he says, Humfrey
has it, he might say the drunk, meaning the actual drunk, as void of reason,
conscience, and devotion for that present, as being more fit to be thrust among
Swine, then suffered to come unto any sacred Ordinance of Worship, in that
profane sordid brutishness, not denying but the same man at another time when
he is sober and in his serious mind to serve God as a Christian, he being not
excommunicated may and ought to partake of every Ordinance in the Church^ a
member.

Says, Mr. Coll.
If he can but show him the least sh^dow of Scripture to prove that a capacity
to exerc^ reason is that other thing which added unto Church Membership gives
one an actual right, we will be (...) bondmen.

Membership alone in its own latitude comprehends as much as he himself wi^^
have added unto it to give a true actual righ^ as is made out above.

And then 2. I hope Mr. Collings will allo^ men and women that are baptized and
continue to adhere to the true Religion to b^ Church Members, and if so,
himself do^ grant their right, which is as much as h^ would have me prove;
unless he think that Church Membership of persons grow^ up to years of
discretion, is a mere not^ onal thing, an empty nothing, levelling
Church Members to the Pagan world, as (...) may well suspect him for several
things me^ withal hereafter; his often urging of something to be added to give
one of years right to the Sacrament, as knowledge, faith, and the fruits of
holiness, strongly implies that to be a Churchmember, disciple, is nothing,
to give a right. It Is the things he superaddes that gives the right to the
Supper; whereas to Church Membership I know, and so may be, that his
superaddings are not proper, nor indeed sense; for add those things to a
Pagan, and they will give him right unto Sacraments, ^hereas a Churchmember
imports the same, ^e they ignorant, or scandalous, during that privileged
estate. Does the Scriptures speak (...) any such additions to a Jew unto his
observing the Passover in its season? Let it (...) proved that an ignorant Jew
lost his actual right as a Jew, or Churchmember, or ^at an ignorant Christian
in the Apostles ^ayes, that was baptized and within had no ^ight to the Lords
Supper. Will you not al^ow as much of Church privilege to a baptized Christian
now, as was allowed then? Are the privileges of the same Church diminished ^o
her members? Wherein will you have a Churchmember not excommunicate differ
from a Heathen, or the excommunicate? You allow all other Ordinances in the
Church to a Heathen, the suspended, Excommunicate, and just so much you allow
to a Churchmember tolerated, and no more, how do you confound things that
differ! What difference do you make between the excommunicable, and the
excommunicate, the ignorant, and such as offend out of weakness that are not
excommunicate? The Primitive and Positive suspension as you call them, the
proper and improper, etc. the punishment de facto in its execution, is all the
very same, deny them the Sacrament only, that is the least, and that is the
greatest. Whether it be done by a Classes, or Presbytery, or a single Minister,
or by the disco^ragement of some private Christians, or (...) of peoples own
carelessness. The only po^ of reformation and end of Discipline is m^ that
great design of keeping Church Members of years from the Sacrament, slight^
their Covenant, relation, obligation unactual observances as members,
disciples, (...) lievers, etc. as if they were no more un^ the duties of Gospel
worship then Turks a^ Pagans. If Church Membership with u^ judged the same with
those were added (...) to the Chdrch in the Apostles days; w^ should we
question the duty and privilege ^^ours, more then they of those times? I wo^
have Mr. Collings either show me a differ^ state of Church Membership; or else
she me a different rule for the same Church (...) walk by, either let him do
the one or (...) other, or else be so ingenuous to yield (...) every member his
right, until the Chur^ have legally dispossessed them of it.

At the latter end of the 22 page, Mr. Coll.
he draw^ up the question between both, and wou^ have it put to trial; but
indeed the questi^ is so wide from the question in controvers^ and so much said
already to clear the question in hand, that I may well pass it b^ and see what
we can find in page 23. when he is still upon the same thing; and plea^
against me thus.

If a mere capacity to exercise reason entitule^ (...) Churchmember to the
Sacrament, then every Churchmember in such a capacity has an undoubted right.

I grant that every Churchmember of years of discretion has an undoubted
right. Church Members that are professing the true religion, not under the
Churches just censure. And had he done so he might have assumed what he could,
but he willing to leave so much out of his antecedent as would have spoiled his
consequence, and prevented him in urging those inconsequences that follow upon
it in the whole page: although I must confess the cases he instances in, have
need to be spoken unto with wisdom and tenderness; so that the truth be not
prejudiced. As to the case of members that are so notoriously scandalous that
of right ought to be excommunicate, but are not, as he instances in incest and
adultery immediately before a Sacrament, he sees I have large principles if I
would admit such a one.

1.

Or 2. are under evident conviction. A suspicion is not sufficient to ground
Church censures upon, if this be clear upon sufficient proof, the Christian
Magistrate has to do with them, those things being punishable by death in our
Law. And such malefactors cannot ordinarily escape the penalty of the Law, if
the Magistrate will n^ do his duty. The Church may assoo^ judicially
excommunicate, as suspend su^. And it is a question that wiser men then I ha^
need to answer. Whether such scandalo^ sinners as Mr. Collings speaks of, ought
no^ most properly to be punished by the Judge in a Christian Commonwealth?
according to the penalties, the Law of God directs i^ such cases? And whether
the Church has (...) do at all with such or no in point of censures is a
question; as for other forts of sinners that the Laws of this Commonwealth
does more indulge: the Churches cognizance in point of discipline may reach,
(...) she be in that capacity, otherwise she ca^ but instruct the ignorant,
warn the unruly, re^buke in public the open offender, admonish all: an^ have
patience toward all men. Every Christian in his place to do what in them lies
to reform themselves: and not suffer sin to lie upon their brother. But as
for that knack of excommunicable and merely upon that account keep members
back, without any trial, whether their offendings b^ out of weakness or
wilfulness; or without any legal proceedings in order to their amendment, is a
very bold part. Such precedents are of pernicious consequence in these times,
where we have none to make our appeal unto: knowing how that Brownism has too
much leavened the greatest part of the most knowing men, Ministers, and others,
in the Church of England. Well, let not any presume upon sin themselves, in
pretense of punishing sin in others. If you cannot act orderly according to
clear rule, make not such haste to reform as to go about it in an
unwarrantable way: as for Church Members that are in possession of their right
according to law, do not dispossess them, until the Church authoritatively
has given out judgment against them. Let not our Churchmen be more
irrational then our Lawyers for subjects in the Commonwealth.

And as for that, he says, Church Members not knowing whether Christ were a
man or a woman. I am sorry that any should be so grossly ignorant. I thank God
I never have known any such; if Mr. Collings have, I hope not in his Parish.
And I cannot but judge it a reproach of our Church and Ministry, if any such
can be found amongst us. But it is a lamentable thing notwithstanding our
scruples about Sacramental Communion so many years together, but few that have
prepared their people ever the more by doubling their diligence in catechizing
of them plainly and familiarly, in public and private. Which I fear, some that
appear forward for a purer Communion, in seven years time never did so much as
in a friendly way spend so much as an hour with their poor ignorant people in
private, to inform them better, and to know their conditions, and encourage
them to learn the things of God, in order to their better profiting in public
administrations. How long is it that we have been excepting against poor
ignorant brethren, and yet not ordinary means used to prevent it more then
heretofore; if so much: for in the Bishops times care was taken that all did
learn the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments; with the
explanations of them, and other parts of the Churches Catechizing; we had our
set Prayers, that people were apt to learn; but now in many places people never
hear the Lords Prayer, Creed, nor Commands, scarce in the year: nor have in use
any common plain Catechism, etc. Ah, poor souls, that care is not toward them
(I verily judge) as good Shepherds have of their Masters dumb sheep, who will
see to every particular one that it be kept in order, and that nothing obstruct
its growth and feeding; and if any sheep go astray he diligently seeks it, and
brings it to his fellows; and when either fly or scab does hinder its
prosperity, he will not let it alone until the poor sheep come to him, (though
he should call it) but he will go to it, and gently catch it, (although it is
so silly to flee from him) and mercifully help it: he will not let them go
till they be infectious, and then separate the broken from the whole; but
endeavor to keep every one in that order that all may fold together. Act.
20.28.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all, over the which the holy
Ghost has made you overseers to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. If you have that love to your Lord and Master as
you should, you will feed his sheep and lambs, that they may fold together.
Reverend Elders we are fallen into careless times, in respect of the Worship
of God; little or no care is taken that our people constantly frequent the
public assemblies: ignorant persons are left to watch to themselves; you have
the more cause to apply your selves to them in private even from house to
house, and be tender unto them as a nurse cherishes her children: to insinuate
your selves in a friendly familiar way into them, will gain in them a reverent
esteem of you in their hearts, which will give you the advantage of persuading
them to receive instruction from you, both in public and private: It Is an
easy business to make a separation in your flocks; and to cast off the
relation of Pastor and people, and to neglect relative duties, and to fill your
people with prejudices, divisions, and discontents, and to break the peace and
union of the whole: but a work of commendable difficulty, when with care,
prudence, and diligence you so apply your selves unto all, as they that must
give an account unto God of every particular soul committed to your charge.
Remember the blood of souls; and judge your selves bound to deal with the worst
of your people as members of the body of Christ, while they remain children of
the Kingdom, and not reckon them dogs and Swine, until they be legally put out
of Church Communion, and hate to be reformed by the Churches censures.

Mr. Page 24.
Collings urges against my principles, thus;

He must be able to discern the Lords Body from comm^n bread. But many men may
be Church members and rational, and yet not able to do this, therefore
something else must he added.

The Minor wants prof, Collings be so uncharitable to any that profess their
desires, and offer themselves reverently in conscience of this service; he
knowing that there is enough in the words of institution, consecration by Word
and Prayer, the words used in the act of giving and receiving, sufficiently to
inform the meanest person that the elements are signs of the body and blood of
Christ, and that they eat and drink in remembrance of Christ for remission of
sins, etc. His Conclusion is false, because his Minor wants proof.

Again, He brings in a child of five or six years old as able to exercise
reason, and so is a Churchmember (if baptized) and if these two things give a
plenary right, such ought to be admitted.

Children mind childish things ordinarily and nothing else: That what he has
said is sufficient to show the vanity of this conceit, as he is pleaseed to
call it, that mere Church membership with years of discretion gives one a full
right to the Lords Supper.

What he means by full right, he may do well to explain himself, I have told
him plainly enough, that Church Membership having its rise from Covenant
relation, gives a true right unto all external Church Priviledges during that
relative state of actual membership. I know that their real state of spiritual
interest in Christ, does put members into a higher capacity to improve their
right for their spiritual advantage, then those that are but in that relative
state only, of visible members in a large sense. Yet the good improvement of
the one, does not hinder nor take away the just right of the other. An ill
husbands right in law is as good as the best husbands in the world, until by
law his right be taken away. And an evil member in the Commonwealth has as
much privilege in respect of the benefit of the law while he is a member, as
any other of the same kind, though never so good. The best subject is but a
subject; and the worst subject is a subject until he be outlawed, or
convicted of treason. So I say, in the Church, the best and holiest man that
lives, is but a Churchmember; and the worst that lives, (he being baptized,
and adhering to the true religion, and under Church indulgence) is a member
also of the same visible Church, and in respect of his relative state, his
right is as good to the Sacrament as the other in a legal sense, for the one is
as much under observance as the other, all are Covenanters, and have entered it
at least, and hence stand bound to the terms of Christian obedience. There is
but one Law and rule for good and bad: the one has received the Spirit of the
Covenant, that makes his service sweet and easy; the other is notwithstanding
under the letter of administrations in a waiting for a blessing, and may not be
released. Such have the right of precept, which is a sufficient warranty for
their observance of the Supper. The other not only that, but the right of
spiritual privilege and blessing through the real union and communion with
Jesus Christ. And Mr. Collings his superadded qualifications to membership, or
Covenanters to give a right to precepts of worship, is so flat by this time (he
urging it so often) that I shall trouble my reader with it no more; only take
notice, that upon the matter he makes membership a mere nothing: for do but
superadde a knowledge of the things of God, conjoined with faith in Christ,
evidenced by the fruits of holiness, unto a Turk, or any other Pagan, or Jew,
in the Infidel world, it would give them the right of membership and
Sacraments; and therefore at once you may see what clear conceptions Mr.
Collings has of the privileges of Church Membership.

In this page Mr. Collings conceives, Page 25.
That I have dealt more unbrotherly with the friends of Presbyterian
Discipline, even some hundreds of them, both learned and reverend men, as I
charge the Doctor to have done with Mr. Humfrey; and that by entering some
exceptions against that discipline. Bar removed, page 8, 9, 10.

I have spoke to this already, that such groundless consequences I observed
from the reverend Doctor, should reflect upon some hundreds of learned reverend
friends to the Presbyterian discipline. I had thought the most of the things I
am unsatisfied in, as being merely groundless, would not have been owned by
some hundreds of such learned men. I spoke chiefly of them that are
Congregations unassociated, and when Mr. Collings, or any other can clear
themselves of what I charge them with, I shall either make good my charge (if
you take it so) or else submit unto you, and acknowledge it my weakness to be
unsatisfied of the truth of what I pointed at in those 8, 9, 10 pages of my
Book: In the mean time Mr. Collings being the first that I have heard of, that
has put so hard a sense of my dissatisfactions, notwithstanding I have many
Presbyterian friends, learned and reverend, it makes me something question
whether many will charge it on me for unbrotherly dealing or no. I being but a
private Christian might do it in order to my own and diverse others
satisfaction, that are in no such way, nor dare attempt any such practices,
although we have made after the search of warrant for those ways as well as
other men, we not knowing how to know the mind of Christ better then by his
Word in these things, nor how to know the simplicity of truth, then by seeking
of God by prayer and humiliation for guidance and direction in our free and
serious debates in the presence of the Lord, amongst our selves in order unto
practice, the which we of great Bowden have carefully done, even a considerable
number of us with our Minister, before we did communicate together in the holy
Supper: And we hope the Lord was with us in the whole, we are fully satisfied,
and not ashamed to publish unto others of our Christian brethren, the grounds
and principles we act from. Our greatest grief is, that we observe too great a
carelessness in our people to worship God with us in this great engaging
Ordinance of holy Communion in the Sacrament of the holy Supper. And this we
shall further declare, that although our Minister were, and is, one of our old
Non conformists, and did endeavor to draw us into another way of Communion; yet
such was our answers and grounds, that he was satisfied therewith. And does
administer Sacraments freely with a settled satisfied judgment: we bless and
praise our God for it. Let others judge of us what they please; we judge that
we act according to the mind of Christ, considering that present capacity we
are in.

In this 26. page, he is pleased to examine my queries upon 1 Cor. 11. and that
the rather it seems, because, as he says, all my superstructure stands upon
the foundation that I have there laid, page 23. at latter end.

I confess I judge the stresse of all the controversy has been occasioned
upon mistake of the Apostles scope and sense in that chapter and therefore have
endeavored by severa queries upon the place, page 14, 15, 16, 17. of my Book,
to give you the sense of the place Which I hope has, and will satisfy many
distressed consciences, which have bee^ perplexed too much through some mistak^
of our latter Divines; former ages an^ Churches, (as some of my friends have
tok^ me since), do much favor the sense that have given of the place. And it
seems t^ me, that Mr. Collings is put to a stand wh^^ to say to it, as for that
great thing of applying the danger to unworthiness of persons, Mr. Coll.
whi^^ troubled us all, he confesses he sees no great han^ is like to come of
it, if it be granted that the Apostle there does not primarily speak of person^
unworthiness, but actual. And again, he says, It Is not much material to
dispute, whether the Apostle there spoke of habitual unworthiness, ^ only
actual. That there is a personal unworthiness himself must grant he says, or
else Turks, an excommunicated persons cannot be excluded.

Here you may see a very fair concession from Mr. Collings, I would we had
found him as ingenuous in other things, that we might have been all of a mind,
but though thi^ place does not prove it, he would have u^ conceive that some
other places do in order to the Sacrament. And it is a thing that I must
grant, else Turks, and the excommunicate cannot be excluded. I will examine his
Scriptures anon, and shall first deny that which he will force me to grant, his
reason is worth nothing, or else Turks, etc. I grant that there is a personal
unworthiness in Turks and Pagans, and in the excommunicate also conditionally,
but does it therefore follow that there is a personal unworthiness in the
Church, that profess themselves a people in Covenant with God, and have the
Lord for their God? Here you may observe again, how Mr. Collings is levelling
Churchmembers with the infidel world; it is strange to me, that a Batcheler of
Divinity, should not be able to make difference between a Pagan and a
Christian. What, 1 Cor. 7.14.
did he forget that foederal holiness that differenceth the clean from the
unclean?

He queries, Whether every unregenerate man as such, be personally unworthy; he
believes he is. I seem to doubt, he says.

Without doubting that there is no personal unworthiness in the unregenerate
in the Church, simply considered in it self, and are entered into Covenant with
God Let no man account common and unclea^ commonizing such a called professing
people with the Pagan world, etc. (as is the humor and sin of these times:) for
person^ unworthiness cannot be in the Church, (...) long as a persons relative
worthiness remains. Indeed we may distinguish of a persons worthiness in the
Church: it is either relative merely, or else real and relativ^ together. The
former is sufficient for the acceptance of the Church unto all Gospe^
Ordinances; the latter is that which hat^ its praise of God, it being called
the ci^ cumcision of the heart, etc. the other but o^ the letter only, Romans
2.20. But Mr. Colling says, there is no need of disputing this. Although I
know the main cause of this con^ troversie occasioned by this very thing. T^
what end is your Bar, but to exclude the unworthy? Why have you devised such
strange things, as to make it strong meat, (...) seal to faith, a strengthening
and a nourishing Ordinance, etc. contradistinct from all: the rest in the
Church, excluding it from being a means of conversion, which you allow to all
the other Ordinances in the Church. To what end is your suspension, and
hindering persons more from this then any other? To what end are your proving
and trying of such that generally profess the same religion your selves
preach, though harmless and honest as to men, yet may not be admitted? I say
to what end is all this, but that you are afraid of personal unworthiness? And
it is the only thing to be disputed: for we are all agreed about actual
unworthiness, that let a man be a godly man, yet if he sin scandalously he is
to be censured it, and so of the unregenerate, if they be obstinate; our
difference about actual unworthiness, will be in what cases the Church may
exercise the rod, for what sins: but he tells us, page 27.

That every Church member is by us to be looked upon as habitually worthy,
unless by some actual miscarriage he declares himself actually unworthy.

But the question is, Collings will grant that those in the Church, that they
find by their miscarriages to be actually unworthy, they judge to be
habitually worthy; and let him tell us plainly, that they keep back no man from
the Sacrament for habitual unworthiness, if he can, and say truth, but for
actual miscarriages only. Let him plainly answer me in that, and then I may
tell him more of my mind: in the mean time let me tell him, that I much fear
his charity to Church Members savours of excess, and exceeds all due bounds.
Take habitual worthiness in his own sense, as he expresses himself in the same
thing thus, Yet we believe their Church Membership is not that which makes them
thus worthy; but their into est in Christ, which charity obliges them thus
believe, until by some fruits they discover the o^ trary.

Then it will follow,

That all Infants born in the Church a habitually worthy,

That charity which obliges us thus (...) believe of all Church Members,

Then it follows, that those that are ha^ tually worthy from their interest in
Christ may fall away from that habitual wo^ thinesse they have from their
interest (...) Christ.

This strongly implies that they hold the no one should be continued a member
of the visible Church, Colling has said. It Is not much material to dispute
whether the Apostle spoke of habitual unworthiness o^ actual, when all he
drives at is nothing else unto his admitting to the Sacrament. If I can but
undermine him in that one prop, his whole building will fall, and the
controversy come to some good issue, for what Mr. Collings can do in it, let
him do the best can.

In the next place he says, he dares not deny but the disorderly eating in the
Church of Corinth, was an unworthy eating; and might be a cause of their
punishment, verse. 30. We know God is very tender of his own order and brings
that instance of Uzziahs case, etc.

This I take to be a good concession to my anwer of the 3. and 4. query, page
16, 17, 18. The Bar removed: But I see he is very unwilling to come off clearly
in it; mark, he does but say, their unworthy eating might be a cause of their
punishment. The holy Apostle says plainly, for this cause many are weak and
sick, some dead. That is, the cause is plain, verse. 29. Their not discerning
was more out of carelessness and profaneness then simply out of ignorance.
their eating and drinking unworthily, which he further explains to be their
not discerning the Lords body, but used the bare elements as common bread, not
discerning the body and blood of the Lord they were consecrated to represent,
with other particular miscarriages in the time of administration, for this
cause, says our Apostle, they were punished; this were a cause, says our
Author, but not all the cause, for which they were punished with death. Who
shall carry the sense now of these two competitors, our Apostle, or Mr.
Collings. I need not again urge what have formerly spoke to this Scripture,
(...) Mr. Collings or any other first answer (...) what I have done in clearing
the set of the place, and let them prove that were for personal unworthiness
if the can, or for any other sins that they w^ guilty of before they met
together for t^ time of administration, etc. Let them g^^ us some clear
demonstrations of it, if they c^^ if they cannot, let them be so ingenu^ as to
give us their consent, and trouble se^ful consciences no longer with such kind
trifling uncertainties that here follow (...) our Author.

Mr. Collings has given us three argume^ to show us why ^e cannot digest the
se^ that I have given of the 1 Cor. 11.20. to^ end.

He says, because the Apostle, chap. 5. had them of Corinth, that they could
not keep (...) feast with the old leaven of malice and wickedne^ And bidden
them purge out the old leaven, verse 7. And not eat with one called a brother
who she be a fornicator, or idolater, etc. And again chap. 10.21. had told them
they could (...) drink of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup devils. What
then, why did he not mal^ his conclusion, that we might have clear^ understood
to what end he quotes tho^ Scriptures as a reason?

But let us a little follow him in these Scriptures, and examine what they will
make to prove these two things:

1. That the Lord punished the Corinthians for personal unworthiness.

2. That they were punished for some other sins then what they were guilty of
in the time of administration: which is the main thing in hand.

As for 1 Cor. 5. he tells us, (not the Apostle) that they could not keep the
feast with malice, etc. the Apostle exhorts them to purge out the old leaven,
meaning that of the incestuous person, speaking by way of an allusion to the
law of the Passover, which were to purge their houses of all leaven against
that feast which continued seven days: resemblably he would have them purge
themselves of that wicked person whom they had indulged amongst them, and made
the name of God to be evil spoken of, by tolerating such sins amongst them, as
is not so much as named amongst the Gentiles, that one should have his fathers
wife, etc. therefore deliver him to Satan, purge your selves of your former
connivence and indulging such, and then says he, let us keep the feast, but
not with malice and wickedness, etc. but with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth, meaning that he would have them spend their whole lives
so; the Apostle tells them what he would have them do, and how they should keep
the feast, Mr. Collins tells us, he told them they could not keep the feast,
etc. but he that has but half an eye may easily discern what this place is for
his purpose; This proves that scandalous persons should be cast out of all
Christian Communion, for the conclusion of the whole is in the last verse, cast
out from amongst your selves that wicked person, which is the thing that I all
along contend for, the just censures of the Church; but I would have none
debarred their right till then.

But Mr. Collings might have given us some probable grounds to prove that the
feast mentioned, was the holy Supper, and not to leave us to such
uncertainties; for if it be not meant of the holy Supper, what is this to his
purpose? Let him show us where the Supper of the Lord is called a feast, and
that this feast must needs be that, but this is but a shift to hold up the old
interest. So hard a thing it is to come off from the authority of men,
especially, when themselves are engaged in such ways that men have framed. But
then he goes on verse. And not eat with one called a Brother, This Scripture is
more fully opened hereafter, as also the 1 Cor. 10.21.
who should be a fornicator, an Idolater, etc.

Mr. Collings should have cleared unto us what is meant by not eat, whether,
not eat, in a civil friendly necessary sense, or not eat, at the holy Supper
with such during their actual abode in the Church. If he mean the latter, in
reference to the Sacrament, I shall demand of him where that word eat alone is
to be taken for the holy Supper; and if it be not meant of the holy Supper,
what is this to the thing in hand? The 9, 10. verses do give us some light of
the Apostles meaning, He had wrote an Epistle to them, not to keep company with
the fornicators of the world. But in this Epistle he mollifies the former with
some liberty, else they must go out of the world: his meaning is, not to keep
company in a civil friendly sense unnecessarily; but if a brother be such a
one, keep no civil friendly company with him at all, no not to eat, upon
unnecessary occasion. And so for that 10. chap. 21. They could not drink of the
cup of the Lord, and of the cup Devils too. The main sin the Apostle aims at in
this chapter is Idolatry, verse. 14. These Corinthians being grafted into the
Christian Church, did bear up themselves upon their Church privileges too
high. And hence grew fearlesse of Gods judgments, notwithstanding their
manifold sins, as that of Idolatry in this chapter, the Apostle tells them, that
the Church of the Jews was invested with the like privileges as they are, and
yet for their provoking sins God was not well pleased with them, but destroyed
many of them for their murmurings, whoredoms, Idolatries, etc. and therefore
warns them of the like in general. And then in the 14. verse he applies himself
unto them in particular, Wherefore my beloved brethren fly from Idolatry, I
speak to wise men, judge what I say, for this is the thing that comes near you,
which some of you are guilty of. And that he might thoroughly convince them of
the heinous nature of this sin, he draws an argument from the nature of that
holy Communion they had together in the holy Supper, which supposes them to be
all of one Christian body, for they all eat of one bread and drink of one cup,
etc. Hence he would have them see what an inconsistent thing it were for them
to be of this Christian body, and of another Heathenish body too; in point of
Communion they could not be of both, of Christ, and Belial, this were a mixture
unsufferable, to drink the cup of the Lord at one time in the Church of Christ;
and then at another time to drink the cup of Devils, in his Temple, Will you
thus provoke the Lord, etc. you must either forbear the one or the other, for
you cannot serve God and the Devil. And this he aggravates the more, because it
was such an offense and scandal to the weak amongst them, the which they that
were the strongest Christians offended in, as the latter end of the chapter
does clearly give it, and that about indifferent things, and it became thus
sinful in regard of some evil circumstances. But now what is this to prove,
that this sin was in their eating and drinking unworthily in the 11 chap. as
Mr. Collins would have it? for here you may conceive, that at most the
offenders were but implicitly threatened with punishment: but in the 11. chapter
they were already punished when this Epistle was sent unto them, the which will
trouble Mr. C. to reconcile. Besides had the Apostle in chapter 11. meant their
actual offending in the 5. and 10. chapter then he would have said, for these
causes some are punished, or for this and diverse other, but as he meant no
other, so he writes, and terminates the only cause of their punishment, was
their profaning the holy Sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord, as has
been spoken to, For this cause, etc.

His second reason to prove he cannot digest the sense I have given, is,
because it seems very absurd to him, that a man who should but offend in a
point of order, should be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and so of
judgment; and he who comes raking with the guilt of scandalous sins, should
not at all be guilty or liable to Gods judgments.

Why will Mr. Collins thus mince their sin? Was their being drunk, and their
using a sacred Ordinance of Christ appointed for so spiritual an end, but as a
civil or common Supper, but offending in a point of order? if this did not
strike at the very essence and nature of the Ordinance, I know not what does;
does not the Apostle tell them plainly, This is not to eat the Lords Supper,
but their own, this profanation of the instituted signs rendered them guilty of
polluting the very body and blood of Christ, that the signs did represent, and
will he say, this were but to offend in a point of order? I might add their
offending in point of order to the main. But then to the latter part, Touching
them that come in scandalous sins, that they should not at all be guilty or
liable to the judgments of God.

Who ever said such a word? Corinthians were punished for no other cause but
their profaning this Ordinance; that therefore I must needs hold that they
that come in other scandalous sins, are not liable to any of Gods judgments
for their other sins? I say, tribulation, anguish, and woe, to every soul that
does evil. And yet I say too, it is possible a scandalous sinner may come to
the Sacrament, and not at all be guilty of the Corinthians sinning, nor as to
his receiving be liable to the judgments of God; provided he come as prepared,
and carry himself as reverently at the administration as he can: for his
scandalous life does not disingage him from Christian observance while he is
within, and not under the just censures of the Church to reform him thereby.

I know for carnal wretched impenitent sinners, to come carelessely, and
customarily, is a great sin, and for them that out of carelessenesse, and want
of affection to it shall neglect it when they are invited to it, is a great sin
also, and both punishable by the Lord. I wish all due and lawful means were
used for the reforming of both, so might we expect a greater blessing of grace
upon all in a holy use of Gods own appointments: in the mean time let us all
reform what we regularly can, and mourn for what we are wanting in.

Mr. Collings third reason is, because he cannot conceive that God should be so
unlike himself, as to look upon one legally unclean, unworthy to eat the
Passover under the Old Testament; and yet look upon one morally unclean as
worthy under the New?

It is too bold to call the blessed God unto man's bar: Collings may be unlike
the truth in what he says page 28. how does he know that God looked upon one
that was legally unclean as unworthy to eat the Passover. We know that that
uncleanness was incident to good men as well as others? It will set him hard
to prove, (I think) that it took away the habitual worthiness of a godly man,
or that relative worthiness of membership, if not, such were not looked upon as
unworthy of the Passover, but were under a contingent necessity by the will of
God that they could not observe it, but they should make the sacrifice unclean:
for by the will of God it was declared unto them, that whatsoever they touched
in their uncleanness should be unclean. And we know it was a case the Lord
indulged equally with those that were in a necessary journey, appointing them
another day of purpose the next month; nor were they so much denied the benefit
of this Ordinance, as of others, that they lost the profit of during their
uncleanness, there being not the like provision appointed as to the Passover.

Again, let me ask Mr. Collins, why the whole Church were to observe the
Passover upon their lives; and yet he cannot deny, but in that Church in their
best estate, there were many that were morally unclean, in his sense; and what
do my principles plead for more in the Christian Church; if I plead but for
the same now, that upon their lives was enjoined then, even by the Lord
himself. I hope he will not charge it upon me, that I make God unlike himself;
but if he will make the New Testament so contrary to the Old, as to say the
whole Church may not observe the Lords Supper, his opinion will hardly be
reconciled with the unchangeablenesse of the faithful, true and living Lord God.

Thus I have given you to understand, that the legally unclean were not looked
upon as unworthy to eat the Passover at all. And the sense that I have given
upon 1 Cor. 11. pleads no otherwise in favor of the morally unclean (as he
calls them) then the Old Testament does enjoin. One hint more: let Mr. Collins
prove that the legally unclean were expressly forbid the Passover. I am sure
Moses knew of no express prohibition and therefore was at a stand when the
case was brought before him, and could not tell what to direct, whether the
unclean might keep it, or forbear, until he had enquired of the Lord what they
should do; Besides when the Passover was rejourned to the last day,
multitudes did eat it, that were not cleansed, and were accepted of: And the
Lord said, 2 Chronicles. 30.15, 17, 18, 19, 20.
If any man of your posterity shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be
in a journey a far off, yet he shall keep the Passover unto the Lord, Numb.
9.10. here you see is an express command for the unclean man to keep the
Passover. He kept the same Passover at Gods appointed season, as well as the
rest of the Congregation, for God appointing and sanctifying another season for
them in special made, the service the same in it self, and to them. And yet for
all this, what ado have our late Divines made about this? I could wish we
might hear no more of it, unless they can make better use of it then Mr.
Collins does. Now I have answered three arguments that made him so hard of
digesting this truth, That the Corinthians were not punished for personal
unworthiness, but for their actual offendings at the time of administration.
For the further helps of this hard digestion and edification and satisfaction
of my Christian friends, I she freely speak my heart for the clearing upon this
in question, according to my measure for I know well enough, that our mistake
about worthiness and unworthiness of person in the Church has done more hurt
is this Church then all the Bishops ever did.

Our holy Apostle in 1 Cor. Jews Church. Why surely if the branches were holy,
then the root was holy also. Now I say, how can it be imagined, that the
Apostle will have the children holy even of those persons that in chap. 11. he
judged personally unworthy? Sure if the children were foederally holy, then
their parents were too, for the right of the child is derived from the
believing state of the parents; and that was sufficient to free them from
unworthy eating in respect of their persons. And therefore the Apostle
concludes that all things are sanctified to the Church by the Word and Prayer.
To the pure all things are pure, but to the unbelieving and impure is nothing
pure. Here is a clear difference between the professing Church and the infidel
world: all is clean to the one, but nothing clean to the other. And therefore
the Sacrament could not be polluted by the believing Corinths, in respect of
their persons. It will follow then that it was profaned by their evil actions
only. The Apostle understood the nature of the Gospel Church better then those
I have to deal with in this controversy. He understood the right rule, and
accordingly reduced all unto it. He distinguishes between clean and unclean,
believer and infidel: all was clean to the one, and nothing clean to the other,
that except the Corinths had admitted Infidels unto the body and blood of
Christ to pollute it, personal unworthiness could not be the sin for which
they were punished; Heathenish uncleanness the uncircumcised might not eat
thereof.

I tell you this is that which has undone us of late, we make the same
difference in the Church, that the Apostle made between the Church and the
world. And all those Scriptures on which this difference is declared by the
Apostle, our Divines usually apply to the different state of persons in the
Church, the regenerate and unregenerate; and accordingly would be dividing
their people, an^ are as fearful (many of them) to admi^ an unsound believer to
the Sacrament as a uncircumcised Infidel, but I hope those exorbitant
distempers that some desperately plunge themselves into from the same mistakes,
will make sober men consider a last.

I know no such language used in Scripture concerning persons of the Church, as
the any Church Members should be personally unworthy to use Gods Ordinance, and
^serve God in his own appointments. Indee^ for persons to reject the tenders
and invitations of the Gospel, to oppose and persecute the messengers that
publish lise and salvation by Jesus Christ; such are said to be unworthy of
eternal life, Act. 13.46. the Apostle Paul again tells the unbelieving Jews,
That it was necessary that the Word of God should have first been spoken unto
you; but seeing by envy, contradiction, and blaspheming, verse. 45. you put it
from you, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the
Gentiles, for s^ has the Lord commanded. So our blessed Savior, Matthew. 10 11,
12, 13, 14. gave the twelve Commission to Preach, that the Kingdom of Heaven
is at hand, etc. they were rather to go to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, then to the Samaritans. And when they came either into City, Town, or
Family, they were to salute it, and preach peace unto them, but if they were
not worthy, their peace should return; and to those that would not receive them
and hear their words, they were to shake off the dust of their feet against
them, verse. 14. with a grievous judgment threatened, verse. 15. against such
people that refuse the Gospel when it is tendered unto them. These are said not
to be worthy, that reject the Gospel wholly as the unbelieving Jews did; which
implies those that receive the Gospel and believe the truth thereof, and
profess their subjection unto it, being of no other religion then what the
Gospel teaches, they may be said to be worthy, whatever they are for sincerity
and truth: so again Matthew. 22. concerning the invited guests to the marriage
Supper, (which set forth the fat things of the Gospel administrations, and the
grace thereof,) the messengers were sent to call in the guests, that were
bidden, but they made light of it, and would not come, and some went to their
farms, and others to their merchandise, and others abused the servants that
invited them, etc. Then the King was wroth and destroyed those murderers, and
said to his servants, The wedding is ready; but they that were invited were not
worthy, verse. 8. This was meant of the unbelieving Jews that totally rejected
Christ, and would never come under his external administrations set up in his
Church, in order to salvation: they are said (you may see) not to be worthy, or
unworthy but the Gentiles that came in, though so^^ came absurdly, and perished
too, at last, y^^ there is no such thing said of them, no the were worthy,
though they consisted of goo^ and bad. The invitation privileged all^ come,
there is no pleading I am unworth to come, but refusal was that which the
unworthiness consisted in only. From the hints of Scriptures we may conceive
there no such thing as personal unworthiness ^ order to observance and duty of
person in Covenant relation, which all are the have entered Covenant, though but
in the parents, until they renounce the Covenan^ or for their hating to be
reformed by the Churches just censures they be discovenante^ conditionally,
that if they never repent (...) return to their obedience in a right way, the
are gone forever; Now then I say, if t^ Scriptures charge not any with
unworthiness of person, but such as I have instanced in, who can imagine that
the Chur^^ of Corinth was punished for that?

I would gladly know of Mr. Collings, reason can you have to judge that the
Corinths were punished for personal unworthiness? It Is true, the sin of our
natures derived from the first man is punished with death: for we al dye in
Adam, but this natural death is a common lot appointed for all, good and bad,
It Is appointed for all men once to dye, Heb. 9.27. And we see death reigns over
Infants that have not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression. Romans
5. but in this both original sin, and death that follows thereupon, is of
unavoidable necessity by the decree of God. So likewise as actual sin is the
transgression of the law, he that so transgresses is liable to the punishment
of that law. 1 Timothy 1.9, 10.
And the whole Law it self is made for the lawless and disobedient, for the
ungodly and for sinners, for murderers, for whoremongers, for liars, and for
perjured persons, etc. that is, for the punishment of all wilful disobedience
of men. And so it is said of the Church, If you will walk contrary to me, I
will walk contrary to you. You have I known of all the families of the earth,
yet the Lord will punish them for their sins. And wherefore does living man
complain for the punishment of his sin? Lam. 3.39. all the punishments
threatened in the Word, and inflicted either by God or man, were for actual
offendings: but we never read of any coming to the Ordinances that were
punished for a mere want of regeneration, circumcision of the heart, an
interest in Christ, etc. This is a case the Lord has always pity^ and
promised the cure of unto his Church forasmuch as no man can convert and rene^
his own soul, of himself; nay of thos^ that have the means, and use the
ordinar^ means of their salvation, as the Jews di^ It Is said, not of him that
wills, nor of b^ that runs, but it is God that shows mercy, R^ 9.
Habitual unworthiness in that respe^ is unavoidable; and is the common state^
all by nature, as well them that are born the Church as those that are born out
of i^ Ephesians. 2. but the Covenants of promise a^ made to the Church for the cure
of this d^ praved state. And the Lord has set up (...) Ordinances of Word,
Sacraments, and Pray^ in the Church, as the ordinary means for men to use in
their conversion and salvation revealed in the promises of the Covenant the
neglect whereof is usually punish with blindness, and profaneness, not
diligent frequenting of them. But what i^ God does punish habitual or natural
u^^ worthiness (it being an effect of Adams defection) What is that to the
Church that i^ bounded by a rule? May they contrary t^ all rule judge of it,
and punish it therefore with suspension from the Sacrament? Our blessed Savior
rebukes this rash humor in men, saying, Judge not, lest you be judged It Is
clear enough, that we may judge of men's actions, and finding them
transgresfors, we may punish their persons; but we have nothing to do to judge
of men's persons, let them be good, or bad, as to their persons, that is nothing
to us, we must leave them to stand or fall to their own Master, for what have
we to do to judge another man's servant. But if either be found transgressors
so far as their offendings come within the Churches cognizance to punish, let
them impartially do it without respect of persons in the Church. We read that
those that are appointed to judge amongst their brethren, Deuteronomy. 1, 16, 17.
are to judge righteously between every man and his brother, without respect of
persons in judgment: to hear the small as well as the great; not fearing the
face of any man, for the judgment is the Lords, and the cause that is too hard
for man to judge of, was to be brought before the Lord, and he would hear it,
there is a rule given to judge of causes and actions between brother and
brother. And yet in point of causes and things external, that brethren might
differ in, these might be too hard for men to judge of. How much more hard is
it to judge of the spirits of men within them, whether they have an interest in
Christ or no? surely if in the other, much more in this we are to refer it to
the Lord; besides, you may see in judging about things which concerns the
Church, Matthew. 18.

1. It must be of evil actions only.

2. Upon sufficient proof.

3. And in case of obstinacy, refusing (...) hear the Church, etc. before any
judgment can issue out against them. Tell me ho^ you can apply this rule to
personal unwor^ thinesse? Can this be attested upon Oath? o^ is the Church able
to convince any in particular of it? Or is it in the power of a^ to reform it?
Hence I conclude, that as it^ not applyable unto the rules of Church dicipline;
so it is such an avoidable thing (...) Church Members, that not any man of
reason will plead the punishing of, with suspe^ sion from the Lords Supper.

If the Apostles meaning 1 Cor. 11. Corinths were punished for habit^^
unworthiness, and that whosoever eats as drinks that is personally unworthy is
gui^^ of the body and blood of the Lord, and (...) eating his own damnation,
then these se^ral inconveniences and snares must neces^ rily follow.

That there is not any Minister on cancan administer the Sacrament clearly in
fai^ because he cannot have a clear ground (...) faith for him to believe that
those he delive, the Sacrament unto,

That all weak doubting fearful Christian (either Ministers or others) that are
not groundedly assured of their interest in Christ for acceptance in this
service, cannot come in faith, for he that doubts is damned if he eat, and what
ever is not of faith is sin. Such persons that are not upon good ground assured
of the truth of their own worthiness, cannot be assured of their eating and
drinking worthily, but must of necessity lie under the fear of being guilty of
what is threatened; and so eat doubtingly, (if such venture to come,) which is
sin, or else they must forbear until they be assured, or are fully persuaded of
the truth of their own personal worthiness. And this would be the perplexity
of most sincere Christians, there being but few in comparison of those, that
arrive to any grounded assurance of their own justification, sanctification,
salvation, etc. Hence we may concive, that when Mr. Collins calls the Sacrament
strong meat, he means because there is not any but strong Christians that can
partake thereof with satisfaction, peace and comfort. And so upon the matter he
denies it to be milk for babes, as well as a means of working grace in those
that want it.

That all blind self-conceited Pharisees, estate before God, and hence they
shall be,

1. Either flattered in their gross presumption by the Churches admittance of
them.

Or 2. They must be bard out by such ban as the Scriptures no where make.

That hence Ministers of the Gospel a^ forced to detract un worthily from
Christ's authority in hiscommanding this observance t^ the whole Church, Christ
does loose, and leave at liberty freely to serve him in his own appointments.

What a snare does this kind of unworthy eating bring upon all the
unregenerate,

What does more occasion godly and tender consciences to withdraw Communion
from our Parochial congregations, and they do not separate from us, for the
most part, out of any other dislike of public Worship.

That hence it is that we make the nature of Sacraments to clash with
themselves, Collins has chewed well of these several things, I hope he will
find in himself a better digesting of that which I have given of the Apostles
sense.

And therefore in the next place I shall come to touch a little further of
actual unworthiness in reference to the Sacrament, having clearly removed that
miserable mistake of personal unworthiness in order to unworthy receiving. And
indeed the whole controversy will be brought to actual sinning; for that is
the very thing the Church of Corinth was blamed and punished for.

Then the dispute will lie in these few questions.

Whether any unworthy actions of persons in the Church,

Whether the Church be able to judge i^ particular,

Whether the Church has power to suspen Church Members from Sacramental
Comm^nion,

I shall answer in the negative unto the^^ (under favor) to Mr. Collins, or
any other that shall endeavor to give further satisfactions to the questions.
And to the first I ha^ hinted at already in answer to Mr. Colli^ quotations, 1
Cor. 5. chap. 10. all that b^ has said from those Scriptures, does no^ amount
to eating and drinking unworthily that was punished, chap. 11. I have also in
m^ Book showed at large, what eating and drinking unworthily it was, that was
punished and which made guilty of the body an^ blood of Christ; in short, I
conceive it we^ an open abuse, or a Sacrilegious profaning holy things to
common use, with other disorders in the very time of the administering the Lords
Supper, practically destroying the very essence, and spiritual ends of Chris^^
holy institution. And upon this accoun^ alone they were guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, and of eating judgment to themselves: not for any other cause
or sins they lay under; but for this cause some are dead, etc. And whosoever
they are that eat and drink the outward signs, set apart by the Word and
Prayer to represent the body and blood of Christ unworthily, as the Corinthians
did, are guilty of the same sin, and liable to the same judgments, but that
all other sinful actions committed before they come, though not repented of,
does make guilty of polluting the body and blood of Christ, and of judgment,
they demeaning themselves reverently, and conformly, as to the externals
thereof: is to me not only doubtful, but irrational and absurd. And until some
better grounds be produced for the satisfaction hereof, then Mr. Collins has
given, I am not like to be answered in this very thing. And let me tell Mr.
Collins, and all that are friends to his judgment, that they must make out
that very thing by holy Scriptures, or else themselves will be forced to yield
the cause, and not so much as threaten their poor people any more with the
murder of Christ, and eating and drinking their own damnation: for as to that
which is visible, which man is to judge of in the act of public
administration, what fault can any of you find? I could wish that in all other
public Worship, all persons would carry themselves as reverently, and be as
serious and intent in their attendance upon divine appointment. It Is a strange
thing to me, that although you cannot charge upon your people the profanation
of the holy Supper in that way that the Corinths were punished for, yet you
fright them with the same danger, and are more severe in barring them from it,
then ever we read of by any Apostles or Elders in Scriptures. In all other
duties of public worship, you press your people to be frequent in; and to do
their homage to God as well as they can, you will tell them is better then to
neglect them. And only touching this public duty of the Sacrament, you tell
them they had better to forbear. And it is a less sin not to come, then to
come, although they come as prepared as they can. When this is a duty incumbent
to all in the Church, that are baptized, and of years sufficient to come under
the obligation of positive precepts, as any other is. The usual grounds you
have given will never hold, because you have run your selves upon such mistakes
about this main place of 1 Cor. 11. and I verily believe I have made such
exceptions against the common interpretations of latter Divines, that you will
find it a work of such difficulty to answer to satisfaction; that you will be
forced either to deny our Church to be a true Church, or else let the
controversy fall; (I mean as it consists of all baptized members in general)
and act as true Scripture Churches have done both in the Old and New Testament.
I have seen what a deal of pains Mr. Collins has taken to make good suspension
from the Sacrament; I have weighed his scripture arguments as heedfully as I am
able, with the judgment of the ancient and modern Divines, and yet I cannot
discern the least solid bottom, for all that he has said in that dispute to
rest upon, or trust in, for my own satisfaction, although God knows I have not
the least prejudice against any authority he has made use of, but am willing
to try all things. And I purpose God willing to examine the main grounds of
Scripture he has concluded suspension from, if I be not otherwise prevented
hereafter: in the mean time I shall go on with this undertaking in hand. I
confess were this true, that personal unworthiness in the Church, did of
necessity cause persons to eat and drink unworthily, and so bring judgment: or
that the ignorant and scandalous amongst us that are actual offenders upon
other accounts, must of necessity eat and drink unworthily if they come, and so
bring judgment upon themselves for unworthy receiving: there were some color
for to fright men and hinder them from coming to the Sacrament: but if these
things will not be sufficiently made good, the ground of all our fears and
scruples, and devices is removed and taken away, and we must conclude, that so
long as the outward administration is carried on with reverence and external
holiness, and go^ order, suitable to the institution and rules (...) worship;
that there is no other unwort^ communion in this part of Gods publi^^ worship,
then in the other parts thereof, (...) so much, for the ignorant unregenerate
Ch^^stians are more careless, and unreverent, a^ sluggish in hearing, praying,
singing, the^ the Sacrament; I cannot tell what men m^ say to this. I find
that Mr. Collins h^ said but little to it, notwithstanding my ^^ging it so much
in my Book, he knowi^^ that if it be not fully answered, all that (...) has
said in favor of suspension will fall (...) the ground, and his book will be
wo^^ nothing. I also shall in all humility des^^ Mr. Collins, or any of his
judgment, to (...) if they can make good the affirmative of t^^ next question.

Whether the Church be able to judge (...) particular,

England cannot certainl^ know of any member beforehand; for s^^ they find one
very ignorant of God, an^ Jesus Christ whom he has sent, and of S^craments and
all other worship; yet (...) being a baptized person, and professing (...)
willingness to learn, and to serve God it his public worship, as well as he
can; Upon what account can any dissuade him from it? as I have already proved
in my Book, the baptized, as well as the circumcised, come under all observance
in the Church.

The which I shall have occasion to speak more fully unto hereafter, when I
come to that which Mr. Collins has answered to that particular. If you say,
such will eat and drink unworthily in the Apostles sense. You cannot be sure of
that, which was seldom or never seen in our Congregations; and for to dissuade
from a necessary duty of worship, upon such a fear before hand, that was
seldom or never heard of, is not very rational. I shall easily grant that
blind obedience and service is sinful obedience. And such lie under an
unsuitable frame of spirit to attempt any of the things of God that are holy and
sacred. But how does this impotency and unsuitable frame disengage them from
duty and homage: especially their reverential approaches unto Sacramental
Communion, being such as bears a good conformity to the main materials
prescribed for the carrying on the external part of that service; and men can
judge but according to the outward appearance; so that then there being no
appearance of any open abuse and profaning holy things, the Church cannot
charge them with any other unworthy eating or drinking, then praying, and
hearing, and singing, etc. Which not any that are sober does judge a ground
competent to dissuade from those duties. Ignorant Churchmembers of years, no
objects of Church censures, especially when they are willing to learn.
Besides, ignorance is rather a mere want, that cannot in many be helped for
want of vision: or plain instruction; the which, though it be threatened, and
punishable by the Lord: yet comes not within the verge and cognizance of men to
punish, otherwise then it is punished in the effects of it, yea even for the
actual miscarriage of such, etc.

Say again, that some persons are known to be scandalous in some actual
offendings, and does not give such satisfaction of their amendment as is
required, shall the Eldership tell such persons they must not come to the
Sacrament, for if they do, they will eat and drink their own damnation, be
guilty of the blood of Christ in the Apostles sense; when they may be knowing
persons and able to discern the Lords body, and to carry themselves conformly,
as to the prescription of all Sacramental actions appertaining to that service?
it does not follow.

I easily grant in this case, For he that regards iniquity in his heart, God
will not hear his prayers; and the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination
unto the Lord; but it will not hence follow, that such must not pray, nor offer
sacrifice at all; but they ought to reform the evil as well as do the good,
if they expect that God should hear them.

I grant also,

I grant again, etc. is eating and drinking the body and blood of the Lord
unworthily, which the Corinthians were punished for.

I grant again, Corinthians sinning at the time of the administration of the
Supper: but is applyable to all other worship as well as to the Sacrament. For
my part I cannot yet see one Scripture alleged by any that does prove, that
the moral unclean in the Church were debarred the Passover, or Supper, more
then the other parts of public worship; which is a thing of necessity to be
proved by those that venture to debar from the one, and yet allow them the
liberty to enjoy the other. What the Doctor has said as to that, has been
answered, and what Mr. Ward has said, has been answered also, and what Mr.
Collins has said, or can say a^ to that, I doubt not in the least but will be
easily answered too. And to this purpose (...) shall take leave to examine some
of Mr. Collins quotations, page 101. Ezra 6 21. And the children of Israel
which were come again out of the captivity; and all such as had separated
themselves unto them, from the filthiness of the Heathen of the land, to seek
the Lord God of Israel, di^ eat, and kept the feast of unleavened bread seve^
days, etc. How this proves that the morally unclean were debarred the
Passover, (...) know not, he might have told us how; that all that were
returned from their captivity, that were of the true Church, and all such that
separated from Heathenish idolatry and mixtures to the Church did eat the
Passover, is true, this implies that those that would not seek the Lord God of
Israel, continued in Idolatrous practices, and would not keep the Passover.
Can Mr. Collins prove that some of the children of Israel, that returned from
their captivity, was debarred the Passover for their moral uncleanness; or
can he prove hence, that they were all free from that uncleanness? doubtless
if he take notice of what follows in the 9.10. chap. he must acknowledge there
were many guilty of moral uncleanness; and yet all kept the Passover: so that
you may easily discern how pertinent this is for his purpose. The next
quotation is 2 Chronicles. 23.19. And he set the porters at the gates of the house
of the Lord, that none which were unclean in any thing should enter in. From
this Scripture he cries up a suspension of some from some Ordinances that were
not excommunicated, etc. but he cannot tell it seems whether from the
Passover or no, and then what is this for his purpose? I think we never read
of any other uncleanness in Scripture, but Heathenish uncleanness, and legal
uncleanness, that were not to enter into Gods House or Sanctuary; and as for
Moral uncleanness, either it was such as was punished by the Judges according
to their Judicial laws, or such as they were cleansed from externally by their
continual course of Sacrifices and offerings, and hence there was no such thing
at all, nor were any ever barred from the Passover upon any such account, that
I could ever find in the Book of God, and well might the Porters charge be, to
keep out those that were unclean in any thing, because we know there were
several kinds of personal uncleanness that were legal, besides the
uncircumcised Heathen that might not enter into the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 44.7, 8.
nor eat of the Passover, Exodus 12. And the main reason why those that were but
legally unclean might not eat the Passover, nor come to the Tabernacle to
offer his Sacrifice, as others in their season did and were accepted; was this,
because the person that was unclean made every thing he touched unclean too, and
he that neglected his time for cleansing and concealing it, that soul was to be
cut of from the Congregation, he has defiled the Lords Sanctuary, Numb. 19.13,
20. That of Hag. 2.14. proves the same. But I have answered his other
quotations in my examine of the Scripture rule. I need not insist upon these
any longer, for they are too triflingly urged to require any further answer.
Why does he not show us some Scripture to prove that some have bin suspended
from the Passover for moral uncleanness, and allowed the liberty of all other
public worship? the which is the whole subject of his great Book almost. Yet I
am certain he can find nothing for his turn in Moses and the Prophets: And I
think he has as little from Christ and his Apostles; for the foundation of his
suspension from the Sacrament only; which is the question I should speak unto
next. But I shall let it alone unill I come in short to examine the quotations
alleged in the New Testament, to prove the affirmative by Mr. Collins in the
main body of his last Book. I shall now go on with answering to what he says
to mine.

My fifth and sixth queries are, 1. What is the remedy the Apostle prescribes to
that Church to prevent future judgment, and to enjoy present benefit.

2. Whether the unregenerate and most ignorant person, professing and owning
the true Religion among them, were not in some capacity so to use the remedy,
as to prevent the judgment, and to receive benefit by the Ordinance where God
gave a blessing, page 13. The Bar removed.

I do not find that Mr. Collins has much to except against, what I have
answered to these two queries in my Book, page 19, 20. He grants what I have
said is true, but yet he says, in case of scandalous sinners in the Church,
self examination is not enough, but there is something to be done by the
Ministers and officers of the Church, he grants self examination a personal
remedy; but there are other Church remedies, which the Apostle commands the
use of, as well as this, 1 Cor. 5.

I am ready to yield it, Cor. 5. is so, for the reforming scandalous brethren.
And that those that are justly delivered up to Satan, or cast out of Christian
Communion by the authority of the Church, should not only be debarred the
Sacrament, but all public Ordinances, and all civil society, so far as our
particular callings will possibly admit of; but yet I am far from thinking,
that the Apostle ever meant that delivering unto Satan, and to put from among
themselves that wicked person, was no more but exclude him the Sacrament. And I
verily believe, that the same censure that was put into execution by the decree
of the Apostle, was made a general rule for the Church, touching their dealing
with all scandalous brethren in the Church, as plainly appears in the 10, 11,
12. verses of that chapter, the which I shall more clearly speak unto, when I
come to examine the grounds of suspension laid down by Mr. Collins.

He says, He cannot subscribe to my inclination, that self examination,
mentioned 1 Cor. 11.28. must be limited by the premises in the context, as the
institution repeated does import with some other directions and cautions given
in cure of their malady, etc.

He might have done it for any strength of reason he can give to the contrary;
That the Corinths were not blamed nor punished for personal unworthiness at
all; Nor 2. for any other actual offendings, but merely for their profaning the
Ordinance of Christ in the very time of administration; for this cause only
some are weak, sick, and some are dead, verse. 30. I say, if this hold, as I
believe it will, what reason can any man have to judge, that the Apostle
intends more in this place then the reforming of them in those particular sins
they were punished for, and blamed for If they were punished for coming to the
Sacrament in an unregenerate state, or for want of the knowledge of God in
Christ, for want of love of God and of Jesus Christ, and of men, or for any
other want, or miscarriage, save only this, so expressed in the context,
examination might have been urged accordingly, but they being not so much as
blamed for any such things in order to the Sacrament, no not in this chap. or
elsewhere, what show of reason can any man have to be so severe in urging of
examination as a duty of that necessity, that if they be not able to discern
the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and to approve themselves to God to be
sincere as to such particulars, which are only necessary for admittance unto
heavenly glory; or else if otherwise they come, they will but eat and drink
their own damnation.

When in my answer I have limited this duty of self-examination to the context,
You being fully convinced of your former woeful abuse, and profaning this holy
Ordinance of Christ, you must now judge and condemn your selves accordingly:
and approve your selves according unto the right rule prescribed unto you in
the institution received from Christ, understanding within your selves, what
this holy observance does mean, and so come and demean your selves with
reverence and good order, suitable to Gods Ordinance, and then he tells them they
should not be judged of the Lord.

This says Mr. Collins is short work indeed, page 29.

What though it be short of the ordinary lasts of some men that will extend
this duty to an infinitum; Collins, or any other can confute it, I shall judge
it right work, and no whit short of the sense o^ this place; the which were it
justly applied to ours as it ought to be, they being members of the same
visible body, and under the same rule and privileges of the Church; and not
offenders in that kind, I think a short work would serve, did not men upon
mistak^ affect to make themselves more work the they have warrant for from
their Lord.

But thus he says, The wrod in the Gree will not be satisfied with such a
short and sea^ interpretation, Magistrates examine malefactor more strictly,
and the Goldsmiths trial of his gold a more searching trial, the Apostle
expounds i^ 2 Cor. 13.5.

You must excuse me as touching the Original, accounts, as Romans 2.18. chap.
14.18. and the 16.10. 2 Cor. 7.11. and 10.18. the 13.7. Phil. 1.10. 2 Timothy
2.15. by some of these places you may see we are to approve of the things that
are excellent, and good, and holy, so as to put forth our endeavors in
pursuance of them, and to decline the contrary, which is all one with 1 Cor.
11.28. the Apostle would have the Corinths to approve themselves to the rules
prescribed them, and so come. 2 Cor. 13.5. is a different thing to 1 Cor.
11.28. there the Apostle perceived that they questioned his authority of
Apostleship, and required a proof of Christ speaking in him; the which says
the Apostle, they need not go far for a proof of. Christ in accompanying his
Word by him toward them is not weak, but mighty, verse. 3. and hence he bids
them examine themselves, whether they be in the faith, prove your selves, that
Christ is in you, and that would be a sufficient proof of Christ's speaking in
him, and of his Ministerial authority. Thus you may clearly see, although here
is the same word, yet it is used upon a far different occasion, and therefore it
does not expound 1 Cor. 11.28. as Mr. Collins would have it.

Next he says, That another kind of examination is here required, has been
the concurrent judgment of all Divines, especially those of the reformed
Churches, etc.

I heartily reverence the concurrent judgment of all Divines, and it is my
grief that I differ from them in some things, I wish that the authority of man
do not cloud the truth from some; for my own part, my inabilities are such,
that there can be no danger of swaying the judgment of any able Divines by my
opinion, wherein I dissent from them; it must be the simplicity of truth, and
the justness of what I maintain only, that bean me up against those I have to
deal with in this controversy. I am a mere naked man that am engaged with men
of complete harness and arms, that History, Arts, and Tongue can furnish them
withal. I must confess I am strongly persuaded of the truth of what I have
writ in this controversy; and that it is the only way to bring the Churcher
peace and truth together, and for Sions sake I can have no rest, but am drawn
on to do things not so well becoming my rank and calling in the Church. I beg
your pardon, I hope some will confess they can see something of God in it,
excuse me, for it is not so much the judgment of Divines, as the Scripture
grounds that will satisfy my spirit in this thing.

Next, page 30. Mr. Collins says, But if they be to examine themselves no more
then whether they discern the Lords Body, we conceive it enough, for discerning
must imply knowledge.

1. To know the Lords Body Sacramentally.

2. As the Lords Body.

3. Acknowledge of the sign and thing signified in the Sacrament.

4. Acknowledge of the two natures of Christ, and of what he has done and
suffered for me.

5. And of the nature of the Sacrament, and what is held forth in it to the
soul.

From hence (he says) will easily follow an answer to the sixth query, That
ignorant persons though by profession they do own the true Religion; yet are
not in a capacity to examine themselves so, as to prevent the judgment, etc.

I grant that every one that comes to this Ordinance, Corinth in order to their
receiving, and therefore these requisites require further proof before he can
conclude any thing from them.

In charity I judge that there is not any that live under any painful
Preachers, for the good of their souls in general. And that accordingly they
humbly and reverently make their addresses unto it to receive the outward
signs, in remembrance that Christ shed his blood to save sinners, etc. and
this is upon the matter as much as the Apostle requires unto worthy receiving,
let it be proved that such a receiving was ever blamed or punished in the holy
Scriptures: if it cannot be proved, why do men bring such needless troubles
and distractions in the Church by their own traditions?

It was not so much the ignorance of the Corinths that was punished, Collins
better consider of these things before he answer them: for although many of
ours should be more ignorant then they of Corinth, yet so long as they do not
openly profane the Ordinance by their actual miscarriages at the time of
worship, as the Corinthians did, it does not follow that they eat and drink
unworthily, and so their own damnation, as they of Corinth. It Is true also,
that the Lord may justly punish persons for their ignorance under the means.
But does it follow, that therefore men may too, with debarring them from the
Sacrament? I think not, until by some clear ground of Scripture, Mr. Collins,
or some other, can prove, the Eldership may. And I shall entreat them to make
it good with the greatest strength they can, for otherwise they must look to be
baffled in it, so long as they grant them Church Members.

I shall now see what Mr. Collins excepts against my answer to the eight query,
that is, Whether a careless incapable neglect of self-examination, does
excuse, and give a writ of ease from that precept, Do this in remembrance of
me.

He says, If I can prove this an universal precept, that concerns every
individual person, that is baptized, and of years of discretion, he may tell
me that such neglect makes them doubly guilty, etc. page 31. He says further,
That he conceives that precept only to concern the disciples of Christ, and
none but true disciples.

I wonder what Mr. Collins will make of ours that are baptized, Do this in
remembrance of me. I am far from going about to divide these duties; I would
have them examine and come too; yet the neglect of the one does not excuse from
the other: a man must not only go and be reconciled with his brother; but he
must come and offer his gift also.

He says, It will not much trouble him, what I have said from Matthew. 28.19,
20. the Apostles were bound to call upon those they preached unto, to observe
all Christ's commands, either that proves the they were to call upon Pagans to
come to the Sacrament; or else to call upon all to observe such things that he
had commanded them respectively, and then it will still remain to prove that
Christ has commanded an ignorant person to come to the Sacrament.

It Is very true, page 23. Bar removed, the argument was drawn from the charge
of Christ to his Apostles in order to them, that came under baptism, not to the
Pagans they preached unto; but to them that by their preaching were converted
and added unto the Church by baptism. Christ charge them to teach his Church
to observe, and do all whatever he has commanded them, and lo he will be
with them always. Where are the Apostles bid? to teach the Heathen as such? to
observe all that he has commanded? He gives his statutes and his judgments
unto Israel, as for the Heathen they have not known his laws. This very charge
of Christ is just the language of God to the Church in Moses and the Prophets,
upon the like encouragement of a blessing.

As Circumcision brought all the uncircumcised under all observances of the old
administration, even the Passover, upon their lives. So baptism lays the same
engagement upon all the baptized to come under all observances of the New
Testament administration, that of the holy Supper, as well as others; hence the
Apostle commends the Church of Corinth for remembering him in all things; and
for keeping the Ordinances as he delivered them unto them, 1 Cor. 11.2. and it
is not good to distinguish and dispute away duty, where the Scriptures gives
such a general warranty. I know not well what he means by Christ's commanding
respectively; if he judge that ours are within, as the Church of Corinth were,
without doubt they are both under the observance and discipline of the Church.
If he judge that ours that are ignorant, and scandalous, are without; then what
has he to do to judge those that are without? there is no hope to amend them
by discipline, or ground to baptize their children, or to justify the main
foundation of our Church.

As I said in my Book, page 23. The Bar removed, so I say again, that Jesus
Christ commands nothing for the hurt of his visible subjects, they observing it
according to their present capacity: Can an instance be given in the Old or New
Testament of any any that came under Circumsion or Baptism, that as private
members were admitted to all other Ordinances in the Church, and yet were
forbidden the other Sacrament, the Passover or the Lords Supper.

To this Mr. Collins answers, That it will pose me, to prove that those that
had touched the dead body of a man might come at no ordinance, but he can prove
they might not come to the Passover, Numb. 9.

Enough has been said to this already, Numb. 19.13, 20, 22. The truth is, what
ever the unclean did touch, or what ever touched him, were unclean, Hag. 2.

Mr. Collins says, Nor is that whimzy of mine, page 25. at all better, by
which I prove the receiving of the Sacrament a duty incumbent upon all, because
included in the first Table, he says it will pose me, to prove that this duty
of receiving is commanded in the first Table; if it were, yet he hopes
preaching of the Word is so also, which yet is not a duty enjoined to all, but
to those only who are appointed thereto.

If that of mine must go under the reproach of a whimzy with Mr. Collins,
Collins appears to be, that do judge, that the affirmative part of the second
Commandment includes all Gods institute worship, which at any time he has, or
shall prescribe to be done. And except Mr. Collins will deny the holy Supper to
be a part of Gods instituted worship; it must come under this prescribed
worship as well as any other, there being no part expressed in the command more
then another, it is enough to prove, that all in the Church come under the
precepts of worship; the Sacrament being so, they are bound to that as well as
all other: but then he seems to grant the thing, yet he hopes so is preaching
of the Word, etc. It Is true, and as I had said in my Book, page 25, That all
Ministers what ever are bound hence to preach etc. And what need we have the
same again, but that he had rather puzle then satisfy the weak? We know that
which lays an injunction upon Ministers to preach, or administer, etc. does
also enjoin all their people to hear and receive as private Christians, the
Commandment does not confound relative duties, although Mr. Collins of purpose
does to deceive his Reader. And me thinks it might make him blush to call that
a whimzy in me, which is so ordinarily delivered by as reverend men as himself,
and a great deal more. But the Judicious Reader may easily judge what poor
shifts he is put unto, that excepts against the truth. Let Mr. Collins give us
some rational account why persons in the Church are less engaged unto this
part of instituted worship then all others, that all of the Jews Church, should
come under the Law of the Passover, without exception, good and bad. And he to
plead no duty to the holy Supper of persons in the Church too: they being not
worse then the carnal Jew. I see not but upon the same ground he exempts them
from this duty, he may exempt them from all others that are essential to a
Church state, and so consequently not only unduty them, but unchurch them too.
For what he has said before implies no less, where he is bold to undisciple
them, to evade this argument, we draw from the command of Christ, Matthew. 28.20.

The Doctor was somewhat sharp with my much respected friend Mr. Humfrey,

1. That the duty of self-examination is but a private duty. And the private is
to be subordinate to the public.

2. This duty of examination was prescribed occasionally as a remedy to that
particular case, of making a breach upon the materials of divine institution
and order. And we may safely say, the end is most principal, the means less.

3. Where a true Church does not so offend as Corinth did, this duty is not so
to be urged upon them, as to the Church of Corinth. But it is clear, there is
not the same offending in the Church of England, as there was at Corinth.

Therefore that duty is not to be urged upon ours with the same necessity of
danger of eating and drinking unworthily, as to the Church of Corinth. Unto
these Mr. Collins has some exceptions.

1. Whether it be sense or no, he cannot tell, that I say, self-examination is
a private duty, and so subordinate to the public, and then says, who denies
it? But yet he questions, whether upon an incapacity, or neglect of the
private, the public be a duty; for where a private duty is commanded in order
to prepare us for the public, we cannot without sin perform the public before
we have performed the private; cleansing were the unclean persons private duty:
yet till it was done, he might not come to the Passover.

1. gladly know wherein the Eldership is any further concerned.

2. What though an incapable neglect of the private, does hinder the profitable
use of the public, and that it cannot without sin be performed, does it
therefore follow that such persons in the Church may neglect the public
worship without sin? if not, whether is the greatest to obey, and do as well
as they can with sin; or to cast off all care o^ duty wholly? it is easily
answered in all other duties, and but a mere begging the question to deny it in
this of the Sacrament, a^ to that instance of his, Cleansing was the unclean
persons private duty, yet till it was done, he might not eat the Passover.

1. Numb. 6.9, 10, 11. and 19.19. speak the contrary.

2. Grant it were, might they enter into the gates of the Sanctuary to offer
unto God any other sacrifice until they were cleansed? In Hezekiahs Passover
of the 2. month, many did eat the Passover that was not clean, and were
accepted.
We know they might not; for it was accounted a defiling the Sanctuary, a thing
threatened with death, or perpetual banishment from the Congregation. His
instance does rather prove, that the justly excommunicate ought not to be
admitted to the public Ordinances of Worship, until they be lawfully admitted
upon their satisfying the Church by repentance.

Then to prove persons in the Church not excommunicate may not take the
Sacrament until they have performed that private duty of examination. I have
said enough, to prove that the neglect of this private duty of examination in
order to receiving, does not reach the neglect of that duty of cleansing in
order unto the whole worship of God.

In his 32. page he is nibling at my next thing, wherein I would have this
private duty of examination occasionally prescribed as a remedy, or a means to
that particular case of offending. And therefore they were to approve
themselves according to the rules of institution and good order, and so come in
doing the good, and declining the evil they had been punished for, etc. To
this purpose, I said the end is more principal, the means less. Unto this Mr.
Collins says,

No man can receive the Sacrament without sin, neglecting the due means to make
him a worthy receiver. He had thought due means must be necessarily supposed to
the end.

Who will deny what he says to this? Collins his weak exceptions: I hope the
impartial Reader may clearly judge upon what bottom we infer free admission,
namely, the authority of Christ's command. Besides, you may take notice of the
pitiful shifts that our adversaries are put unto, to dispute against the
authority of Christ's commands: Let them consider, He that breaks the least of
his commands, and teaches men so, shall be accounted least in the Kingdom of
Heaven; Nay, if they shall wittingly thus offend in one, they are guilty of all.

My last query is, Whether there be any thing in the Nature, language, actions
or end of the Sacrament in 1 Cor. 11. or elsewhere incongruous to the
unregenerate receiving in the Church?

Mr. Collins says, Whether in 1 Cor. 11. there be any thing or no, he will not
dispute, it is enough he finds it elsewhere, and he conceives there is
something contrary to the receiving of the ignorant and scandalous, which is
the question, for the Church judges not of secret things.

What he has said to this,

But then he comes more particularly to the question.

As first, Touching the institution, for says he, Christ gave it to none such,
he means Christ gave it to none that were ignorant or scandalous.

1. Christ gave it to none but the twelve, that were empowered with Commission
to Preach and baptize, heal the sick, and to cast out Devils, etc. What then,
must none but such be admitted? this would be a good argument to deny not only
the cup, but the whole administration from the Laity.

But 2. The question is, whether the Apostles in their ordering of particular
Congregations, gave any direction to exclude any that came under Baptism from
the holy Supper, and yet allowed them the privilege of all other Ordinances in
the Church. The Scripture speaks of thousands that submitted unto baptism, and
continued steadfast in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of
bread, and in prayers, which are the main essentials of worship: and this is
spoken of the whole, as soon as they were baptized. Act. 2.32.
And the Church of Corinths are commended for keeping the Ordinances. It was a
profaning of this of the Supper they were blamed and punished for. And for
gross ignorance amongst them, we need not doubt of it, and other scandalous
and disorderly conversation; but what is this of his, but ^o insinuate unto the
world, that the bap^ized in the Church that are either ignorant, or in some
things scandalous are not of the Church: the old road of Brownism.

But then he says secondly, The Sacrament is contrary to such in the nature of
it, for it is strong meat, and the seal of the righteousness of faith.

That it is strong meat only, page 104. Strong meat belongs to men of age, who
by reason of an habit have their senses exercised to discern good and evil,
Heb. 5.13, 14.

But the Sacrament is strong meat; therefore it does not belong to those that
are babes in knowledge.

But I deny his minor; he says it is evident, he gives his reason, That meat
which is of ha^dest digestion and concoction; and which not duly digested,
proves most pernicious to the body, is strong meat: but such is the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper. I deny his minor again: he proves it, 1 Cor. 11.28 and
tells us, This meat is not tasted, nor digested well without the knowing of the
greatest mysteries of religion in some measure, namely;

1. The union of Christ with the Father.

2. The union of the two natures in the person of Christ.

3. The mystical union of the soul with Christ.

4. The mysterious exercise of faith in applying the soul to the pronise, etc.
and this is all his proof, the which amounts just to as much as his say so: as
to his quotation, 1 Cor. 11.28. enough has been spoken already to show the
vanity of his high flown conceptions: And indeed a most pernicious perplexing
tenent to poor, doubting, weak, unsatisfied Christians, should it be believed.
I have always been taught, that Sacraments are the lowest condescensions of
the love of Christ to his weakest babes, they being suited so familiarly to our
bodily senses, as it were with Thomas, his seeing and feeling the body of
Christ was more effectual to make him believe, then the testimony of their word
who preached Christ was risen indeed.

But the next he says, The Sacrament is the seal of the righteousness of
faith; and hence it seems incongruous to the ignorant and scandalous that have
not faith.

The question is of the unregenerate in the Church, these I think should have
the benefit of all the Ordinances, as the ordinary means of their salvation.
But now to his assertion, That the Sacrament is the seal of the righteousness
of faith.

We know that Sacraments which had their Original from God unto Abraham, 17.
were tokens of the everlasting Covenant of grace, made with Abraham and his
seed, God having deputed him to be a father of many Nations. And that all the
Nations of the earth shall be blessed in him, etc. Circumcision was appointed
to be a token unto Abraham in this comprehensive sense, that not only they that
were his seed by natural descent, but those also that shall embrace the
profession of the faith of Abraham, shall be blessed with him, even they, and
their natural issue also. And the Apostle, Romans 4.4. descants much upon this
large Covenant, or promise made unto Abraham, in the warranty of the Gentiles
engrafting into the stock of Abraham by faith; the which the Jews stumbled at,
and fell into prejudices and discontents upon the Gentiles embracing of the
Gospel, concluding it false, because they embraced it, that were always left of
God, and so abominable to the Church as naturally descended from Abraham and
the Prophets, etc. The Apostle disputes this thing with them, and says, Is he
a God of the Jews only, is he not of the Gentiles also? Yes of the Gentiles
also, chap. 3.29. And he tells them their fleshly privileges, according to the
Law, will not continue them the people of God without faith in Christ. And by
faith in Christ the Gentiles are made the people of God unto Justification,
opposing faith unto works chiefly in point of Justification, as in the
beginning of the 4. chapter is expressed in that instance of Abraham and David.
It was not works, but faith, that was reckoned unto Abraham for righteousness
in his uncircumcised state: and hence he argues Abraham to be a father of the
uncircumcision, as well as of the circumcision; because he received the token
of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of that faith he had in his
uncircumcision, that he might be the father of all that believe, that
righteousness might be imputed to them also, and a father of the believing
circumcision too, etc. Now then what was the main thing that Abraham is thus
commended for, and blessed for? Why it is said, He believed God, and that was
imputed unto him for righteousness. But then we may enquire, what was the
thing he believed God would be as good as his word to him in? Answer. It' was
this, that God had made him a father of many Nations, though he had no child;
yet he believed against hope, etc. And this was imputed unto him for
righteousness. We know that Abraham after the flesh was not a father of many
Nations; that is not the sense, but he is so in a spiritual sense by religion
and says, and that is the thing the Apostle drives at, to prove him a father of
all that come in unto his religion and faith; And that all such are of him, and
blessed with him. And doubtless Abraham that saw this day of Christ and
rejoiced, so understood it, that all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed
in him, by faith; and this blessedness to begin in his own natural family; and
to be extended unto all Nations in time. And hence that is true, I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed in their generations for ever, Genesis 17.7. and that
he should be the father of many Nations, and that they should be blessed in him,
etc. This is the everlasting Covenant of Grace that Abraham believed, and this
is the faith that circumcision was a token of, and did confirm the truth of, to
him and all that are in him by religion for ever, even to them and theirs: and
I doubt not but the Sacrament seals to the same faith still in reference to
them that have entered the same Covenant, and profess their subjection to the
laws and administration thereof, but I have not expressed my self in this so
fully and clearly, as I could wish, I shall have occasion to do more in it
hereafter. This by the way to give a hint, what the Apostle means, in calling
circumcision a seal of the righteousness of that faith that Abraham yet had in
uncircunacision, it being too ambiguously lest and applied by Mr. Collins in
order unto Church Members unregenerate.

Mr. Collins has two or three things more in the 32. page but finding nothing
in them that does trouble us about the question in hand, I pass them by,
though it is true, he takes the boldness to deny, yet he does not give any
ground or reason why, but takes all for granted still, though I have rationally
cleared the contrary in my answer to the query, page 36, 37, 38, 39. Bar
removed.

I shall now see what he excepts against my 6. proposition, page 30. 31.

I conceive that Sacraments in general,

First he grants as much, page 33. jus ad rem, and then queries, how this
proves that therefore every particular member ought in his present state come
to it, and coming ought to be admitted.

If the proposition be true,

But he has two things to except against the consequence.

He says, Was not the Passover so appointed, yet he thinks unclean persons
might not come during their uncleanness?

But now there is no such uncleanness in the Gospel Church to hinder any.

They were no more debarred the Passover then all other public worship,

And as that of Moral uncleanness was no hinderance then,

But then 2. he tells us, That some reverend men think the excommunicate person
is yet a member of the Catholic Church, and shall not be baptized upon his
repentance: and he owning the true religion, and being baptized, his repentance
being supposed, the Sacrament is for his good; but it will not therefore
follow, he ought in that state of his excommunication to come to the Sacrament.

It Is not material to the question, he is under the last remedy and Ordinance
of Christ for his amendment or utter ruin.

Then if you suppose his repentance and satisfying the Church,

That the justly excommunicate are absolutely dismembered is too harsh to
affirm,

My second proposition is, That the Church of Christ consists of good and bad.
And this Mr. Collins grants me also. And it having such a dependence on the
first, that it compleats for my opinion this argument.

The holy Supper is instituted for the spiritual good of every particular
member of the Church.

But this Church of Christ consists of good and bad, regenerate and
unregenerate; therefore the holy Supper is instituted for the spiritual good of
good and bad, regenerat^ and unregenerate, and consequently is to be
administered to them in order to that good.

I conceive that both propositions being granted, the conclusion cannot be
denied.

My third is, That the unregenerate in the Church are the only immediate
objects of the pr^mise of the first grace.

Mr. Collins answers unto this thus, That b^ h^d rather say, that the
unregenerate are objects (...) the first grace, then of the promise of that
grace, (...) the promises profit not any without faith, and h^^ the
unregenerate should apply the promise, he cannot tell.

1.

2. Nor promised unto any at all.

3. Or else given to some to whom God never promised it. The which things to
affirm would be point blanck against the Scriptures. So that the question is,
whether Mr. Collins does own any such thing as promises of giving the first
grace at all. For if there be any such promises at all made to the Church in
general, they must of necessity immediately respect some proper object that
has not that grace, of, and in it self; it is want and misery that is the
proper object of grace and mercy: But why should Mr. Collins express himself
thus doubtfully in such a main thing. Does he not baptize all Infants upon this
account chiefly that the promise is to the Parents and children? surely if they
be not objects of the promises of the first grace, the most of ours every where
are objects of no promises that Sacraments seal; for it is too certain, that
they and theirs have not a true sincere purifying faith to apply the other
promises of salvation. This is certain, if they be not objects of the promises
of the first grace, they cannot be objects of the promises of crowning that
grace with glory: exclude the unregenerate in the Church from the promise of
the first grace, and you exclude them from all. And then judge what will follow.

And where he says, The premises profit not any without faith, shall the want
of a fincere faith make the faithfulness of God without effect? God forbid.
Let God be true in what he has promised to the Church in general, and
indefinite terms, and every man a liar, Romans 3.3, 4. We know of the Jews that
were the greatest enemies unto Christ, a remnant of them were sanctified and
saved, according unto Act. 2.39. Peter tells the wicked Jews that were guilty of
the innocent blood of Christ, that the promise is to them and their children,
before he knew whether they would repent or no. What faith had they when Peter
told them so? not so as much ours have that generally believe that Christ i^
the only Savior of the world. These Jews denied this, yet being of the visible
Church as descended from Abraham, the Apostle make^ them and their children
objects of the promises; and hence persuades them to repent o^ what they had
done against Christ, and be baptized for remission of sins, etc. And so many
(...) received his word were baptized indeed, and submitted themselves to the
obedience o^ faith. What though the unregenerate cannot actually apply those
promises by faith unto themselves? Does it follow that therefore they are not
objects, or susceptives of them in a passive sense, God being free in making
these promises unto them, and by his Spirit in the use of his own appointments
to apply them effectually unto whom he will, of such that have not faith to
apply them: Forasmuch as not any can in astrict sense believe, until he be
empowered with regenerating grace: No, nor then, without the concurrence of a
divine aid to apply the promises made to such a blessed state to their own
comfort and salvation.

Besides, the promises of the first grace are not only free, but absolute, not
so depending upon condition of faith in a strict sense, as many other promises
do: yet not so absolute, but that the ordinary means of salvation ought to be
observed diligently in order ^o attainment of the first grace: for God will ^e
enquired after by the house of Israel, for the grace of the New Covenant, Ezekiel.
36.

My fourth proposition is, That the whole ^dministration of the Covenant
belongs to those in he Church, that are the immediate objects of the ^bsolute
promises, in order to the Lords putting these ^romises into execution.

Mr. Collin^ says, If the argument be good,

It seems, Mr. Collins would not have the ^romises of first grace be limited
unto the Church, but would have the unregenerate ^ut of the Church as much
objects as those within: for indeed he is ready at every pinch ^o level the
unregenerate in the Church to the ^n fidel world.

Therefore I shall endeavor to clear unto you the difference in this
particular, briefly; ^t may be I may publish more of this hereaf^er.

It is evident, Jer. 31. Heb. 8. Ezekiel. 36. A ^ew Covenant I will make with the
house of Judah and Jerusalem: in which Covenant the promise of the first grace
is most express an^ full: the state of the Jews Church cons^^ing most of
carnal members, that were proper objects of the promises of first grace Why the
Gentile world as carnal, and b^miserable, yet this Covenant containing the
first grace was never made to them at all, b^ upon condition of faith, and
grafting them selves into the same visible body: as they a^ Infidels and
without, They are aliens from (...) Common wealth of Israel, strangers to the
Coven^ of promises, and without all hope: and with^^ God in the world, Ephesians.
2.12. How can the be said to be as much objects of the promi^ of the first
grace that are without, as the^ that are within; when they are alienat^ from
all, during that Infidel state? It Is t^^ there is a promise, that all the
Nations (...) the earth shall be blessed in Abraham; but i^ runs in conditional
terms, as they are i^ him, they must first be brought into him and be of the
true Church that Abraham wa^ father of, before they can be blessed in him and
so the Apostle expounds it, They that a^^ of faith, are blessed with him, and
ye are all, eve^ the whole Church, Jews and Gentiles, the children of Abraham
by faith in Christ Jesus. And not any others in the world that remained in
their infidel estate.

This difference is clearly intimated by the Apostle Peter, Act. 2.39. when he
speaks of the Jews that were of the Church by nature as descended from Abraham,
he tells them plainly, The promise is to them and their children, speaking in
the present tense. But then speaking of the Gentiles, he says, the promise is
intended unto them also, but with another restriction then to the Jews, even
unto as many as it shall please the Lord our God to call of them, at any time
for the future, and to none else: they of the infidel world must be externally
called at least, and planted into the visible Church of Christ by baptism,
before they and theirs can be children of the promise, and in Covenant relation.

As the Pagan world is without the promise of the first grace, If our Gospel be
hid, or withheld from persons or people, it is hid to them that perish.

Our own experience will convince us,

Hence I judge there is a real difference between the Church and the Pagan
world; in respect of the one they are objects of the promises, the other
without promise and hope, and God in the world; and me thinks Mr. Collins, and
the friends of his judgment, (they being godly, sober, Orthodox Divines)
should be satisfied with this difference, I have only hinted at in short; for
my part, I think there is nothing more clear, and easy to be made out from
holy Scriptures, were not men of his judgment too much learned with Brownism,
destroying that which our fir^ reformers have planted. I must confess it is
nothing becoming my calling and abilities to challenge any learned reverend
men; yet I doubt not but through the assistance of Gods grace, to maintain this
difference I have in short laid down, against all the contradiction of sober
Orthodox men: provided they will dispute it from the authority of holy
Scriptures, and what may be clearly and rationally deducted thence. Next

Mr. Collins is pleased to put my proposition into form, page 34.

Those to whom the absolute promises of the Covenant belong, to those the whole
administration of the Covenant; and so the seals belong.

But to the unregenerate in the Church, and of years the promises belong.

Ergo.

He says, Let but [belong] in each proposition be understood in the same
sense, and the answer is easy, and the argument weak, etc.

I will yield him that which he desires, That by this argument Heathens may
come to the Sacrament.

I say no, unless Mr. Collins can prove that the Heathen are as much objects
of the absolute promises in the Covenant, as the unregenerate in the Church. I
think when he has performed that task soundly and undeniably, I shall yield
the argument weak, and think the worse of my cause: but until then, he must
give me leave to think the argument strong, for any thing he has yet said in
answer of it.

He only says it, That no promise does so belong to any unregenerate man, as
his portion which he may clear and make use of it in his unregeneracy.

What thinks Mr. Collins then of the baptizing the Infants of such,

The absolute promise of the first grace to the unregenerate, of hope unto all,
and as they are sinners destitute of the work of grace, they may rightly go to
God and pray for a new heart, and for his Spirit to beget regenerating grace it
their graceless spirits. Oh turn thou us Lord, and we shall be converted unto
thee, for thou never said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye my face, in vain.
And we are the seed of thy Church and people, whom thou have promised to be a
God unto, and to make us thy people, for thy names sake, forsake us not, but
put forth (...) work of thy mighty power, to open our hear^ to receive the
grace of thy promise, we (...) objects of, and without which we are undou^ I
say ask, and you shall have; for the Lord will give his Spirit to them that ask
it. An^ this I hope is of good use to the unregenerate it is a special ground to
pray for renewing grace themselves; and likewise for other that have grace to
pray for them, as Minister for their people, and parents for their children,
etc. Exclude them from these promises and you exclude them from your prayers,
for we have no warrant to pray for that which God does not promise to give.

My fifth proposition, That the Sacraments being visible representations of
Christ's death, on which those promises are founded, and by which they ^ne
confirmed, the use of the Sacraments belongs to those whom those promises do
immediately respect.

Unto this he has nothing considerable, but what has been answered already;
only he grants the main of this. And yet says, that Sacraments are seals as
well as signs.

1. Sacraments are seals as they are signs,

2. They are but representatives of the real seal that confirms the absolute
promises, namely the death of Christ, and so not seals properly, but by way of
resemblance, giving the name to the signs, that is only proper to the thing
signified, namely, the death of Christ, it being all one to imagine the
Sacraments real seals of the Covenant, with real presence. If I mistake not,
hence it will follow, That which the death of Christ is a seal of, Sacraments
are seals of: but the death of Christ is a seal of the promises of first grace,
which respect the unregenerate in the Church: therefore the use of these seals
belong to them. I see not but that the Sacraments, as they are seals to confirm
the truth of the Covenant, in which are included promises of first grace to the
unregenerate in the Church, the unregenerate may use the seals for their
encouragement to wait upon God, in the use of that and all ordinary means, in
hope of the blessing of regenerating grace, according to what is promised in
the Word, and sealed in the Sacrament; who else should use the seals, if not
those that have a right unto what is sealed, should not?

But then he says, It is false, that the use of the Sacraments belongs to such
as the promises of first grace do respect, for then the use of the Sacrame^
belongs to Heathens: but the use of it belongs (...) those only who by faith
apply the promises.

So long as any creatures are without to letter, If (...) Gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that perish. An^ whereas Mr. Collins says, The Sacrament belongs
only to those who by faith apply the promise^. Alas, this he takes for granted,
although be knows we have denied it upon confiderable ground. Take faith in his
sense, can any man imagine that all the people of the Jews were able by faith
to apply the promises? yet they were all bound to keep the Passover: Conceive
how improbable it were, that all that submitted unto baptism in the Apostles
age, were able by a true says to apply the promises: yet none were denied the
Supper that came under Baptism. Does Mr. Gollins think, that all in our Church
are able by a true sincere faith to apply the promises? Yet we administer
baptism unto their children, a seal of the same promises, upon the account of
their parents. And I verily judge that the parents are in as good a capacity
for the holy Supper, as their children are for holy baptism; If the childs
right may be derived more remote, then much more the Parents of that child as
being a generation nearer that right. If the promise include the grand child,
much more his own child; And wherein is the holy Supper a different seal of
the Covenant from baptism? So that in giving Baptism to their child, you
clearly yield their right to use the Supper, provided they be not
excommunicated.

But Mr. Collins argues against me thus, in his late Book, page 104. Those who
if they were Heathens might not be baptized, though they be baptized, and in
the Church ought not to be admitted to the Lords Supper.

But those who are ignorant and scandalous, if they were Heathens, should not
be baptized.

Ergo,

I grant his minor is true, and scandalous Heathens should not be baptized. But
I deny his Major, that ignorant and scandalous Christians are Heathens. Suppose
them unbaptized, which they are not; for I will suppose that their Covenant
relation holds still, though they were unbaptized, they being the issue of
persons in the Church, and they never as yet have renounced the Covenant, but
adhere to the public administration thereof: which may be the case of some in
these exorbitant time for there are many a growing up to year of discretion,
that through the delusion (...) their parents are unbaptized, the which (...)
think are no Heathen, being Christians born nor cut off from Covenant relation,
no^ Church Membership, notwithstanding their parents wickedness to dispute
them ou^ of the Covenant, and consequently ou^ of the Church, and so from
baptism a privilege thereof: but they ought to be baptized when ever
themselves, or any other o^ their friends desire it for them, upon the account
of membership, it not being their fault it has been neglected so long, but
their parents. And I say likewise of the ignorant and scandalous born in the
Church, were they unbaptized, the Church ought to use all means possible, to
persuade them unto it as their special duty to engage them unto better
obedience, and Church discipline for their amendment. The children of Israel
were uncircumcised a great many of them while they were in their travel in the
Wilderness; their uncircumcision did not discovenant nor unchurch them; but
they were al circumcised when they came to Canaan. God was angry with Moses for
neglecting the circumcising of his sons, but yet their Covenant relation held,
they must be circumcised. And I think here is nothing against reason in all
this. But then there is not the like reason for Heathen to be baptized, that
are ignorant and scandalous, because they are strangers from the Covenants of
promise, have no such privilege as Covenant relation, they are unclean, and
until they embrace the faith of the Gospel, and express themselves real in
their acceptance of it, and promise to join themselves with the visible
professing body of Christ, they may not be received. These are two huge
different things, which Mr. Collins all along levels to the same, and therefore
his argument falls to nothing. And I would have Mr. Collins, and all others that
profess themselves friends to the Church of England, to beware how they
maintain that Baptism makes Church Members: it is true of those that are of the
Pagan world by nature, they can in no wise be made members of the visible
Church of Christ but by lawful baptism: but those in the Church that are born
of Christian parents are members born, they being comprehended in the same
Covenant with their parents.

But Mr. Collins in proof of his major says, It is against reason to say the
contraray. A not^ble proof indeed! Let him show us wh^ reason it is against, to
say, that Church Members unbaptized, ought to be baptized upon lower personal
qualifications then Heathen.

I come to my next proposition, That the in the Church whom we cannot exclude
from C^^venant relation, that are of years, must not be excluded from the
Sacrament, because Sacrament are seals of Covenant love to that people the are
in possession of Covenant administrations.

Mr. Collins in answer to this, is fallen upon the old business again, and
wonders her years of discretion comes in, for he says, the argument is to
prove a right to Covenant seals, for s^^ as are in Covenant relation. Now
children are (...) Covenant relation, that exception plainly implies, say he,
that Covenant relation is not enough to give right to Covenant seals. And so he
says, I have answered my self.

Mr. Collins is more happy then others, i^ such an answer be judged a
sufficient one, because years of discretion, is no essential o^ Covenant
relation, but of a man, putting him into an actual capacity to perform act^ of
worship, the which until then he is not under the obligation of actual
observance. I have spoken enough to this already. Why is not Covenant relation
enough? I never thought so; but maintain that Covenant relation gives right to
Covenant seals unto parents and children. I hope I am as clear in this point as
most are. It Is an handsome shifting of an answer, to say, I have answered my
self: The argument lies to answer still. If Sacraments be seals of covenant
love to a people in possession of covenant administrations, then such a people
ought to use these seals of Covenant love unto them in remembrance thereof,
until they be legally dispossessed of the same. But ours are in Covenant
relation, and in possession of the Ordinances of the Covenant. Therefore it
belongs to them to make use of the seals of Gods love in remembrance of his
goodness toward them. Until you can discovenant them it is a weak thing to
go about to dispriviledge them in the externals of the Church; especially the
Ordinances being the Ordinary way and means of attaining the grace of the
Covenant.

In his 35. page he tells us, That Sacraments are not seals of the everlasting
Covenant, but seal to the acceptance of the Covenant to which faith must be
supposed.

I have always thought that the Covenant made with Abraham and his seed, Jews
Church, and applied to the Gospel Church, Heb. 8. had been an everlasting
Covenant of grace; and that Sacraments seal to this Covenant: And that not only
the new Covenant, but the seals thereof belong unto the visible Church. And
that the agreement or Covenant between the Father and the Son, for the elect,
had been a different thing from the Covenant made unto the Church, which
Sacraments seal. If that were not an everlasting Covenant that Circumcision was
a fign and seal of, I must confess I am out: but I am sure it is that which I
have been always taught, and never heard it denied, but by Anabaptists, and
such like Heterodox spirits. It Is true, this everlasting Covenant is to be
entered into by those the seals are to be applied unto; and this entrance or
acceptance is either personal or parental. An alien upon profession of faith,
and desiring to join himself to the visible Church of Christ by baptism, and so
to come voluntarily under the Laws of Christ, is to be received, he has
accepted of the laws of the Covenant. But for those that are in the Church by
nature, and profess no other religion and worship but the true, are all
supposed to have such a faith at least as does argue their acceptance of the
Covenant, during their abode in the Church, the which is sufficient to engage
them unto Christian obedience, and does entitle them to external Church
privileges; although this is not enough in order to their justification and
salvation: but yet the external part is the way prescribed for the attainment
of the internal blessings of the everlasting Covenant, even to as many in the
Church that Jesus Christ was sent into the world to seek and to save, by giving
them repentance and remission of sins. Hence it is very necessary to
distinguish of a twofold acceptance; one common that accepts of the external
part of the Covenant, which reprobates do with the elect, the other is
internal and special, when God by his Spirit opens the heart, and inclines the
will to receive the grace of the Covenant unto eternal life: the former is that
which gives right to the external privileges of the Church; the other to the
internal blessings of grace and glory. The former has the promise of the first
grace, the other the promise of increase in grace, and the reward of glory. If
that be true of Mr. Collins, That Sacraments seal to the acceptance of the
Covenant which supposes faith: It Is sufficient for our opinion, because all in
the Church do accept of the Covenant, and have faith. And we do not plead for
Heathens until they believe and come under baptism. But surely the death of
Christ confirmed the everlasting Covenant, out of which faith with the fruits
thereof freely flow. And I think Sacraments are no other ways seals, then they
are signs of his death; as it is said, This cup is the new Covenant in my
blood, the cup was not really the new Covenant, but a sign thereof,
representatively; as I have hinted before: Yet surely, says Mr. Collins, those
that are in a state of unbelief, are not in Covenant, though they may be
objects of Gods first free grace.

Answ. If they be not in the everlasting Covenant, they cannot be said to be
objects of Gods first free grace: for doubtless God gives grace to none that
are out of that Covenant, himself grants that the elect are enrold in the
everlasting Covenant, and many of them may be in the Church, I hope, though in
a state of unbelief in his sense; and doubtless it is for the elects sake that
we have an external administration, a Church consisting of most bad, that his
elect may be gathered out of all sorts of sinners, and others left without
excuse, is this wise contrivance of the ever blessed God. And hence this
mingled state of good and bad must grow together until the harvest, experience
does tell us what precious wheat has sprung out of the roots of wicked tares.
And wicked tares have sprung out of the roots of the choycest wheat: let that
convince us.

Mr. Collins says, That argument about baptism has been answered again and
again. The argument is this, If parents that are ignorant and scandalous in the
Church, be so much in Covenant as to give their children right unto holy
baptism, a seal of the Covenant, then themselves have right to the holy Supper,
it being but the seal of the same Covenant.

The antecedent is granted by Mr. Collins, and all that are friends to his
judgment, and yet they deny the consequence, because they say more is required
to the Lords Supper, then unto Baptism. Unto this I answer.

It cannot be proved,

Less is required unto Covenant seals of persons born in the Church,

The ignorant and scandalous are in as good a capacity of the Supper of the
Lord,

First, They are in an active capacity of exercising the understanding heart
and conscience, memory, with all the externals required unto that service,
their children are merely passive for the other.

Secondly, Parents are in possession of the feals of themselves, but their
children before baptism are not.

from their Ancestors, as their children do until they be discovenanted, if
not more, as being a generation nearer that right.

If parents Covenant relation be sufficient to give right to the seals for his
child,

Besides the contradiction in the other opinion of Mr. Collins; as first, he
pleads the Covna^nt for the parents unto their childrens baptism; and then
disputes them out of Covenant in his admission unto the holy Supper. They shall
be accounted believers as to the one, but unbelievers as to the other. The
promise is to them and their children in order unto baptism, but then in order
to the holy Supper, there is no more promise belongs unto them then unto
Pagans. And there is no promise made to any that have not faith to apply them;
and so exclude children from the promise too at last, for they have not such a
faith as to apply the promises. Thus you may see he is a Presbyterian in
practice; and an Anabaptist in opinion. For if his judgment be true about
baptism, then it is false about the holy Supper; if his judgment be true about
the Supper, then it is false about baptism: for both are the same seal of the
same Covenant exhibited, only by different figns. People had need be well
settled and satisfied of themselves in these times, that keep their station in
the Church, where they have such Teachers, and meet with such opinions that
destroy all. The truth is, our straightness in the one, and largeness in the
other, does destroy it self; and does occasion most intelligent Christians,
either to fall off from Infant baptism, or else to restrain it to those that
are judged fit to be received into holy Communion in the Lords Supper. Had it
not been for our own scruples about admitting to the Supper, casting off the
most of Churchmembers from Communion, under the notion of ignorant and
scandalous, we had never known of these exorbitances in the Church, which now
we suffer under by the separations.

It is an easy thing for Mr. Collins to say the argument is answered again and
again, not telling us by whom; nor how. But if it be not better answered then
he has done it in his answer to Mr. Barksdel, he must answer it again, or else
it must be unanswered, and cleave close unto him still as such a Churchrent
that he will never free himself of, unless he alter his judgment: which he
will find the readiest way of the two.

In his 15. page to Mr. Barksdels 10. argument for free admission he puts in
three exceptions.

He grants children are baptized in their parents right; but yet can see no
reason,

True, for sometimes it may fall out, turned Apostates: in these cases it is not
necessary; but otherwise being of the true Christian Church and faith, the
ignorant and scandalous being in actual Church Membership, and baptized; give
as true a legal right to their child's baptism, as any other member what ever:
so long as their own right holds, their child's right does also, and that
immediately from them, is to the sober unquestionable. Indeed if parents be
never so really godly and unbaptized, their childrens right to baptism must
either be derived from Ancestors, or else have none at all, a visible
peofession of faith in persons baptized gives a true right for their child to
the Sacramental seal, and consequently for themselves to the same seal of the
Supper; there was the same danger for the neglect of the Passover, as for
circumcision.

He says further, There is no self-examination prerequired unto baptism: but
to the Supper a man must examine himself, and so let him come.

Philip put it upon the Ethiopian Eunuch, Paul to the Corinths. Baptism to men
of years was upon the condition of a personal faith, without which they might
not be baptized, employed by this, If thou believe with all thy heart, thou
may, otherwise not, but there is no such thing in order to the Supper: they
were to examine themselves, and so come, it cannot be reasonably conceived of,
that if they neglected this private duty, they should not come, for it was
their duty to come together to celebrate the Supper, but not to profane it for
the worse. Profession of faith was a public duty in order to baptism, without
which they could not be baptized: but examination but a private duty left to
God and our own consciences, which no public officers have to do with
concerning others, but to instruct and to exhort unto the duty, etc. they have
not the like warrant to require an account whether the private has been
performed, much less to debar them upon a supposal of nonperformance, or
prejudge of their incapacity before hand, and so discourage from coming
together, for which we have not one syllable of warrant: but I have spoken
enough to this already. Remember the abuse of the Brazen Serpent.

He says, The children of the legally unclean were not forbid circumcision,
but the unclean man might not eat the Passover.

The unclean during his uncleanness, to be done the eight day, it might be
rejourned for a week upon the same reason as the Passover was for a month, and
circumcision in another case for forty years: we know the rule in cases of
necessity, God will rather have mercy then sacrifice.

There is no legal uncleanness in the Church now,

And to prevent some mistake, let me entreat the Reader carefully to consider,
That although I have said, that more is required unto the Supper then unto
Baptism. It is to be understood in the Church of persons that are
Church Members by nature. But of Aliens, I conceive more is required of them
unto baptism, then of Church Members unto the Supper, especially when they were
members by birth privilege. The ground is this, because a public profession
of faith is necessary for the admitting of a Heathen into the visible Catholic
Church, by baptism. And so of his entering the Gospel Covenant for himself and
seed: but to them that are in Covenant by birth, it is otherwise, their
Covenant right remains until it be forfeited by renouncing the Covenant, or
hating to be reformed by the Churches just censures. And while they are in the
Covenant, and in the Church, they may not be denied the external privileges
thereof, although they be transgressors of the Covenant, etc. But to proceed,
and come more close to the query in hand, namely, Whether there be any thing in
the nature, end, action, language of the Sacrament, incongruous to the
unregenerate in the Church receiving, in 1 Cor. 11. or elsewhere. To which I
have in the general, showed a congruity between the Sacrament and the
unregenerate in the Church; And have answered unto Mr. Collins exceptions
against me. Now we come more directly to the query, and to what is excepted
against us. I must confess in page 36. Bar removed, there is a great mistake,
but who were faulty in it, I cannot well tell, the 19. line is out of place,
and is to be prefixed to my three arguments, to prove the Sacrament a
converting Ordinance, page 40. for that which follows page 36. line 19. is to
demonstrate a sutablenesse or congruity in the Sacrament to the unregenerate
man's receiving, where the particulars of the question are examined and cleared.
And hence Mr. Collins follows the mistake, and makes himself merry with those
three new arguments, as he had thought they were: but he finds the first as
old as Paul's steeple. And the third proves a Monkies right to the Sacrament, in
his page 35, 36.

I confess my nature inclines me too much to give him returns suitable unto his
vein of levity,

I laid down the nature of the Sacrament to be a visible Gospel,

Mr. Collins says, Bravely concluded! from need to right is wide concluding.

I conclude from the nature of the Sacrament, etc. That therefore the
unregenerate in the Church have need to be allowed the use of all their senses,
to let in the knowledge of Christ as the regenerate, they being more dull, etc.
And hence I conceive a congruity unto such, he says, from need to right is
wide concluding. The question is not to prove a right, but a congruity, or
rather to free the unregenerate from the charge of incongruity, etc. unto which
Mr. Collins excepts nothing against the nature of it.

In spiritual things unto the Church, With him the fatherless and desolate
find mercy. If any want wisdom, let them ask it of God who gives freely. What
though from need to right does not always hold in the Courts of men; it is a
good plea in the Court of free grace, and well taken when sinners come off, in
the use of Gods own appointments, for the obtaining of a blessing of supply
unto their necessities.

In the next place, Collins excepts against the end of the Sacrament, as I have
expressed my self, page 37. The Bar removed, as touching the query in hand, The
end of the Sacrament is to put the Church in mind of the death of Christ, and
that satisfaction made by him, by which all the saving blessings of the
Covenant are procured unto fallen man. Christ's blood was shed for many, for
remission of sins. That he might gather into one the children of God scattered
abroad in all the world, and ages thereof; is the end of his death, Joh. 11.52.
And the Sacrament is to be observed in remembrance of this, by all in the
Church that profess they hope to be saved by the merits of his death; which
the unregenrate does whom we cannot exclude from being the sheep Christ dyed
for; and therefore it is as proper and congruous for such to be put in mind of
the death of Christ, by the Sacrament, for their spiritual good as others,
regenerating grace being a blessing of the Covenant procured by the death of
Christ, as well as salvation is.

Unto this Mr. Collins answers somewhat feebly,

1. Restraining the benefits that come by the death of Christ, unto those only
that have a lively hope, purifying themselves, as God is pure, etc.

2. He queries, How if such be ignorant of what Christ is, and did; how can
such do it in remembrance of him?

3. Or how if by bloody Oaths and blasphemies profane his blood. How can they
do it in a practical remembrance of him?

That the unregenerate as such, etc. I grant, but that they have a warrantable
hope, as professing the true Christian Religion, relying upon the mercy of God
through the merits of Christ's death, Christ being the right object of all hope;
which is a good encouragement for such to use the means in hope of a blessing;
forasmuch as not any man in special can exempt himself from the saving benefits
of his death, whom they by the outward signs are put in mind of, every
Sacrament.

As before he would not have them objects of the promises of first grace, etc.
So now he will have none to have any ground of hope to receive the saving
benefits that are procured for sinners by the death of Christ, (which
Sacraments represent) but those in the Church, that have a lively hope. Does
Mr. Collins think, thas a man may have faith to apply the promise before he
has grace? Or does he think those promises have no object? Or that any shall
have grace to whom it is not promised in the Church? So likewise, if none but
those that have a lively hope can receive benefit by the death of Christ; then
it will follow,

1. That the first regenerating grace is not a benefit that flows from the
death of Christ, except a man can have this lively hope before he be regenerate.

2. That regeneration, as it is a benefit of the death of Christ, belongs to
none but regenerate persons that have a lively hope; and then we shall exclude
the unregenerate from all benefit or hope by Christ; unless they can convert
themselves; which they cannot; and so exclude them from the day of grace and
mercy, and make them aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers to the
Covenant of promise, and without hope and God in the world; equal with the
Pagan world; which upon gross mistake he has done all along in this present
Controversy. But I hope enough has been spoke to satisfy my Reader, as to
that particular. And therefore the unregenerate being so much concerned in the
benefits of the death of Christ, which Sacraments are remembrancers of, it is
very meet and suitable they should partake of the signs, that are so much
concerned in the thing represented and exhibited thereby. Unto his second I

If they be so ignorant,

And for such as are scandalous, they should be dealt withal in a regular way,
for their amendment, that their actual miscarriages indulged do not leaven the
whole, and hinder the blessing of every Ordinance from themselves. And although
a practical remembrance may be desired of all; yet in the visible Church we
shall always meet with many loose carnal wretched sinners, that will offend
scandalously, and so abuse the grace of Gospel Ordinances to their utter ruin,
if the Lord prevent it not by giving them his grace to repent. The Sacrament is
a means to engage unto amendment, as proper as any other Ordinance, until they
be Juridically cast out. Nothing else can disoblige them from duties of public
worship, as the Sacrament is. I confess it is a sad and a lamentable
condition, that such wretched miserable persons are in, that woefully abuse the
Grace of the Gospel, and make such desperate returns for such exceeding rich
grace and mercy, abusing the patience and longsuffering of God which should
lead to repentance. How dare any profane persons bear up themselves upon the
name of the Lord, and hope they shall be saved by Jesus Christ, and yet live in
licentious courses, and hate instruction, and will not have Christ to rule over
them by his Word and Scepter! Why, consider this, yea that forget God, lest he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver; do not flatter your selves
the more because you are in the visible Church; for so long as you are but
chafe and tares, you are liable every moment to be plucked up and burnt in
unquenchable flames. What though thou may escape the censures of the Church;
be sure thou shall not escape the judgment of God, if thou continuest thy
rebellion against him. It may be thou art spared for the sake of some precious
wheat of Gods Elect, whom he will cause to spring out of thy roots, though a
wicked tare thy self, and thy ancestors before thee. Remember Judas that
desperate Traitor, and son of perdition that was false to the Lord Jesus: his
false heart and unworthy actions to his Lord whom he religiously professed,
made him swell until he burst asunder, and all his bowels gushed out. If thou will swear, blaspheme, be drunk, and scoff at godliness, and live an idle
filthy voluptuous life, and yet hope to be saved by Christ, and professest thy
self a Christian; it may be thou had as good have been that Judas, as such a
wretch as thou art, adding obstinacy unto thy former rebellion, until the
wrath of the Lord and his jealousy smoke against thee, bringing all the
plagues written in his Book upon thee, and blot out thy name from under heaven.
Either do what in thee lies to walk up to thy profession of the true Religion
that Sacraments oblige thee unto; or else be sure thy profession will rather
aggravate thy abominable doings, and sink thee deeper in the bottomless pit,
then be any plea for thee at the Judgment seat of Jesus Christ: for he will
say unto all such false hearted profane Christians at the last, Depart from me
ye workers of iniquity, etc.

In the next place we come to the Sacramental Actions, I have argued learnedly,
when I say the unregenerate have a hand to take, and a mouth to eat, which the
reverent Doctor denied, because they have not faith, etc. I desired him to
prove that faith was that hand, but Mr. Collins has prevented him, and given
his proof of it in John 6.54, 53, 56. compared with verse. 40.35, 50. Ephesians.
4.17. Joh. 3.36.

The 6. of John does prove, at all, for it is the Spirit of Christ that
quickens: the flesh profits nothing The words of Christ unto his, they are
Spirit, and life. I am sorry the Papists should see our Divines applying this
6. of John to the Sacrament.

I say still as before, that taking and eating are bodily actions, and to be
understood according to the rules of institution, which the unregenerate
Christians are capable to do, and act as well as any. And it remains still to
prove, by Mr. Collins favor, that take and eat, etc. is meant of faith to be
the hand and mouth to take and eat with; his quotations are drawn too much awry
to speak his opinion. I must demand further proof, or else he will not clear
the thing I am sure.

I grant that unto actual receiving of the signs,

I grant it necessary, whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And hence all the
Church as professing themselves Christ's subjects, must plead for their warranty
Christ's command, Do this in remembrance of him.

I grant it good and lawful for them that truly can, in the act of receiving,

I grant that the outward signs are holy in a relative sense, as respecting
their end,

I grant that the Sacraments are of fingular use,

Mr. Collins had thought the taking, eating, and drinking the outward signs
must be spiritual by faith, he says.

I think there is but few of his mind in this: for certainly nothing more
clear the^ that to take, eat and drink of the signs i^ natural and bodily,
which is necessary to be done, by every one from the words of institution. And
as they are elements or creature fit to eat and drink, they are properly
objects of the outward senses, and not of faith, as I said before, which
natural actions are appointted unto a spiritual end, which end requires the
exercise of the mind, memory, heart and conscience, faith in Christ being
supposed in all that are baptized and admited thither, I mean a profession of
faith (...) be saved by Jesus Christ at least. And ho^ Mr. Collins can prove,
that all the actions about giving and receiving must be spiritual by faith I
know not, unless he can tell how to make a Sacrament of every action abo^^ the
Sacramental administration; the which to do will find him some work. Let hi^
prove, that take, and eat, is a sign of our spiritual taking and eating by
faith, which is more easy to be proved then the other, that to take and eat
must be spiritual by faith: for then all natural actions are needless, if
faith be all that is meant. And if those actions be significant, and instruct
the receiver to receive Christ by a particular applicatory act of faith, I hope
the unregenerate have as much need to be taught and encouraged unto this by the
Sacrament as any. I know n^^ incongruity in this.

I said in my Book, page 38, 39. The language of the Sacrament was in general
and indefinite terms. This cup is the New Testament in my blood, shed for many
for remission of sins, etc. Mr. Collins asks, who those many are? and answers
himself, and says, disciples of Christ.

It Is true, Collins conceive of Church Members baptized, and not excommunicate?
Are not they Christ's disciples? if not, let him prove them Infidels if he can.

When the Lord Jesus said he shed his blood for many,

Besides, some other things, I said, It sounds very harsh in the Church, to
exclude this Ordinance of Christ from being a means of converting the
unregenerate in the Church, they being the most proper objects of converting
grace, as held out in in the promises, for the putting of which into execution,
all the Ordinances in the Church seem to be subservient.

And I verily believe, this Ordinance of the holy Supper, had never been denied
to convert in the Church, had not Divines run themselves upon such great
mistake about habitual unworthiness from 1 Cor. 11. That very mistake has
occasioned this: for if the unregenerate eat and drink unworthily as the
Corinths did, and were punished for, of necessity then it were rational to deny
it a converting Ordinance: for as the Reverent Doctor argues rationally from
that, thus, Natural men are guilty of the blood of Christ, and ea^ and drink
judgment to themselves, and shall we think, that that sinful act in unworthy
receiving shall be so blessed of God, as to become a means of conversion to them,
etc. This must needs be a consequence of the other mistake, That being removed,
men will easily yield the other. Mr. Collins tells us of twenty arguments of Mr.
Gillespy, that it is not for conversion, the which he says, I have not yet
answered. I must confess it; neither do I know what they are, for I have not
his Book. My friend Mr. Humfrey has promised to answer those arguments: Which
I believe will be easy enough to do, unless they be stronger then the
strongest of Mr. Collins in his answer to Mr. Barsdale, upon the same argument,
page 14. the latter end of his Book, the which argument of his I shall examine
anon. Let us first see what he has excepted against mine. Which I think are so
much for the probability of the affirmative, that the negative must remain
doubtful, unto the impartial intelligent Reader.

That one special end of the work of the Ministry in general,

But to the administration of the Sacrament the main essentials of that work of
the Ministry in the Church are of necessity, as Word, and Prayer, and breaking
of Bread, Act. 2.42. Therefore one special end of the Sacrament, as it is an
essential part of that work, is for the converting the unregenerate in the
Church.

The major proposition is bottomed from Ephesians. 4.8, 10, 11, 12, 13 verses.
Christ ascended far above the heavens, that he might fill all things. And he
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers; for the gathering of Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come into the union of faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man; unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ.

1. Here it is plain that God has ordained the work of the Ministry in the
hands of Pastors and Teachers in the Church, to edify the body of Christ,
until the whole number of his elect be united to him, and made complete, etc.
And we know there is always in the Church, objects of conversion as well as of
the promises, to which the work of the Ministry is intended to unite them unto
Christ, etc.

And this is to be done by the work of the Ministry in general, without any
distinction of parts, the whole work together without exception of any part, is
for conversion in the Church, as is clear from this place. Now unless Mr.
Collins, or any other what ever, can give us some clear Scripture to exclude a
part of this work from that end of conversion, they must allow this end of
conversion to the work of the Ministry in general, but as that was never
performed as yet, so I think never will by any: only men take the boldness to
separate that which the holy Ghost does join together, upon mere mistake about
unworthy receiving.

And it is a rule that Mr. Collins does justify from Matthew. 7.6. Where the
Scriptures d^ not distinguish, we must not distinguish. If a principal end of
the work of the Ministry in the Church be intended for conversion in general,
then the particular parts of that work; for the particulars are included in the
general. And the most comprehensive sense i^ to be taken of all
Scripture-expressions, unless some other Scriptures put some limitations of
that sense; and when any man ca^ show me a Scripture that excludes the
administration of the Sacrament, from this principal end of conversion in the
Church, I will have done with this Argument. And until then, the Argument is
of more force then all the authority of men (merely) can in the least
overthrow. We should distinguish of preaching the Gospel unto Pagans, that are
aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel; and of the work of the Ministry
consisting of the whole administration of the Gospel, intended only for the
spiritual good of the visible Church of Christ: unto Infidels the preaching of
the Gospel is appointed the ordinary way and means to convert them unto the
faith, and bring them into the Church; but those that are in the Church as they
are objects of the promises, and under the obligation of all observances, which
Infidels are not, so they are under greater advantages of converting them unto
sincerity of faith, and the power of godliness by the work of the Ministry in
general, of which Infidels are allowed but a part.

The minor proposition is evident, that to the administration of the Sacrament,
it is necessary that the main essentials of the work of the Ministry in the
Church be performed, as publishing not only the Word of institution, but the
History of Christ's death and passion, with exhortations suitable to the
Ordinance in hand, according to the practice and custom of our own Church, with
solemn prayers and praises considerably meet for so weighty an Ordinance; unto
which are adjoined instituted signs to be given and taken in remembrance of
the death of Christ; all which concurring together in the act of
administration, does comprise upon the matter the main essentials of public
worship, wherein the work of the Ministry does chiefly consist; so that I
cannot conceive how the premises can be denied by any: therefore the conclusion
does necessarily follow, That the Sacrament, as it is an essential part of the
work of the Ministry, is for conversion in the Church.

But Mr. Collins says, This argument is worth nothing. But why did he not show
the weakness of it then, his bare say so is no answer. But he says, Let it be
proved that therefore Christ has appointed it for conversion; if it were,
doubtless the excommunicate should not be debarred.

I have made good the premises,

But in the administration of the Sacrament, are the same instruments of the
Spirit, unto conversion, as Word, Prayer, etc.

Therefore the Sacrament is appointed for conversion in the Church.

Whereas he says, Then doubtless the excommunicate should not be debarred, it
is no consequence, because converting of sinners, is not all the ground why God
commands his Church to observe all things of his prescribing, but his own
glory, in commanding what he will, because he will: Besides,

2. Bar removed, page 70, 71, 72, 73.
The excommunicate should be put out of all Church Communion in all other parts
of public worship, as well as from the Sacrament, as I have made it out in my
answer unto Doctor Drake, which is not yet answered by any.

3. This implies that the unregenerate are not to do any thing by way of duty,
but what is for conversion, not be diligent in their callings, show mercy, and
do justly, etc. because these duties are not appointed to convert them.

Next, all men confess that the Word and Prayer, as they are public
Ordinances of God, are for conversion in the Church.

But without the Word and Prayer sanctifying, and setting apart the elements of
Bread and Wine, there can be no Sacrament.

Therefore the Sacrament, as consisting in Word and Prayer, is converting.

This Mr. Collins terms, A threadbare argument that has a great hole in it.
For though the Word and Prayer are means of conversion, and they do constantly
attend the Sacrament, yet it does not follow, that the Sacrament qua Sacrament
is so; nor is there any need for conversion, that the unregenerate should be at
it, for they may hear, and pray, and not receive.

Why did not Mr. Collins really discover a hole in the argument by some solid
answer, but fancy a hole before it be made: he confesses the Word and Prayer
are means of conversion, and so grants my major: and upon the matter grants my
minor, by saying, that Word and Prayer do constantly attend the Sacrament, but
yet he is not willing to yield the conclusion; which is not very rational, I
concluding no more then what he grants in the propositions. But he says, It
will not follow, that the Sacrament qua a Sacrament is converting; either he
must mean, that the giving and receiving without word and Prayer, is the
Sacrament, qua a Sacrament, or that giving and receiving the signs, in
relation to Word and Prayer conjoined, is the Sacrament, qua a Sacrament. If he
means the former, let him prove that giving and receiving the signs of Bread
and Wine without Word and Prayer is the Sacrament. If the latter, then in his
granting the premises he yields the conclusion, and thus you may quickly see
what a great hole the has made in this argument.

But then he says, Nor is there any need for conversion, that the unregenerate
should be at it, for they may pray, and hear, and not receive.

No! They may hear, and pray, and not receive. It Is true, (so may any other)
does it therefore follow, that none may receive? or that hearing and praying in
order to receiving, is sufficient without taking, and eating and drinking the
institute signs in remembrance of the death of Christ? Or would he have them
to hear and pray, in order to receiving, and then turn their backs upon Gods
holy Ordinance, after they have prayed unto God for his blessing upon it? The
Reverend Doctor said, That presence might answer this end, unto which I
answered, If bare presence, much more actual receiving. But now Mr. Collins
says, That they cannot promise them, that their presence will do them good,
but they are sure, he says, their receiving will not. And hence concludes my
consequence is naught.

Who can promise beforehand, that any other Ordinance in the Church shall do
the unregenerate good by their presence at the time, shall they not therefore
give their presence? It Is the language of Scripture, that all in the Church are
to keep Gods statutes and judgments for their good.

But he is sure their receiving will do them no good. I wonder how he dare
limit the holy One, and detract so injuriously from the wisdom, power, and
grace of Christ in his own appointments. He has confessed before, that the
Sacraments were instituted for the spiritual good of the visible Church of
Christ in general, and that this Church consists of good and bad; and now he
says the Sacrament will do the unregenerate no good. Does he think the
unregenerate are not of the visible Church, that Sacraments were instituted for
the good thereof? The judicious Reader may easily discern how consonant he is
to his own judgment, in more things then this.

But this antecedent of his, That he is sure their receiving will do them no
good, is sufficient to publish to the world, that my consequence is naught,
etc. in answer to the Doctor.

But why does Mr. Collins give us his argument for the negative? He turns me
over to Mr. Gillespy, that has twenty arguments. I suppose himself may use
some of them in his answer to Mr. Barkesdales 9. argument, wherein he seems to
make a show of silenceing all men, that hold the Sacrament a converting
Ordinance, page 14. And because the argument which he answers unto, is the same
with mine, I shall crave leave of Mr. Barksdale, to examine in brief the
strength of his, because he thinks he has done enough at once to show
thevanity of our opinion.

1. He argues from the absurdities that will follow: Then it is as proper to go
to the Heathen and call them to a Sacrament, in order to their conversion, as
to preach the Gospel unto them.

It concerns Mr. Collins to prove that every Ordinance in the Church instituted
for the good thereof,

Let him prove that the unbaptized Heathen are as much in Covenant relation,

Let him prove that whatsoever is for conversion in the Church, the
unregenerate Christian, I should be satisfied. Thus you may see even in the
very thing wherein he would charge absurdity upon us, it will return upon
himself, by putting no difference between the Church of Christ, and the Infidel
world.

He says, If the Sacrament be a converting Ordinance, there can be no personal
unworthiness sufficient to debar any from it, then come Turks, Indians,
Papists, excommunicate persons, etc.

This is but the same again in other words,

He says, If it be a converting Ordinance, he can see no reason why the
Communicant should be bound to examine himself, and so eat, or whether he has
skill to discern the Lords body.

The Word and Prayer are converting Ordinances, Collins be not too perverse.

But then he comes to speak distinctly to the argument.

He distinguishes between converting by accident, Romans 10. Hear and your soul
shall live, let any show us a Scripture speaking to this purpose concerning the
Lords Supper.

It Is true, faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. proves, that it is not possible
that any should call upon the name of the Lord in whom they have not believed.
And how should they believe in him, of whom they have not (so much as) heard
of? And how shall they hear without a Preacher, etc. which is spoken to the
case of Heathens that never heard of Christ. Such must of necessity hear
Christ, before they can believe in him. And this faith comes by hearing, and
this hearing by the Word of God, by a Preacher sent. This was the ordinary
means of bringing persons into the Church, that were Pagans born; and then
being within, they had the benefit of all other Ordinances in the Church, for
their edification and salvation. What then, will it follow hence, that persons
born in the Church, that draw in the knowledge of Christ by education and
tradition in their youth, cannot believe or have faith in any other way but by
hearing only? The promise is, that whosoever shall call upon the Name of the
Lord shall be saved, in opposition to those that never heard of his Name.
Salvation is of the Christian Church, as once of the Jews, unto which promise
of Salvation all the Ordinances set up in the Church are subservient.

The work of the Ministry was to be carried on by the Pastors and Teachers
fixed unto their several flocks in the Church, which they are constantly to
attend upon for the spiritual good thereof; as they which must give an account
thereof unto their Lord; and it concerns them faithfully to carry on the whole
work of their Ministry accordingly toward their whole flock, and not to make
Heathens of them, and then content themselves only with preaching unto them on
the Lords day, and the work is done, as if there were no more care to be taken
with Church Members, then with Pagans, nor no more means to be used for their
spiritual good then they would use unto Heathen, whom the work of the Ministry
was never intended for. And whereas Mr. Collins calls for proof, Where are the
like Scriptures to prove the Sacrament a converting Ordinance, as is preaching
and hearing? I answer him by distinguishing thus, hearing of faith preached was
and is the ordinary means of sincere believing in the Church, of which the
Sacrament is a special part. Befides, the Sacrament cannot be administered
without hearing the Word of God, and prayer, with the use of other senses, as
it is the visible compendium of the whole Gospel holding forth Christ crucified
for remission of fins.

But to speak a little unto his other quotation, Isai. 55. Hear and your souls
shall live. This was spoken unto the Church he will say; I grant it was, and
more then this too, as that chapter shows. That first they were invited to come
unto God in whom all spiritual blessing was to be had, for the satisfying of
every empty thirsty soul; and dissuaded from thinking to be satisfied
elsewhere- Secondly, exhorted unto several duties.

1. To hearken diligently unto what the Lord had said unto them, and be
satisfied with good.

Then 2. incline your ear and come unto me, that you may be satisfied with the
fatness of my house: They were to hear, and come to God too in all holy
obedience; for in the Scriptures men are said not to hear, when they will not
regard to do what the Lord has commanded them, so hear that your souls may
live, hear and do is the language of the holy Ghost to the Church usually.

3. Then to seek God while he will be found, and to call upon him him while he
is near, seek him in all his own appointments and Ordinances, where he has
promised his presence.

4. Then is subjoyned, Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts; And let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy on him,
etc. Therefore you may easily conceive here is not only hear, and your soul
shall live, but all other duties of worship and observance are required also in
the Church, in order to a blessing of spiritual life, and there are promises of
grace and mercy unto the Church in that same chapter upon their doing their
duties enjoined: the which does make good the distinction above; We know in the
Church, Not the hearers of the Word, but the doers thereof shall be blesied in
their deed; persons in the Church are bound to observe and do all that Christ
in his Word has commanded; upon that account they have the promise of his
gracious presence; and if the Sacrament be an Ordinance of Christ for the good
of his Church; why may we not exspect the presence of Christ, in blessing this
for the spiritual good of his Church as all the rest? Mr. Collins must give
stronger reasons to deny it a converting Ordinance then these, or else he had
better have said nothing: me thinks Mr. Gillespie might have furnished him with
a greater strength then so.

Next he says, Either the Word alone (read at the administration) is to
convert, or Word and signs making up the Sacrament; if the Word only, he
thinks wicked men may stay and hear that, if we say more, we must prove it.

This, Collins is able to exclude the Sacrament from the work of the Ministry
in the Church; and exclude Word and Prayer in order to the Sacrament from that
work, (and end of converting) in the Church; and can exclude this Ordinance,
from being a spiritual instrument in the hand of the Spirit of Christ to
quicken whom he will, and can exclude the unregenerate from Covenant relation,
and membership, and allow them no other privilege in the Church for their
spiritual good, then unto Infidels, etc. I say, when he has performed this
task soundly and substantially; it is possible he may make the vanity of our
opinion (that are for the affirmative) to appear, and put us upon further
proof: until then let the Judiclous Reader judge of the arguments between us,
whether ours or his be most rational and satisfactory; as they are deducted
from general rules of Scripture and reason. And by this time I have given you
an account of all that Mr. Collins has excepted against the first part of my
book. I do not know of any material thing I have omitted to answer in
particular: but indeed not so much for any great cause I had thus to do, in
what he has said to loosen the foundations and principles upon which my whole
building stands, but from a desire further to clear up the thing in
controversy, and to reduce the controversy into a narrower compass.

In the close of Mr. Collins answer, he collects about seven rotten pillars, as
he calls them, out of the whole of mine, and pens them down as he pleases, and
then bids others judge of them, taking it for granted that he has discovered
them to be rotten and false, And that my Book has not much truth in any one
page of it.

It Is possible that there may be some things in my Book, that are doubtful,
Collins has made no such discovery in any one thing that he has excepted
against.

I humbly conceive,

I shall give you a breviate of the principles I build upon in the managing of
this in controversy.

That the Eternal God has created all mankind for himself, sin and the
punishment thereof, to the infinite glory of his Justice, in the just
condemnation of the wicked world.

That for the Elects sake,

That Jesus Christ is the only meriting and procuring cause of the Gospel
Covenant,

That this Covenant of grace,



Secondly, in promises of growth in grace.

Thirdly, In promises of rewarding graces with comfortable blessings temporal
and spiritual in this life, and with eternal glory i^ the world to come.

That the Church of God on earth, those different promises included in the
Gospel Covenant, unto which the natural issue of Christians in the visible
Church does well agree.

That Sacraments,

That Sacraments are instituted and intended only for the Churches use,

That all in the Church come under the the obligation of all instituted worship
prescribed,

That Covenant relation is either personal,

That a positive profession of faith explicitly is necessity unto admission
unto Church Membership of those that are Heathens born,

That to be Saints, Believers, Disciples,

That during the state of Church Membership, privileges of that Church,
whereof he is a member in particular, until he voluntarily fall away by final
apostasy, or be justly cast out of all Church Communion by an authoritative
act of Church censures.

That those that derive their Church Membership from that great Charter of
Covenant relation with the Church,

Though the right of discipline may be inherent in every lawful Presbyter,

Irregular actings and good ends cannot stand together;

The state of unregeneracy and personal unworthiness in the Church does not
bar any one from the Sacrament,

Actual unworthiness persisted in unto obstinacy, of persons in the Church;
yet all actual unworthiness does not necessarily run persons upon eating and
drinking the Lords Supper unworthily, in the Apostles sense.

There is no personal unworthiness in the Church, in a relative sense,

Not to discern the Lords Body, is,

Examination is a private duty to be performed between God and the conscience
unto a profitable receiving,

There is a real difference to be put between the unregenerate Christian,

The whole Church is in Covenant with God,

The whole Church are under all Gospel observance;

Salvation is of the Christian Church, How can they call on him in whom they
have not believed? and how can they believe in him of whom they have not heard?
And there is salvation in no other Name, whatsoever, save only in Jesus Christ.

That the legally unclean were not so much debarred the benefit of the
Passover,

That the Moral uncleanness then,

That no persons in the Church of the Old Testament, that suspension from the
Sacrament alone, usually called the minor Excommunication, is but a humane
invention in the Church.

More is required to the Lords Supper then to Baptism in the Church,

We must distinguish of real and relative personal worthiness,

2. Of believing in a large sense, and of believing in a strict sense; both to
be accounted true believers in Scripture sense: The denomination of a Believer
is as well derived from a right object believed on, as from the right and
holiness of the Subject believing.

3. Of entering into the Covenant, and of continuing in the Covenant. The former
is proper for Infidels: the latter concerns the Church; for it is supposed that
all in the Church have entered the Gospel Covenant. And in the Church we must
distinguish of transgressing the Covenant, and renouncing the Covenant, of
breaking, and renewing it; and whosoever is entered into the Covenant, comes
under the whole administration thereof, and cannot be disobliged from any
observance thereof, but by the binding power of the Keys of Christ's Kingdom
exercised Juridically.

Beloved Friends, I have now given you an account of the most of my principles
that I build upon, and conclude free admission to the holy Supper from. And I
judge they are such that have their rise from the holy Scriptures; or are
rational deductions drawn from thence, which are not in the least loosened nor
shaken by Mr. Collins, nor any other of his judgment; nor I think never will,
notwithstanding his forwardness of spirit in the close of his Book, to cry up
a victory, when he has not so much as routed me in any one thing in all my
Book, which argues a bold conceited vapouring spirit a little too much.

Therefore now in short, I shall collect some of his main strength and
magisterial principles made use of to undermine the foundations of mine, either
expressed or employed.

He denies that Church Membership alone does give a full right to the
Sacrament,

in Christ, until they discover the contrary by their actual offendings.

Then say I, he holds, That all Infants are habitually worthy from their
interest in Christ, and commonly fall away from that state of grace.

He says, It Is not much material, Corinths were punished for habitual
unworthiness or no, and yet upon the matter, that the whole he disputes
against.

He says the unregenerate are personally unworthy, and therefore cannot
receive.

He says there is no promise belongs to the unregenerate in the Church,

He puts no difference between the unregenerate in the Church and the Pagan
world,

He says, meat, which weak Christians are not able to digest, and that they are
seals of faith only.

He denies the Sacrament to be a converting Ordinance, etc. And will not have
the unregenerate Christians to come under any duty, but what is converting.

He affirms that in an unlearned Congregation, etc. And yet in all other thing
seem to bear himself much upon the authority of men. With such like things as
these he thinks he has loosened all that I have built upon, and hence thinks
that the whole will fall; but he must take a great deal of pains more then yet
he has done, if he think to be the man that must give satisfaction in this
Controversy. And I believe he must speak a great deal more then has been
spoken by any, if in the least he can make good suspension from the Sacrament,
more then from any other part of holy Communion in sacred worship, I mean of
Church Members of years of discretion, as the question is stated. He must not
think that the authority of men will carry the thing, it being a business of
this consequence, that on which the peace and settlement depends; which can
never be as to our condition, so long as men make habitual worthiness in a
real sense, that which alone gives one right to the Sacrament. 2. And set up
the distinction of Believer and Infidel in the Church. 3. And level the
unregenerate part of the Church with the world in respect of Covenant relation,
promises of first grace, work of the Ministry, feals of the Covenant, etc. Such
like interferings in a visible Church does destroy it, and pluck up the very
foundation on which the Church of England stands. My constant prayer to the
Lord is, and shall be, that he will so favor us with the blessings of his
people, as to give us Magistrates and Ministers, that may be tender in
protecting and defending the Vine which himself has planted. And it is pity
that Mr. Collins and diverse others of his judgment should not see where truth
and the Churches peace lies.

I have done with him, as to what he has excepted against my Book in
particular; I shall very briefly examine his strength for Suspension from the
Lords Supper.

FINIS.
I shall in the next place annex a short Answer to, or an Examination of Mr.
Collins Quotations and Arguments for that which he calls A Juridical Suspension
from the Lords Supper, the main Subject of his late Book.
BEloved Friends, I am sorry that our Author should take such a deal of pains,
to make good that thing that has, and does so much trouble and hinder the
edification and peace of the Church; and has been the occasion of the
extirpation of the Churches Discipline; and the main impediment of an
establishment of Discipline at the present. And how impossible it is, that the
Church of England should be preserved and secured in a Church state, from the
common reproaches of adversaries upon his principles, let them that are sober
judge; when himself is equalling the most of her members to the Infidel world,
disobliging them from duties of instituted worship and observance, under this
pretense, that they are unbelievers, and no disciples, nor brethren that are
within; and hence he will allow them just as much privilege in the Church, as
he does unto Pagans; except baptizing their Infants, which he will hardly do
upon their own parents faith, but upon their remote predecessors. And thus he
makes a great stir about suspension from the Sacrament; and by this groundless
censure, does hinder or make invalid other necessary commands of Jesus Christ,
to the great prejudice of the Church of Christ; As namely, the benefit of Gods
Ordinance of Sacrament, and just excommunications according to the practice of
Apostolical Churches, when this suspension was not known nor heard of. And
therefore I having spoke so much already in defense of this privilege and and
right of a Churchmember, and that being already engaged in this Controversy,
give me leave further to answer to what I can find urged against the friends
of my judgment that has not as yet been spoken unto, as may satisfy the
plain minded Christian, that is not able to unravel so many subtle needless
syllogisms, that Mr. Collins abounds with in his elaborate Book. But I intend
brevity; And therefore expect not my answer unto every thing, but to his main
grounds he has laid for suspension.

In stating of the question Mr. Collins says;

1. As to suspending of some persons from the Supper; he means no more then a
denial of that Ordinance from some, page 1.

2. He distinguishes of Suspension, To be either Juridical, or Pastoral,
Positive, or Primitive.

3. Of a Presbytered Church he says, They finding some of their members
grossly ignorant or seandalous, not excommunicated in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, are to warn them to forbear coming to the Lords Table for a time, and if
they press in to deny it them, declaring the Church has no Communion with
them, page 3.

I shall speak unto that suspension he calls Juridical and Positive only;

1. He says, They mean no more by suspension then a denial of that Ordinance
of the Supper from them, for a time.

Then 2. In case they will come, to deny it them, declaring the Church has no
communion with them.

Here you may take notice, how clear Mr. Collins is in stating the question.

1. He makes suspension no more but a de^yal of the Sacrament from some for a
time.

And then secondly the Church declares they have no Communion with them: so
that he in stating the question lays foundation for a Suspension, and
Excommunication both: For if excommunidation consists not in putting out of all
Church Communion, I know not what it is. He so confounds these, that I know not
how to take him.

And therefore I must query him a little further about the question stated.

I query whether a Minister with his Parochial Lay Elders be a Presbytery that
can saspend their members Juridically.

I query whether in suspending of members from the Sacrament, Matthew. 18.15, 16,
17, etc. and how they can apply that rule unto the ignorant, that are not
scandalous, they may do well to tell us.

I query what difference they make between a Juridical suspended member,

I query again in what relation does a suspended member stand in reference unto
holy Communion in the other parts of Gods worship.

If you say, but as a Heathen, whom you will allow the benefit of converting
Ordinances in the Church; then your suspension is the same with
excommunication; for you allow an excommunicate person as much benefit of
converting Ordinances as a Heathen. And if you say, hearing and praying, etc.
You allow as a members duty and privilege, then in those acts of worship you
hold communion with them as members of the same body with you, then how is it
that you declare unto such in the name of Christ, and the Church, that you have
no communion with them, as Mr. Collins has stated it?

If in the third place you say, The Church declares she will have no Communion
with such in the Sacrament as a member only; limiting her none Communion to
that, and from no other holy Communion in worship as a member, then you will
make a disagreement in acts of worship, which are all acts of holy Communion,
and make a ren^ in that which is uniform in it self; by God^ appointment all
acts of worship being of Gods own prescribing, and are incumben^ unto all that
are in Covenant relation with him, as all Church Members are until they be
legally dismembered, conditionally; the Churches censures binding persons under
wrath, until they penitently return unto Christian obedience. If
Church Membership be not a sufficient title to claim the benefit of a
Sacrament, as I have stated it, cleared and proved it, we should rather begin
the reforming of our Church at membership (if we can tell how) then at the
Sacrament, the Sacrament being the undoubted right of every Churchmember. If
suspension put persons out of all Church Communion in acts of holy worship,
then they are considered as in the state of Heathens, which is all one with
excommunication. And therefore Mr. Collins has taken a great deal of pains to
prove I know not what, unless it be excommunication under the name of
Juridical suspension, and then what will become of suspension? it will fall of
it is own accord without any further disputing.

Doubtless if there be such a Church censure as suspension, distinct from
excommunication, then we should find something of it in the Scriptures: And in
what cases it should be exercised; if it be a lesser censure, then in reason we
should have some hints from Scriptures, for what sins, or for what want of
qualifications prerequisite unto the Sacrament more then any other Ordinance of
Worship. Now Mr. Collins says, If he can but prove it in any case how
ignorant, heretical or scandalous soever, etc. page 4. Mr. Botemans challenge
will be answered. True, but that still remains to do; and if Mr. Collins fail
in the stating of the question, it is ten to one he is at as great a loss in
his proof.

Therefore I will suppose, that that suspension which Mr. Boteman would have
proved, is this, that a Minister with his two Elders have power, in the Name of
Christ to deny the Sacrament to those that are Church Members and in possession
of the Sacrament, and allow them the privilege of all the other Ordinances of
Worship and Communion in the Church, as members of the same Church. And I
believe Mr. Boteman and I shall never see nor hear that suspension proved by
any whatever, from the Scriptures. And I think that the thing he endeavors to
prove: either he means this, or else the same with excommunication, if he will
allow them no other Communion with the Church then unto Heathens.

Now I come to examine his proof: and his principal examination is this.

To those whom the Sacrament may not lawfully be given, it may lawfully be
denied. But there be some baptized persons in the Church, to whom it may not
lawfully be given.

Ergo,

His Major is granted, Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto Dogs,
neither cast you your pearls before Swine, lest they trample them under their
feet, and turn again and rent you. He is a great deal more large upon this
proof, then he is profitable or pertinent to the business: I shall endtvour
first to give the sense; and then to examine the main of his, for he is too
large for me to transcribe.

I conceive then, That this Text of our blessed Savior is chiefly spoken by
way of counsel and caution unto his Disciples and followers in general,
respecting all that were then present hearers of him at his Sermon upon the
Mount, that gave credit unto his Doctrine, and acknowledged his Person: and
whereas he would not have them give that which is holy to the dogs, he means
private reproofs and admonitions; because those were perilous times in regard
of the cruel carping In fidel Pharisees and Jews, that were such deadly enemies
unto him, and unto all that should speak on his behalf: therefore in reference
to the safety of their persons, he warrants their silence, rather then to put
their persons upon such imminent danger of being rent by that untoward
generation of malicious enemies of Christ; and especially, Christ knowing that
they were given up to a spirit of blindness and hardness of heart, that they
should not repent; and therefore whatever Pearls of Divine Truth were cast unto
them for their good, were to no purpose, they would but slight and scorn them,
and trample them under their feet; so that the reason is double, why he
warrants their filence to such dogs; not only the safety of their persons, but
the unprofitablenesse of their reproofs and holy admonitions; they will but
trample them under feet, etc. Good reason had our blessed Savior thus to
caution his Disciples; for, if I mistake not, Christ himself not long before
was led by such kind of wretched people, unto the brow of a hill, thinking to
have thrown him down headlong; but by a divine power escaped through the midst
of them. If you compare Matthew. 4. with Luke 4. it is probable that it was before
this Sermon.

1. That it was meant of private admonition or reproof, is clear, because it
was before the twelve were so much as all called, much less sent publicly to
preach.

2. It cannot be meant of public Ordinances in the Church of Christ, because
then the old administrations were in form, which all were enjoined to observe;
And the new administrations were not then in being.

3. It could not be meant of the Lords Supper, because it was not instituted
then, nor of two or three years after; therefore those whom he preached unto,
and meant by the word yea, could not be in a capacity to give that holy thing
at all.

4. By Dogs and Swine cannot be meant Disciples, and those that were followers
and adherers unto Christ, for to them is this counsel and moderate merciful
caution given. I do not deny, but this place is applyable unto all times in the
Church upon the same or like reason and occasion, but I think this place is
nothing at all to the Controversy in hand, for I know of none that will plead
for the admission of such that will rent you for giving them the holy Supper.
And as that is no reason why they should deny it to ours, so not the sense of
the place, as by dogs were not meant professors and followers of Christ then,
so not now; but by dogs must needs be understood cruel persecutors of Christ
and the truth of precious doctrine that he taught, and was believed by many.
And therefore when he first sent forth his Disciples to preach the Kingdom of
heaven only to the Jews, Christ gives them the like counsel, Behold, Matthew. 10.
I send you as Sheep among Wolves, be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and
innocent as Doves. And when they persecute you in one City, flee to another.
And shake the dust off your feet against those that will not receive you: but
are ready rather to rent you. You see our blessed Savior compares the
unbelieving Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, and Priests unto Wolves, which are a
kind of wild dogs: the which strengthens the sense I have given. Tell me
where the Prophets or Apostles are forbid to warn, reprove, admonish the Church
(though never so corrupt) in their public dispensations, or forbid to
administer the holy Sacraments unto them; from the like reasons as in the Text.
The Prophets were to give warning, and tell the people of their sins, and of
Gods judgments for their sins, the Pastors and Elders of their several flocks
are to feed the flock of God, and to teach them all observances prescribed by
their Lord. And see that their people know, observe, and do all things that
Christ commands, ruling over them as the heritage of their Lord, and not as if
they were of Belial, Dogs and Swine, whom they may shut out of doors, and
starve them at their pleasure.

Having given this sense, which I doubt not but is nearer the mark, and less
liable unto exceptions then Mr. Collins his sense will appear to be. And is
applyable to men of reproveable spirits now, and in the Church too unto private
Christians, that upon their necessary journey, or otherwise may possibly meet
with such that will not bear reproofs, be it performed with never such wisdom,
but will either fly in the face, or reproach and scorn their reprover. In such
like cases, Christ does warrant his peoples silence. Indeed Mr. Beteman has
done well upon this text; and although it were not very civil for Mr. Collins
to print his brothers Sermon without his consent, and that at second hand too,
himself not hearing it at all. Yet I doubt not but his printing of that Sermon
has done much in taking off, what he so freely asperses and reproacheth him
with, in his long narrative preface.

But in such cases as before the Church, (were she in a capacity) might use her
power to reform such railing dogged offenders.

Mr. Collins queries 1. What is meant by that which is holy, which was forbid
to be given.

2. Who are the Dogs and Swine here spoken of.

3. To whom this precept is directed.

His answer to the first is, That all holy things and pearls are here forbid,
etc. which the Scripture does not elsewhere plainly allow to be given unto Dogs
and Swine.

Secondly, He says he hopes it will easily be granted to concern such holy
things as God has betrusted us Ministers to give out: His reason is, For is is
to men Christ spakes.

How can Mr. Collins be assured,

Private reproofs, instructions, Collins does; nor does he say, give not that
which shall be holy hereafter unto the dogs, within my Church, as Mr. Collins
would have it, but he says, Give not that which is holy, etc. speaking in the
present tense; and then judge whether the holy Supper be here meant, that was
not yet instituted, nor prophesied of. Nay, see how our Author is intoxicated
with his own fancy, that he fetches first such a compass to include it in; and
then so narrows the text again, that he excludes all other holy things out of
it, and will allow no other thing to be meant but the holy Supper only, which
is not to be given unto dogs, says he; this is a fine fetch to prove
suspension indeed, if it would hold, it is certain the Sacrament was not spoken
of in this text at all.

Whereas he says, He hopes it will be granted him, that the text concerns all
such holy things as are betrusted unto Ministers by God himself; for it is men
that Christ speaks unto.

See his reason, What is meant by Dogs and Swine.

His answer to this is something large, in giving the opinion of the learned;
but I shall not meddle with his authorities; but to what himself says in his
15, 16. pages, wherein he shows, that the Scriptures call some men dogs in
several respects; but I shall only examine those which concern the argument in
hand, namely, who are Dogs and Swine in the Church of Christ, whom Ministers
are forbid to give the Sacrament unto, and allow them the benefit of all the
other Ordinances.

To his 1, 2, 3. account, let the indifferent reader look unto his quotations,
and he will be satisfied, that they concern not the argument in hand.

His 4. is, Wicked men both in the Old Testament, Prove. 26.11. and in the New,
2 Pet. 2.22. are called dogs, because as the dog filthily licks up his vomit
again, etc.

That of Solomon is this, As a dog returns to his vomit, so a fool returns to
his folly. Every fool is not a wicked man, yet every wicked man is a fool in
Scripture sense I think: but it does not follow, that every wicked graceless
man is a dog, though he may have some properties like the properties of a dog,
but this is a different property from that in the text, and nothing to the
purpose. That of Peter is meant of Apostates, falling from the Truth and
profession of faith once embraced, like those that St. Paul prophesies of, men
shall arise from among your selves, speaking perverse things, and shall draw
disciples after them, such as these Peter speaks of, that turn from the Truth
unto Error, and upon that account take upon them to be Teachers, that they may
vent their damnable heresies, etc. and so fall away from the true Church,
either to their former vomit of Heathenism, or to wallow in the mire of their
former sensuality; such need not to be suspended, that fall off from the Church
of themselves. This will not reach the argument in hand as to our case.

His 5. is, Heathens are called dogs, Mat. 7.27. and we will yield the argument
so far.

His last is, Sinners in general are called dogs, Phil. 3.2. Beware of dogs,
where he means false teachers, rightly called dogs, says Musculus.

This is fine, Musculus; and yet this he quotes to prove that sinners in
general are called dogs. What, are all sinners in general false Teachers? Then
the grossly ignorant are too; And if false Teachers that pervert and trouble
the Church be rightly called dogs, then offending brethren that adhere to the
doctrine and profession of the Church are but falsely called dogs; for they are
to be admonished as brethren.

Let Mr. Collins show us some Scriptures to prove that Church Members,
disciples or any one that is called a brother, and within, that is an object of
Church Censures, is any where called a dog. Does not himself say, that one that
was excommunicate was to be admonished as a brother, according unto 2 These.
3.15? And does not the Apostle allow a disorderly member the title of a
brother? And would not have such counted an en^my, or dog, (which Mr. Collins
makes of all sinners in general) as before: And so himself too, if he be a
sinner, which I believe he will confess that he is: but me thinks if Mr.
Collins will allow a disorderly stubborn sinner under excommunication to be a
brother, (for so he takes that quotation) then he has little reason to count a
member under the indulgence of the Church a dog, or a swine. The truth is, he
is so miserably out, I think he did not know what he writ; and he had need have
a better head then mine to bring all his ends together in this argument, they
are so wide one from another; and the Church and World so confounded into one,
that I cannot tell what to make of him; For if we say, (says he) that by dogs
are meant the Heathen, as Mark. 7.27. Then either those only, or those amongst
others. (2). If we say the latter, then they yield it.

What does he mean by Heathen amongst others,

I but if we say that the Heathen are the only dogs to whom only holy things
should be denied, then holy things may be given unto Persecutors and the
Excommunicate.

1.

2. That the text is not directed unto Ministers properly, but unto private
Believers or hearers of Christ.

3. That which is holy, is to be understood of private reproofs and
admonitions, which for the safety of their persons, living amongst such Dogs,
and Wolves, as the unbelieving cruel Pharisees, Priests and people of the Jews,
then so called by Christ. And here they are cautioned not to meddle with them,
etc.

4. This counsel is directed unto the whole Church or Brotherhood touching
their dealing with others, that were Persecutors and fierce dogged enemies to
the Christian profesfion; and is not at all applyable to persons in the Church,
in respect of public administrations, the which all in the Church are
commanded to observe; nor is our Saviors reason of any force for any in the
Church, (lest they turn again and rent you) nor applyable to the public
Ordinances; for there is not any that will rent you for administering unto them
the Word, Sacrament, and prayer, in the Church; if any will do so, let the
Church judge them for it.

5. I grant that by dogs is meant cruel persecutors, that at any time shall
rent and ruin the persons of those that profess the true Christian Religion.
And this may be done by some that are not Heathens, for there are many
mis-believers and false teachers, that where they are backed with power, (as in
the Papacy) are cruel dogs against the Professors of the true Religion: but yet
it does not follow, that any that profeesse themselves members of our Church
are the dogs meant in the text. It Is true, we have had our differences amongst
our selves, about some circumstances and inconvenient Ceremonies, about the
ordering of Worship. And our first Reformers put us in a way for discipline,
confirmed by the Supreme Authority of this Nation. And those that had the
exercise of the Churches discipline, have been severe in punishing those that
have not been obedient unto her commands; and we know they abused their power
in some cases too much, under the pretense of singular good ends: Namely, the
order, peace, unity, and edification of the whole, to prevent the common
mischief of factions, schisin, divisions, erroneous doctrine, and the like,
without which, in a Church these evils will abound. Now I say, it is not very
handsome for Mr. Collins, that professes himself a younger son of the Church,
to account the Rulers of our Church Persecutors; much less the common people
for adhering unto their Governors and Teachers: as they shall have better
Rulers, and Teachers, I question not but we shall find them better disposed;
how ever this is a far different case to the cruel unbelieving Jews, and
Heretical bloody Papists, and yet neither of them Pagans.

6. I affirm, That as all other Scripture, so this, in special, is written for
our learning and use; and it always holds in the same, or like cases, or
reason. Whether unto the desperate irreproveable Ruffian in the Church, or of
the bloody Persecutors out of the Church, Jews, Turks, or Papists: and yet I
say also, that whomsoever upon tasting of them, we find them of peaceable
spirits, whether they be in the Church or out of the Church, we should reprove,
instruct, admonish and warn every sinner, to fly the wrath to come: And this
we ought to do toward all, in our places and callings as private Christians.
And hence I conceive that Mr. Collins is hugely mistaken, that stretches the
metaphor of dogs, to any kind of sinners that the Scriptures compare to dogs,
for other kind of properties of dogs, as worthlesnesse, greediness, barking,
or licking up their vomit, etc. the text is of such dogs that will tear and
scorn you for the best counsel you can give them for the good of their souls.

And me thinks, that the same ground Mr. Collins goes upon to allow all the
other holy things unto Heathens, the Excomunicate, etc. might satisfy him, as
rationally to allow the Sacrament unto the ignorant and scandalous in the
Church: all that he pleads to the other is from some other Scripture warrant;
and I appeal unto the Impartial to judge between us, whether Pastors and
Teachers of their respective flocks, be not as much bound by Christ's command to
administer the holy Supper unto their particular flocks, consisting of
Church Members, disciples, baptized and not excommunicated, as to administer
the other holy Ordinances unto Heathen, the Excommunicate, etc. I think I have
said enough as to the former from Mat. 28.20. to give full satisfaction.

Let me tell our Author and the world, Collins quotes it to prove. And thus in
short I have answered to the main of Mr. Collins strength, as touching this
place. And I humbly conceive have broke his argument drawn from this text to
make good his principal Syllogism, page 4. That there may be some baptized
persons in the Church, not cast out, to whom the Sacrament may not lawfully be
given. And he must quit himself a great deal better (then in his book) to make
good his two propositions from this text, before he can conclude any thing for
his purpose. And truly I think it was an acceptable service (both to God and
the poor Church) in Mr. Boteman, who so presently addressed himself to redeem a
captive text, so woefully wrested to perplex and disturb the poor Churches
peace, in seting up an invention of men, which Jesus Christ commanded not.

And for his assumption, That the Sacrament is a holy thing, and a Pearl; and
there may be some in the Church not cast out, who in Scripture phrase are Dogs
and Swine. Ergo, etc.

It Is true, etc. And though it be granted that there are some in the Church
that are such kind of dogs, that are irreproveable, that will not endure a
private reproof, it will not follow that therefore they are not to be reproved
Ministerially by persons in Office in their public preaching; nor that they
may not authoritatively be reproved and admonished, and censured by the Church
Juridically, for their desperate railing dogged miscarriages: if there be any
such offending brethren, why are they not dealt withal according unto the
right rule, Matthew. 18. 1 Cor. 5. If any persons in the Church be objects of
Excommunication, I judge such are; and then judge whether Suspension be
sufficient, where Excommunication should and ought to take place, provided they
be obstinate: otherwise Church admonition may be a sufficient remedy to reform
such scandalous sinners. Hence judge how pertinent this text is made use of to
prove suspension of some from the Sacrament, that as members of the Church may
be allowed Communion with the Church, in all other spiritual acts of worship!
How this proves Suspension of some distinct from Excommunication, I leave to
the freedom of your own Judgments to judge of.

In the next place (without any wrong to the Author) I shall examine his third
Scripture argument deducible from 1 Cor. 5. rather choosing to follow the
Apostles order in this Epistle, because by answering of this first, it will
save me some labor in my answer to his second, 1 Cor. 10.17.

His Argument is this,

It is unlawful for the Officers of the Church to give the Sacrament to such
with whom it is unlawful for themselves or their brethren to eat.

But there may be some in the Church not cast out, with whom it may be unlawful
for the Church to eat.

Ergo.

I question the truth of his first proposition, does not follow therefore, that
I upon my necessary occasions in my Calling must shun such, but that I may set
such a one a work, and admit him to my Table he being not cast out, though
scandalous, or a poor man may work for a scandalous rich man, and eat at his
Table with him, etc. or upon a journey, and diverse such cases, with relations,
etc. Therefore the same persons that I may not eat with, the same persons I may
eat with, so that if the Apostle in 1 Cor. 5.11. mean but civil eating, his
first proposition is not good, nor very clear, which he would have his Reader
to believe without any doubt, or proof.

If we may eat with a scandalous brother not legally cast out as before, the
bottom of his argument: For there is but few Interpreters otherwise expound
it, but of a civil eating. And himself seems most confident in that argument in
its place. And therefore he should have proved his main proposition; namely,
That it is unlawful to give the Sacrament to those in the Church not
Excommunicate, with whom in some cases it is unlawful to eat in a civil sense.
And for to take it, for not to eat at the Sacrament only properly, as it is too
difficult to prove, so it would follow, that he will prove the same, by the
same; for then the sense of his proposition is this: That it is unlawful to
give the Sacrament unto such that we may not give the Sacrament unto: but there
is some not cast out we may not give the Sacrament unto. Ergo.

Take his argument in what sense you can, there is nothing in 1 Cor. 5. to
stand upon, or in the least to make it good: his proof of his Minor falls too
short.

I will grant him, 1. That there may be such in the Church, that the Apostle
calls old leaven.

2. That it is unlawful for the Church to connive at their wickedness, that
was that old leaven, and keep the Feast of the Lords Supper with them: but
what is this for his purpose? himself says it is a plain case, that the Apostle
did chide the Corinths, in that they did not cast out the incestuous person,
that leavened their Communion, by Excommunication, page 35. in this he says
true, and they of Corinth put this Decree into execution, concerning the
incestuous person, as the only remedy to purge themselves of that leaven that
sowred the whole, by their connivence and sinful indulgence. What then? Does it
follow because they were chidden for their neglect of exercising
Church Censures, therefore they were chidden for admistring the Sacrament unto
him before he was Juridically put out of all Communion with them? If the
Apostle had understood that suspension from the Sacrament only, had been a
sufficient remedy to purge the Church, and reform the sinner, then doubtless
he would have blamed them for admitting him to the Sacrament, and he would have
given the remedy in prescribing a rule to suspend him from the Sacrament only:
but as their whole Communion was leavened by their sinful indulgence, so they
were urged to cast that scandalous person out of all Christian Communion,
sacred and civil, with such a one, no not eat; but how does this prove, that
there may be some in the Church not excommunicated, with whom it is unlawful to
eat the Sacrament?

But he goes on with his proof of his second thing. That it is not lawful to
communicate with scandalous sinners, let us therefore keep the Feast, not with
the old leaven of malice and wickedness: from hence is easily gathered, says
he, that Christians ought not to keep the feast with scandalous sinners.

True, I say so too, Corinth did.

But I deny still,

Mr. Collins makes a great deal of do about keeping the Feast, but at last I
think he fastens upon a good honest safe interpretation, page 38. from Isai.
25.6. Where the Lord promises to make a feast of fat things unto all people,
Gentiles, as well as Jews; by which, says he, is promised all Gospel
Ordinances, and a holy Communion with them, in all his Ordinances, etc. and
hence the Sacrament is a part of this Feast, etc. page 39.

But if that be the sense, Collins allows scandalous sinners the liberty of all
the other dishes and parts of this Feast: but being aware of this, he adds,
that the Lord Supper is the only proper Feast of this Feast, that is his sense;
first he will be honest, and let every Gospel Ordinance have a share in this
Feast, and then attributes all to this one, and makes it the proper Feast of
the Feast they was to keep. And he tells us, Doubtless it must be so, because
some Communion with on incestuous person in other Ordinances may be allowed.

Thus you see, let the Scripture say what it will; and although Mr. Collins is
forced to confess his assent unto a rational sense, you may see how his
private opinion and fancy draws him off again, and makes him venture to give
the denomination of this Feast to the Lords Supper only; and it must be so,
because against his own reason and sense he will have it so; is that a reason
to make it good, for some Communion with an incestuous person in other
Ordinances may be allowed, directly contrary to the Apostles decree, and
direction, when he commands them, To put out from amongst your selves that
wicked person, verse the last.

But still the very main thing of his argument wants proof, That there may be
some in the Church, not Excommunicate, with whom it is unlawful for the Church
to eat.

In his proof of this, he must make good these several things.

That in this 5. Cor. the Church was blamed for eating with the scandalous
brother before the Churches trial and censure of Excommunication was inflicted.

That the Church was not leavened for their careless connivence,

That the Church of Corinth had done their duty,

That we are as much forbid the company and civil friendly familiarity in
eating and drinking with a scandalous brother not cast out, as with an
Excommunicate person.

I shall refer my self to those that are learned and sober, if it be not of
necessity to prove those things, before he can conclude from this Chapter, that
there may be some in the Church not cast out, with whom it may be unlawful to
eat the Sacrament, or that the unexcommunicate members should be suspended from
the Sacrament, and allowed the liberty of all other Ordinances in the Church as
members.

But Mr. Collins in stead of making good his Argument, he trifles about making
that word Feast, to be meant only the Sacrament, after he has granted it was
but a part thereof, as it is one Ordinance with the other of Gospel Worship. He
quotes Mr. Gillespy, that tells us this Feast cannot be restrained unto the
Lords Supper only. And Mr. Rutherford, that understands it of Church Communion
in the dainties of the Gospel. And Ravenella, that says it is taken for all
Gospel Worship, from Zach. 14.16, 17, 18. and yet he will go beyond his own
Authors, and prove with reason beyond them all, that by this Feast is meant the
Sacrament only.

I confess I had thought (to prevent tediousness) to have past by his
reasons; but lest he should be wise in his own conceit, I shall take some
notice of them.

All he says amounts to this, surely it were not a civil Feast, nor a Mosaical
Feast, but meant of some spiritual Gospel Feast; and the Supper is a part of
the Gospel Feast, the relation the text has to the Passover, and the liberty
of Communion with an incestuous person in the other Ordinances.

1. Is he sure that all Mosaical Feasts were then out of use?

2. That their Feasts of Charity may have no reference to this Feast? Jude tells
us, that scandalous loose heretical persons in the Church were spots in their
Feasts of Charity. And this scandalous person is said to leaven them, and
nothing more opposite to their Feasts of Charity then to feast together with
malice and wickedness.

3. Is there no difference to be put between that one Sacrifice of Christ
himself once for all, and the Paschal Lamb an outward sign thereof, that the
Apostles analogy must needs be restrained unto the Sacrament succeeding? The
rest have been answered.

Let him prove that the Sacrament is any where called a Feast: it does not
become him to give Jesus Christ a nick name.

I must confess for my own part, I most incline to those that understand by
keeping holy Communion in the Profession of the Gospel thoughout the whole
course of our lives, not denying but that the Sacrament is involved in this
General of a holy life.

And my reasons are these.

The Apostles motive thus to keep the Feast, holds unto all holy duties,

We have always cause of purging out the old leaven out of our own hearts and
lives,

The rule or remedy prescribed in the text,

But what if I should grant him what he can never prove that by Feast is meant
the Sacrament only, will it follow that scandalous brethren must only be left
out, or barely denied the Sacrament only, when the Apostle chides the Church of
Corinth, for not grieving it so, as to provoke them unto zeal, to put away that
person from among them, verse. 2. Besides, if such scandalous sinners in the
Church, as the Apostle reckons up ver. 11. ought not to be excommunicate, then
not any at all, and is it safe for the Church to deny such the Sacrament only,
whom they ought to Excommunicate and put out of all Communion whatsoever?
Suppose the Church had done no more, but put that wicked person from the
Sacrament, do you think they had put that Apostolical sentence into execution,
verse. 4.5. Let him prove that ever any Church in the Apostles age suspended
their members from the Sacrament only, as he would have it. The truth is, he
affects to draw up many syllogisms, but he is not able to prove any one of
them. I could wish he would either study his things better, or else give over
his writing about this controversy.

His second Argument from this text is this,

If there be some in the Church not yet cast out by Excommunication, who are
Fornicators, or covetous, or Idolaters, or Raylers, or Drunkards, or
Extortioners, then there may be so^e in the Church with whom a Christian ought
not to eat the Lords Supper.

But there may be such in the Church. -- Ergo,

He says the Minor will easily be granted, the Major is grounded on 1 Cor.
5.11.

And he further says, all that can be said in this case is, that the eating
there forbidden is not eating the Lords Supper: so says the friends of my
opinion.

If no more can be said and proved but that,

But he is a little too confident,

For 1. the proof of his major does not say that in the Church of Corinth there
were such. But if a man that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, etc. which
implies that there may be such in a true Church, as well as a Brother that was
an incestuous person.

Suppose that there be such in a true Church, guilty of such and such
scandalous sins at any time in the Church, the Church ought to judge them by
putting them out of all Communion, as in that particular case of incest. If
such as the Apostle nominates for scandalous brethren be not objects of
excommunication, not only my self but all reformed Churches in Christendom are
hugely out. Can any have the least show of reason to conceive, that the Apostle
should be so severe against an incestuous person, and the Church for not
putting him away from among them, verse. 2. and say nothing to their conniving
and indulging an Adulterer, Idolater, etc. That were then such guilty persons
known amongst them, as he for incest; or that suppose there were such, can we
imagine that they were suspended from the Sacrament only, as a sufficient
punishment for those sins, as Mr. Collins would; And so upon the matter lose
this Ordinance of Excommunication, except it be for incest? Beloved Friends, I
beseech you mark the Apostles order and scope, and you may easily conceive his
sense; he had wrote an Epistle unto them before, not to company with
fornicators, covetous, Extortioners, or Idolaters of the world, but upon this
occasion of a members miscarriage in the Church, in this Epistle he mollifies
with lenity his former Epistle, and tells them now, yet not altogether forbear
company with such and such of the world, for then you must go out of the
world, but now I have written unto you, not to keep company, not to eat, upon
another stricter account, if a Brother be such a one as an Infidel Pagan is,
put them out of your Communion altogether. And thus he draws out a general
rule from this particular case of the incestuous person; leaving the Infidel
world to the judgment of God, but sets up a judging in the Church for the
destruction of the flesh, that scandalous Brethren may be reformed, and their
souls saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; as I have spoke already. And if I
mistake not, Reverend Calvin speaks to the same purpose, upon the same place,
in his 12. chap. 4. book. 5. Section Of his Institutions. Upon the second end
of Excommunication. It Is true, he says, in the administration of the Supper
choice is greatly requisite, which yet (says he) cannot be had but by the
Jurisdiction of the Church. Then in the second end, least (as it is wont to
come to pass) with the continual company of the evil, the good should be
corrupted. This end the Apostle touched, when he commanded the Corinths to put
the incestuous person out of their company. A little leaven (says he) corrupts
the whole. And he foresaw herein so great a danger that he forbad him all
fellowship, and so applies the 11. verse to the same with the incestuous
person. If any Brother be either a whoremonger, or an Idolater, etc. with such
a one I grant you not leave, so much as to eat. Therefore you may clearly
conceive that Calvin applies that particular instance to be spoke of all other,
the Apostle names in the 11. verse: this Reverend Author would have none
debarred the Sacrament, but by the Jurisdiction of the Church, nor have any
Excommunicate for lesser sins, when the severity of words authoritatively will
amend them: but when they grievously offend the Church; they ought for a time
to be deprived of the Communion of the Supper, till they have given assurance
of their repentance; his ground is 1 Cor. 5.5. thus explaining himself, for
against the Corinthian Paul uses not only rebuking of words, but drives him
out of the Church, etc. What Is this but Excommunication? and yet Mr. Collins
quotes this very place to prove suspension distinct from Excommunication in his
page 140, 141. If he deal thus with his authority, he makes such a noise
withal, no wonder they be not all of his opinion. Then he quotes Vrsin, which
I desire in brief to to give you an account of, he concludes that Vrsin is for
suspension.

1. Because he makes Excommunication the last remedy.

2. Because he has given fourteen reasons to prove that scandalous persons
ought to be kept from the holy Supper.

1. He has not a word of suspension.

2. Must the last remedy necessarily imply suspension, why not severity of
words, private and public admonition, etc. And to his second, he gives
fourteen arguments to prove that the Power of the Keys is necessary in the
Church. And Mr. Collins tells his Reader they are to keep the scandalous from
the Sacrament: but he deals with his Author as he does with Scriptures. But as
touching this Reverend Author, for my purpose;

1. He admits of no other proceedings in the discipline of the Church, but
according to that known rule Matthew. 18.15. and that in all cases of scandal and
open ungodliness.

2. Not to proceed unto Excommunication, but in point of obstinacy persisted in.

3. He defines Excommunication to be the banishing of a grievous transgressor,
or an open ungodly and obstinate person from the fellowship of the faithful, by
the judgment of the Elders, and consent of the Church, and by the Authority of
Christ, and by the holy Scriptures, and then says, when the Church pronounces
of any that they are not godly, they must be excommunicated, and not admitted
unto the Sacrament, etc. in his 5. question upon the Keys of the Kingdom.
Thus you may conceive this quotation of his, directly proves that
Excommunication is that which debars scandalous sinners from the Sacrament, and
not suspension, as Mr. Collins would falsely have it be.

By this time the Reader may easily judge what foundation Mr. Collins has
deducted his argument from: he first mistakes the text, and then rayses his
argument; and thus he has built a Castle in the air. And before he can
conclude any thing to suspend scandalous brethren from the Sacrament, from 1
Cor. 5.11. he must prove that those that the Apostle speaks of, were not
Excommunicate, or that he speaks to the case of scandalous brethren in the
Church, in the want of Church Discipline. I must confess with grief of heart,
that his Minor is true, that there are such scandalous sinners in o^^ Church,
that the Apostle does instance i^ 1 Cor. 5.11. and not Excommunicate; but where
does any Scripture forbid to keep company, not to eat, as in case they were
Juridically Excommunicate? A difference must be made between a Brother under
Church toleration, and a brother under Church Excommunication, or else Church
censures are merely superfluous; and to n^ purpose, if we be as much bound to
withdraw Communion to the one, as to the other, in respect of holy and civil
fellowship together. So that his dispute about not keep company, not to eat,
with scandalous Brethren not Excommunicate, is nothing at all to the Text, nor
to his Argument, for we are all agreed in this, that the Excommunicate person
may not come to the Sacrament, nor during that censure, may we keep company,
and as Calvin renders it, the Apostle would not grant them leave so much as to
eat with such, (the necessity of relation excepted) but as touching an offender
in the Church not Juridically proceeded against, Mr. Collins doubts not, nor
any that are sober, but upon our necessary occasions as our several callings
lead us unto, we may keep company, we may eat, and take more liberty of
familiarity with such then with Heathens, did we live amongst them as the
Corinthians did. Yet doubtless all unnecessary intimate friendly familiarity
is to be declined with scandalous brethren, the Church not being in a capacity
to judge them, or neglects her duty through carelessness: but this is more then
this text will bear too, but yet is consonant unto other parts of holy
Scriptures, etc.

From the Apostles scope in this chapter, I shall assert these things.

That Church censures are of such necessity,

If the Church of Corinth were leavened with indulging of one scandalous
Brother,

If the Church of Corinth was thus chidden by the Apostle for their neglect of
Discipline unto one scandalous member,

That a true Church of Christ may possibly have such scandalous members in it,

That scandalous persons in the Church,

That less familiarity in civil and sacred Communion is allowed to the
Excommunicate,

That the Apostle urges a general rule for the excommunicating of all
scandalous brethren in the Church,

That the main and proper end of Excommunication,

Here is not one word in this Chapter for Suspension from the Sacrament only;
hence we may do things that are commanded and lawful with scandalous brethren
not cast out by Excommunication.

Although this incestuous person was in Church Communion and fellowship with
them in all the Ordinances,

The Apostle no where says, ex tempore, etc. with such do not eat, but he
instances in scandalous sins only.

I confess Mr. Collins has a great many words about this, no not eat with
such, which had he applied to a Brother Excommunicate, it would be yielded him;
but his argument is a different thing; for it is of a Brother not cast out by
Excommunication.

1. Can any disoblige a brother from his necessary duties of instituted
Worship, that is not under the binding power of the keys of Christ's Kingdom?

2. Are we as much to decline friendly familiarity to a scandalous brother
within, and not so much as brought to his trial, as to one that is cast out for
continuing obstinate in his sin?

3. As the case does not hold so much as to necessary company, and civil
eating, (as has been hinted) much less will it hold in duties of commanded
worship. Christ's commands are of more force to oblige his visible subjects,
then the private prohibitions of a single Pastor with his intruded Elders. It Is
true, they can excommunicate, as well as suspend from the Sacrament; but I
humbly desire such to be sure that they are entrusted with the exercise of
Church Discipline of binding and loosing, before they put it into execution.

Now I shall examine what he has drawn from 1 Cor. 10.21. to prove suspension
distinct from Excommunication; his argument is this:

It is unlawful to give the Sacrament to those that cannot eat or drink it, but
there may be some in the Church (not excommunicated) who cannot drink of the
Lords Cup. -- Ergo.

In his explaining the terms, he understands cannot eat, in a moral sense, and
then the sense is, you cannot lawfully and warrantably eat and drink the Cup of
the Lord, and the cup of Devils: the sum of all is,

1. Such as God has forbidden to come to that Ordinance.

Or, 2. Such as if they rush upon the Ordinance, yet can have no Communion with
Christ, no benefit by it: this he makes to be the sense, and then doubts not
but he shall make good his argument, page 27, 28, 29.

Give me leave to search into the Apostles sense, and then examine how Mr.
Collins and the holy Apostle do agree in the sense of this Text, 1 Cor. 10.21.

I have said something unto this already upon another account; I will be as
brief as I can. This is the fourth public fault the Apostle deals with the
Corinthians about.

First, he chides them for their factious respect had about their Ministers,
upon which they ran into divisions, and making of parties, chap. 1.3.

Secondly, he chides them for indulging and tolerating a known member amongst
them in an incestuous marriage, which has been largely handled, chap. 5.

Thirdly, he chides them for their unnecessary suits of Law, Brother with
Brother in Infidel Courts before Heathen Judges.

Fourthly, he blames them for eating of things offered in Sacrifice unto Idols,
at their Idolatrous Festivals in the Idol Temple, chap. 8. And to that end he
might reform them, and take them off that were guilty; as in the other
different faults, he applied himself unto them with different remedies, and
means of reforming, (which would be too tedious to speak unto) so here in this
as it is a different fault he deals with the offenders in a different way to
the former.

His concession with them,



1. In respect of the Heathen that out of conscience eat it, as a thing offered
unto the Idol, the presence of Christians emboldened them in their Idolatry.

2. In respect of weak Brethren, that have not that clear knowledge in the
nature of the thing it self, as some had; which upon such Precedents was ready
to venture upon the same practice, and not having knowledge of himself, his
conscience were defiled by the liberty and practice of the other, v. 10. and so
by consequence it became a sin unto the strong, verse. 12. etc.

3. Then he comes to persuade with them to forbear that practice upon several
considerations and reasons.

1. He urges Christian Charity in order unto the edification of others, before
knowledge in their liberty, so as to use it to the prejudice of the weak.

2. Tells them his own tenderness in such a case, rather then he by meat should
make his brother to offend, he would eat no flesh while the world stands.

3. Then commends unto them himself and Barnabas, for an ensample in another
case, chapter 9. That although they had power as well as other Apostles, to marry,
and require maintenance from them, which was no more then Christ had ordained
and appointed for the Preachers of the Gospel, yet they used not this power,
nor required any such maintenance from them: and though he was free from all,
yet he became servant unto all, to the Jew he became a Jew, to the weak he
became as weak, that he might save some; and this he did for the Gospel sake,
etc. and then applies it, Know ye not that they which run in a race run all,
even so run that you may obtain; even as himself denied himself in many things
(which he might have looked after) for their sakes and the Gospels; looking for
a better prize or reward hereafter, so he would have them to deny themselves in
some things, that they might do, rather then to cause their Brother to offend
so uncharitably, But in the 10. chapter he comes more close, and adds several
arguments taken from their relation they had to God, as they were of his Church
and people, and invested with such privileges of gifts and graces, and of
Church Ordinances, in which they had Communion with Christ, and one with
another, as he instances in Sacramental Communion, etc. Well this he yields
unto them, and then draws his argument,

1. From the Church of the Jews; they were related unto God as near as we can
be, and they had the same Sacraments and other peculiar Ordinances of Gods own
prescribing; yet notwithstanding the Lord often punished them for their sins, I
and for as small sins as some of them were guilty of; and therefore he would
have the Corinthians (and all others) be warned and admonished by such
precedents of Gods severity toward his own; the particular instances thereof
are written for our admonition. Wherefore let him that think he stands, take
caution, lest he falls. It Is a dangerous thing to go to the outside of your
liberty, and to put your selves upon such dangerous temptations, as to go into
the Idol Temple to feast with Idolaters. Gods people before time have been
drawn into Idolatry by such temptations; and so might they. And yet see the
tenderness and the good opinion the Apostle had of them, he mingles his sharp
with some sweet, telling them, that although some of them had miscarryed, in
this very thing, yet there has no temptation taken you but what is common unto
frail imperfect man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be
tempted above that ye are able, etc. And hence exhorts to decline the
temptation, v. 14. Wherefore my beloved Brethren flee from Idolatry: Two things
to be noted,

1. He does not call them Idolaters, but his beloved Brethren that were guilty
of this fault.

2. He does not charge them with flat Idolatry, but is earnest to persuade them
to flee the temptations, appearances, occasions of Idolatry.

He spoke unto wise men, that as they gave offense this way, so they were able
to judge of his arguments and manner of dealing with them; still yielding unto
them their deserts, that his arguments might the better take with them to
reform them: but still goes on with further considerations, that might further
convince them, and be prevailing to reform the evil, by commending unto them
the consideration of their Sacramental Communion, verse. 16, 17. comprehending
all, The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood
of Christ? Doubtless it was unto the whole Church in a Sacramental sense, as
follows, For we being many are one bread, and one body, for we are all
partakers of that one bread, even those that were in fault were a part of that
(many) and (all) we are all partakers of that one Sacramental bread, and
consequently of Christ Sacramentally; as he gives a proof thereof, verse. 18.
Behold Israel after the flesh, are not they which eat of the Sacrifices
partakers of the Altar? this they could not deny, but must yield it, What say I
then? that the Idol is any thing? or that which is offered in Sacrifice to
Idols is any thing? He grants them that still which they so much stood upon,
but yet he says, This is something that the things which the Gentiles
sacrifice they sacrifice unto Devils, and not to God; and I would not that you
should have fellowship with Devils; That Is the consequence; and here lies the
argument, If, as you are Christians by eating the instituted bread, you have
Communion together, and partake of Christ the end of that bread, then as you
eat and partake with the Gentiles in those things that are consecrated and
sacrificed to the Devil, you have communion with Devils; or as Israel which
eat of the Sacrifices of the Altar were partakers of the Altar; even so
Christians with Heathens that eat of the things sacrificed unto Devils, were
partakers of Devils. This by consequence was a greater evil then they were
aware of; and therefore he tells them, I would not that you should have
fellowship with Devils; which had they been aware of, doubtless they would
have declined it. The Apostle having thus brought the sin home, by such an
argument that could not be evaded, then he concludes from hence, that you
cannot drink of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of Devils. Ye cannot be
partakers of the Table of the Lord, and of the table of Devils. Do you provoke
the Lord to jealousy, are you stronger then he, etc. verse. 21, 22. Well, now
we are come to the place that Mr. Collins makes the very bottom of his
argument, You cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils, etc.
That I conceive is to be understood thus; so long as they professed themselves
for Christ, and continued in his visible body the Church, and were partakers of
the Sacramental Communion with Christ, they could not without sin drink the cup
of Devils, and be partakers of the table of Devils: there was such a direct
opposition in these two Tables, that it was a thing inconsistent, or a
contradiction for one to partake of both: as a Heathen might not drink the cup
of the Lord, so a Christian might not drink the cup of Devils, there was a
diametrical opposition in these two, even as much as Christ and Belial.
Accordingly our blessed Savior in another case, No man can serve two Masters,
that is, two Masters directly contrary: ye cannot serve God and Mammom. And so
Elijah, If the Lord be God, follow him; if Baal be God, follow him; they could
not follow both: who will or can imagine that our Savior spoke this to forbid
such to serve God? Or that Elijah forbid the Israelites to follow God, because
he said they could not follow both? And yet Mr. Collins strength of fancy has
wryed his reason, that he will have the Corinths forbid the Sacrament, and
their serving of God therein, because they could not do both. The Apostle's
end in writing is to reform the evil, by forbidding them the cup of Devils; but
Mr. Collins end in writing is to forbid them the cup of the Lord, and that is
all the reformation that he drives at.

But the Apostle goes on and grants as much at the last as he did at the first,
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient, all things are
lawful, but all things edify not, verse. 23, 24. meaning the things that were
sacrificed unto Idols, upon the same account as at first, that an Idol is
nothing in the world, chap. 8. But the thing was inexpedient, and uncharitable,
did rather destroy then edify my self or brother, and therefore advises not
to seek our own, but every man another wealth, etc. And so he has done with
that, only he hints at another case, upon their civil and necessary occasions,
if they bought any such meat at the shambles, they might lawfully eat it
without scruple of conscience; nay further, if an unbeliever should bid a
Christian to a civil feast, he leaves them to their own liberty to go and eat
whatsoever was set before them. But I have been too long already, yet I was
willing to search after the true sense of the place, which is not easily
discerned, unless we mind heedfully the scope, especially when a thing is in
an intricate case, and so much reasoning largely held out, proving that to be
evil by consequence, as clothed with some circumstances, which in it is self,
in its own nature is lawful and good, as here; Now I shall examine Mr. Coll.
argument what bottom it stands on, his argument is, It Is unlawful to give the
Sacrament unto those that cannot eat it, But there may be some in the Church
(not Excommunicate) who cannot drink of the Lords cup -- Ergo, etc. His Major
he says, is proved, verse. 21.

I will confess that in this place we have the Sacrament spoken of, and that
those that the Apostle blames for drinking the cup of Devils, were not
Excommunicate: but yet I deny that it was unlawful to give the Sacrament to
such;

For 1. it is a great question, and will require some time for Mr. Collins to
prove, That eating of things offered unto Idols, was a sin that came within the
verge of the Church to punish with putting such out of Sacramental Communion.
In the 5. chapter as I take it, those that the Apostle deals with in the 10.
Chapter, are not in that particular list, verse. 11. which the Church was to
judge: doubtless if they had been such Idolaters, that in the 5. chap. 11. he
speaks of, he would have threatened the rod, and given order unto the Elders of
the Church to put out of their Communion such Idolaters: for their connivence
at Idolaters would leaven the lump, as well as an incestuous person; but herein
not a word of any such thing. But he will be ready to say, The Apostle spoke of
putting out of Com^union before in the 5. chap. therefore it was not necessary
to repeat it again in the 10. I, but how will these things hang together?

1. To give a charge to the Church to cast out Idolaters, and then himself
using such mildness of speech, and variety of argumentation, as I have showed,
to convince them that it was a sin, granting the thing in it self lawful, but
evil in respect of some circumstances.

2. The main argument to prove their eating and drinking in the Idol Temple to
be a sin, was drawn from the nature of the Sacrament, in which themselves, as
Christians, are said to have Communion with Christ, by being partakers of the
cup and bread consicrated for to represent the body and blood of Christ; in
like manner they were said to have Communion with Devils, by being partakers of
the cup and meat in the Idol Temple, that was consecrated and offered unto
Idols: and hence the Apostle would not have them to have Communion with Devils;
as all his other reasons, so this tends solely to reform them in that
particular of eating in the Idol Temple, and not a word of forbidding any such
the Sacrament, as Mr. Collins would have it, when he says, The sum is, they
who cannot drink the cup of the Lord, are either

1. Such as God has forbidden coming thither.

2. Or those that can have no Communion with Christ, nor benefit by this
Ordinance.

Those that give credit to that sense, Collins fancy, then the sense of holy
Scriptures; what are any of those two, to the text in hand? was any forbid the
Sacrament that eat of things offered unto Idols?

2. Does not the Apostle affirm, that they all had Communion with Christ in
partaking of the cup of blessings? Is not that the very medium of his argument?
the Apostle argues from their Sacramental Communion as Christians, to decline
Communion with Idolaters. Mr. Collins argues from their Communion with Idols,
to a none Communion as Christians. And thus the Judicious Reader may easily
judge of the soundation of his argument, who out of an inconsiderate rashness
most grossly runs upon mistake, and thence forms a silly syllogism, page 29. I
grant it a sin to deliver the Sacrament to those whom we know God has forbid
it. But I deny that these of Corinth spoken of are in the least, so much as
blamed, or in the least tittle forbid the Sacrament, the Apostle proves they
all took it, and had Communion in Christ in it.

I wonder that ever a man pretending unto sober principles, should be so fond
as to think, (that those that the Apostles writes to as Saints, sanctified in
Christ Jesus, his dearly beloved Brethren, and writing unto them as wise men,
and such that had great gifts, and largeness of knowledge in their liberties
by Jesus Christ, that knew an Idol was nothing in the world, and that which was
offered was never the worse, every creature of God was good, and not to be
resused, etc. as the Apostle yields) I say, how he comes to think that these
should be forbidden the Sacrament, and to be such as could not have Communion
with Christ, makes me wonder: if Saints, and the Apostles dearly beloved
Brethren, whom he argues so friendly with, were not under Christ's command of
this necessary observance in the Church, then here is not any that are, but I
have said enough to this already, and all that he says to this text is most
irrational and impertinent, to prove that some in the Church not
excommunicated, ought to be denied the Sacrament; this place proves that they
did all partake of that one Sacramental bread, 1 Cor. 10.17. and puts the thing
past questioning. He has more things in making good his argument, but having
plucked up his ground work, it is too tedious both for me to write, and you to
read the confutation of the rest; for it will fall of it self, you must grant
him what he says to be true, because he says it, for he is not able in the
least to bring any one argument from Scripture to prove suspension distinct
from Excommunication, as himself states it.

I will trouble you but with two things more of his in this argument; for now I
intend brevity in all he has further to say in defense of Suspension; for I
know not any one thing more much material, that I have not fully answered in
the former discourse, in order to his several exceptions against the Bar
removed.

He says, He hopes we have all too reverend thoughts of the wisdom of God, to
think that he should lay an obligation upon his Ministers to give this
Ordinance unto them, whom he has warned upon pain of damnation not to take it.

What is this but to beg the question, Corinths were threatened or punished for
any scandalous sins committed before they came, or for admitting any scandalous
brethren at all; but only for their actual miscarriage in the very act of
administration. I have said more for the negative, then Mr. Collins will be
able to answer this two days.

He says, None can without sin knowingly expose the Ordinance of God to
necessary abuse and profanation: but to administer it to one that cannot have
Communion with Christ profanes it. -- Ergo.

Let him prove the consequence if he can.

1. The Apostle proves that all the Corinthians that drank of the Lords cup,
and eat of that bread, had Communion with Christ, and he says, We that are
many are one bread, chapter 10.16, 17. And doubtless those that made divisions,
and lived in incest, and eat of things offered unto Idols, and that oppressed one
another by needless and scandalous suits at law in the Heathen Courts; and
those that were guilty of such great schisms and disorders in the Church, were
a part of that many. The very outward actions of eating and drinking according
to the institution is a Sacramental Communion, which is a holy Communion in the
relation the signs have to the thing signified thereby: And in the relation
the receiver has to the benefit and profit thereof, Sacraments being
instituted to that end for the Church; as has been proved.

But he tells us how a thing is abused.

1. When it is not turned to a right use.

2. When no difference is put between the holy and profane, Ezekiel. 22.26.

The first is answered,

He says further, That he cannot see but every scandalous sinner, Drunkard,
Swearer, Adulterer, etc. has as great a fellowship with Devils, as the
Corinthians had.

He must see a great deal more fellowship with devils in such, Corinthians, or
else he can conclude nothing for his purpose; for it is certain the Corinthians
were not kept from the Sacrament, nor forbid it upon that account.

His first argument for Suspension is,

That nothing is lawful in the worship of God, but what we have precept or
president for: but to give the Sacrament to such as are visibly scandalous, not
Excommunicate, is to do that in the worship of God which neither precept nor
example does justify. -- Ergo, Sacraments are parts of institute worship, and
in the administrations we are to be guided according to the precepts given,
upon the institution of them; and according to the example of the Lord Jesus,
who at the first institution of the Supper gave us an example for the perpetual
celebration of it, etc. p. 51, 52.

His Major is good, Churches always practiced, and yielded unto their members.
And so long as our Antagonists own our Church for the Church of Christ, and our
members true members of the Church, they do but discover their own nakedness
in all they say against us, and what is this argument in hand but the same with
the Anabaptists, if not a great deal less rational, then they use it for? Had
we but that clear precept, or precedent for Insant baptism, that we have for
baptized members of the visible Church, to receive the Sacrament in remembrance
of Christ; I doubt not but there is hundreds of those that would quit the
argument, and reform their practice. Christ says to his Disciples when it was
first instituted, drink ye all of it. The Apostle Paul understands this
precept, as respecting the whole Church of Corinth, for he directs that Church
in general to act according to the institution of Christ; for he delivered what
he received from the Evangelists that did hear and see the institution. That
question about Judas is not very material to the Controversy, whether he did
receive the Sacrament or not: it is certain he eat the Passover, and what was
the Paschal Lamb, but a sign of the body and blood of Christ? and the Bread
and the Wine is no more. Besides he might have taken the Sacrament if he had
had a mind to have continued with them during that service, who hindered him
or forbad him? if he did not, he had done better to have adhered unto Christ in
the observance of his holy Ordinances, (though but a hypocrite,) then by giving
way to the Devils temptation to turn his back upon Gods Ordinance, and seek for
opportunity how to betray his Lord and Master into the hands of his bloody
enemies; but for my own part I incline to believe that Judas did receive the
Sacrament, but I need not trouble my self with that dispute.

I have said enough as from that of Matthew. 28.19, 20. compared with 1 Cor.
11.24. to satisfy any that are impartial. I need add no more in proof of
this, that it is a duty incumbent upon all Church Members to observe the
Sacrament, as any other public duties of Worship. This we shall with more
case and less time make good against all opposition of men, then our
adversaries who oppose us, will free themselves from what the Pharisees were
charged withal, namely, in making void the commands of God, by their own
Traditions.

As for Precedents, the Analogy of the Passover, the practice of the
Apostolical Churches, which have been urged sufficiently to satisfy any that
are sober of the Presbyterians judgment, that have not such clearness of
reason from the Analogy of circumcision, nor new Testament Precedents for
Infant baptism, as we for free admission of Church Members baptized, and not
excommunicated, unto the Supper, and hence were they but as rational in the one
as the other, the controversy would cease amongst us that are for a National
Church.

I proceed unto his sixth Argument,

If there may be some in the Church not yet cast out, with whom the Communion
of the Church cannot be pure; then there may be some in the Church not
Excommunicate whom the Officers may not without sin admit to the Lords Supper.

But there may be some such in the Church. -- Ergo,

His proof of the proposition is,

1. That it is the duty of the Officers of the Church to keep the fellowship of
the Church pure. This, he says, none will deny: but if any be inclined to deny
it, he should do well,

First, To think to what end the rod of discipline is put into their hands.

Secondly, How to expound 1 Cor. 5.7. and those many other Texts that look this
way, page 86, 87.

2. That it is their special duty to keep the fellowship of the Church pure, as
to this Ordinance, as this was proved before from 1 Cor. 5.8. so it is c^ar from
reason; it is apparent, that of all other Ordinances, this Ordinance alone is
appointed for such as have something of grace in them.

I grant that it is the duty of the Rulers of the Church to use all necessary
and lawful means to preserve the purity of Church Communion in all acts of
public Worship.

I grant that they are in a special manner to take care to keep the Communion
of the Church pure, Cor. 5.7, 8, 13. has been examined already, and proves no
such thing: let it be proved that the Communion of that Church was leavened for
admitting one that was scandalous to the Sacrament, or that their Communion is
that Ordinance was polluted, by their connivence toward him: or that to deny
him the Sacrament was a sufficient remedy both to reform the offender, and to
purge out the old leaven wherewith they were leavened: if the Text will bear
none of these things, what is it quoted for? The Rod of Discipline it is
expressed clearly from the text, was to reform the sinner, with the salvation
of his soul, and the Church by doing her duty is correcting, with this merciful
end, did clear and purge her self from that sinful connivence and toleration of
such a one. And if this purging was not by excommunication, then I am out, if
it was, then Mr. Collins is quite out in quoting it, and he has said nothing
in laying the foundation of his argument, as to the keeping of the Sacramental
Communion pure by Suspension. I beseech you mark, for in this very argument
many are very much perplexed, as if the only end of discipline were to preserve
the Communion of the Church pure only at the Sacrament, and as if the greatest
impurity of Communion in the Church lay in the admitting of ignorant
unregenerate scandalous brethren unto the Sacrament: whereas I dare be bold to
affirm, that to receive the Sacrament is as much the duth of any such, as they
are Church Members and within, as any other duty of public worship whatever;
and their obedience in that observance is as well pleasing and acceptable unto
the Lord (they coming as prepared as they can) as any observance in the Church.
And if it was not for the correcting of such things that are in their own
nature sinful, such as are nominated, 1 Cor. 5.11. there would be no need of
Church discipline. The main end of discipline is to reform that which is evil
in Church Members, and to encourage unto well doing, that every member may be
obedient in all things. And for Mr. Collins to say, that the Sacrament alone is
appointed for such as have something of grace in them, is only his bare saying,
and does clash with the command of Christ, as also with the peace, edification,
charity, and unity of the Church.

But he says further, The Word is called the bread of life, and it is to be
offered to dead souls. Heathens were ever admitted to hear, and profane persons
are the objects of discipline. The Excommunicate may hear, and ought to be
admonished as brethren. That he knows not wherein the Officers can have any
work to keep the Communion of a Church pure, if not in this Ordinance, a^ to
this, the Scripture says it cannot be pertaked of worthily, without examining
our selves and discerning the Lords Body.

It Is true,

Or, 2. Therefore Church Members may hear; but the question is, whether he will
allow a Christian to hear as a member, or as a Heathen. The profane are the
objects of discipline: What them? Must they not pray, hear, receive, until
they be cast out by it? Are they objects of nothing else? How are they objects
of discipline that were never admitted unto the Sacrament? Can you suspend them
from that they never had? wherein are such more objects of discipline then
those that are without; who may hear, and pray, and be present at every
Ordinance as well as the other that are within? Then he says, The
Excommunicate may hear, and ought to be admonished as brethren. Very good; it is
well the Excommunicate may have the title of Brethren; but as ill that those in
the Church whom we cannot charge with obstinacy, until it be Juridically
tried, shall have the odious terms of Hogs, and Dogs, profane, etc.

He knows not wherein the Officers of a Church, can have any work to keep the
Communion of the Church pure, if not in the Sacrament.

What, does all their work lie, in that?

1. Is no care to be had how men profane all the other Ordinances by their
sleeping, talking, laughing, and disturbing the Minister and others, in holy
Worship?

2. Is not care to be had that the doctrine be holy, and sound, even the Word
of the Lord, that is taught? That the Worship of Prayer be performed with
soundness of words suitable to the necessities of the people, and with such
devotion and affection becoming Worship?

3. Is not care to be had that the Sacraments be rightly administered according
unto the institution, without superstitious addings unto, or detracting from
them?

4. Is not care to be had to admonish, rebuke the unruly, and to excommunicate
the obstinate, to reform and amend them in order to their spiritual good? And
is this and the former no work, if the Officers may not suspend from the
Sacrament only? The truth is, he puts so much in this, that he makes nothing of
all other work that the Scriptures clearly teach; allow him but suspension,
which he has unnecessarily engaged himself to prove, and he will give you an
acquittance, or a release from Excommunication; keep but from the Sacrament,
you need not fear any examination, adomonition, or excommunication; if you can
but dispense with your conscience carelessely to neglect this Ordinance, you
may freely enjoy all the rest as well as a Heathen, or an Excommunicate person.
Nay, it may be, if you will but keep from the Sacrament, he will allow you the
title of Brethren, as well as an Excommunicate person: but if you will not be
satisfied unless you may receive the Sacrament in remembrance of Christ for
remission of sins, then you must look to be called Hogs, and Dogs, unbelievers,
murderers of Christ, the profane world, that are without hope and God in the
world. This argument of his does better become a Brownist, then one that
pretends to a friendly owning of our Church; but the poor Church may say; these
slanders, divisions, Separations, and confusions, are the wounds that she has
received by the hands of such friends. All that he says in proof of his Minor
has been sufficiently answered already, both by my learned friend Mr. Humfrey,
and my self; I intend brevity, for there is nothing left in his following
arguments much considerable. His seventh Argument,

Either it is lawful for the Officers to deny the Sacrament to such as they
find ignorant, scandalous and impenitent, or they are bound to give into such.
But they are not bound to give it to such, -- Ergo.

His proof of the Minor is, The Officers are not bound to administer the
Ordinance to those who they know are not bound to receive it, but the ignorant
and scandalous are visibly such as are not bound to receive it. -- Ergo.

His main proof of this Minor is this, If such be bound to receive, then they
are bound to make themselves guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and to eat
and drink their own damnation, which are strange things for a man to be bound
in conscience unto.

This argument is wholly founded upon that gross mistake of personal
unworthiness,

If none may be suspended but those who are excommunicated, then none must be
kept away but those that are contumacious.

But some may be kept away who are not contumacious. -- Ergo. The major is
plain, Mat. 18.

The minor only needs proof (says he) 1. Surely those that are under
admonition are to be kept away.

2. Suppose one should come to the Minister the morning he were to receive, and
blaspheme Christ; and tell him he came for nothing, but to abuse the Church; or
suppose a Minister should know one of his people had committed murder, theft,
incest, whoredom the night before, etc. shall such be admitted, they not being
excommunicate? if not, then there is suspension distinct from Excommunication,
page 98.

The Major admits of some question, Matthew. 18.15. speaks not very clearly unto
all cases; that instance is of particular trespasses between private brethren,
which are things of a lesser nature, yet these persisted in unto contumacy
after the Churches admonition makes one liable unto Excommunication; but I
question whether all public notorious open scandalous sinners in the Church,
be thus to be proceeded against, especially when their scandalous sinning is of
long continuance, and does offend the Congregation: the whole Congregation in
such a case is to be satisfied, which cannot be by a private repentance (should
it be supposed) upon the admonitionof the Church. I think the incestuous
Corinth was not dealt withal according to that rule, Matthew. 18.15. Public
sins should have public shame, that others may fear, and the offender be
brought to a serious and notorious repentance, before the Church declare
themselves satisfied, and receive them into holy Communion; so that I think for
the Church to proceed gradually in some cases, as such as Mr. Collins does
instance in, is not always necessary, nor to wait until the offender appears
to be obstinate, but ipso facto to be forthwith censured. But these cases are
not to be left to the discretion of every particular Pastor to judge of, but to
the discretion and grave judgment of the ruling part of the whole Church.
Besides, I question whether one that has been often reproved in the public
Ministry, and yet lives in scandalous sins of whoredom, drunkenness, cursing
and swearing, variance and contention, etc. is not to be judged contumacious,
and upon that account, the Church being in a capacity, and informed, should
upon sufficient proof without delay Excommunicate him. I leave these things to
better Judgments, but yet I am inclinable to conceive, that Matthew. 18. most
properly respects private trespasses which are not openly known, and how that
rule should hold to be applied in the same manner to open scandals, that cause
the name of God, and the true profession of Religion to be blasphemed and
reproached, I am not very clear.

But now we shall examine his Minor, But some may be kept away from the
Sacrament that are not contumacious.

So may some be Excommunicate that are not contumacious, as I have hinted at,

But he says surely, Those that are under admonition are to be kept away.

This he begs; how will he prove it? For where the offense will admit of
hearing the Churches admonition, and upon that give hope or satisfaction of
amendment, why should they be kept from the Sacrament more then the other
Ordinances? they not being authoritatively put out of Church Communion, is it
rational for to execute, before sentence be given?

Unto his suppositions, I shall answer him, first they are no proof.

If such may be Juridically suspended,

Murder, of the course of civil Courts of Justice.

If one should grant that in an extraordinary case, Collins need not have been
so hasty in aspersing Mr. Boteman, page 98. unless he could in some ordinary
case prove Juridical Suspension from the Sacrament distinct from
Excommunication, the which he has not yet done, and it is a great question
whether he ever will or can.

It Is true,

For 1. this was only in case of obstinacy, being dealt with all by the
Minister, who was by the Canons and Rubric of the Church authorized thus to
do.

2. Such acts of discipline were subject to the Churches judgment and censure
afterward; the persons conceiving themselves wronged might complain, and those
Ministers were liable to be censured for going beyond the rule, as some have
been suspended from officiating themselves, for putting persons by, upon
slender proof, even such as their Ordinary upon hearing did not judge competent.

3. The Church urged the act of receiving as a necessary duty incumbent upon
all of years, and upon that ground both earnestly exhorted all to come, and
punished those that carelessly neglected it.

4. The Churches Jurisdiction consisted of Excommunication only in case of
obstinacy, but in case of penitency, admonition, and public penance, the
offenders confession of his sins (humbly in the body of the Church) craving the
forgiveness of their sin in particular, both of God and the Church, did free
from Excommunication: The obstinate was denied all the Ordinances, except to
hear the Sermon at the Church doors, or behind the Font, the penitent not
denied any one Ordinance: lay these things together, and then let wise men
judge how our Church heretofore does precedent the Suspension which Mr. Collins
contends for; namely, that a Minister by virtue of his Office, with his Elders
may, and ought upon Scripture ground to deny some the Sicrament (not obstinate)
and allow them the privilege of all other Church Communion as Members. And
this he would have Juridical, although the Church be in no capacity to empower
them with any acts of discipline at all, nor have the help of appeals to
restrain the rash proceedings of inconsiderate uncharitable zealous Ministers,
whose principles tend too much to division, Separation, and confusion in the
Church, who would be more careful to further the edification, peace, and unity
of the Church, were themselves under the rod of holy discipline Juridically
exercised by grave, learned, experienced presidents, which particular
Presbyters in reason will not be very zealous for, so long as themselves are
left to themselves to exercise an absolute power, to rule as they please in
their own Congregation without control. I wish these petty irregular
reformings prove not the greatest remora's that hinder the reformation, peace,
and edification of the whole, especially where particular Pastors and Elders
are of Mr. Collins opinion.

1. That makes a mere nothing of Church Membership without grace.

2. That will allow them no other Covenant relation then to Heathens.

3. That will not so much as allow them the external titles of Brethren,
Saints, Believers, within, but reproach them with the odious names of Hogs and
Dogs, unbelievers, and of the Devil, etc. though they he such as never had the
benefit and help of holy discipline to amend them, or try whether they sin out
of weakness or wilfulness.

4. That will take upon him in his own name to dissolve them from Christ's
commands, and threaten them not to do it upon pain of damnation.

5. That will make the Sacrament strong meat, that cannot be digested by weak
doubting Christians.

6. That knows not wherein the Officers can have any work to keep the Communion
of the Church pure, if not in the Sacrament.

7. That will allow no more privilege in duties of worship to the ignorant and
scandalous, then to Heathens out of the Church.

8. That does insolently affirm that a single Pastor alone, may lawfully
suspend from the Sacrament, he being the ruling part of that particular Church.

9. That upon the matter puts the whole of discipline in Suspension from the
Lords Supper, either making it the same with Excommunication, or else renders
Excommunication needless in the Church. Are men thus leavened with Brownism,
fit to be rulers in the Church of God? Or like to preserve the peace, unity,
edification, and seek reformation of the whole, according to the general rules
and ends prescribed in the Scriptures? I appeal to the standing rule of
Sciptures to judge, whether such as himself, or the friends of my judgment and
opinions, as to the weal of the Church, (it being judged true by both) be
consonant unto it, and whether he or we be guilty of the most folly and filth,
and defend such things as is a shame to be named amongst Christians, as himself
expresses against our opinion in opposing his, page 98.

I come to his ninth argument; the sum is,

If scandalous persons not excommunicate nor unclean were debarred the
Passover, then such may be suspended from the Lords Supper: but the first is
true, therefore the latter.

I grant the consequence is good,

1. The Church of the Jews were in Covenant relation, and holy in a Covenant
sense, and no where blamed or debarred the Ordinances of the Church upon any
such account.

2. Because it was either punished by their Judicials, or taken away by a
continual course of Sacrifices; and therefore could not rest upon them, much
less bar them from the Sacrament of the Passover.

3. Because nothing could excuse from the not observing of that service in its
appointed season, but legal uncleanness, and a necessary journey, upon their
lives; if nothing else would excuse, then all others were to keep it.

4. It Is clear that some did keep the Passover that were guilty of that which
you will say was moral uncleanness. Ezra 9.1. after they had kept the
Passover, complaint was brought unto Ezra, saying, The people of Israel,
Priests and Levites have not separated themselves from the people of the lands,
doing according to their abominations, of the Canaanites, etc. for they have
taken of the daughters for themselves, and for their sons, and the Princes have
been chief in this trespass.

5. I say further that in some cases the people of Israel were accepted of, in
their keeping the Passover, although many of them did eat the Passover
otherwise then was written, for some that were unclean did eat thereof, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20.

6. It was the will of God that declared that such things upon a man should be
unclean, and all things he touched should be so by his institution only; but
there is no such thing declared by the will of God touching moral uncleanness
in the Church, as to debar them the Passover or any other Ordinance^ all his,
and other men's quotations have been sufficiently examined as to this, and fully
answered, unless it be one of Mr. Collins, Deuteronomy. 23.18. Thou shall not bring
the price of a whore, or the price of a Dog into the House of the Lord for
any vow, for these are abomination to the Lord, if not the price, then not the
Whore or Dog.

He argues from the lesser to the greater.

Answ. Does it follow, that because they might not offer any of those two for
any vow, that therefore they might not bring their Lamb in its season to the
House of the Lord, and offer it before him according to Gods command? It was an
abomination to do those things that God forbad; therefore it is abomination to
do that which God commands; that is all the text will prove, as to debarring of
the moral unclean from the Passover. Away with such trifling and impertinent
applications of holy Scriptures. The truth is, men of his judgment must do
more then they have yet done; I had almost said more then they can do, or else
had better never to have said any thing about this argument drawn from the
Analogy of the Passover: all that man can say against us from that, does but
discover their own weakness in fighting against the Truth.

His tenth Argument, It Is a sin in a Minister to declare those one visible
Body, who are not one body with visible Saints; but scandalous sinners are not
one body with visible Saints. And be that gives the Lords Supper, declares
those to whom he gives it unto, to be one visible Body. -- Ergo.

1. etc. Is it a sin to declare this?

2. Are not all that are baptized into one Body, of that Body, and are not the
scandalous in the Church baptized, and is it a sin for one to declare that the
baptized are one visible body with visible Saints? What is a visible Saint, but
a baptized visible professing Christian, that is a member of the true visible
Church? Is not an offending brother a brother, and within while he is within?
If the Sacrament of baptism do initiate into that one body, and the Sacrament
of the Supper bespeaks them so too that are baptized: Is it a sin for a
Minister to give the Sacrament to such, by declaring that which is true, and
which no man can deny that holds our Church a true visible Church? Who can you
say is not a real member of Christ in particular? And one that he dyed not for?
The Apostle affirmed it of all in the Church of Corinth, that they were one
body. What if Gillespy will not be persuaded the Apostle would say it of all,
we find it so written, and I think it safe to be persuaded of the truth of
what is written: the authority of Scripture shall persuade with me before the
authority of men.

His eleventh Argument,

The Sacrament is not to be given to any who are not Christ's Disciples, but
scandalous sinners are none of his disciples -- Ergo.

The Major is true, possible you may do something in this argument; and when
you have done that, I doubt not but you will be answered.

His 12.13. arguments, I have answered in my answer to what he has excepted
against The Bar removed; His fourteenth Argument.

It is unlawful to partake of other men's sins, Ephesians. 5.7. But he that gives
the Sacrament wittingly to an ignorant scandalous person partakes with him in
his sin. -- Ergo.

I grant his Major, Shall man's impotency and iniquity pull down Gods authority?
If in all other duties of Gospel Worship such had better obey as well as they
can, then neglect Gods worship altogether, it is but a begging the question to
deny it, in the observance of the Sacrament.

It Is true, a Minister may be guilty of his peoples ignorance, and may fear and
tremble at that guilt, if he neglect all or any due and probable principles of
the true Religion, that may in some measure prepare them to profit by every
Ordinance in the Church: But having done his duty, he need not fear to give
them the Sacrament, but tremble at the neglect of that administration, and
discouraging weak and ignorant Christians from it.

True it is also, etc. by which sinners should be reformed from their evils;
otherwise the Minister and Church may partake of those sins, though they never
come to the Sacrament; but this is a conceit of some men, that unless a man
do what he can to keep such away from the Sacrament, he is a partaker of their
sins, whereas the Sacrament is his duty as well as any other Worship, who is
not to be blamed for that, but for his sins, such works of darkness that the
Apostle does instance in, Ephesians. 5.2, 3, 4. the place that this argument stands
upon. We are not to reform such offenders in those lawful things, they are but
to reform them from the wicked and ungodly courses that they offend in.

I grant that if any in the Church should pollute the holy signs of Bread and
Wine to profane ends, Corinthians did, and were punished for, or if by any rude
profane carriage or misdemeanour, shall be disorderly in the time of
administration, the Officers of the Church not doing what in them lies to
restrain and prevent it, might be partakers of their sins: but this is a case
which was hardly ever known in our Congregations. But as for Church Members
that come with reverence, and demean themselves orderly, and conform to the
external actions, according to the rules of institution, there can nothing be
proved against any for being partakers with other men's sins, as to this
particular, so far as I am able to judge.

I have now given you an account of Mr. Collins 14. arguments, to prove
Suspension from the Sacrament, only distinct from Excommunication. And if I
mistake not very much, I have sully answered them by removing all his
foundations from Scripture and reason he pretends to deduct them from. What
others can do I do not know, I will prejudge none of his persuasion; but yet
I am somewhat confident, that the more wise men search into this Controversy,
the more they will find it a work of that difficulty to make good Suspension
from the Lords Supper only from Scriptures, and allow the liberty of all other
Ordinances in the Church as members, that they had need follow no other studies
but this that undertake it.

Touching that authority brought in proof of Suspension, so largely insisted
upon, I cannot examine. And therefore must leave it to those that are in a
capacity to search and judge; whether Mr. Collins has dealt any more
impartially with his Authors then with the holy Scriptures.

I question, whether any of his quotations,

Whether they suspended from the Sacrament of the holy Supper only,

proceedings unto Excommunication, and so of no longer continuance then to try
the offenders obstinacy, or repentance.

Whether they grounded Suspension on the Word of God, Collins does not urge it
upon any such account, nor may the Churches prudence be pleaded, where Christ
commands, and the Word does determine.

Whether non-admittance of Penitents,

I question whether any one instance can be given of any Church or persons that
were judged Orthodox, Collins defends, or that ever any scandalous members were
only kept from the Sacrament, without any further Juridical proceedings unto
Excommunication; or whether any Church ever would suffer their members of years
to neglect the Ordinance of the holy Supper year after year through
carelessness, or merely leave them out as Heathens, though born in the Church
and baptized. Now I say, if that authority which is quoted by Mr. Collins will
not reach these cases, they are but little for his purpose, they will not speak
to the clearing of the Controversy in hand. Besides humane authority only will
not satisfy the conscience of the doubtful; it is only the authority of the
holy Scriptures that must satisfy conscience, and be binding unto all. And as
it is apparent the ancient Church did err in their extremity of rigor in
their censures in respect of length of time, so it is possible enough they might
err in their several degrees of censures. Not so much their practice as the
ground thereof from Scripture rule will give satisfaction to those that doubt.

Besides these, let Mr. Collins give us authority of any Church before these
last ages, that ever made a Pastoral examination of Church Members of years, of
that necessity unto the holy Supper, without which they would debar them the
Sacrament. By these and the like queries, I hope we shall hear by some of the
Presbyterian judgment, or others, by what authority they practice so many
things, not to be found in the holy Scriptures.

But I find Mr. Collins in his Book page (157.) making some Apology for
themselves. He confesses their present practice does differ from other reformed
settled Churches: as to the suspension of any they admit, they agree with
others, and will suspend none but after admonition for some scandalous sin. And
indeed says he this only is properly Suspension. We deny the Sacrament indeed
to others, viz. such as will not give account of their faith and submit to the
order of the Church, etc.

What did Mr. Collins mean in his stating the question to put in ignorant
persons,

They agree with other reformed Churches as to suspension properly; as the
Brownists and Anabaptists do, scandalous members that will not be resormed by
admonition: but what is this to the case in controversy, unless they judge,
that not any are members until they be admitted upon profession of faith, etc.
as others of the separations judge: if so, what is the Church privilege of one
born a Christian and baptized, and of years of discretion to the holy Supper,
more then a Pagan, who upon his profession of faith, has right to Sacraments?
What does admission upon profession of faith imply, but that all in the Church
not so admitted, are Heathens and without, making the Lords Supper the
initiating Ordinance into Church Communion, and subjection to censures?

If of those that are admitted none may be suspended but after admonition for
some scandalous sin, Col. what he will make the cause of excommunication. If he
say that scandalous sinning is the cause of both, then one of those censures
are superfluous; if he say, we must distinguish of scandalous sining in regard
of degrees some deserving the lesser censure, the other the greater
Excommunication. Let him make that good from the Scriptures; which concerns him
to do before he can prove suspension from the Sacrament distinct from
Excommunication: in the mean time what he affirms of proper Suspension, is all
one with Excommunication, and upon the same ground, the Church may as well
proceed unto Excommunication as Suspension: so that this very concession of
his, does (upon the matter) undermine his chiefest strength, and render all he
has said in proof of Suspension as distinct from Excommunication, frivolous.

But in the next place his pleading, That they must be looked upon as now
reforming a disordered Church: had former Ministers done their duties they
might have saved us this labor of putting our people upon making a profession
of faith in order to admittance to the Lords Supper. Col. thus late pleadings;
the issue being little else but either neglect of Gods Ordinance, or running
Pastors and people into a deluge of division, of Doctrine, Worship, and
discipline in the Church. And do they think to advance reformain the removal of
the foundations of the Churches well being? 5. Church must bow unto, in order
to holy worship: and hence Mr. Col. must first make good, that it is the duty
of all in the Church to make a public profession of faith, or submit to the
examination of his Eldership, in order to the holy Supper, before he tells
others what they require now, and suspend for, is to be excused, by their being
upon reformation now: A strange reformation that is begun in making void the
commands of Jesus Christ, and carried on with prejudices and division, and if
persisted in, may end in confusion. Was it ever known before now that
Reformation began in admitting to the Passover or Lords Supper? it is an absurd
reforming that will allow those to be Churchmembers, and yet deny them to do the
duty of a Member and Christian. It was more rational and agreeing with
Scripture rule, to correct that general careless neglect in Ministers and
people in order to reforming, then to devise a novel way in a settled reformed
Church to hinder the most of Church-memb. from doing their duty. The care and
zeal of our first reformers, was both to exhort and to press all of years to
actual receiving, not thinking it sufficient to be present gazing on, or
careless in not preparing; and likewise corrected those that neglected this
holy observance: how unlike are these men's spirits to our first reformers? It Is
true, many Ministers then were too careless of their duties in catechizing and
instructing the younger sort, and so it will be still; but what then? Does that
disoblige Christians from that necessary part of institute Worship? Ministers
neglect their duties to their people, therefore the people must not do their
duty to their Lord; but must be left out and levelled with the Pagan world! Had
our Church been abolished, when they abolished Episcopacy, then in order unto
constituting and gathering a new Church, a verbal profession of says in order
unto lawful baptism, had been proper; but to plead it unto reforming but of the
same Church already imbodyed and planted together by baptism, is to be wise
beyond what is written. If Mr. Collins plea be good for the Presbyterian
persuasion, it holds as good to the Independent practice, for they admit into
Communion upon the same principle, But he would not have this looked upon as a
standing principle.

Answ. (Why,) because it wants a standing rule, that is his reason I judge.

But then he tells us, Our former Ministers would admit any one for his two
pence.

This is somewhat an ignorant slander, as if it was left to the liberty of a
private Minister to admit and refuse at his pleasure, when he might know both
the Minister and people were under the precept and penalty of the Church. But
what means all this pleading to excuse their rigid practices, but that either
they question their warrant, or would have us think the case is extraordinary,
and so will warrant their irregular improper proceedings in order to admitting
Church Members to the Lords Supper; an argument indeed of late, that does set
the whole land at a stand to answer, but not so much for strength of reason
that is in it, but for a power out of it, that will make any thing hold that is
said.

158. page Mr. Collins pleads further, and tells his Reader, That there was no
way but this to begin any Reformation amongst us, who by our former way of
administration of the holy Supper had made our Churches a reproach to Papists,
and a grief to all Protestants, and opened a way for Brownists and Anabaptists
to fill their Congregation with our strictest Professors, etc.

The substance of this is much to be doubted of, Rome or Italy, who are taught
that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, and I think the most of Orthodox
Protestants were more grieved about the gesture determined by the Church, and
those superstitious rails, and turning the Table Altarwise, and the
insufficient administrators; then at our free admission of Church Members.

Suppose all he says were true, so long as it is the ordinary case of most, and
they may have the liberty of all the other Ordinances in the Church as members?
How is this like to reform their persons, when they may be let alone to be
loose and profane, if they do but keep away from the Sacraments? Such a kind
of reforming that was never read of in holy writ, nor in any Orthodox Authors.
Had it not been better to reform according to Scripture rules and precedents,
(we judging all in the Church adhering to the Protestant Religion
Church Members) to have pressed them unto all Christian observance, and to have
dealt with them as those that are within? and to have proceeded against some
unto the like admonitions and excommucation Juridically? Gods way is always
best, and we may groundedly hope to have his way attended with a blessing of
success in the amendment of the worst sinners amongst us.

It Is a pitiful shift to prevent our strictest professors from running into the
Brownists Congregations, to practice their principles, and so become like them
in making admission to the Lords Supper upon a public profession of faith, the
only ground to unite and imbody the visible Church into Ecclesiastical
Communion, and so in gratifying some few in their error, require such terms
unto actual receiving of necessity, that the baptized in the Church of years
are no where bound to submit unto, nor in a capacity to come unto: And yet are
under the obligation of actual receiving, unless in plain terms you will
unchurch them, and so unduty them, and speak out as the Brownists do.

But I think enough has been said already as to this, and therefore I shall
now take my leave of my Reader, having done with the main things in Mr. Collins
late Book as it opposes free admission to the Lords Supper. And I hope Mr.
Collins may seriously conceive himself soberly and rationally answered, as to
Juridical Suspension distinct from Excommunication, as himself has stated it.
He has taken some pains to prove it in the power of a single Minister to
suspend from the Supper, but I think it needless to examine him, or answer him
in that; for I know that Mr. Collins will have work enough to maintain that
Suspension from the Lords Supper which he calls Juridical; he might first have
tried how he could have come off with this, before he had showed himself so
forward to go about to prove that which is so denied by all that are Orthodox
and sober. And I know were there any thing in what he has said of private
Suspension considerable, and worthy of a consutation; that learned Reverend
Gentleman Mr. Joanes, whom he attempts to answer, would call him to an acount
of his forwardness of Spirit, to Lord it over Gods heritage, and to be a Pope
in his own Congregation.

FINIS.
A BRIEF ANSWER TO THE ANTIDIATRIBE WRITTEN By Mr. Saunders, Minister of
Hollesworth in Devonshire.

Wherein his chief Strength in Defense of Separation in a Church, and
Examination in order to admitting To the LORDS-SVPPER Is Examined, and the way
he defends proved to be SCHISMATICAL.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for William Tomson at Harborough in
Leicestershire, 1655.

ABRIEF ANSWER To Mr. SAUNDERS ANTIDIATRIBE.
IN the midst of these unhappy and dividing times in the Church of God, I know
not how such a worm as I should improve a few hours better, after redious l^bor
in my honest calling, then by remembering the happy and ever to be desired Peace
and Reformation of renowned Zion. As it is my daily prayer, so it is a part of
my daily care and study to endeavor that the Churches peace and truth may meet
in one. And hence it is that I so often appear against those who upon dangerous
mistakes destroy and pluck up the main principles and foundations, on which the
Churches peace and reformation should stand, and consist in. How sad are our
miseries like to be in the end, when those that are our professed friends are
ever hatching of new unheard of ways of Separation and Schism? Amongst others
this unhappy Author does bear his share, by defending such a way that is rarely
met withal, and yet cried up to be the way of truth and reformation according
unto Gospel rule. The way he defends in brief is this, some certain Ministers
and Christians have agreed to form up a Church in the choice of a Pastor,
Officers and members in some one place: The terms agreed on unto admission to
and exclusion from the sacred Communion of this Church, as to the holy Supper,
is either a public profession of faith, or submitting to a Church examination
in giving an account of their knowledge and faith unto satisfaction, etc. and
so likewise, as to practice, they require not only a freedom from things
scandalous, but some real demonstrations of the faith of holiness unto
admittance.

This way it appears has been rigorously carried on against the consent of
some able Ministers in those parts. And something is excepted against their way
by a solid reverend Gentleman I judge; with several demands, and queries, and
objections for them to answer and clear in defense of their way and practice.
Mr. Saunders in behalf of the rest has taken some pains to give satisfaction
unto others, professing himself ready to stand or fall, as the truth is with
him or against him in their practice: It Is an ingenuous resolution I confess;
and if he will but stand to it, I doubt not of the issue, but that it will be
worth our labor to dispute it with him according to Scripture and Reason, the
only Judge of Truth. Besides, I am the rather inclined to enter the lists with
him in this Controversy, because he protests against a rigid separation from a
true Church, and declares himself only for a moderate and lawful separation in
the Church; not as yet disowning our Churches I take it.

Unto this I answer,

That Separation that is proper and lawful in the Church,

Or 2. by wholesome Discipline Juridically exercised;

Or 3. we may and ought to withdraw all unnecessary friendly and intimate
familiarity from scandalous brethren, where the necessary duties of our general
and particular callings will permit without prejudice to our selves. And then
the question will be, whether the practice defended in respect of separation be
no more but so: if it be but Doctrinal, or putting out of Communion Juridically
by Excommunication, or declining all unnecessary familiarity with the
scandalous though tolerated: all will be yielded on his side. But if it be
found otherwise, I shall deny it as dangerous, and warn all Christians to avoid
it, lest they be infected with Schism, a cursed fruit of the flesh; and drawn
into such needless separations as can never be warranted. It Is one thing to
separate from the sinful courses of scandalous brethren, and another thing to
separate from the necessary duties of Gods Worship, and of our calling, where
such are tolerated. It Is one thing to exclude the scandalous Juridically,
another thing to exclude the ignorant who desire to be learners of wholesome
Doctrine; or those that are not satisfied to yield unto their terms, as
presented under the necessity of duty, when upon search their terms are but the
bold inventions and opinions of strong fancies, and not to be owned upon any
such account as is pretended. Yet I shall advise to a condescension to the same
terms upon a prudential account, for the help and encouragement of all in says
and knowledge: provided it be used to no such end as to exclude Church Members
from that necessary duty of institute worship, Do this in remembrance of me.
Christians ought not to betray their own and their brethrens liberties to those
that have the boldness in these exorbitant times to invade them, and bring all
into division and confusion. Why should not all that are within, and of the
Church, enjoy all external helps and means of their amendment, until the
Church has taken the forfeiture of their offending, and issued out judgment
against them? I think I have writ more to this then will be answered in have.
Mr. Saunders would be judged a sober moderate man that still owns our Church,
Ministry and members for true. But yet we find him so inconsistent to himself,
that upon the matter he unchurches all our Parochial Congregations, that he
will not allow them to be Churches, but in an equivocating sense; that is to
say, in no sense as a ^^rish in it is Precincts; but as a separate Church may be
in a Parish, as in the world. We do not say, says he, that our Assemblies are
Churches as Parishes, but that they are Churches in Parishes; and in that sense
Parish Churches, page 127. and yet he is sharp against rigid separation, and
pretends but to Surgery, not to Butchery: but if unchurching of our Parochial
Assemblies be not a rigid Butchery, let him tell us what is more rigid. They of
the Independent judgment do generally acknowledge our Assemblies to be the
Churches of Christ, though out of order. The Anabaptists will confess, a
Church may be in a Parish, as well as in a City, Country, and World, and in
this sense they may say there are Churches in Parishes, and so Parish Churches.
How is our Church beholden to such pretenders that will speak as much in
defense of our Parochial Churches, as they state them, as our adversaries will
grant? And yet he has the happiness to be approved of by a learned Gentleman
for his recommending to the Church a well tempered Reformation, if love to his
person and cause deceive him not: Mr. Manton in his approbational Epistle to
this Book.

I confess, if those we plead for be not members of true Churches in Scripture
account, then all must needs go against us; for it is certain that Heathens,
the unbaptized, or such as have renounced the Christian Religion may not eat
thereof; our opinion pleads for all Church Members of years baptized and not
excommunicated, as knowing not any rule against the admitting of such to the
Lords Supper, produced yet by any. And yet Mr. Manton says peremptorily,
amongst all others, none have deserved worse of the Church of God, then those
that plead for a loose way (as he calls it) of receiving all sorts of persons to
holy things: and by promiscuous administrations prostitute the Ordinance of God
to every comer. I confess this passage from so reverend a Minister as he is
reputed to be, did enter my very heart at first, and plunged my soul into a
greater perplex of passion then is ordinary. Yet not out of any apprehension of
guilt, (though I have always cause to flee unto Gods mercy for acceptance) but
that so good a man, and an eminent Minister of the Gospel should be so
inconsiderately rash in his censure of the Churches friends.

But to answer directly;

1. Does not Mr. Manton receive all sorts of Christians unto Gods Ordinances of
Word, Prayer, singing of Psalms, the administration of holy baptism? Are not
these holy things? And is it looseness in himself to admit all sorts of
persons in the Church to partake of these? I hope not, and why then not in the
other, it being a necessary duty to all in the Church, of years, (as the
Ordinances before named:) he might do well to give some better reason then
others do. When he can charge us justly with pleading the admission of the
unbaptized, Heathens, the Excommunicate; then let him charge us with that odium
of looseness, or a loose way, as being against Gospel-rule; but until then
his charge and censure is no other then a rash slander unbecoming such a
person. It Is strange and to be admired, that our pressing unto Christian
observance to those that are baptized, professing Christians, and of the
visible Church, should have such a hard sense put upon it, as to be branded
with looseness; when in all other duties pressing to obedience according to
rule is accounted godliness, and holy strictness. But doubtless that way
that is the nearest to Gospel rule, is the good way and straight way. However
it may have the hap (upon mistake) to be called a loose way.

Truly to speak freely, I little value that perverse disputing in most that
oppose us, that are forced to uncovenant, unchurch, undisciple, unduty a
Christian professing baptized people to make out their argument and own
invented way, against such manifest demonstration, which cannot otherwise be
answered: and yet for the zeal of the Churches peace and privileges we defend
in behalf of her members, we are counted the greatest enemies to the Church;
none deserve worse of the Church then we, no not Ranters, Quakers,
Antitrinitarians, Anabaptists, Brownists, that destroy all the Church is in
possession of, through the gift of his grace; for there are some amongst all
others that deserve bad enough sure, but we deserve worse then all these, if
this good man say true. As for looking at a worldly interest (he hints at) I
have as little cause as ever had any man, I have what I looked for before I
engaged, to have many tongues and pens against me, even of them I esteem my
very good friends; which thing I have put my self upon with no small reluctance
of spirit; what the Lord intends by it for good or hurt, I am not certain, but
content to submit to his pleasure and further guidance in the Controversy,
being well assured of this, that I shall not loose my labor of zeal and love
for the Churches peace, and edification.

my self and friends from this heavy censure. The question shall be put to the
judgment of the learned and sober in the Church of England, Whether Mr.
Saunders himself gives approbation of, or Mr. Humfry, or my self, deserves
worse of the Church of God. If we do not deserve worse of the Church then the
Author himself approves of, I hope the judicious Reader will forgive us the
wrong, and what himself has published will acquit us. And I doubt not but when
our principles and theirs are laid together, and compared impartially, as I
have given some discoveries in these followings sheets; it will not be very
difficult to judge, whether they or we deserve worse of the Church of God. And
so I will leave Mr. Mantons hard censure to himself and others, that shall read
both to judge between us.

I should hardly have troubled you with these sheets had not that passage much
provoked me, nor would I hinder that reverend Gentleman engaged; he may rejoyn
more deliberately, if he see cause. I think I have done enough to caution the
Reader of less judgment from being taken with this Author, with whose
smoothness of expression and plausible pretenses his Reader may quickly be
entangled, and carried away with a sound of enticing words that have no truth
nor solid reason in them. I shall now upon the sudden come to examine the main
of his Book.

And my way will be first to examine what himself relates of their way.

Secondly, I shall examine the state of the question, and the proofs urged to
defend it, answer his arguments, queries, and motives, and then conclude.

Mr. Saunders tells us what their way is: There is a Church formed in one of our
Congregations according to the rule of the Word. In the choice of a Pastor,
Officers, and Members; other Ministers and people are joined to this society,
in which we are like to walk till we can see truth or reason against us, page
121.

To this something may be yielded,

Then something is to be denied,

As namely, 1. That he that is a Pastor of a particular Congregation, and
Church, or flock, (unto which he was either lawfully sent, and inducted by the
Church, or came in by the consent of the people over whom he is) I say for such
a one to join himself to another Church as a common member, and to hold
constant Communion in the Sacrament with that Church, and altogether neglect
the administering of the Lords Supper to that people he is Pastor of; I utterly
reject as that which the Scripture does no where allow, but is contrary to
reason, order, peace, and edification of his people; if it does not imply a
forsaking his Pastoral relation and duties.

2. I would gladly see it made out by Scripture, that one that is a Pastor of a
Church already, may be chosen a Pastor again, either by the people he is Pastor
unto, or by others that have lawful Pastors over them already; if this practice
be permitted in those that are confessed by the Author to be true Churches,
(which they dare not separate from) What a deluge of disorder and confusion
must necessarily follow! Can a man be a Pastor of a select company out of
several Churches, and a Pastor to his own people in general he was first
related unto, denying the Lords Supper to them that are properly his own flock,
and give it as Pastor to other men's flocks and charge? Or can a man be Pastor
of a true Church, and an Officer of another? Or a particular private member in
constant Communion with another in acts of worship? These things have need of
sugared words indeed to make them pass; yet this is represented unto all with
the common guise of every Sect, to be according to the rule of the Word; when
Mr. Saunders has given us his proof to make good these paradoxes hinted at,
and further declared and explained their way, we may have occasion more
strictly to examine it in all the particulars of it. In the mean time I can
conceive no less of their way, but that it makes such a rent in their several
Congregations that most properly and justly is called Schism; pleading
necessity will not help you, especially when it is of your own making, running
upon sundry mistakes, and taking principles upon trust for truth, that the holy
Scriptures no where teach, brings most knowing men under these straights,
overwhelming the Church with distraction, division, and confusion. Besides,
there is no necessity to sin upon pretense of reforming, that Reformation that
is begun by sinful means is not of God, nor can never tend to the Churches
good. Arguments drawn from pretended necessities are of little strength in a
sober rational dispute, however prevalent they are conceived to be, when
accompanied with the sword. How can those Ministers think they have done their
duty in administering the holy Supper to their respective Congregations, by
drawing a few of their own members with them to receive it in another man's
Congregation? They may as well think they have done their duty in preaching to
their own Congregation by a constant drawing a few of their people with them to
hear another man preach; and if the other be their Pastor, as to some in the
way they are in, cannot be denied, why should not such members constantly
attend him in all public administrations, as their duty? And with what
conscience can such live upon the Churches maintenance, that forsake their
function and duty to their Congregations? And if they make the Sacrament the
distinguishing Ordinance between the Church and the world, as the Author calls
it some where, then no wonder they are so tender who they admit into the
Church; and thus upon the matter they look upon the greatest part of their
Congregations as Heathens, unbelievers, whom the duties of Christianity do not
concern. In another place he says, an unregenerate person is far from being a
disciple, etc. and therefore not a Christian, for the Disciples were first
called Christians at Antioch. And hence they devise ways and bars to keep them
from the Lords Table equal unto a Heathen. But me thinks they might easily
perceive their mistake; for baptism of old was accounted the only
distinguishing Ordinance; as circumcision between the Church and the world, and
the only separating and distinguishing Ordinance in the Church is Juridical
Excommunication, which they make no use of, for Mr. Saunders says they
Excommunicate none, if they judge their people Church Members and within, if
they have any scandalous crime against them, why do they not begin reformation
by casting out the obstinate, according to rule? they are all for admission of
members, when they should be for ejecting in the work of reforming. If they be
for admission into Church Communion, they must begin with baptism, and I think
the terms they stand upon in order to the Supper, will sooner be made good in
order to baptism, of grown ones, then to those that are initiated into the
Church already by lawful baptism, I have writ enough to this already; the truth
is, if my judgment fail not, Mr. Saund. does but shuffle, when he speaks of our
Assemblies to be true Churches some of them, one while they are true Churches,
and have both matter and form (which are the main essentials of true Churches)
agreed upon by all, only he says, but not without great disorder at present,
(Discipline being interrupted, as I suppose he means). And he must needs speak
this in behalf of our Parochial Churches, for he makes mention of the Churches
of England, of which some he will undertake to prove to be true Churches,
against those that deny all for matter and form to be true, page 127. And yet
in the very same page he contradicts himself, in saying, We do not say our
Assemblies are Churches as Parishes, but that they are Churches in Parishes,
and in that sense Parish Churches: and in the page before, he thinks the truth
of some of our Churches, (as to their Essence) he can prove. A Church may be in
a Parish as well as in a Country, or City, (as Ephesus, Corinth) yea as well as
in the World. By this you may conceive what a good friend he is like to be to
our Parish Churches, against Anabaptists, and Brownists: that although he
accounts them rigid Separatists, they will grant that there are some Parishes
in England, that some that are godly and real members of Christ dwell in them,
which they will confess are the matter of a true Church. Nay, there may be a
rigid separate Church in fellowship and order in a Parish as well as in a
Country, City, World. And in this sense they are Parish Churches. What shifts
are these? but why does he not speak plain to the case in question, and clearly
speak his judgment of our Parochial Congregations as they are baptized, and
adhere to the public Ministry in general, consisting of good and bad, nay the
most very ignorant, and in some thing or other either scandalous, offensive, or
remiss? Will he prove such Parishes in their Precincts and outward bounds, to
have both the matter and form of true Churches? If he would do so, I shall
embrace him as friend of the Church. And one would think in his 128. page that
is his sense, by what he infers for baptism: saying, That all Infants born in
our Churches are to be baptized, for Congregational Churches (as they are
called) baptized all their Infants, and then, If it be objected that sundry of
the parents are ungodly whose children we baptize, he asks whether they can
deny baptism to the child of any member how offensive soever, before the
sentence of cutting off pass upon him? So he answers of ours. These supposed
wicked ones, whether (as carnal or profane) are not excommunicated, what
therefore should hinder their childrens baptism? Hence he owns all in our
Churches that are baptized members Christians, and within; for I suppose he
would not plead the baptizing of the children of those that are Infidels and
without, that are no objects of Excommunication. And yet in other places they
are far from being Disciples, Church Members, etc. Nay, he says, as to baptism
we suppose our Churches to be true, but sick, and corrupt, page 126, but
wherein corrupt? if all be true you publish (129. page.), wherein you add to
what you said before? Besides the children are not baptized in their Parents
right alone, but in the Churches, where the child is born a member, being holy
federally by birth, and therefore to be baptized* You prove the Subjects of our
baptism lawful, the Minist^^, and baptism it self for matter and manner I
presume; wherein is it sick and corrupt then? I could wish you were more steady
in your judgment and consonant to your self, and honest to your Reader. But to
reply upon your own grants: if all children born in the Church he holy
foederally by birth; then it follows that all parents in the Church of whom
they are so born are believers, for the Apostle affirms that only of the
children of believers, 1 Cor. 7.14. And then if all parents in the Church be
believers, why do you not administer the Lords Supper to them? for actual
receiving is the undoubted duty of all believers; how you will deny the
consequence I cannot tell. I pray you consider well of my Answer unto Mr.
Collings, for I must be very brief to yours.

Again if our Churches be true Churches; and all it consists of lawfully
admitted into it,

Then it will follow, 1. That while they are within, they are to enjoy all
external privileges of our Church according unto Gospel rule, which is one and
the same unto all Church Members as such. This is so rational and clear, that
all that separate from us, own and practice it; until a member by Apostasy
fall off, or be Juridically cast out of Church privileges.

2. That Pastors of true Churches are to attend their several flocks in a
constant exercise of the whole ministerial work they are designed unto, by the
Church that ordained them such.

3. That forming a Church in the choice of a Pastor and Officers, members, in a
true Church already formed according unto rule, (as to the essentials thereof,
at least) is a work not only superfluous and absurd, but Schismatical and
pernicious, breaking the peace and union of that Church they are of by making
unnecessary rents and divisions in it. It is not separation from a Church, but
separation in a true Church causelessly, that is properly a Schism: absolute
separation from a true Church is properly apostasy in an Ecclesiastical sense,
I take it. Hence his distinction of separation from a true Church, and
separation in a true Church where the ordinary means of salvation is, and the
fruits thereof, (as himself confesses of ours) is groundless and wicked. The
first sort come under the censure of the Apostles John and Jude, 1 Epistle of
John 2.19. Judes general Epistle, verse. 19. The last sort are detected by St.
Paul. 1 Cor. 1.10, 11, 12. Chap. 11.18, 19. Romans 16.7. Act. 20.30. 1 Cor.
12.23, 24, 25. chap. 14.33.

Now I shall a little touch upon what this new formed Church requires of
persons they admit into Sacramental Communion with them. And I will give you
the question as themselves have stated it.

Whether in the reforming of a long corrupted Church, Mr. Saund.
it be necessary that all the members thereof do submit to some examination or
trial of their knowledge before they be admitted unto the Lords Supper. This
question they fear not to maintain in the affirmative; Here they suppose
corruption in our Churches, and therefore with men well satisfied with their
present frame and temper, not looking on them as under any such disorder, as we
suppose: with such we desire not much to dispute, we can expect little of
reason, or truth from men of that mind.

This question is but ambiguously stated, Horizon, as himself confesses page 6.
and this Examination is only in reference to sound knowledge, the means whereof
the Church was not corrupted in, so as to deserve the denomination of a long
corrupted Church in that respect. For generally the principles that were
taught, and received by the people were Orthodox, that the people cannot in
reason generally lie under the Suspension of heretical knowledge, for they have
been so long habituated to sound words in respect of several Creeds which very
frequently were professed and assented unto in our assemblies, with such
plainness of Catechizing, etc. that in respect of the ordinary means of the
peoples knowing in a competent sense (which is the subject matter that
examination and trial only relates unto in the question) that the Church cannot
be truly said, to have been a long corrupted Church. And then that clause in
the question (as to us) is needless, which indeed upon the matter is the very
cause of the question, that being taken away makes the question fall, for then
the question will be, Whether in a reformed Church, as to knowledge,
examination be necessary in all we admit to the Sacrament? And I judge this the
most proper question, by what himself has acknowledged of our Church in
respect of purity of Doctrine, the only means of sound knowledge to her
members, they being generally educated and trained up therein from their youth;
so that as to knowledge the Church was not corrupt; That many of her members
have but little knowledge, and are weak in the faith, is confessed, and is
their sin, but whether it be such a sin that the Church may chastise with
discipline, I very much doubt of: they being otherwise not tainted with
scandalous offending. And how a Churchmember should be denied a necessary duty
of institute worship without some proper act of discipline, I cannot tell. I
confess had the generality of our people been poisoned with Popish heretical
principles, touching the holy Supper, and all other worship, there had been a
rational cause of the question, as he has stated it, and a ground sufficient
to be suspicious of the knowledge of most, whether that little most know were
true or false, Orthodox or heretical. And if upon complaint or trial they
should be found heretical, and will not be reclaimed, I think such come under
the chastisement of the Church; but this is not our case, nor question.

If by the word (necessary) in the question, Antidiatribe; we shall examine his
proofs anon.

I should grant him that it might be necessary,

I grant that the Church actually empowered with the exercise of true
discipline, censure them, but the question intends another thing.

I grant that self Examination is a necessary duty in order to receiving, and
that may satisfy the question as it is stated; for that is (some examination)
to receiving as his expression is, when this is indevoured of professing
Christians, although they neglect that which is Pastoral, it is a question
whether they deserve to be excluded or no. But to reply. If Church Examination
be a necessary duty to all admission: As he would; why not unto every time they
come to receive? For that examination that the Apostle enjoins, holds to every
time the holy Sacrament is administered; but they require it but once, and that
only upon a supposition of a general corruption of our Churches, ( p. 22.) But
were not the Church of the Jews as generally corrupt as ours at some times, and
yet at such a time did not as godly men as your selves call all to observe the
Passover without such a way of examination you plead for; think of Josiah,
Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Nehemiah, etc. You confess the Passover and Supper are
the same for substance; and in answer to the first objection, you say Christ
had communicated with his Disciples before in the Passover, therefore he
needed not examine those that were admitted before: If your reason be good, I
ask what need you examine those that have been admitted to the Louds Supper
before? Nay what need you examine those that are admitted unto holy Baptism
before, that are of years, not excommunicated? That which was necessary unto
Baptism was sufficient to admission into the Church, where Sacramental
Communion (only) is: and which none ever was denied in the Apostolical Churches
during their abode in those Churches: And to those that judge ours lawfully
baptized, and in a true Church, cannot rationally refuse to admit them while
they are within. And again if the examination defended be a necessary duty, why
not binding unto all Church Members of the same kind? Necessary duties use to
be universal. How comes this to be restrained only to such as well may be
suspected for incompetent knoweldge? Sure if it be a necessary duty, it is
incumbent upon all in the Church, or else to none at all; if a Minister be at
liberty to dispense with some, a gift may blind their eyes at length. But what
Scriptures determine of the just measure of this competent knowledge that the
Ignorant are to be examined of, without which they must be excluded the
Sacrament? if no certain rule can be found to satisfy us in this, how can men
determine of it? Then it will follow, as in all other doubtful or groundless
things; so many men, so many minds, and will but add more fuel to our too
many hot divisions already. And know an unquestionable duty of public worship
should be made void upon such trifling uncertainties, that not any are able to
determine of, seems to me, too great a boldness in man. Thus as briefly as I
could, I have not only questioned the question, but have examined it in
particulars thereof, by explaining and yielding something, and by denying other
things intended by the Author. And I think the true question is this.

Whether it be the duty of all professing the true Religion, (and admitted into
fellowship and Communion of the Church already by holy baptism, and constantly
attend the public Worship of God) to give an account of their knowledge and
faith upon the command and examination of their Minister and Officers, and
either to be admitted or refused the Lords Supper, as these examiners shall
approve, or not approve, of the measure, truth and soundness of the knowledge
of all, and whether all that refuse to submit to this duty, are justly to be
excluded the Sacrament.

I dare say that is the proper question as to our case, and now I come to
examine the Scriptures and reasons laid down by Mr. Saunders, to prove the
affirmative. Namely, that all are bound to stand to this trial before they can
lawfully be admitted to the Lords Supper: His quotations are many, and he is
something large upon them, therefore I must desire the Readers patience in my
answer; yet I will promise thee I have labored to avoid all tedious
impertinences.

Mr. Saunders first proof, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in
order. This, he says, is a general rule, serving till the worlds end, to
direct the Churches in matters of outward worship, whereof this of admission
to, and exclusion from the Lords Supper is one.

Who knows not that the Apostle as in the 11. chapter, Cotinth for her
divisions and disorders in their public Assemblies, in the very time of
administering the Lords Supper, and prescribes them rules and orders in special
as to the reforming of those profane disorders: so in this chapter he takes
them up for some other disorders they were guilty of, in the like assemblies in
the carrying on of some other exercises of Religion amongst themselves, as
verse 26. does intimate: How is it then brethren when you come together, every
one of you has a Psalm, has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a revelation,
has an interpretation? let all things be done to edifying. The fault was this,
in the exercises of these different gifts by different persons, they observed
no order, but made a confusion, all exercising their particular gifts at once,
that not any could be edified by another gift; either for his own, or because
so many spoke together, that those that were hearers could not tell which to
attend, etc. Therefore after many particular directions prescribed to
particular cases, lest the Apostle should omit some other things, that might
fall out about the ordering of Worship in the Church of God, he gives them more
general rules that might reach all other the like cases. Let all things be done
decently, and in order. The Apostle orders speech and silence in their
Assemblies so, as all may be edified and comforted, but here is not a word of
admission to and exclusion from the Sacrament, nor any other Ordinance in the
Church: for they that were received into the Church, were bound as Christians
to attend upon all Ordinances of public Worship, while they were within: this
rule was given to direct us about some necessary circumstances in the ordering
of necessary worship, which other Scriptures enforce upon all in the Church to
observe, as time and place, and external order in all parts of institute
worship; decent and reverent gesture, silence and watchings, authorized
administrators, etc. But Mr. Saunders consequence is false, for it is not such
a general rule as he would have it, namely to warrant a Minister to receive of
his people to duties of necessary worship whom he pleases, and refuse whom he
pleases, is this to direct in matters or circumstances of outward worship, to
exclude Christians from their necessary duties of worship? If this will warrant
his excluding from one Ordinance of worship, then from all at his pleasure; if
a persons admission, and exclusion be but a circumstance of outward worship,
then our Bishops did well in forbidding preaching and hearing in the afternoon,
and punishing those that made conscience of their duty otherwise. By this
Church Members are not left at liberty to do what Christ commands, but what
the Church commands: we may see how ways of men's own chooseing will warp them.
If this consequence had been published by a Bishop in their times, Christians
would have startled at it. But he goes on. And supposes, they had no particular
warrant in Gods Word to bear them out, yet, says he, if our course be holy and
orderly, it has warrant from that general rule.

1.

2. That tends to their peoples hinderance and exclusion from their necessary
duties of worship as Christians.

3. That is warranted by no Scripture rule.

4. The discovery of the fallacy of your consequence from this general rule,
makes your supposition nothing for your purpose. The Apostle speaks of such a
rational prudential decency and order in the Church, that may be necessary and
yet no where in the Scriptures determined of, as to particulars, either in
commanding or forbidding. And would Ministers take up an order (under the same
notion) to instruct, ask questions of their people to that end, they may better
profit by every Ordinance, and be encouraged to a more diligent and frequent
attendance thereon in hope of a blessing, I conceive were nearer the mind of
Christ from this text, then what it is urged for. Next he assumes something
from what is granted by Bishop Abbot, but that is nothing to the text, nor proof
of his way, page 131. The Text he says will yield us this argument, page. 133.

Where is no due order in Sacramental administrations, Mr. Saund.
there Gods Word is not observed. But where all are admitted there is no order.
Therefore in admission of all Gods will is not observed.

The major may be yielded, the Minor is to be denied by distinguishing.

1. etc. there is no order, it is true, as being against many Scriptures.

But 2. where (all) are admitted that are of a true Orthodox Church, and are
baptized professing Christians, under the Churches indulgence, the children of
whom himself accounts (holy) federally, of these the Minor is to be denied, and
so the argument falls; for pressing of baptized Christians or believers, come
under the obligation of this part of institute worship in the Church as of any
other the precept is commended to the whole Church, As often as you do this do
it in remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. And if a Minister will be faithful
to his charge, he must teach and encourage al of his flock to observe and do
(all) that Christ commands, Mat. 28.20. And how can they say as St. Paul did,
that they kept back nothing that was necessary for the Church, when they keep
back so necessary an Ordinance from their respective flocks? The Lord discover
unto his servants their great neglects and error.

Mr. Saunders adds in proof of his Minor thus;

Where there is mixture and confusion of good and bad, fit and unfit, there is
no order. But where all are admitted is this mixture. Ergo.

What is an evil mixture, but are not all things sanctified by the warrant of
the Word to the whole Church? And are not all things clean to them in a federal
sense? Is there not grace and mercy enough in the Gospel Covenant made to the
professing Church, to cure the worst, Gods blessing concurring with the
necessary means used to that end? Let not men be dividing where God joins by
his own constitution and merciful gift, comprehending the natural children of
all parents in the Church with the Church, for the gathering of his elect out
of them all. To call this a mixture in an evil sense as corrupting the Church
and Ordinances, is a slander and an unjust reproach brought upon the Church by
rash and inconsiderate heads, care is to be taken for the exercise of true
discipline, for the amendment of the scandalous, as is provided in all my
writings. But there is nothing can be said otherwise to exclude any in the
Church from necessary duties of institute Worship. And therefore the vanity of
that self flattery is discovered in his 134. page wherein he applauds their
course and way, as tending to advance order and holiness in the Church, which
indeed they are guilty of the breach of very great commands of Jesus Christ, in
setting up this pretended order and holiness. Let them consider better of it,
and free themselves from what I charge them with, if they can tell how, or else
make good what they promise in returning from their way of schism, to their
Pastoral duties to their respective flocks.

His second proof is Jer. 15.19. If thou take the precious from the vile,
then shall thou be as my mouth.

In short to give a few hints of the true sense before I examine his.

The people of Judah and Jerusalem were in a most desperate apostasy in the
reign of King Zedekiah, the time of this holy Prophets prophesying, for they
had forsaken the Lord and his prescribed worship, which but a little before
godly Josiah had put them in possession of according to the laws of God, left
in writing by Moses; but his son being wicked, turned to Idolatry, and all the
people with him ran a whoring after strange Gods, insomuch that the Lord
complains of them, according to thy Cities are thy Gods oh Judah, for which and
many other of their abominable doings, the Lord sent his servant Jeremie to
denounce Gods judgments against them, especially that judgment of their being
subdued by the King of Babylon, and carried away captives by him. This message
did so vex them, that they wholly set themselves in opposition to the Prophet,
insomuch that the good man was so tired out with their revilings and threats,
that out of his frailty he grew into a passionate discontent, questioning the
message that he had received from the mouth of the Lord; and staggering at Gods
promise of protection made in particular to him, chap. 1.8. here he charge
God rashly, as if he had been to him as a liar, and as waters that fail, chap.
15.18. this 19. verse is an answer to Jeremiahs rash charge. Therefore thus
says the Lord, if thou return or repent, then will I bring thee again, and
thou shall stand before me, if thou take away the precious from the vile, then
shall thou be as my Word, let them return to thee and submit to the truth of
that message I have sent by thee. But do not thou return to them by reason of
their extreme unreasonable opposition they raise against thee: for I will be as
good to thee as ever I promised to be: for I will make thee to this people a
strong brazen wall, and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not
prevail, etc. v. 20. Jeremiahs duty was to bear up himself in discharge of the
message sent upon with courage, constancy, faithfulness, against all
discouragements met with whatever, he was to denounce the judgments of God
against them for their provoking sins, to bring them to repentance, or leave
them without excuse, and in so doing his duty, the Word of the Lord spoken by
him should have an answerable effect upon the spirits of men, some should
believe it and reform, and yield themselves voluntarily to the King of Babylon,
and so live: others should be hardened and accuse the Prophet of revolting from
his own Nation, and holding intelligence with an enemy, and discouraging the
people from their arms by persuading them to yield and live, and so set
themselves against him, and reject his word and perish. Thus the Word of the
Lord made a separation for the saving of some and destruction of others I take
it. And so the stream of Interpreters runs, but to this Mr. Saunders answers;

If this Text allows only a doctrinal separation, and denies any other, then
Excommunication falls.

We do not say that this Text denies any other separation, but this we say,

Takes occasion to speak of separation as Ecclesiastical, Mr. Saund.
and that twofold.

1. From an Idolatrous Church, as we from Rome, justly, etc.

2. When a Church does separate from the scandalous members of her own body; Or
separate such as are scandalous from her: this he says is grounded upon the
Text in hand, and 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. This is termed a negative separation in a
Church, not from it. This he says, is their case, they separate only in that
wherein those separated from cannot lawfully join, page 136.

The first separation may be lawful when we cannot have communion with them in
the main essentials of doctrine and worship, Jews was then Idolatrous in their
worship, and had forsaken the Lord and his prescribed worship; therefore he
denounces most terrible judgments against them by his Prophet to reform them,
which could not be as to particulars without separating from their Idolatrous
assemblies of worship.

But to say as he, in the next, that this text does warrant a separation in a
Church (where the doctrine and worship is holy, and owned by the presence and
blessing of the Lord) as themselves cannot deny of ours, is too impudently
asserted.

How proper it is for a Church to separate from the scandalous members of her
own body, I am yet to learn; that she may separate such as are scandalous from
her Juridically is all along granted, but this is nothing to their case, who
confess they excommunicate none.

But here lies the bottom of all, They separate only in that wherein those
separated from cannot lawfully join. Let Us examine how the text in hand will
warrant them in that, Did Jer. and those that were separated by virtue of Gods
Word, separate from the other of the Church, because they could not lawfully
join with them in Gods own prescribed worship, which all were enjoined by Gods
command to observe? Then it will be some ground for your way: but as there can
be no such thing in the text, so no color of ground for you to plead hence in
defense of your way. Nay, it may rather reflect upon you, thus, As they fell
off from that Reformation of Josiah that had reduced the people to a conformity
to the Law, and chose to themselves new Idolatrous ways that God commanded
not, so you fall off from that Reformation begun according to the Laws of
Christ, enjoining al professing baptized Christians to a conformity to all his
laws and Ordinances in the Church, and choose to your selves a way of Schism
and separation needlessly, without the least show of solid ground; for if an
Israelite, though otherwise ignorant and wicked, was privileged to join with
the Church in all holy and commanded worship, then, why not a Christian as well
under an equal capacity? If those you separate from in that of the Sacrament be
under the obligation of Christ's command, as they are professing baptized
Christians, which none can deny upon good ground, then Christ's command is of
sufficient warrant to justify their lawful joining with you, as in all other
commanded duties of worship you seem to practice; the antecedent has been
proved already from 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. Matthew. 28.20. the consequence will be
yielded I hope. But to give you the sum of all he draws from the text in hand.

That which God commands is our duty; but God requires more then a doctrinal
separation in applying the Word. Therefore more is our duty.

His Major is undeniable,

Indeed all he says to this, Now if some separation must be made, then
examination, and such like proper means also, page 138.

Though this may be granted in respect of Excommunication, yet this is more
then can be concluded from the text in hand, as I have given sufficient hints
of already.

His third proof is, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2, 6, 14, 15 verses.

Mr. Saunders says, The Apostle speaks of wicked men, verse. 2. which he will
have noted, (verse. 14) that is censured, as is plain, etc. In the 2. verse. he
gives a character of some false brethren, unreasonable wicked men; then a
command, verse. 6. to withdraw, and after to have no company, verse. 14. which by
the following words we are constrained to understand of some exclusion from
fellowship in some Ordinances, etc.

1. If those unreasonable wicked men were of the Church and Brethren, page 140.
and therefore by his own sense from verse. 2. this text will prove no more but
what he always granted, namely excommunication.

If those unreasonable wicked men,

Suppose one should grant him, page 20. These were not excluded any Communion
for ignorance, but for disorderly walking. And we allow some examination to
find out offenders in the exercise of discipline; but deny that the Church
upon finding her members greatly defective in knowledge; for that she may
exclude them from fellowship in some Ordinances, without better proof.

But because both reverend and learned Interpreters are uncertain; and in doubt
of the practical part of the Apostles directions as touching the offending
Brethren, I shall here contribute that little of my dark apprehensions I have at
present toward the searching after the sense of the place. And in so doing
three things are to be inquired after especially.

First, The quality or condition of the person.

Secondly, The nature of the sin.

Thirdly, The remedy prescribed to reform the sinner.

In the first there is no difficulty at all, that the Apostle meant a brother,
one that was within, and a Christian, all agree: so as touching the nature of
the sin writ about it is clear enough. (How Mr. Saunders should be so wide is
to be admired, in applying the remedy to wrong persons, verse. 2.) It Is certain
the fault or sin intended was this, there was one, or some of that Christian
Church that altogether neglected the works of their particular calling, and
lived in idleness, not working at all, verse. 11. and not only so, but that
such were guilty of that common vice that always attends idle persons, they
were (busy bodies) in the same verse, and this is usual when a man's mind is
not taken up in some lawful calling, he is subject to those temptations; for
want of business of his own, he will busy himself with other men's, and for
want of necessaries of his own, which idleness brings upon him, he is ready to
thrust in where he can, and backbite, flatter, invent tales, tending to the
disquiet and contention of the places where such are, this seems to be
intimated, ver. 12. In the first part of the remedy he commanding them in the
authority of Christ, that with quietness they work, eating their own bread,
yet they might the rather be gently dealt with, because they having newly
received the knowledge of Christian hope of eternal life by him, they might be
so taken with this mercy, that it might take some off from their necessary
occasions, and make them think that they should always be talking and speaking
of the things of Christ, they not considering the inconveniences that would
follow thereupon, not only the burdening of the Church, but giving an occasion
of the growth, and putting forth such vicious corruptions (hinted at before)
that the corrupt nature of all men are more or less inclined unto.

The remedy prescribed consists of several parts, I shall but touch at things.

A command in a double respect.

The first was when he was with them in person, verse. 10. and this ran upon a
penalty, This we commanded you; that if any would not work, neither should he
eat: notwithstanding this charge the Church was careless and remiss in
putting this into execution, and did relieve them, and too much countenance
them in that disorderly course, insomuch that some complaint was made against
the thing. For we hear, says the Apostle, that there are some that walk
disorderly, not working at all, etc. verse. 11. and in order to this sinful
connivence of the Church, he lays a strict injunction in the authority of
Christ upon the Church to withdraw from such, verse. 6. in respect of civil
familiarity and maintenance according to their charge, as before.

He repeats the command again in his absence, and that in the authority of
Christ, That with quietness they work, and eat their own bread, verse. 12. and
further tells them, if any one shall refuse to be obedient according to this
Epistle, the Church should note them, by some sign of distinction, declining
that wonted and friendly familiarity as to others that lived orderly; and so
doing, would be a means to bring them into some shame, and amendment, and clear
the Church of the guilt of such disorders; I mean the Church in general.
Besides I should have taken notice how the Apostle presses upon them his own
practice when he was amongst them, verse. 7, 8, 9. for the Apostles they wrought
with labor, etc. but not because they had not power and liberty to forbear
working, but to make themselves an ensample unto all in the Church to follow
them: and that they might not be chargeable to any.

But last of all, lest the Church should run on the other hand into too much
severity, and in stead of healing and amending of the offender, destroy and
loose him, by expelling him out of their society, as they would an enemy, the
Apostle puts in a moderate caution, yet count him not as an enemy, (or Infidel,
as we judge of one that is Excommunicate) but admonish him as a brother, (or
one within) under a more gentle cure.) So that I conceive the most severity
here intended, was to decline all friendly fellowship with them, by withdrawing
their friendly countenance and kindness, and rather to reprove and admonish
them, for their amendment; this seems to be but a particular drawn from a more
general rule, Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them, nor partake in other men's sins.

But Mr. Saunders says, This sense that I pitch upon in respect of the penalty
is too little, as Excommunication is too much: quoting Erasmus, page 140. he
says further, it must be such a noting and withdrawing, as tends to the saving
and reforming of scandalous and misliving brethren; suspension from eivil
society is less shaming.

1. such that would revolt from their Christian profession upon the least
danger.

2. The punishment in a civil sense was so sharp, that had all in that Church
but done their duty, in putting it into execution, the offender must either
have reformed, or have been pined to death, or forsake the Church; for every
member was under an Apostolical command, If any would not work, neither should
he eat, had the whole together, or a part made conscience of their duty, they
might have humbled the proudest, and brought them under some yoke or other I
warrant you.

3. If this was too little for scandalous misliving brethren, as he says, then
why is not suspension from the Lords Supper too little, especially where most
in a Church are upon the matter suspended, as with them of their way? many of
which are neither ignorant nor scandalous, nor any way of a misliving course,
and can it be imagined that any that are scandalous misliving brethren should
ever be brought to shame by keeping them from the Sacrament (only), when so
many of them that are brethren of honest and good repute are kept away as well
as the other. It Is both a vain and absurd thing to pretend to the right means
to reform, and yet so to use them as to be certainly disappointed of the end.
Nay where such reforming as theirs is once in acting, what is the event and end,
or fruit that follows, but strife and debate, contention, division, prejudices,
backbiting, quarreling and questioning what such a Minister preaches, with
derision and confusion, and such like desperate fruits, as experience does
daily show.

4. If excommunication be too much for scandalous misliving brethren, that
would not reform, as is supposed of these in the text, why then it will follow
as before, that none ought to be excommunicate at all, for none can be worse in
the Church then scandalous misliving brethren, sure, that will not reform.

But to come to this argument in the close of this Mr. Saunders forms it up
thus;

Noting offending brethren so as to shame them, is holy and necessary. But such
is our suspension of misliving men. Therefore holy and necessary.

How wide his Major is from the text needs no great discovery to the Judicious,
a general from a particular is evil: if any kind of noting will but shame
them, (then it is holy and necessary) from this text, it would as well follow,
that the stocks or pillory is so to note offending brethren as to shame them,
therefore holy and necessary from this text; what may not then be assumed to be
holy and necessary, if it will but shame men? But I have shown above that their
way brings none to shame, and therefore has not the least color of warrant
from the text. The Lord give them hearts to consider of it.

His fourth proof to prove examination a necessary duty unto admission to the
Lords Supper, is 1 Cor. 5.11. If any man that is called a Brother be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, drunkard, etc. with such one no not to
eat.

If we take not to eat in a civil sense, then they raise their argument from
the lesser to the greater.

2. If we take it for Sacramental eating, then we have an Apostolical
injunction against the coming of the ungodly ones to the Lords Table: and by
consequence an allowance of separation, as to such, and of trial in order to
it, page 141, 142.

1. You shall see what himself says in answer to all this, in that which
follows in the some page.

1. The whole chapter concerns Church Fellowship and censures. It is about
casting out of the incestuous person, as every one sees: Do not we judge them
that are within, put away from among you that (or the like) wicked person.
Again, he says that the nature of the recited sins, verse. 11. show that he
intends scandals calling for discipline and coming under the like censure with
incest; thus far himself, page 143. And therefore from his own sense of the
context I conclude that this text allows of no other separation in the Church,
but what is made by Juridical Excommunication; for doubtless the incestuous
person was only so separated from the fellowship of the Church: and this is the
same which I always plead for and would have reformation begin withal. Let
him draw what consequence he can from his own sense of the text for their
separation, when he confesses in another place that they excommunicate none.

By this the intelligent and sober may know what to judge of the way he
defends, that is so point blanck to his own quotations: for in the text
reforming the scandalous in the Church is only by Excommunication; and they
excommunicate none, but separate from their Churches, leaving the infectious
and diseased to cure themselves, or perish for them, by neglecting those due
and necessary Ordinances appointed for their amendment: but in my answer to Mr.
Collings I have spoke largely to this Scripture, whither I shall refer you.

His fifth proof is Matthew. 7.6, but I cannot conceive he does draw any thing
from it at all in proof of the question in hand, and I having largely spoke to
it in my answer to Mr. Collings, it is needless to repeat: besides, I have
answered to more difficulties from Mr. Collings, then is urged by Mr. Saunders.

So also his sixth proof, 1 Cor. 11.27. to the end, is fully answered, no more
need be added until what I have writ in my answer to Mr. Collings be thoroughly
answered and confuted. All that I can find of Mr. Saunders, amounts but to
this; If self-examination be necessary to go before receiving, then such as
do not, or cannot, ought to be excluded. And hence they will enforce it the
duty of all to be examined, that they may know who are able to examine
themselves; and those that upon this search they find not capable, exclude
them.

It concerns them, 1.

2. To determine of the lowest degree of what is necessary to receiving or
excluding in respect of every member.

3. To prove that unless the private be so done at least the public cease
to be their duty; but certainly I judge that those that are under the actual
obligation of self-examination are under the actual obligation of receiving; I
grant the Word does justify the necessity of those things he lays down, and
are the duties of all Christians. But deny that these things are to be applied
to qualifie^ persons for the Sacrament.
for the Church of Corinth was commanded both: and sure both were the duty of
all her members of years: however denied to ours by the Author. The
qualifications in order to receiving laid down by Mr. Saunders, page
171.172.173. are such, that had he not forsaken his Pastoral charge, and joined
himself to another Church, before he had been able to prove the least
particular there confidently affirmed; he should never have runned into that
needless exorbitant separation while he had lived. But this is that which
undoes them, first they fancy to themselves a false sense of some Scriptures,
and then draw a multiplication of far fetched consequences from it too, and by
this means run themselves into an infinitum of mischievous errors, to the
Churches prejudice and trouble. And truly I cannot but admire at the wisdom
and providence of God only wise, that has by strange workings made void from
time to time what has been prepared in order unto the exercise of discipline;
I doubt not but when our principles are more the mind of Scriptures in regard
of the blessed and privileged state of the whole visible Church in Covenant
relation with God, the Lord will favor us in his great kindness, by putting
the poor despised Church of the Nation into a possession of that discipline
that is most the mind of Jesus Christ revealed in the Word. In the mean time
we have all need to pray much, for we are under an hour of temptation, and many
are scared by it.

I come to his seventh proof, page 148. 1 Timothy 5.22. Neither be partakers of
other men's sins. The sum of what he says to this, was not enough for a
Minister to give the unworthy warning of the danger, or to reprove and denounce
Gods judgments against the impenitent to free him from other men's sins.

This may clear him as a Preacher, but not as a Ruler or Steward, for if the
same Minister shall loose the same men by giving them the seals of the New
Covenant, which is to tell them that they are interessed in Gospel privileges
and promises, he fears that the guilt that was thrust out of the fore door,
comes in again at the back door.

1. The main of the question lies in this, them up to come reverently and
orderly, carrying themselves suitable to the external actions there required,
has not done his duty in an Evangelical sense, as to that of his, that every
Minister is a Ruler, and therefore to urge upon them acts of discipline, and
Jurisdiction as a Ruler, when the whole Church is without discipline, is such a
boldness, that never any pretending to sober principles assumed, (until these
exorbitant times we are fallen into) for want of holy discipline.

But he grants that in respect of all, the Minister doing his duty as before,
is clear as a Preacher. And that is sufficient from his own mouth to justify
those that dare assume no other power in the Church at present, but what they
have by virtue of their Ministerial Office. And as Stewards they are bound to
be faithful in the dispensing of that, leaving the issue to the blessing of
their Master. And it concerns Mr. Saunders to prove himself a Ruler, and
empowered with the actual exercise of the Keys of Jurisdiction in his Church,
before he take upon him to bind and loose at his pleasure; if he be so
empowered, why does he not reform his own Congregation, and administer all the
Ordinances in his own Church? Why does he not by his authority convent the
scandalous before him, and admonish, rebuke, Excommunicate, without any fear or
scruple, and practice all Church Communion in all the Ordinances to the other
not at all under his censure? Will he blame another in that which he neglects
himself? If there be none in his Congregation over whom he rules, liable to his
censures to amend them, why does he neglect to administer the holy Sacrament
unto them? If there be scandalous members in his Church, why does he connive at
their wickedness, and suffer himself to be leavened by his careless indulgence
toward them, partaking of their sins, forasmuch as he neglects the only means
to reform them by Juridical Excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. If he say, he keeps them
from the Sacrament, I answer, But the Church of Corinth were commanded to do
more; Was it ever read of in the Scripture, that a Pastor refused to administer
the holy Suppe^ to his flock to keep the scandalous from communicating with
them? What though you plead but for Suspension, ought not that to be Juridical
as you are a Ruler empowered so to act? And have you so proceeded with all your
people that are excluded the holy Supper? I pray you Sir, satisfy me in these
things, either by some Scripture grounds, or by your Reformation as you are a
Christian and a Minister of the holy Gospel. As to the rest of this Paragraph,
I wish you would better study the nature of the New Covenant, and whom it
respects. And how the Sacraments may be said to be seals thereof, and what they
seal to in the Covenant, which things I have insisted somewhat upon in my other
writings, both in answer to Dr. Drake and Mr. Collins, whither I refer you,
intending have at present.

In his next Paragraph he speaks to the text in hand, The Apostle speaks of
Ordination of Ministers, wherein by not examining the persons to be ordained
guilt is contracted ordaining without proving, as 1 Timothy 3.10. is too sudden so
likewise the giving of the Sacrament is sudden and guilty (though but once in a
year) where no difference or trial is made of them that come but he that will,
though of the basest of the people may be a guest at the Lords Table. Men may
put all this off, by thinking the fault is not theirs while the act is others
men's, but others men's sins may be ou^s. As incivil Judicatories there are
principals and accessories: So before God there will be too: and non-examiners
are accessories before the fact: thus far he, p. 150

This text is quoted either for illustration, non-sequitur: it remains for him
to prove the necessity of the latter equal with the former; let the like proof
and reason be given for the one as the other, they being of themselves things
distinct to each other, and different things in the premises will not bear the
same conclusions: And therefore that which the text intends I grant; but deny
the other until further proof. And for his distinction in principals, and
accessories in sin. And non-examiners are accessories before the fact. Still
the question is but begged, it is still to prove that examination is the duty of
every Minister in order to excluding the ignorant, etc. his distinction holds
only in those sins or actions that are absolutely forbid, in that which i^ sin
in its own nature; but I deny that giving and receiving the Sacrament is so to
baptized Christians of years, and of the Church. I have sufficiently proved
that to be their necessary duty, which will not be answered these two days.
And until that be answered, the argument does reflect upon themselves, not
only by being accessories of their peoples neglects of institute worship; but
being principals of enforcing those neglects of necessary worship groundlesly
hindering those that would.

1. You must prove that the baptized rational members of the Church, if
ignorant, and in some things offensive, are forbid the Lords Supper, and yet
stand bound as members to all other observances of worship.

2. That a scandalous member indulged leavens the Church by doing lawful and
religious actions commanded.

3. That the prime end in casting out the scandalous and obstinate, is to keep
them from the Sacrament mainly; I say that which leavens a Church, is to
connive at the scandalous, by not doing what they are in a capacity to do in
acts of severe censures to reform them, it being far from my heart to think
that the good actions of a scandalous brother indulged does leaven the whole,
but his evil actions not punished with severity of discipline according unto
rule. But why the Church should be leavened more by the admission of such to
the Sacrament, the^ to holy prayer, etc. is to me a mystery, because the
Scriptures are clear both in commanding spiritual qualifications in order to
prayer, and forbidding the evil; and yet are silent as to these in order to
the Sacrament.

2. It cannot be denied but the Sacraments are the most carnal Ordinances in
the Gospel Church, consisting of external matter, that more suites with our
bodily senses then any other.

And lastly the weakness of their argument, that cry up the holy Supper above
her fellows in the Church with the mischievous effects that follow thereupon
inevitably. Yet notwithstanding (to prevent mistake) I judge the Lords Supper
equal in dignity and holiness, with the rest of holy appointments in the
Church, as being holy in respect of the holiness of the Author, institution,
use, and ends, requiring as much of preparation, reverent approaches, and
divine adoration in this part of sacred Worship, as any other part of worship
prescribed.

His eight and ninth proofs are Heb. 13.17. 1 Pet. 3.15. page 151.

Obey them that have the rule over you, etc. be ready to give an answer to
every one, that asks a reason of the hope that is in you.

The sum of that in Peter is but this, he says, If this were to be given
before an enemy, then much more, and easier is it to be made before friends,
such as desire to be helpers of men's faith, not upbraiders of their weakness.

The Author shows some ingenuity upon this text, by way of motive as helping
their faith, etc. and I dare say it will be sooner yielded unto upon that
score, then upon the account of a necessary duty; and I shall highly honor
those that are endeavoring to their utmost to draw on all their people to some
profession of faith or other, provided they do it to no other ends, but to
help forward the weak and ignorant in faith and knowledge, without the least
infringement of the privileges of the Ordinances in the Church, they stand
bound to observe as they are professing Christians. But for men to urge it as a
necessary duty in the name of Christ, when he never commands it at all to any
such and, they pretend, that is in order to admission to and exclusion from the
Sacrament, is that which I think my self bound to oppose as superstitions,
pernicious, and tyrannical in the Church of Christ. And I doubt not but to make
it good against all those that will acknowledge the constitution and form of
our Church to be true at present, though in some things out of order. I
confess my expressions may be judged too harsh, but I hope you will a little
bear with my zeal, it being in the behalf of the Church, defending their just
rights against those that thing they do well to degrade them of the same.

That of Heb. 13.17. does now come to be spoken to, Mr. Saunders observes;

1. That the people under them must be ruled and governed by them.

2. Ministers must give an account of them, which cannot be well done without
taking knowledge of their estates.

3. They must not only preach and exhort, but do all else which may conduce to
the peoples salvation.

4. If people obey not (their Rulers in the Church) they hurt themselves two
ways.

1. By sinning against this command.

2. By sadding their Pastors hearts, and so lessening their profit by his
Ministry. All these are applicable to our purpose urging activity on the
Ministers as well in discipline, as in preaching, calling for compliance from
the people.

To his 1. where a Church is so happy,

of that Ministerial work, accordingto Gospel rule; but I deny that the Apostle
intended the peoples obedience to every fancy that some have the boldness in
these times to urge upon their people, to their great prejudice and spiritual
hurt in debarring them some necessary duty and Covenant blessing. Therefore as
children unto parents, so people unto their Pastors must be obedient, in all
things, but with this restriction, in the Lord, for this is right, Ephesians. 6.7.

To his second, Ministers must give an account of them, which cannot well be
without taking knowledge of their estates.

Answ. 1. He does not keep to the terms of the text. The Apostle does not say
that, Ministers must give an account of their people, (whether they be good or
bad, profitable or unprofitable): but he says, for they watch for your souls
as they that must give an account, that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief, etc. The sense is this, they must perform all necessary duties belonging
to their Office toward you, as such that must give an account to God of their
being diligent and faithful in the work they are sent to perform: therefore he
would have the people to be willing and obedient unto them, for their
encouragement in the work, that they may do it with joy, etc. It Is certain,
both Minister and people must give an account to God; The Minister of his
faithful discharge of his duties in relation to his people, and the people of
theirs accordingly. For if souls miscarry for his unfaithfulness in not
warning them of the danger, they make themselves guilty of the blood of souls,
otherwise doing their duty faithfully, they are free from the blood of all.

But Mr. Saunders would have it thus, That Ministers must give an account of
the state and condition of their people, I think; or if he mean, they must take
knowledge of their spiritual estates, that they may know how to apply
themselves toward them both in private and public with seasonable words, etc.
in reference to their own account: I see no great hurt in that; nor does it
prove any such thing the text is quoted for. But if he should argue as some
others do from this text, Ministers must give an account to God of their
people, therefore the people must give an account of themselves to their
Ministers.

Answ. 1. As before by denying the antecedent as respecting their personal
condition, whether regenerate or not, or whether they have profited or not, but
of their own duty in respect of their peoples good.

2. Grant it, as themselves would, the consequence is not clear, because a
Ministers account unto God, and a peoples account to their Minister stand at so
great a distance, so wide a difference. But why should this be required of the
people more in order to the Sacrament, then Prayer, or in respect of their
Salvation? Prove that the Minister is to give an account to God only, how he
prepares, and whom he admits to the Sacrament, restraining the Text to that
particular only.

But the text he says is for their purpose, Because it urges to activity in
discipline, as in preaching, and calling aloud for compliance from the people.

1.

1. Then the Church cannot be said to be undisciplined at all, so long as she
has Ministers, but all the fault lies in this, the Ministers negligence in not
exercising acts of Jurisdiction, as he is bound to do, and empowered with.

2. Then a Minister is absolute and independent of himself, and not accountable
to any Church power in his male-administrations of that power, but to Jesus
Christ alone.

3. Then all have this power that are Ministers, and so at liberty to act as
their several humors move them, and must be left to this liberty as they are
Ministers, being once ordained, but who can be so blind as not to see into
what a gulf of division, tyranny, and confusion, that error, if put into
practice, would involve the whole? And most miserable is the condition of those
people, that are oppressed with Ministers of such impudent insolent principles,
when drawn into act. It concerns the Christian Magistrate to relieve such a
people.

But to proceed to his next, called the 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. proofs, page 153.
from Levit. 13.5. 2 Chronicles. 23.19. Joel 3.17. Nahum 1.15. Zach. 14.21. For the
two first, he pleads an equity in them, which is argumentative, The three last,
he says, are against the impure and horrid mixtures, which in our days are
without sufficient check in most Assemblies.

Do but read read over his quotations,

His 1. speaks of the uncleanness of Leprofie, and how he was to be shut up
seven days, now during this time he could come to no Ordinances, therefore
ignorant persons in the Gospel Church must not come to the Sacrament, a goodly
equitable consequence indeed. But I have been large in confuting the same in my
answer to Mr. Collings, whither I refer the Reader, as also his

2. Is there fully spoken to. His last three are so impertinent, that it is but
lost labor to repeat the texts, for they are special promises peculiar to the
Jews, upon their return from the Babylonish captivity.

1. The Temple should be built again, and no more be defiled with the
uncircumcised Heathen. And this he applies to us, as if the unregenerate,
ignorant, and offending brethren that are of the Church were meant to be these
uncircumcised Heathens, aliens and strangers, that pollute the Churches
Communion now, as they the holy Temple and Sanctuary then: though himself does
grant ours to be within, and of the Gospel Church, and their children (holy
federally) by virtue of the Covenant; but this is so absurd that it tires me, I
having spoke so much to this already.

But he says, God has promised this happiness unto his people under the
Gospel, that there shall come no more in to them the uncircumcised and unclean.

Now if strangers, men of Belial not enduring the yoke of Christ shall still be
mixed with Gods people; How is this promise made good? he asks.

This promise Isai. 52.1.

Besides 1. How does it call into question all Churches of the Gospel, that
ever were? for there were scandalous and wicked persons in them all.

2. It Is inconsistent with the wisdom and pleasure of God, who has constituted
the Church in such mercy and grace, that all that are born in the Church are of
the Church; and is it likely that such admission did intend such a purity; all
being so corrupt by nature as the Church maintains?

3. The very Ordinances set up in the Church to convert, the promises made to
the Church in order to that end: and our own experience of some fruit thereof,
may discover the vanity of that conceit, (namely, that there shall be no
regenerate or wicked in the Church). And he that shall resist such manifest
demonstration, I think he understands but little of the truth and nature of the
Gospel Covenant, and the blessings of grace and mercy that are conferred upon
sinners in the Church from it. I pray you Sir, why is it not Gospel-like for
sinners in the Church, to partake of all Gospel Ordinances of Worship? What is
the Gospel it self, but good news to sinners? And what do all the Ordinances
tend to, but to bring sinners home to God? And I hope he is no enemy to
holiness, as our Author intimates page 154. that would have Ministers to allow
Jesus Christ the liberty of his own appointments in the Church to unite unto
himself all those he dearly loves and dyed for.

But Mr. Saunders tells us, That God looks now for a more real and spiritual
people, and will not own such for his people that are graceless, what ever
their profession may be, quoting Camero.

But what a strange assertion is this, birth as himself confesses! And will
God now disown them for his people that are graceless by nature? then we may
cast all Infants out of the Church, and so from baptism: For it will hardly be
made good that Infants by nature have real inherent grace: then what hope is
there left for graceless professing people under the Ordinances? if God will
not own such, they are left destitute of all hope; for who can own God, and
come to him by the power of Grace, until the Lord own them for his people by
giving them that grace first? But what reason can any of sober principles give,
that God will not now in the Gospel times own such a graceless professing
people for his people, as he has done before the coming of Christ in the flesh?

For 1. Is not Jesus Christ the Author and procurer of all spiritual blessings
to fallen man, and always the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever?

2. And was not the Gospel Covenant, (as to the substance of it) always the
same to the visible professing Church and to their seed? Is it straightned in
respect of grace and mercy toward man since the coming of our Lord, more then
before? Or does it run upon such terms now, as that not any may come under the
outward administration that have not real grace? Or will you have none come
under Gospel worship and duties, that profess Christianity, that have not real
grace? What rocks does that assertion dash against?

3. Is not the visible Church the same, all being grassed into the same Olive
and Vine, and planted together into the same body by baptism, as the Jew by
circumcision? Do you think that a different administration only made such a
different Church, and consequently requires such a different subject in
admission into it, as yours imports? What was there in the old administration
that should in reason indulge so great a latitude as to the subjects, more then
in the new? Those that can tell us wherein the mystery of this lies, should do
well to give us the discovery; for my part, I must confess, I judge both the
Old and also the New, merely external, as in the letter, both fitted for
reasonable man, as instrumental to conveigh a blessing of grace unto whom the
Lord will, of those that in obedience yield what homage they are able unto
their Lord. Whosoever entered this great Covenant of grace, that the visible
Church always has, and is in possession of, came always under the
restipulation thereof as his duty, which is this, to observe and do all that
the Lord requires to be done at that time and age that any person lives in, so
shall ye be his people, and the Lord will be your God. The Lords Covenant with
his Church does always oblige those that have entered into it, to all that
obedience that at present is in force by the Lord. A Jew by nature was under
all that God commanded them, and a Christian by nature is under all that God
commands now. A Jew by nature and profession had all the Church privileges of
a Jew. In like manner, a Christian by nature and profession has all the Church
privileges of a Christian, only with greater advantage; forasmuch as the
privileges of the Christian Church are more clear and spiritual, tending more
unto the spiritual profit and edification of the whole. And what reason,
besides the good pleasure of God, can any man give why the Lord should vary in
these different administrations? Most certain it is, that since Christ was
manifested in the flesh, and justified in the Spirit, and ascended into glory,
greater has been the advantage both of knowing and believing in the Son of
God, in comparison of attaining unto knowledge and faith in Christ, by those
that had but some dark obscure discoveries of him by types and shadows; for
men now to say that God looks for more at our hands then of them, is rational.
But to affirm that the Lord in Gospel times will not own a Christ-professing
people that have not real grace, is altogethere groundless, and a little too
peremptorily spoken, without better proof then Camero. And it is too harsh to
affirm that a mere want of real grace does discovenant a Christian professing
people, and that God will disown them for his people upon that account, they
being holy federally by birth, and upon that account baptized, and thereby put
in possession of the Sacramental Seal, which himself will grant. And would the
same men but argue as rationally from the state of the Jews Church, as touching
grown ones, as they do of Infants, this Controversy about who shall be
admitted to the Sacrament would have been frivolous.

But now Mr. Saunders has done with the texts which he says Conclude
positively for their practice in gathering and distinguishing their
Communicants, by examining. What all these lights will do being set up
together, who knows?

So likewise, Saunders so much as applied them (for the most part) to prove the
question. So little is his own confidence of the pertinentnesse of his own
quotations; for some of them he has applied to prove suspension, and others to
prove excommunication, which in order to their way of gathering they meddle not
with at all, nor is it proper so to do in the way they have designed, their
way being rather to admit unto membership, then the exclusion of Church Members
from the privileges of the Church they have formed. But Sir, how doubtfully
do you express your self at last, as if your self were in some doubt whether
these texts make for your way or not, What they may do, who knows? and yet in
the beginning of the same sentence you say, they conclude positively for your
practice.

I may well assure you (Sir) that it is a grief to my Spirit, that such sober
godly moderate Gentlemen as your self seems to be, should engage in a practice
before you could tell how to make it out by the authority of holy Scriptures
against all the world. Had you been so happy as first to have seen an undoubted
warrant, before you had engaged in this separation, you should never have been
one in that society, whilst you had lived. How an ingenuous and rational head
can withstand such plain demonstrations, that by the assistance of the Lord I
have expressed my self in, in opposing yours, and endeavoring to give the true
sense of the Scriptures in debate, I cannot tell; I must and do commend all
that is written to the powerful working of the Spirit of Truth and Grace, to
persuade and incline the hearts of the godly, to see where truth and the
Churches peace and reformation lies, according to plain and evident rule. I
doubt not but your own heart will bear me witness, that I have rationally
discovered the most (if not all) your consequences and conclusions as applied
to desend your practice, to be mere mistakes and impertinent. I beseech you
consider seriously, how ever you will be able to give the Church of God sat is
faction, for running into such a needless separation that is altogether
without Scripture warrant. Nay, do but think how you will answer your Lord,
for breaking the peade and union of your particular Congregations, raising
prejudices, bringing your persons and Ministry into contempt, by making such a
groundless rent and schism in his Church: and that to the great prejudice of
his visible subjects; setting up laws of your own choosing, urging them upon
your people as necessary, or else must be excluded, (as to you) the necessary
Laws of Jesus Christ their absolute Lord. You say well, (as every conscionable
sober serious Christian should) that you are ready to stand or fall, as the
authority of Scriptures shall determine. In charity I am bound to believe that
you intend no less then what you have soberly published. Gods providence has
so overruled the action, (that one that is a mere stranger unto you; I not so
much as hearing of your quality, no otherwise then I can gather by your Book)
to give you a sudden answer, wherein you are now upon the trial of your
ingenuity and honesty, there to make good your practice you are acting
vigorously in, or to return to your own flock, and withhold nothing that is
from them. If you seriously search into the conditions of your people, I
believe you may see cause to confess that you have lost more in your
respective flocks, then you are like to recover while you live; at least some
of you. Please not your selves with what is so much pretended in this giddy
age; Namely, to act in reforming in some pure and stricter way. For many have
run them out of all, under such like pretenses. Be holy and strict as it is
written according to the known and undoubted rule of Scripture Canon; and be
assured that that is the purest way, for you know, not our own way, be it never
so specious; but the way of the Lord is the straight way that leads to life in
glory, and if you return, and be saithful in dispensing the things of God, as
you are obliged by the Word, that is the way that God will own, the way of the
Churches peace and edification; the way to make Ministers a blessing to their
people, and their people a blessing unto them: and the only way both to unite
and to reform the whole. The Lord give you a heart to be serious and searching
after the safest way, in the further discharge of those relative duties, as
Pastor of a Congregation, whom you are set to watch over, and warn and feed
also in the Lord.

I must confess unto you, that I have been something more round and rude in my
answer then is so well becoming; considering the moderate temper of our Author.
But the Lord is my record, that I have not any slight esteem of his person; but
am verily persuaded he is a precious, able sober, Divine, that expresses much
of true godliness in him. It is partly the want of some easier and smoother
expression; partly my zeal of the Churches peace, so miserably plunged into
divisions and separations, the great impediments to reformation; partly because
I would provoke to more searching into this Controversy about admission to and
exclusion from the Sacrament, for I see that our over rigid principles in this,
do run us upon other dangerous rocks. Partly to vindicate my self, and those
of the same persuasion from what we are censured for, by Mr. Manton. But if any
thing be inexcuseable, that your charitable construction cannot moderate, I beg
your pardon, for I affect not to be bitter, nor would I be guilty of any
incivility toward any godly Ministers of the Gospel.

But I shall go on, and come to examine his convincing arguments, laid down as
seconds to the Scriptures alleged, page 156. and the first is this, Because
the holy Supper belongs to godly ones, real believers men have a right in Gods
sight only as such: They that have no true grace, have a seal set to a blanck.
Men stand in the visible Church as they are apprehended to belong to the
invisible; all this, he says, is soundly proved by our Savior adminstring to
Disciples only, Matthew. 26.26. not to Disciples in the largest acceptance, for
many professed besides: but to such as were more peculiar was it given. And his
practice is to be a rule to the Church.

All Mr. Saunders strength in proof of this argument stands in two things.

1. In his asserting several things that are usually taken for granted, without
any special proof.

2. In urging the practice of our Savior in the first administration, Matthew.
26.26. as proving soundly all the particulars asserted in the argument, he
denying that this was an accidental circumstance, but was foredetermined by
Christ so to have it, but his enumeration of particulars are merely begged, and
argued against in my answer to Mr. Collings, unless it be this, that men stand
in the visible Church as they belong to the invisible. I know not any ground
why we should apprehend that all in the visible Church do belong to the
invisible of Gods Elect: for in the Church amongst them that are called, it is
said that many are called, but sew are chosen; though it is true in a negative
sense in this respect of particular persons we cannot exclude any one from
Election.

Mr. Saunders argument in form, as to the substance and sense, is thus.

Such only that Christ gave the Sacrament unto, have right to receive it; But
he gave it to none but holy ones, Disciples by peculiar choice -- Ergo, holy
ones, disciples by peculiar choice (only) have right unto it.

The argument is so weak and feeble that to the Judicious it needs no answer;

1. Were there no other Scripture presidents, Precepts, Intimations, for
clearing and warranting the right of those that are to be admitted, but the
first president argued from; then it would have posed us to answer it; or to
prove the continuance of it to the Churches use at all; because at first it was
given to extraordinary persons in Office only. But if he will allow the whole
of holy Scripture he might see enough to justify the right of all in the
Church in general without any peculiar choice, 1 Cor. 10.17. Act. 2.42. chapter
20.7.

2. If this President, Matthew. 26.26. were fore-determined by Christ to be an
example and rule for the Church; then

1. Who must administer this Ordinance now according to this pattern? Christ
himself only blessed, and gave it unto Apostles only.

2. Then it will follow, that none but persons in Office, and of the Ministry
should receive it.

3. Then the greatest part of sincere Disciples and followers of Christ should
be left out; for without doubt there were many such at that present that were
not admitted. Besides the seventy Disciples sometimes sent forth to preach the
Gospel, there were other holy persons both men and women; the names that
presently met together for religious and divine employments were about an
hundred and twenty; of whom some choice persons are named, as Mary the Mother
of Jesus, and other women, and Matthias and Barsabas, Act. 1.14, 15, 23. which
Christ gave not the Sacrament unto: therefore if this president must be our
rule, no wonder they refuse as good as they admit, nay better then they admit;
for without doubt Christ gave it to some, that afterward discovered great
ignorance and unbelief, besides one of them was a Devil.

4. If this president must be our rule as it is urged, then there must be a
choice of some peculiar holy ones, out of holy ones admitted, and as holy and
sincere refused. And yet see how the Author prevaricates and departs from this
president in another place: where he says, Our way is only to exclude the
visibly unworthy, and no others, page 166.

3. If all that Christ gave the Sacrament unto were not holy, then the argument
will fall of it self; but Christ gave it unto Judas whom he knew was a Traitor,
and had conspired with other of his enemies to destroy him: therefore all that
Christ gave it unto were not holy ones, and so the argument ^als. That which is
to be made good is the Minor; for indeed some are in doubt whether Judas
received the Sacrament or no. And therefore I shall a little touch upon that:
and it will be made good from Matthew. 26.26. his own quotation: in this text,
Christ gave the signs of his body and blood to his Disciples, and said, Take,
eat, this is my Body; Judas was one of his Disciples that sat down at the
Table, verse. 20. When Even was come, he sat down with the twelve, and one of
this twelve should betray him, verse. 21. and that Judas continued at the Supper
it evident, verse. 23. He that dippeth with me in the dish, the same is he. And
St. Mark 14. chap. of his Gospel, verse. 17.20. relates just the same with St.
Matthew, Then come to Saint Luke, chap. 22.14, 21. he agrees with the former,
that all the twelve sat down, and he in special speaks of the actions done at
the Table the twelve sat down unto.

Namely, 1. The eating of the Passover, verse. 15, 17, 18. Then Christ's
celebrating this sacred Ordinance, blessing and breaking bread; to be done in
remembrance of Christ, verse. 19.20. And now having related the main actions
that were performed thus solemnly at the Table, then he relates what words fell
out to be spoken at the Table, verse. 21, 22. notwithstanding Christ's love in
this familiar manner expressed to them, and theirs to him both in the Passover,
and holy Supper; yet Christ tells them that one of them should betray him: and
Luke you see relates these words as being at the conclusion of those holy
appointments of the Passover, and holy Supper. And thus we may conceive a
clear agreement of these three Evangelists, that Judas was at the Lords Table,
and did do as the other did for any thing in the least hinted at by these
three, that wrote first of this holy history. And how ever it should come into
the head of any so much as to scruple such a thing, whether Judas (one of the
twelve that sat and eat at the same Table with Christ and the other,) received
the holy Supper or no, especially there being not the least hint of his
exclusion or withdrawing more then of the other: is to be admired. Without
doubt we may rationally conclude from these three, that Judas received the
Sacrament of the Lord, as well as Peter or James, or Thomas, etc. for they are
not recorded to have received it by name in particular, but as they were his
Disciples, and of the twelve, that sat down at the Table. But then you will
say, how comes it to pass, that this of Judas receiving or not, is made such a
great controversy in the Church in all ages.

Answ. That which has occasioned this Controversy from the four Evangelists
is in Joh. 13.30. Judas having received the Sop, went immediately out, and it
was night, hence it is conceived that John has relation to the Passover
Supper, and this sop was some part of that service, and upon his eating this,
the Devil entered, verse. 27. and he went out immediately before the Lords Supper
was instituted and given; and brought about his actual treason in a part of
that night. This place and sense has occasioned the question, and quarrel, as
to Judas, so far as ever I could meet with any color of reason. Therefore now
I shall both briefly and plainly give you my thoughts how to reconcile the
Evangelists, and to satisfy any that are rational, I hope.

1. It can never be proved, that St. John does so much as mention, or mean the
Passover Supper in the 13. of John, at all, only he gives a more particular
account of that Supper, which Christ and his Disciples had together at Bethany,
two days before the feast of the Passover, in the house of one Simon a
Leaper, where a woman poured upon Christ's head a box of very costly ointment,
etc. all the Evangelists spoke of this Supper, Matthew. 26.2, 6, 7. Mark. 14.1,
3. Luke 21.1, 3. Joh. 13. 1, 2. all the doubt is of this of John, whether it be
the same with the other three.

Answ. Consult the words and circumstances, v. 1. Now before the Feast of the
Passover, etc. Matthew and Mark has it, You know that after two days is the
Feast of the Passover. Luke upon the same says, Now the Feast of unleavened
bread drew nigh, which is called the Passover: thus far you see there is no
disagreement; only Matthew and Mark are more punctual for the space of time
before (namely) two days, then Luke and John.

2. They all agree in this, that Judas began his treason, made his bargain
before the Passover night or Supper, 1 John 13.1, 2. compared, Now before the
Feast of the Passover, and Supper being ended, the Devil having now put into
the heart of Judas to betray him. Even now before the Passover came at a
private civil Supper in Simon the Leapers house, the Devil first put it into
Judas heart to betray him. And then Luke relates the same, chap. 22.3. and 1.
put together. Now the Feast of the Passover drew nigh. Then entered Satan into
Judas, one of the twelve, and he went his way and communed with the chief
Priests, how he might betray him unto them. And they were glad and covenonted
to give him money, and he promised and sought opportunity to betray him in the
absence of the people, verse. 4, 5, 6. Then after this came the Passover, verse.
7. Thus it is clear the Devil entered into Judas before the Passover Supper.
Now if the sop John spoke of, had been at the Passover Supper, (which preceded
Satan's entering and prevailing, putting Judas upon treason,) then how will Luke
be reconciled, and the other, Matthew and Mark, which spoke the very same with
Luke, And from that time he sought to betray him, Matthew. 26.16. that is, after
he had made his bargain for thirty pieces of silver, verse. 15. all this was
done before they went into the City, or could tell where to keep the Passover,
verse. 17, 18. The very same is in Mark. 14.10, 11. Thus far we see an agreement
of all the Evangelists, that the Devil entered Judas, and he had plotted and
contracted the treason before the Passover Supper, and therefore this of John
cannot be meant of the Passover night.

1. Because the sop preceding Satan's entering was before that night, as Luke
22.3. is express.

2. Because that Supper, Joh. 13.1, 2. was before the Passover.

3. Because the sop in Joh. 13.27. was that which did immediately precede
Satan's entrance, prevailing with Judas to betray his Master.

4. Because when after the sop our Savior says, What thou do do quickly,
the other Disciples not knowing what it meant, thought because it was spoken to
Judas, he having the bag, that Jesus had bid him buy those things that they had
need of against the Feast, verse. 28, 29. and therefore it was before the
Passover Feast began, there being no lawful buying and selling, when the Feast
of the Passover was begun. If any shall say, that St. Mark, chap. 14.20.
speaks the same with John; and it is clear, that of St. Marks was spoken in
relation to the Passover Supper, and therefore the dipping a sop in John was
at the Passover; for they seem both to relate to the same thing.

Answ. I grant St. Mark has relation to the Passover Supper, but then I deny
that both these dippings were the same, and at the same time. Mark says,
Jesus said, Verily I say unto you, one of you that eats with me shall betray
me, v. 18. Nay Christ came nearer, and said it was one of the twelve, that
dipped with him in the dish; and so left it in the general amongst them, which
caused every one to suspect himself: But this in John seems to be a different
thing; for this of dipping and giving was occasioned by John's private question,
verse. 25. Lord who is it, says John, leaning on Jesus breast, (being put on by
Peter to move the question). Jesus gave this sign privately only in answer to
John; He it is to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it, and he gave
it to Judas, and said, What thou do do quickly. This discovered the Traitor
unto John only; For no man at the Table knew for what intent Christ spoke thus
unto him: this is a far different thing to that of Mark, there one of the
twelve, that did eat with him in the same dish which all did, here he it is
that Christ gave a sop unto when he had dipped it; there one of the twelve,
here which of the twelve; there none could be satisfied who was the Traitor;
here John only could tell that it was Judas, and indeed John knew the Traitor,
but did not discover him. Many more things might be added, but I have done more
then I intended, to clear up the Evangelical Harmony in relation to Judas his
receiving the Lords Supper. Matthew, Mark, Luke, are clear for the affirmative,
and John you may clearly see in his 13. chapter speaks not at all of the Passover
Supper, but of that Supper at Bethany, which all the other make mention of too
as well as he, they larger in relating of some particulars; he of other
particulars, for the perfecting of this holy History. Hence it may be clearly
concluded that Judas received the Sacrament; And they all drunk of it, Mark.
14.23. And now you may easily see what foundation Mr. Saunders first convincing
argument stands upon, to prove that there should be Examination, and
differencing of men in order to Reformation, and preventing unworthy receivers.
Christ though he knew Judas to be a Devil, and had discovered him to be the
Traitor unto John, yet he gives both the Passover and Sacrament of his body
and blood to Judas amongst the rest, without any differencing act of exclusion;
yet not without telling him smartly of his sin, and the judgments of God ready
to follow thereupon; which left him more without excuse.

I come now to his second Argument;

The means and the end come under the same command; Now we find the end
commanded, unworthy ones are forbidden, and denied. Who will say that Ignorant
and scandalous in life are to be admitted? Now this being granted any proper
and sufficient way to this end; Namely, the exclusion of the unfit: cannot want
a probation from the Word, for the end is attained by means, and is in vain set
forth without them, page 157.

I grant those that are forbidden to come, therefore that their persons were
unworthy, because some of their actions were. I have insisted largely upon this
in answer to Mr. Collins. The truth is, how can they be said to be forbidden,
that are of the Church and baptized, and as such are under the command of all
institute worship? Nay it is a question whether Excommunication do disoblige
from precepts of worship, although the Church may lawfully deny them the
benefit of all worship in the punishing of impenitent scandalous sinners for
their amendment. A prison does not excuse a Fellon from duties of public
worship, when he by his own sinning has brought himself justly under that
restraint. And in his saying, Any proper and sufficient way to the exclusion of
the unfit. I know no way but Juridical censures of the Church that is proper
according to the Gospel rule, Juridical Admonition and Excommunication the Word
has prescribed directly, and that only is proper and sufficient for the
exclusion of the unfit; as for any other way to be proper that is no where to
be found in the Scripture, and neglect to do as it is written, is but a raw
sancy of a man's own framing, and punishable by the Scriptures, as is clear in
the case of Nadab, and Abihu, Levit. 10.1, 2. they invented a proper and a
sufficient way in kindling common fire to consume the Sacrifice of Incense, the
fire of the Tabernacle being out through their own negligence; but the Lord
destroyed them with fire from heaven, for presuming to offer that which the
Lord commanded not. For where the Lord himself prescribes a way, the Church is
bound only to that way, not any way; but that only of Gods own prescribing will
he be pleased with. God will be sanctified in them that come nigh him. Now then
I say, when we upon Church reforming, through the subtilty of some, and
carelessenesse of others, have lost the exercise of the Churches discipline:
being out of actual possession, through our own default, as to the edification
of the whole, shall any be so bold now, as to invade this authoritative power,
and assume to themselves without the consent of the Church the exercise of
discipline? and under that pretense use any way that is but proper and
sufficient to exclude the ignorant and scandalous from the Sacrament? when the
Lord has prescribed a direct way what is to be done with the scandalous in the
Church. Again, that the Ark should be fetched unto its proper place, was an
(end) commanded, yet any proper and sufficient means subservient thereunto were
not warrantable; but that way and means only that God had appointed: and you
know David swerved from the prescription in fetching back the Ark, but the Lord
made a breach upon them for it, in smiting Vzzah that he dyed. This way was
proper and sufficient to attain the end, yet they were punished for it. The
Lord made a breach amongst them, because they carried not the Ark according to
that order God had prescribed in the Law. It Is a dangerous and desperate
attempt to invent ways and means of exclusion of Christ's visible subjects from
their native rights otherwise then it is written. There is a clear rule for
Juridical Excommunication, and in what cases, and by whom to be exercised; and
let that satisfy all, until they can find further order from the Scriptures
to warrant their other proceedings, under the notion of discipline in this
giddy age. The Reader may sufficiently by this see the weakness and vanity of
the way and practice defended by the Author. I have fully answered the texts of
Scripture and the reasons added as seconds to warrant their way, they must
either find out a better warrant then is yet produced; or else as the ten
Tribes were jealous of the other two and a half, Josh. 22. when they heard that
the two had erected an Altar of their own heads, conceived they were in a
superstitious rebellion, in forsakeing the ways of the Lord, and so to provoke
the Lord unto anger to punish the whole Congregation, as in the matter of Peor
and Achan; so may we be jealous and suspicious of these new invented ways, so
vigorously acted in by our brethren, which tend so evidently to make division
and schism in the Church, and is such an impediment, that does obstruct and
make void all hopes of attaining unto that discipline, that God has prescribed
for the health and welfare of the whole Church. They cannot say as the two
Tribes of their Altar, It is not for sacrifice, but for a witness to the other
Tribes that their children had part in the Lord, and in the Altar that he had
commanded to be built for sacrifice and worship. For the way that Mr. Saunders
defends is for worship, and held forth as necessary, to the prejudice of
professing Christians that have any interest in the Lord, and in all his
commanded worship that you exclude them from, and upon the matter discovenant
them, and their children from having a part in the Lord. Do you think it but a
small evil to your professing people to deprive them of the benefit and
blessing of Gospel appointments, instituted by the Lord himself for the
spiritual good of his visible Church, of which your people are members and
within? What know you but it may lie heavy upon your souls, if ever you be
reduced into straights and trials, to think of the wrong you have done to your
peoples souls in withholding that from them, which was necessary? You think
(now) the fault is your peoples, and that they keep themselves away from the
Sacrament; they may be admitted if they will; for you say it is more for want of
a will, then of capacity that they are not admitted. But by your leave Sir, may
I presume to speak one word on the peoples behalf? you impose such laws and
ties upon their consciences in order to admission, that you cannot in the least
make good by the authority of your Master, you pretend very much to his
authority in those very things, which are merely your own fancies, and
inconsistent with your own principles otherwise. I dare boldly say that you
are in such a way, (and stickle to defend it too) that you will never while you
live be able to produce one plain text of Scripture, (allowing it its own
sense) to justify either the forming of your Church, or to prove any one thing
of what you stand upon as necessary to admission: you have quoted 15. texts to
prove examination, and suspension only, and not one will in the least favor
you as has bin discovered already, and in your laying down necessary things to
qualify unto receiving, you quote about sixty texts, and I have searched after
them, I dare say it and justify it too, that there is not one text of all that
number in the least pertinent to prove any one of the qualifications, as laid
down to be necessary to this end; namely, to admission to the holy Supper. And
how would you have your people to come up to your terms, when you so evidently
wrest the sense of Scriptures to justify the boldness of venting forth your
own fancies in the name of the Lord? This is the way you are agreed of, and you
rejoice in your comforts, and applaud it for purity, and you are resolved thus
to walk, and you cry up Gospel rule: and yet your actings are not consonant to
any rule the Scripture teach; for any thing you have said in defense of your
way. May not your comforts be suspected, as well as others, whose ways and
courses are dangerous, and to be avoided? I would have you consider of it, for
these unnecessary separations in a true Church, (as you confess of ours) are
absolutely schismatical: and your people are bound to decline your way, and to
keep their station in the Church into which they are imbodyed, and to use all
their endeavors to partake of Gods Ordinances where they may, without running
themselves into such dangerous schisms that directly tend to the confusion of
the whole. And without doubt if you will be as ingenuous as you express, you
must either return to your distracted flocks and perform those relative duties
you stand bound unto, or persist in ways of your own choosing, merely without
the words warranty, which is scandalous in the Church of Christ, so to do and
deserves to be censured.

Mr. Saunders after his arguments, he gives some motives which he would have
his Reader lay to heart the evils following the neglect of them, or the like
course.

1. And chiefly God is provoked to remove our Candlestick, for neglect of
Church censures upon scandalous offenders: A little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump, 1 Cor. 5.6.

I deny that the way defended has any thing of the Church censures in it
according to that text, Saunders says, they excommunicate none, and
Excommunication (alone) is meant by this Scripture. The Apostle does not say,
Separate the meal from the leaven, but purge out the leaven from the meal, he
does not say, exclude the scandalous. from the Sacrament, but put out from
among your selves such wicked persons: that is, out of all Christian Communion,
civil or sacred. What is their course to this Text, when they Juridically
censure none, nor indeed are in a capacity so to do? Casting out of the
Church, and leaving out from the Sacrament those that are within, are huge
different things; the first is lawful and according to Gospel rule, the other
unlawful, as being against all Gospel rules or precedents. It Is true, the
neglect of Church censures where a Church is in such a capacity, is a great
evil, that does much provoke the Lord to punish such neglect, and that we are
in this capacity at present, some have more to answer for, then I fear they are
sensible of, nor humbled under that direful guilt; my prayer to God is to make
us all sensible of our malady, and in his due time restore unto this poor rent
and divided Church that remedy of holy discipline.

His second evil is, The confusion of souls by ordinary and common profanation;
eating and drinking their own damnation.

This is high indeed for words, Corinth lay under the guilt of high
profanation, but it was not ordinary or common I think. It Is probable they
never offended so again, nor any other Church: what their sin was should be
enquired after more strictly, and the punishment inflicted, and then judge
whether the Sacrament be, for the confusion of souls; it was a temporal
chastisement to prevent the damnation of souls. This to the punishment: The sin
was a sacrilegious misuse of holy things to carnal and common ends in the very
act of administration, which I have largely given my thoughts of, and showed
that not any Congregations in our Church did ever or rarely so offend; and what
he means by common profanation, must be some other thing, that the Scripture
no where condemns, otherwise then in every other Ordinance of God, that is too
carelessly performed. As all other Ordinances, so this was instituted for the
spiritual good of the Church; Christ commands nothing for the hurt of his
visible subjects, they conforming thereunto according to their present
capacity: the Lord gives his laws and Ordinances for our good only: Sometimes
he permits a people for their punishment to choose Ordinances and statutes of
their own making for their hurt, as Israel of old did. I conclude then, that
this evil, the confusion of souls, etc. is a slander of Gods Ordinance, and an
evil of men's own making, when applied to the Sacrament more then to all other
Ordinances in the Church. -- Next,

He says in his third place, Abuse of the blood of Christ by being too
prodigal hereof.

1.

2. They who admit Heathens and give the holy Supper to persons unbaptized, or
excommunicate, or to those that come on purpose to abuse the signs to common
ends. But to administer the Sacrament unto serious professing Christians that
come reverently, and demean themselves orderly according to the external part
of this observance, is that which is according unto Gospel rule, and the
administration holy and warrantable; Christ that gave himself for his Church,
does not think much of giving the signs and representations of himself, body
and blood to the members thereof. And who will plead for any but
Church Members, who are under the obligation of this observance of their Lord?
And to deny it to such, is to be more withholding then is meet, and a dishonor
to Jesus Christ, who came into the world to save sinners.

His fourth is, Obstructing the reformation of the Churches we live in.

And what is reformation in the Church, Christians, in hope of his mercy and
blessing to their souls, are discouraged and hindered by these pretenders to
reform: They shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against poor souls, that as sinners
would be entering in and adhering to their Savior. They forbid whom Christ
commands to serve him in this Ordinance, and in reforming of their Churches
they make void the commands of Christ by their own traditions; which ways tend
more to the destruction and confusion of Churches then in the least the
reforming of them.

His fifth is, Crossing the desire of the godly in the land, and the actings of
the State herein.

The desires of the godly were,

His sixth, Degenerating from the Primitive times, and all true antiquity.

That the Virgin Primitive times in the Apostolical Churches admitted all to
the holy Supper that came under baptism, as has been showed already; and for
after times, if they acted otherwise, they are as much to be questioned for
swerving from the first precedents, as we. ^


As for that Antiquity that is newer then the Scriptures, this Author is no
adorer of it, as himself writes: The Fathers were divided in truth, and united
in error. The principle of Antiquity yields but a popular and fallacious
argumeent, page 6.9. and therefore he might have spared this quotation of
Chrysostom in his Homily 83. Let us keep away all without exception, that we
see to come unworthily. But what he meant by unworthily who can tell? and what
he meant by keeping away; whether as a single Minister, or by the Churches
Jurisdiction, is a query. But did ever Chrysostom forsake his Church as
Pastor, and join himself as an Officer or member to another Pastor and Church?
And in stead of administering the holy Supper to his own Congregation, or using
any acts of discipline to amend them, leave them out? and separate some few
with him to receive the Sacrament in another Church? See whether Christ or his
Apostles, or Chrysostom, will justify your own practice; all that you have
yet pretended from the Scripture, to warrant your way, has been sufficiently
examined and confuted.

His last, The want of making some separation, as to the Lords Table, has
given occasion to some to forsake our Congregations. Master Cotton, Bloody
Tenent.

1. ^
The want of right and solid principles, as touching the constitution and first
reforming of our Church, has given the occasion of the Brownists separation
from us, for they in New England do not scruple the administering of the
Sacrament to a scandalous member tolerated by the Church, till censured
Juridically: and for them that own our Church and Ordinances for true, they
might be rationally satisfied upon the same principle.

2. The want of right principles, as to the Sacrament, has wryed more of the
godly minded then otherwise would be; as men come to embrace truer principles,
and conceptions of this holy Ordinance, according to the Scriptures; they will
be more tender of making unnecessary separations and rents in the Church.

3. It is a wonder that our common principles in order to the Sacrament, do
not hurry all knowing conscientious men into some separations or other, since
it is said the unregenerate are far from being disciples, believers; and the
Sacrament is a cup of poison, and for the confusion and damnation of such
souls; they are guilty of the murder of Christ, etc. And that they have nothing
to do with the Covenant; and therefore the Sacrament is but a seal to a blanck
when administered unto them; These erroneous principles do more distract and
trouble the poor Church, then men are willing to understand; or decline the
unnecessary stirs that follow thereupon.

His second motive contains, The great advantages got by acting in some courses
of discipline. But he should have told us, what courses of discipline he means,
whether any course that men can invent? or that which the Scriptures only
teach? What shall we think of that course themselves are acting in? Does theirs
(were it generally taken up) enable us the better to defend the truth of our
Churches, as he tells us, page 162.

Must we run into a schism, etc. I doubt not but we shall find friends to
defend the truth of our Churches, as to their being, as they are formed up
already and grafted into the true Olive, root and branch. And I think none are
more perfidious to our Churches, then those that forsake their former station
in the Church; and form a new with the specious pretenses according to Gospel
rule. What does this imply, but that our Churches are false, and not according
to Gospel rule? What (beside their own word) can free them from rigid and
absolute separation? That which follows; We shall have the better satisfaction
in our Consciences, (whilst God is our witness that we have taken pains,
drawn loss upon our estates, stirred up the envy of the multitude for his
service sake.)

And who has required this at your hands? page 164.

1. The stirs and troubles where any such separation is made.

2. The separation defended is the same with schism, and absolute separation,
page 165.

His answer is, We must follow peace with men, as it may stand with holiness
and no otherwise; and indeed from a high, rash or absolute separation there are
dangerous consequences; but from that which is moderate and warrantable no such
dangers, says he.

To this I reply,

1. That keeping the peace of the Church of Christ is more urged and pressed home
amongst Christians, then to other men in the world; Christ came to make
division between the Church and the world: but left a legacy of love and peace
to his Church only, they are to follow after the things that make for peace and
the edification one of another without limitation: but holiness is the
boundary of our peace with all other men of the world: there is an absolute
injunction to the Church. And have peace amongst your selves, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
Mark. 9.50.

2. That to break the Churches peace by an unnecessary Separation is so far
from holiness, or losing our blessing, that it is a wicked schism, as I have
proved theirs to be; they not being able to warrant the separation they are
acting in by any ground of Scripturce or prin^iples of solid reason: And
therefore it will reflect upon them to their reproach and shame, until they be
able to give satisfaction to the Church in their fuller defense, or reforming,
by returning from the schism they have hatched and nourished to the great
prejudice of many of their peoples souls. I come to his queries, page 166. I
shall be very brief, and but touch at things, I having done more then was
intended.

1. Whether it be not against the Solemn Covenant, not to act in some
disciplinary courses, for in this we have swo^n to endeavor Reformation in
Discipune according to the Word Hence he assumes when this was taken, either we
saw the alteration of corrupt customs to be necessary in the Congregations we
live in, or not necessary now; if the latter be true then whosoever so took it
he swore not in judgment, and so took Gods name in vain for he swore to reform
being convinced of no corruptions. But if the 1 be true, then we desire of
every Minister and other man, that has taken it, with what conscience they can
oppose ways and courses tending to that sworn end, and bow they dare to
withhold their own activity therein?

1. England, and Iteland, in Doctine, Worship, Discipline, and Government
according to the Word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches;
and likewise not to endeavor to bring the three Nations to the nearest
conjunction and uniformity in Religion, confession of faith, form of Church
Government, etc. But then the question is, What our endeavors should be as the
case stands, as particular Minisiers or private members? Reformation in
Discipline being not yet agreed of by the whole what it is, nor in present
exercise and force by virtue of law which was intended in the Covenant.

2 Whether the ways and courses defended by our Author, do not cross and
assault the ends of the Covenant, as tending to nothing more then making
divisions and several factions and confusions in the Churches of God, which
have swore to bring the whole Church of the three Nations to the nearest
conjunction and uniformity in Religion, confession of Faith, form of
Church Government, etc. That we and our posterity after us, may as Brethren
live in faith and love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

3. The Covenant binds us to reform in Discipline according to the Word, and
example of best reformed Churches. Mr. Saunders puts in, and practices a more
general lati^ude, Whether not to act (in some disciplinary ways) and courses
be not against the Covenant; he means some courses or other of men's own
inventing, as that of theirs which has nothing of the particulars in the
Covenant, in it, as being not grounded upon the Word (as I have made it
manifest) not according to the example of best reformed Churches that have ever
abhorred rents and schisms in the Church by unlawful separations, as their is,
upon their own principles: for they separate from Churches they confess to be
true Churches; and the members thereof they own for believers, brethren, and
within, in baptizing their children upon the account of federal holiness. In
stead of reforming their Churches, as formed of old by our first Reformers,
they form up a new of the principal part of the old; leaving out of this frame
the main matter of the old, so that upon the matter they pull down many
Churches to build one, and rather destroy their Churches then reform them by
holy Discipline. Discipline is to purge out some few to amend them; but theirs
is to separate from the most of their Churches to destroy them, in not using
the right means toward them as brethren to encourage them in all Christian
obedience, etc. And hence with good conscience I fear not to oppose their way
and course, without breach of my Covenant.

Nay in the 2. Article of the Covenant we are bound without respect of person
to endeavor the extirpation of Superstition and Schism, as well as Popery,
Prelacy, and Heresy. The two former may with good conscience be charged upon
your way.

1. Superstition, because you urge upon all you admit, duties of necessity that
God no where commands, binding the conscience where it is free, and so become
Lords of men's faith: and unless Christ's subjects will submit to these
superstitious inventions, you have framed, you exclude them from necessary
duties of homage and worship enjoined by their Lord.

2. Schism, because you are run into an unnecessary separation in the Church
breaking the peace of the Church causelessly, as has been hinted all along, It
being the main I have writ, to discover your way Schismatical. But it seems he
thinks that there was nothing corrupt in the Church to be reformed by
Discipline, but admission so largely to the Sacrament, and that this was the
only thing we swore to reform; and therefore must join with them, or else be
forsworn, although they have nothing at all of true discipline in exercise: for
they excommunicate none himself confesses. And it is clear as the Sun at mid
day, that there is no other means to exclude Church Members from the Sacrament,
but by casting them out of the Church Juridically, which is a question, whether
any at present in our Church be in a capacity so to act; and hence the Covenant
binds us to endeavor after such a capacity as to reform all corruptions that
are properly reformable by true Discipline.

3. What other way there is to be walked in to keep close to the Word.

I have given my thoughts in my answer to Mr. Ward. The Scripture rule
examined; Joanes is considerable to answer this query, as the state stands with
us at present. And if we were in possession of true discipline, we should
endeavor so to exercise it, that the worst might be reformed by it, not refuse
to admit them to the Sacrament, and so exclude them from all discipline, as if
they were Heathens: and let not any assume the exercise of discipline, that are
not sure of their warrant from the Word. And let them be sure they use no other
censures then they have precept or precedent for from the word. And let them be
sure they proceed to censures gradually, and for no other cause but for the
like sins and scandals that the Word directs in.

4. Whether the Church should own men to be members for a bare profession, etc.

I confess I do the more wonder at the query, page 129. then why have not the
parents of that child the same remote right as being a generation nearer that
right; they being not Excommunicate as is supposed? Is the child a member
without so much as a bare profession, and the parents none that profess
Christianity externally? A bare profession may be serious in its kind I
suppose, though it want the will of holiness. So that if we add to a
historical or temporary professor, but to be serious and real in his profession
for the present, he may pass for a member with him: and I shall think those
men very uncharitable that judge less of ours, generally that frequent Gods
Ordinances, and take themselves greatly wronged, when they are deprived of any
one, I take it to be a good sign that they are serious in what they profess,
and then this is but the same (which in others) he conceives unsound.

2. What shall be done with the children of the most godly when they are grown
up, if profession without true holiness does not continue such members,
forasmuch that there is no rule left to dismember for ignorance or want of the
work of true holiness, regeneration, etc. members such, are, not only by
birth, but formally by the Churches approbational act of baptism, they are so
far from renouncing or forsaking their Christian profession, that they adhere
to the external part of it, and are not scandalous: They neither fall off, nor
are cut off by any rule, or act of censure; what hinders them, but that such
remain members of the Church, and have a true right to all the external
privileges of membership?

3. If positive unbelief in denying the person and Ordinances of Christ, on
whom the Church is built, cut off persons from the Church, as is clearly spoken
of the Jews, Romans 11. then the contrary to that Infidelity, which is a real
owning and professing the person and Ordinances of Christ continues those that
are members born, to be members so long as they hold to the Christian
profession. Excommunication dismembers but conditionally, for in case the
offender externally reform, and hold to his profession, and promise amendment,
he ought to be loosed from that censure. But I hasten.

What shall Ministers do while Government is unsettled,

1. Shall they give the Sacrament promiscuously to all?

2. Shall they by their own Antiquity exclude the unfit?

3. Or shall they wholly desist? To the last he answers, that the use of the
Ordinance of the Supper is so necessary, as that it may not always nor long be
discontinued; the command of Christ (Do this) requires obedience: this (he
says) is well proved by Mr. Joanes, but yet he does not close with him in
another point; namely, that while the Church is undisciplined, the Sacrament
may be administered in every Congregation without any separation. But he
conceived that the Lords Supper cannot be holily transacted by any unless the
scandalous be removed, etc. page 169.

1. which are no where to be found in the Scriptures, but in their own wills
and fancies, as I have discovered already, it is well he is so sober, as to hold
the administering of the Lords Supper so necessary that it may not long be
omitted, and that he assents to that Reverend Minister Mr. Joanes, (who has
done the Church most eminent service in that undertaking of his.) And then if
it be a necessary duty requiring obedience, why then this may satisfy him in
answer to his first, Shall they give the Sacrament to all? Yeato all that are
concerned in Christian obedience and observance, which all in your Parish that
are baptized and of years are, as well to this, as to any other part of
instituted worship in the Church. And there is no more danger in the word
(promiscuous) to this Ordinance then to all others; there being as much to be
said for the casting the scandalous out of the Church, as from the Sacrament,
and more too; for we have no rule at all to exclude a scandalous member from
the Sacrament while he is within, but we have clear rule to cast such out of
the Church by Excommunication, and then removal from the Sacrament falls in as a
consequence of that Juridical act, and no otherwise.

That Ministers are in a very great strait, by reason of the necessity of the
one hand to administer (says he) and yet perchance have a wicked party
predominant to hinder any good course of separation.

Answ. The strait is not to great more, as in show and conceit, men first
receive false principles, and then conclude accordingly from them: and that
brings them into straits, whereas if they were rightly informed of their own
duties and their peoples privileges as Church Members, the case were easy.
Christ commands to all his visible subjects, while they are within, is a
sufficient warranty, and upon this very ground, you are now in no more strait
about the Lords supper, then in all other worship which many scarce make so
much as a scruple of. His saying, that this is against the mind of Christ, he
intending it for disciples only, is pitiful weak, when himself grants, the
baptizing of the children of all as holy federally from their parents, which
cannot be true unless their parents be believers or disciples, as has been
showed: and therefore in granting that, it does necessarily prove the lawful
right of all to the holy Supper, Baptism and Lords Supper being but the same
seal of the same Covenant, in which both are in cluded and concerned. And
doubtless a single Minister is not empowered with authority to excommunicate
Juridically, which I suppose he means is Mr. Joanes his advantage upon his
adversaries, he holding them strictly to some such Presbyterian principles, as
this; which I wonder that any man should dare to assume to do as Mr. Saunders
opens his mind in, and has published it against the learned Assembly, and
all sober men; he says, Thus the Minister by his own authority (without
Elders) may put back such as he knows to be unfit. But if by his authority he
may put back the unfit, then by the same authority he may as well
Excommunicate; if by authority he means the authority of rule in acts of
discipline; but if he only understand his Ministerial authority in a case of
necessity, I think it not so insolent as the other, although it is a hard task
to justify either from the rule or free themselves of doing evil that good
may come, etc. And Mr. Saunders will find work enough to justify their own
way from Schism: he had not need entice others to as bad. But he says further,
the Minister is empowered and Commissioned as to all Ordinances by Christ,
whether to this Sacrament, to act solely, or alone, is a question? Answ. What
should hinder, but that one alone may administer the Sacrament by virtue of
that Ministerial power as well as in all other Ordinances of Worship? I know
not Scripture that requires acts of discipline in order to the Lords Supper
more then to the rest of worship in the Church. Those that can find any such
Scripture may do well to publish what they know.

6.

1. Concerning knowledge; he stands not so much upon the muchnesse as the
soundness of it, save this, it must be so much as may let in Christ into the
soul, etc.

But he is not clear and distinct in prescribing the least measure of such a
knowledge,

2. Christ first comes into a dark soul, that has no other but a passive
reception, and he alone brings true and saving light with him.

3. If no more knowledge be required to actual receiving of the Sacrament, then
to a passive reception of Christ, where Christ pleases by his Spirit. First to
take hold on souls, we may consent to this: but if he mean so much light and
faith, whereby a man is capable actually to apply some further spiritual
blessing by Christ, it requires proof; the bare sayings of men merely are not
competent to weigh with the Churches peace and truth; so much concerned in this
practice.

4. How weak is all that they can say in defense of this qualification to
admission to the Lords Supper, when ours are all baptized (and within) and
therefore under the actual observance of this duty as any other; himself says
well of a wicked man's praying thus.

Their presence at the duty can be no sin, while it is that they are commanded
to do: though at present their own evils make them unable to do as they
should, page 126. would men say but the same of this of the Sacrament, it is not
sin to receive while it is that they are commanded to do, though at present
they through ignorance and other wants cannot receive as they should. I say
would but men thus judge and say of the Sacrament, there being the same reason
for it, as is proved clearly in another place: this controversy would be
ended, and all parties pleased. Besides there is not any law or rule in
Scriptures to warrant the punishing of ignorance, or unregeneracie in the
Church with the deprivation of a common privilege belonging to members in
common of the same kind: never was such a thing heard of in the Apostolical
Churches, that any were censured for ignorance in excluding them from the Lords
Table, or from any other Ordinance in the Church. If you judge ours within, and
baptized, and of years, and yet exclude them the Sacrament for want of
knowledge: I dare be bold to say, that you venture to do that which you have
neither Scripture precept, nor counsel, nor precedent for: How you think to be
born out in such a bold presumptuous practice against the clear command of
Christ, you may do well to consider of it. His quotations are so impertinent
for his purpose, that it will be but loss of time and labor to examine them.
I admire how men dare so notoriously mis-apply the holy Scriptures.

2. As to practice he says, These four quallifications seem necessary to
admitting to the Sacrament.

1. They must be no companions of drunkards, or any other wicked livers.

2. They must be such as frequent and delight in the society of godly people.

3. Such as are not known to be guilty of any known sin.

4. Such as perform all religious duties, as well in private as in public, etc.

1.

2. That these qualifications are necessary in order to Gods glory and our
Salvation is confessed: but that they are necessary in order to receiving to
the Sacrament (upon good grounds) is to be denied until better proof.

3. These qualifications are necessary to prove our spiritual states by, and to
know in what condition we stand in before the Lord. But the Scriptures quoted
do not in the least urge them as prerequisite unto the Lords Supper, more then
to all other worship. They that have this Book, let them search and see if they
can find one of these sixty texts, that has so much as a sound to prove any
of these qualifications laid down, page 172. necessarily prerequisite in order
to the Lords Supper. And if you cannot find one of so great a number for his
purpose, had it not been more for his repuration (as he is a Minister) not to
have quoted them, then thus absurdly to misapply them to justify a way
themselves have inconsiderately chosen? It Is the usual road of those that have
strong fancies and weak judgments to multiply texts of Scriptures
impertinently. If this Author shall think it necessary still to defend their
way, I much desire that he may show himself a workman that need not be ashamed
by dividing the pure truths of God aright: one clear and rational deduction
from the holy Scripture properly applied either for suspension or examination,
or excluding the ignorant, would do more to justify the separations that some
venture to make amongst their people in order to the Sacrament, then multitude
of texts impertinently alleged, as has been discovered. Nay it is a strange
thing, and to be wondered at, that the same men that do satisfy themselves,
touching Infant Baptism, upon the Analogy of Circumcision, Covenant relation
according to the state of the Jews Church, without any express rule in the New
Testament, in respect of precept or precedent. And yet the same men will except
against the Analogy of the Passover, notwithstanding we have clear precept and
precedent in the New to warrant the baptized of years to receive the Lords
Supper. If the same men should be as exceptions against the Analogy of
Circumcision to Baptism, as of the Passover to the Lords Supper: they would
utterly throw away the cause and run to the tents of our adversaries; both weak
and worthless is that of Mr. Saunders in reply to Mr. Humfry, upon the Analogy
of the Passover, page 185. The Passover had an external benefit which all did
partake of, therefore a right to that Ordinance so far as external: but the
Lords Supper is a more, spiritual Ordinance, no type. The wicked were termed
Gods people then, not so in the New. See Camero.

1.

2. It concerns the Author to make good the first thing asserted, That all had
an external benefit by it, more then what was eaten and drunk to the satisfying
of nature, for all that came under the Law of the Passover were not in Egypt
to partake of that benefit of preservation, when the first born of the
Egyptians were slain. What think you of the generations that were then to come
successively until Christ? Nor were all the Egyptians smitten with that death,
but the first born only. Besides, what external benefit were this to the Aliens
and strangers that were Proselytes, and came under Circumcision? they were as
much under the Law of the Passover as the Israelites, and yet did not partake
of that external benefit, and therefore that was not the thing that gave them
right as he pretends. And whereas he says, the Lords Supper is more spiritual,
it is to be proved, the Passover having the same Author appointing it for the
same spiritual use and ends in the Church with the holy Supper. The external
Ceremonial part of the one and of the other both alike carnal: and his
granting, that both are the same for substance, as to the use and end, does
cross and contradict this of his here: let it be proved that the unregenerate
and wicked in the Church are not to be termed Gods people now. Do not the
Apostles give equal titles to all in the Church; calling them Saints, and such
as were brethren and within, although scandalous and stubborn? and if the
unregenerate and wicked in the Church, are not to be termed Gods people, how
are their children holy federally, that being affirmed only of the children of
believers, which himself grants, which is cross to Camero. And the truth is,
the arguments we urge from the Passover, Covenant relation, state of the Jews
Church, Gospel precept, and precedents, the right of membership, the love of
Christ to sinners, are so solid and full of strength, that all that oppose us
will be ashamed at last.

There is no need of any further examining of what is writ by this Author in
answer to Mr. Humfry, for had he consulted with what was written of late before
his came out, he might have spared that part as unnecessary, he having but
little that is new, considerable in the controversy. If the Author want work,
let him answer Mr. Humfreys rejoinder, or the last part of my first Book not
yet answered, or make good his own so clearly confuted, if he can: Or else
return to the Church in feeding his own flock, and be quiet, endeavoring to
heal the breach, which by an unnecessary separation he has sinfully made in
his Church.

I shall now take my leave of my Reader, and end with some Apologizing reasons,
why I have appeared so stiff in opposing of these petty irregular reformings.

1. Because they have no foundation to stand upon from the Scriptures.

2. Because they hinder and obstruct the Reformation of the whole: Who will
desire or endeavor after a uniformity of true discipline, if these private
petty ways will attain the end without it?

3. Because Suspension and Separation makes void Juridical. Excommunication,
the only separating Ordinance in the Church, and now upon the matter is wholly
lost in Church.

4. Because these new contrivances tend to wicked division and schism in the
Church, and a complying with that wild Principle of tolerating every Sect and
way, to the scandal of the whole.

5. Because these groundless partial reformings do make us insensible of our
malady, and so careless of the right remedy.

6. Because this groundless pretended discipline runs private Ministers upon
intruding the power of Jurisdiction, which as private Ministers they are not
empowered with at all, until the Church have chose and designed them unto
Ecclesiastical rule and Jurisdiction: for all are not competent for that work,
nor is it necessary that all should bear a share in the exercise of Church
censures and policies.

I confess I judge that not any Minister in the Church can justly assume an
authoritative power of Jurisdiction in his Church by virtue of his Ordination
and Induction.

And lastly, what Reformation can be rationally expected, when those that
should be entrusted with the exercise of discipline, are wryed in their
judgments about the censures of the Church, and in what cases to correct, and
who should have the exercise thereof? Whether every Presbyter in general, or
some peculiarly chosen, and set apart for Ecclesiastical rule and order only?
What work would have been made in the Church by this, if the Presbyterian
principles had been put into execution? We should have had but few Communicants
in many of our Churches, had that rigid way of Examination and power in the
Eldership to suspend upon pleasure gone on. When the Lord of his Church is
pleased to bless this poor distracted English Church with so great a blessing,
as true and holy discipline is; he will both qualify and furnish us with
instruments fit for that work; in the mean time let us pray and wait, and use
all good means we can to possess so great a mercy, as may truly tend to the
Reformation of the whole, without the hurt or prejudice of any part of Christ's
visible Church.

FINIS.
Books that are to be sold by Thomas Williams at the Bible in Little Britain.
A Chronicle of the Kings of England from the Romans Govrnment unto the reign
of King Charles, containing all passages of Church and State, with all other
observations proper for a History: the second Edition enlarged with notes and a
large Table.

A complete Christian Dictionary showing the Interpretation of the proper
names, the several significations, and several acceptations of all the words in
the Bible, with the addition of above four thousand words and phrase^, with a
description of the properties of Beasts, Fowls, Herbs, Trees, etc. A book of
great use unto Ministers, Masters of families, all private Christians; the sixth
Edition.

The Art of Distillations, with the choycest preparations performed by way of
Distillations, with a description of the best Furnaces and vessels, used by
ancient and modern Chemists: also diverse Spagerical Experiments and
Curiosities, the anatomy of gold and silver, with their preparations and
virtues; the second Edition, to which is added the London Distiller, showing
the way to draw all sorts of Spirits and Strong waters.

The New Light of Alchymy, by Sandevogius, with nine Books of Paracelsus of the
nature of things, with a Chemical Dictionary.

Glaubers Philosophical Furnaces, or a New way of distilling in five parts,
with the tincture of Gold, and Aurum Potabile, the first part of his Mineral
work.

Spots discovery of Witcheraft, showing the power of Witches, contracting with
Devils, Spirits, or Familiars, and their power to kill, torment, and consume
the bodies of Creatures, with the knavery of Conjurors, Inchanters,
Figure-casters, Astrologers, the vanity of dreams, with all tricks of Juggling,
and Legerdemain; and many other secrets.

Vade Mecum, A companion for a Surgeon, showing the use of every instrument
belonging to a Surgeon, with the cure of all green wounds, the virtue and
quality of all medicines useful, with the way to make them; with directions for
Crowners how to make Reports with a treatise of Bleeding.

A Vindication of Mr. Humfreys free Admission to the Sacrament, being an answer
to Dr. Drakes Bar, done by John Timson.


