The Archbishop of Canterbury's SERMON Concerning the Sacrifice and
Satisfaction of Christ.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, APRIL the 9 th. 1693.
Concerning the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ.

By JOHN Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Published by Her Majesty's special Command.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill: And W.
Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1693.

A SERMON Concerning the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, etc.
HEB. IX. 26. But now once has he appeared in the end of the world, to take
away sin by the sacrifice of himself.
AMONG many other great ends and reasons for which God was pleased to send his
Son into the World to dwell amongst us, this was one of the chief, that by a
long course of the greatest innocence and the greatest sufferings in our Nature
he might be capable to make a perfect Expiation of Sin: But now once in the end
of the world, (...), in the conclusion of the Ages, that is in the last Age of
the World, which is the Gospel Age, has he appeared to take away sin by the
sacrifice of himself.

The general design of God in sending his Son into the World was to save
mankind from eternal death and misery, and to purchase for us eternal life and
happiness. So the Author of our Salvation Joh. 3. 16.
himself tells us, That God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life.

Now in order to the procuring of this Salvation for us, the impediments and
hindrances of it were to be removed: these were the guilt, and the dominion of
Sin: By the guilt of Sin we were become obnoxious to the wrath of God and to
eternal condemnation, and by the defilement and dominion of it we were
incapable of the happiness of Heaven and the reward of eternal Life.

To remove these two great hindrances two things were necessary: the Forgivenes
of sins past, in order to our deliverance from the wrath of God and the eternal
torments of the next Life; and the Reformation of our hearts and lives to make
us capable of eternal Life and happiness in another World. And both these, if
God had so pleased, might have been effected by the abundant mercy and powerful
grace of God, without this wonderful method and dispensation of sending his Son
in our Nature to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself: But it seems the
wisdom of God thought fit to pitch upon this way and method of our Salvation,
and no doubt for very good Reasons; amongst which these three seem to be very
obvious and very considerable.

First, to vindicate the honor of his Laws, which if Sin had gone altogether
unpunished would have been in great danger of falling into contempt. For if God
had proclaimed a general Pardon of Sin to all mankind, without any testimony of
his wrath and displeasure against it, who would have had any great veneration
for his Laws, or have believed in good earnest that the violation of them had
been either so extremely offensive to Him, or so very dangerous to the Sinner?

Therefore to maintain the honor of his Laws, rather than Sin should pass
unpunished God would lay the punishment of it upon his only begotten Son, the
dearest Person to him in the World: Which is a greater testimony of his high
displeasure against Sin, and of his tender regard and concernment for the
honor of his Laws, than if the Sinner had suffered the punishment due to it in
his own person.

Secondly, another Reason of this Dispensation, and that likewise very
considerable, was, that God might forgive Sin in such a way as yet effectually
to discountenance and discourage it, and to create in us the greatest horror
and hatred of it: Which could not have been by an absolute Pardon, without any
punishment inflicted, or satisfaction made to the honor of his Justice. For
had Sin been so easily forgiven, who would have been sensible of the great evil
of it, or afraid to offend for the future?

But when God makes his own Son a Sacrifice, and lays upon him the punishment
due for the iniquities of us all, this is a demonstration that God hates Sin as
much, if it be possible, as he loved his own Son. For this plainly shows what
Sin deserves, and what the Sinner may justly expect, if after this severity of
God against it he will venture to commit it.

And if this Sacrifice for Sin, and the Pardon purchased by it, be not
effectual to reclaim us from Sin, and to beget in us an eternal dread and
detestation of it: If we sin wilfully after so clear a revelation of the wrath
of God from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation to consume the adversaries. For what could God
do more to testify his displeasure against sin, and to discountenance the
practice of it, than to make his only Son an offering for Sin, and to give him
up to be wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities? In
what clearer Glass can we at once behold the great evil and demerit of Sin, and
the infinite goodness and mercy of God to Sinners, than in the sorrows and
sufferings of the Son of God for our Sins and for our sakes?

Thirdly, another Reason of this Dispensation seems to have been a gracious
condescension and compliance of Almighty God with a certain apprehension and
persuasion, which had very early and universally obtained among Mankind,
concerning the expiation of Sin and appeasing the offended Deity by Sacrifices:
by the Sacrifices of living Creatures, of Birds and Beasts; and afterward by
Human Sacrifices and the blood of their sons and daughters: by offering to God,
as the expression is in the Prophet, their firstborn for their transgression,
and the fruit of their body for the sin of their souls.

And this Notion of the expiation of Sin by Sacrifice, whether it had its first
Rise from Divine Revelation, and was afterward propagated from Age to Age by
Tradition: I say, from whence soever this Notion came, it has of all other
Notions concerning Religion, excepting those of the Being of God, and his
Providence, and of the Recompenses of another Life, found the most universal
reception, and the thing has been the most generally practiced in all Ages and
Nations, not only in the old, but in the new discovered parts of the World.

And indeed a very great part of the Jewish Religion, which was instituted by
God himself, seems to have been a plain condescension to the general
Apprehension of Mankind, concerning this way of appeasing the offended Deity by
Sacrifices: As it was also a Figure of that great and efficacious Sacrifice
which should in due time be offered to God to make atonement once for all for
the Sins of all Mankind.

And the Apostle to the Hebrews does very particularly insist upon this
condescension of God to them, in the Dispensation of the Gospel: and whereas
they apprehended so great a necessity of an High Priest and of Sacrifices to
make expiation for the sins of the People, that it was an established Principle
among them, that without shedding of blood there was no remission of Sins; God
was pleased to comply so far with these Notions and Apprehensions of theirs, as
to make his own Son both a Priest and a Sacrifice, to do that once for all
which their own High Priest pretended to do year by year.

And from hence the same Apostle takes occasion to recommend to them the new
Covenant and Dispensation of the Gospel, as having a greater and more perfect
High Priest and a more excellent Sacrifice, than were the Highpriests and the
Sacrifices under the Law; the Son of God having by one Sacrifice of himself
obtained eternal Redemption for us, and perfected for ever them that are
sanctified.

And this Apprehension prevailed no less in the Heathen World, and proceeded to
the Sacrifices of Men, even of their firstborn. And with this Apprehension,
not to countenance but to abolish it, God was pleased to comply so far as to
make a general Atonement for the Sins of Mankind by the Death of his Son,
appearing in our Nature to become a voluntary Sacrifice for us: God permitting
him to be unjustly put to death and his blood to be shed by the malice of men,
in appearance as a Malefactor, but in truth as a Martyr; and accepting of his
Death as a meritorious Sacrifice and propitiation for the Sins of the whole
World: That by this wise counsel and permission of his Providence he might for
ever put an end to that barbarous and inhuman way of serving God which had been
so long in use and practice among them: The Son of God by the voluntary
Sacrifice of himself having effected all that at once, and for ever, which
Mankind from the beginning of the World had in vain been endeavoring to
accomplish by innumerable and continual Sacrifices; namely, the pardon of their
Sins, and perfect peace and reconciliation with God.

For these Ends and Reasons, and perhaps for many more as great and
considerable as these which our shallow understandings are not able to fathom,
the Wisdom of God has pitched upon this way and method of delivering Mankind
from the guilt and dominion of Sin by the Sacrifice of his Son. And to this end
it was requisite that he should appear in our Nature and dwell amongst us for
some considerable time, that by a long course of the greatest Innocence and of
the greatest Sufferings in our Nature he might be capable of making a perfect
expiation of Sin.

So that two things were requisite to qualify him for this purpose; perfect
Innocence and Obedience, and great Sufferings in our Nature, even to the
suffering of Death. Both these the Scripture declares to be necessary
qualifications of a Person capable to make expiation of Sin; and both these
were found in the Person of our B. Savior.

First, unspotted Innocence and perfect Obedience. This the Scripture testifies
concerning Him, and the whole course of his Life and actions. He was in all
points tempted like as we are, yet without Heb. 4. 15.
Sin, says the Apostle to the Hebrews. He always did the things which pleased
God, as He testifies concerning Joh. 8. 29.
himself, and we are sure that his witness is true. He did no sin, neither was
guile found in his 1 Pet. 2. 22.
mouth; as St. Peter tells us of Him. And this was necessary to qualify him for
the perfect expiation of Sin, whether we consider Him as a Priest, or as a
Sacrifice.

As a Priest, he could not have been fit to make expiation for the Sins of
others, had he not been without sin himself. And this the Apostle tells us is
one great Advantage of our High Priest under the Gospel, above the High Priest
under the Law, who being a Sinner himself, as well as those for whom he
offered, had need to offer for himself before he could make so much as a Legal
expiation for the Sins of others: But a perfect and effectual expiation of Sin,
so as to purge the conscience from the guilt of it, cannot be made but by an
High Priest who is holy and innocent himself; For such an High Priest, says
the Heb. 7. 26, 27.
Apostle, became us, that is, now under the Dispensation of the Gospel, when a
perfect expiation of Sins is to be made, such an High Priest is necessary, as
is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, who needs not as those
Highpriests, that is as the Highpriests under the Law, to offer up sacrifice
first for his own Sins, and then for the People: The plain force of which
Argument is this, that he who will be qualified to make atonement for the Sins
of others must be without Sin himself.

And then if we consider Christ as a Sacrifice for Sin; perfect holiness is
necessary to make a Sacrifice acceptable and available for the expiation of
Sin. The necessity of this was typified by the quality of the expiatory
Sacrifices under the Law: the Beasts that were to be offered were to be without
spot and blemish: To which the Apostle alludes, speaking of the quality and
efficacy of Heb. 9. 14.
the Sacrifice of Christ: How much more, says he, shall the blood of Christ,
who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your
consciences from dead works to serve the living God? And to 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
the same purpose St. Peter, Forasmuch as ye know ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ,
as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot, etc; hereby intimating, that
nothing less than the perfect innocence and holiness of him who was to be a
Sacrifice for us could have expiated the guilt of our sins and purchased
eternal Redemption for us.

Secondly, great Sufferings likewise in our Nature, even to the suffering of
Death, were requisite to the perfect expiation of Sin: I say, even to the
suffering of Death. For the Sacrifices which were to make expiation were to be
slain. And it was a constant Maxim and Principle among the Jews, and the
Apostle more than once in this Epistle seems to allow and confirm it, that
without shedding of blood there was no remission of Sins.

Not that God could not have pardoned Sin without satisfaction made to his
Justice, either by the suffering of the Sinner himself, or of a Sacrifice in
his stead: But, according to the method and Dispensation which the Wisdom of
God had pitched upon, he was resolved not to dispense Forgiveness in any other
way. For which reason he seems either to have possessed Mankind with this
Principle, or to have permitted them to be so persuaded, that Sin was not to be
expiated but by Blood, that is, either by Death of the Sinner, or of the
Sacrifice.

Now the Life of our B. Savior, as well as his Death, was made up of
Sufferings of one kind or other: Continual Sufferings from his Cradle to his
Cross, from the time he drew his first breath to his giving up of the ghost:
And not only continual Sufferings, but the greatest that ever were, considering
the Dignity of the Person that suffered, and the nature of the Sufferings:
Considering likewise that these Sufferings were not only wholly undeserved on
his part, but unmerited also on ours, for whose sake he submitted himself to
them: Nay, on the contrary, he had obliged to the utmost those for whom and by
whom he suffered, and continued still to oblige them by the greatest Blessings
and Benefits purchased and procured for them by those very Sufferings which
with so much Malice and Cruelty they inflicted on him.

Had our B. Savior been a mere Man, the perfect Innocence and unspotted Purity
of his whole Life; his Zeal to do the Will of God, and his delight in doing it;
his infinite pains and unwearied diligence in going about doing good: His
constant Obedience to God in the most difficult Instances, and his perseverance
in well doing, notwithstanding the ill usage and hard measure, the bitter
Reproaches and Persecutions he met withal for it, from a wicked and ill natured
World: His perfect submission to the Will of God, his invincible Patience under
the greatest and bitterest Sufferings, and his infinite Charity to his Enemies
and Persecutors: These must needs be highly acceptable to God, and if Man could
merit of God, likely enough to be available for the Sins of others.

But our Savior and our Sacrifice being the Son of God in our Nature; and He
voluntarily assuming it, and submitting to the condition of Humanity in its
lowest and most miserable state, Sin only excepted; and his being contented to
live a Life of doing good and suffering evil, and at last to be put to Death
and slain a Sacrifice for us: The Dignity of the Person who did and suffered
all this for us, and his dearness to God, must needs add a mighty value to so
perfect an Obedience and such patient Sufferings; so as to render them a full,
perfect and sufficient Sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction for the Sins of the
whole World.

And all this being willingly performed in our Nature, and accepted by God as
done upon our account, may reasonably be presumed to redound to our benefit and
advantage, as much as if we our selves had performed it in our own persons:
Nothing being so proper, and so available to make an honorable amends and
satisfaction to the Justice of God for the Sins of all Mankind, as the
voluntary Obedience and Sufferings of Human Nature in a Person of so great
Dignity and dearness to God as his eternal and entirely beloved Son.

Now that Expiation of Sin was made by the Sufferings of Christ in our stead, I
shall endeavor to make good these three ways.

First, from plain Testimonies of H. Scripture, declaring this matter to us as
clearly and fully as it is possible for words to do it.

Secondly, from the nature and intention of Expiatory Sacrifices, both among
the Jews and Heathen; to which the Death of Christ is in the New Testament so
frequently compared, and in point of virtue and efficacy to take away Sin
infinitely preferred to it.

Thirdly, by vindicating this Method and Dispensation of the Divine Wisdom from
the Objections which are brought against it; and by showing that there is
nothing in it that is unreasonable, or any wise unworthy of God.

I. I. I shall produce some plain Testimonies of H. Scripture which declare
this matter as clearly and fully as it is possible for words to do it; namely,
that the Son of God, in order to the effectual Expiation of Sin, suffered in
our stead, and bore the wrath of God for us, and made a perfect Atonement for
Sin, and obtained eternal Redemption for us.

This the Scripture declares to us in great variety of expressions; as, that
Christ dyed for us, and for our Sins; that he was a Sacrifice for us, and a
propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, that is, of all Mankind; that he
bare our Sins in his own body on the Tree, and appeared to take away Sin by the
Sacrifice of himself; that we are justified in his blood, and redeemed by the
price of it; and in very many other expressions to the same purpose.

And this is so evidently the scope and meaning of these Expressions, that it
cannot be denied without offering the greatest violence imaginable to the H.
Scriptures. For can any man think that God would have used so many expressions
in Scripture, the plain and most obvious sense of all which is that the Son of
God suffered for our Sins and in our stead, if this had not been his design and
meaning? Would not this be in effect to say, that God has written a great Book
to puzzle and confound, but not to instruct and teach Mankind?

I will at present single out some few of those many Texts of Scripture which
might be produced to this purpose: He has made him to be sin 2 Cor. 5. 21.
for us, who knew no sin, that is, he has made him who had no sin himself a
Sacrifice for our sins. Again; and walk in love, as Christ also has loved Ephesians.
5. 10.
us and given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God. St. Peter to
the same purpose 1 Pet. 1. 18.
tells us, that Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh: Here
Christ is said to have suffered for Sin; and to declare that the Apostle did
not only mean that Christ suffered upon the occasion of our Sins, but that he
suffered in the place and stead of the Sinner, he adds, the just for the
unjust, that is, the Son of God, who was innocent and had no Sin, suffered for
us who were Sinners; or as it is elsewhere expressed, he bare our sins in his
own body on the Tree.

It is true indeed, that Christ suffered for our benefit and advantage; which
the Socinians would have to be all that is meant in the Texts which I have
cited: But then it ought to be considered, that Christ's suffering for our
benefit and advantage does by no means exclude, nor is any wise inconsistent
with his suffering in our stead. For whoever suffers in another man's stead,
and to save him from suffering, does undoubtedly suffer for his benefit and
advantage, and gives the best demonstration of it that can be: But the manner
of the expression, if compared with other parallel Texts of Scripture, and
especially with what is so often said of our Savior's being a Sacrifice, which
I shall have occasion further to urge by and by: I say the manner of the
expression, if well considered, will appear to any man that is not contentious
to signify our Savior's suffering instead of the Sinner.

But not to argue from words and phrases, I will produce two Texts which
declare this matter so plainly, that the force of them is not to be avoided
without the most shameful wresting and perverting of them. This is Joh. 15. 12.
my commandment, says our Savior, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you. How is that? he declares in the next words, Greater love V. 13.
than this has no man, that a man lay down his life for his friend, that is,
that he be contented to die in his stead. And to the same purpose St. Paul, For
when ye were yet Sinners, Romans 6. 6, 7, 8,
in due time Christ dyed for the ungodly: Now the question is, whether by this
expression of Christ's dying for the ungodly be meant only his dying for the
benefit and advantage of Sinners, but not his dying in their stead? This, let
the words which immediately follow determine: For scarcely for a righteous man
will one dye, yet peradventure for a good man one would even dare to dye: But
God commends his love to us, in that whilst we were yet sinners Christ dyed
for us. And now I appeal to any man of good sense, whether it be not plain that
the Apostle here speaks of Christ's dying for Sinners in the same sense as one
man is said to dye for another, that is, to save another from death; which what
is it else but to dye in his stead? He that can deny this, is perverse to the
highest degree, and I fear almost beyond the possibility of being convinced.

And the Argument from these two Texts is so much the stronger, because we do
not here reason merely from the phrase and expression, but from the main Scope
of our Savior's discourse in the one, and of St. Paul's in the other. For the
design of both is to recommend the superlative love of Christ to us above the
greatest love that ever any man expressed to another. The highest pitch that
human affection did ever rise to, was for a man to lay down his life for his
Friend; but the Son of God laid down his life for his Enemies. Scarcely, says
St. Paul, would one lay down his life for a righteous man, that is, for one who
is but strictly just and honest, and does no body wrong; but for a good man,
that is, for-one that is kind and beneficial to all, and has obliged Mankind
by great Benefits, some one may be found that would lay down his life to save
the life of such a Person: But the love of Christ has gone far beyond this: He
dyed for Sinners, for those who were neither good men, nor righteous: But God
commends his love to us, in that whilst we were yet Sinners Christ dyed for
us. Now where does the force of this Argument lie, if not in this? that Christ
has done that for us, who were Enemies and Sinners, which some very few
persons in the World have done for their Friend, or for some very eminently
good man: And what is that? Why, they have laid down their lives in their
stead: And so Christ has done for us. This seems to be so very plain, that I
do not see how the force of this Argument is possible to be avoided.

It is evident then from Scripture, that Christ dyed not only for our advantage
but in our stead; as truly and really as any man ever did or can dye for
another who lays down his own life to save another from death. For if Christ
had not dyed, we had perished everlastingly; and because he dyed, we are saved
from eternal Death and misery.

And though this be no where in Scripture spoken of by the name or term of
Satisfaction, yet it is said to be the price of our Redemption; which surely is
the same thing in effect with Satisfaction. For as we are Sinners we are
liable, and, as I may say, indebted to the Justice of God: And the Son of God,
by his Death and Sufferings in our Nature, has discharged this obligation and
paid this debt for us: Which discharge since it was obtained for us by the
shedding of Christ's Blood, and the Scripture tells us that without shedding of
blood there is no remission of Sins: And since God is graciously pleased to
accept of it for the Debt which we owed to his Justice, and to declare himself
fully pleased and contented with it, why it may not properly enough be called
payment or satisfaction I confess I am not able to understand. Men may
eternally wrangle about any thing, but what a frivolous contention, what a
trifling in serious matters, what barretrie in Divinity is this?

Not that God was angry with his Son, when he thus laid on him the iniquities
of us all: No he was always well pleased with him; and never better, than when
he became obedient to the Death, even the Death of the Cross, and bore our Sins
in his own body on the Tree.

Nor yet that our Savior suffered the very same that the Sinner should have
suffered, namely, the proper Pains and Torment of the Damned: But that his
Obedience and Sufferings were of that value and esteem with God, and his
voluntary Sacrifice of himself so well-pleasing to him, that he thereupon
entered into a Covenant of Grace and Mercy with Mankind, wherein he has engaged
himself to forgive the Sins of those who believe and repent, and to make them
partakers of eternal life. And hence the Blood of Christ which was shed for us
upon the Cross is called the Blood of the Covenant, as being the Sanction of
that New Covenant into which God is entered with Mankind: And not only the
Sanction and confirmation of that Covenant, but the very Foundation of it: For
which reason the Cup in the Lord's Supper is called the New Testament, or, as
the word should rather be rendered, the New Covenant in his Blood, which was
shed for many for the remission of Sins. I proceed now to the

IId. Thing propounded, which was to show that the Expiation of our Sins was
made by the Sufferings of Christ, from the nature and intention of Expiatory
Sacrifices, both among the Jews and Heathen; to which the Death of Christ is in
the New Testament so frequently compared, and in point of virtue and efficacy
to take away Sin infinitely preferred to it.

Now the nature and design of Expiatory Sacrifices was plainly this: To
substitute one Living Creature to suffer and die instead of another; so that
what the Sinner deserved to have suffered was supposed to be done to the
Sacrifice, that is, it was slain to make an atonement for the Sinner.

And though there was no reason to hope for any such effect from the Blood of
Bulls, or of Goats, or of any other Living Creatures that were wont to be
offered up in Sacrifice; yet that both Jews and Heathen did expect and hope for
it, is so very evident, that it cannot without extreme Ignorance or Obstinacy
be denied.

But this expectation, how unreasonable soever, plainly shows it to have been
the common Apprehension of Mankind, in all Ages, that God would not be
appeased, nor should Sin be pardoned without Suffering: But yet so, that men
generally conceived good hopes that upon the Repentance of Sinners God would
accept of a vicarious punishment, that is, of the Suffering of some other in
their stead. And very probably, as I said before, in compliance with this
Apprehension of Mankind, and in condescension to it, as well as for other
weighty Reasons best known to the Divine Wisdom, God was pleased to find out
such a Sacrifice as should really and effectually procure for them that great
Blessing of the Forgiveness of Sins, which they had so long hoped for from the
multitude of their own Sacrifices.

And the Apostle to the Hebrews does in a large Discourse show the great virtue
and efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, to the purpose of Remission of Sins,
above that of the Sacrifices under the Law: And that the Death of Christ is
really and effectually to our advantage all that which the Sacrifices under the
Law were supposed to be to the Sinner: But now once, says the Apostle here in
the Text, in the end of the World, has he appeared to take away Sin by the
Sacrifice of himself. This is the great virtue and efficacy of the Sacrifice of
Christ, that what ever was expected from any other Sacrifices, either by Jews
or Heathens, was really effected by this.

This was plainly signified by the Jewish Passover, wherein the Lamb was slain,
and the Sinner did escape and was passed by. In allusion whereto St. Paul makes
no scruple to call Christ our Passover or Paschal Lamb, who was slain that we
might escape: Christ our Passover, says he, is slain 1 Cor. 5. 7.
or offered for us; that is, He by the gracious appointment of God was
substituted to suffer all that in our stead which the Paschal Lamb was supposed
to suffer for the Sinner.

And this was likewise signified by the Sinners laying his hand upon the
Sacrifice that was to be slain, thereby as it were transferring the punishment
which was due to himself upon the Sacrifice that was to be slain and offered
up. For so God tells Moses, that the Sinner, who came to offer an Expiatory
Sacrifice, should do: He Lev. 1. 4.
shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt-offering, and it shall be
accepted for him, to make an Atonement for him. And the Apostle tells us, that
it was an established Principle in the Jewish Religion, that without shedding
of blood there was no remission of Sins: Which plainly shows that they expected
this Benefit of the Remission of Sins from the Blood of their Sacrifices.

And then he tells us, that we are really made partakers of this Benefit by the
Blood of Christ, and by the virtue of his Sacrifice: And again, Heb. 9. 28.
Christ, says he, was once offered to bear the Sins of many; plainly alluding
to the Sacrifices under the Law, which did, as it were, bear the faults of the
Sinner.

And that this expression, of Christ's being offered to bear our Sins, cannot
be meant of his taking away our Sins by his holy Doctrine which was confirmed
by his Death, but of his bearing our Sins by way of imputation, and by his
suffering for them in our stead, as the Sacrifice was supposed to do for the
Sinner; This, I say, is evident beyond all denial from the opposition which
follows, after the Text, between his first Appearance and his second; Christ,
says our Apostle, was once v. 28.
offered to bear our Sins, but unto them that look for him he shall appear a
second time without Sin unto Salvation. Why? Did he not appear the first time
without Sin? Yes certainly, as to any inherent guilt; for the Scripture tells
us he had no Sin. What then is the meaning of the opposition, That at his first
Coming he bore our Sins, but at his second Coming he shall appear without Sin
unto Salvation? These words can have no other imaginable sense but this; that
at his first Coming he sustained the Person of a Sinner and suffered instead of
us; but his second Coming shall be upon another account, and he shall appear
without Sin unto Salvation, that is, not as a Sacrifice, but as a Judge to
conferr the Reward of Eternal Life upon those who are partakers of the benefit
of that Sacrifice which he offered to God for us in the days of his Flesh. I
proceed to the

III. IIId. Thing I proposed, and which yet remains to be spoken to; namely, to
vindicate this Method and Dispensation of the Divine Wisdom from the Objections
which are brought against it; and to show that there is nothing in it that is
unreasonable, or any wise unworthy of God. I shall mention four Objections
which are commonly urged in this matter, and I think they are all that are
considerable.

Obj. 1st.
First, That this Method, of the Expiation of Sin by the Sufferings of Christ,
seems to argue some defect and want of Goodness in God, as if he needed some
external Motive and were not of himself disposed to forgive Sinners.

To which I think the Answer is not difficult, namely, that God did not want
Goodness to have forgiven Sin freely and without any Satisfaction, but his
Wisdom did not think it meet to give encouragement to Sin by too easy a
forgiveness, and without some remarkable testimony of his severe displeasure
against it: And therefore his greater Goodness and Compassion to Mankind
devised this way to save the Sinner, without giving the least countenance and
encouragement to Sin.

For God to think of saving us any way, was excessive Goodness and Mercy; but
to think of doing it in this way, by substituting his dearly beloved Son to
suffer in our stead, is a Condescension so very amazing, that if God had not
been pleased of his own Goodness to stoop to it, it had almost been Blasphemy
in Man to have thought of it, or desired it.

Secondly, How can our Sins be said to have Obj. 2d.
been forgiven freely, if the Pardon of them was purchased at so dear a rate
and so mighty a Price was paid for it?

In Answer to this I desire these two things may be considered. 1 st. That it
is a wonderful grace and favor of God to admit of this translation of the
Punishment which was due to us, and to accept of the Sufferings of another in
our stead, and for our benefit; when he might justly have exacted it of us in
our own Persons: So that, even in this respect, we are, as St. Paul says,
justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ:
And freely too in respect of any necessity that lay upon God to forgive us in
this or any other way. It was a free act of his Goodness to save us, even by
the Satisfaction and Sufferings of his own Son. 2 ly. It was in effect freely
too, notwithstanding the mighty Price which was paid for our Redemption.
Because this Price was not of our own procuring, but of God's providing; He
found out this Ransom for us. And will any man say, that a Prince who prevails
with his Son to intercede for the Pardon of a Rebel, yea and to suffer some
punishment or to pay a Fine for the obtaining of it, does not in effect and in
all equitable and grateful construction forgive him freely?

Obj. 3d.
Thirdly, It is yet further objected, That this seems to be more unreasonable
than the sacrificing of Beasts among the Jews, nay than the sacrificing of Men
among the Heathen, and even of their own Sons and Daughters: Because this is
the offering up of the Son of God, the most innocent and the most excellent
Person that ever was.

To which I answer, that if we consider the manner, and the design of it, the
thing will appear to be quite otherwise.

As to the manner of it, God did not command his Son to be sacrificed, but his
Providence permitted the wickedness and violence of men to put him to death:
And then his Goodness and Wisdom did overruled this worst of Actions to the
best of Ends. And if we consider the matter aright, how is this any more a
reflection upon the Holy Providence of God, than any Enormities and Cruelties
which by his permission are daily committed in the World?

And then if we consider the End and Design of this permission of Christ's
Death, and the application of it to the purpose of a general Expiation; we
cannot but acknowledge, and even adore the gracious and merciful Design of it.
For by this means God did at once put an end to that unreasonable and bloody
way of Worship, which had been so long practiced in the World: And after this
one Sacrifice, which was so infinitely dear to God, the benefit of Expiation
was not to be expected in any other way; all other Sacrifices being worthless
and vain in comparison of this: And it has ever since obtained this effect, of
making all other Sacrifices to cease, in all Parts of the World where
Christianity has prevailed.

Fourthly, The last Objection is, the Injustice and Obj. 4th.
Cruelty of an innocent Person's suffering instead of the Offender.

To this I answer, That they who make so great a noise with this Objection do
seem to me to give a full and clear Answer to it themselves, by acknowledging,
as they constantly and expressly do, that our Savior suffered all this for our
benefit and advantage, though not in our place and stead. For this, to my
apprehension, is plainly to give up the Cause, unless they can show a good
reason why there is not as much Injustice and Cruelty in an innocent Person's
suffering for the benefit and advantage of a Malefactor, as in his suffering
in his stead: So little do Men, in the heat of dispute and opposition, who are
resolved to hold fast an Opinion in despite of Reason and good sense, consider,
that they do many times in effect, and by necessary consequence, grant the very
thing which in express terms they do so stiffly and pertinaciously deny.

The truth of the matter is this; there is nothing of Injustice or Cruelty in
either Case; neither in an Innocent Person's suffering for the benefit of an
Offender, nor in his stead; supposing the Suffering to be voluntary: But they
have equally the same appearance of Injustice and Cruelty: Nor can I possibly
discern any reason why Injustice and Cruelty should be objected in the one Case
more than in the other, there being every whit as little reason why an Innocent
Person should suffer for the benefit of a Criminal, as why he should suffer in
his stead. So that I hope this Objection, which above all the rest has been so
loudly and so invidiously urged, has received a just Answer.

And I believe, if the matter were searched to the bottom, all this perverse
contention, about our Savior's suffering for our benefit but not in our stead,
will signify just nothing. For if Christ dyed for our benefit so as some way or
other, by virtue of his Death and Sufferings, to save us from the wrath of God
and to procure our escape from eternal Death, this, for ought I know, is all
that any body means by his dying in our stead. For he that dies with an
intention to do that benefit to another as to save him from Death, does
certainly to all intents and purposes dye in his place and stead.

And if they will grant this to be their meaning, the Controversy is at an
end; and both Sides are agreed in the thing, and do only differ in the phrase
and manner of expression: Which is to seek a quarrel and an occasion of
difference where there is no real ground for it; a thing which ought to be very
far from reasonable and peaceable Minds.

For the Socinians say, that our Savior's voluntary Obedience and Sufferings
did procure his Exaltation at the right hand of God, and Power and Authority to
forgive Sins, and to give eternal Life to as many as he pleased: So that they
grant that his Obedience and Sufferings, in the meritorious consequence of
them, do redound to our Benefit and advantage as much as we pretend and say
they do; only they are loath in express terms to acknowledge that Christ dyed in
our stead: And this, for no other reason that I can imagine, but because they
have denied it so often and so long.

But I appeal to the ingenuity of our Adversaries, whether this do not in the
last issue come all to one; and be not, on their part, a mere Controversy
about words? For suppose a Malefactor condemned to some grievous punishment,
and the King's Son to save him from it is contented to submit to great disgrace
and sufferings: In reward of which Sufferings the King takes his Son into his
Throne and sets him at his own right hand, and gives him power to pardon this
Malefactor, and upon a fitting Submission and Repentance to advance him to
honor: Will not any man in this Case allow that the King's Son suffered
instead of this Malefactor, and smile at any man that shall be so nice as to
grant that indeed he suffered for him, but yet to deny that he was punished for
him; to allow that he bore the inconvenience of his faults, but yet obstinately
to stand it out that the faults of this Malefactor were not laid upon him, or
in any wise so imputed to him that he can be said to have suffered in his
stead? This is just the Case, and the difference in reallity and in the last
result of things is nothing but words.

Thus far have I tried your patience in a contentious Argument; in which I take
no pleasure, but yet shall be glad if I may be so happy as by any thing that
has been said to contribute toward the putting an end to so unhappy a
Controversy, which has troubled the World so long and raised such a dust that
very few have been able to see clearly through it.

However, I cannot dismiss this Argument without making some useful but very
short reflection upon this great Doctrine of our Religion, namely, That the Son
of God being made a Sacrifice for us, and exposed to such bitter Sufferings and
so cruel a Death for the Expiation of our Sins, should create in us the
greatest dread and detestation of Sin, and for ever deterr us from all wilful
transgression and disobedience. For if the guilt of our Sins was done away upon
such hard terms and cost the dearly beloved Son of God so much sweat and blood,
then surely we ought to take great heed how by our renewed Provocations we
renew his Passion, and do what in us lies to crucify to our selves the Son of
God afresh, and to put him to an open shame.

If God did so terribly afflict the dearly beloved of his Soul for our sakes;
if the Son of God was so grievously wounded for our transgressions and so
sorely bruised for our iniquities: If so fearful a Storm of Vengeance fell
upon the most innocent Person that ever was for our Sins, then we have reason
to take that kind and merciful admonition of the Son of God to Sinners, to sin
no more, lest a worse thing, if it be possible, come upon our selves.

In this Dispensation of God's Grace and Mercy to Mankind, by the Death of his
Son, God seems to have gone to the very extremity of things, and almost further
than Goodness and Justice will well admit; to afflict Innocence it self to save
the Guilty: And if herein God has expressed his hatred of Sin in such a
wonderful way of love and kindness to the Sons of Men as looks almost like
hatred of Innocence and his own Son: This ought in all ingenuity and gratitude
to our gracious Redeemer, who was made a curse for us, and loved us to that
degree as to wash us from our Sins in his own Blood; I say, This ought to beget
in us a greater displeasure against Sin, and a more perfect detestation of it,
than if we had suffered the punishment due to it, in our own Persons: For in
this Case, we could only have been displeased at our Selves and our Sins as the
just Cause of our Sufferings; but in the other, we ought to hate Sin as the
unhappy Occasion of the saddest Misfortune and sorest Calamities to the best
Man that ever was, and to our best Friend, for our Sins and for our Sakes.

Since then the Son of God has so graciously condescended to be made in all
things like unto us, Sin only excepted; let us aspire, as much as is possible,
to become like to Him: Above all, let us hate and avoid Sin as the only thing
in which the Son of God would have no part with us, though he was contented to
suffer such bitter things to save us from the Defilement and Dominion of it,
from the Punishment and all the dismal consequences of it.

He had no Sin, but God was pleased to lay upon him the iniquities of us all,
and to make his Soul an offering for Sin, and to permit all that to be done to
Him which was due to us: He was contented to be sacrificed once for all
Mankind, that men might for ever cease from that inhuman and ineffectual way of
sacrificing one another, whereby instead of expiating their guilt they did
inflame it, and by thinking to make Atonement for their Sins they did in truth
add to the number and heinousness of them.

And let us likewise learn from this admirable Pattern, to pity those that are
in misery, as Christ also has pitied us; and to save them that are ready to
perish, for His sake who came to seek and to save us that were lost.

Let us, upon all occasions, be ready to open our bowels of Compassion toward
the Poor; in a thankful imitation of his Grace and Goodness who for our sakes
chose to be a Beggar, that we for his sake might not despise the Poor, but
might have a tender regard and compassion to those whose Condition in this
World does so nearly resemble that in which the Son of God thought it fittest
for him to appear when he was pleased to become Man.

In a word, Let us in the whole course, and in all the actions of our lives,
show forth the Virtues of Him who has called us out of darkness into his
mavelous light; and has raised up a mighty Salvation for us, that being
delivered from all our spiritual Enemies, from Sin and all the Powers of
darkness, we might serve him who has saved us; walking in holiness and
righteousness before him, all the days of our lives.

Now, To him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb that was slain: To
God even our Father, and to our Lord Jesus Christ, the first-begotten from the
dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth: Unto Him, who has loved us,
and washed from our Sins in his own Blood; and whilst we were Enemies to Him,
loved us at such a rate as never any man did his Friend. To Him, who became
Man, that he might bring us to God; and assumed our frail and mortal Nature,
that he might cloth us with Immortality and Life: To Him, who was pleased to
dwell and live amongst us, that He might teach us how to live: To Him, who dyed
for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification, and lives for ever to make
Intercession for us: To Him be Glory and Dominion, Thanksgiving and Praise to
eternal Ages.

Amen.
FINIS.

