A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, The 27th of
OCTOBER, Being the Day appointed for a Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God,
For the Signal Victory at SEA: For the Preservation of His Majesty's Sacred
Person, And for His safe Return to His People.

By JOHN, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill: And William Rogers at the Sun over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1692.

A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN.
JEREM. IX. 23, 24. Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man
glory in his riches: But let him that glories glory in this, That he
understands and knows Me, that I am the Lord, which exercise
lovingkindness, and judgment, and righteousness in the earth: For in these
things I delight, says the Lord.
THESE words are a message from God sent by his Prophet to the People of the
Jews, who trusted in their own Wisdom and Might and Riches for their safety and
preservation from that Destruction which, in the former part of this Chapter,
God had threatened to bring upon them by the King of Babylon. To take them off
from this vain confidence is this Message sent to them, Thus says the Lord,
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in
his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches: But let him that glories
glory in this, That he understands and knows Me, that I am the Lord, which
exercise lovingkindness and judgment and righteousness in the Earth: For in
these things I delight, says the Lord.

In the handling of these Words, I shall abstract from the particular Occasion
of them, and only consider the general Truth contained in them: Which I shall
do under these two Heads.

First, What we are not to glory in: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in
his riches.

Secondly, What it is that is matter of true glory: But let him that glories
glory in this, That he understands and knows Me, that I am the Lord, which
exercise lovingkindness, and judgment, and righteousness in the Earth.

I. What we are not to glory in. The Text instanceth in three things which are
the great idols of mankind, and in which they are very apt to pride themselves
and to place their confidence, namely, Wisdom, and Might, and Riches. I shall
consider these severally, and show how little reason there is to glory in any
of them.

1. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom. This may comprehend both human
knowledge, and likewise prudence in the management of affairs. We will suppose
both these to be intended here by the name of Wisdom, Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, that is, neither in the largeness and compass of his
knowledge and understanding, nor in his skill and dexterity in the contrivance
and conduct of human affairs: And that for these two reasons,

First, Because the highest pitch of human knowledge and wisdom is very
imperfect.

Secondly, Because when knowledge and wisdom are with much difficulty in any
competent measure attained, how easily are they lost?

First, the highest pitch of human knowledge and wisdom is very imperfect. Our
Ignorance does vastly exceed our knowledge at the best. Wisdom in any tolerable
degree is difficult to be attained, but perfection in it utterly to be
despaired of. Where is there to be found so strong and sound a head, as has no
soft place; so perfect, so clear an understanding as has no flaw, no dark
water in it? How hard a matter is it to be truly wise? And yet there are so
many pretenders to wisdom as would almost tempt a man to think that nothing is
easier. Men do frequently murmur and repine at the unequal distribution of
other things, as of health and strength, of power and riches: But if we will
trust the judgment of most men concerning themselves, nothing is more equally
shared among mankind than a good degree of wisdom and understanding. Many will
grant others to be superior to them in other gifts of Nature, as in bodily
strength and stature; and in the gifts of Fortune, as in riches and honor;
because the difference between one man and another in these qualities is many
times so gross and palpable, that no body has the face to deny it: But very
few in comparison, unless it be in mere complement and civility, will yield
others to be wiser than themselves; and yet the difference in this also is for
the most part very visible to every body but themselves.

So that true Wisdom is a thing very extraordinary. Happy are they that have
it: And, next to them, not those many that think they have it, but those few
that are sensible of their own defects and imperfections and know that they
have it not.

And among all the kinds of Wisdom none is more nice and difficult, and meets
with more frequent disappointments, than that which men are most apt to pride
themselves in, I mean Political wisdom and prudence; because it depends upon so
many contingent causes, any one of which failing the best laid design breaks
and falls in pieces: It depends upon the uncertain wills and fickle humors,
the mistaken and mutable interests of men, which are perpetually shifting from
one point to another, so that no body knows where to find them: Besides an
unaccountable mixture of that which the Heathen called Fortune, but we
Christians by its true name, the Providence of God; which does frequently
interpose in human affairs, and loves to confound the wisdom of the wise, and
to turn their counsels into foolishness.

Of this we have a most remarkable Example in Achitophel, of whose wisdom the
Scripture gives this extraordinary testimony, That the counsel which he
counseled in those days was as if one had enquired at the Oracle of God: Such
was all the counsel of Achitophel both with David and with Absalom. It seems he
gave very good counsel also to Absalom, and because he would not follow it was
discontented to that degree as to lay violent hands upon himself: And now who
would pride himself in being so very wise as to be able to give the best
counsel in the world, and yet so very weak as to make away himself because he
to whom it was given was not wise enough to take it?

The like miscarriages often happen in point of Military skill and prudence. A
great Prince or General is sometimes so very cautious and wary, that nothing
can provoke him to a Battle; and then at another time, and perhaps in another
Element, so rash and wilful that nothing can hinder him from fighting and being
beaten: As if the two Elements made the difference; and caution were great
wisdom at Land, and confidence and presumption great prudence at Sea. But the
true reason of these things lies much deeper, in the secret Providence of
Almighty God, who when he pleases can so govern and overruled both the
understandings and the wills of men, as shall best serve his own wise purpose
and design.

And as the highest pitch of human Wisdom is very imperfect in it self, so is
it much more so in comparison with the Divine knowledge and wisdom: Compared
with this it is mere folly, and less than the understanding and wisdom of a
child to that of the wisest man. The 1 Cor. 1. 25.
foolishness of God, says St. Paul, is wiser than men, that is, the least grain
of Divine wisdom is infinitely beyond all the wisdom of men: But in opposition
to the wisdom of God, the wisdom of men is less than nothing and vanity. Let
men design things never so prudently, and make them never so sure, even to the
Popish and French degree of infallibility; let them reckon upon it as a Blow
that cannot fail: Yet after all, the counsel of the Lord that shall stand, and
he will do all his pleasure; for there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor
counsel against the Lord.

And now we may ask the Question which Job does, Where shall wisdom be found,
and where is Job 21. 30.
the place of understanding? And we must answer it as he does, It is not to be
found in the land Chap. 28. 12.
of the living: unless it be that one infallible Point of Wisdom to which God
directs every man, and of which every man is capable, viz. Religion and the
fear of God, Unto man he said, Job 28. 28.
Behold! the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is
understanding.

Secondly, When knowledge and wisdom are with great difficulty in any competent
measure attained, how easily are they lost? By a disease, by a blow upon the
head; by a sudden and violent passion, which may disorder the strongest Brain
and confound the clearest Understanding in a moment: Nay even the excess of
knowledge and wisdom, especially if attended with pride as too often it is, is
very dangerous and does many times border upon distraction and run into
madness: Like an Athletick constitution and perfect state of health, which is
observed by Physicians to verge upon some dangerous disease, and to be a
forerunner of it.

And when a man's understanding is once crazed and shattered, how are the
finest notions and thoughts of the wisest man blunder'd and broken, perplexed
and entangled? like a puzzled lump of silk, so that the man cannot draw out a
thought to any length, but is forced to break it off and to begin at another
end. Upon all which and many more accounts, Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, which is so very imperfect; so hard to be attained, and yet so easy to
be lost.

2. Neither let the mighty man glory in his might. Which whether it be meant of
natural strength of body, or of military force and power, how weak and
imperfect is it, and how frequently foiled by an unequal strength?

If we understand it of the natural strength of men's bodies, how little reason
is there to glory in that, in which so many of the Creatures below us do by so
many degrees excel us? In that, which may so many ways be lost; by sickness,
by a maime, and by many other external accidents; and which however will decay
of it self, and by age sink into infirmity and weakness.

And how little reason is there to glory in that, which is so frequently foiled
by an unequal strength? of which Goliath is a famous Instance. When he defied
the Host of Israel, and would needs have the matter decided by single Combat,
God inspired David to accept the Challenge; who tho he was no wise comparable
to him in strength, and would have been nothing in his hands in close fight,
yet God directed him to assail him at a distance by a weapon that was too hard
for him, a stone out of a sling, which struck the Giant in the forehead and
brought his unweildy bulk down to the earth.

Or if by might we understand military force and power, how little likewise is
that to be gloried in? considering the uncertain events of War, and how very
often and remarkably the Providence of God does interpose to cast the Victory
on the unlikely Side. It is Solomon's observation, that such are the
interpositions of Divine Providence in human Affairs, that Event of things is
many times not at all answerable to the power and probability of second Causes:
I Eccl. 9. 11.
returned, says he, and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong.

And one way, among many others, whereby the Providence of God does often
interpose to decide the events of War, is by a remarkable change of the Seasons
and Weather in favor of one Side: As by sending great Snows, or violent Rains,
to hinder the early motion and march of a powerful Army, to the disappointment
or prejudice of some great Design: By remarkable Winds and Storms at Sea, to
prevent the conjunction of a powerful Fleet: and by governing all these for a
long time together so visibly to the advantage of one Side as utterly to defeat
the well laid design of the other. Of all which, by the great mercy and
goodness of God to us, we have had the happy experience in all our late signal
Deliverances and Victories.

And here I cannot but take notice of a passage to this purpose in the Book of
Job: Which may deserve our more attentive regard and consideration, because I
take this Book to be incomparably the most ancient of all other, and much elder
than Moses: And yet it is written with as lively a sense of the Providence of
God, and as noble Figures and flights of Eloquence as perhaps any Book extant
in the world. The Passage I mean is, where God to convince Job of his ignorance
in the secrets of Nature and Providence poseth him with many hard Questions,
and with this amongst the rest, Have thou entered into the Job 38. 22, 23.
treasures of the Snow? have thou seen the treasures of the Hail? which I have
reserved against the time of trouble, against the Day of Battle and War. The
meaning of which is, that the Providence of God does sometimes interpose to
determine the events of War, by governing the Seasons and the Weather, and by
making the Snows and Rains, the Winds and Storms to fulfill his word and to
execute his pleasure.

Of this we have a remarkable Instance in the defeat of Sifera's mighty Army;
against whom, in the Song of Deborah, the Stars are said to have fought in
their courses: The expression is Poetical, but the plain meaning of it is, that
by mighty Rains, which the common Opinion did ascribe to a special influence of
the Planets, the River of Kishon, near which Sisera's Army lay, was by sudden
Rains so raised and swollen as to drown the greatest part of that huge Host. For
so Deborah explains the fighting of the Stars in their courses against Sisera:
They fought, says she, from Heaven, the stars in their courses fought against
Sisera, the River of Kishon swept them away: As if the Stars, which were
supposed by their influence to have caused those sudden and extraordinary
Rains, had set themselves in Battelarray against Sisera and his Army.

Therefore, let not the mighty man glory in his might, which is so small in it
self, but in opposition to God is weakness and nothing. The weakness of God,
says St. Paul, is stronger than men. All power to do mischief is but impotence,
and Ps. 52. 1.
therefore no matter of boasting: Why boastest thou thy self, thou Tyrant, that
thou art able to do mischief? the goodness of God endures continually: The
goodness of God is too hard for the pride and malice of man, and will last and
hold out when that has tired and spent it self.

3. Thirdly, Let not the rich man glory in his riches. In these, men are apt to
pride themselves: even the meanest and poorest spirits, who have nothing to be
proud of but their money, when they have got good store of that together, how
will they swell and strut? as if because they are rich and increased in goods
they wanted nothing.

But we may do well to consider, that Riches are things without us; not the
real excellencies of our Nature, but the accidental ornaments of our Fortune.
If they descend upon us, they are the privilege of our Birth, not the effect
of our wisdom and industry; and those things in the procurement whereof we had
no hand, we can hardly call our own: And if they be the fruit of our own
prudent industry, that is no such matter of glorying; because men of much
slower understandings do commonly outdo others in diligence and drudging, their
minds lying more level to the low design of being rich.

At the best, Riches are uncertain. Charge them, says St. Paul, that are rich
in this world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches: Men
have little reason to pride themselves, or to place their confidence in that
which is uncertain, and even next to that which is not: So the wise man speaks
of Riches, Will thou set thine heart upon that Prove. 23. 5.
which is not? for riches certainly make themselves wings, and fly as an Eagle
toward heaven: He expresses it in such a manner, as if a rich man sat
brooding over an Estate till it was fledged and had gotten it self wings to fly
away.

But that which is the most stinging consideration of all is, that many men
have an evil eye upon a good Estate; so that instead of being the means of our
happiness it may prove the occasion of our ruin: So the same Wise man observes,
Eccl. 5. 13.
There is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun, namely, riches kept for
the owners thereof to their hurt. And it is not without example, that a very
rich man has been excepted out of a general Pardon, both as to Life and
Estate, for no other visible reason but his vast and overgrown Fortune: So
Solomon observes to us again, Such Prove. 1. 18.
are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain, which takes away the life
of the owners thereof. And why should any man be proud of his danger, of that
which one time or other may be the certain and only cause of his ruin? A man
may be too rich to be forgiven a fault which would never have been prosecuted
against a man of a middle fortune. For these reasons, and a great many more,
Let not the rich man glory in his riches.

II. I proceed to consider, What it is that is matter of true glory? But let
him that glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I
am the Lord, which exercise lovingkindness, and judgment, and righteousness in
the Earth: For in these things I delight, says the Lord.

That he understands and knows me: Here are two words used to express the
thing morefully, understanding and knowledge; which seem not only to import
right apprehensions of the Being, and Providence, and Perfections of God; but
likewise a lively sense of these things, and affections suitable to these
apprehensions.

That he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, that is the Creator,
and the Sovereign Governor of the World.

Which exercise lovingkindness, and judgment, and righteousness in the Earth.

The best knowledge of Religion, and that which is the foundation of all the
rest, is the knowledge of the Divine Nature and Perfections: especially of those
which are most proper for our imitation; and such are those mentioned in the
Text, lovingkindness, and judgment, and righteousness; which we may distinguish
thus: Lovingkindness comprehends Gods milder Attributes, his Goodness, and
Mercy, and Patience: Judgment signifies his severer dealings with men, whether
in the chastisement of his People, or in the remarkable punishment of great
Offenders for example and warning to others: Righteousness seems to be a word
of a larger signification, and to denote that universal Rectitude of the Divine
Nature which appears in all the administrations of his Providence here below;
for the Text speaks of the exercise of these Perfections in this world: which
exercise lovingkindness, and judgment, and righteousness in the Earth.

Several of the Perfections of the Divine Nature are incommunicable to a
Creature, and therefore cannot be thought to be proposed to us for a Pattern;
as self-existence, independence, and all sufficiency; the eternity, and the
immensity of the Divine Being; to be the original Cause of all other things,
and the Sovereign Governor of the whole World: For God only is sufficient for
that; and to be a Match for all the World, a nec pluribus impar, is not a Motto
fit for a mortal man. A Creature may swell with pride till it burst, before it
can stretch it self to this pitch of Power and Greatness: It is an insufferable
presumption, and a sottish Ignorance of the necessary bounds and limits of our
Being, to think to resemble God in these Perfections: This was the ambition of
Lucifer, to ascend into Heaven, and to be like the most High.

In our imitation of God we must still keep within the station of Creatures;
not affecting an independency and sovereignty like God, and to be omnipotent as
he is: Have thou an arm like God, and can Job 40. 9.
thou thunder with a voice like Him? as God himself argues with Job.

For in these things I delight, says the Lord. God takes pleasure to exercise
these Perfections himself, and to see them imitated by us; and the imitation of
these Divine Perfections is our perfection and glory; in comparison of which
all human wisdom, and power, and riches, are so far from being matter of glory,
that they are very despicable and pitiful things: Knowledge and skill to devise
mischief, and power to effect it, are the true nature and Character of the
Devil and his Angels; those Apostate and accursed Spirits, who in temper and
disposition are most contrary to God, who is the Rule and Pattern of all
perfection.

I shall only make two Observations and Inferences from what has been said,
and then apply the whole Discourse to the great Occasion of this Day: And they
are these.

First, That the wisest and surest Reasonings in Religion are grounded upon the
unquestionable Perfections of the Divine Nature.

Secondly, That the Nature of God is the true Idea and Pattern of Perfection
and Happiness.

First, That the wisest and surest Reasonings in Religion are grounded upon the
unquestionable Perfections of the Divine Nature: Upon those more especially
which to us are most easy and intelligible: such as are those mentioned in the
Text. And this makes the knowledge of God, and of these Perfections, to be so
useful and so valuable: Because all Religion is founded in right notions of
God, and of his Perfections: Insomuch that Divine Revelation it self does
suppose these for its foundation, and can signify nothing to us unless these be
first known and believed: For unless we be first firmly persuaded of the
Providence of God, and of his particular care of Mankind, why should we suppose
that he makes any Revelation of his Will to us? Unless it be first naturally
known that God is a God of truth, what ground is there for the belief of his
Word? So that the Principles of Natural Religion are the foundation of that
which is Revealed: And therefore nothing can in Reason be admitted to be a
Revelation from God, which does plainly contradict his essential Perfections.

Upon this Principle, a great many Doctrines are without more ado to be
rejected, because they do plainly and at first sight contradict the Divine
Nature and Perfections. I will give a few Instances, instead of many that might
be given.

In virtue of this Principle I cannot believe, upon the pretended Authority or
Infallibility of any Person or Church, that Force is a fit Argument to produce
Faith: No man shall ever persuade me, no not the Bishop of Meaux with all his
Eloquence, that Prisons and Tortures, Dragoons and the Galleys, are proper
means to convince the Understanding, and either Christian or Human methods of
converting men to the true Religion.

For the same Reason I cannot believe, that God would not have men to
understand their public Prayers, nor the Lessons of Scripture which are read
to them: Because a Lesson is something that is to be learnt, and therefore a
Lesson that is not to be understood is nonsense; for if it be not understood
how can it be learnt?

As little can I believe, that God who caused the Holy Scriptures to be written
for the instruction of mankind, did ever intend that they should be locked up
and concealed from the People in an unknown Tongue.

Least of all can I believe that Doctrine of the Council of Trent, That the
saving efficacy of the Sacraments does depend upon the intention of the Priest
that administers them: Which is to say, that though the People believe and live
never so well, yet they may be damned by shoals, and whole Parishes together,
at the pleasure of the Priest: And this for no other reason, but because the
Priest is so cross and so cruel that he will not intend to save them.

Now can any man believe this, that has any tolerable notion either of the
Goodness or Justice of God? May we not appeal to God in this, as Abraham did in
another Case? Will thou destroy the righteous with the wicked? That be far from
thee, to do after this manner: Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right?
Much more, to destroy the righteous for the wicked, and that righteous and
innocent People should lie at the mercy and will of a wicked and perverse
Priest, to be saved or damned by him as he thinks fit, That be far from thee:
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? For, to drive the argument to
the head, if this be to do right there is no possibility of doing wrong.

Thus in things which are more obscure we should govern all our Reasonings
concerning God and Religion by that which is clear and unquestionable, and
should with Moses lay down this for a certain Principle, All his ways are
judgment, a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is He: And say
with St. Paul, Is there then unrighteousness with God? God forbid? And again,
We know that the Judgment of God is according to truth.

2 ly, The other Inference is this, That the Nature of God is the true Idea and
Pattern of Perfection and Happiness: And therefore nothing but our conformity
to it can make us happy: And for this reason, to understand and know God is our
great excellency and glory, because it is necessary to our imtation of Him who
is the best and happiest Being. And so far as we are from resembling God, so
far are we distant from Happiness and the true temper of the Blessed. For
Goodness is an essential ingredient of Happiness; and as without Goodness there
can be no true Majesty and Greatness, so neither any true Felicity and
Blessedness.

Now Goodness is a generous disposition of mind to diffuse and communicate it
self by making others to partake of our Happiness, in such degrees as they are
capable: For no Being is so happy as it might be, that has not the power and
the pleasure to make others happy: This surely is the highest pleasure, I had
almost said pride, of a great Mind.

In vain therefore do we dream of Happiness in any thing without us. Happiness
must be within us; the foundation of it must be laid in the inward frame and
disposition of our spirits: And the very same causes and ingredients which make
up the Happiness of God must be found in us, though in a much inferior degree,
or we can not be happy. They understand not the nature of Happiness, who hope
for it upon any other terms: He who is the Author and fountain of Happiness
can not convey it to us by any other way, than by planting in us such
dispositions of mind as are in truth a kind of participation of the Divine
Nature; and by enduing us with such qualities as are the necessary materials of
Happiness: And a man may as soon be well without Health as happy without
Goodness.

If a wicked man were taken up into Heaven, yet if he still continue the same
bad man that he was before, coelum, non animum mutavit, he may have changed the
Climate, and be gone into a far Country; but because he carries himself still
along with him, he will still be miserable from himself: Because the man's mind
is not changed all the while, which would signify a thousand times more to his
happiness, than change of place, or of any outward circumstances whatsoever:
For a bad man has a Fiend in his own Breast, and the fuel of Hell in his
guilty Conscience.

There is a certain kind of temper and disposition which is necessary and
essential to Happiness, and that is Holiness and Goodness, which is the very
Nature of God; and so far as any man departs from this temper, so far he
removes himself and runs away from happiness. And here the foundation of Hell
is laid, in the evil disposition of a man's own mind, which is naturally a
torment to it self: And till this be cured, it is as impossible for him to be
happy, as for a Limb that is out of joint to be at ease; because the man's
Spirit is out of order, and off the hinges, and as it were tossed from its
Center; and till that be set right, and restored to its proper and natural
state, the man will be perpetually unquiet, and can have no rest and peace
within himself. The wicked, says the Prophet, is like the troubled Sea, when
it cannot rest: There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked: No peace with
God, no peace with his own mind; for a bad man is at perpetual discord and Wars
within himself: And hence, as St. James tells us, come Wars and fightings
without us, even from our Lusts which war in our members.

And now that I have mentioned Wars and fightings without us, this cannot but
bring to mind the great and glorious Occasion of this Day: Which gives us
manifold Cause of Praise and Thanksgiving to Almighty God: For several
wonderful Mercies and Deliverances; and more particularly, for a most glorious
Victory at Sea, vouchsafed to Their Majesty's Fleet in this last Summers
Expedition.

For several great Mercies and Deliverances: For a wonderful Deliverance
indeed, from a sudden Invasion designed upon us by the inveterate and
implacable Enemies of our Peace and Religion; which by the merciful Providence
of God was happily and strangely prevented, when it was just upon the point of
execution.

Next, for the preservation of our Gracious Sovereign, from that horrid and
most barbarous Attempt designed upon his Sacred Person: And from those great
and manifold Dangers to which he was exposed in his late tedious Expedition:
And for His safe and most welcome Return to us.

And lastly, For a most glorious Victory at Sea: The greatest and the cheapest
that ever the Sun saw, from his first setting out to run his Course. The
Opportunity indeed of this Victory was through the rashness and confidence of
our Enemies, by the wise Providence of God put into our hands: But the
improvement of this Opportunity into so great and happy a Victory we owe, under
God, to the matchless Conduct and Courage of the Brave Admiral, and to the
invincible Resolution and Valor of the Captains and Seamen.

This great Deliverance from the designed Invasion, and this glorious Victory,
God vouchsafed to us at Home, whilst His Sacred Majesty was so freely hazarding
his Royal Person abroad, in the Public Cause of the Rights and Liberties of
almost all Europe.

And now what may God justly expect from us, as a meet return for his Goodness
to us? What? but that we should glorify Him, first by offering praise and
thanksgiving; and then, by ordering our conversation aright, that he may still
delight to show us his Salvation.

God might have stood aloof from us in the Day of our distress, and have said
to us, as He once did to the People of Israel, so often have I delivered you
from the hands of your Enemies, but ye have still provoked me more and Judge.
10. 13.
more, Wherefore I will deliver you no more: He might have said of us, as he
did of the Deuteronomy. 32. 20.
same People, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall
be: For they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith: Our
resolutions and promises of better obedience are not to be trusted; all our
Repentance and Righteousness are but as the morning cloud, and like the early
dew which passes away: Nay methinks God seems now to say to us, as he did of
old Jer. 6. 8.
to Jerusalem, Be instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee, and I
make thee desolate, a Land not inhabited.

We are here met together this Day, to pay our Solemn acknowledgments to the
God of our Salvation; who has showed strength with his arm, and has scattered
the proud in the imaginations of their heart: Even to him that exercises
loving kindness, and judgment, and righteousness in the Earth: In Him will we
glory, as our sure Refuge and Defense, as our mighty Deliverer, and the Rock of
our Salvation.

And now I have only to entreat your patience a little longer, whilst I apply
what has been discoursed upon this Text a little more closely to the Occasion
of this Day. I may be tedious, but I will not be long.

And blessed be God for this happy Occasion: The greatest England ever had,
and, in the true consequences of it, perhaps the greatest that Europe ever had
of Praise and Thanksgiving.

You have heard two sorts of Persons described in the Text, by very different
Characters: The One, that glory in their Wisdom, and Might, and Riches: The
other, that glory in this, that they understand and know God to be the Lord,
which exercises loving kindness, and judgment, and righteousness in the Earth.

And we have seen these two Characters exemplified, or rather drawn to the
Life, in this present Age. We who live in this Western part of Christendom have
seen a mighty Prince, by the just permission of God raised up to be a Terror
and Scourge to all his Neighbors: A Prince, who had in perfection all the
Advantages mentioned in the former part of the Text: And who, in the opinion of
many who had been long dazzled with his Splendor and Greatness, has passed
for many years, for the most Politic, and Powerful, and Richest Monarch that
has appeared in these parts of the World, for many Ages:

Who has governed his Affairs by the deepest and steddyest Counsels, and the
most refined Wisdom of this World: A Prince mighty and Powerful in his
Preparations for War; formidable for his vast and well disciplined Armies, and
for his great Naval Force: And who had brought the Art of War almost to that
perfection, as to be able to Conquer and do his business without fighting: A
Mystery hardly known to former Ages and Generations: And all this Skill and
Strength united under one absolute Will, not hampered or bound up by any
restraints of Law or Conscience.

A Prince that commands the Estates of all his Subjects, and of all his
Conquests; which has furnished him with an almost inexhaustible Treasure and
Revenue: And One, who if the World does not greatly mistake him; has
sufficiently gloryed in all these Advantages, and even beyond the rate of a
mortal man.

But not knowing God to be the Lord, which exercises loving kindness, and
judgment, and righteousness in the Earth; How has the pride of all his Glory
been stained by Tyranny and Oppression, by Injustice and Cruelty; by enlarging
his Dominions without Right, and by making War upon his Neighbors without
Reason, or even color of Provocation? And this in a more Barbarous manner than
the most Barbarous Nations ever did; carrying Fire and Desolation wheresoever
he went, and laying wast many and great Cities without necessity, and without
pity.

And now behold what a terrible Rebuke the Providence of God has given to this
mighty Monarch, in the full Carrier of his Fortune and Fury. The consideration
whereof brings to my thoughts those Passages in the Prophet concerning old
Babylon, that standing and perpetual Type of the great Oppressors and
Persecutors of Gods true Church and Religion: How is the Oppressor ceased? the
exactour Isa. 14.
of gold ceased? He who smote the People in wrath with a continual stroke, he
who ruled the Nations in anger is himself persecuted, and none hinders. The
whole Earth is at rest and is quiet, and breaks forth into singing: The grave
beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming; it stirs up the dead
for thee, even all the Captains of the Earth; it has raised up from their
Thrones all the Kings of the Nations; all they shall speak and say unto thee,
art thou also become weak as we are? art thou also become like unto us? How art
thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the morning? How art thou cut down
to the ground that did weaken the Nations? For thou have said in thy heart, I
will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God: I will
sit also upon the Mount of the Congregation in the sides of the North, That is,
upon Mount Zion, for just so the Psalmist describes Ps. 48. 2.
it, Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole Earth is Mount Zion, on the
sides of the North. Here the King of Babylon threatens to take Jerusalem, and
to demolish the Temple where the Congregation of Israel met for the Worship of
the true God; I will also sit upon the Mount of the Congregation in the sides
of the North, Much in the same Style with the threatenings of Modern Babylon, I
will destroy the Reformation, I will extirpate the Northern Heresy.

And then he goes on, I will ascend above the height of the clouds, I will be
like the most High: Yet thou shall be brought down to the grave, to the sides
of the pit: They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider
thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake
Kingdoms; that made the World as a Wilderness, and destroyed the Cities
thereof, and opened not the House of his Prisoners?

God seems already to have begun this Work, in the late glorious Victory at
Sea; and I hope he will cut it short in righteousness. I have sometimes
heretofore wondered, Why at the destruction of Modern and Mystical Babylon the
Scripture should make so express mention of great wailing and lamentation for
the loss of Her Ships and Seamen: Little imagining, thirty Rev. 18. 17.
years ago, that any of the Kingdoms who had given their power to the Beast
would ever have arrived to that mighty Naval Force: But the Scripture says
nothing in vain.

Whether, and how far, Success is an argument of a good Cause: I shall not now
debate: But thus much, I think, may safely be affirmed, That the Providence of
God does sometimes, without plain and downright Miracles, so visibly show it
self, that we cannot without great stupidity and obstinacy refuse to
acknowledge it.

I grant, the Cause must first be manifestly just, before Success can be made
an Argument of Gods favor to it and approbation of it: And if the Cause of
true Religion, and the necessary defense of it against a false and Idolatrous
Worship, be a good Cause, Ours is so: And I do not here beg the Question; we
have abundantly proved it to the confusion of our Adversaries: If the
vindication of the common Liberties of Mankind, against Tyranny and Oppression,
be a good Cause, then Ours is so: And this needs not to be proved, it is so
glaringly evident to all the World And as our Cause is not like theirs, so
neither has their Rock been like our Rock, our Enemies themselves being Judges.

And yet as bad an argument as success is of a good Cause, I am sorry to say
it, but I am afraid it is true, it is like in the conclusion to prove the best
Argument of all other to convince those who have so long pretended conscience
against submission to the present Government.

Mere Success is certainly one of the worst Arguments in the World of a good
Cause, and the most improper to satisfy Conscience: And yet we find by
experience, that in the issue it is the most successful of all other Arguments;
and does in a very odd but effectual way satisfy the Consciences of a great
many men by showing them their Interest.

God has of late visibly made bare his Arm in our behalf, though some are still
so blind and obstinate that they will not see it: Like those of whom the
Prophet complains, Lord, when thy Isa. 26. 11.
hand is lifted up they will not see, but they shall see, and be ashamed for
their envy at thy People.

Thus have I represented unto you a mighty Monarch, who like a fiery Comet has
hung over Europe for many years; and by his malignant influence has made such
terrible havoc and devastations in this part of the World.

Let us now turn our View to the other part of the Text: And behold a greater
than he is here: A Prince of a quite different Character, who does understand
and know God to be the Lord, which does exercise loving kindness and judgment
and righteousness in the Earth: And who has made it the great Study and
Endeavor of his life to imitate these Divine Perfections, as far as the
imperfection of humane nature in this mortal state will admit: I say, a greater
than he is here; who never said or did an insolent thing, but instead of
despising his Enemies has upon all occasions encountered them with an undaunted
Spirit and resolution.

This is the Man whom God has honored to give a Check to this Mighty Man of
the Earth, and to put a hook into the Nostrils of this great Leviathan who has
so long had his pastime in the Seas.

But we will not insult, as He once did in a most unprincely manner over a Man
much better than himself, wheu he believed Him to have been slain at the Boyne:
And indeed Death came then as near to him as was possible without killing him:
But the merciful Providence of God was pleased to step in for his Preservation,
almost by a Miracle: For I do not believe that from the first use of great Guns
to that Day, any mortal man ever had his shoulder so kindly kissed by a Canon
bullet.

But I will not trespass any further upon that which is the great Ornament of
all his other Virtues; though I have said nothing of Him but what all the World
does see and must acknowledge: He is as much above being flattered, as it is
beneath an honest and a generous mind to flatter.

Let us then glory in the Lord, and rejoice in the God of our Salvation: Let us
now in the presence of all his People pay our most thankful acknowledgments to
him who is worthy to be praised; even to the Lord God of Israel who alone does
wondrous things: Who gives Victory unto Kings, and has preserved our David
his Servant from the hurtful Sword.

And let us humbly beseech Almighty God, that he would long preserve to us the
invaluable Blessing of our two Excellent Princes; whom the Providence of God
has sent amongst us, like two good Angels; not to rescue two or three persons,
but almost a whole Nation out of Sodom: By saving us I hope at last from our
Vices, as well as at first from that Vengeance which was just ready to have
been poured down upon us.

Two Sovereign Princes reigning together, and in the same Throne; and yet so
entirely one, as perhaps no Nation, no Age can furnish us with a Parallel: Two
Princes perfectly united in the same Design of promoting the true Religion, and
the Public Welfare, by reforming our Manners, and, as far as is possible, by
repairing the breaches, and healing the ^ivisions of a miserably distracted
Church and Nation: In a Word, Two Princes who are contented to sacrifice
Themselves and their whole Time to the care of the Public: And for the sake of
that to deny themselves almost all sort of ease and pleasure: To deny
themselves, did I say? No, they have wisely and judiciously chosen the truest
and highest Pleasure that this World knows, the Pleasure of doing good, and
being Benefactors to mankind. May they have a long and happy Reign over us, to
make us happy, and to lay up in store for Themselves A Happiness without
measure, and without end, in Gods glorious and everlasting Kingdom: for his
Mercies sake in Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, O Father, and the Holy Ghost,
be all Honor and Glory, Thanksgiving and Praise, both now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
THERE is newly Printed, and in few days will be published Sixteen Discourses on
several Texts of Scripture, By the late Pious and Learned Henry More, D. D. in
Octavo. Printed for Brab. Aylmer in Cornhil.


