A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN, AT White Hall, February the 27th 1690/1.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D. D. Dean of St. PAVL's, And Clerk of the Closet to His
Majesty.

Published by Her Maiesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange; and William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXCI.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
ACTS xxiv. 16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience
void of offense toward God, and toward men.
THese words are part of the Defense which St. Paul made for himself, before
Faelix the Roman Governor.

In which he first of all vindicates himself from the charge of Sedition, ver.
12, They neither found me in the Temple, disputing with any man; neither
raising up the People, neither in the Synagogue, nor in the City; that is, they
could not charge him with making any disturbance either in Church or State.

After this, he makes a free and open profession of his Religion, ver. 14. But
this I confess, that after the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the
God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the
Prophets: Here he declares the Scriptures to be the Rule of his Faith, in
opposition to the Oral Tradition of the Pharisees.

More particularly he asserts the Doctrine of the Resurrection, which was a
principal Article both of the Jewish and the Christian Religion; ver. 15, And I
have hope also toward God, that there shall be a Resurrection, both of the
just and the unjust.

And having made this declaration of his Faith, he gives an account of his
Life, in the words of the Text, ver. 16, And herein do I exercise my self, to
have always a conscience void of offense, toward God, and toward men.

Herein, (...), that is, in this work, do I employ myself; or as others render
it, in the mean time, whilst I am in this World; or as others, I think most
probably, for this cause and reason,(...), for (...), for this reason, because
I believe a Resurrection, therefore have I a conscientious care of my life, and
all the actions of it.

The Discourse I intend to make upon these words, shall be comprised in these
following Particulars.

I. Here is the extent of a good man's pious practice, to have a conscience
void of offense, toward God, and toward men. II. Here is his constancy and
perseverance in this course; to have allways a conscience void of offense. III.
Here is his earnest care and endeavor to this purpose, I exercise my self. IV.
Here is the Principle and immediate Guide of his actions, which St. Paul here
tells us was his Conscience. V. I shall lay down some Rules and directions for
the keeping of a good Conscience. VI. Here is the great motive and
encouragement to this, which St. Paul tells us was the belief of a
Resurrection, and of a future State of Rewards and Punishments consequent upon
it; for this cause; because I hope for a Resurrection both of the just and
unjust, I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense toward
God and toward men. I shall speak but briefly to the three first of these
Particulars, that I may be larger in the rest.
Here is the extent of a good man's pious practice. It has regard to the whole
compass of his Duty, as it respects God and Man. I exercise my self, says St.
Paul, to have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward men. And
this distribution of our Duty, under these two general heads, is very frequent
in Scripture. The Decalogue refers our Duty to these two heads: And accordingly
our Savior comprehends the whole Duty of Man in those two great Commandments,
the love of God and of our Neighbor, Matthew. 22.38. Upon these two Commandments
hang all the Law and the Prophets, that is, all the Moral Precepts, which are
dispersed up and down in the Law and the Prophets, may be referred to these two
general Heads.

Here is his constancy and perseverance in this course. St. Paul says, that he
exercised himself to have always a conscience void of offense; (...),
continually, at all times, in the whole course of his life. We must not only
make conscience of our ways by fits and starts, but in the general course and
tenor of our lives and actions, without any baulks and intermissions.

There are some that will refrain from grosser Sins, and be very strict at some
Seasons; as during the Time of a Solemn Repentance, and for some days before
they receive the Sacrament, and perhaps for a little while after it: And when
these devout Seasons are over, they let themselves loose again to their former
lewd and vicious course: But Religion should be a constant frame and temper of
mind, discovering it self in the habitual course of our lives and actions.

Here is likewise a very earnest care and endeavor to this purpose. Herein do
I exercise my self, says St. Paul. The word (...), which is here rendered
exercise, is a word of a very intense signification, and does denote that St.
Paul applied himself to this business with all his care and might, and that he
made it his earnest study and endeavor: And so must we; we must take great
care to understand our duty, and to be rightly informed concerning good and
evil, that we may not mistake the nature of things, and call good evil, and
evil good: We must apply our minds in good earnest to be thoroughly instructed
in all the parts of our Duty, that so we may not be at a loss what to do when
we are called to the practice of it: And when we know our Duty, we must be true
and honest to our selves, and very careful and conscientious in the discharge
and performance of it. I proceed in the

the Principle and immediate Guide of our actions, which St. Paul here tells us
was his Conscience; I exercise my self to have always a Conscience void of
offense: By which he does not only mean a resolution to follow the dictate and
direction of his Conscience, but likewise a due care to inform his Conscience
aright, that he might not in any thing transgress the Law of God, and his Duty.

Conscience is the great Principle of moral actions, and our Guide in matter of
Sin and Duty. It is not the Law and Rule of our actions, that the Law of God
only is; but it is our immediate Guide and directour, telling us what is the
Law of God and our Duty.

But because Conscience is a word of a very large and various signification, I
shall endeavor very briefly to give you the true notion of it. Now in common
speech concerning Conscience, every man is represented as having a kind of
Court and Tribunal in his own breast, where he tries himself and all his
actions: And Conscience, under one notion or other, sustains all parts in this
Trial: The Court is called the Court of a man's Conscience, and the Bar at
which the Sinner stands impleaded, is called the Bar of Conscience: Conscience
also is the Accuser; and it is the Record and Register of our Crimes, in which
the memory of them is preserved: And it is the Witness which gives testimony
for, or against us; hence are those expressions of the testimony of our
Consciences, and that a man's own Conscience is to him instead of a thousand
Witnesses: And it is likewise the Judge which declares the Law, and what we
ought, or ought not to have done, in such or such a Case, and accordingly
passes Sentence upon us by acquitting or condemning us. Thus, according to
common use of Speech, Conscience sustains all imaginable parts in this
Spiritual Court: It is the Court, and the Bench, and the Bar; the Accuser, and
Witness, and Register, and all.

But I shall only at present consider Conscience in the most common and famous
notion of it, as it is the Principle or Faculty whereby we judge of moral Good
and Evil, and do accordingly direct and govern our actions: So that in short,
Conscience is nothing else but the Judgment of a man's own mind concerning the
morality of his actions; that is, the Good, or Evil, or Indifferency of them;
telling us what things are commanded by God, and consequently are our Duty;
what things are forbidden by Him, and consequently are sinful; what things are
neither commanded nor forbidden, and consequently are indifferent. I proceed in
the

to give some Rules and directions for the keeping of a Conscience void of
offense. And they shall be these following:

First, Never in any case to act contrary to the persuasion and conviction of
our Conscience. For that certainly is a great Sin, and that which properly
offends the Conscience and renders us guilty; guilt being nothing else but
trouble arising in our minds from a consciousness of having done contrary to
what we are verily persuaded was our duty: And though perhaps this persuasion
is not always well grounded, yet the guilt is the same so long as this
persuasion continues; because every man's Conscience is a kind of God to him,
and accuses or absolves him according to the present persuasion of it. And
therefore we ought to take great care not to offend against the light and
conviction of our own mind.

Secondly, We should be very careful to inform our Consciences aright, that we
may not mistake concerning our duty; or if we do, that our error and mistake
may not be grossly wilful and faulty.

And this Rule is the more necessary to be considered and regarded by us,
because generally men are apt to think it a sufficient excuse for any thing,
that they did it according to their Conscience. But this will appear to be a
dangerous mistake, and of very pernicious consequence to the Souls of men, if
we consider these two things.

1st, That men may be guilty of the most heinous Sins in following an erroneous
Conscience. 2ly, And these Sins may prove damnable without a particular
repentance for them.
1st, That men may be guilty of the most heinous Sins in following an erroneous
Conscience. Men may neglect and abuse themselves so far, as to do some of the
worst and wickedest things in the world with a persuasion that they do well.
Our Savior tells his Disciples that the time should come when the Jews should
put them to death, Joh. 16.2.
thinking they did God good service: Nay the Jews murdered the Son of God
himself through ignorance and a false persuasion of mind: Father forgive them,
says our Blessed Lord, when he was breathing out his Soul upon the Cross, Luke
23.34.
for they know not what they do. And St. Peter, after he had charged the Jews
with killing the Prince of Life, Acts 3.17.
he presently adds, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your
Rulers. And St. Paul, in mitigation of that great Crime, says, Had they known,
they would not have crucified the Lord of life and glory: And concerning
himself he tells us, Acts 26.9.
That he verily thought with himself, that he ought to do many things against
the Name of Jesus of Nazareth: And yet notwithstanding that he acted herein
according to the persuasion of his Conscience, he tells us that he had been a
blasphemer, and a persecutour, and injurious, and a murderer, and in a word,
the greatest of Sinners. So that Men may be guilty of the greatest Sins in
following an erroneous Conscience. And

2ly, These Sins may prove damnable, without a particular repentance for them.
Where the ignorance and mistake is not grossly wilful, there God will accept of
a general repentance; but where it is grossly wilful, great Sins committed upon
it are not pardoned without a particular Repentance for them: And an error
which proceeds from want of ordinary human care and due government of a man's
self, is in a great degree wilful: As when it proceeds from an unreasonable and
obstinate prejudice, from great pride and self-conceit, and contempt of counsel
and instruction; or from a visible bias of self-interest, or when it is
accompanied with a furious passion and zeal, prompting men to cruel and
horrible things, contrary to the light of nature and the common sense of
humanity: Anerrour proceeding from such causes, and producing such effects, is
wilful in so high a degree, that whatever evil is done in virtue of it is
almost equally faulty with a direct and wilful violation of the Law of God.

The ignorance and mistake does indeed make the person so mistaken more capable
of forgiveness, which is the ground of our Savior's Prayer for his Murderers,
Father forgive them, for they know what they do: St. Paul likewise tells us,
that he found mercy upon this account, Nevertheless, says he, I obtained mercy,
1 Timothy 1.13.
because I did it ignorantly, and in unbelief, that is, through a false
persuasion of mind, not believing it to be a Sin: And yet he did not obtain
this mercy, without a particular conviction of his fault and repentance for it.
And St. Peter after he had convinced, the Jews of their great Sin in crucifying
Christ, though they did it ignorantly, yet he exhorts them to a particular and
deep repentance for it, as necessary to the pardon and forgiveness of it: And
therefore after he had said, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did
also your Rulers, Act 3.19.
he immediately adds, Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may
be blotted out.

So that it highly concerns men to consider what opinions they embrace in order
to practice, and not to suffer themselves to be hurried away by an unreasonable
prejudice and a heady passion, without a due and calm examination of things,
nor to be overborn by pride, or humor, or partiality, or interest, or by a
furious and extravagant zeal: Because proportionally to the voluntariness of
our Error will be the guilt of our practice pursuant to that Error. Indeed
where our Error is involuntary, and morally invincible, God will consider it,
and make allowance for it; but where it is voluntary, and occasioned by our own
gross fault and neglect, we are bound to consider, and to rectify our mistake:
For whatever we do contrary to the Law of God and our duty, in virtue of that
false persuasion, we do it at our utmost peril, and must be answerable to God
for it, notwithstanding we did it according to the dictate of our Conscience.

A Third Rule is this, That in all doubts of Conscience we endeavor to be
equal and impartial, and do not lay all the weight of our doubts on one side,
when there is perhaps as much or greater reason of doubting on the other: And
consequently, that we be as tractable and easy to receive satisfaction of our
doubts in one kind as in another, and be equally contented to have them
overruled in cases that are equal: I mean, where our passions and interests
are not concerned, as well as where they are. And if we do not do this, it is a
sign that we are partial in our pretenses of Conscience, and that we do not aim
merely at the peace and satisfaction of our own minds, but have some other
interest and design.

For it is a very suspicious thing, when men's doubts and scruples bear all on
one side, especially if it be on that side which is against charity, and peace,
and obedience to Government, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil: In this case I
think that a mere doubt, and much more a scruple, may, nay ought in reason to
be overruled by the command of Authority, by the opinion and judgment of wise
and good men, and in consideration of the public peace, and of the unity and
edification of the Church.

Not that a man is in any case to go against the clear persuasion and
conviction of his own mind, but when there is only a mere doubt concerning the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of a thing, it seems to me in that case very
reasonable that a man should suffer a mere doubt or scruple to be overruled by
any of those weighty considerations which I mentioned before.

The Fourth Rule is, That all pretenses of Conscience are vehemently to be
suspecled, which are accompanied with turbulent passion and a furious zeal. It
is an hundred to one but such a man's Conscience is in the wrong. It is an
excellent saying of St. James, Jam. 1.20.
The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, that is, the fierce
passions of men are no proper instruments to promote Religion, and to
accomplish any thing that is good. And therefore if any man be transported with
a wild zeal, and pretend conscience for his fury, it is great odds but he is in
an error: None are so likely to judge amiss, as they whose minds are clouded
and blinded by their passions,

Nubila men's est, Boeth.

Haec ubi regnant.
And if men would carefully observe themselves, they might almost certainly
know when they act upon Reason and a true principle of Conscience. A good
Conscience is easy to it self, and pleased with its own doings; but when a
man's passion and discontent are a weight upon his judgment, and do, as it
were, bear down his Conscience to a compliance, no wonder if this puts a man's
mind into a very unnatural and uneasy state.

There can hardly be a broader sign that a man is in the wrong, than to rage
and be confident: Because this plainly shows that the man's Conscience is not
settled upon clear reason, but that he has brought over his Conscience to his
interest, or to his humor and discontent.

And though such a man may be so far blinded by his passion as not to see what
is right, yet methinks he should feel himself to be in the wrong by his being
so very hot and impatient.

Art thou sure thou art in the right? thou art a happy man, and have reason to
be pleased: What cause then, what need is there of being angry? Has a man
Reason on his side? What would he have more? Why then does he fly out into
Passion? which as it gives no strength to a bad Argument, so I could never yet
see that it was any grace and advantage to a good one.

Of the great evil, and the perpetual mistake of this furious kind of Zeal, the
Jews are a lively and a lamentable Example, in their carriage toward our
Blessed Savior and his Apostles: And more particularly St. Paul, when he
persecuted the Christians from a false and erroneous persuasion of his
Conscience. Hear how St Paul describes himself and his own doings whilst he was
acted by an erroneous Conscience: Acts 22.4.
I persecuted, says he, this way unto the death, binding and delivering into
prison both men and women: And in another Chapter, I verily thought with my
self, Acts 26.9.
that I ought to do many things against the Name of Jesus of Nazareth: Here was
his erroneous Conscience: Let us next see what were the unhappy concomitants
and effects of it; ver. 10, 11: Which things, says he, I also did in Jerusalem,
and many of the Saints I shut up in prison, and when they were put to death I
gave my voice against them, and punished them often in every Synagogue, and
compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I
persecuted them even to strange Cities. When Conscience transports men with
such a furious zeal and passion, it is hardly ever in the right; or if it
should happen to be so, they who are thus transported, by their ungracious way
of maintaining the truth, and their ill management of a good cause, have found
out a cunning way to be in the wrong, even when they are in the right.

Fifthly, all pretenses of Conscience are likewise to be suspected, which are
not accompanied with modesty and humility, and a teachable temper and
disposition, willing to learn and to be better informed. A proud and conceited
temper of mind is very likely to run into mistakes; because pride and fullness
of a man's self does keep out knowledge, and obstructs all the passages by which
wisdom and instruction should enter into men: Besides that it provokes God to
abandon men to their own follies and mistakes; for God resists the proud, but
the meek will he guide in judgment, and will give more grace and wisdom to the
humble. When men are once come to this, to think themselves wiser than their
Teachers, and to despise and cast off their Guides, no wonder if then they go
astray.

Lastly, Let us be sure to mind that which is our plain and unquestionable
duty; the great things of Religion, wherein the life and substance of it does
consist; and the things likewise which make for peace, and whereby we may edify
one another: And let us not suffer our disputes about lesser matters to
prejudice and hinder our main duty: But let it be our great care not to fail in
those greater things which are comprehended under the two great Commandments of
the Law, the Love of God and of our Neighbor: Let us be strict and constant in
our piety and devotion toward God; chaste and temperate in reference to our
selves; just and honest, kind and charitable, humble and meek, patient and
peaceable toward all men; submissive and obedient to our Superiors, Natural,
Civil, and Spiritual. A due regard to these great Virtues of the Christian life
is the way to keep a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men:
And surely the best means to have our doubts cleared about matters of lesser
moment in Religion, is heartily to set about the practice of the great and
unquestionable Duties of it: So our B. Savior has assured us, Job. 7.17.
that if any man will do the will of God, he shall know of his Doctrine whether
it be of God. I come now in the

VIth and Last place, to consider the great Motive and encouragement to this
conscientious care of our Lives and actions; which St. Paul here tells us was
his belief of a Resurrection, and of the Rewards and Punishments consequent
upon it; I have hope, says he, toward God, that there shall be a Resurrection
both of the just and unjust: For this cause therefore I exercise my self to
have always a conscience void of offense toward God and toward men.

If we believe the Resurrection of the dead, and a future Judgment, we ought to
be very careful to discharge a good Conscience now, in order to the rendering
of a good Account hereafter; that we may be sincere and without offense, with
respect to the day of Christ, as the Apostle expresses it. For when that great
Day of Recompenses shall come, we shall most assuredly find that nothing will
then raise our hearts, and make us to lift up our heads with joy, like the
witness of a good conscience: And therefore we should make that our constant
care and companion now, which will then be our great comfort and rejoicing, a
good Conscience and the testimony of it, that in all simplicity and godly
sincerity we have had our conversation in the world.

And on the contrary, when we come to appear before the Great Judge of the
World, nothing will fill our minds with so much terror, and our faces with so
much confusion, as the clamorous accusations of a guilty Conscience; which will
be more than a thousand witnesses against us, and will anticipate our
condemnation, and pass almost as severe a Sentence upon us as the Judge himself
can.

This is that which will make the sinner to droop, and to hang down his head
for ever: And one of the principal ingredients of his misery and torment will
be the perpetual regret and remorse of his own mind for his wilful wickedness
and folly; which will kindle a fire within him as hot as that without him, and
as hard to be quenched.

This consideration ought to have a mighty operation upon us to make us very
careful to have Consciences void of offense now, that they may be free from
torment and anguish hereafter: That when we shall come into the other World, we
may not be eternally displeased with our selves, and enraged at our own doings;
but may carry with us thither Consciences clear of all guilt, either by
Innocence, or by Repentance.

The firm belief of a future state of eternal Happiness or Misery in another
World is the great weight or spring that sets a going those two powerful
Principles of human activity, the Hopes and the Fears of men; and is in its
nature so fitted to raise these Passions to that degree, that did not
experience show us the contrary, one would think it morally impossible for
human Nature to resist the mighty force of it.

All men are sensible, more or less, at one time or other of the true force of
these Arguments; but the mischief is, that in some persons they work quite the
wrong way, and instead of leading men to Repentance, they drive them to
Infidelity: They cannot deny the force of these Arguments, if they were true;
but that they may avoid the force of them, they will not believe them to be
true: And so far they are in the right, that granting these things to be true,
they cannot but acknowledge that they ought to live otherwise than they do: But
here is their fatal miscarriage, that being resolved upon an evil course, since
they cannot reconcile their practice with such Principles as these, they will
fit their Principles to their practice; and so they will believe nothing at all
of the Rewards and Punishments of another World, lest this should disturb them
in their course: Vain men! as if Heaven and Hell must needs vanish and
disappear, because some witty but wicked men have no mind to believe them.

These men are Infidels in their own defense, and merely for the quiet of their
own minds; that their Consciences may not perpetually rate them, and fly in
their faces. For a right belief and an evil Conscience are but unsuitable
companions; they are quarrelsome neighbors, and must needs live very uneasily
by one another. He that believes the Principles of Religion, and yet is
conscious to himself that he has lived contrary to them, and still continues
to do so, how can he possibly have any peace and quiet-in his mind? unless like
Jonah he can sleep in a storm, and his conscience be, as it were, seared with a
hot iron: For if his Conscience be awake, and in any degree sensible, the
evident danger of eternal ruin, continually hanging over him, must in reason
either drive him to repentance or to despair: If so forcible and violent an
Argument can make no impression upon us, we are stupid and bewitched, we are
lost and undone, we are wretched and miserable for ever.

But besides the future Reward of a holy and conscientious course, which is
unspeakable and full of glory; it has also this present fruit, this earnest,
as I may say, and ready money in hand, the peace and satisfaction of our own
minds, which is much more valuable than thousands of gold and silver; the
unspeakable comfort whereof every man will then find, when he has most need of
it: For it will be matter of great joy to him, not only under the sorest
afflictions and calamities of Life, but even at the hour of Death; when the
miseries of life oppress him, and the sorrows of death compass him about, and
the pangs of it are ready to take hold of him.

There is certainly no such comfort under the evils and afflictions of this
life, as a faithful witness in our own breasts of our own innocence and
integrity: When we are afflicted by God, or persecuted and reviled by men, it
cannot but be a mighty consolation to us to be conscious to our selves of our
own sincerity. For though no man can acquit and justify himself before God as
to the perfect innocence of his life, in which sense St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 4.4.
that though he knew nothing by himself, yet was he not thereby justified; I
say, though no man can plead perfect innocence, yet as to the general course
and tenor of an unblameable life, a good man may appeal to God, and even when
he afflicts him, may look upon Him as a tender and compassionate Father, and
not as an angry and revengeful Judge.

With this, holy and patient Job, under all those terrible disasters and
calamities which befell him, was able in some measure to comfort himself: After
he had lost all, and he had a great deal to lose; when he was forsaken of all
other comfort, even the charitable opinion of his best Friends concerning his
sincerity. In these sad and disconsolate circumstances, what was it that bore
up his spirit? nothing but the conscience of his own integrity. See with what
resolution and constancy of mind he asserts and maintains it: Job 25.5, 6.
I will not, says he, remove mine integrity from me: my righteousness will I
hold fast, and will not let it go: mine heart shall not reproach me, so long
(...) as I live: You see, that when every thing else mas gone, his integrity
stuck by him, and supported him to the last.

And as to persecutions and sufferings from men, our own innocence, and the
goodness of our Cause, will be our best comfort under them: When we are not
guilty to our selves that we have deserved them from men, and are inwardly
assured that whatever we patiently suffer for God and a good conscience, will
all turn to our account another Day, and work for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory.

This was that which supported the first Christians, that noble Army of
Martyrs, under all those bitter and cruel persecutions, which had otherwise
been beyond all human patience to have endured: This comforted them in all
their tribulations; Our rejoicing, says St. Paul, is this, the testimony of our
consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our
conversation in the world.

So likewise under that inferior but equally malicious sort of persecution, of
which this Age is so very profuse and prodigal, I mean the causeless calumnies
and reproaches of men: If under these we can but approve our Consciences to
God, the uncharitable Censures of men are not so much to be regarded by us:
some impression they will make upon a tender mind, but we must not, if we can
help it, let them sink too deep into our spirits: 1 John 3.21.
If our hearts condemn us not, we may have confidence toward God; and then
surely much more toward men: If God and our own Consciences do but acquit us,
methinks it should be no such difficult matter to bear the slanders and hard
censures of men.

But above all other times, the comfort of a good Conscience is most sensible,
and most considerable, at the hour of Death: For as nothing dejects a man's
spirit more, and sends him down with so much sorrow to the grave, as the guilt
of an evil Conscience; what terror and anguish, what rage and despair do seize
upon a Sinner at that time, when he reflects upon what he has done, and
considers what he is like to suffer? So on the other hand, there is nothing
that revives and raises the fainting spirits of a dying man, like the
Conscience of a holy and useful life, which has brought glory to God, Prove.
14.32.
and good to men. The wicked, says Solomon, is driven away in his wickedness,
that is, he is carried out of the World, as it were, in a storm and tempest:
But the righteous has hope in his death; he usually dies calmly and
comfortably: Mark the perfect man, Psalm. 37.37.
says David, and behold the upright; for the end of that man is peace.

If a man be conscious to himself that he has sincerely endeavored to keep
the commandments of God, and to do the things which please Him; if he has
lived inoffensively and, as St. Paul Acts 23.1.
says of himself, in all good conscience before God, and men; what an
unspeakable consolation must it be to him, in that dark and gloomy time, and
when he is walking through the valley of the shadow of death, then to fear no
evil? and to be able with our Blessed Savior to say, though in a much
inferior measure and degree, John 17.4.
Father, I have glorified thee on the earth, I have finished the work which
thou have given me to do: And to be able to look Death in the face with the
like courage and constancy of mind as St. Paul did when he saw it approaching
toward wards him: I am now, says he, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8
ready to be of fer'd, and the time of my departure is at hand; I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my race, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day. A comfortable Death, that is free from the stings
and upbraidings, the terrors and tortures, the confusion and amazement of a
guilty Conscience, is a happiness so desirable, as to be well worth the best
care and endeavor of a man's whole life.

Let us then have a conscientious regard to the whole compass of our Duty, and,
with St. Paul, Let us exercise to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward men: And let us never do any thing whereby we shall
offer violence to the light of our minds. God has given us this Principle to
be our constant guide, and companion; and whoever, after due care to inform
himself aright, does sincerely follow the dictate and direction of this Guide,
shall never fatally miscarry: But whoever goes against the clear dictate and
conviction of his Conscience, in so doing he undermines the foundation of his
own comfort and peace, and sins against God and his own Soul.

And to the end we may keep our Consciences clear of guilt, we should
frequently examine our selves, and look back upon the actions of our lives, and
call our selves to a strict account for them; that wherein-soever we have
failed of innocence, we may make it up by repentance; and may get our
Consciences cleared of guilt by pardon and forgiveness: And if we do not do
this, we cannot with confidence rely upon the testimony of our Consciences;
because many great Sins may slip out of our memories without a particular
repentance for them, which yet do require and stand in need of a particular
repentance.

Especially, we should search our Consciences more narrowly at these more
solemn Times of repentance, and when we are preparing our selves to receive the
Holy Sacrament: And if at these Times our hearts do accuse and condemn us for
any thing, we should not only heartily lament and bewail it before God, but
sincerely resolve by Gods grace to reform in that particular, and from that
time to break off that Sin which we have then repented of, and have asked
forgiveness of God for* For if after we have repented of it, we return to it
again, we wound our Conscience afresh, and involve them in a new guilt.

In the last place, We should reverence our Consciences, and stand in awe of
them, and have a great regard to their testimony and verdict: For Conscience is
a domestic Judge, and a kind of familiar God: And therefore, next to the
Supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth, every man should be afraid to offend his
own Reason and Conscience, which whenever we knowingly do amiss, will beat us
with many stripes, and handle us more severely than the greatest Enemy we have
in the World: So that next to the dreadful sentence of the great Day, every man
has reason to dread the sentence of his own Conscience, God indeed is greater
than our hearts, and knows all things; but under Him we have the greatest
reason to fear the judgment of our own Consciences: For nothing but that can
give us Comfort, and nothing can create so much trouble and disquiet to us.

And though the judgment of our Consciences be not always the judgment of God,
yet we have great reason to have great regard to it; and that upon several
accounts, which I shall but briefly mention, and so conclude.

First, Because the judgment of out Conscience is free from any compulsion. No
body can force it from us, whether we will or no; and make us to pass sentence
against our selves, whether we see reason for it or not.

Secondly, The sentence of our own Consciences is very likely to be impartial,
at lest not too hard on the severe side; because men naturally love themselves,
and are too apt to be favorable in their own case: All the World cannot bribe
a man against himself: There is no man whose mind is not either distempered by
melancholy, or deluded by false Principles, that is apt to be credulous against
himself, and his own interest and peace.

Thirdly, The judgment which our Conscience passes upon our own actions, is
upon the most intimate and certain knowledge of them, and of their true motives
and ends. We may easily be deceived in our judgment of the actions of other
men, and may think them to be much better or worse than in truth they are:
Because we cannot certainly tell with what mind they were done, and what
circumstances there may be to excuse or aggravate them; how strong the
temptation was, or how weak the judgment of him that was seduced by it into
error and folly.

But we are conscious to all the secret springs, and motives, and circumstances
of our own actions: We can descend into our own hearts, and dive to the bottom
of them, and search into the most retired corners of our intentions and ends;
which none, besides our selves, but only God can do; for excepting Him only,
none knows the things of a man but the Spirit of a man which is in him.

Fourthly, The Sentence of our Conscience is peremptory and inexorable, and
there is no way to avoid it. Thou may possibly fly from the wrath of other
men to the uttermost parts of the Earth, but thou can not stir one step from
thy self: In vain shall thou call upon the mountains and rocks to fall on thee
and hide thee from the sight of thine own Conscience.

Wretched and miserable man! when thou have offended and wounded thy
Conscience: For whether can thou go, to escape the eye of this Witness, the
terror of this Judge, the torment of this Executioner? A man may as soon get
rid of himself, and quit his own being, as fly from the sharp accusations and
stinging guilt of his own Conscience; which will perpetually haunt him, till it
be done away by repentance and forgiveness.

We account it a fearful thing to be haunted by evil spirits, and yet the
spirit of a man which is in him, thoroughly affrighted with its own guilt, may
be a more ghastly and amazing Spectacle than all the Devils in Hell: There is
no such frightful Apparition in the World, as a man's own guilty and terrified
Conscience staring him in the face: A spirit that is thus wounded, who can bear?

To conclude; Let these confederations prevail with us always to live, not
with regard to the opinion of others, which may be grounded upon mistake, or
may not indeed be their opinion, but their flattery; but with regard to the
judgment of our own Conscience, which though it may sometimes be mistaken, can
never be bribed and corrupted: We may be hypocrites to others and base
flatterers, but our Consciences whenever they are thoroughly awakened are
always sincere, and deal truly with us, and speak to us as they think.

Therefore whatever we say or do, let it be sincere: For though hypocrisy may
for a while preserve our esteem and reputation with others, yet it can signify
nothing to the peace of our own minds: And then what will it avail us to
conceal any thing from other men, when we can hide nothing that we say or do
from our own Consciences?

The sum of all is this: If we would keep a Conscience void of offense, let
us always be calm and considerate, and have the patience to examine things
thoroughly and impartially: Let us be humble and willing to learn, and never too
proud and stiff to be better informed: Let us do what we can to free our selves
from prejudice and passion, from self-conceit and self-interest, which are
often too strong a bias upon the judgments of the best men, as we may see
every day in very sad and melancholy instances: And having taken all due care
to inform our Consciences aright, let us follow the judgment of our minds in
what we do; and then we have done what we can to please God.

And if we would always take this care to keep a good Conscience, we should
always be easy, and good company to our selves: But if we offend our
Consciences, by doing contrary to the clear dictate and conviction of them, we
make the unhappyest breach in the World; we stir up a quarrel in our own
breasts, and arm our own minds against our selves; we create an enemy to our
selves in our own bosoms, and fall but with the best and most inseparable
Companion of our lives.

And on the contrary, a good Conscience will be a continual Feast, and will
give us that comfort and courage in an evil day which nothing else can: And
then whatever happen to us, we may commit our souls to God in well-doing, as
into the hands of a faithful Creator, To whom with our Blessed Savior and
Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost the Comforter, be all honor and glory, now and
ever, Amen.

FINIS*

