Dr. TILLOTSON's SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN AT HAMPTON COURT.

A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN AT Hampton Court, APRIL the 14th.
1689.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D. D. Dean of Canterbury.

Published by his Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill; And W. Rogers, at the Sun over against S. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street. MDCLXXXIX.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen AT HAMPTON COURT, April the 14th.
1689.
LUKE X. 42. But one thing is needful.
IN the accounts of Wise men, one of the first Rules and Measures of human
actions is this, To regard every thing more or less, according to the degree of
its consequence and importance to our happiness. That which is most necessary
to that End ought in all reason to be minded by us in the first place, and
other things only so far as they are consistent with that great End, and
subservient to it.

Our B. Savior here tells us that there is one thing needful, that is, one
thing which ought first and principally to be regarded by us: And what that is,
it is of great concernment to us all to know, that we may mind and pursue it as
it deserves.

And we may easily understand what it is by considering the Context, and the
occasion of these Words, which was briefly this: Our Savior, as He went about
preaching the Kingdom of God, came into a certain Village, where He was
entertained at the house of two devout Sisters. The elder, who had the care and
management of the Family and the affairs of it, was employed in making
entertainment for such a Guest: The other sat at our Savior's feet, attending
to the Doctrine of Salvation which he preached.

The elder finding her self not able to do all the business alone, desires of
our Savior that he would command her Sister to come and help her. Upon this
our Savior gives her this gentle reprehension, Martha, Martha, Thou art
careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful. And what
that is he declares in the next words, And Mary has chosen that good part,
which shall not be taken away from her; that is, she has chosen to take care
of her Salvation, which is infinitely more considerable than any thing else.

Our Savior does not altogether blame Martha for her respectfull care of Him,
but commends her Sister for her greater care of her Soul; which made her either
wholly to forget, or unwilling to mind other things at that time. So that, upon
the whole matter, He highly approves her wise choice, in preferring an
attentive regard to His Doctrine, even before that which might be thought a
necessary civility to His Person.

From the Words thus explained the Observation which I shall make is this.

That the care of Religion and of our Souls is the one thing necessary, and
that which every man is concerned in the first place and above all other things
to mind and regard.

This Observation seems to be plainly contained in the Text. I shall handle it
as briefly as I can; and then by way of Application shall endeavor to persuade
You and my self to mind this one thing necessary.

And in speaking to this serious and weighty Argument I shall do these two
things.

First, I shall endeavor to show wherein this care of Religion and of our
Souls does consist.

Secondly, to convince men of the necessity of taking this care.



And of this I shall give an account in the five following Particulars, in
which I think the main business of Religion and the due care of our Souls does
consist.

First, in the distinct knowledge, and in the firm belief and persuasion of
those things which are necessary to be known and believed by us in order to our
eternal Salvation.

Secondly, in the frequent Examination of our lives and actions, and in a
sincere Repentance for all the errors and miscarriages of them.

Thirdly, in the constant and daily exercise of Piety and Devotion.

Fourthly, in avoiding those things which are pernicious to our Salvation, and
whereby men do often hazard their Souls.

Fifthly, in the even and constant practice of the several Graces and Virtues
of a good Life.

I. The due care of Religion and our Souls does consist in the distinct
knowledge, and in the firm belief and persuasion of those things which are
necessary to be known and believed by us in order to our eternal Salvation.

For this knowledge of the necessary Principles and Duties of Religion is the
foundation of all good Practice, wherein the life of Religion does consist. And
without this no man can be truly Religious. Heb. 11. 6.
Without faith, says the Apostle to the Hebrews, it is impossible to please
God: For he that comes to God, must believe that He is, and that He is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek Him. Now these two expressions of
pleasing God and seeking Him, are plainly of the same importance, and do both
of them signify Religion, or the Worship and Service of God; which does
antecedently suppose our firm belief and persuasion of these two fundamental
Principles of all Religion, That there is a God, and, That He will reward those
that serve Him: Because unless a man do first believe these, there would
neither be ground nor encouragement for any such thing as Religion.

And this knowledge of the necessary Principles of Religion our B. Savior
calls eternal Life, because it is so fundamentally necessary in order to our
attaining of it: Joh. 17. 3.
This is life eternal, says He, to know thee, the only true God; and Him whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ, that is, to be rightly instructed in the
knowledge of the only true God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: Under
which two general Heads are comprehended all the necessary Principles both of
the Natural and of the Christian Religion.

And to the attaining of this knowledge which is absolutely necessary to
Salvation, no such extraordinary pains and study is required; but only a
teachable disposition, and a due application of mind. For whatever in Religion
is necessary to be known by all, must in all reason be plain and easy, and lie
level to all capacities; otherwise we must say, that God who would have all men
to be saved has not provided for the Salvation of all men. And therefore, now
that the knowledge of the true God and the light of Christianity are shed
abroad in the world, all that enjoy the Gospel are, or may be, sufficiently
instructed in all things necessary to their happiness: unless such care be
used, as is in the Church of Rome, to take away the key of knowledge, and to
lock up the Scriptures from the People in an unknown Tongue; and this, as they
pretend, upon a very charitable consideration, only it is to be hoped that it
is not true, that the generality of Mankind are mad and have need to be kept in
the dark. But supposing men to be allowed those means of knowledge which God
affords, and has appointed for us, the great difficulty does not commonly lie
in men's Understandings, but in their Wills: Only when men know these things,
they must attend to them and consider them; that the light which is in their
Understandings may warm their Hearts, and have its due influence upon their
Lives.

II. The due care of our Souls consists in the frequent Examination of our
lives and actions, and in a sincere Repentance for all the errors and
miscarriages of them: In a more particular and deep humiliation and repentance
for deliberate and wilful sins, so far as we can call them to our remembrance;
and in a general repentance for sins of Ignorance, and Infirmity, and Surprise.
In the exercise whereof we are always to remember, that the nature of true
Repentance does not consist only in an humble confession of our sins to God,
and a hearty trouble and contrition for them; but chiefly in the steadfast
purpose and resolution of a better life, and in prosecution of this resolution,
in actual reformation and amendment.

By the constant exercise hereof, we are put into a safe condition; provided
that we persevere in this holy resolution and course: But if we still retain
the love and practice of any known sin, or if after we have taken up these good
resolutions we return again to an evil course; this is a clear evidence, either
that our Repentance was not sincere at first, or that we are relapsed into our
former state: And then our Souls are still in apparent danger of being lost,
and will continue in that dangerous state, till we have renewed our Repentance
and made it good in the following course of our lives.

III. The due care of our Souls consists in the constant and daily exercise of
piety and devotion, both in private, and in public if there be opportunity for
it, especially at proper times and upon more solemn occasions: By servent
prayer to God, and by hearing and reading the Word of God with reverence and
godly fear: By frequenting his public Worship, and demeaning our selves in it
with that solemnity and seriousness which becomes the prefence and service of
the great and glorious Majesty of God, who observes our behavior and sees into
our hearts: And by receiving the B. Sacrament, as often as we have opportunity,
with due preparation and devotion of mind.

For these are not only outward testimonies of our inward piety, but they are
means likewise appointed by God to improve and confirm us in holiness and
goodness. And whoever neglects these Duties of Religion, or performs them in a
slight and superficial manner, does plainly show that he has neither a due
sense of God, nor care of himself: For in vain does any man pretend that he
does in good earnest design the End, when he neglects the best and most proper
means for the attainment of it.

IV. The due care of our Souls consists also in avoiding those things which are
pernicious to our Salvation, and whereby men do often hazard their Souls. Such
in general is the practice of any known Sin. By this we do, as it were, run
upon the swords point, and do endanger our Salvation as much as a deep wound in
our Body would do our Life: And though such a wound may perhaps be cured
afterward by Repentance, yet no man that commits any wilful Sin knows the
dismal consequence of it, and whither by degrees it may carry him at last: For
upon such a provocation God may leave the Sinner to himself, and withdraw his
grace from him, and give him up to a hard and impenitent heart to proceed from
evil to worse, and from one wickedness to another, till he be finally ruined.
So dangerous a thing is it knowingly to offend God, and to commit any
deliberate act of Sin.

More particularly, an inordinate love of the World is very pernicious to the
Souls of men; because it quenches the heavenly life, and fills our minds with
earthly cares and designs; it tempts men to forsake God and Religion when their
worldly interests come in competition with them; and betrays them to fraud, and
falsehood, and all kind of injustice, and many other hurtful lusts which drown
the Soul in perdition.

But besides these dangers which are more visible and apparent, there is
another which is less discernable because it has the face of Piety; and that
is Faction in Religion: By which I mean an unpeaceable and uncharitable zeal
about things wherein Religion either does not at all, or but very little
consist. For besides that this temper is utterly inconsistent with several of
the most eminent Christian Graces and Virtues, as humility, love, peace,
meekness, and forbearance toward those that differ from us; it has likewise
two very great mischiefs commonly attending upon it, and both of them
pernicious to Religion and the Souls of men.

First, that it takes such men off from minding the more necessary and
essential parts of Religion. They are so zealous about small things, the
tithing of mint and anise and cummin, that they neglect the weightier things of
the Law, Faith and Mercy, and Judgment, and the Love of God: They spend so much
of their time and heat about things doubtful, that they have no leisure to
mind the things that are necessary: And are so concerned about little
Speculative Opinions in Religion, which they always call fundamental Articles
of Faith, that the Practice of Religion is almost wholly neglected by them: And
they are so taken up in spying out and censuring Error and Heresy in others,
that they never think of curing those Lusts and Vices and Passions which do so
visibly reign in themselves. Deluded people! that do not consider that the
greatest Heresy in the World is a wicked life, because it is so directly and
fundamentally opposite to the whole design of the Christian Faith and Religion:
And that do not consider, that God will sooner forgive a man a hundred defects
of his Understanding than one fault of his Will.

Secondly, another great mischief which attends this temper is, that men are
very apt to interpret this zeal of theirs against others to be great Piety in
themselves, and as much as is necessary to bring them to Heaven; and to think
that they are very Religious, because they keep a great stir about maintaining
the Outworks of Religion, when it is ready to be starved within; and that
there needs no more to denominate them good Christians, but to be of such a
Party and to be listed of such a Church, which they always take for granted to
be the only true one; and then zealously to hate and uncharitably to censure
all the rest of Mankind.

How many are there in the World, that think they have made very sure of
Heaven, not by the old plain way of leaving their sins and reforming their
lives, but by a more close and cunning way of carrying their Vices along with
them into another Church, and calling themselves good Catboliques, and all
others Heretics? And that having done this, they are in a safe condition; as
if a mere Name would admit a man into Heaven, or as if there were any Church in
the World, that had this fantastical Privilege belonging to it, that a wicked
man might be saved for no other reason but because he is of it.

Therefore, as thou valuest thy Soul, take heed of engaging in any Faction in
Religion; because it is an hundred to one but thy zeal will be so employed
about lesser things, that the main and substantial parts of Religion will be
neglected: Besides, that a man deeply engaged in heats and controversies of
this nature, shall very hardly escape being possessed with that Spirit of
uncharitableness and contention, of peevishness and fierceness, which reigns in
all Factions, but more especially in those of Rellgion.

V. The due care of our Souls consists in the even and constant practice of the
several Graces and Virtues of a good life; or, as the Apostle expresses it, in
exercising our selves always to have a conscience void of offense toward God
and men. For herein is Religion best seen, in the equal and uniform practice of
every part of our Duty: Not only in serving God devoutly, but in demeaning our
selves peaceably and justly, kindly and charitably toward all men: Not only
in restraining our selves from the outward act of sin, but in mortifying the
inward inclination to it, in subduing our Lusts, and governing our Passions,
and bridling our Tongues. As he that would have a prudent care of his health
and life, must not only guard himself against the chief and common diseases
which are incident to men, and take care to prevent them; but must likewise be
careful to preserve himself from those which are esteemed less dangerous, but
yet sometimes do prove mortal: He must not only endeavor to secure his Head
and Heart from being wounded, but must have a tender care of every part; there
being hardly any disease or wound so slight but that some have dyed of it: In
like manner, the care of our Souls consists in an universal regard to our Duty,
and that we be defective in no part of it: Though we ought to have a more
especial regard to those Duties which are more considerable and wherein
Religion does mainly consist; as Piety toward God, Temperance and Chastity in
regard of our selves, Charity toward the poor, Truth and Justice, Goodness and
Kindness toward all men: But then no other Grace and Virtue, though of an
inferior rank, ought to be neglected by us.

And thus I have endeavored, as plainly and briefly as I could, to declare to
you in what Instances the due care of Religion and our Souls does chiefly
consist.

And I would not have any man think that all this is an easy business and
requires but little time to do it in, and that a small degree of diligence and
industry will serve for this purpose: To master and root out the inveterate
Habits of Sin, to bring our Passions under the command and government of our
Reason, and to attain to a good degree of every Christian Grace and Virtue:
That Faith and Hope and Charity; Humility and Meekness and Patience, may all
have their perfect work; and that, as St. James says, we may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing; nothing that belongs to the perfection of a good man,
and of a good Christian. And this, whenever we come to make the trial, we shall
find to be a great and a long work.

Some indeed would make Religion to be a very short and easy business, and to
consist only in believing what Christ has done for us, and relying
confidently upon it: Which is so far from being the true Notion of Christian
Faith, that, if I be not much mistaken, it is the very Definition of
Presumption. For the Bible plainly teaches us, that unless our Faith work by
Charity, and purify our hearts and reform our lives; unless like Abraham's
Faith it be perfected by works, it is but a dead Faith, and will in no wise
avail to our Justification and Salvation. And our B. Savior, the great Author
and finisher of our Faith, has no where, that I know of, said one word to this
purpose, That Faith separated from obedience and a good life will save any man:
But He has said very much to the contrary, and that very plainly. For He
promises Blessedness to none, but those who live in the practice of those
Christian Graces and Virtues which are particularly mentioned by Him in the
beginning of his excellent Sermon upon the Mount; Matthew. 5. 3, 4, etc.
of Humility, and Repentance, and Meekness, and Righteousness, and
Mercifulness, and Purity, and Peaceableness, and Patience under persecution and
sufferings for Righteousness sake. And afterward in the same Sermon, Matthew. 7.
21.
Not every one, says He, that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father which is in heaven.
V. 24.
And again, Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will
liken him unto a wise man which built his house upon a Rock. V. 26, 27.
And afterward, He tells us, that whosoever builds his hopes of eternal
happiness upon any other foundation, than the Faith of the Gospel and the
Practice of its Precepts, does build his house upon the Sand; which when it
comes to be tried by the Rain and the Winds, will fall; and the fall of it will
be great. Joh. 13. 17.
And elsewhere; If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. And He
does very severely check the vain confidence and presumption of those, who will
needs rely upon Him for Salvation without keeping his commandments; Luke 6. 46.
Why call ye me, says He, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?

Does any man think that he can be saved without loving God and Christ? 1 John
5. 3.
And this, says St. John, is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: 1 John 2. 4.
and again, He that says I know him, and by the same reason, he that says I
love him, and keeps not his commandments, he is a liar, and the truth is not
in him. If ye love me, Joh. 14. 15.
says our B. Lord, keep my commandments: And again, V. 21.
He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me.

Does any man think, that any but the children of God shall be heirs of eternal
Life? Hear then what St. John says, 1 John 3. 7.
Little children, let no man deceive you, he that does righteousness is
righteous, even as He is righteous: And again, V. 10.
In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil, he
that does not righteousness is not of God.

In a word, this is the perpetual tenor of the Bible, from the beginning of it
to the end. If thou do well, Genesis 3. 7.
says God to Cain, shall thou not be accepted? Isai. 3. 10, 11.
And again, Say ye to the righteous, it shall be well with him, for they shall
eat the fruit of their doings: Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him,
for the reward of his hands shall be given him. And in the Gospel, when the
young man came to our Savior to be instructed by Him what good thing he should
do that he might inherit eternal life, our Lord gives him this short and plain
advice, Matthew. 19. 17.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. And in the very last
Chapter of the Bible we find this solemn declaration, Blessed are they that do
his commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and enter in
through the Gates into the City, that is, into Heaven, which the Apostle to the
Hebrews calls the City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God.
So vain and groundless is the imagination of those, who trust to be saved by an
idle and ineffectual Faith, without holiness and obedience of life.

Second place to convince us all, if it may be, of the necessity of minding
Religion and our Souls. When we call any thing necessary, we mean that it is so
in order to some End, which cannot be attained without it. We call those things
the necessaries of Life, without which men cannot subsist and live in a
tolerable condition in this World: And that is necessary to our eternal
happiness, without which it cannot be attained. Now happiness being our chief
End, whatever is necessary to that is more necessary than any thing else; and
in comparison of that, all other things not only may, but ought to be
neglected by us.

Now to convince men of the necessity of Religion, I shall briefly show, That
it is a certain way to happiness: That it is certain that there is no other way
but this: And that if we neglect Religion, we shall certainly be extremely and
for ever miserable.

First, That Religion is a certain way to happiness. And for this we have God's
express Declaration and Promise, the best assurance that can be. He that cannot
lie has promised eternal life, to them who by patient continuance in
well-doing seek for glory and honor and immortality. All the happiness that we
can desire, and of which the nature of man is capable, is promised to us upon
the terms of Religion, upon our denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and
living soberly, and righteously, and godlily in this present world: A mighty
reward for a little service; an eternity of happiness, of joys unspeakable and
full of glory, for the diligence and industry of a few days: A happiness large
as our wishes, and lasting as our Souls.

Secondly, It Is certain also that there is no other way to happiness but this.
He, who alone can make us happy, has promised it to us upon these and no other
terms. He has said, That if we live after the flesh, we shall die; but if by
the spirit we mortify the deeds of the flesh, we shall live: That without
holiness no man shall see the Lord: And, that he that lives in the habitual
Practice of any Vice, of Covetousness, or Adultery, or Malice, or Revenge,
shall not enter into the kingdom of God: And we have reason to believe Him
concerning the terms of this happiness, and the means of attaining it, by whose
favor and bounty alone we hope to be made partakers of it.

And if God had not said it in his Word, yet the nature and reason of the thing
does plainly declare it. For Religion is not only a condition of our happiness,
but a necessary qualification and disposition for it. We must be like to God in
the temper of our minds, before we can find any felicity in the enjoyment of
him. Men must be purged from their Lusts, and from those ill-natured and
devilish Passions of Malice, and Envy, and Revenge, before they can be fit
company for their heavenly Father, and meet to dwell with him who is love, and
dwells in love.

Thirdly, If we neglect Religion, we shall certainly be extremely and for ever
miserable. The Word of Truth has said it, that indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul of man that does evil. Nay, if
God should hold his hand, and should inflict no positive torment upon sinners,
yet they could not spare themselves, but would be their own Executioners and
Tormentors. The guilt of that wicked Life which they had led in this World, and
the Stings of their own Consciences must necessarily make them miserable,
whenever their own Thoughts are let loose upon them; as they will certainly be
in the other World, when they shall have nothing either of pleasure or business
to divert them.

So that if we be concerned, either to be happy hereafter, or to avoid those
Miseries which are great and dreadful beyond all imagination, it will be
necessary for us to mind Religion; without which we can neither attain that
Happiness, nor escape those Miseries.

All that now remains, is to persuade you and my self seriously to mind this
one thing necessary. And to this end, I shall apply my Discourse to two sorts
of Persons; those who are remiss in a matter of so great concernment, and those
who are grossly careless, and mind it not at all.

First, To those who are remiss in a matter of such vast concernment: Who mind
the business of Religion in some degree, but not so heartily and vigorously as
a matter of such infinite consequence does require and deserve.

And here I fear the very best are greatly defective; and so much the more to
be blamed, by how much they are more convinced than others, of the necessity of
a Religious and Holy Life, and that without this no man shall ever be admitted
into the Mansions of the Blessed: They believe likewise, that according to the
degrees of every man's holiness and virtue in this Life, will be the degrees of
his happiness in the other; that he that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly,
and he that sows plentifully shall reap plentifully; and that the measure of
every man's reward shall be according to his improvement of the Talents that
were committed to him.

But how little do men live under the power of these convictions? And
notwithstanding we are allured by the most glorious promises and hopes, and
awed by the greatest fears, and urged by the most forcible argument in the
world, the evident necessity of the thing; Yet how faintly do we run the Race
that is set before us? How frequently and how easily are we stopped or diverted
in our Christian course by very little temptations? How cold, and how careless,
and how inconstant are we in the Exercises of Piety, and how defective in every
part of our Duty? Did we act reasonably, and as Men use to do in matters of
much less moment, we could not be so indifferent about a thing so necessary, so
slight and careless in a matter of Life and Death, and upon which all Eternity
does depend.

Let us then shake off this sloth and security, and resolve to make that the
great business of Time, which is our great concernment to all Eternity: And
when we are immersed in the cares and business of this Life, and troubled about
many things, let this thought often come into our minds, That there is one
thing needful, and which therefore deserves above all other things to be
regarded by us.

Secondly, There are another sort of persons, who are groslly careless of this
one thing necessary, and do not seem to mind it at all: Who go on securely in
an evil course, as if either they had no Souls, or no concernment for them. I
may say to these as the Master of the Ship did to Jonah, when he was fast
asleep in the Storm, What meanest thou, O sleeper? Arise and call upon thy God.
When our Souls are every moment in danger of sinking, it is high time for us to
awake out of sleep, to ply every Oar, and to use all possible care and industry
to save a thing so precious from a danger so threatening and so terrible.

We are apt enough to be sensible of the force of this Argument of necessity in
other cases, and very carefully to provide against the pressing necessities of
this life, and how to avoid those great temporal evils of poverty and disgrace,
of pain and suffering: But the great necessity of all, and that which is mainly
incumbent upon us, is to provide for Eternity, to secure the everlasting
happiness, and to prevent the endless and insupportable miseries of another
World. This, this, is the one thing necessary; and to this we ought to bend and
apply all our care and endeavors.

If we would fairly compare the necessity of things, and wisely weigh the
concernments of this Life and the other in a just and equal balance, we should
be ashamed to misplace our diligence and industry as we do; to bestow our best
thoughts and time about these vain and perishing things, and to take no care
about that better part which cannot be taken from us. Fond and vain men that we
are! who are so solicitous how we shall pass a few days in this world, but
matter not what shall become of us for ever.

But as careless as we are now about these things, time will come when we shall
sadly lay them to heart, and when they will touch us to the quick: When we come
to lie upon a Deathbed, if God shall be pleased to grant us then so much time
and use of our Reason as to be able to recollect our selves, we shall then be
convinced how great a necessity there was of minding our Souls, and of the
prodigious folly of neglecting them, and of our not being sensible of the value
of them, till we are ready to despair of saving them.

But, blessed be God, this is not yet our case, though we know not how soon it
may be. Let us then be wise, and consider these things in time, least Death and
Despair should overtake and oppress us at once.

You that are young, be pleased to consider that this is the best opportunity
of your Lives, for the minding and doing of this work. You are now most capable
of the best impressions, before the habits of Vice have taken deep root, and
your hearts be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: This is the
acceptable time, this is the day of salvation.

And there is likewise a very weighty consideration to be urged upon those that
are old, if there be any that are willing to own themselves so; that this is
the last opportunity of their lives, and therefore they should lay hold of it,
and improve it with all their might: For it will soon be past, and when it is,
nothing call it back.

It is but a very little while before we shall all certainly be of this mind,
that the best thing we could have done in this World, was to prepare for the
other. Could I represent to you that invisible World which I am speaking of,
you would all readily assent to this counsel, and would be glad to follow it
and put it speedily in practice. Do but then open your eyes, and look a little
before you to the things which are not far off from any of us, and to many of
us may perhaps be much nearer than we are aware: Let us but judge of things
now, as we shall all shortly judge of them: And let us live now, as after a few
days we shall every one of us wish with all our Souls that we had lived; and be
as serious, as if we were ready to step into the other World, and to enter upon
that change which Death will quickly make in every one of us. Strange stupidity
of Men! That a change so near, so great, so certain, should affect us so
coldly, and be so little considered and provided for by us: That the things of
Time should move us so much, and the things of Eternity so little. What will we
do when this change comes; if we have made no preparation for it?

If we be Christians, and do verily believe the things which I am speaking of,
and that after a few days more are passed Death will come, and draw aside that
thick Veil of sense and security which now hides these things from us; and show
us that fearful and amazing sight which we are now so loath to think upon: I
say, if we believe this, it is time for us to be wise and serious.

And happy that man, who in the days of his health has retired himself from
the noise and tumult of this world, and made that careful preparation for Death
and a better Life, as may give him that constancy and firmness of Spirit, as to
be able to bear the thoughts and approaches of his great Change without
amazement; and to have a mind almost equally poised between that strong
inclination of Nature which makes us desirous to live, and that wiser dictate
of Reason and Religion which should make us willing and contented to die
whenever God thinks fit.

Many of us do not now so clearly discern these things, because our eyes are
dazzel'd with the false light and splendor of earthly felicity: But this
assuredly is more worth than all the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of
them, to be able to possess our Souls at such a time, and to be at perfect
Peace with our own minds, having our hearts fixed trusting in God: To have our
Accounts made up, and Estate of our immortal Souls as well settled and secured,
as by the assistance of God's Grace humane care and endeavor, though mixed
with much humane frailty, is able to do.

And if we be convinced of these things, we are utterly inexcusable if we do
not make this our first and great care, and prefer it to all other interests
whatsoever. And to this end, we should resolutely disentangle our selves from
worldly cares and encumbrances; at least so far, that we may have competent
liberty and leisure to attend this great concernment, and to put our Souls into
a fit posture and preparation for another World: That when Sickness and Death
shall come, we may not act our last part indecently and confusedly, and have a
great deal of work to do when we shall want both time and all other advantages
to do it in: Whereby our Souls, when they will stand most in need of comfort
and support, will unavoidably be left in a trembling and disconsolate
condition, and in an anxious doubtfulness of mind what will become of them for
ever.

To conclude, This care of Religion and our Souls is a thing so necessary, that
in comparison of it we are to neglect the very necessaries of Life. So our Lord
teaches us, Take no thought saying, Matthew. 6. 31, 33.
what shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be
clothed? But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness. The Calls
of God and Religion are so very pressing and importunate, that they admit of no
delay or excuse whatsoever: This our Savior signifies to us by denying the
Disciple, whom he had called to follow him, leave to go and bury his Father,
Let the dead, says he, bury their dead, but do thou follow me.

There is one thing needful, and that is the business of Religion and the care
of our immortal Souls, which whatever else we neglect should be carefully
minded and regarded by every one of us. O that there were such a heart in us. O
that we were wise, that we understood this, that we would consider our latter
end: Which God grant we may all do, in this our day; for his mercies sake in
Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and
Glory, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson.
THirty Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions. In Three Volumes. In
Octavo.

The Rule of Faith: Or, an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. Sarjant: By Dr.
Tillotson. To which is adjoined, A Reply to Mr. J. S. his Third Appendix, etc.
By Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's. In Octavo.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation. In Octavo. Price 3 d. alone.

A Persuasive to Frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. In
Octavo. Price 3 d. alone.

A Thanksgiving Sermon: Preached at Lincolns-Inn-Chappel, on the Thirty-First
of January, 1688.

A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White Hall, on Matthew. 5. 44.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, at Hampton Court.


