To the Memory of the ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE GEORGE Duke of Buckingham.
WHen the dread Summons of Commanding Fate
Sounds the Last Call at some proud Palace-Gate,
When both the Rich, the Fair, the Great, and High,
Fortunes most darling Favorites must dye;
Strait at the Alar'm the busy Heralds wait
To fill the Solemn Pomp, and Mourn in State:
Scutcheons and Sables then make up the Show,
Whilst on the Hearse the mourning Streamers flow,
With all the rich Magnificence of Woe.
If Common Greatness these just Rights can Claim,
What Nobler Train must wait on Buckingham!
When so much Wit, Witt's Great Reformer, dies,
The very Muses at thy Obsequies,
(The Muses that melodious cheerful Quire,
Whom Misery could nere untune, nor tire,
But chirp in Rags, and even in Dungeons sing,)
Now with their broken Notes, and flagging Wing,
To thy sad Dirge their murmuring Plaints shall bring.
Wit, and Witt's god, for Buckingham shall mourn,
And His loved Laurel into Cypress turn.
Nor shall the Nine sad Sisters only keep
This mourning Day: even Time himself shall weep,
And in new Brine his hoary surrows steep.
Time that so much must thy great Debtor be
As to have borrowed even new Life from Thee;
Whilst thy gay Wit has made his sullen Glass
And tedious Hours with newborn Raptures pass.
What though black Envy with her ranc'rous Tongue,
And angry Poets in embitter'd Song
(Whilst to new tracks thy boundless Soul aspires)
Charge thee with roving Change, and wandering Fires
Envy more base did never Virtue wrong;
Thy Wit, a Torrent for the Banks too strong,
In twenty smaller Rills o're-flow'd the Dam,
Though the main Channel still was Buckingham.
Let Care the busy Statesman overwhelm,
Tugging at the Oar, or drudging at the Helm.
With laboring Pain so half-soul'd Pilots plod,
Great Buckingham a sprightlier Measure trod:
When over the mounting Waves the Vessel rod,
Unshock'd by Toyls, by Tempests undismayed,
Steered the Great Bark, and as that danced, He played.
Nor bounds thy Praise to Albions narrow Coast,
Thy Gallantry shall Foreign Nations boast,
The Gallick Shore with all the Trumps of Fame
To endless Ages shall resound thy Name.
When Buckingham Great CHARLES Ambassador,
With such a Port the Royal Image bore,
So near the Life the Imperial Copy drew,
As even the Mighty Louis could not View
With Wonder only, but with Envy too.
His very Fleur-de-Liz'es fainting Light
Half droopt to see the English Rose so bright.
Let Grovelling Minds of Natures basest mould
Hug and Adore their dearest Idol, Gold:
Thy Nobler Soul did the weak Charms defy,
Disdained the Earthy Dross to mount more High.
Whilst Humbler Merit on Court-Smiles depends
For the Gilt Shower in which their Jove descends;
Thou mount'st to Honor for a Braver End;
What others borrow, Thou came there to lend:
Did sacred Virtues naked Self adore,
And leftst her Portion for her sordid woer;
The poorer Miser how do thou outshine,
He the worlds Slave, but Thou have made it thine:
Great Buckingham's Exalted Character
That in the Prince lived the Philosopher.
Thus all the wealth thy Generous Hand has spent
Shall Raise thy Everlasting Monument.
So the famed Phoenix builds her dying Nest
Of all the richest Spices of the East:
Then the heaped Mass prepared for a kind Ray
Some warmer Beam of the Great God of Day,
Does in one hallowed Conflagration burn,
A precious Incense to her Funeral Vrn.
So Thy bright Blaze felt the same funeral Doom,
A wealthyer Pile then old Mausolus Tomb.
Only too Great, too Proud to imitate
The poorer Phoenix more Ignoble Fate,
Thy Matchless Worth all Successors defies,
And scorned an Heir should from thy Ashes rise:
Begins and finishes that Glorious Sphere
Too Mighty for a Second Charioteer.
FINIS.
This may be Printed,

R. P.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin. 1687.


