THE ENTRANCE OF MAZZARINI, CONTINUED Through the first years REGENCY, of ANNA
MARIA of AUSTRIA, Qu. Dowager of FRANCE, and Mother of the present Monarch.
LOVIS XIV.

Wherein the principal causes of those Revolutions, that have since happened
in that Kingdom, may be discovered.

OXFORD Printed by ANN LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, 1658.

To the Reader.
ONce, since I exposed a former part of these relations, I thought rather, to
have letten that go out of it self, which had gotten out into the light; then
by adding more fuel to warm my self any longer at the censures of my own
kindling. But leisure and a long winter, joined with the other incentives of my
friends, made me light at last this end too; I doubt to wast before the Sun,
and burn daylight, being only a divulger of things, that were before public
in other languages. And so, my only wisdom might have been, to have hidden my
head in obscurity, while I left my body so obnoxious: but I love not to
complement so far, as to furnish any one, with a real argument against
myself. I had rather have it thought, as it is in truth, that I am not merely
a Collectour out of any others, that have written in the same fashion, which no
other has done hitherto: but I myself have made my own subject, and squared my
design out of whole quarries' without any injury to another man's wall.
Though, I must confess, I have not yet deserved to challenge so much credit to
my self, without any other recommendation. But as the first is above my merit;
so the second is too ^verse to my proper inclination: And therefore, I appeal
rather, to the favor of my fortune, which lies in the Candor of my Readers,
and so take a long adieu of them, and of any the like adventures for the future.

The Second Part of the ENTRANCE of MAZZARINI.
THe death of Lewis, surnamed the Just, was no less to be counted immature in
respect of his age, which was but of two and forty years; then of that of his
Successor, which was but of four and eight months: and of the interests of his
Crown, which, on other more accounts, were to look for most apparent and sure
concussions. For his grand enemy the Spaniard, who before had beaten many ways
to get a suspension of hostility, on expectation of this accident, and the
consequences likely to ensue, did now confound the sent, and utterly refuse to
be found again in the same tracks: but rather bent his whole sagacity and power
to drive it to extremity. The dependents on the Crown for it wonted powerful
aides particularly the Swedes and Catalonians were grievously stricken with the
sense of the same thing: and a^ its allies became the colder i^ their Treaties,
by how much the affairs were more important especially the States of Holla^^
would needs let the cord sli^ which so lately held them in the strictest
league. Within the Kingdom, the Houses of Vendosm^ Guise, Espernon, Bouillon,
and others of the more potent, pretended to high satisfactions, for the
injuries that the late Government had left upon them. Nay, the Queen herself
and Duke of Orleans, had matter of high displeasure against the creatures and
alliances of the late Cardinal (which yet held the chief places of authority
and dignity in France) from whom they had each endured a long persecution. The
several high Officers of State and War, that had been at pleasure deprived,
exiled, confined. The Courts of Parliament, whose power had been in a great
part exauctorated: and the people that had suffered so long* and miserable
impositions to the maintenance of sundry great armies, and payment of vast
pensions to foreign States and Princes might now combine severally to make a
new settlement very tachy and untractable. What, that the Kin^ left an empty
Exchequer, and necessity for the same charges, i^ not greater, to be still
continued while the same occasions still remained in open and vast dominions,
that were environed on al^ sides with potent enemies, and had no other walls,
then Armies to defend them? What, that thi^ defense was vain without offen^
ding, and this offending was either subject to great losses; or a^ best,
increased those scattere^ acquisitions, which drew the blood from the heart to
the extremities? This was the outwar^ face of things, besides the mo^^
impenetrable difficulties, which a multitude of pretenders might occasion in
the working of their interests. Let us therefore pursu^ the winding of these
torrents, and see how they may loose their eddinesse in the current of events.

On the day after the late Kings death, the Qu. Regent, accompanied by the
young King, the Dukes of Anjou and Orleans, with the guards of foot and Horse,
and a numerous throng of People came from St Germans into Paris, and went
strait to dismount at the Louure: from whence the young King dispatched
forthwith his Letters to the Parliament, wherein he imparted to them the death
of the King his father, commanding them to continue in the exercise of their
charges, and that he expected when they should come to make a new oath of
fealty to him, without making any mention of the Queen Regent, who thereupon
(if we may believe that such an action should be done without her cognizance,
expressed her self to be dissatisfied as well as the Parliament, for that a new
Oath was required of them against custom: but the fault was all laid upon the
Ministers: and in Particular the Secretary de. Guenegaud bore some check for
it, which, it may be thought, he did not feel much, as being not alone in it.
The Parliament expected when the Queen should come to their Court, to take
possession of the Regency. The Ministers of the Court when the Parliament
should come thither in their Body, and Scarlet Robes, as they use when they
march in Ceremony, or assemble themselves about the public affaire^ in the
Kings presence) to do obeisance to the King and Queen^ But now (if ever) was a
time t^ stand on privilege. Wherefor^ the Parliament considering anoient
customs, agreed only to send their Deputies thither in their blacks, the
rather to elude the new Oath pretended to be offered them. These addressed
themselves to their Majesty's, assuring them of their Allegiance, and
beseeching the King to come and sit on his bed of Justice (as the Royal Throne
in the Parliament is there styled.) In fine these Offices are accepted in the
form as they are rendered, and their request is granted.

But ere these Deputies part, the Duke of Orleans has other business with them,
which neither any scruple within his spirit, or gout within his shoe can hinder
him from bringing. He acquaints them therefore that in the time of the King his
Brother, he had brought to the Parliament a Declaration, and made semblance of
approving it, that he might not be taxed with disobedience: but in truth that
he judged that Declaration to be defective, and not observable: especially in
that part which restraines the Authority of the Qu. Regent, to whose prudence
he intended to be the first that should remit the sum of the Government,
without whateever limitations: and tells them further, that the Prince of Conde
was also of the same mind. Indeed they both knew how intimately the Queen
might be grieved, that, contrary to former precedents, her Regency was so
restrained and hampered by the King deceased, and therefore sought by the
freeing of her interests to clear their own: for the same prescript form of
Government did equallize them (the First Princes of the Blood, notwithstanding
their prerogatives in the custom of that Kingdom) with the other Counselors,
and, it may be when accounts were cast, render them much inferior: for if all
results were to pass by plurality of votes, it was easy to be ghessed, that the
Card. Mazzarin, the Secretary de Chauigny, and the Chancellor Se^uier might
join together for their common interest and sway all affairs at their own
pleasure. This was a notable stroke of the Princes, that looked like a generous
action, and was received with good applause as most agreeable to the Government
of France, which had ever been a pure Monarchy: but there was another fate in
it, then they expected, though at first it seemed to run luckily.

On the Monday following, which was the 18th of May and fourth from the Kings
death, the Qu. brought her Royal Pupil to place him in the Throne of Justice,
and herself at his righthand; accompanied with the Duke of Orleans, the
Princes of Conde and Conti, the Duke of Vendosme, and other the principal
Peers and Officers of the Kingdom, where the Young King first broke up silence
with these words Messicurs, I am come to see you to testify my affections to
you. My Chancellor will tell you the rest. But first the Queen and Princes of
the blood took their turns, which may deserve some recital. She expressed
hersel^e thus;

My Lords and Gentlemen,

The death of my Lord the late King, although it has not at all surprised me,
by reason of his long weakness, yet has it filled me with so much grief, that
hitherto I have been incapable of comfort, or of council: and although the
affairs of the Kingdom should require a continual application to suffice to
all occasions both at home and abroad; my affliction has been so great, that it
has put me beside the thinking what J were to do, till to'ther day that your
Deputies came to salute the King my Son and bring their protestations of
Loyalty and Obedience to him, beseeching him to come and sit on his Throne of
Justice, and take the place of his Ancestors, which act is considered as a
mark of Royalty, which I were willing to do this day to testify to this
Company, that on all occasions I shall be well contented to serve my self of
your Counsels, praying you to give unto the King my Son and unto Me such as
you shall judge in your Consciences to be most conducible to the good of the
State.

Then the Duke of Orleans, resuming the Speech, addressed it to the Queen,
remonstrating to her.

The satisfaction which all the Kingdom ought to have of her actions, as he
had sufficiently signified to the Deputies of Parliament the last Saturday, when
he told them that the whole honor of the Government was due not only to her
Condition as Mother of the King; but also to her merit and virtue: and that the
REGENCY being conferred on her by the order of the late King, and afterward
verified in Parliament in his presence, he did not desire any other part in
affairs then what should please her to impart to him, not pretending to any
vantage from whatsoever particular clause contained in the foresaid Declaration.

The Prince of Conde applauded the generosity of the Duke, adding withal, that
it was not only profitable, but also necessary to the good government of the
STATE, that the chief authority should not be divided.

Then succeeded the Lord Chancellor, and after him Monsieur Talon, the King's
Advocate, whose formal speeches cannot be brought into our lists, without
breaking them. At last, the Chancellor, rising from his Seat goes to the Royal
Throne, and Kneeling there expects the Kings opinion from the mouth of the
Queen, who excused her Self, alleging that she had no other then the sense of
the Parliament. Whereupon returning to hisSeat, and asking the opinion of the
rest, the Duke of Orleans added, that the ^auses inserted in the last
declaration did always seem extraordinary unto him, and without example: Nor
had he eve^ subscribed to them, but for obedience, and not to contradict the
King's will, though he ever thougt they could not be put in execution; and as
he had, for his own particular, quitted all pretensions in it; so now it was
his judgment, that the whole authority should be committed to the Queen. The
Pr. of Conde; and all the other Nobles, Officers, and Councillors concurred in
this vote: and so the Chancellor (howsoever, one may conclude, against his
mind) pronounced the arrest following.

The King sitting on his Throne of justice in the presence and with the
council of the Duke of Orleans his, Uncle of his cosins the Princes of Conde
and of Conti, and of other Princes, Prelates, Peers and Officers of the Crown
has declared and does declare the Queen his Mother, Regent of France,
according to the will of the deceased King, his most honored Lord and Father,
to have care of the education and nourture of his person, and the absolute,
full, and entire administration of the affairs of his Kingdom during his
Minority. His aforesaid Majesty does also will and intend, that the Duke of
Orleans his Uncle shall be Lieutenant General in all the provinces of the said
Kingdom under the Authority of the said Regent; and that under the same
Authority his foresaid Uncle shall be chief of his Council, and in his
absence his Cousin, the Prince of Conde, it resting in the will of the Queen to
make choice of persons of worth and experience in such as she shall think fit,
to debate in the said Councills, without being otherwise obliged to follow the
plurality of voices, then she her self pleases. His aforesaid Majesty
ordaines that this present arrest be read, published and registered in all
Baily-wicks etc.

The Queen felt her self now well established; and the Card. Mazzarini with
the Secretary de Chavigny expecting nothing less then to be licenced, or fall
into worse disgraces were ready to demand retirement; when the Queen,
pretending only as she expressed her self, not to depend on her Ministers, but
the^ on her, confirmed in the Council all that had been nominated by the King
her husband: and in particular (though the scope of the Parliament seemed to
wind another way) treated the Cardinal with demonstrations of a singular
estimation: whereby it was soon left to be gathered, that she was no less
jealous of saving her own power, by taking caution against the only sway of the
Princes of the blood; then Lewis himself had been of his Childrens interest on
that supposall. Yet besides these sheadded to her Council the Bishop of
Beauvais, her grand Almoner, sending to Rome to get the red hat for him: and
joined himwith the Card. Mazzarin, and one F. Vincent Genesis of the Missionaries
in the Council of Conscience for the distribution of benefices.

The season of the year was now advanced to a high Cam^^gne; for the furthering
whereof ^owards Italy, we have heard already what overtures were made to those
of Venice: But to ^nforce this toward Flanders, it is now time to examine what
issue the other treatyes with those of Holland might produce.

It came to a signing of articles by Ambassadors, and Commissioners on either
part, dated March 30 1643. the tenor of which imported thus much.

That the King, and Lords-State shall set on foot an army of 18 or 20000, Foot,
and 4500, o^ 5000, Horse, which shall ente into Flanders the next May, if he
that is Commander in chief for the King of Spain do not issu^ sooner but in
that case the King and the said States shall be ob^liged to set out their
Armies bot^ at the same time, on what soeve^ side the enemy shall turn: That
that of the Lords States shall atta^ que some strong fortress on the^ side,
and his Majesty on his: o^ else give such diversion to the enemy, by striking
into his Country, that may divide his forces and leave the Prince of Orange, by
that means, the greater facility in gaining of his Enterprise. Yet, that if
his Majesty intend but a simple diversion, that then he put himself into the
field a fortnight before the said Prince. But if both resolve to attaque
someplace that then they shall precisely issue on the same day.

The said Lords-States do oblige themselves, by the 8th of April, to equippe
at their own charges a fleet of 30 Vessels of war provided with two, three,
four, and five hundred boats to ply about the Coast of Calais to hinder the
enemies passage into Flanders by Sea, and in case the Kings Army does attaque
any place on the Coast of Flanders, the said 30 Vessels shall remain on the
same Coast, during the enterprise, to besiege it by Sea and help to the
transportation of such victual to the Kings Army, as shall be sent from
France, or bought of them at a reasonable rate.

Moreover the said States do^ faithfully promise to suffer the Kings forces to
pass to and fro, upon the Rhine to Wesel, and upon the Meuse, to Maestrich,
when they shall be requested, so it may not tend to the prejudice of their
States.

They shall also keep their Army on foot, as long as the good of the common
cause shall require, and the season of the year permit.

On these Conditions his Majesty was to aid the Lords-State for this year
with, a sum of one million, and two hundred thousand Livers to be faithfully
expended by the said Lords, in the leuying and maintaining of such forces
extraordinary, as were agreed on for this purpose, which payment should be made
punctually at 3 terms, (viz) four hundred thousand Livers at the ratifying of
this treaty, four hundred thousand more, next July, and the rest in October
following.

Only the said Lords-States do consent, that upon the said sum of one
Million, and two hundred thousand Livers received, the pensions of the French
Officers should be taken out, and paid according to the treaty of June 1630,
and of April 1634, whereby a sum of fifty thousand Livers, was rereserved to
be distributed by the French Ambassador to the French Officers.

Lastly, that this treaty shall no ways derogate from any former; but rather
confirm them all in full force and vigor.

The stone was not rolled thus far without great travel, but it soon
recoiled, and got thereby a Crosse-byas, wedged in with such reasons, as will
discover themselves hereafter: But if ever it were worth the cost of such
pensions, so many years continued, to purchase the slowfooted aides of the
H^ll^nd^rs, besides the proffers of afaire pa^^tage, let them account (for me)
whom it more concerns, what a^^ fit conditions for the English.

But in the Interim the Spanish forces, that are left hovering about the
frontires of Picardie, are are no way negligent to gain their advantages: to
which purpose they had sent before some part o^ their Army, which they still
augmented with new recruites (the French corresponding with the^ in the same
manner) till Do^ Francesco di Melo a Portughese at that time Governor of the
low Countries for the King of Spain, arrived with the maine succors drawn
from Luxenburg and the neigbouring Provinces making up in all an army of ^ive
and twenty thousand men effective.

This party was so highly satisfied with such a trust reposed in him, and so
desirous to recommend himself by a brave discharge of it (so as they are
commonly affected, that have no great pretensions besides their own merits)
that he had multiplied letters to the Court, and Council of War at Madrid,
communicating his intentions about the ordering of this Campaign, which were,
not to attaque an^ place, least he should endanger the crumbling of his
Majestys forces in those parts against some rugged siege, but only to appear on
the frontires of France, and be in a readiness, when any alterations should
happen there by the Kings death, to follow his advantage: or siding with some
party, thatshould have recourse to him, make his entrancewithin the heart of
that Kingdom, which might exceedingly enhance conditions at the opening of the
treaty for a general peace, that had been now some time in agitation, and
Plenipotentiary's furnished on both sides. A design, wherein he met with much
applause, as ^itted to the juncture of affairs then current. But he incurred
the ordinary fate of such ambitions* as covet to overdoe their actions, though
he had raised in himself, no less then others, a great expectation of his
Conduct in this expedition, by his success the year before at the battle of
Honcourt.

On the ninth of May he musters his Troops about Quesnoy, distributing among
them some pay, and then leaves the Count of Fuensaldagn^, Governor of ^ambray
with four thousand foot, and two thousand horse, about those quarters to
advance, as occasion should require; he himself marching with twelve thousand
foot, and seven thousand horse toward La Capelle, where he made a show of
sitting down: but rising on a sudden entered into Tei^asche, a Province that
lies `twixt Picardie and Champagne, harrassing and burning the Country
thereabouts (as if indeed his stroke pointed to the heart of France) while he
sent the Count of ^sembourg with a party of six thousand* foot, and two
thousand horse to sit down before Rocroy, a place so little, that one may
think, it was not much suspected, being also so slenderly provided of a
Garrison, that it had not above threee hundred foot in it, without horse: yet
o^ great importance, because from thence there is a ready way to Paris without
the passing of any river, whereupon the rest of the Army soon arrived, and
se^ting themselves to storm the fortress, which was but of five Bulwark^ not
enskonced, but only warded by some half moons, within 3 days they carried
four of these, the Governor ^ussreville for scarceness of people being glad
to draw his soldiers to secure the body of the place* yet in gaining one of
them, the Cavalier Vis^o^^ti a Noble Milarese in this service, lost about one
hundred and fifty of his tertia, on which the Cannon from the town charged
with bagg's of small shot did great execution.

Some accuse the General in this place of too much confidence in his own
forces with undue contempt of his enemy because, they say, he neither
sufficiently intercepted all the advenues, whereby relief might come to the
City nor yet took care to entrench himself, which had he been a true
Spaniard, he would not have omitted. It may be, he did it to be punctual to
his engaged design of not besieging any place, nor thought this deserved the
delaying of his army: but might be forthwith carried, and otherwise not so fit
to be left upon his back, when he should sweep his way before him into
Fran^e, which, as he thought had no army in a readynesse to counterpoise him,
or once appear before the place distressed in any season to relieve it: But, if
I may be as free to descant as other men peradventure Melo intended to reserve
some masterpeece till he might show it in the effect it self* if fortune had
been so favorable to his designs, as commonly those that have an ambition of
glory mixed with the love of their Master's service (as if they thought
themselves in effect to be free, and not in reason ^o be gaged, like mere
Instruments, to the solitary ends of any other) do affect to retain always
somewhat in their own power, and discretion, by which they may upon occasion,
show themselves apart in some sufficiency of their own But these are not the
least subject to miscarriages, whether for having too fair an hope in
Contingencies, they aim at great things overhastily, and saving their activity
for such periods, become too perfunctory in the intermediate actions, whereby
they should secure their progress; whereas neither hope, nor proof of fortune
should make one slight the least moments in the balance, and some success
should rather take us up from oscitancy, because the reason of all events is so
variable: or else, for being inwardly puffed up, they are apt to bound over
those occurrents, which they may leave to be stumbling blocks another time.

Yet to bring this siege to the better issue, and hinder any aides from that
side, he sends order to General Bek to hold himself with a thousand foot, and
two thousand horse on the frontires of Luxenborg, in assaulting a little Castle
there, upon the Meuse, which might also secure any Conuoyes from the town of
Namur for the serving of his own Camp, and keep those forces in a readiness
to join with him whenever notice should be given.

The news of this enterprise^ing brought to the Duke of Eng^en, a Captain of
two and twent^ years old, the the^ flower of Frenc^ Galantrie, inspired his
soul wi^^ no less joy in the hope of a ba^^tell, then it would some other the
certainty of a triumph rea^ dressed, and set before them: As the only Heroic
love were t^^ of glory, and the only Cour^sh^ this of danger.

He was then quartered wi^^ fourteen thousand men abo^^ Encre, a fair town
on the utmo^^ frontires toward Ar^ois, which was the directest way from (...)
midst of ^^France to the midst Flanders: Incontinent he bea^s^^ rendevous to
those troops the he had in a readynesse, and se^^ his march toward the Enemy,
di^patching present orders to oth^^ two brigades commanded by the Marquis of
Geures and Monsieur d' Espenan to join with him upon the way: which
accordingly put in punctual execution, he advanced with an Army twenty
thousand strong to deliver the place besieged, using diligence in his march,
because he was resolved to engage the first that should impeach his proceeding.
But when he was come within four Leagues of the City, he had intelligence that
it was invested by all the Spanish forces, hard pressed, and driven from their
outer fortifications, circumstances that would have turned, or when his blade
beyond the edge, if it had not been good metal, but being now brought almost
to the point of engagement, he foin'd with some suspense, to make thereby the
better judgment of a pass which was to reach the heart of h^s enemy. The ardor
of this Prince was happy in the symbolizing of his chief Officers, but
especially of the Marshall de Gassion, whose pareil inclinations, heighth'ned
with a lively industry, and long experience, (gotten in the discipline of the
chiefest Master of the modern age, the great Gustavus) prompted his genius to
the same affectations, and gained therewithal the heart of his General.
Whereupon he sends him before with a thousand horse, to cast in some recruits
into the place, and to discover the state of the Spanish Army, whether it were
entrenched, or whether it advanced to meet the succors: Having well considered
the fashion of the Leagure, for want of foot, he dismounted two hundred
CaraCarabines and Firelocks committed to the guidance of the Sieur de S.
Martin, and left them lurking in the hedges with an hundred horse to assist
them, while he with the rest went to beat up the enemy's quarters, and fell on
the guard of Cavalry which belonged unto Bucquoy: wherein though he found
himself so unhappily encumbred in a marish ground, that he could not make so
strong an impression as he intended; yet he did not fail of his whole design*
for this so sudden, and furious an Alarm to that quarter of the enemy made
them run thither and leave an open field for the succors to enter into the
City; which immediately infused such a new courage into the breasts of those
defendants, that the fire which grew intense before, by being ^traitned, did
now enforce its passage sage with the more violence: (...) these considering
the danger^^ approaches of the enemy, that (...) shouldered themselves under
so^ earth within a narrow ma^^ of their town ditch, and the their Sally^ port
being too r^^ mote, did leave them room the^^ to dispose themselves at large,
a^ so to prepare an Assault witho^ difficulty, took an hardy, and (...)
pricious resolution to slide dow^ by a rampire', with their Musk^ betwixt their
legs, and their bac^ stayed on them; which as read^^ done, they hastened to
storm the approach, and met so good succ^^ in it, that they presently clee^^
all that trench, and out in pe^^ those that guarded it.

The tempered discourse (...) Gassion when he came to gi^^ the General an
account of (...) delegacy on this affair, joyn^ with so fair a proof at the
first commencement of the action, did secretly transport his mind with such a
passion, as, you may think, one cannot describ or imagine, that cannot have
the happiness to feel somewhat like it: but it was as the quintessence of some
rich spirits, drop by drop, infused into his flames, which at first, with a
kind of unsatiable covetize of hearing, drew the matter to the center,
restraining his soul by excess of pleasure to a narrow compass so full of
vigor, that it could not long contain its self from impatiency: and yet for
fear, least betraying such a passion he might encounter some ungrateful
contestation of his end with those by whom he was to atchieue it, he matures
the calling of a Council of War, before which, with the continency of a
well-weigh'd General, h^ puts the question to the board^ what might be fit to
do in thi^ juncture.

And first the Lieut. General (...) l' Hospital (if I may here use a privilege
by prescription, which I my self allow not in a professed Historian) delivered
his mind in this manner.

Were it now a time to raise the first repute of the French nation, whose
courage and prowess is the most renowned of any other; or vindicate our own
valor, which is not th^^ of new men, or of fresh Soldiers, from the obloquy of
the world; (...) if we had to do with rude and barbarous enemies, as we have
with those that are Competito^^ with us in military force and discipline, I
should not utterly refuse this time for engagement, though under many
disadvantages. But since our end is rather to uphold a reputation already
gotten with the acquists that have attended it* and this may be done with
honor, by a bare waiting on the enemy to straiten and incommodate him (which
will be looked upon at this time as a mating and outbraving of him) and a
battle cannot be offered without apparent difficulties and most unequal
hazzards, I think it may deserve some serious pondering, if not a plain
suspense of any further action at the present; unless such as I hinted before,
or casting in some more succors, if need require, within the place, which if
it serve but to defend it, and so defeat the Spaniards of their design, it may
suffice by it self to overthrow their army without any notable loss or
hazard; and this is as noble a way of overcomming, as the gaining of a field,
and more Gaesarean: for he though he never refused to stand the ^ury of our
untrained Ancestor^ yet when he was to fight with Afra^nius or Pompey, men of
the lik^ expertnesse with himself, he studie^ still to gain by his conduct,
and shif^ a Battle to extremities. And if (...) can earne the victory, it
matters no^ so much whether it be by the strok^ of fortune or the sith of
time; for it will be weighed rather by its consequence, then the first bruit of
it^ But if we venture a battle nowwithout necessity, in my opinion we shall
but lay great odds on an even wager; if (at least) I may call it even* while
our enemies are more in number; and our superiors in artillery and ammunition:
and what thoug^ the issue of the battle should favo^^ our audacitie? What
should we gai^ besides the field? whereas if (...) should fall to loose it, as
what endeavors of man can hinder the possibltities of the war?) we must
inevitably expose our Country and ^azzard the embroiling of it in all manner
of confusions: for if his Majesty should now shortly yield to his languishing,
which is genarally feared, and this army, which othewise might serve to balance
the peace of France, and keep the war without it should be overthrowen, I dare
not imagine what might follow. Wherefore my advice at present is to temporize,
rather the^ engage further then we may draw our army off at our own discretion.

Thus he spoke and there were others of his opinion. But the glory, hope, and
courage, which now had lighted a fire of emulation in the generous heart of
Gassion were so incented by the sprinklings of these more cooler deliberations
(as the most Heroicke spirits feel the influence of the sun upon their hearts,
more then that other of the moon upon their brains) that the difficulti^
objected in this enterprise, mad^ his virtue glow the more intensel^ knowing
that the merit would b^ more precious by how much the present exigency of the
State wa^ more sensible, the renoun more clear and evident by the puissanc^ of
the enemy, and the victory not u^^ certain with that resolution, which he did
not seem to himself to have put upon him, like an harnes, (...) to have
inspired in him by the ge^nius of success. Which drew a reply from him to this
effect.

The succors, which have alread^ been cast into this place, may we^ serve to
rouse the industry of our e^nemies, but not to secure it: and i^ we will
decline the Battle, we mus^ incur the hazard of seeing it forced to our
beards; or if we cast i^ more supplies, divide our strength, and neither leave
our selves in state to offer or refuse it. But in my opinion, since the enemy
has (...) rich Country of his own behind him, and is now set down without a
curtain before this hold, there is no other way remaining either to in^ommodate
or oppose him, but offering combat, and obliging him to accept it; which now he
sh^ws a freedom to: but if we once let the occasion slip, will scarce be
found so much at open guard again. For my part, I cannot count it safe to delay
any time of impeaching the enemies design, nor agreeing wtih the reputation of
our Arms, being thus near to forbear of fronting him. Nor yet that more
courage should be added to his present insolency, or any despondence to our own
men, which the pride of the Spaniards, and our own diffidence must needs create
in them. And therefore this is my advice and de^s^re, that we make all haste
possibl^ ^o ciment with them.

So he left abruptly, thinking that in short speech there are quicker stings,
and prompter resentme^ts left in the hearers; which he found true with others;
but especially with the Duke, whose native ardor arising from a French, a
youthful, and a Royal blood, sent such spirits to crowd that passage unto
reason which dissuaded Fighting, and opened the Files to the contrary; that
hardly any argument could gain access, which did not come with the sound of
Trumpet, and beat of Drum to salute the General with hope of Victory. But as
great Spirits have many ways to palliate their designs according to others
men's reasons, which of themselves would not serve them above the half way, so
he, to show himself the fitter Moderator, propounds a seeming middle way, but
indeed a certain one, to engage de l' Hospital, and his other Field-Officers in
a necessity of encountering. He tells them, he would march the Army as far as
the Wood (for Rocroy stands upon a Green, environed on all sides with a woody
place of ten miles diameter) and there that they might be under shelter, and
have it in their power to fight, or to do otherwise, as they should see reason.

Which being the issue of that consultation, Gassion is again dispatched to
clear the way before their Army, and feize himself of such Posts as he should
find convenient for disposing of the maine Body which was to follow after.
Whereupon he pusheth through few of the Enemies Guards, and enters into a
Plain of a mile and halfs extent, that lies between i^ and the City, without
any other opposition, or show of being taken notice of, although the Spaniard^
might easily have prevented him, if they had Marshalled there first, and
guarded only two Passes, which were so straight that neither he, nor the rest
of the Army could have advanced through them in any order: Or if they had fallen
on them while they were encumbred, have gotten a great victory. But this
omission was imputed afterward (as men are ingenious to find out faults for
the unfortunate, and virtues for the prosperous) to an over weening fancy,
which made them either ignorant, or negligent of the French motions, persuading
themselves, that they du^st not bide a Battle, but only assay the casting in
some more relief; and it may be therefore feared to draw off at any distance
from the place, lest the French Cavalry should find means to effectuate that
design.

Gassion, being thus advanced to amuse the Enemy, and by accosting nearer to
inure his own men to be more confident, and more familiar with danger, marches
on with twelve Troops of Horse to go and view the Huts of the Enemy, and what
extent they occupied, whereby he soon perceived, that General Melo, as if he
slighted this show as a mere bravery, did but slowly rouse to put his people
in Battalia, and therefore, as a safe time, dispatcheth notice to the Duke to
hasten his advancement with the rest of the Army; who no less impatient of all
delays, was gone before with a small party of Horse to pry and learn the site
of the places thereabouts; but immediately upon this advice inorders the
Marquis of Geures to march before diligently with the Vantguard, to secure yet
further the passage to the rest: But it was so troublesome, that before the
French Army could get well through, the Spanish was come up in set Squadrons
ready to charge them, which made the Duke push his Van the more forward to get
room, obliging the Spaniards to quit a certain eminency which they had first
gotten.

The Captains that had been met in Melo's Praetorium to advise about the Battle
were diversely inclined, particularly the Camp-Master General, the Count of
Fontaines, a Soldier of fifty years experience, delivered this as his sense:
That it would be the best way to guard their station only til General Bek
should arrive with his supplies of four thousand men more, but a few hours
then distant, and at night to entrench themselves, that so the Enemy might not
venture to come on till they were ready for them without apparent hazard. But
the Governor General, reputing himself to have already the over-powering of
his Adversary, and the taking of opportunity by the forehand to be necessary to
his proceedings, disposed himself rather to prepare for the Battle.

The two Armies being come within Musket Shot, saluted one another with loud
outcries, casting their Hats in the air, and their Montiers in one another
faces: And as if the manner of managing each Army had been debated in the same
Council, and Fortune resolved to put them on even terms before the Combat,
they both deferred the decision of the quarrel till the next day, beating as it
were an alta by mutual agreement, and that (which the oldest Soldier did
admire) with so much quiet on both sides (except that their Cannon began to
parley before the evening, to the greater damage of the French, that were the
worser furnished of Artillery) that a false Allarm did not pass all night
between them. The Duke though he would feign anticipate Bek, yet could not come
up to engage, because his left Wing had yet but a dangerous station among the
Marshes. The same respect to Bek made the Governor entertain the same
resolution, being herein, it may be, the more unhappy, that he neither entirely
followed his own inclination of buckling sooner while the French were
encumbered, nor yet the counsel of Fontaines, to entrench himself: but being
still tenacious of his first conceit, lest the French should get more succors
to pass into the Town, he by night withdrew his Army nearer to it, and brought
himself to want such room as before he had commodious for him.

The Marshal de Gassion made a better use of the darkness, to enlarge his
right Wing (a stratagem which he said he had learned from his Master
Gustav^^) with which he intended to assayl tha^ of the Spaniards in the Flank,
and 'twas observed, that he did not herein fail of his judgment, but rather
that it was a main stroke to the Victory.

In the mean time the Duke of Anguien, to show how capable (...) young spirit
may be of commanding virtues, rides about all nigh^ with some of his ^h^ef
Officers to animate his Troops with his own life and presence; to acquaint them
with the true reason why he did not lead them on to fight the day before; not
for any shadow of fear, or diffidence, unless in the untrustinesse of the
ground, and promising to conduct them the next day to the head of their
Enemies. A thing that assured his Soldiers to him; endearing his courage to
their affection, and their endeavors to his utmost service. But when the
Armies met again the next morning, that of the Spanish houted to the French
with opprobrious language, the tidings of their King's death, which indeed the
French Generals had received over night, with order (as 'twas reported) not to
venture on a Battle; but they so prudently dissembled it, that this stratagem
was deaded (like a Cannon shot in Wool-packs) by the incredulity of the
Soldiers; and so now nothing else remained but the chocque it self.

The French Cavalry (in all six thousand, were disposed to either Wing, and
interlaced with choice Musketeers to protect them; and the whole Army (except a
Body of Reserve commanded by the Baron de Sirot, of about twelve hundred Horse)
made a great Front, and so advanced with a just and steady pace against the
Spanish Army, which had drawn it self up within an half miles distance nearer
to the Town, in a readiness to receive them. But these in the marshalling of
their Army were much disgusted by the setting of the Duke of Albuq^^^que, a
young Gallant, privileged by his birth to be a Grand (...) Spain, to command
the Horse (...) prejudice of the Count of (...) quoy, an approved Captain, wh^
was hereupon licensed to retire to his Government of Mons, leaving this charge
to his Competitor.

The left Wing of the Frenc^ Army being led by the Duke himself, who appeared
all in Iron, except his head, whereon he those rather to wear his Hat and Plum^
of white Feathers, begun a terrible and furious Charge, which not availing to
break the ranks o^ the Spaniards right Wing, began to slake its first vigor,
and being hardly pressed to give back, not without disorder; the Lieutenant
General de l' Hospital, and the Marshall de la Ferte Seneterre being both
wounded, and this latter taken prisoner, though after rescued; the Spaniards
gaining on this side all their Cannon, which were some eight Pieces, disposed
in the Front of this Wing; and the two Swisse Regiments with another of
Picardy, placed in the spaces of these Squadrons, went to utter havoc. But
what the French lost in one place, they gained in another; for their right Wing
under Gassion, coming to charge the left of the Austrians, being weak and not
sustained by any Infantry, after a first and second violent recharging overbore
them, the greatest part being cut in pieces, which struck such a terror in a
fresh Body of the Spanish Cavalry, that were advancing to their succor, that
without one Pistol shot, or daring once fac^ them (which some impute one^ly to
their disgust) they retired in good order to their own Infan^try, but that
could not save either of them: for Gassion's men al^ already fleshed in
carnage, pursue^ so furiously, that after some ob^stinacy at last they
overthre^ them, making further lavish o^ two Foot Squadrons, commanded by Don
Antonio di Vellanda, and the Count di Vivalda, with the death of these, and
slaughter o^ more than twenty Captains, and a thousand Soldiers.

This gave him leisure to attend their left wing, that reste^ yet victorious:
so that turning o^ them in the rear while the Baron of Sirot advanced with his
reserv^ and the rallied fugitives, to charg^ them in the front, they oblige^
them to cease their pursuit, and look to their own safety: bu^ soon found
themselves overpowred and put to flight, leaving the Cannon which they had
taken to be reprised by the Conqueror.

Besides a few shattered Regiments, which Melo hardly drew off (being forced to
cast away his Generals baston to save himself) there remained nothing but 5
regiments of the Veteran Spanish, infantry, in the head whereof the Count of
Fontaines made himself be placed in a chair, because he was in fetters of the
Gout, resolving to sacrifice their lives together for the expiating of their
own honor, and cancelling the disgrace of the rest of their army. They
maintained their ground above 2 hours, having sustained 5 or 6 charges, as if
they meant to hold it out till the whole dispute might be re-co^menced, and
force their fortune yet to step into the lighter balance, wherein the noble
Count showed the excellency of his direction, and these their admirable
address in the performance, till the eagerness of an army just ready to touch
the goal of victory, and importunely remora'd, especially the Switzers (raging
for the loss they had sustained that day) bore so rudely on their Pikes, that
at last they forced the remainders of them to cry forquarter. But their ground
showed like the Skeleton of a battle, and the Carcasses lay so exactly in rank
and file, with such a Captain in the head of them, as might have Kindled
emulation in the General, that he had not found the same bed of honor to lay
himself in, but must return to his Government to be shortly after outed; and
in the mean while to hear him a native (...) most bitterly lamen^ted by the
Flamands, and himself accused of al these disastres by his in-capacitie (which
they objected) of such a charge as he sustained. And althoug he published
several writings (being yet a little more unhappy that none of these could
fall into my hands to be inserted here in his favor) full of arguments,
excusing his own cond^ct; yet it could avail nothing to stop the common
Vogue, which becomes deaf to all reason, where the event answers not their
needs or passions.

The battle lasted 6 hours, and cost the Conquerors, as some account 2500 of
their men; others but 1400. among which none of great quality save the Count of
Noailles, The Spaniards loss was reckoned at least 4000, some say 5000, among
which above these before mentioned was the Count of Is^mborg, and 7000 taken
prisoners, with 20 pieces of Cannon, 170 Ensigns, 14 Cornets, 2 Banners and
all their baggage and ammunition. Nor was the staff of Melo a small
embellishment to the other trophies, which (if you can but phancie it) was
presented to the Duke of Anguien with this Heroicke Elogy.

Once, when the fair Charlotte did salute
The Chaste Lucina for her tender fruit,
A shooting-starre did through the Cup conveigh
That part of heaven it had unto the boy:
And then how it had found it told to fame
Another center to revive its flame.
Then let not fame now higher soaring doubt
To sound what wonders in Anguien sprou^n;
Whose youthful courage^, like a lambent fire
Preyes over those spirits which the world admire
In elder chiefes: the lightning of his rage
Dissolves their swords before they dare engage.
And while their tropheys, like an ivy-bind
Climbing by some old wall, at last do wind
In scan^y ^wigges about their frosty eaves
(The goodly guerdon that their age receives)
His laurel on his temples over spredde
Does in one triumph show another budde.
Then take, brave son of beauty and of war
These glittring spoises, the beamings of thy star,
And let this staff, if it be placed so,
As that at Tralles, to a Palm Tree grow.
The news of any victory is ever welcome, especially at Paris, where they are
observed to be the greatest sympathizers with their fortunes of any others: but
this was not only a flourish to take with vulgar spirits, but a stroke that
made an exquisite harmony at the Louure, it being an early crisis to the
REGENCY, and a symptom of convalescency: for it allayed the boiling of
discontented spirits, with drawing the fuel of their presumption, and giving
them leisure to settle and evaporate: it raised the allies and confederats of
the Crown, that now desponding of the wonted vigor of the French conjunctions,
were about to treat apart their interests with the house of Austria. Nor was it
now a time to derogate from this exploit by questioning how advised, since
anhigh valor and a like success had approved it. But at the Court of Spain,
the same messenger, which brought the news of the death of Louis, by which
they promised themselves so great advantages, brought also this of the ruin at
Rocroy, which quashed all and made their hopes as jarringly recoile upon them, as
curious wires that burst in over-winding and ravell upon their springs.

Yet neither these distasters, nor this hostility did abate any point of
ceremony at that Court in solemnizing the exequialls of his M^j^stie^ Brother
in-law of France in his own chapel, where the King and Queen and chief
nobility then present put themselves in ample trains of mourning, and had
three solemn masses sung, the first celibrated by a Bishop, the second by an
Archbishop, and the third by the Pope's Nuntio: and after that hard a
patheticall oration delivered by the Confessor of the late Card, Infanta in the
praise of Louis and his most Christian virtues, with the circumstances of his
death, which mollified the hearts and drew tears from some of the Auditory,
while he p^udently omitted and covered such passages, as might have turned the
minds of the Spaniards. But let us take our ^ongie here, and back again to the
Court of France,

Where the King's Council employ their accurate deliberations about some orders
to be issued for the best improvement of the victory: But the Cardinal's advice
(which he presented in an excellent discourse on that subject) to set presently
on Thionuille (a strong place in Luxenborg, which might protect the town of
Mets and the adjacent territory, assure the Mozelle with the communication
betwixt France and the Elector of Triers, intercept the Spaniards commerce that
way from the lower Palati^^^e, where they then ruled,) prevailed with the Qu.
as a great enterprise, represented hopeful, and in case it should succeed,
full of glory to her Government as what would show it self an ent^^e fruit of
the present guidance o^ affairs, without reference to any provision
whatsoever, made in the former reign. Where upon a speedy order is dispatched
to the Duke of Anguien (who was then in prosecution of his victory, ravaging
the enemies country, and sacking all places that were but weakly guarded) to
hasten toward the siege of that place: but first to give the enemy a strong
diversion by forcing them toward Brusselles, and so leave them to suspect any
other thing, rather then this of Thionville: and another order was dispatched,
at the same time, to the Marquis of Gevres to go forthwith with that body that
he commanded in Champagne, to sit down before it, which on his part was so
well executed, and the City so surprised, that he secured all the advenues till
the Dukes arrival.

The unfortunate Melo, was using his utmost diligence to recruit an army,
wherewithal to oppose the French progress, and draining some of his more
remote Garrisons, whereof this was one, being then 2000 strong and 80 leagues
distant from the French army, to make up a strong body of Infantry, which were
most endammaged in the late battle* but being again amused by the dubiousnesse
of the enemies marching, he sends command to General Beck to flank them with
6000 men, and wait upon their motions: who now ghessing at the true design,
crossed the Meuse at Namur cutting thereby a nearer way to Thionville, and so
had intercepted the Dukes march, but that the French had sent a flying army
without baggage to clear the Coast before them, while the rest followed with
the gross artillery and ammunition: yet he so accosted them that before they
could defend it, he put in a supply of 800 men into the garrison.

The siege was opposed vigorously by frequent shots and Sallies almost two
months. The Marquis of Gevres lost his life in it, The Duke at once had all
his attendants wounded when he went to oversee a battery that was raising.
Mons. d' Espenan was lightly wounded in the head, and Gasslon so grievously,
that the Queen despeeded the Count of Rantzau to supply his place, and the
Card. presented him on that occasion with a pair of Barbes, and six other
Coach-horses with a purse of a thousand sterlings: and there wanted no
diligence to supply that army in this service. Some foot regiments were sent to
recruit them out of Burgundy, of which one Italian of the Card* Mazzarini's and
three other were raised a new to augment them under the names of the Queen and
the Duke of Orleans, 500000 franks were sent to the Generall-Duke, besides a
sum^^ from his father, the Pr. of Con^^^ for his private expenses. The besieged
sustained the springi^^ of two mines, repulsed more assaults, made great
slaughter, an^ at last when they saw no hope (...) succor capitulated hard:
but the Duke, to make a shorter work^ with them, and let them know wha^ favor,
he was ready to grant to their valor caused his other Mine^ to be showed to
their Commissioners, and after gave them honorable articles, dated the 8th of
Aug. 1643.

The Hollanders whose conjunction, according to the late treaty, was hitherto
in vain expected (and when there was most need of seconding the designs of
their Confederates by some diversion, whether indeed they were jealous of the
French successes, or nillingly induc't to comport with the Prince of Orange's
desires, while they thought their own interests not much engaged) began now to
be drawn by a sense of some advantage, and the Prince's indisposition of health
(which as yet served for their excuse) being now well amended, he imbarqued his
army on certain vessels to attempt the prise of Hulst: but finding the
Spaniard^ there too well provided, he had order from the States to attempt Sass
van Gant, but herein also Melo prevented him, being ready with a good army to
wait upon him, and so obliged him to retire to Assenden, where he found leisure
to think of some stratagem to defray the honor and charges of his expedition,
since 'twas now too late to acquit himself of either by force of arms.

Whereupon he sends his whole cavalry with 3000 foot to surpris^ the quarters
of Don Andrea Cantel^ in the houses about Antwerp* an^ the next morning puts a
quantit^ of his men in the habit of boor^ coming early to the Marke^ to seize
themselves of a gate (...) the city: but the Spaniards having smelt the plot
pelted the first comers with their Musket^ which giving warning to the other
guards and notice to the enemy of their unsuspected discovery* they hastened
their retrea^ thoug not so fast, but the Spani^ards with Cantelmo^, taking the
alarm, overtook some of them and encouraged thereby pursued with such
eagerness, that at last some of them fell on an ambush of the Hollanders,
where Don Giovan^^ Borgia Lieut. General of the horse, with other Officers,
remained Pris^ners, and Don Andrea was forced to return with loss to his own
quarters.

This exploit sufficed the Hollanders for this Campaign, and the Lords States
found themselves so much aggrieved at the charges occasioned by the barks that
were at first employed, that all the applications of the French Ambassador de
la Tuillerie, could scarce prevail with them from unseasonable reclaiming of
their army to winter quarters, a thing which strangely disgusted the French
Ministers, to see how little their confederates esteemed the common cause,
while they loved so well their money, that sometimes they would receive it in
nothing else but Franks of weight, which they might return with most advantage
in the species of their own Country, And when they had received it against
the common enemy, employed it rather to counter-balance their friends
prosperity, as if they more desired to gage their progress, through jealousy
of the future, then advance their own interest with present acquisitions. And
these misprisions were the more augmented by their starting back from the
articles already made with France, alleging that the Queen being to pay them
certain sums according to the treaty, which she could not do but by
authority of the young King, it should be necessary to renew the overtures of
agreement, wherein though they did not show themselves obstinate, but at last
complied with the French Ambassador in confirming the last treaty; yet they
gave the Spaniards to observe their coldness, and thereby to move with them
the more instantly, to sever themselves from the French interests, and treat
apart their own conditions of peace with the King of Spain: wherein they
promised them the more fairly, to defeat the French designs toward the
Munster treaty, as well as to divide their strength; nor failed of being well
listened to, notwithstanding the great renitency of these their Allies.

And the Swedes in Germany, that ere while had been but ill satisfied of the
French addresses on their side, to counter-batter the house of Austria (since
both had agreed to distract the Emperor's forces by the sound and echo of
their mutual diversions, so promoting one another pretentions to be urged in
the treaty before mentioned) and being more diffident of any further vigor in
th^^ design to be expected from that crown, since the late Cardinal, and the
King, in whose perso^^ the total correspondency in this affair seemed to be
involved* were unseasonably taken off, and a new Government to succeed, whose
ability, at such a juncture* they were no less to suspect, then their
affection, and indeed it was thought the Queen's conscience would have labored
hard with this doubt, joined with a passion toward her own house (if a
Church^man had not stood by her chair of state with a ready hand to assist
her) began now to think apart of their own interests, and what conditions to
make for themselves without regard to their late Confederacy: but as soon as
the Cardinals letters were imparted to them by the Chancellor Oxenstiern,
assuring them of the constant applications of that crown to prosecute, as much
as ever, their common designs till the general peace: it quite restored their
former confidence with resolution to persist in this issue, as was before
agreed. Nor had they any reason or affection to manage their alliance so
leiger-handedly as the Hollanders (to whom the Cardinal's letters of the like
importance were yet so acceptable, that they sent copies of them to every good
town and house throughout their states: and no less, though it may be not
expressed in the same fashion, were his others to the Prince of Orange, the
Duchess of Savoy, the Lady Lantgrave Van Hessen, the King of Portugal, and
the Catalonians) but to wish as well as might be to the French progress in
weakening the house of Austri^, while they themselves were there by enabled,
together with the be^nefit of their pay and the Germ^ booty, to exact their
own adva^^tages.

But as the blood comes of^ner to the heart before it ma^^ an entire
circulation; so the cur^rent of our discourse must back^ again to Paris, to
consider the in^ner state of France, before it ca^ arrive in Italy, or in
Catalonia.

We remember what graceswe^^ before granted by the late King^ and how the new
Governmen^ did enlarge them; insomuch tha^ the Queens bounty did almost amount
to a general indemnity* yet with obligation to come and justify themselves in
Parliament, which occasioned some difficulty in stating the greater cases.

And first the Duke of Esper^o^* having fled into England in his fathers life
time (where the King conferred the garter on him) to avoid the persecutions of
the late Card. imputing the loss at Fontarabie to his account, presented, with
his petition, a protestation of nullitie to the sentence denounced against him
without any legal process, and with out much difficulty was readmitted to
enjoy his estate with the Government of Guie^ne, wherewithal the Count of
Harcourt, a noble cient of the Guisards, had been gratified in his absence, and
in lieu thereof is now recompensed with the charge of Gran Escuyer (or Mr. of
the horse) and a pension of 10000 Crowns a year from the King's exchequer.

The Duke of Guise (who before his elder Brother died at Florence) was destined
to the, church, and invested with the Archbishopricke of Reims, the Abbacy of
S. De^^^ and 500000 livers rent in bene^^ces, whereof he was deprived, the late
Card. (because engaged (...) a promise of marriage) fou^^ more favor yet in
the proe^^ of his restitution: for whereas (...) Council were ready to grant
(...) reparation by the usual form (...) abolition, the Card. Mazzar^^
represented to her Majesty (...) great aversation the old Dutche^ had conceived
against that for^^^ desiring only a simple declaration innocence (wherein her
aim (...) at recovering the Ecclesiastic^^ promotions, and all in one act^^
which though her Majesty grac^^ously condescended to; yet it (...) with many
difficulties in the Par^lement, which, pleading their le^gall sentence given
against (...) Duke, pronounced an arrest, ob^liging him to take an abolit^o^
which at last the Duke, to avoid (...) further tediousness was will^^g to
accept; and so had it rati^^^d in Parliament, while the instan^^ of the Pr. of
Conde and Card. Maz^^ri^i sufficed toward the Queen (...) Council to remit
also his form (...) benefices to his dispoall. Yet the ^^ke was now married to
an other ^^dy at Brusselles (where he retired (...) Richelieu's displeasure,
and dealt ^ith the Spaniards there for the ^ount of Soissons) then her that
be^^re he had promised, though at his ^^turne into France he left her too,
(...) sued afterward for a divorce.

The Duke of Bouillon's case ^ust be driven somewhat higher (...) get a true
intelligence of it. ^is name is Frederick Maurice de lae (...), son of Henry de
la Tour (...) of Bouillon, Prince of Sedan, ^^count of Turenne etc. and of
^lisabeth of Nassau daughter of William Prince of Orange, and (...) the
Marshall de Turenne for his on^ Brother. His Ancestors were und^^ the clientele
of France, and (...) father premier Marshall when (...) died: But the present
Duke, ha^ving made himself a Catholick^ some time before; joined in leag^^
first with the Count of Soisso^^ and after that with the Marq^^ of Cinq Marcs
against the crowne^ (though he then commanded (...) forces of France in Italy)
an^ being in both oppressed, he (...) constrained to purchase his (...) and
liberty by putting his sove^rainty of Sedan with the adjace^ domaine in the
King of France (...) power. But now he hoped if (...) to re-enter on his
estates by th^^ interest of the house of Orange, (...) favor of the Duke of
Orlean^ whom formerly he had engaged* or his alliance with the Princ^ (...)
Cond^, (which was somewhat (...), by marriage of one of his ^^^ters to the Duke
of Trimouille (...) Prince's Cousin Germain) where^^ the reason of state made
strong ^^ainst him: yet, at least, as a Sove^^igne Prince by birth and title,
(...) obtain a worthy recompense, and an high rank in France, with ^he title
of Prince and Princess (...) himself and Duchess, where^^ he made much
instance, and ^ound the other Dukes and Peers of France no less averse to it.

Whereupon he chose rather, then (...) hearken to other recompenses ^ropounded
to him, to retire to his ^state of Turenne in the Province of Gascony, which
giving jealousy (...) the Qu. she sent again to him (...) come and finish the
affair a^out Sedan, which he pretended (...) satisfy; but insted thereof
with^^ew privately into Italy, where he sojourned 3 years, and at last was glad
to return into France, accepting the same recompense that was before proffered
to him, which was the Duchy of Auuergne (with a sum of money)

The Duke of Vendos^^e, a natural son of Henry the 4 by the Duchess of
Beaufort, having mar^ried Frances, only daughter of Philip Emanuel of Lorraine
Duke o^ Mercoeur, by whom he had two sons, the eldest bearing title o^ Duke of
Mercoeur, and the younger of Beaufort, was with these hi^ sons, the principal
of those th^^ were ingratiated and freed from the imputation of Mons. le Grands
conspiracy, which as readily made way for him to all his forme^ rights and
privileges besides the Government of Bretagne, whereunto because he had some
pretense of property by the said marage, the late Card, took advantage to
dispossess him: as he had dealt with the former Duke of Guise, who claiming
some right to the County of Provence, as descended from Rene of Aniou, King of
Sicilie, and Count of Provence (who left this estate to Lewis XI. in prejudice
of the Princes of the house Lorrain, whereof himself was the next to the
first, that now enjoye'd the absolute right and title to that Soverainty) and
herewithall the Admiralty of the Levant sea, he first disseizeth him of this
Government, and then procures from the King a Declaration to suppress the
charge of Admiral, and instead thereof to erect that of Grand-Master, chief,
and Surintendant General of the Navigation, and commerce of France, which he
got to be invested in his own person, and left by his will to his Nephew the
Duke of Fron^sac.

And because in the Duke's absence, the Marshall de la Meilleraye, by the
favor of Richelie^ (whose mother being the Marshall's fathers sister made them
Cousin germains) and of the Government of Breast in Bretag^^ (which accruing to
him by the Duke of Brissac's daughter, rendered it convenient to entrust the
Lieutenancy of the whole province to his charge) did supply insted of
Governor, the Duke employes his utmost interest to recover that dignity
wherein Beaufo^^ casting an evil eye on Meilleraye, affected so much passion,
th^^ it drew the court almost into parties. This occasioned some overtures to
compremize this difference with a profer to the Duke of Ven^^sme of the
Governmen^ of Champagne in lieu of the other, and the charge of Grand Escuyer
(then not disposed) to the Duke of Beaufort to quiet him: but nothing would
satisfy at that time but a restitution, which dashed all further treating, and
left disturbed spirits, to agitate the animosities of Beaufort, as it soon
appeared.

But in the mean while an accident that befell the Secretary de Chavigny
somewhat like that other which broke over Noyers, if the Cardinal Mazzarini had
not lent an hand at last to alleviate it, may entertain our contemplation with
some other variety. Monsieur Bouthiller having had a fair time of offices and
employments, was now willing to abate somewhat in the use of his fortunes and
quit the charge which he enjoyed, of Sur-intendant of the finances to the
Queens disposal, hoping that this action might reflect the more favor upon
his son, the Count of Chavigny, but she immediately conferred it on Mousieur le
Bailleul, and Mons. d' Avaux to exercise it jointly; and whether indeed the
Queen resenting that unpala^able form of message, which the Count brought with
the Kings declaration (according to which, notwithstanding, she had confirmed
him in her Council) intended to chastise him with the veirges of Royal eyes,
or he having privilege to sit in Council covered, did fry (as we say) in his
own grease by the daily kindlingof his conceit, that he was not had in
answerable regard or estimation: in ^ine, he was so much perplexed, that he
could not refrain to ease his mind in the breast of his Confessor; who
thereupon preaching to him of the vanity of all wordly happiness, or
Court^favour, concluded with an exhortation to him to think of another way of
employing his devoirs, for the good of Christendom, by promoting of the
general peace, and insted of that office of Secretary of the King's
commandments, to apply himself to become a Plenipotentiary of the Crown, at
the Munster treaty. Which done, this Father ( Amelot of the order of the
Orators) informs the Countess of Brienne, what thoughts and resolutions were
working in the mind of the Secretary de Chavigny, who being a Lady of high
descent, and of a present and subtle spirit, applauded these his purposes,
advising the Father to keep him still intent upon them. And a while after this,
she sends in have for the Priest again, and then delivers to him, under the
seal of secrecy, this intelligence, which she said she had heard herself in
the Queens Cabinet, from her own mouth, that the Qu. intended to remove the
secretary de Chavigny from his place, and therefore out of good affection, to
prevent any such unhandsome accident, she had took that care to get a timely
meeting with him (the said father) that by his means some notice of it might
be conveyed to the Count to make his best advantage of it. Nor were these
tidings any sooner trilled in his ear, but they found a ready credence, and as
soon imported his passion with the fear of such a slurre, the doubt of removal
from all other public managements, and loosing the emolument (which they use
in France with Royal privilege) of his decession, so that hastening to the
Cardinal, he importunes the favor of him, to obtain a license for him from
the Queen, to deposit his charge of Secretary, and he omitted no argument to
diswade him: yet (not prevailing) would not fail to satisfy his desires, but
accordingly procures a liberty for him to transfer his office to the Count of
Brienne, re-imbursing himself of the charges, that he pretended.

But before this business was well ac^complished, Chavigny had bethought
himself better, and altering his resolution, employed his principal friends,
and in particular the Duke of Bellegarde toward the Duke of Orleans, to help
restore him to his former station. But the Queen answered, that she could not
so disparage herself and government by admitting an imputation of feminine
inconstancy, that he demised his charge, although to the Count of Brien^e,
against her will, and now that he had the grant of it, she would not hear of
any retractation, yet she condescended, at the instance of the Cardinal, to
salve his Honor, in the nominating of him for one of her Plenipotentiaryes for
the general peace, which did a little palliate the reputation of his
discretion, from the piercing air of court-talke, that being a person of
spirit and policy, he should be so trepan'd between a Priest and a woman.

A sleighter cause then, this did almost occasion a great embroilement; for one
night when the Duchess of Montbazon had revells at her house, she caused one
of her waiting Gentlewomen to take up two love letters, that fell from the
Marquis of Coligny, a Cousin and a confident of the Duke of Anguyen, and so
consequently of his sister the Duchess of Longueville, and thence conveighing
them to her own chamber* had them read before many Gentlemen persuading them,
that that Lady had directed them to the Marquis (which was thought to be of
envy, because she had a picque at this (which was the ^d) mar^iage of the Duke
of Longueville.) The Princess of Conde having news of this, is presently shod
with Mercury, and away she hastens to the Queen, to require justice for this
injury, while the Duchess demands the producing of these supposed letters* to
be confronted with others of ^her own, only the Husband shows to slight these
passages; but the rest of the house of Conde gave to know, if the Queen did not
right them, that they would fasten some affront on that Duchess, whose
Husband the Duke of Montbazon*^ (having some ailiance by the marriage of one of
his daughters, by a former venture, to the Duke of Chevre^se) with the family of
the Guisardes, had these engaged therefore to protect his house from any
disgrace whatsoever, And among these, Beaufort would needs be the principal.
The Queen commits the cementing of this rupture to the Cardinall's politenesse,
and he, as the best means to procure it, persuades the Q^^ to invite both
parties with their relations, and some persons of high quality, to her own
appartment, and there with the train and the intruders, were about 500 persons
attending on this occasion* The Princess of Conde expressed herself first.

That since her Majesty had signified her pleasure to her, that for the benefit
of the crown and her proper satisfaction, she desired to see the differences
composed betwixt her house and the Duchess of Montbazon, she was most willing
to condescend thereunto, since for her Majestyes pleasure and the welfare of
the Kingdom she was to sacrifice her life and honor. But the Duchess of
Montbazon, (having laid aside her mourning for that day, and richly cloa^h'd
herself with her hair, her eyes and her black patches, set to her gallant
humor) came close up to the Princess, and after mutual salutations began to
read a billet tied to her Fan in these precise terms. I come to protest to ye,
that I am -- where the Princess interrupted her, saying to the Cardinal --
see, s^ee knows not whom she speaks to, but the Duchess not at all moved
proceeds, Madam, I am come hitherto protest to you, that I am most innocent of
the baseness, wherewithal I am charged, there being no person of h^^nour,
that can affirm such a calumny: and if I had committed any fault in this sort,
I should submit readily to any penalty, that her Majesty should appoint me, nor
should I ever appear in the sight of the world, without having asked you pardon.
And I beseech you to believe, that I shall not at any time fail in that
respect which I owe, and that conceit which I have of the virtue and merit of
Madam de Longueville. To which again the Princess answered, Madam, I axcept
readily of the assurance, which you give me of having no share in the slander
divulged, referring all to the Command which the Queen has herein laid upon me.
Which thus ended, the Lady of Montbazon turned to the Princess and after a
short discourse, took her leave, with the like haughtines, as she showed at
her first entrance.

And it soon appeared, that these greifes were but slightly skinned; for a
while after when the Queen was invited by the Duchess of Chevreuse to a
banquet, in her garden, she would have had the Princess to have gone in with
her; but she refusing to come where the Duchess of Montbazon was, her Majesty
sent courteously to the said Duchess, to desire her, that she would be
pleased to withdraw herself, wherein when she discovered a great reluctance,
the Queen herself withdrew, much altered, and gave order forthwith to the
secretary de Guenega ud, to intimate to her in her name, that she abstain from
Court: and she indeed expecting nothing less, prevented that order; retiring
to her place at Rochefort, about some 30 miles from Paris: but thither it is
sent after her, that she do not stir from thence without precise order from
her Majesty.

This gave pretenses to the Duke of Beaufort to get some blades about him:
especially since 'twas commonly said in Paris, that the Marquis of Coligny
being now on his return from the Camp at Thionville, intended to retort some
iujuryon of Madam Montbazon for the blemish wherewithal she had asperst him.
Nor was that common rumor of a vain surmise^ for as soon as the Marquis was
arrived, he sent a challenge to the Duke of Guise, as the chief of all that
justified that Ladies quarrel, wherein he fell twice wounded to the ground and
was permitted by the like generosity of the Duke, which scorned at first to
serve it self of the prerogative of his title and quality, to rise again. But
yet at last, though the Duke had received a slight wound in his right
shoulder, he buckled a gain so strictly with his defier, that he forced him to
part with his sword, and ask his life of him, though it could not much avail
him, for (God not being so entreated) he died shortly after of the hurts
received in this encounter.

The Count of Chavigny was now providing for his journey, and whether it were
for a fair diversion, or for curiosity to see some of his choicer utensills,
especially a couple of stately court-cupboards of white and gilt plate, or
rather intended by the Queen and Card. as an Honor to him, Her Majesty came to
entertain herself with the said Count at the Castle of Boisde Vincennes,
whereof he was the Governor; but in the middle of this treatment arrives
Beaufort, discovering (as 'twas surmised) a notable alteration in his
countenance, when he mist the Cardinal there, to whom he was become diffident,
and toward whom he had an ill eye, as the obstacle of his designs, while
certain Cavaliers, suspected to be set by him to kill his Eminency, scouted in
little parties about the Wood, leaving strange apprehensions of their design.
And this notice was brough^ to the Cardinal, with such an Echo, as if the
Duke, having failed to to find him there, was coming to surprise him in his
own palace: whereupon he hasted to recover himself in the Louure, where the
principal of the Court came to congratulate with him, for the danger that he
had escaped, and next day the Duke was arrested in the Queens name, by the
Captain of her guards, and sent to the same Castle as a Prisoner, and the
Cardinal had the like guard allowed for his person, as his predecessor had
before. But this persuaded him to procure the detaining of Chavigny, as a
necessary friend to have about him, and in his stead to send Monsieur de
Servient with instructions for the treaty.

The discovery of a plot gives great advantage, and just plea to any Potentate,
that was the object of it, to secure himself more and root deeper; Mazzarin
found occasion by this means to move the Queen to prevent all dissentions,
that might be fomented in her Council, that so she might become the better
fortified about her heart, to resist those qualmes, which might annoy her in
civil broiles such as always use to infest the Minority of the French Kings,
and such as did already discover some sad prognostics to he^ Regency. Which so
prevailed with her Majesty, that she dismissed the Bishops of Beauvais (of whom
we have before made mention) and of Lisieux from sitting any longer in her
councils* bringing in, in their steads, the Lord Chancellor and the
Pen^tentiary of Nostredame in Paris, consenting likewise to bid some
withdrawing to those that we^^ suspected of disaffection, or had (...) ill
character in the former reign^*

The Duke of Vendosuse with hi^ son, the Duke of Mercoeur, were also set a
distance from the court o^ city of Paris, and the former by some rumors that
were spread becoming more suspicious, was cited to his defense, and soldien sent
to arrest him, but he made ^^cape first to Geneva, and thence into Italy; from
whence how he since returned, and had the Go^ernment of Provence, with the
of^^ce of Grand Master etc. that is (...) lieu of High Admiral, and the
survivall of this charge to his son the Duke of Beaufort, given to con^^ent
him, cannot fall within mycir^^^t, any more then the following Honors of the
Duke of Mercoeur and his marriage to one of the Cardinau's nieces, it being a
great (...) in policy toward a friendship to be a potent enemy, and their
amity being commonly more de^ired that have power, and will, to do us
mischief, then those that have both to do us good.

The stroke, which imminent danger can inflict, was no where else so green and
tender as in Catatalonia, since the enemies, that the feared were more potent
neighbors, which had lately been the^ Masters, and the aid of France, that
they now relied on, was more on a nominall subjection then any real dependence
(these not having any bridle put into their hands, whereby to hinder the
Catalonians, at their pleasure to reconcile themselves with Spain, and help to
drive out them their adopted Guardians) Therefore the more care was requisite,
to exhib^ tokens of good affection to these people, since it was by this only
correspondence, that the interest of the one could be preserved, and the hearts
of the other surmount their own Despondences.

Nor did the Spaniards pretermit any due application of their designs to the
Catalans: for whilst the imminent death of the late King was under
expectation, the King of Spain in person, which since the time of Charles the
fifth has been somewhat rare, advanced to Saragoca to foment some revolting from
his enemies and add the more vigor to his forces that way, as well as to
encourage those of Arragon and Valencia, who being next neigbours, and
sometimes dangerously touched by the near nesse of the fire, had showed
themselves very forward in raising men for his Majesty's service, without
pleading of their privileges, as they used too scrupulouslyon other occasions:
but finding these efforts of theirs the worse seconded, by how much they did
their part the better, began now to speak out their discontentments. Yet
neither the news of that King's approaching, or of this Kings death, the
writings scattered in Barcelon^, exhorting them to return to the open arms of
their true and natural Lord, while they were now freed, before any new
allegiance should come to be tenderd them; nor the downfall of Olivarez, who
served for a former pretense to their defectio^, could any way alter the
aversion of these people from the yoke of Castile, as they showed openly by
practicing the same ceremonies, at the death of the French King, which before
they used for that of the Spanish, (...) some exceedings in the sumpt^ousnesse,
which was interpreted as an owning of his successor to be their Lord.

The French ministers were no less diligent to support their hopes of wonted
succor, and qualify their other jealousies, and because they could not
dissemble their suspected unprovidednesle to issue in Campaign by reason of
these accidents, they endeavour^d to show the more courage with those they had;
and sent a strong party to wast the county of Rivagerca (a vale sprinkled with
good ^ownes within the Kingdom of ^rragon) which therewithal took and
pillaged the town and castle of Estadiglia, a place of 1000 houses, and within
3 leagues of Moncon, which it might well serve to protect in the French hands,
and so defend the ground which they had gained within that Kingdom.

But his Majesty of Spain forth^ with issues orders from Saragoca to D. Filippo
di Silva, to go and beset that place, quitting the design of Balaguer, as too
too hazzardous, it being hard to get any ill disaster recruited there a little
good success at first promising fairly to accumulate in its progress.
Whereupon, according to appointment, the Marquess of Mortara issues out of
Fraga, with a body of 2500 horse toward Lerida, a place whereof the French
were most jealous, to carry their solicitude that way, and otherwise to pay
themselves by surprising some of their enemies in the quarters thereabouts,
which taking effect, as it was designed, among the rest some 50 Catalans were
taken prisoners, which expecting no other but the punishment of Rebels, were
freely dismissed by the Marquis, saying, that His King did not make war
against his subjects, but against his Enemeies. This alarm sounded high at
Barcelona, where the Viceroy, for want of expected supplies out of France, not
being ready to put himself into the field with forces able to wage his enemy,
was fain to hear his amorous pastimes objected to him, while the country was
in imminent danger: and they again from him, their backwardness at such a
time, to lend their assistance toward the paying of his army, whereby he got
from them a sum of 50000 Crowns, and then put himself on the way to Lerida,
to provide for its security and that of Flix, which two he most feared. And
once, when he went out with a party to clear the Coast, he fell foul on a
greater number of the enemy: and, being by nature bold and froward was trap't
in the middle of them, his followers routed, and himself a prisoner for an hour
or two, till at last espying where a few of his guard were coming to relieve
him having been by good fortune unknown that while, he spurred toward them,
and by the fleetnesse of his horse recovered Liberty.

Silva had by this time covered his back before Moncon, not having above 5000
foot, and 600 horse with him, because there was not forage to be had for a
greater number; but he had quartered near at hand other 3000, and 1500 more to
dispatch on any necessary expedition, whenever the French should attempt to
succor it, while the king himself did valiantly appoint, at Sarogoca, an
hundred Masses to be celebrated every day, for the happy success of his Arms
abroad.

The Viceroy was sufficiently roused with this news: But what should he do?
He sends to Barcelona for 500 musketeers, and they send 1000 and order the
posse Principatus, the whole Militia of the Country to attend him, wherein
those of his Duchy of Cardona vied to be the forwardest, and with these
directly marches to the trenches of the Spaniards, provoking them to battle:
but he returns answer, that first he would have Moncon, and after not refuse
the combat. Wherefore finding that he could not force them, he retired with his
forces back to Lerida, and shortly after to Barcelona, to their great disgust
there, and the Governor of Moncon was left to make his own conditions, as he
did very honorably: and this exploit (which made way for that of Lerida the
next year) sufficed the Spaniards for this Campaign, returning to their winter
Quarters, and the King with this Trophy to his court at Madrid.

In our way from hence to Italy we meet with an insurrection of certain
peasants against the exacters of the taxes* whereof one or two Ringleaders
being taken and carried to Villa Franca, they were presently followed to the
gates of the city, by about 10000 of them, with apeece of ordnance, demanding,
with their fellows, the Intendent of justice, who had caused them to be
arrested: but the Marshall de Schomberg with a few troops out of Languedoc
did soon suppress these, as the Marquis of Aumont did some others, more
menacing, in Poictou and Xantongne, with a few Regiments which he had in a
readynesse there.

The state of Milan having now a new governor sent them out of Flanders, the
Marquisse of Vellada, (the rather for having been an in timate friend of Prince
Thomas, when they served the King of Spain together there, he might be the more
proper to reduce him to his old devotion) might have hoped for some new favor
from their fortune, as usually happens at such junctures, if before he saw
himself duly placed in his charge, he had not seen his enemy successful in
the field by the taking of Villanuova d' Asti (a place which bridled Asti, the
only prise which the French had made the last Campaign in lieu of the Tortona)
and now at liberty to employ their entire forces with the Savoyards on some
other enterprise.

And first they attempted Alessandria, securing all the advenues about the
place with about 8000 foot, and 4000 horse excepting only one quarter reserved
for the Marquis of Ville, who was now ready to return thither from Villanuoua,
with 2000 foot more: but the Spaniards took that nicke of time to reinforce
that garrison, though before well enough provided (but that the Prince trusted
somewhat to his intelligence with in it) with 1000 more both horse and foot,
which obliged them to give over that design, as not feasible. so that now it
returned to the Council what exploit to try next, Valenza was most in their
eye, but their forces scarce sufficient, because to straiten that they should
be held to maintain their siege in two quarters on the opposite banks of Po;
and Breme, though a noble prize, was too strongly fortified. Wherefore the
result fell on Trino, a place that might be more commodiously invested a and
being near their friends, might better subsist there with their army, and
free them from the ordinary annoiances, which the Spaniards turned on them from
that Hold: yet neither could they now wind their march with such trains though
they divided and went about; as to seduce their enemy: or prevent his putting
in 200 dragoones, and Cuirassiers the same night that they came to block it,
making up in all a garrison of 1500 foot, and 300 horse, under the command of
the Baron of Vatteville their Governor.

While the Prince, with his Brother Maurice of Savoy, and the Vicount (now
Marshal) of Turenne, employed themselves in this Siege, they appointed Monsieur
de Couunges, Governor of Casale, with a part of that garrison, and other
levies made about the Country adjacent to take in Camin a little Castle which
might serve to secure any convoys of victual from Casale to the camp, which
happily ensued, giving commodity to the Siegers to ply it close abouea months,
(when those within having stoutly maintained themselves so long, and now no
longer able to repair or man their breaches) were forced to capitulate. The
new Governor was advanced with a part of his army between Novara and Oleggio,
to cut off the French designs of seizing any Post besides the river Tesin: but
they, having well refresh't their soldiers, wheel about to Pontestura, a
fortress lying upon the Po betwixt Casale and Trino, where the Marquis (since
also Marshal) of Plessi^-Praslin formed the siege (Pr. Thomas and Turenne being
both out of health) while the Marquis of Ville lay on to other side of the
river to hinder any succors. The garrison had 800 foot in it without horse,
and were not waning to their own defense, till they themselves did
accidentally set fire to a mine of their enemies which blew up the miner and
two other workmen: but made such abreach upon themselves, as forced them also
to accept of conditions. The Governor had no remedy but to secure the places
that were yet in danger, wherein he used great diligence; such as great regret
and hope in the future would excite in him: and he French accounting themselves
well appaied for this Campaign, retired to their winter Quarters.

But while the feud of eitheir nation employes its force of arms on the skirts
of Italy, it holds their reciprocal art and interest in no less exercise to
gain authority in the heart of it, by bearing away the honor of Mediation
betwixt the Pope, and the League abovementioned. And however among the
infinite revolutions that every age produces, there remains but little record
to posterity; save only where a lavish sword does engrave its own tracke in
indelible characters; yet in those emergents, which have gnawed their passage
by the teeth of time, and travel through the joints of several coalescent
fortunes, there are left (though in lighter mould) more curious signatures of
humane passions to be observed.

When this quarrel first began, and the French to intercede in it, the
Cardinal of Richeli^u was at the helm, and he in a bad opinion with the Pope:
so that after the breach of the treaty at Castel-G^ orgio, the French and
Ecclesiastics did recriminate one another, and the Pope charged Richelieu and
his instrument de Lionne, to study rather to imbroile all things, then to
pacify: and he every where declaimed against the Barberini, and wrote in his
own defense against the Cardinal Spada, who had been the Popes
Plenipotentialy at that treaty. But when the cardinal Mazzarini was come to
the Government: the Pope and the Barberini considered him as a great confident
obliged to them for his advancement, and bore a better eye to any overtures
that afterward (...) from that crown. And he, that had not so much
quicksilver in his humor, as his predecessor applied himself the more
seriously to gain this honor, as a notable point to illustrate the reputation
of that crown and accredit himself in his own Country. Wherefore considering
that although the Marquis of Fontenay's return, did somewhat reduce the French
interposition into new request; yet Mons de Lionne, by reason of disgusts that
had passed, could no more continue a gracious person in the way of mediating,
he procures the sending of Cardinal Bichi, then in France, in a noble way, and
full commission to be the Plenipotentiary of that crown, and its Mediator
between the parties: which by reason of the Quality and qualities of the
person, an Italian, a Cardinal, the most accort and full of Gentilesse of any
other, was generally accepted with these Princes, and all proceedings toward a
peace, left in suspense till his arrival, though de Lionne, and the other
French Ministers, did nothing slack their wonted diligence to promote them.

And this was a quick in centive to the Spaniard, to thrust in between this
juncture, and get the standard of his auhority erected first on the temple of
peace; (especially in that country where his awe had formerly borne so high,
that the Princes of it durst not dispose of their subjects, of their children,
or of their own persons without consent of his Council: and the French, that
were his competitors, had not a foot of land in it, besides their late
acquists, that yet were under contestation) but many circumstances did still
create him new impediments.

And first, that through the whole Pontificate of this Pope, which nowhad
lasted 20 years and upwards, there had been perpe^uae simultates betwixt him
and the Spaniards, these declaring him adverse to their interests, as in effect
his Nephews were constant partisans of the other side. Then, that the Spanish
Ambassador and the Cardinals, that were dependants of that Crown, had diverse
Months since (and before Fontenay) retired in disgust from Rome (because the
Portugal Ambassador ( Lamego) pretending to be so received, and by assistance
of the French, repulsing the Spaniard's violence, and endangering his Person in
a street encounter, were countenanced more then He) whereby there rested a
certain strangeness on all their interposalls, with such a distance, that
every overture took wind before it took effect: whereas the French were still
at hand to manage all their instances with life and presence toward the Pope,
toward the Republic, and toward the respective Princes. Add to these, that
it was so long before any resolutions or patents could come from Spain; that
those which at last arrived to the Viceroy of Naples, to the Governor of Milan,
to their Ambassador at Venice, to the Cardinals Monti, Cueua, and Albernoz
were all stale and importune: and so accordingly were their Ministers treated
by the Cardinal Barberino, imparting nothing else but good words to them, and
old rejected propositions, which had first been in the French hands, and could
not be adjusted. And when they complained to the League of their non-admission
to be Mediators; not withstanding their Masters good will, and right of
neighborhood, to interpose in all good offices, they receive in answer: that
it was not their part to offer; but accept conditions from the part of Rome,
and that they were ready to hear any, that should bring the fairest terms of
peace, which they had had before in ampler manner from the French Ambassador:
and therefore gaind no more but complement, and to be made acquainted civillyas
they proceeded.

Besides these, there were two other obstalces, close: but more insuperable:
the first, that the King of Spain sent not any Minister on that purpose,
whereas the French had first recalled the Marshal d' Extree from Rome, because
he had incurred disgusts there, and sent the Marquis of Fontenay in his sted,
on this very errand: and when he also was disgusted, and gone from Rome, they
soon procured his re-calling; and the better to promote his applications,
dispatched first de Lionne, and then Bichi, to accommodate them with the other
parties: which were otherwise accepted, then the Agents or Ambassadors of the
Viceroy of Naples, and Governor of Milan, whose power in any emergent
difficulty should refer to the Council at Madrid. The other, that when the
Pope would have joined with the Spaniards to chastise the French, when their
Ambassador had retired and left him hardly pressed by the League, there were no
aides or Compliances to be got from them (as the Duke of Parma did also find,
notwithstanding promises to keep him from accepting the French proffers, who as
readily suppy'd him both with men and money) whether for want of confidence, or
because reduced to extreme frugality to make both the ends of Naples and Milan
hold together, and lend besides an helping hand to Flanders, whereas they saw,
to their great jealousy, a power of French both in Popes and leagues service,
not knowing how they might be bestowed either in the wars, or after a peace
concluded.

Bichi arrived in June to execute his commission, and first takes a Pass of
the Duke of Florence, to conduct himself from Genoua to Parma, where that Duke
being then absent, the Duke of Modena took occasion to invite him thither to
complement, and prepare him for certain private interests, which he desired to
have comprehended in the treaty of peace; but thought it not then time to
discover himself freely, nor the other to take any cognizance, only to sound
his intentions, and take the altitude of his aims, which were at other
pretensions that he had with the holy See about Comucchio and Ferrar^^: Thence
he takes his way to Bondeno, a town of the state Ecclesiastical, where the D.
of Parma was, having taken it in the war, and treats with him about the
propositions which had already been sent from Rome to him, by the Marquis of
Fontenay; but he found him most determined, now the term assigned at
Castel-Georgio was expired, to hearken to no depositing; but effectual
restitution: wherein having well informed himself of his disposition, he goes
to Corraro, the Venetian Proveditor at Finale, from whom he could only get
thus much in general terms, that the colleagues did desire a firm and durable
peace, and that the late treaty at Castel-Georgio did admonish them to proceed
with circumspection. Whereupon he addresseth himself next to the Cardinal
Antonio Barberino, the Popes nephew at Bologna, where he had the charge of his
forces, acquainting him with the good disposition that he found toward a
peace, and presses the nomination of a Plenipotentiary on the Popes part to
promote a treaty; which the Cardinal answered, assuring him of his Holinesses
intention to that purpose already designed in the person of Cardinal Donghi.
And with this he returns again to Corraro, and General Pesaro, urging them to
move their Republique to the same correspondence, and writes to the French
Ambassador at Venice to apply himself effectually in the College to that end,
and withal sends a writing to him, which had almost spoiled all in the first
beginning.

For when the Cardinal Bi^hi ^ound that no good was to be ^one on the old
propositions; but that from him a new Mediator, ^ew overtures were expected:
he ^ramed a new draught at Bol^na ^ut of the old, compared with the ^etters
from Rome of the French Ambassador, expressing the Cardinal Francesco
Barberino's sense about the manner of according, which he communicated to the
Cardinal Antonio and Secretary Ferragalo, and obtaining their approbation
imparted them first to the Venetian Generals, and then to the French
Ambassador Resident there, to be communicated to the senate, whereupon he
obtained from them the nomination of their plenipotentiary, the Procurator
Nani. But when this draught was sent to Rome by the Secretary Ferragalo, the
Card. Francesco forthwith displaces him utters raish speeches concerning Bichi,
and in a Congregation (...) state, procures the disallowing of them with
marginall exceptions, to several clauses in them: and is highly dissatisfied,
that such a thing should be sent from Bologna, (from whence the Ecclesiastical
c^probation might be presumed) before it were exhibited at Rome: with was not
all; for something was to be understood, which it grieved the Cardinal Barb.
to have unwarily been expressed: for whereas the restitution of Castro was
before exhibited, the Card. (who had hither to framed a 1000 collusions to
evade this restitution) thought in some measure to have satisfied his passion
against the Duke, by hindering him at Rome in some emolument of grain, issuing
out of that state, to the Duke's bank by several patents granted by former
Popes in favor of that house: but his secret drift in this business not being
comprehended by his Brother An^onio, or their Secretary, when the terms of the
draught came to be altered, it altered the case with it, and Bichi's proffers
became thereby more ample then was intended. But he surmiseth nothing yet of
what is poaching at the Court of Rome: in the mean time he takes his way
toward Florence to comply also with that Prin^e, as one of the chief of the
league, and learn what satisfaction it was that he pretended, where he found a
fair reception and nothing in effect more; but that he held it not convenient
to admit any negotiation apart, but that the Plenipotentiaries of the
Colleagues should agree together of of what points to be insisted o^ and with
that answer returns to Lombardy to resume the further management of the
treaty, where he hears, that by the instances (...) the Marquis of Fontenay,
the Cardinal Doughi was upon his way, but with order by no means to admit of
his folio: but only of that exhibited formerly by the Marquis, and sent to the
other Resident at Venice. But all this while the many pleas of Bichi to procure
a suspension of hostility, could avail little with the parties, especially
with the league, who followed their arms the more vigorously, because they
being to receive conditions would be sure to bea^ them down to reason, while
they had their adversary at the advantage, having lately beaten them at
Mongiovino, and shortly after with a greater stroke at Pittigliano, where the
grand Dukes forces proved the heaviest to them. Yet the Duke of Modena was so
much overpowred in his estates by the Church forces, and found the Venetians so
much startled at the taking of Lagoscuro (a strong place on their ^ide of the
river P^, which exposed all their palaces, and country houses to plunder and
utter ruin) by the Papalins, that he could get no aides from them (they being
all so poli^quely ligued, that they loved their ^eighbours rather, for
themselves then as themselves) that he was contented to hearken, without
standing on terms, foreign to the plea in hand, to a fair agreement, as well
as the Venetians, for the reason specified: and the Grand Duke, because nothing
was to be gotten by the war: for one neighbor will not permit any augmentation
in Italy to another; but all are all against him that removes the Landmarke^
and plucking up the floodgates (...) a sure lefting in some foreign in u^
dation, wherewithal that Country has been so often plagued. And especially,
that which is gotten of the Church, being not any private Patrimony; but S.
Peter^ must be rendered back to the next successor, or else all Christendom
engaged in the quartell: So that though the Chu^^ usurp on other
temporalities, ye^ her own are sacred and not to be touched. And this was the
reason why the war was so temperat^^ and in so long a time's continuance (above
2 years) so little do^^ not that the state Ecclesiastical (...) match enough
for so many neigh^bours (though of extent much larger within Italy, then any
one of the ligued Princes: or so much richer; for it has but little benefit of
the sea, and was so much exhausted, that no way was left to get money; the
wealth of that state being in few hands, the Peasans, miserable, and the
public poor, unless the Church ^tensills be reckoned in the sum which
would inflame it to a vastness: so that one Million was taken out of the Castle
S. Angelo, which was one of the five put in ^y Sixtus 5. on that condition that
(...) should not be taken out but in case of extremity, when the city of Rome
was in utmost danger: and 15. Cardinals made at once to raise money) but because
of the remissness of the league, as being defensive rather than offensive and
against the Barberini, as they would have it styled, rather than against the
Church. Nor was the D. of Parma so scrupulous on this occasion, when
excommunicated but he expelled all the Religions in his dominions, that were of
the State-Ecclesiastial, and all that would not continue in the exercise of
their charges, and promise loyalty to him: and he himself frequented Masses
more than before. Nor did his Neighbors fear to join with him,
notwithstanding that enchantment, set upon his doors.

But now, that all parties (...) peace, there is nothing more ^^noyant to it,
then the point of reputation, the remora (the truest remora) of puntilioes: to
remove which, the Card. Bichi would omit no expedient: but what can be do,
while the most remorsive of any other, stuck upon himself, when he hears how
his writing had been censured? Wherefore, being on his way, from Bondeno
toward Ferrara, and accompanied thither by de Lionne, the Cardinal Donhgi
came at some good distance to receive him, and en^^ing all into one Coach,
there passed some resentive discourse between the^: which de Lionne gave the
first occasion to, complaining of the vanity of any negotiation, by what was
seen in the past treaty of Castel-Geo^gio, land taxing the artifice of the
Ecclesiastics, with aversion to the peace: which led the Card. to speak, in
like manner, of the bad requital of his endeavors, by the censuring of his
proposalls, although he had thereby withheld the Duke of Parma from assaulting
the fort of Lagofcuro, at the same time with the Ve^^etians; stopped the
pretensions of the Duke of Modena; balanced the Duke of Florence; obliged the
benevolence of France toward the church, and obtained the nominating of
Plenipotentiaries for the treaty; that his writing contained nothing but what
he had other writings to justify it by, and in (...) nothing different from
the former, sent from Rome. That it should be as if it never were, for that he
would demand the original of the Vene^ian Generals and burn it in the Card*
presence at Rome, where he was resolved to conduct himself next in his own
vindication, though he had reason to fear that that action would cast all
things farther from agreement, then ever they were before, and bring the league
more powerfully armed and combined on the state Ecclesiastical, then ever to
that time.

Donghi answered, that he came as a new Plenipotentiary on a new negotiation,
that the Pope did embrace his Eminency's endeavors toward the peace, and that
the Cardinal Barberino's desire did only tend to that scope, that these
proposalls might pass only as an ^^t of the same, as he was Media^or; and not
as yet allowed at Rome (for Donghi abstained as yet to express himself fully
to his commission in this particular) and for his Eminency's intention of going
to the Court of Rome, commended and advised it, as a thing proper for him to
do, as a Cardinal and Mediator, to pass the like offic^s with his Holiness,
as he had already done with the other Princes, assuring him, that his arrival
there had been erewhile expected.

But when the two Cardinals were come to Ferrara, they retired without d^
Lionne's intervention, to debate more effectually about the means to purchase
this glory to themsevles, and benefit to all Italy, to compremise this
difference with the re-establishment of peace betwixt all parties, and first
considered of the place of meeting for the Plenipotentiaries. Bichi urged, that
such a ground of confidence might be laid in the ligued Princes, as to leave it
to their election, Doughi, that that respect and reverence might be done to his
Holiness and the Church, to have it within the Ecclesiastical State: which was
the sum of their dispute, at that meeting, and so they part both, to return
to Rome by several ways.

Bichi takes the way of Florence, and to salve his reputation of ha^ing
exceeded his Commission, and being disapproved at Rome, ^ives out that, that
writing of his ^as not disallowed, but only disavowed by the Cardinal
Barberino to be none of his, to content the Spaniards, complaining that
overtutes of more importance were communicated to the French Ministers, then to
those of his Catholic Majesty.

The Imperial Ambassador, being moved by the Spanish, does yet persist at the
Senate, in declaring the Pope's willingness to deposite Castro in the
Emperor's hands, and acquaints them that his Imperial Majesty had licenced the
Duke of Savelli from his service (because he was a Roman subject, and at this
time Lieutenant General of their arms) lest his partiality should be a
prejudice to his Majesty's mediation. The Senate knew this to be a delusion of
the Barberini (effectual restitution having been before proffered to the French
Ministers) yet they answer with good respect referring to the meeting of the
several plenipotentiaries* but when the Ambassador pressed further, than an
Imperial Deputy might be present at it, they put it off on purpose, to stop any
such pretension.

It does not so directly belong to this scene to follow the Cardinal Bichi in
the infinite windings through which he was trained ^t Rome, nor to consider the
jealousy of the Colleagues on his delaying so long there without any issue:
and much longer he might have been, notwithstanding his dexterity, if the last
chocque at Pitigli^no had not forced them to some conclusion: suffice it to
say, that at the latter end of November he returns with his propositions well
adjusted and power to treat of any Neutrall place, being void of garrison,
within the Mantouan But considering on the way, what obstructions were likely
to accrue with this designed congresse, both in respect of the formalities of
precedure which might occasion some distgusts: and the counter-working of so
many diverse heads and interests, but especially by the spleen of the Austrians,
which would not cease to deal by him and the peace here, as they had done at
Rome, casting all imaginable rubbs against the course of it, he thought it
better to treat with the interessed Princes themselves at their own places,
and so passing from one to another to prepare them for the sealing of Articles
interchangably. Which once before induc't him to delay at Florence t^l he had
communicated this design and found an approbation of it from all side^, Then he
offers by the French Resident at Venice, to transport himself thither to
finish this affair, which they accept the gladlier, that the Grand Duke might
not rest Arbiter of the league, by drawing all the management that way; and
when he arrived there, his entertainment was extraordinary. When he came to
their confines, they ordered the Podesta of Chiozza, to receive him at the
Polesella, and discharge him, with sumptuous treatment, through all their
dominion. I omit the noble way of meeting and receiving him into their City*
But when he came to his public audience, the Doge met him at the top of the
stairs with the whole Signory; where he took off his crown to salute him,
and putting himself on the left hand, walks uncovered to the Gran Sala, and so
to the steps of the Throne* where they mounted both together, but yet the
Cardinal a little befoe, and was the first placed in the Ducall seat, enlarged
on purpose for this occasion, to receive a persons. Being thus sat at the
Dukes right hand, he presented his Majesty's credentiall letters, which were
read by a secretary, before a numerous throng of people. After which the
Cardinal delivered his public complement, and the Doge made answer, which
ended that ceremony, and prepared so well for following negotiations, that
within a while after, when he took his leave to meet again with Donghi, the
whole treaty had been finished; but that a dangerous sickness of the Pope had
almost reversed all: but as soon as he recovered it, Donghi transferres
himself to Ferrara to subcribe the articles, the other Plenipotentiaries
waiting at Venice to subscribe them in like manner, and date them the same day,
the import whereof amounted to thus much.

That the Pope and Leagu^ should plight their faith to the K. of France, that
all things should be restored to the State wherein they were before the Wars,
whereof the said King should take hostages to be delivered at Casale till the
execution, and the said King should promise and engage to turn his arms on the
non-observer of this accord, and should crave absolution in due manner, on
behalf of the Duke of Parma, which was accordingly subscribed March 31. 1644.
by Donghi the Popes Plenipotentiary at Ferrara, by Bichi for the King of France
(who also stipulated for the Duke of Prama) and the other 3 Commissioners at
Venice, the same day: which was the ending at present of this turmoile, to the
great content and reputation of the French Ministers. But although the treaty
were punctually put in execution, within the term of 60 days after signing:
yet it did not long avail the Duke of Parma: for the next Pope Innocent the
10. on a sudden reprised and razed Castro to the ground, erecting only in the
middle of it (as I have been told at Rome) a stone with this inscription, Qu^
stava Castro. And the present Pope, Alex. 7. has re-entred on these Estates,
and the Emoluments of them, as confiscations to the Church (which was the Dukes
undertaker toward the Montists) notwithstanding the remonstrances of his
Ambassador, pretending that the sickness was only the cause why the Duke had
not satisfied his obligations within the term indented: but the Duke at
present is young, and under too great engagements (besides his love of
pleasure) to recover these estates: nor shall ever, in any probability, be able
to find the like assistance, as his Father did.

And here I may have a fair outlet, which I would gladly have burst through,
to have found sooner.

We have now surveyed the whole Campaign of this year, excepting only one
encroachment unluckily jutting into Germany* where the Count of Guebriant,
being straightened and overpowered by the Duke of Bavaria in his quarters, between
Brisaoh and Strasburg, and his corres^ondents, the Swedes, diverted then into
Denmark (with almost as great su^cesse, as at this instant) sollicites
earnestly at the Court for new recruits: which accordingly sends order to the
Duke of Anguien, to dispatch some of his squadrons from Thionville thither, it
being but a few days march distant, wherein when the said Duke had observed
orders, he came himself to Paris, to see his Lady, and the little son, which
she had lately brought him, to the great content of the kindred of the late
Cardinal, whose Niece she was. The same night he went to reverence the Queen,
who received him with tokens, answerable to that esteem which she made of his
valor, and the signal services, that he had rendered to the Crown in that
Campaign. But he had not rested long, before he is again designed to conduct
other aides into Germany, which either the blandishments of the Court, or an
opinion that such a service might be as well discharged by any ordinary Marshal
of the Camp, as by himself, or else that he had some other recompense in his
eye, then yet he had obtained; made him frame excuses to the great disgust of
the Ministers of state, who thereupon persuaded with her Majesty to commit that
charge to the Duke of Ango^lesmo, who being nigh upon the place might assume it
the more readily: but upon the first receipt of this commission, he immediately
dispatches a Gentleman to the Court to excuse himself that from expedition,
being hindered by the gou^ from exposing himself to any other pains: which
unexpected answer would have troubled the Queen and her Council, if at the same
time the Duke of Angnien, being promppted with an ardor after new triumphs, had
not offered to resume that trust to the great contentment of the Queen, and all
the Kingdom, as the confluence of Soldiers proved. And while the rest are
providing the Count of Ranzau is dispatched before with about 8000 choice men,
drawn out of the Queens Regiments, with the Scotch and French guards to join
with Guebriant, and so to force the Bavarians out of Wirtemberg and seize
themselves of their quarters: that so they might not only subsist themselves;
but return the burden of those Soldiers on the estates of their own Elector,
and so oblige him to hearken to a peace, and raise themselves to the higher
reputation, within Germany, at the opening of the Munster Congress.

The arrival of the Count of Ranzau (making the army up some 14000 men) was
very troublesome to the thoughts of the Marshall of Guebrian, least he, being a
great favorite of the Cardinal's, should be sent as his controller, and if any
disgrace should happen, to be his successor, which apprehension became
disastrous to his conduct: for although he were more sensible, then any other,
of the danger of passing too hastily to the other side of the Rhine: yet the
sense of Ranzau, being followed by the officers under him, imposed a neeessity
on the Marshal to put it in execution: so that on the first day of November. they
began to advance by a bad token; for the sky, that was clear before, mantled on
a sudden, and fell in continued folds of snow for a month together, which made
the ways so deep that the Cannon was not dragged without great dificulty: and
General Ro^a, whom the Marshal sent before to discover and clear the coast,
though he had been, at other times, a vigilant and a valiant Captain, was at
night surprised in his Quarter, by one Coll. Sporch, a Captain before of no
note; and his men, which were the double number, routed by 600 of this
Sporch's, with the prise of 800 horse. Which news being brought to Guebrian did
so amuse him, that he said publicly: that such a Capt. that had given so
signal proofs of his valor, in 30 several occasions and above, which he
could reckon, should be so surprised and beaten by one Coll. Sporch, did
confirm in him his former doubts that, what had been prognosticated in the
council, would not answer in the event, and with that he went to hear Mass.

The squadrons of Ranzau were but ill provided for the warfare of a German
winter: and many got away from the army. Nor was the scarcity of bread a small
disaster to it, which the beaten Soldiers put among the baggage; but the rest
that carried it in their Knapsacks spoiled by the weather; so that once again,
Guebrian devised to assign them to their quarters: but Rantzau again prevailed
with him to assault Rotweil, a place fortified with towers and a dry trench
without bulwarks: and the Snow continuing the Cannon was not yet arrived at the
Camp; so that the defendants repulsed all assaults with great slaughter, and
prolonged the time till the Bavarians had united all their forces to come and
succor it: so that once again the Genesis moved with the Count of Ranzau to
withdraw their army: but with the like success as he had done before.
Wherefore applying his utmost diligence to prosecute the storm, and direct the
mines with one of the ordnance (that were since com in) he was stricken by a
Cannon shot in the right arm, which proved mortal to him, and griveous to the
soldiery (he being reputed one of the prime Captains of the age) who
notwithstanding, after 14 days spent in this siege, constrained the delivery
of this place.

But least the death of Guebrian should seem to contibute to the glory of
Ranzau, while he leads the army further to Tutlinghen, the Bavarians come upon
him on the sudden, by the benefit of a wood near at hand, and having surprised
the artillery, unexpectedly turned it against the city, and then blockt it up,
holding all the Soldiers within it, Prisoners. On which noise, General Rosa
hastens with his Cavalry to the Head-quarter: but finding his attempt too late,
and the Bavarians set in battle, he went to return to Rotweil: but before he
could recover it, he finds it reprised by his enemies. The other Quarters of
the French Army were overpowr'd in the like manner: only* ten Regiments of
Horse took flight, which the Italian Reg^^ment of Cardinal Mazzarin coming to
join withal, and to maintain their ground, remained for the most part dead
(after brave resistance) upon the place. Ra^zau himself remained prisoner,
with his chief Officers, above five thousand more, and two and fifty Cornets
and Ensigns, with all the Baggage and the Cannon: Yet* (...) jealousy to these
their Confederates, about any underhand compliances, relating to their common
interests, now to be de^at^d* His business here, is, only to attend the
motions of the French Plenipotentiaries, and to be sure (at least) to keep as
much state, as they should do, about his ap^pearance, and advancement toward
the place. But these we shall find in Holland, employing all their art, to
engage that people to an adequate concurren^e with them at the Treaty; so that
both their satisfactions should run in one line, and neither of them admit of
either Peace, or Truce, without the issue of the other: and in case, the Peace
should not be concluded (as it happened) before the next Campaign, to prepare
some overtures, which afterward took effect, of joining their united Forces,
by Sea and Land^ to thrust the Spaniards out of ^raveling and Dunkerk. The
success of which, as then glorious to the Cardinal's direction, and now revived
by another (I hope) yet more vigorous and noble conjunction, will (no doubt)
dispense with my hand, and engage sublimer Pens to glory in the subject.

(...) sat eru^t qui dicere lauds, Galle, tuas cupiant and tristia condere
(...) bella.

Pos^scrip^.
(...) kind of pedantry) then they themselves have done those others, whose
credits they usurp, which would impose upon the Reader with too^much
impertinency. Yet I do not envy a fair acknowledgement, (though I am beholden
to more than twenty more) to Him that has done me the greatest courtesy, for
the matter of so poor a web; and to let the world know, that it is Mercurio
di Siri, ^ Writer so voluminous, that we need not either of us suspect a
translation. Though I have rambled in such a fashion through Him, and so
confounded him with oothers, and abounded in my own liberty, that I could wish
it; either for the public benefit, or my own vindication. But in the interim,
I do not think the end can deserve so much paius, or the poorness of my
reputation provoke any free spirit, to under go the trouble of comparing them:
so that all my security is the smallnes of my own merit, and the assurance of
my good intention, which having done no wrong, is ^^t liable to much exception:
especially, if you be pleased first, to correct these few Errata, and think, if
you find any more of lighter consequence, that I either oversaw, or on purpose
did neglect them.

ERRATA.
^

FINIS.

