To the General Clothiers of England of the Old and New Drapery.
Gentlemen,
Whereas Mr. Bedle has set out a book in print, entitled His Remonstrance
and Vindication, and sent it to the General Clothiers of England; which is
regard it is of such dangerous consequence, that may beget an ill opinion of
those men that have been Agents for the Clothiers, and have prosecuted their
Petition with their persons and purses, as well as Not: Bedle, to the utmost of
their power: it has caused them to set out this Remonstrance, to certify the
truth of the matter, which they shall be ready to prove upon oath, as well as
Mr. Bedle has done, Concerning his Remonstrance and Vindication.

They do not desire that Mr. Bedle should be undervalued and dis-esteemed of
the Clothiers, for his worth, care, charge, and pains, in the prosecution of
so great a business, that does concern the general good of the Kingdom;
neither do they question his Estate, Progenitors, nor Gentility, it being a
matter of no value to be enquired after: But because he has declar^ed himself
to be the only man that has done the whole work, and not only slighted, but
disgraced those that have supported him in the prosecution of it, with their
advice and money; they do here declare the truth, as follows,

THis business has been followed for the Clothiers by able, honest, and
sufficient men, long before Mr. Bedle was acquainted with it, who did as much
look to the public good in it as he has or will do: all the grievances were
preferred by way of Petition and Bill to the honorable House of Commons at the
beginning of this Parliament; and it is to be believed, it had been finished
before N. B. did enter upon it, had it not bin for the miserable distractions
of the times: Concerning Mr. Bedle, he entered upon this business a little
above two years since: and whereas he does write, he was drawn into it by the
Company, especially by W. T. Surely, that is very unlikely, for he being
acquainted with the business by a friend of his R. B. who after he had informed
him was very earnest and desirous from time to time that he might join with
the Agents in the prosecution of it for the Clothiers, and for the money that
he disbursed, there was a great deal of money expended before he was
acquainted with the business, and that which he paid was not half so much as
diverse of the Agents had disburst long before.

And whereas he writes, that he had bin employed by the Parliament: He was a
Committee man, and a Sequestrator for Norfolk; and as he did acknowledge
himself, the place was very beneficial unto him. But a little before he did
enter upon this employment he was dismissed of that place: whether it were for
his pride, or his unfaithfulness, is best known to himself: And to the
Parliament, who put him out of that employment, and put another in his room:
Surely, this is certain; his proud and lofty carriage has made him
disesteemed, and not approved of; not only of the Agents, but of diverse eminent
Clothiers of the Kingdom: for he being first chosen Agent by the Company,
before ever he was acquainted with the Clothiers; and albeit he was from time
to time furnished with money from them; not only for his weekly allowance,
which was ^4. s. a week, besides his extraordinary expenses: but also such sum
and sums of money, as he did still demand for the charges, in the prosecution
of the said business: yet notwithstanding he had such a proud and lofty mind,
that he would seldom, or never meet the Agents, to make known unto them the
proceedings of the business; and he was grown to that height of pride of late,
that he did disdain that any man should be seen in the business but
himself, unless they were those whom he did please, that so he might have all
the glory profit, and credit to himself: but to leave the generals, and come to
particulars.

In August 1645. R. S. having one or two with him, went to Colchester^in Essex,
to gather the hands of the Clothiers to the Petition; who having procured a
meeting of the chiefest of them, and the petition being drawn up, with their
advice and approbation: the said R. S. gathered above twelve hundred hands in
that Town: This was done before Mr. Bedle went into the Country: therefore he
has not done all the work.

Then Mr. Rozer, and others of the Company sent Mr. Bedle to Colchester, to
assist R. S. for the gathering of hands in Essex and Suffolk, Mr. Rozer giving
him Bills of Exchange to receive money for their charges: he bringing in his
account for that journey 45. l. This was the first going on of the work after
Mr. Bedle was entered upon it, and then Mr. Rozer was the only man that did
support him. Albeit he has so much slighted him since; and not only then, but
from time to time after, both with money, advice, and his countenance, for
which he was not well thought of by many of the Agents.

When he was in Essex and Suffolk with R. S. he had his instructions from him,
who spent a great deal of time with him both by day and by night, to instruct
him in the business: and albeit he was in the Country to assist R. S. in
getting of hands: yet R. S. by the help of another got the hands of most places
in those Counties without him. Surely Mr. Bedle has not done all the work.

R. S. and R. B. gathered the kands to the Petition in most of the Counties of
England.

W. T. E. R. R. B. With the help of others got more friends to promote it in
the House, then he did, and has still attended from time to time when the
Committee sat to prosecute the business.

But what has Mr. Bedle done? In the first place, he spent above ten pound,
and five weeks time to mend the Petition: and when he had done all that he
could do, he made it worse then it was before: He does make the world believe,
he has done great matters for the Clothiers: pray God it does not prove that
he has done more harm then good to the business: Surely he has spent the
most part of the time these two years in writtings, and printing frivolous
Books, and letters that have done moee harm then good, especially the last
book that is able to make a man's ears itch to hear it, and benum his senses to
read ir: those that have supported him this time with advice and money have
found him to be a proud and self-conceited man: he thinks unless he does it,
it cannot be done: there is not a wise man amongst the Agents, but only he: but
the truth is, he has proved himself to be the veri^st fool of all, in
procuring those to be his enemies that were his best friends in the supporting
of him in this business: He writes that he has beat his brains, and tired
out his spirits in contriving the business, and answering objections of the
Staplers: It were better that his own works did praise him in the gate. How
came he by this knowledge? Was he bred up a Clothier? Could he speak
experimentally; if not then, he must have it from some body. You have heard
before in part how he g^t ir; the truth is, he has been a Solicitor of the
Law, and they are men that will have a hand in any business to get money. No
sooner was he entered upon the business, but he sought for weekly allowance,
and he had it: Others have spent their time, pains, and money in the
business, and has had nothing yet: He has written a Remonstrance and
Vindication, and he has quoted diverse places of Scripture; but as the Devil
did to Christ: He has writ^en some truths; but that truth that would not
advance his applause and honor amongst you, that he has left out: Therefore
they have added something more unto it; and so they leave him and all his
books together.

But concerning the great business that is now in agitation that does concern
the general good of the Clothiers of this Kingdom: There be diverse honest
able and sufficient men that have undertook the prosecution of this business
for you, and will go on without Mr. Bedle, and they are willing and ready to
further the business in the prosecution of it to the utmost of their power:
They do not think it best that one man should prosecute it alone, as Mr. Bedle
says he has done: Albeit others have done more for the good of the business,
then he has done: only this they do present to your consideration, that they
are willing and ready with you: and by the help of God will be ready, looking
at the public good, and not aiming at their own ends: as also with your
advice to go on with the work, desiring God that it may be effected for the
Public good, which they shall nothing else desire; and so I rest,

Your loving friend and servant, A Clothier, R. S.


