TO HIS GRACE The DUKE of ORMOND, Upon His leaving the Government and Kingdom
of IRELAND.
HAve we a further Trouble yet in store?
And can our Destiny afflict us more?
To lose our Prince we thought too great a blow,
And must we lose his glorious Image too?
Ireland for more than thrice seven yeagrave;rs has been
Envied without, for being so blessed within;
While Plague, Fire, Famine, War abroad has reigned,
This only was the safe and happy Land.
Which Happiness, Great Sir, to You we owe,
Next to the God above, and God below.
The Irish Harp, which long abused had lain,
Your skilful Hand first brought in Tune again.
And when some others by our King were sent
To play upon the Noble Instrument,
Such was their Ignorance, or their Errors such,
They proved but Foils to your Melodious Touch.
Into Your Hands then, which before it graced,
The Noble Instrument again was placed;
On which, a long, soft Tune again You played,
When jarring Discord did all else invade.
And we rejoiced to think you would play on --
But Heavens and our King's Will must still be done:
We submit humbly to that Sovereign Power,
Which can the Bliss it takes away, restore;
More we cannot have, nor do we wish for more.
Adieu then, much-loved Prince --
(With mournful Hearts we make this Prayer for you)
Greatest and Best of Un-Crown'd Heads, adieu.
And since You must go hence --
Over you shall fly, a steady Gale of Prayers,
And under roll an humble Sea of Tears;
All the amends which for Your mighty Toil
Can be returned by a poor Widdow-Isle:
Such now, alas! she is, and never till now,
That ORMOND's Noble House does wholly from her go;
Not leaving, to support her fainting Mind,
An ARRAN, or an OSSORY behind.
May Heavens choice Blessings on them all attend;
And bring them to a Calm and Glorious End.
Glorious and Calm may all their Passage be;
As was the Hour in which they put to Sea.
And landed; wheresoever her ORMOND goes,
May England dote on him, as Ireland does.
To whole Great King, due Homage having done,
His Councils Honored, and secured his Throne;
Let Him Return His VICEROY here again;
May Heavens and England's Monarch say, Amen.
Dublin, Printed by A. C. and S. H. Reprinted at London for Ben. Took, 1685.


