To the High Court of PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging. The humble Petition of diverse,
in behalf of themselves, and about fifteen hundred others (necessitous
Publike-faith-lenders) inhabiting in and about London (whom less then fifty
thousand pounds will fully satisfy and) who are altogether unable to double
what they have lent.
Most humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners did in the years 1641, 1642, 1643, 1644. etc. lend
several sums of money, etc. upon the credit and Faith of the Nation (according
to the Propositions, etc.) at the requests, and earnest desires of the
Parliament, in their greatest necessities.

That through their good affection to the well-being of their native Country,
they were carried forth to lend (not only so timely, but also) so largely (in
which they were Exemplary to the whole Nation (not doubting to have had it
again in a very short time) that they thereby made themselves altogether
unable to double, (as others did that lent sparingly (though far better able)
whereby many have been utterly dispoyled of their trades and livelihoods, many
become prisoners, others (in abundance) in hourly fear of becoming such,
hundreds so poor, they have not bread (of their own) to este, but are
supported either by friends, Parishes, etc.

That they have not been wanting any time this seven years to make known the
sad effects of their said want thereof unto the Parliaments, the Council of
State, and to the Lord Prorector, and his Council, but (to their great grief
and encerease of their misery) all has hitherto proved little more then
fruitless cost and labor.

That according to an Act of the 7. of October 1653. they have presented their
claims to their said several sums before the Comnissioners therein named, in
whose custody they yet remain.

That your Petitioners are not at all against general satisfaction, (but should
greatly rejoice to see it effected) only (fearing it will prove a hard work to
be done at once, and) knowing their own necessities to be so unsupportable, and
themselves so forward, and timely appearers both in person and purse; they
desire they may be taken care for, and clearly paid off in the first place,

Therefore they are most humble and earnest Suitors unto your Honors, that you
would be pleased now to take their sad and distressed condition into your most
serious and Christian consideration; to settle some speedy and effectual way
for paying your Petitioners their said sums (and the interest thereof,) so
shall you take away the great reproach the credit of the Nation yet lies under,
the common derision your Petitioners have long undergone (by such as have
greatly rejoiced to see them thus become poor) set many prisoners at liberty,
enable hundreds to keep and keep up their credis and callings, many to eat
their own bread, that now live upon others charity, the ablest amongst them to
pay their debts, and the whole body of them, their poor wives and children to
pray for your Honors temporal and eternal prosperity.

Reasons, Argument, or Motives humbly offered to the consideration of the said
High Court, and every individual Member thereof, on the behalf, and for the
primary, and distinct satisfying of the said Petitioners, viz.
1. BEcause they, etc. in and about London were always the first lenders, and
most forward appearers upon every straight and occasion, and were in that
respect the great wheel that (by example) moved all the rest in the Countries
that lent any thing at all.

2. Because men in and about London (and in particular, your said Petitioners,)
did lend much more in proportion (as well as more timely and frequently) then
any others; as being at the very elbow of, and daily conversant with the
Members of that Parliament; and under the powerful Ministry of such, as used
all their utmost abilities to persuade men to lend, and take Arms for the
Parliament; all which were as so much fuel heaped upon the fire of their good
affection, which joined with hopes of sure and speedy repayment, carried them
forth to lend above, and beyond their abilities.

3. Because that they, their sons, servants, etc. in and about London, were
none of the least part of the first Army, nor of recruiting the after Armies,
whenever broken by the enemies, which caused them to say, It is in vain for
us to fight any longer, unless London be burnt or destroyed; for let us beat
their Armies as often as we will, yet that cursed City still sends forth more.

4. Because they humbly conceive their said active forward affectionis not to
be equalized in all the Land; for no where else is any to be found, that (like
the Widow) threw in all they had; or of such as took up money at interest (and
pay interest for it still,) on purpose to lend it to the Parliament; or of
hundreds that lent a 4, and 3d part, or half of their whole estates voluntarily.

5. Because they have been so greatly instrumental in many kinds, to advance
the Common Cause owned by the Parliament, viz. in their constant readiness
upon all occasions (even at the very beck of the Parliament) with their own
horse, arms, etc. to move into the adjacent Counties, etc. to feaze the Arms
or persons, etc. of such as appeared enemies; as also by their unwearied
activenesse amongst their neighbors, to rectify their affection, persuade
them to lend, or give money, etc. and at all meetings and places in the years
1642. 1643. etc. where any way or means for public good or safety was
intended, debated, etc. about forming and raising the Auxiliaries, in arming
and encouraging them; in fortifying the Cities of London, Wesetminster, etc.
and in guarding the Parliament, Tower, Forts, etc. and many going into the
Army, and all this at their own charge; by all which ways and occasions, they
exceedingly hindered themselves in their callings, (by loss of time, and
expense of much money, and some lost them quite,) and so were utterly undone;
and besides, they have owned and stood close by the said Cause in the greatest
straits and worst of times.

6. Being tradesmen, and lending beyond their abilities (as aforesaid) to
answer the often and earnest desires of Parliament, they have exceedingly wanted
their money ever fince to manage their callings, and some forced either to
leave them quite off (for want of money) or deal upon credit, as well as they
could; and being so forced to buy hard pennyworths, they are over-topt with
young ones (who having great stocks (as never lending any thing) and your said
Petitioners small ones, they even eat them out, and get their trading and
customers from them; and besides, some are grown so old, and so cast down with
grief (that they should be so long kept from their said money in their so great
necessities) that they are not able to work or look after their trades as
formerly; many are shut up close in prisons, and hundreds more ready to be
haled in daily after them, and therefore have the more need of their money.

7. Because they have had many verbal and printed promises of Parliament, of
setting some eminent marks of honor upon the Citizens of London, for their
unparalled, large and voluntary Lones, etc. none of which have been made
good unto your Petitioners, (and therefore they desire to be paid their said
sums in the first place, and they shall take that as honor enough, and
forget all the rest) but rather the contrary has befallen them; for hitherto
London (within the freedom) bears the fifteenth part of the Taxes of all
England, (of which the Petitioners have borne the more by reason of their first
forwardness; many of them not daring since to ask any case (as living
altogether upon their credits, left their weak estates should be discovered,
and so be utterly undone) which is so great a disproportion, that one that
lives within, of equal estate with one that lives without the freedom, is
taxed at six pence for the others penny; and in that heavy Tax of 10000. li.
per week, the 50 Subsidies, fortification moncy, etc. which were laid upon
London only, and no where else: also the Excise, which is little or nothing to
most Country men, though of great estates; but lies very havie upon many
Artificers, traders, etc. in London, though of very mean estates; all which
has caused many of the ablest Citizens to leave the City, and take houses in
the Suburbs, or some few miles off, to avoid the said burdens; which those
that stay behind are necessitated to bear till they sink quite down under them.

8. Because the Parliament did promise and declare, that none that were forced
to lend, should be paid till all that willingly lent was first paid.

9. Because they promised and declared, that none should be neglected or
flighted, (that faithfully stood to the said Cause, (as your Petitioners have
done) but should be thankfully rewarded, to their own honor, and the good of
their posterity: they only desire that which is properly due unto them without
further honor, and therefore hope they shall certainly be provided for by your
honors.

10. Because it seems (to them) very unlikely, that Gentlemen, Yeomen, etc. in
the Countries (who generally lent sparingly,) or townsmen, (unless one perhaps
of hundreds) should have the like need of their money with your Petitioners,
who have spent seven or eight years time in seeking after it, and the others in
11. on 12. years neither seeking nor petitioning for it; but if any be so
necessitous there, they do heartily wish and desire their speedy satisfaction.

11. Because as it has already been very great, so it is certain it will be
much greater hurt to them if they be kept longer from their said money; whereas
to rich men, or such as can double, it will be no damage at all to stay a
little longer, (because you are to give them interest all the time it is out)
and it may be some would put it to interest elsewhere, if they had it, as
having no use for it themselves.

12. Because they have been so long Petitioners (have amongst them spent so
great a quantity of money, and so much precious time, in seeking after, and
petitioning for it;) and that they do again most earnestly pray that they may
be provided for: they may be eased from their long, cold, hungry, grievous and
wearisome journeyes and attendance in seeking for it; which has been so
prejudicial to many of them, that it had been mercy in the Parliament, to have
told them at the first, that they would not have paid them at all, rather then
to have put them off from time to time to the ruin of many already, and of
abundance more if not speedily prevented by your Honors effectual providing
for their satisfaction.

In answer to that old and common objection, (by which some have hitherto
hindered your Petitioners satisfaction) viz. that the Parliament must be just,
and do things without partiality, and therefore may not provide for them before
they provide for all lenders in general.) They answer, it is not counted
unjust, or partial for any private man, that holds money at interest, of
several people, to pay some of them their money in, and continue to owe the
others their money longer, at the same rates and securities as before: and
further they answer, that it was not accounted unjust or partial, to borrow it
of one before another; nor in one man to lend his money, etc. or appear before
another; for then no man's money, or appearance was turned back, because his
rich or politick-lending neighbors, were not come along with them: nor was
there any that foretold the middling or poorer fort of people, that they must
keep enough to be able afterward to double what they then lent; nor was the
meanest, or most zealous, called in question, why they lent so much, or so
often; and therefore they hope your Honors will hearken to no such
dishonorable objections, but go on to pay your said Petitioners in the first
place, and the rest as soon as it may be done.


