TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
The most Humble Address of the MAYOR, ALDERMEN, SHERIFFS, and COMMON COUNCIL
of the City of GLOUCESTER.
May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most humble, loyal, and obedient Subjects, out of a deep
sense of Your most Princely Tenderness, and transcendent Care, for us, and all
Your good Subjects, as well in respect of our Religious as Civil Concerns; Do
make this our most humble and faithful Address, returning all possible
Gratitude for Your Majesty's most gracious late Declaration, which has like a
Flood of Goodness issued from your Royal Heart toward all Your Subjects;
whereby all Men that have not wilfully blinded their Intellects, may be
abundantly satisfied of Your Majesty's Fatherly Love to us all.

We cannot but remember by what Frauds and Machinations the Subjects of this
Your Majesty's Realm in the late Times were beguiled, and under pretext of
Religion (and particularly this City, by which there was a most deserved Infamy
brought upon us by Men of Sedicious Principles, the Dregs of which still remain
always watching to disturb our Peace) cheated into a Rebellion, the
Consequences whereof were a sad Devastation of all, and the loss of the best of
Kings. And we have reason to believe the same deadly Poison was again
preparing, and had certainly been given, had not GOD put it into Your Majesty's
Heart timely and most speedily to prevent it.

And therefore as we are bound to glorify God for his Mercy, so we make our
most humble and grateful Acknowledgment to Your Majesty for Your most intent
Vigilance to save us from so portentous a Storm; and do therefore with all
Humility and Faithfulness prostrate our selves at Your Majesty's Feet, solemnly
vowing before God and the whole World, that we are and will be ready to the
last drop of our Blood, and Mite of our Estates, to stand by, and defend Your
most Sacred Person, Your lawful Successors, and the just Laws by which You
govern, both in Church and State.

The God of Heaven and Earth by whom Kings reign bless you with length of days,
health, and all affluence of Wealth; establish Your Sacred Person in the Hearts
of Your People; dissipate your Enemies, and confound their Devices; and let the
Scepter of Great Britain be swayed by You, and Your lawful Successors, to the
end of Time.

This Address was presented to His Majesty on Friday, the Sixth of this instant
May.



LONDON, Printed by A Godbid and J. Playford, 1681.


