TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Now Assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders, and
other Inhabitants of the County of Dorset.
Shows,
THat notwithstanding the indefatigable pains of this Honorable House, for the
redress of all the Grievances of this Kingdom (which your Petitioners do with
all humble and possible thankfulness acknowledge) they do to their grief
observe by your late Remonstrance, that by reason of the obstructions of your
proceedings in the House of Peers by the Popish Lords and Prelates, your godly
endeavors want their desired effect: Distractions and fears increase amongst
us more and more; the Kingdom is not yet put into such a Posture of defense, as
these dangerous times require; the Rebels in Ireland prevail to the extreme
hazard of that Kingdom, for want of speedy supplies; the very Privileges of
Parliament (our dear and undoubted right) have been very much impeached. And
besides these common evils, your Petitioners conceive themselves above others
in other Counties, in special, endangered. First, By fear of foreign
invasion, which we ground upon continual rumors, tending to that purpose, and
upon the situation of this County in a sort inviting, it being Champion, and
bordering on the Sea. Secondly, By the now more then usual flocking together,
and posting up and down of Papists, especially by night, together with their
contemptuous and insolent carriage. Thirdly, By the dangerous consequences that
may result from the present decay of the Trade of Clothing (the main support of
the poor of these Parts.) And lastly, After all these imminent dangers, by
being lest almost wholly destitute of means to prevent them; for since the late
removal of the last Lieutenant, we have no Captains appointed over our Trained
Bands to draw them together upon occasion, or to discipline them in the mean
time.

All these weighty considerations enforce us to make our instant address to
this honorable House, humbly craving the continuance of your uttermost
endeavors for the removal of that obstructive party from the House of Peers;
and that our poor distressed brethren in Ireland may be forthwith assisted, and
the whole Kingdom (especially this County speedily put into a Posture of
defense, by setting fit and able Captains over the Trained Bands, and
furnishing them with lawful power to exercise and train their Companies; As
also by appointing the leavying of more Arms in supply of those many that were
carried away and lost in the Northern expedition.

Which shall engage and enable your humble Petitioners (as our Duty and your
Deserts obliege us) for the defense of His Majesty's Royal Person and Dignity,
and the Persons and Privileges of this great Council of Parliament, with our
dearest lives and estates.

And move us to pray, etc.

Febr. 21. London, Printed 1641.


