(...) OR WISDOM and PRVDENCE, Exhibited in a SERMON Before the Right
Honorable The LORD Chief JUSTICE RAINSFORD, And the Lord Chief Justice NORTH.
In their late Western Circuit.

By Tho. Tanner, Rector of Brightstone in H^nts.

(...).

Romans 1. 16. London, Printed for William Keblewhite Bookseller at Newport in
the Isle of Wight.

To the (...) Honorable Sir Courtenay Pole, Baronet; Colonel-General of the
Eastern Division of Devon, a Member of the Parliament, etc.
SIR,
YOU may well wonder to be surprised with a Letter from me, which is first
exposed unto public view, together with a Sermon out of date. The acceptance
whereof from your Candor, I had no reason to doubt howsoever: but rather how
it may be entertained abroad; since there were no end of printing, if every
Sermon that has been preached in an honorable Audience, were to be divulged.
Nor yet did I intend to have done this, having kept it above a twelvemonth by
me, without such a thought till now. If my Reader will vouchsafe to know the
reasons of it, it was preached at your request, as some part of a Sundays
entertainment, belonging to the Reverend Judges, who were treated otherwise by
you, with great Magnificence. If it pleased in the heaing (being but dense of
matter) why may it not be more profitable in the reading, and never out of
season? we have heretofore been taken up in comparing spiritual things with
spiritual, but since through a surquedry of new models (which did not answer
expectation) men have come to take offense at Religion it self, in whatsoever
dress she does appear: so that we have been reduced to compare even natural
things with spiritual; and by this discourse (I trust) it will appear, that the
later has infinitely the more advantages. What others have written lately to
the like effect ought not to withhold me: for the better cause requires (...)
evidence; and number it self is not despised in the case: besides that a new
form is like clothing of the first matter with a new existence. Which is all
the apology that I need to make unto the public, more then others that have
gone before; especially confessing, that private reasons joined with it, did
over-poise me.

Such as these: you were lately my Mecoenas, and your brave house, and Family
my Municipium, wherein I did enjoy much liberty, and privilege. You were also
a part of my late charge, which I was forced to leave more abruptly then I
intended, and so, there remains to me now no other way of preaching to you,
besides this. So that I send it as a kind of token to you first, and by you to
the rest, to make up some part of my Apology; and to return to you with such a
foot as I had left, to set forward (being enclosed with the Seas) such an one
as is shod with the wings of Mercury, of which we use to make our pens. In
fine, it is almost the only way, that men of our condition have to testify
their gratitude unto Persons of your Quality (to coin somewhat that may bear
the superscription of your names) which lies the more upon me, since your
respects have so often followed me hither: which seldom happens when interest,
and Relation cease. Let this therefore pass by your hand, and it will add more
to the great cumble of favors, wherein you have still taken pleasure to oblige,

Sir, Your most affectionate and faithful Servant Thomas Tanner.
Brightston in the Isle of Wight Sept. 24. 1677.
Prove. 8. 12. I Wisdom dwell with Prudence --
THis is gracious condescension of Wisdom (by which name all the World imagines
an high Soverain, or a kind of Deity to be intended) to tell us where she
dwells. Every one might think, that he knew before; yet all are in the quest
still, and few do find it, because she dwells with Prudence, A Lady that does
often change her seats, and delight her self in labyrinths, which are
in-accessible, without a certain clue. But since Wisdom seem to be (as it
were) at board with Prudence, whether is the greater? which of these is the
Dowager, and which the Daughter? might it not as well have been said, I
prudence dwell with wisdom, as I wisdom dwell with prudence? if the King say, I
dwell in my Court: and the Court say, I am wheresoever the King is; which is
the readiest enquiry to bring us into the presence of the Royal Majesty? so
when wisdom tells us, that she dwells with prudence, and an imprudent man knows
not where that is, what is he the wiser for this direction?

The truth is, it is not fit, that the man which wants wisdom, should find it
without some certain travel: for, Chap. 2. 4.
she is to be sought for as Silver, and searched for as hidden treasures. Nay,
to be concealed too, after finding; as the Merchant did by the rich pearl,
Math. 13. 45.
found in the midst of a Field, till he could purchase all together; least
another man should come between him, and his prize.

What shall we do? shall we preserve the state of wisdom any longer? or put the
clue immediately into your hands, that we may all proceed together, to wait at
the gates of wisdom? we are in have; let me loose no time to do it!

Wisdom is the same, that we call Religion, the way of happiness here, and
hereafter; and she dwells with Prudence, that is, in the breasts of such as
will obey her. For, Job 28. 28.
unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart
from evil, that is understanding, or a right Prudence. In Philosophy, Wisdom is
the knowledge of choice things, and Prudence is a practical disposition of
applying so much of it unto use, as may do a man good, when the case requires.
This makes men to enlarge their studies; that if it be possible, they may not
be to seek in any case to know, when they should be ready to do. So though
wisdom be the greater, (...)?
yet Prudence entertains her, to her own profit, and is never able to exhaust
her treasures. What avails knowledge, if a man have not a present mind to do
himself good by it?

So likewise in Divinity, wisdom is the knowledge of the Word of God, which is
unsearchable: and Prudence is a right obedience to it, which has no bounds,
nor limits. Let us therefore measure our steps from hence, from one degree to
another; and when we come near enough to be informed; no doubt, but we may find
our selves to be arrived unto some attainment higher, then to what the world
does call its own wisdom, or its own pretended virtues whatsoever. And the
first hint to be observed is this.

Point. 1. That Religion is no carnal Policy, or wisdom; but Wisdom of God
himself.

Distinguish of Religion natural, or Christian: it holds in either of them. Be
it true or degenerous, so much as there is of Religion in the breasts of men,
it is of God and not of men, and it is the first Wisdom in the World.

Let us put this first principle out of doubt, because it has been questioned,
whether there be any religion at all by nature, or whether that which is, has
entered merely thorough Art, and Policy, the wiser taking advantage of the
ignorance; and the stronger of the fears of the simpler sort, for ends of their
own. Let me pitch my banner here a little, while I labor to reduce this
skonce, which it is not safe to leave behind me.

I say then, that there are certain common Principles, or notions of religion,
imprinted by nature (which is the immediate work, or protoplasm of the Divine
wisdom, and power) in the hearts of all men indelebly. Which notions, though
possibly they may be tainted at the very springhead, by idolatrous, or
erroneous education; yet so much as there is of religion, to be discerned
thorough these, it is of God, that did at first implant it, and ever since
maintain it, in the hearts of men; that he himself might be justified; and such
as obey it not, may be judged by it, and left without excuse. So that, this
must needs be the Wisdom of God in men, and no humane policy.

For else, Primus in orb deos secit timor.
whereas it has been said, that fear at first, brought in all religion, it
might have been showed by such, as have written de primis rerum inventoribus,
of the Authors, and beginnings of all Arts, and Sciences; when religion also
had its first beginning. But this they could not do, though they could tell
when Saturn, Jupiter, and the rest of their greater Deities began to be
worshipped: an argument, that worship, or religion was before Idolatry.

Much less, can they tell when such fear began, as they conceive to have been
the cause of religion: as sure an argument, that it had no beginning, but in
that nature, which God created at the first, after his own image. Of this Moses
alone has given us the right knowledge, but if any one had rather credit the
Heathen Poets, Hesiod. etc. Quae est gens, aut quod genus hominum, quod non
habeat sine doctrina, anticipationem quandam deorum, Cic. 1. de not. deorum,
Nulla gens tam fera, cujusimentem non imbuerit deorum opinio. Tusc. qu. 1.
or Historians (which are many ages junior unto him) the eldest of them
describe unto us the superstition of the Gentiles, which was their religion;
and their superstition ever was meticulous: but I say, which of these has
showed us, when this tardy humor had its first Original? Therefore it was ab
origin.

Again, if religion were but of humane policy; it could not have passed through
all Nations, and that, through all ages hitherto. Quae regio in terris? ubi
gentium? ubi temporis, aut loci? in what Country, or at what time, was there
no religion amongst the inhabitants of the Earth? as for his own age, and all
before, which he had ever heard, Nulla gens usquam est adeo extra leges,
moresque projecta, ut non aliquos deos credat. Sen. Ep. 117.
or read of, Cicero has testified; that although some barbarous people wanted
walls and Laws; yet none were without some sort of Religion. Before him, the
great Stagyrite, unworthily suspected of Atheism; and below him, Seneca, and
Plutarch; and indeed, (...) Arist ^ de coelo. (...) Plut. in amator. etc.
as many before, and after, as have written any thing at all only, of later
times, since new discoveries, a few barbarous people have been questioned; but
the relators are not agreed.

But suppose the generality of the vulgar could have been imposed upon in this
kind; certainly, some of the Philosophers, who had searched into Nature, and
the Policies of States, could easily have discovered this imposture; and would
have adventured to atchieve so great a glory, as to have redeemed their own
sects, and followers from the muffler of the common people: yet, we meet with
none so bold, as to deny a Deity, besides one Diagoras, who could not make a
Sect; but affected rather (like that mad-fellow, who burnt the Temple of Diana,
only that he might be talked of, after he was dead, whatsoever he suffered for
it,) to be infamous for ever, among the Heathen themselves, then to dye in his
obscurity. And one Epicurus only, denied a special providence; making a Sect in
other Tenants, but never able to prevail with any of them, not to pray in a
storm, Plut. adv. epicur.
or tempest, which Plutarch does retort upon them. But rather, as the Poet did
observe. Hi sunt qui trepidant, quos omnia sulgura terrent.

Now, Ut passim est videre in Lucretio.
some of these have looked upon religion, as a great trouble unto States, and
private persons; and labored to set men free from the apprehensions of it: had
it been but of Art, or humane Wisdom, what should hinder but they might have
done it, one time or another, since the lower Sects, as the humor of
respective ages took, did often surmount the reputation of the greater? but it
could never go this way.

If it be suggested, that the Philosophers were deterred by the example of
Socrates, from intermeddling with this mystery of Government, what deterred the
Martial men, and Politicians, from age to age, why they durst not meddle with
it; why were they held by these cob-webs? nay, why more fast then others? not
to speak of the Grecians (because the time will not permit) who were more
superstitious then the Romans. Among these later, who so superstitious, as
Camillus, and the Decij, and the Curij, and the Fabij, and the Scipio's, and
the Catoes; and the rest of greater note? only, Caesar seemed to despise the
auguries, yet, he was not a little troubled at the little river Rubicon. Lucan
l. 1.


Numa, Plut. in vitis
and Lycurgus founded their estates, and governments by superstitious rites,
using them only as an hank upon the people; and dissembling things that were
not true; which they themselves neither feared, nor believed. It may be so:
does it hence follow, that religion is but a stalking horse, or stratagem of
Policy? nay, it rather follows, that if the sense of some religion had not
been before, most strongly grounded in the minds of the generality of men,
there could have been no policy (of which the Atheist would seem to be more
fond then any other) in laying that upon them, which either would not take, or
could not hold. It had been in vain to go about to establish a religion, if
there had not been such a disposition in the people before, as we have hinted,
Certainly, Numa could not infuse such a disposition into the minds of men, that
were born before him (many of which he governed) but had he brought the people
to a form, for a time; it had dyed with him: or, when that form of policy had
ceased, either that form of religion, or all religion, if it had been but a
mere imposture, had ceased with it.

In the issue it remains, that as men were never of any other mind, but that by
force, or choice, they must have some religion; so, they are never like to have
any other power, or inclination, for the future: let the Atheist try his art,
or power to the utmost! but, though more may be made of religion, then there
should; yet there is so much of it written in humane nature; that as the
statuary engraved his own name in his work, so that no one could efface it,
without the demollishing of the whole; so no humane wit, or malice, can
obliterate religion out of humane nature, without the destruction of humanity
together with it, because it is of an higher impress; even the devise, and the
motto of Almighty God in all his reasonable Creatures. To come to the Christian
religion in particular. In this indeed was the manifold wisdom of God made
manifest above the rest. Among the Gentiles there were as many Gods, as
Nations, as many Idols as there were Hills, and Valleys. And they worshipped
one another Gods, when they came into one another Country (even as some of
our gentile Protestant-travellers make no matter, to bow to every Popish
Relic where they pass) there was no enmity betwixt Idolaters upon the
account of their religions (only all abhorred the true worshippers) but rather,
Athens sent to Egypt to learn what they could of their absurd Rites, Livy.
and Mysteries: and the great Philosophers commented upon their hieroglyphics
or ^acred sphinges; even as wise men make morals upon some foolish fable. Rome
again translated her laws, and rites from Athens first, and then from other
places, till the City began to be so full of religions, that the Senate was
sain to take order against admitting more. But when the Christian religion come
to be set on foot, it soon reduced all to one.

That you may perceive the wisdom, and the power of God therein, and have the
better prospect into wonder: take account in what posture the world stood, when
the Gospel first began to be divulged.

Our Lord himself, the Son of a Carpenter (as he was reputed) preached three
years; and then was so disgraced by the cross, and the malice of his own
Countrymen; that one would have thought, there had been an end of him, and of
all his new Doctrine; yet he left twelve Fishermen behind him to uphold it, for
which they were to dye too. The Jews hated these, beyond any patience: the
Gentiles had them at first, in derision, after in suspicion. Whither should
they go? or what should they do? must they persuade the Jews against the Law of
Moses? this they must do. Must they persuade the Gentiles to abandon their
Idolatry? the Gods which they feared, and loved; the magnificence of sumptuous
shows, and Temples, and such feastings as they chiefly used after sacrifice and
oblations? this they must do. A likely matter to take effect, or to take the
world by so much as by the little finger.

Could these, or any of their followers raise an army? it is hard to imagine
out of what quarters: but what if they could? had they then been but once
beaten ( as Gamaliel did observe) they had been for ever quelled: Act. 5. 37.
or, if they had prevailed, and attained to an Empire (as some have arose from
small beginnings) yet their fate might have been like that of all before, and
since. Which did you ever read of, that has lasted 1600 years with advantage,
and rooted it self so invincibly in Asia, Europe, Africa, and America, still
proceeding conquering, and to conquer? which besides, did ever possess any one
of these; and, next consider how and what way Christianity is bound to subdue
them all.

By Faith, and patience; by prayers, and intercessions for all men: Rev. 13. 10.
especially for Kings and all that were in Authority over Christians, that
under them, they might lead a quiet, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.
and peaceable life in all Godliness, and honesty. O ridiculous Wisdom in the
eye of carnal policy; and yet it over-swayed all!

In above 300 years we read of no insurrection of theirs against oppression,
though they swarmed in all Provinces of the Empire long before that: the Roman
legions were full of Christian Soldiers, and never mutinied; though He began
his reign A. D. 310
Constantine came with the greater favor to the Imperial Crown, because he was
a Christian, and so many of his Veterans of the same profession.

So that Prophecy was accomplished: Not by might, or army, Zech. 4. 6.
(as the Turkish Empire, and religion) but by my Spirit, Says the Lord. Which
turned the heart of the Fathers to the Children, Mal. 4. 6.
and the heart of the Children to the Fathers, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just, to make ready a people, Luke 1. 17.
prepared for the Lord.

But it may be, that which was wanting in an army might be supplied by policy?

One might think so indeed, if the greater number of the wise, and potent men
of the world had taken this way. But St. Paul (who had his hand from the
beginning in this work, and had the best experience of it) witnesses after
this manner. The foolishness of God is wiser then men: 1 Cor. 1. 25.
for ye see your calling, Brethren, how that not many wise men after the Flesh;
not many mighty, not many noble are called, though some of all these.

Instead of aids therefore, put into the contrary balance; that all the might,
and policy of the world; all that enraged Jews, and Idolaters could do, was set
against it. And yet, (by a new example) men delightted to dye for religion,
which was never known before, at least, amongst the Gentiles: and out of their
blood (as out of the Teeth that Cadmus sowed) an innumerable power of supplies
rose out of the earth. Of which it was foretold, Rev. 12. 16.
that it should befriend the Woman, and help her, swallowing up that stood,
which the dragon cast out of his mouth to drown her. Like Hydra's heads cut off
one, and more started up in the stead of it: persecution wrought nothing but
increase, as mowing makes the grass to grow. It wrought nothing else but a
sweeter smell, and savor to Christianity: even as when a roller is driven over
a walk of Camomil, what could it avail to hinder?

I have said but little yet (though it tend to admiration) let the unbeliever
mark, and be astonished at that, which follows.

Said not the proud Assyrian to the servants of King Hezekiah; 1 Kings 18. 33.
Have any of the Gods of the Nations delivered at all his Land (for every
Nation then made choice of some especial Numen to be their Protector) out of
the hand of the King of Assyria: where are the Gods of Hamath and of Arphad?
where are the Gods of Sepharvaim? but now, where are the Gods of Assyria it
self? We need such a learned Antiquary as your Seldom, Libro de Djs Syris.
to let us know their names. Where are the Gods that Greece, and Rome adored;
why is there never a Temple (at the least) of Jupiter's remaining, who was
styled the Father of Gods, and men? what ailed thee, O thou dreadful Oracle at
Delphos, that thou made such pitiful excuses (as thou did) and then
retired'st with the rest (who made none) to everlasting silence, Plut. de orac.
to deceive the world no more? it was not because ye were dis-obliged by the
Heathen all the world over, at the same time. It was because ye could not
choose: it was not because there was an earthly power to depresse ye; but
another spirit, which ye were not able to with-stand. Rise again, if ye are
able, to answer these reproaches! that part of the world is forced to bow with
you, which is not ready to adore!

More closely to the case in hand still: how came the despised Land of Jewry to
send a Law forth to all the world, and yet themselves to be dissipated so, as
never people were and this has lasted above these 1600 years, wherein (however)
as there is not a Roman left, so there is not a Jew lost; but there is a mark
upon them. A mighty people, if they could be gathered: but they are cast far
back for that, Romans 11. 25.
for it is not like to be, till the fullness of the Gentiles is come in.

There is now but one God, and where Mahomet is professed, Christ is also
acknowledged to have been a great Prophet before Him: and they have the history
of the Gospel, upon which they raise their damned Idol, which is confounding
evidence against these Apostates from the Faith; and together with it,
confounders of that civility, that was in the world before.

This one God is worshipped according to the Law, which he gave from the
beginning of the world, which no false religion can pretend to in the least.
Before, there was no enmity betwixt nations on the account of religion: but
now, it is the greatest point, and ground of amity, Genesis 3.
or enmity. As it was said in Genesis, I will put enmity between thy Seed, and
between her Seed. So more expressly in the Gospel, our Lord himself does
testifye, saying, I came not to send Peace upon the Earth, but a Sword, Matthew.
10. 34.
and to set men at variance upon this account of religion only. Which many
Statesmen, having well observed, would fain have taken another order with
religion, if they had been able; but it was too far above them. Christianity
has abolished Idolatry, Philosophy, Policy, and brought in other orders, and
Governments among the Nations, then the wisemen of the world allowed. All
which does show, and prove; that the Christian religion is the wisdom of God
above all; and not of man: that as it was raised at first, so it does still
subsist by miracles, and therefore is invincible; so that the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. Matthew. 16. 18.


But, since we have said so much concerning this wisdom, viz. that it has
abolished, not Idolatry only, but Philosophy; not the Jewish Law alone, but the
civil; not established governments, but subverted them not brought in peace but
war, it is high time, that we take some caution concerning prudence, with which
this wisdom is said to dwell; least she be misprised for a destroyer of the
house, wherein she lives; since such things as these cannot consist with
prudence. Let us therefore pass to the second, and the last point, to show.

Point. 2. That this wisdom dwells with prudence, and is the best policy: for
so says the context, and find out the knowledge of witty inventions, that is,
the choice expedients of felicity for all estates.

What though the Christian religion has beaten down the galleries of the
Cynicks, Stoics, Skepticks, Epicureans, and all other heresies of true
Philosophy, as well as the Altars of the Idols? yet, it has no more abolished
Philosophy, rightly so called, then it has religion. But rather, since the
spreading of Christianity, multi transierunt, and aucta est scientia. Many have
traveled to augment learning, and to redeem Philosophy from all the errors,
wherein it was before entangled.

St. Paul exhorts the Colossians, Col. 2. 8.
to beware least any man should spoil them through Philosophy, and vain deceit,
after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ: for though all the
Sects called themselves the Philosophers, and theirs the Philosophy; even as
our Sects in religion do imitate the ancient usurpation; yet it is plain, that
the Apostle cautions them against no other Philosophy, but such as is vain
deceit, and opposite unto the simplicity of the Faith of Christ; which no real
knowledge is.

Again, he admonishes them against a show of wisdom in will worship, verse 22.
and humility, and neglecting of the body. It is but the show of wisdom, which
really is not such, that he cautions them against; especially such a show, as
ministered before to heathen superstition, and being brought into the Christian
Church, might tend to corrupt it with the old leaven, the rudiments of the
world.

In the mean time, he himself disputed with the Stoics, and Epicureans, and
other Philosophers, according to their own Notions, which he had learned at the
feet of Gamaliel; being as conversant in the Learning of the Greeks, as Moses
had been before in that of the Egyptians. Acts 7. 22.
The rest of the Apostles were endued from above with tongues, and all
knowledge; so that they were reputed at the first, amongst the Gentiles, as a
new sect of Philosophers.

In the next succession, the prime Fathers of the Church were of the converted
Rhetors, and Philosophers, as Ignatius, Clemens, Irenaeus, Justin Martyr,
Athenagoras, Tertullian, Origin, Lactantius, and diverse others. What has since
been added to the magazine of learning, I may safely leave to be demonstrated
by the ROYAL SOCIETY.

What if the Christian religion has almost antiquated the Civil Law in diverse
Countries? it is only so far as it has abolish't slavery, and brought in
Christian liberty, even in civil things, wheresoever a Christian Government has
been established. Neither has it subverted any other, but to bring in better,
and a sweeter order. As may appear at this day, by comparing Christendom,
howsoever corrupted, with the Turkish, or Pagan dominations. Wheresoever the
Christian yoke lies not on Princes, and their Governments, they are barbarous,
and cruel: whereas in Christendom, (especially amongst the Princes, and the
States of the Reformation) there is more property, immunity, and privilege to
the lower states: and in case of trespass, there are more pardons, and
impunities: in case of punishment, more mercy, Malefactors are chastised, or
put to death with the less severity, and horror; and the poor are not exposed.

In a word; though by accident, Christianity draw the hatred of the
un-beleiving world, as being opposed to the power of Satan, Ephesians. 2. 2.
who works in the children of disobedience: yet, it has made even wars
themselves more gentle, then they were before, both in sieges, and in battles,
sparing the effusion of blood (which the Qui praemia, and triumphos decrevere,
secundum numerum hostium occisorum.
Romans glorified in) affording ransom, enslaving none of the Christian
profession. And where they trespass (possibly) upon Christian tenderness in
enslaving Turks, or Infidels; they seem to make some amends by better usage of
them, then our own poor Captives do expect in Barbary.

Content (may some one say) we are for religion, and for the Christian too
above all; but not with such hankes as are put upon us, under this pretense, to
the prejudice of civil life; and thefore, contrary unto common prudence.

And first, because it is an hindrance to preferment, to be held to such rules
as may be given us: Si violandum est jus, regnandi causa. Caesar ex Eurip.
if a Kingdom, or a great estate or fortune, lie before me; must I let another
carry them before me, if there be but a scruple about the title, or the
circumstances of proceeding? if I have made a promise; must I keep it to my own
wrong?

Machiavel observes, de principe.
that those Princes have been but unfortunate, who have suffered themselves to
be hampered by a word, or to be in earnest, too religious [but he is very
unfortunate himself in the instances, which he gives of some, that seemed to
have prospered by their falsenesse, and impiety.] What shall we return to this?

We say first, that, that which has been called virtue (for the most part) is
a certain strain of natural piety, even in the Heathens, so far as it can go:
and that such of those (whether private men, or Princes) as lived most
according unto true virtue, were the most prosperous, and glorious. But because
the lives of private men are apt to be buried in obscurity* after a small time;
let us take account of Princes, whose memories remain sacred, when they have
done virtuously; as their persons were before (whether they were Pagan, or
whether they were Christian) while the issues hung in suspense, and the ages
under awe, wherein they lived.

Who can be compared with Augustus, Titus, Trajan, Antoninus, Constantine the
great, and the rest of better note? as for the vicious monsters of the Empire,
who by ambition, and deceit attained, and managed the sway for a time; which of
them came to a timely end? as for those that retained wicked policies with a
show, and some pretense of virtue: which of these did not spoil all the rest
thereby? I cannot stand to speak of Tiberius, Galba, Severus, Julian, and
others of them. Much less, to verify the same from our own Chronicles (which
might seem to exceed the lists of my profession) to leave to every one their
own.

We say again, that looking upon examples in the Scripture; we have found none
to have flourished like those, that had the zeal of true religion; as David,
So. lomon, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, etc. Only, good Josiah perished at the
last, by admitting a little policy, to be tempered with his piety: and out of a
Princely emulation (as it might be thought) in his youth, to show his valor.

On the other side, the wicked Princes fell by their own vices: and had been
likely so to do, though there had been none but men to punish them. The Princes
that compounded, or confounded their pretenses to religion with other policies,
fell ever short of their own designs, which they pursued, under the veil, or
mask of hypocrisy; as Saul, and Jeroboam, and Jehu, and Amaziah, and the rest.

Then comes another in, with such a complaint as this, to render this pretended
prudence of ours to be but foolishness (according to their shallow reasonings)
shall I part with a certainty for an uncertainty? quit my delights, and
pleasures to embrace Melancholy, and to solace my self with deaths-heads, and
Coffins set before me, while I walk in youth, or strength? shall I bind a
carcass to my living body, and go about with it, like a ghost, through the
terror of a resurrection, and a future judgment, whilst it seems to common
observation, that death is but a mere extinction; and as such, despised by the
bravest men?

First, it is Popish superstition, that has painted out religion in solitudes,
and penances: and it is the modern Catharism only, that has sequestered it from
society, and civility; wherein the highest satisfactions of life consist; and
certainly, men are rendered the more civil, and not the less, by a right temper
of religion, which is wisdom dwelling in the Court of prudence, the bond of all
humanity. So that impiety does but put an ugly visard on religion, or cloth it
in a Bears-skin, to work its prejudice, when it sets it forth after this
manner. It is far from being sad, and melancholy, when it is rightly
understood; but is rather to be described, Boeth. de consolat. philosophiae. l.
1. Mulier reverendi admodum vultus, oculis ardentibus, color vivido, atque in
exhausti vigoris, quamvis ita aevi plena soret, ut nullo modo nostrae
crederetur aetatis.
as the Christian Philosopher describes wisdom, to be like a woman of a
Matronly-look, having piercing eyes, and a lively color; and though far above
our age, seeming yet to retain the flower of her youth.

Again, there is no certainty to be parted with by a religious life, seeing all
other things are uncertain here, unless it be this truth; that all good things
are the certain free gifts of God, dispensed much according to meet rewards of
piety and virtue: and so it often goes, whilst all the superfluity of divine
bounty, being no way prodigal, is unaccountable unto men. But uncertainty there
can be none about the future hopes, and fears, till any man has answered the
evidence, which we have given in before of the Christian religion. Which we
also presume to be un answerable by all the wits of men, though they were even
granted a Bacchanalian liberty.

Let us cast up the count (if you please) on either hand, what mischief comes
by irreligion, and what benefits do accompany an unfeigned Christian Piety.

First, An irreligious life, through private lusts, and passions, destroys
bodies, and estates, and the public weal; which are all saved, and advanced by
the prudence, and goodness of a Christian life, how many bodies have been
ruined by intemperance, and lust? but who was ever hurt by Continence and
Abstinence? How many men have perished by the persecution of revenge? but who
ever came to any great disaster by gentleness, and patience? How many estates
have been confounded by a prodigal profusion upon vanities? but what estate did
ever suffer by frugality, with an abhorrency from all vainglory, and
impertinent delights? what confusion has it brought into States, and
Kingdoms, when particular persons, having power in their hands, have
dis-regarded, and hindered the public good, for their private ends, and
satisfactions? but when was the State ever hurt by a public spirit, and by
self-denial? the ungodly life of a few men brings judgments on the land; but
the Godly lie of fewer stinteth the divine wrath, and brings blessings, not
only on themselves, but on many more.

2. An irreligious life brings men under great bondage; but a religious life
(according unto this prudence) does set them free, and far above all fears, or
the causes of them. The one is in bondage unto meats, and drinks, to make
provision for the Flesh; enough to furnish out a voyage: not (as it is usually
pretended) for hospitality, but because he wants them: whereas nature is
contented with a little, and piety with less. The one is tempted with the
forbidden fruit, and is in bondage, because he will be satisfied; though it be
through dishonor, and a cumble of inconveniences. But unto purer minds there
arises little trouble of this kind: either their mind is free from the power
of such temptations; or else, it is purged by repentance, and every lust is
mortified. The one cannot live comfortably (as he conceives) without his lusts,
and the other cannot live at all with them.

The weight of an ungodly man's bondage follows yet (as the wain must follow the
wheels.) When an ungodly man has pursued his ambition, pride, revenge,
covetize, or any of his pleasures to the height; he is still so far from being
satisfied, that he is rather sad and discomposed, partly through vanity of the
Creature, and partly through the remorse of his Conscience, reflecting upon so
much of the vanity of Sin, as he is sensible of, in the things that he has
acted, or wherewithal he was affected for the time. So, that instead of
recovering himself by reason, and by resolution, he is usually re-mitted to the
same disease to be healed, as they say, that a second burning of the finger
will cure the first. Now, if this part of a man's soul (if I may divide it into
parts) troubled the Heathen themselves (as I cannot stand to cite sentences,
and instances, that might be quoted out of Authors) how much more, may I
presume, it may do in such, as have heard the Gospel preached all their days,
from which they cannot choose, but to have received some impressions, howsoever
impregnable they may pretend to be.

In a word, whereas true religion pacifies the conscience, and alone is able to
render that tranquillity of mind, which the Gentiles sought in vain; an
irreligious life makes men meticulous, as often as the wind does blow, or the
clouds are rent with thunder. A religious man is in peace at home, impavidum
ferient ruinae; The end of the world will be no amazement to him; though the
heavens fall, or glow with fervent fire, as they must do at the last, he is not
to be dismayed by it.

Thirdly and Lastly, There is as much latitude in Christian prudence, as a wise
man could wish: For there is nothing in religion, that makes against a right
prudence; nay, it comprehends all, and far excels human prudence: you
cannot instance in a case, wherein you may not be, the best resolved. Hence
Philosophers have prescribed much austerity, and Idolaters have used (and do
use) great severity, but the Christian Religion required nothing, but what is
gentle, and agreeable unto nature, and civility. There is enough in it to
preserve the Temporal felicity, and to augment it. Enjoy as much of the goods,
that God has given you, as will do you good: and be sure, if God had not known
better then we, what was good for us, he would have allowed to us the larger
size.

Some restraints indeed, we must acknowledge, but such as are for our greater
privilege, and enlargement another way. Some think it a restraint if they may
not riot, but if they do, it spoileth bodies, and estates: others, that there
is no Community; but where there is most impunity for that, the blood is most
corrupted. Others, that Polygamy (at least) is not permitted; but where it is,
it engenders unto feuds, more then unto love. And when community was once too
much indulged, the Romans were fain to provide by law, that every man of such a
quality, should have (at least) one wife. The Laws of God therefore are the
basis of all other prudence, the establishment of the earth; such as far
exceeded those of all other Nations, to make both the public; and the private
man the happier, so that every way it is the better policy.

I think our own Law approves of it, and has this rule, Lex Dei est lex
terrae; The Law of God is the Law of the Land: and that, there is no such
preamble to any of our Statutes, as, nos mitigantes regorem juris divini, etc.
do enact, Referente mihi nobili Polono de ^ua gente.
that it shall not be accounted murder in a Noble man, if he kill a Paisan. If
it were so, it would not only be a violation of religion, but much against the
policy of ENGLAND.

Certainly then this Christian prudence cannot interfere with the Civil,
because it does not only far surmount, but comprehend it. (...)
. It has been said, that all virtue is comprised in justice: much more in
piety, which is not only the greatest motive unto justice; but the primum
mobile, a superior orb, that does contain, and carry it about with its own
motion. Whatsoever therefore makes against piety, makes as much against
justice, and all other virtues, and as much against the felicity of mankind,
even in this civil life.

Add to this the vantage, we have showed, that true religion lays but few and
light restraints; but it opens such enlargements of happiness, and fruition, on
another hand, as are neither to be counted by curious observation; nor yet to
be expressed, or uttered by the tongues of men, and Angels,

What if I should resume my text (but that it is too late) to be expounded
mystically, and yet without an allegory? you see that wisdom and prudence are
here set forth as two persons: and prudence for her part as if she had an house
large enough to entertain wisdom. What if I should say, upon the whole, that it
is not obscurely signified by this; that Christ, the Son of God, the wisdom of
the father, dwells in them that do believe, by his own spirit? whereby he is
as much the soul of their souls, as their souls are the life of their bodies:
and so does prompt, and inspire them by his grace, in such a manner, that they
shall not only, not lightly forego, or so much as slip any point, that tends
to their happiness temporal, Romans 8. 18.
or eternal (for, all things work together for good to them that love God) but
does also fill them full of such inward joys, as carnal wisdom is not able to
conceive.

Such as have been addicted to their studies, have placed the chiefest felicity
of life in contemplation (we must suppose that a man be of sufficiency to be
vacant to it, (...) Ad Nicom. l. 10. cap. 7.
and to make his choice of what he likes) because this is the pleasure of the
mind. So our master Aristotle, although his own speculations were but dry
((...).) But Sencea distinguishes betwixt that part of Philosophy, which is
conversant about the natural questions, and that which rises up to the
researches, that are concerning God; speaking of this later as being above the
other, as much as the Heaven is above the Earth: yet he moves only such remote
questions of contemplation as these are, what the nature of God is; and whether
he be wholly intent upon himself, or has sometimes regard to us: pronouncing
(notwithstanding) of this later part, that it is more Altior est haec, and
animosior, and multo hanc caliginem in qua volutamur, excedit, and e tenebris
creptos illo producit, unde lucct. pri. not. quaest.
high, and spritely then the other: and such as wraps us up above this
darkness, wherein we were mantled before as in thick clouds, and brings us near
unto that light, from whence it self does shine, Such pleasures did they
pretend to take in their poor, and low sentiments of Philosophy, the highest of
which do hardly reach the threshold of Divinity!

The Poets seemed to be full of one of the nine Goddesses, the Muses, and to
take great pleasure in it, when their Genius worked kindly toward verses: and
therefore used to begin their poems with a prayer to one, or other of them,
which was counted most propitious unto such a vein, or strein of Poesy, as they
then intended. The Heathen Priests in their Temples gloryed in being possessed
with the Demon, strutting in the Penetralia, like the bird of Juno.

Cicero delighted in the notion of immortality: but it was of name only: that
of the Soul he accounted as a problem. Of death he therefore makes the less
account, (as other of the Heathens) who thought it but indifferent, In Parad.
because it brought as much good, as evil with it.

Cato was much taken with Socrates his discourses about the immortality of the
soul, when he was about to kill himself: Plutarch in vit. Cat. min. In Phaedone
Platonio. Grandia morituri verba catonis discere, ab insano multum Laudanda
Magistro, Pers. Sat. 3.
and uttered strange, and admirable sayings to the Heathen hearers: yet he
dreamed not of a resurrection, an Heaven; or but only of Elysian fields, or
shades: and so he dyed, not so much out of good will, as to save himself from
falling into the hands of enemies, which he thought would use him
contumeliously.

But when we come to contemplate one God, distinguished (and not divided) into
three persons, for our sakes: in the works of creation, redemption, and
sanctification unto glory; how infinitely far is our contemplation enlarged
beyond theirs? when we meditate on the attributes of his glory, as that he is
merciful, and bounteous, and the rest: in a word, that he is light and love,;
which are unfolded only in the Scriptures: what an infinite of tenters
arethere, to extend this wooff, until there be no more place, nor space, but
that which runs into eternity?

When we shall consider what he is in respect to us: In whom we live, Act. 1^.
Ps. 139. 15. etc.
and move, and have our beings: who covered us, when we were made in secret;
and in whose book our members were all written, being yet unperfect, who was
not only the Father of our Fathers; but much more then a Father to every one of
us in particular; giving us all the good that ever we did enjoy, and is never
weary of it: but above all, who is our redeemer, and the Father of Our Lord,
and husband, together with himself, God blessed for ever. O admirable
contemplations! O what peculiar pleasures do belong to this adoption! O the
ecstasies of study, love and wonder! what can there be wanting, if we think but
of the least of these, to raise our souls up to a near alliance with the
Angels, that are in Heaven? it is from this doctrine, that the soul comes to
have her wings full summed, that were hardly impt before, that did but hover
about (indeed) in clouds of darkness.

What though the Poets boast of raptures? they terminate in a Woman: and for
the most part, Sic Just. Mart. (ni male memini) retundit Poetas Ethnicos,
quorum, (...). Horat. de art. poet.
desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne. What though the heathen Priests
seemed to have some familiarity with the Gods, in whose Temples they did
attend, and serve? they were usually deadly sick with it. Let Cicero please
himself about an immortal name: we should not know him from another man, though
we should meet him: though we talk of him, he cannot hear us: and if he be not,
what is he the nearer, as Valla argues. Let Cato speak bravely of the
immortality of the soul it self, since he thought it better to dye, then to
protract his misery: yet none of his admirers could sind in his heart to quit
an indifferent life here, for the best that they could make of the other.

But since it is another kind of immortality, that the Christian faith does
grasp, and gasp after: no wonder if the excellency of so sublime an object do
draw them up far above the state of other men, that seem to have more in them,
then themselves: and give them other manner of fruitions, which are unspeakable
and full of glory, without deceit, or stilt: in a word, that it silleth them
not only with a true contempt of death (which the other do but seign) but
impelleth them to triumph over it, and often to provoke it in the way of
Martyrdom. Let us move yet but one step further, that we may reach the goal.

Others are not much addicted unto contemplation (but rather leave it as a
fancy to them that like it better) yet they will not quit their own pretensions
unto happiness. They had rather have it placed in an active, or a quiet life,
supported with such means, and aides, as may best administer unto either of
them, as they themselves should choose. Be it so, we are at all points ready to
show where happiness is, sooner then any other, for Godliness is profitable
unto all things, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
having the promises of this life, and of that which is to come.

Carnal wisdom seems to teach how to enjoy, and manage the goods of fortune but
it cannot get them: whereas the true wisdom has length of days in her right
hand, Prove. 3. 16.
and in her left riches and honor.

Carnal wisdom teaches to enjoy them alone, but this how to enjoy God together
with them, which is much more. Carnal Wisdom teaches a pretended equanimity,
and indifference in adversity (which it cannot possibly prevent) but it can no
more do it, then it can satisfy thirst, and hunger with dainty words; whereas
this wisdom and prudence, whereof we speak, affords such a true support
within, 2 Cor. 6. 10. 74 Romans 5. 3.
as has really made many (and still does) to rejoice in tribulations.

And if you ask me what this inward support is. I answer, it is the spirit of
Union, through faith, whereof I gave you but an hint before, indeed, how the
Saints are united mystically unto Christ, and have thereby unspeakable
enjoyments, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
and full of glory: we cannot show in Act, because it is internal, and a
mystery: but it plainly appears by the effects: for, they are often transported
in their private prayers, who have Communion with the Father, 1 John 1. 3. 4.
and with his Son Jesus Christ, they have admirable gifts when they come
abroad. That Spirit, which we account as their higher souls or by way of
eminence, shows wonders, when occasion draws it forth to outward observation.
But it is not according to the will of man: neither of him that has it, always
to exert the power of it, nor of others to make collusion with it: but rather,
it makes but little show to the world (till God himself do set it forth to
action, or to patience) because it abounds most in mortified men: who being
filled with the Spirit, look never the fuller for it; Ephesians. 5. 18.
and while they are invincible in the Faith, do but show to be the meekest men.
And so each one does acknowledge for himself, when he professes with St. Paul,
Gal. 2. 20. Col 3, 3.
The Life which I seem to live in the stesh, I live not; but my life is hid
with Christ in God.

To conclude (since we must needs be reduced unto some bounds, though our
subject cannot) here is the highest pitch of this excellency, which has no
perch below the clouds; but pierces into the Empyrean heavens. This wisdom
does secure us of a better life (while it is so far from diminishing, that it
added unto this, as I have showed you) but irreligion hazzards both, upon a
fond supposition; what if there be no resurrection? yet, by piety, you shall
live more happily here, then without it. The madman that had great joys to go
unto the Port, and to see the Ships come in, conceiting that they were all his
own, proved but melancholy, when he was cured. Better it were to be deceived
with godliness, which is profitable unto all things, then to be deluded by the
world, that yeildeth no security, or felicity to them, that stick the closest
to it.

But what if there be a resurrection at the last? insipientis erit tum dicere,
non putaram. It will be but folly to plead then; I had not thought, that it
would have proved so. And it will be too late to put in any other plea: for
this very wisdom will then come in, in evidence; and after speak like a judge
from the bench, in this manner. Since ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and
would none of my reproof, Prove, 1. 24. etc.
I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; when
your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction as a whirlwind; when
distress, and anguish comes on you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will
not answer: they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.

This is the sum of my exhortation, and my argument. To day while it is
called to day, Heb 3. 15. 4. 7.
let us hearken to the voice of wisdom, let us claspe this prudence, and never
part with it: but let us keep it so, that it my keep us for ever. Phil. 4. 7.
And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts,
and minds through Christ Jesus. Heb. 13. 20.
Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that, which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father
and the Holy Ghost be praise and glory for ever and ever.

AMEN.

