To His Most Excellent Majesty KING CHARLES The Second, our Most Gracious
SOVEREIGN.

The humble Address of the Officers of the several Regiments of Horse under
the Command of his Excellency the Lord General MONCK, as it was presented by
them to His Majesty at Dartford Heath in Kent this present Tuesday, May 29.
1660.

LONDON: Printed by S. Griffin, for John Playford at his Shop in the Temple,
1660.

Charles Royal blazon C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

TO HIS Most Excellent MAJESTY KING CHARLES The Second, Our Most Gracious
SOVEREIGN. The humble Address of the Officers of the several Regiments, etc.
WITH such a Joy as flows from Reverence and Love, We humbly present our selves
before your Sacred Majesty: Besides our reflection on the Common good, which in
this happy Change relates to our particular, intends this joy, and renders it
sincere; For we can now please our selves in our selves, while we are really
performing that Duty for which we were first raised. And with all Thankfulness
we acknowledge that Care your Majesty in your late Letter and Declaration has
expressed of our Necessary intent.

We bless God to see that day when the serenity of every man's Countenance
discovers the tranquillity of his mind, for this shows your Majesty to be the
true Soul of the People, since during your absence the whole Nation was cast
into such Distractious, as we have no pleasure to remember, but had rather turn
our Thoughts and grateful Acknowledgements to the happy Conduct of our Noble
General, who has thus far lead us in our Duty to your Royal Person. Yet as
we cannot attribute too much to his Merits, so neither can we deprive our
selves of that Honor and Comfort which we find in the accomplishment of his
just design.

Therefore in plain and Soldier like (though humble) Terms, we say your
Majesty has made us and the Nation happy in your Return to this your Native
Kingdom; which doubtless will, nay we may say, has produced a settlement
upon the foundation of our Ancient Laws; By the due Excution of which, together
with your Majesty's pious Inclinations, we trust Libertisme and Profaneness
wholly suppressed, the Protestant Cause and true professors of it encouraged,
to the comfort of all your Religious and Good People.

Your Majesty will now have your Great Council about you, who have already
given proof of their Loyalty and Wisdom both to your Majesty and them. We
Profess and Declare, That as we have not been altogether useless in the
Restoration as well of your Sacred Majesty to your Crowns and Kingdoms, as
your People to their just Rights, so we shall in the future cheerfully
sacrifice our Lives, or whatsoever can be more dear to us in the Service of
your Majesty against all Oppositions whatsoever, and by a ready Obedience to
your Majesty's Commands, Express our selves,

Your Majesty smost Loyal Subjects, and obedient Servants.

FINIS.

