To the honorable Assembly of the Commons House of Parliament.
The humble Petition of all and every the Inhabitants of the Town of old
Braintford in the County of Middlesex.
Shows,
THat it is too manifest to the world, how that your Petitioners on the 12 and
13 days of this present Month, were plundered and bereaved of their several
and particular estates, as Money, Plate, Housholdstuff of all sorts, and other
necessaries of what condition soever, by His Majesty's forces, then happening
amongst them, The grief whereof is more piercing unto them, then your
Petitioners are able to express.

The consideration of whose loss amounting to near 4000, as by particulars may
appear, together with the miserable and sad condition they are brought unto,
your Petitioners humbly leave to the consideration and wisdom of this
honorable Assembly.

Humbly craving some speedy course may be thought of and taken, for the relief
of your Petitioners in this their great distress by such ways and means as in
your great and grave wisedoms shall be thought meet,

And they shall ever pray, etc.
Die Sabbathi, 26. November. 1642.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the
Ministers of Middlesex, and or those Parishes that are partly Middlesex, and
partly of London, do the next Fast day read in their several Parish Churches
the Relation of the sufferings of the Inhabitants of old Braintford on the
twelfth and thirteenth of this month by his Majesty's Forces, and that they do
excite the people to a compassionate consideration of them, and that whatsoever
shall be collected upon the next Fast day within the Parishes aforesaid, may be
employed for the relief of the Inhabitants of old Braintford aforesaid, and of
such of new Braintford as have been plundered and ruined by the Forces
aforesaid.

Hen Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

24 November. 1642.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Relation, concerning
the Passages of the Kings Army at Old- Brainceford, be forthwith Printed and
Published; And further, That no Person, upon any pretense whatsoever, shall
presume to Print the same Passages but Edward Husbands and John Frank, until
the 25 of December next ensuing the date hereof.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl Dom. Com.


