HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Gentry, Citizens, and others Your Majesty's Loyal
Subjects of the County and City of York.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE Your Majesty's faithful Subjects and Petitioners, do in all humility
acknowledge Your Majesty's abundant Grace in calling this present Parliament,
to consult with, and advise Your Majesty touching the redress of the
oppressions, and other grievances of Your Subjects, both in the Church, and
Civil State of this Your Kingdom of England: And we do with like humble
thankfulness, acknowledge Your Majesty's forwardness and Fatherly care to
relieve them, declared by sundry most just and excellent Laws already enacted,
for the re-estating of Your Subjects in their ancient Rights and Privileges,
and for taking away part of those Pressures that lay upon them. And amongst the
rest, We have more particular cause to be thankful for Your Majesty's Gracious
care, in part securing this County, by putting a Garrison into Hull, commanded
by such Persons, in whom we have just cause to confide: Which Princely
proceedings of Your Majesty has infused a strong confidence into Your
Petitioners, That Your Majesty inclined to ease your Subjects in all whatsoever
grievances; Whereof they have complained to Your Majesty in Parliament, as well
touching Reformation of Church Government, and Ceremonies in Religion, as
touching the Civil Government, and Administration of Justice, Yet so it is
most Gracious Sovereign, That now of late the Rights, and Liberties of
Parliament, being the Representative body of the whole Kingdom, And the Rights
and Liberties of every Subject involved therein, have been in a most dangerous
and unusual manner invaded and violated: Whereof we, with the rest of Your
Majesty's Loyal Subjects (to our unspeakable grief) are most senseable; And to
enlarge the cause of our sorrows, We do now understand that Your Majesty has
withdrawn Your Royal Presence, from Your Great Council, who wanting the
comfort of it, are not able to proceed with such effect, as is requisite in
those great Affairs of Church and State, that are daily presented to them;
Which Characters of displeasure, we humbly presume, have been engraven in Your
Majesty's most gracious disposition, by the subtle work and Council of those
disaffected persons, who study nothing more, then to beget differences and
jealousies between Your Majesty, and Your more Loyal Subjects of the reformed
Religion, with intention to hinder and disturb the perfect Reformation in
matters of Religion, and sending over Succors to Your distressed Protestant
Subjects in Ireland, where the Papists do most inhumanely destroy all that will
not renounce the reformed Religion, and embrace Popery.

YOur Majesty's Petitioners therefore most humbly pray, That Your Majesty will
be pleased henceforward to shut Your Sacred Ears against such malignant
Counsels, And in all affairs to repose Your confidence wholly upon the
Wisdom and fidelity of Your Great Council now assembled in Parliament, and
by their advice to settle and dispose such places of trust, as may conduce to
the safety of Your Majesty's Dominions; not doubting but their care will
equally tender Your Majesty's Honor with the public Interests and welfare of
Your Kingdoms. And that those Members of Parliament lately accused of Treason
may have a fair and speedy trial, according to the Privilege of the House,
that so they may either receive condign punishment. If they have offended, or
being acquit, may cheerfully attend those weighty affairs, appertaining to
their charge. And lastly, That Your Majesty will not hereafter suffer to be
enterprised any thing tending to the Violation or breach of Privileges of
Parliament.

And Your Petitioners shall pray for Your Majesty's long and prosperous Reign,
etc. This is the perfect Copy which was presented to His Majesty this instant
February.



Febr. 19. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1641.


