To the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
The humble Petition of the Baronets, Esquires, Ministers, Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and others peaceably affected in the County Palatine of Lancaster.
Showing to Your Sacred Majesty
Our heartbreaking sense and sorrow for the unhappy Rents and Distractions in
Your Majesty's Dominions, especially in the Sesion of so grave and godly an
Assembly, (most graciously convened by Your Majesty) endeavoring the glory of
Almighty God in the Reformation of Religion, and the Honor and Weal of Your
Majesty, and Your Realms, in settling and securing Your Royal Throne in plenty
and peace. But perceiving the long and remote distance of Your Majesty from
that Honorable Assembly, to have distracted the hearts of Your good Subjects,
and animated the Popish and malignant party amongst us, and fearing it may
expose us to the danger and fury of a foreign foe, retard the settling of the
weighty affairs in our Land, and the subduing of the Rebels in Ireland; and
finding Your Majesty's late Resolution for that expedition, to threaten danger
to Your Royal Person, far more worth then ten thousand of us.

We therefore Your Majesty's most loyal Subjects out of our zeal to Gods true
Religion, Your Majesty's Honor and safety, and the Peace and Welfare of Your
Dominions; and out of the deep sense and apprehension of our interest in the
same, do in all humility present and prostrate our selves, and supplication at
Your Royal feet, beseeching Your Majesty to return to Your great Council
(the representative body of Your kingdom) in whom this Nation has so far
consided, that they have entrusted them with their lives, liberties; and in
which multitude of Counselors there is health and steadfastness, and whereby
the Royal Throne may be established in Righteousness, and we with the rest of
Your faithful Subjects shall continually praise and pray for Your prosperous
and happy Reign over us.

At the Court YORK the 10th. of MAY, 1642. His Majesty has expressly
commanded me to give you this His ANSWER to your PETITION.
THat this Petition as some others of this nature is grounded upon
misinformation, and being grieved and highly offended to see how his good
People have been and are abused by the false rumors and intelligences, which
have procured causlesse fears and apprehensions, referres the Petitioners to
the Answers he has given to the Declaration presented to him at Newmarket, and
to the Petition presented to him the six and twentieth of March, last at York;
wherein his Majesty faith you will clearly perceive that he is not gone but
driven from his Parliament: his Majesty likewise for your further information
of his proceedings and intentions, recommends to your view and consideration
his two Messages, and Declaration concernig Hull, and his Message touching the
reasons of his refusal to grant the Militia, all which when they shall be
fully represented to the rest of your County, he doubts not, but that you will
rest very well satisfied of his consent and resolution for the maintaining of,
and governing his People by the Law of the Land, his unmovable resolution for
the maintenance and defense of the true Protestant Profession, and the
suppression of the barbarous Irish Rebellion, and his Majesty faith, that he
believes you may then find reason to petition the Parliament to comply with
his Majesty's just desires and gracious offers, which is the only way safely
and speedily to cure the present distractions of this Kingdom, and with Gods
blesssing to put a happy end to the Irish Rebellion: for the effecting whereof,
as his Maejsty has often said, he will neither spare pains, nor decline any
hazard of his Person or fortune.

Edward Nichols.

London, Printed for N. Alen. May 26. 1642.


