To his Excellency, the Earl of Forth, Lord General of His Majesty's Army:
THE HVMBLE PETITION of diverse poor Prisoners in Oxford-castle, whole Names are
hereunder written:
Who humbly show
THat your poor Petitioners have there remained in hard imprisonment, for the
space of seven weeks and upwards, having for the greatest part of that time had
allowed them only five Farthings a day, sometimes nothing for the space of
three days together; And now at this present have only bread and water for
their maintenance, no Friend being permitted to come at them, or relieve them
with food or linen; By means whereof, with their straight imprisonment, and
bad lodging, some are dead, others desperately sick, and the rest in great
peril of perishing.

Wherefore they most humbly beseech your Excellency to take their distressed
condition into your pious consideration; And vouchsafe to give such order and
direction for them, that your Petitioners may receive some relief from their
Friends, or for their moneys, that thereby their Lives may be preserved; And
your Petitioners will (as they shall have just cause) ever pray for your
Excellencies health and happiness long to continue.

Edw. Bradney. William Whitlowe. William Sarrant. Joseph Bisset. William Gough.
Humphrey York. Lewis Crapon. Henry Southam. Daniel Aston. Tho. Chainy. John
Allen. Tho. Chamberlain. Nathaniel Hone. Thomas Knowles. Richard Green. Edward
Leader. Richard Simes. John Henly. Robert Bryant, John Fuller. William Bryant.
Thomas Alline. Edward Parsons. Richard Cadle. Steven Lawrence. Christopher
Wilks. Edward Hutchins. James Deane. Stephen Hooper. Robert Neale. John Hiller.
John Hancock. Tho. Dauson. Christopher Shipway. Richard Brown. Jo: Tailor.
James Bolton. Henry Brinckly. Jo: Mountgomery.
Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Petition be forthwith printed
and published:

Hen: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for EDW: HUSBANDS, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Middle Temple. February 15. 1642.


