PRIMORDIA: OR, THE RISE and GROWTH Of the FIRST Church of God DESCRIBED.

By THO. TANNER, M.A. J.C. and Rector of Winchfield in Hampshire.

To which are added Two LETTERS of Mr RVDYERD's, in Answer to two QUESTIONS
propounded by the Author: One about The Multiplying of Mankind until the Flood.
The other concerning The Multiplying of the Children of Israel in Egypt.

Quod primum verum.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S Paul's
Churchyard. MDC LXXXIII.

TO THE Much Honored JAMES RVDYERD, of Winchfield, Esquire
SIR,
SInce it has been a Custom from one Generation to another, for all sorts of
Writers to creep into the Light at first with their well-set Apologies; it may
justly seem in vain now (when there is nothing left to be said) for me to
travel in that kind, wherein the Wits themselves have been stranded (as it
were) before: But as for Us, who are Divines by Our Profession, it might
possibly be better to confess ingenuously, That it is as much our duty (as
occasion or acceptance may oblige us) to Write as to Preach the truth. Nor can
such an exigency be ever wanting while they that are weary of our Scribbling,
will help off our Impressions: for they see some reason for it. And it is most
likely to be this, They may perceive that all is not truth that is in Print;
but much more that disguised truth is the fittest of all to serve the turn of
error; which is not of the like consequence in reference unto all opinions.
For how we shall be saved is another matter than how we shall be re-imbursed
with a Notion only. We have as frequent need to bring all Metals to the
Touchstone or the Scale, as the Goldsmiths have, and in certain Points to be
scrupulous, even to a Grain, since the Filings of Gold are precious.

Wherefore as for this Essay in pa^ticular, which I have desired to present
unto the common light through Your hands, I must confess, Sir, that although I
wrote it not on purpose to oblige or disoblige an^ Party; yet I cannot be
unsensible, that as it comes home to certain Points at which I aimed not at
first; so there may be diverse that may take themselves to be more concerned in
it than I was aware: for whose sakes I may be the more sorry, that I have also
written in some confusion, rather as Books came to my hand, in this obscurity
(as You know best, who have been my chiefest Lender) than as my method lay in
the first Scheme, wherein it was designed. And if I beg leave here to give You
a further Prospect into that than I have done before, the rest of my Observers
may be prepared the better for it.

Since the Prime Antiquity is the only Standard both of Truth and Purity, and
the Scripture it self ( tanquam Index sui, and obliqui) the only Rule whereby
to prove the Reports of Ancient Writers, which may be many ways seduced, or
imposed on by others; I thought by comparing these together to set forth what I
could discover of the true Church, from the first beginning to the end (at
least) of the first Century after Our Lord's Nativity; having a due regard both
to the outward and inward Constitution of it, waving or referring unto others,
what I found done to my content before. I weighed with my self the Subterfuges
of the Papists, in writhed or feigned Antiquities only; and of diverse modern
Sects, in the real obscurity of the first Ages, both of the Old and New
Testaments: which it may be diverse of them would rather wish to be left under a
Standing Veil still, than to be discovered by any other Lights than their own.
And if I say no more at first, it may be it is because I know not how far I may
be able to proceed, though I have the whole Substance in my rude Draughts
already.

I have been informed, that the Great Bishop Montague had designed to
accomplish a Refutation of Baronius's Annals; but he lived to finish little
else (of that Design) beyond his Apparatus. And that it was among the Belli
Pensieri of Mr. Cowley, to take a review of the original Principles of the
Primitive Church. Which he purposed should reach to Our Savior's, and the
Apostles Lives, and their immediate Successors, for four or five Centuries,
till Interest or Policy prevailed over true Devotion. But alas! for ought
appears, these dyed with him.

But what shall I say for my self at last, in that I have not only thrust these
Papers forth under Your Name in the Front, but also fortified my self with the
same in the Rere, by pressing one or two unusual Requests from You? For the
first, sure it can be thought no other than the least expression of gratitude
(howsoever rude) that can be made (as the World goes now) to an uncorrupted
Patron. And for the second, let them that blame Your condescension, but show
first that they are able to acquit themselves as well, or (at least) to imitate
Your Example; and then they shall escape the better in exchange of censures: In
the mean while it is no matter who shall tell them, That Learning and Virtue,
such as Yours, in an Ancient House, is the Elder Nobility, and like to raise
You ^o more Esteem among the better Spirits, and to oblige other kind of thanks
than mine, who am,

SIR, Your most affectionate and humble Servant, THO. TANNER.
Winchfield, August the 20th 1682
PRIMORDIA: OR, THE Rise and Growth Of the FIRST CHURCH of GOD.
CHAP. I. Introduction. Adam why Created out of Paradise, and after brought in?
Our first Parents Created in perfection, yet never offered to couple in their
innocence, though they had such a command, with a blessing; and why? Why, also,
they coveted Children after their fall? wherein their outward state of misery
is pointed out.
BY what degrees and means the Divine Power and Wisdom would erect a Kingdom to
himself, distinct from all the Nations, which he suffered to walk in their own
ways, Acts 14.16.
is the scope of these reserches: to the end, that we may come to know (at
last) what manner of Kingdom that should be, which God would give unto his only
Son. Who being to derive his flesh from the first Adam, we cannot choose but
begin from the head of all; and observe somewhat concerning his state, that
has either escaped some Writers, or been wisely passed over by others to evade
perplexity.

Genesis 1.26, 27. and 2.8.
As for Adam (then) the Schoolmen have observed, that he was created out of
Paradise, and after brought in: from which some of them would infer, and
argue, Si hom^ non pe^asset, tota terra velut Paradisus quidam, ab hominibus
generatione multiplicandis, incolenda s^it^; licet ille Paradisus, in quo
positus dicitar Adam, esset ins^gnior cat^^is, ideoque primo ^omini attributus,
quatenus gene^is principi. Est. in lib. 2. sent. did. 25. 2.
That he was not created in Grace, but in his pure naturals; and that he was
endued with supernatural Gifts, when he came to be instated there. To which
some others have fitly applied this Answer: That if Adam had not sinned, the
whole Earth would have been a kind of Paradise to the sons of men; but that,
that which was set forth for Adam, was adorned for him (in a special manner) as
the Prince, and head of all mankind; to be his residence, and mansion (which as
it is described, comprised many regions) while his Children, to be born, had
all the rest before them.

Whereas, if there be any mystery at all to be observed in it, it may seem to
have been this, That God would not leave Adam, to abide in the wide world (at
large) as his own master, and Lord of all besides, without any homage to be
paid to himself, his Maker; and therefore, that he would impale him (without
confinement) within a certain glorious place, wherein he would be worshipped,
in a more especial manner, by him and his, that were to constitute an holy
Church in the state of innocence, if he had held it. Unto which intent, God
took Adam into a kind of implicit Covenant (but not the same with that, which
some do take for the Covenant of Works) with himself, and to the ordinance of
the Sabbath, he annexed (as a kind of Sacraments) the Tree of knowledge for his
caution; Genesis 2.2, 3, 9.
and the Tree of Life for his comfort, Genesis 2.17.
as a pledge of immortal felicity, in case of his obedience. But when Adam fell
from this, it gave occasion unto God to excommunicate, Genesis 3.22, 23, 24.
and send him forth from the Garden of Eden, to till the [common] ground, from
whence (...) had been taken, into that consecrated place.

Now, although it be manifest by it self, that our first Parents were created
in perfection, inasmuch as God blessed them (as soon as he had done) and said
unto them, Genesis 1.28.
be fruitful, and multiply; yet, no Christian ever did presume to think R.
Iarchi tamen asserit Adamum, ante praevaricationem, genuisse Cainum, quia
praeceptum su^rat, crescite, etc. At Doctores Catholici statuunt cos e Paradiso
egressos Virgins: praeceptum vero expectasse tempus debitum, ^t varii Coment.
in G^n.
that there was any offer of copulation between them in the Garden: whether,
because they had no burning blood in them, but were like to other tame
creatures (that retain their native innocence) which have no desire, but at
certain seasons, when men observe to join them: Or, whether it was so ordered
(according to the foreknowledge of God) that no kind of inconvenience might
ensue; for, if Adam had had but one Son, born in innocence, then all mankind
could not have fallen together, in Adam's person; but the state of Men might
have proved like to that of Angels, whereof some left their first station,
while others held it: Or, if Eve had but conceived in her integrity, that
conception (not having been shapen in iniquity, Psalm. ^51.5.
could scarce have been said to have been born in sin; or to have sinned in its
Parents loins: So that it might have been justly questioned, how far such an
issue might be liable to, or exempted from, the consequents of sin, in
reference unto punishment? Ezekiel. 1^.4.
for he says, Behold all souls are mine; as the soul of the Father, so also
the soul of the Son is mine: the soul that sins, it shall die.

But as soon as they were fallen, and yet (in mercy) respited from sudden
death, they began to long for posterity; both to supply their own mortality,
and also to obtain the blessed seed, that had been promised to them for their
recovery.

In the next place, therefore, we have to contemplate the greatest beauties,
and the most accomplished souls that ever were, (as coming immediately, out of
the hands of the (...), or first Former of all mankind, in them) thrust forth
to dig, or till the ground, that had been newly cursed with barrenness. But
what shall they dig, or cut withal? He that made all living creatures made no
tools: Nay he hid the Iron within the earth, so that without Iron it is not
easy to come by it: or if Adam find any in the stony mass, above ground, what
should he do with it, if the use of the forge was not known till Tubal-Cain was
born, above a hundred years after? But it seems that Tubal was an improver
rather than an inventer: For the Text says only, Genesis 4.22.
that he was the instructor of every [ Arti^icer] (as if there were Artificers
before) in brass and iron. It makes no matter, since we find that the Indians
in America had Bows and Arrows, and comely Tents, having only ways to sharpen
stones, and fish-bones, without the use of Iron, before they learnt it hence.
And we will suppose our father Adam to have been much more handy and ingenious,
than those brutish peoples and the better workman needs the fewe^ tools, and
helps: for what could ^^ve do, who must be taken up (for her part) to make some
thing or other of skins, or wool, to be spun, or wove, or patcht, for clothes
and clou^s against her lying-in?

Then she could have no other but her Husband instead of Midwife, Nurse, and
Tender; and before she could have any child to be officious to her, what a deal
must lie upon her hands? And whereas she had this heavy sentence from the Lord?
Genesis 3.16.
I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy conception: In sorrow shall thou
bring forth Children: and thy desire shall be to thy Husband [for more.] Judge
what she might suffer, by bearing and nursing Children, in her time, if she
lived proportionably unto Adam, nine hundred and thirty years, and bare (one
year with another) but three hundred of them. To which misery, this was also to
be added; she must needs bear the seed of the Serpent as well as her own, and
not know which was which, till they should be grown: when she should have more
sorrow with one Cain, than in bearing all the rest. And thus we have surveyed
some part of their outward punishment for sin.

CHAP. II. That our first Parents repented, and believed. That in token thereof
they sacrificed, and taught their Children so. That Sacrifices were not of the
light of Nature, against Pelagius; but of institution; though not to be proved
but by inference, as the Lords Supper it self, and Infant Baptism, and the
Lords Day, and single Marriages.
NOR can we doubt, but that our first Parents, seeing into what a state they
had brought themselves, did earnestly repent, and embrace the promise of the
blessed Seed, and understand so much of the meaning of it as was for their use
and comfort. Neither could they live without fear thereafter, of sinning
(again) by the like disobedience: For by occasion of their sin, they came to
see into the horror of eternal death, which remained as the utmost punishment
thereof, and which they could not understand so well before.

^r^naeus l. 3. ^ontra Haer. cap. 34, etc. Eppihan. Her. 46, ^7.
And this truth the Catholic Church has ever held with so much zeal, that it
has taxed Tatianus and the Encratitae, of Heresy, for holding to the
contrary. For (say they) if these were not saved, of whom Christ was to be
born, Nihil quicquam eorum massae salvabitur, Nothing of their mass can ever be
saved. And if they were to perish, certainly the whole Church of God was once
at a loss and failure; which, that it might not be, God had no sooner
excommunicated them out of his Temple of Paradise, but he took them into the
Church of Christ, the State of Grace; whereinto he called them by repentance
Deus utrumque poslquam peccarunt, non dereliquit, sed increpando requisivit,
and adpoenitentiam vocavit: and ut eos in majorem spem veniae erigeret,
promisit Semen ex Muliere nasciturum, quo aliquando conter^ret^r Caput
Serpentis, qui cos ad transgressionem Divinae Legis induxerat. Est. in 1. 2. d.
33.. 10.
, and faith in his blessed promise. He did not leave them so soon as they had
left him, but he brought them about again, by reproving of their sin, and
setting a better hope before them than they had deserved.

And the effects themselves will show it: For they not only submitted unto
their punishments with thankfulness, in that they were delivered both from
sudden and eternal death; but also o^^ered continual Sacrifices and Oblatitions
unto God, both of their Herds and Flocks and Fruits and all their increase or
acquists, that they had; and so they taught their Children all alike, that God
might be glorified in all, and their Children become Partakers of the same
hope, which themselves, through mercy, had received. Now,

As for Sacrifices, we may well think that it could not lightly enter into
their heads to invent them; but if they had, that God himself was unlikely to
be so well pleased with their will worship, as, first, to accept, and after, to
make a standing Ordinance of them (with the addition of many more Rites) till
the fullness of time should be accomplished: Nor is it easy to discover how
this kind of service (which was a Type and a Mystery) came to be first revealed
to them.

I cannot pass the Porch of this Argument, but I shall meet Pelagius ready to
oppose me with the first; For it follows from his opinion, That Sacrifices were
but of the light of Nature only, if the Fathers, Pelagius docuit primos post
peccatum homines, sal^atos suisse per Legem Naturae; pos^eriores per Legem
Mosis; postremos vero per Evangelium Chris^i, quasi ^ine gratia Christi, vel
Natura, vel Moses cuiquam potuerit prodesse ad salutem. Est. in l. 3. sent. d.
1. 3.
from Adam to Moses, lived by no other light; as from Moses to Christ, by the
Law; and we at last by Grace (by him also Pelagius vero, cum gratiam Dei omnino
negare non posset, docebac ^am in libero arbitrio, in Lege data, in exemplo
Chrisli* etc. sitam es^e. Id. in l. 2. sent. d. 26.. 18. Naturalis gratia
ha^ent^r bona gubernationis, etc. ut and dona naturalia scientiae, and morum:
quanquam gratia significavit antiquitus donum aliquod supernaturalis Ordinis,
alque dovec Pelagius abus^^ est boc nomine, ad significandum solam Naturam
gratis creatam. Alvar. disp. 1. de auxiliis. Quam gratiam sussecisse ad
salutem, secundum P^lagium* resert etiam Voss. Hist. Pelag. l. 3 th. 1.
perperam intellectam.)

As for the practice it self, there is no doubt: for although we do not read
that Adam himself did make any Sacrifice or Oblation, Genesis 4.
yet we find that in process of time, Cain ( being a Tiller of the [newly
accursed] ground) brought of the fruits thereof an Offering unto the Lord* And
Abel (being a Keeper of the Sheep amongst which the immaculate Lamb was)
brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof. Which how
should they do, but by their Parents directions* That Abraham offered the Tent^
of his spoils unto Melchisedeck; Chap. 14.
and that Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, etc. then shall
the Lord be thy God, and of all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the
tenth unto thee.^ Chapter 28.20
If to Sacrifices, what should he add? If to any Priesthood, after the
disappearing of Melchisedeck, where was the like o^der? If to any other pious
uses (since the Building of Altars of Earth or loose Stones was of little
charge, and Poor he had none) Expositors are troubled to show them; unless
there be some light arising out of those words, -- ver. 22.
And this Stone which I have set for a Pillar, shall be Gods House; as if he
had designed, like David, to erect a Temple over his Altar, if it had pleased
God to permit him. Only it is manifest that these things were revealed ( ab
initio) from the very first.

Not by the light of Nature: For then, 1. Adam in innocence had been bound to
sacrifice; 2. Since Christ's death, Sacrifices also would be in force as much
as the rest of the Laws of Nature; 3. It seems rather abhorrent unto Nature
to shed the blood of Beasts in vain; so that many of the Heaten Philosophers
have seemed to symbolize with those passages of the Psalmist, Psalm. 51.16.
Thou desire not Sacrifice, thou delightest not in Burnt-offerings. Will I
eat the flesh of Bulls, -- 50.13.
or drink the blood of Goats?

Indeed it is a Question among the Schoolmen, whether Christ should have been
incarnate, though Adam had not sinned; but it was never doubted, whether he
should have been crucified without out it. And that the slaying of Beasts
prefigured this, the common consent of Christians has made it manifest, who
ever since the death of Christ, did not only cease to sacrifice, but declare
all sacrificing to be a denial of it, and a crucifying of Him afresh. And the
power of God has so wrought, that wherever the Gospel came, the Heathen
Sacrifices also decayed by degrees. Nay, that where it came not (to our
knowledge) as in America, and the utmost Indies, the sacrificing of any Beasts
was not found in use when later Travelers came amongst them. But why they were
in use all the World over, before the coming of Christ, no other reason can be
given than that Adam, first, and after Noah, taught their Children all alike to
offer Sacrifice. But as it went, it gathered manifold corruptions: for whereas
Adam and Abel (as Seldom and Bertram judge Seldom de jure naturali, and Gentium
juxtadisciplinam Ebraeor. l. 3 c. 8. and quia Noachus munda ab immundis
segregavit. Genesis 7.2. Item Bertr. de Rep. Ebr. cap. 2. Illud non praeter^undum,
non sicut ips^ Sacrificia, ita omnia, quae prophanae Gentes ad Sacrificia
adhibuerant, adscita ^uisse in Dei sacra: nec enim omnia Animantium, nec Rituum
sacrificalium genera eadem in populi Isra^litici, a^ Gentium a'iarum, sacris
^rant. Ou^^am de Sacrificiis, lib. 1. cap. 1.
put a difference betwixt the clean and unclean in their Sacrifices; the
Gentiles afterward offered Swine, and all abominations, even Vt notum est de
Poenis, Phoenicibus, Syris. DeGallis etiam Caesar: pro vita hominis nisi vita
hominis reddatu^, non posse D^orum Immortalium numen placari arbitrantur. De
Bello Gall. lib. 6.
Mankind, unto some or other of their Idols; and by erecting Altars for
Sacrifice unto other men, they did translate them into the number of their
reputed Deities. But so much by occasion of Pelagius.

On another hand, who will dare to say, That it was lawful to sacrifice (which
was the special Sacrament of the Old Testament, in lieu of which the Papists
would set up their Sacrifice of the Altar, tanquam incruentum only, as a proper
Sacrifice of the like kind) without an institution? Or who can show the
institution before the practice? A Point that is like to move the Kidney in two
sorts of men.

The first can never prove, That God did directly institute this Ordinance of
sacrificing, the most substantial part of his worship, which, no doubt, from
Adam unto Moses (whatever he added to it) was not without confession and
bewailing of sins, so far as the Sacrifices were Sin Offerings, that is, of
expiation or atonement; or without prayers, if they were but Peace Offerings,
or Sacrifices of propitiation for obtaining of benevolence; nor without certain
words of Benediction, or Thanksgiving, when they were oblations of inanimate
things for the blessings that God had bestowed, or continued to them. How do
they then stand so stiffly on it, that nothing is to be admitted in the worship
and service of God, without a positive command, extending to all the material
circumstances, (at the least) when they cannot find so much as a syllable of
the substance of this first Sacrament at all?

In the New Testament, we find no institution neither (which will touch them
nearer still) of the Lords Supper itself (which all hold for an Ordinance, and
a Sacrament, (...); and it may be a weak pretense, why they excuse so many from
coming to it, and keep so many more from it:) For when our Lord gave it to his
Disciples, he only showed them an example, as to some part of the manner (not
observable, or observed since, in point of conscience; as to be celebrated at
the Passover, or in the midst, or after Supper; or sitting, kneeling, standing;
or with or without any form or gift of Prayer, more than blessing or asking of
a blessing, before the breaking of the bread and pouring out of the wine) but
as if he left them at an ingenuous liberty, according to their own good will,
or love; 1 Cor. 11.25, 26.
he only says, As often as ye do this, do it in remembrance of me: not so much
as directing them how often to do it.

In the like manner St Paul, -- v. 23.
I have received of the Lord (whether by tradition, or report, or example of
the Apostles at Jerusalem, and the Churches of their first planting, or by
special revelation) that which I also delivered unto you, setting forth no more
but only Christ's own example. Will they therefore wholely deny any
institution, by way of implicit precept? or raise example in some one case, or
two, as high as a precept; and in many more, of great importance, study to
dwindle it to nothing?

As for Baptism, indeed, our Lord speaks positively, and expressly (as if they
might infer, that this ordinance of initiation were only instituted; and not
the other, which they account worthily, of greater excellency) Go teach all
Nations, Matt. 28.19.
baptizing them, Mark 16.15.
etc. but say the Anabaptists, baptize only such as ye have taught before, and
not Infants, which could not understand you; contrary to the universal practice
of the Church, succeeding in the next age from the Apostles, as deriving from
the first: Shall we therefore stand strictly to the institution (as some
account institution) and deny Baptism unto Infants?

No, say others, that is utterly unreasonable. Genesis 2.2, 3.
Yet some of these will scarce acknowledge that those express words, Exodus
20.11.
God rested on the s^venth day, and therefore blessed the seventh day, and
sanc^ified it, did amount to any institution, as to Adam in Paradise, or his
Children afterward, Vide ^tiam plura de hac qu. in Seldeno, loco supra citato
and cap. 9. sequen^e.
affirming that the Patriarchs did not keep it, because they do not read that
they did, (as if God were obliged to be as punctual in his Commands and Records
as men, if he would be obeyed) but that it was of Moses first; not considering,
or not weighing what St Paul says, Gal. 3.
that the Law of Moses was added only because of transgressions: and therefore
because in ^gypt (it is like) this Observation had been neglected, God would
have the transgression of this his original Institution to become Capital for
the future. Nor yet, that Moses brought in no new Institutions at all, but of
Rites and Circumstances relating to the Jewish Church and Commonwealth alone.
And although the Sabbath be not of the Law of nature, yet I doubt not Videsis
que fusius de hac re disseruit Seldom. de jure nature. etc. l. 3. cap. 8. and 9.
but it obliged all Nations from Adam, as the penalty did the Jews alone by
virtue of the Law of Moses.

The same men (that they may preserve the greater veneration to the Customs of
the Church) though Christ arose on the first day of the Week, (the seventh
being the first day to Adam also, Genesis 1.31.
who was created on the sixth) and sent the Holy Ghost on the same, and the
Disciples met on the same to break Bread, (in no common way) and that St Paul
says expressly, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.
Concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the
Churches of Galatia, so do ye. Upon the first day of the Week let every one
contribute, as God has prospered him; do notwithstanding hold, that the Lords
Day is but of even rank with other Holy days that the Church observes, as if it
were of Ecclesiastical Tradition only, and not of Institution; whereas it may
be shown when other Feasts began successively, and demonstrated that the Lords
Day began from Easter and Whitsunday, (fifty days after) and so continued
without any interruption hitherto, as has happened unto all the rest.

But if all this amount not to an institution, in vain do they object against
the Anabaptists that which they may so readily retort. For may not they say,
Why do not you hold the Lords Day to be jure Divino? Is it not for the same
reason that we hold Infant Baptism to be nothing so?

The like might be said of single Marriage, Genesis 2.23, 24.
That it was instituted or ordained in Paradise as an implicit positive Law,
dispensed with (for a time) by the Lawgiver unto the Patriarchs, and Divorces
indulged to the Israelites (till Christ came) for the hardness of their hearts.
Matthew. 19.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Mark 10.5, 6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 5.31, 32.
But when he says, From the beginning it was not so, without more words he
revives the Primitive Institution. So that where the Scripture speaks but
little, there is much to be understood; John 21.25.
for if all should be written at large, the world it self could not contain the
Books that should be written. It remains therefore that we think otherwise of
Institutions than some men do: And, for all these two Institutions in Paradise,
( viz. of the Sabbath and of single Marriage) that we do not presently imagine,
Cautione adhibitaa contra Socinum, qui censet Adamum ante pecc^sse, quam comed
ret, ^ametsi sola comessione a slat^ excideret.
that though Adam had not eaten of the forbidden Fruit, he might have fallen
some other way; but rather that he was under a Sacramental Guard before he made
a breach upon Gods injuction.

CHAPTER. III. The subtilty of the modern Socinians. An abstract of their chief
Tenants, and the main design to which they are all ^ccommodated, noted. A
groundwork laid against them in order to prove, That Sacrifices were offered
by revelation, and not according to any possible invention of man.
BUT (to resume our Argument about the original of Sacrifices) the modern
Pelagians (learning how to ward the Passes that pressed home upon their
Founder) espied this to be one, That if Sacrifices had been of the light of
Nature, it would have been written there indelebly, as with a Sunbeam, at the
same time that Adam received the Image of God; or (if there be any difference)
if it were of the Law of Nature, men's consciences could not choose but bear
witness to it, Romans 2.15.
their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another, according
to the performance or omission of their Sacrifices; and this as much before the
Fall as after: whereupon they bethought themselves of such a subterfuge as
this, Referente Outramo lib. 1. c. 1.. 6. in haec verba, Hi, qui sua sponte
pririo sa(...) judicant, bun^ sacri^ic^^^i Rit^m ad Naturea (...) dictas,
^ternas, ^lique^, and immutabiles non reser^nt; sed ad ejus^nodi Instituta,
quae ratio naturalis ^xcogitaverit, tanguam (...) icuum Dei cultum apt^^^^^^,
and idonea, etc Contra sententiam Antiquoram, qui Sacrificia isla ignita, ex
jussu, seu inspiratione Numinis, cum caeteris ad cultum necessari^^, originem
babuisse tradid^runt. Uti probant Alex. Halens. p. 4. membr. 6. and Scot. in
sent. 4. did. 1. quaest. 7.
viz. That Sacrifices were offered unto God of m^ns own accord, not accord^^g
to the Laws of Nature properly so called, (which are eternal, immutable,
confirmed, and far from being abolished by Christ himself) but according to
such institutes thereof as natural reason might excogitate as apt and sit for
the conspicuous worship of God. v. gr. To offer the best of the Flock [like an
Herriot] unto God in acknowledgment of his dominion and power and bounty; but
more especially as the Lord of life and death, in token of homage, as other
Offerings in token of thanksgiving for their increase. Which is the most
favorable opinion of such as do but socinianize, and so double-refine upon
him, who thought he had refined Pelagius before. Neque mirum, inquiunt, se quae
primi illi homines Deo sacra faciebant, ea igne absumenda curarent, u^pote quod
faciendum erat, ne quod Deo sacratum fuit, ad usus prophanos transferretur,
quod aliter accidere potuisset. For they say it was no wonder, but most natural
that the Ancients should consume by fire that which they had dedicated unto
God, lest any remainders of them should hap to be afterward converted to
profane uses. Which does not amount to so much as the Heathen did imagine, who
thought their Sacrifices to be sanctified by that Celestial Element of fire. Or
the Jewish Rabbis, (enemies unto Christ, or any mystery relating unto him) for
they held, D^ Lig^t^oot's Temple Service chapter 8. 1.
That Burnt-offerings were to expiate for matters whereupon there was a
penalty; and that the Body of the Beast that was sacrificed did serve to
expiate, even for the thoughts of the heart. From which we may collect, That
they also thought their Offerings to have been purified by the ^ir^ of the
Altar.

Now I can hardly forbear (at the first entrance) to declare my opinion, That
whoever doubts ^o deny, that Sacrifices came in ure by the use of natural
reason, (e^cogitating any acceptable service unto God) or to determine and
affirm with us, that they came in by institution only, according to the
illumination of the very first Patriarchs, and were not essential to salvation
before Moses; they can hardly come so clearly off from Pelagianism or
Socinianism, as to oppose them ab imis fundamentis, but must needs yield
Goliah's Sword to gratify them. Neither yet that they can heartily acknowledge
this fundamental Principle, Vn^m esse omnium fidem, that there was but one
faith and way of salvation from the beginning, I mean since the Fall, (which I
am shortly about more clearly to demonstrate) till the end. I shall therefore
immediately betake my self to compare opinions, that contraria juxta se pos^ta,
magis illucescant, contraries being set one against another, the truth may
arise the brighter out of all obscurity, the one setting off the other.

When we meet with any Divine Notions among the Heathen Writers (which are not
a few) we may take all the rest, that they had not from the Phoenicians (by
which name they seem to have known in general the Hebrew people) to have been
clearly from the light of Nature, or from some old Traditions, traduced by
their Poets, which were their ancientest Philosophers. When there are any
Passages quoted out of the Jewish Rabbis in favor of any Gloss or Tenent, we
are to consider whether that Author lived before our Saviors birth, or after:
If before, how far suspicious of the leven of the Pharisees; if after, how much
tainted with the reprobate imaginations of the unbelieving Jews, (which yet
some do swallow as a Loche;) or, in fine, how far free from contradiction,
(those blinded people, out of hatred to Christianity, having many ways belied
one another, in delivering of their pretended Rites and Traditions.) In
Christian Controversies, where the Authority of Fathers and Councils is quoted,
the times, circumstances, occasions, interests and powers, are either to be
added or subtracted, as Grains are in the weight of Gold. But the present
scope and design of Parties may seem to give us the best light (if we can
discover it) into modern opinions, what to judge of them. I will therefore here
endeavor to detect that of the Socinians, (as far as I am able) because it
stands in my way now, and is like to stand in my light hereafter, (as I
proceed) if I do not utterly remove it.

The design of Socinianism is not to destroy all Religion, without which they
could not make a Sect; nor yet to deny the Gospel in express terms, (lest they
be questioned of Judaism or Mahumetism, which would work nothing else to their
purpose besides a prejudice) but by consequence only. Yet because they draw as
near to the Borders of Atheism as those of Poland do to the Grand Seignior's,
they have a mighty ^orce (as it were) of Cossacks, that pretend indeed as if
they were of that Sect, but really hang betwixt that and utter Atheism. Their
main foundation is, That men might and may be saved by the light of Nature in
things Divine and moral.

To second which Hypothesis, E praelectionibus th^olog. F. S^cini Senensis,
sparsim.
amongst others, these are some of the chief, First* That men argue so from
Scripture, a^^f they did (in effect) but adhere to their own opinions,
according to their light of reason, or capacity of reasoning; taking only the
Subject of it to furnish their apprehensions with some more probable matter of
believing, and generally seem to adhere unto that common reason, whereof they
accuse Socinians only. Secondly, That there is not naturally a sense of the
Being and Providence of God in men, but that it is a matter of Faith only to
believe that God is. Heb. 11.6.
. Thirdly, That natural Religion is only moral, and that he which is just shall
be saved, though he believe not whether there be a God or no; and to believe
more, they are only bound to whom more has been revealed. Fourthly, That there
was no such thing as original righteousness in Adam (but only innocence) before
the Fall; nor as original sin, ensuing thereupon, or any imputation of his sin
at all to his Posterity: (For he holds that Adam was mortal in Paradise, though
he might have been continued in life, or have been translated if he had not
si^ned that sin (though he did others in inordinate affections, at the least,
before) and that his Posterity was little the worse for it, although somewhat.)
Fifthly, That Christ (though a more Divine Person than any other) neither
justly could, nor did satisfy for sin; so that his righteousness can be any
way said to be imputed: but that men are justified by simple condonation only.
Sixthly, That he was given to us, chiefly as an example, to show us that way to
Heaven, which else it would have been hard for us to find. Seventhly, That as
Adam had freewill before he fell, so all his Posterity has still; since there
is no cause why he should be deprived of it by his Fall, nor the nature of the
thing it self, nor of Divine Justice so admitting. Eighthly, That by the right
use of this, a man may obey the Divine Law. Ninthly, That Predestination unto
life is of such as shall do so, according to the foreknowledge of God. Tenthly,
That such foreknowledge relieth on no Decree, Cui ^nim usui, obsecro, is^a
praenotio esset? Annon fatis est, D^^n c^n^la regere perpetu^, ac g^b^^nare,
n^^ ^pso plan^ nelente quidquam fieri posse? S^a cura ubique semper, ^ta
scientia, ac potentia sua praest^ esse, ut omnes ho^inis conatus and
perspicere, and si sibi visum suerit, impedire posse^, insin^^aque sua
sa^i^ntia (^uicquid homo ^^oliatur, aut moliri (...)) omnia ad sui gloriam
(...); and qua rationi, prout hominis conatus suerit, sibi, ag^ndu^ sit, ja^,
ant^a, si it^ placet, constituisse? cap. 9.
but is like to the foresight only of a prudent man, including no contingences.

Now according unto these Principles, if Christ himself was not made a
S^crifice for sin, (nor needed) but only suffered martyrdom, as the Prophets
before, to instruct us in the way of patience, meekness, Cap. 10. respondend^
ad 1 Pet. 1.20.
or the like (as Socinus teaches more expressly afterward) what should they do
but talk contemptuously of Sacrifices from the first to the last, as indeed
they do? For what say others of his Followers? When we urge them thus, Would
such a righteous man as Abel imbrue his hands in the blood of a Beast, and burn
it, as an Offering acceptable unto God, if it had been no way revealed to him,
that with such Sacrifices God was well pleased? ^^ Outram. ubi supra.
Nobis, inquiunt, quibus alii mores, aliae Religiones inveter^runt, non est
temere judicandum, tanto temporis intervallo, quid alteri in mentem venire
posset, praesertim eorum, quae non sunt contra Naturae Leges, qualia utique
erant Sacrificia; ut quae Deus, qui nihil unquam contra Nature Leges jussit,
populo Hebraeo imperabat. To us, say they, who are inured unto other manners,
and religious Rites, it is in vain to judge rashly, after so long a time, what
might come into the mind of another man, especially about such things which are
not contrary to the Laws of Nature, as Sacrifices were not, since God commanded
them unto the Hebrew people. Agedum, igitur, jam cominus agamus.

CHAP. IV. That the Arguments of Socinians are taken from two of the weakest
Topics. A distinction offered to detect the first fallacy, betwixt a Law
imperative and indicative. That Sacrifices were of the latter sort, proved,
first, Because in all Ages God prescribed his own worship, and accepted no
other. Secondly, Because illumination (in this case) preceded Sacrifice,
showed, 1. By the manner of acceptance of Cain's Offering.
I Would fain come indeed to handyblows with my Adversary, but that I cannot
but remember that the Romans themselves could scarce at last get any advantage
against Hannibal in that way, because he fought more by subtilty and slight.
Nor is there any great force in a Serpent, Outram. in Praes. libri de
Sacrif^ci^s.
when he is displayed, Ita scilicet Socini Discipuli, quoties urgentur sacris
literis, vel ad verborum ambiguitatem, vel ad sensus quosdam tralatitios,
tanquam in Castra se recipient, as my Author speaks. When the Socinians are
urged with the Scriptures, they betake themselves to ambiguity of words, or to
certain wrested expositions, as it were into their Holds. You may partly guess
(from the beginning) what art they need to send and prove, when you shall have
once observed, that all their Arguments arise from two of the weakest Topics,
viz. A negativo ad positivum generale; from a negative to a positive Conclusion
general, that because no Law is expressly recorded, therefore there was none. 2.
A possibili ad necessarium, that because it was not impossible, but that by the
light of Nature (reasoning and excogitating) the Offering of Sacrifice might
come into their minds, that therefore it must needs be so, and no otherwise.

Temere ab ^is sactum judicant, qui Lege aliqua a Deo lata, cujas neque Moses,
neque alius quisqua^ Scri^or^m ve^^rum osquam ^neminit, primo sacrificatum
sla^^^t. Prorsus enim incredibile esse, omnes plane Scriptores sacros ^iulmodi
si qua esset, Legem que primis omnium hominum parentibus eorhinque posteris a
Deo ipso lata^suerit; quase nullius momenti rem, tacit praeloire ^^l^isse. ubi
supr. l. 1. c. 1.
To the first Argument therefore, That because there is no Law commanding
Sacrifices expressly recorded, there was no such. Or, (as my Author amplifies
it, according unto their sense, and not his own) That it is incredible that God
should have ordained such a Law unto posterity, and that Moses and all other
sacred Writers should pretermit it as a thing of no moment, and that it is a
rash thing to introduce imaginary Laws. It is to be answered, That it is
sallacia in homonymia, and may be solved easily by distinguishing betwixt Laws
imperative and indicative: for as it is a rashness to introduce the former,
without showing of the express Precept; so it is a like rashness to deny the
other (by way of true construction) as made more in favor than the other; and
implying the same authority and hazard, in case of violation, as the other.
Wherefore under the name of a Law we must know that a Rule, direction,
intimation, or any signification whatsoever, from a Sovereign power, obtains
the name of a Law indifferently, to all his loyal Subjects, without any Act or
Edict whatsoever. For who will dare to disobey the nod of a Prince (if he may
understand it right) without the pain of displeasure, or other penalties? Who
will venture to keep his place, if a General point with his Staff or Finger,
directing any motion? And that this Law of Sacrifices was of this latter sort,
I am ready now not only to prove, but to demonstrate unto any clear and
unprejudiced man, by these two irrefragable Arguments; 1. Because, though God
in all Ages left to humane prudence the ordering of such things as were
agreeable only unto humane order, yet he never suffered it (so depraved
especially as it is since the Fall) to excogitate any way of worship
whatsoever; much less an entire way to please him, such as Sacrifice, with all
its appurtenances, ever was. Which if I take for the assumption of my Argument,
I believe it will not be denied in its kind. Ergo, The Offering of Sacrifices
could not be of any men's excogitation.

The major likewise will hold its own, unless an instance can be given in any
other thing besides Sacrifice it self, which I believe cannot be done. And if
they still insist no less on that than before, we say, It is very strange that
so important a thing as Sacrifice (about which, God afterward establishing but
a better order, destroyed Nadab and Abihu for offering strange fire before the
Lord, Lev. 10.1.
which he commanded them not) should be the sole exception.

But if it be said further, Why might not God (accepting of Sacrifices, which
men had offered of their own accord) after make an Ordinance of them, as Christ
himself did of Baptism, in use among the Jews before? Or of the Bread and Wine
that was used at the Passover, to frame his own Supper by it, according to
their use? I answer, That for Baptism, if it had been grounded in Pharisaical
washings, it would have availed the Objectors somewhat; but that which was
grounded on the Law, and warranted by it before, might well be taken out, and
varied by the Giver of the Law. And so for the Lords Supper; when he abolished
the Passover, he took Bread and Wine out of it, as he had taken a Rib out of
Adam, and made another Creature. There is not the least of humane invention
therefore left in either of these, having both their first Originals from God,
before men were conversant about them. In sine, if it be urged, That if
Sacrifices were by no Law, it remains that they must needs have their Original
from the apprehensions of men, bethinking themselves what service was proper
for them to offer unto their Maker, Lord of life and death and all; and that
none appeared like to Sacrifices of living Creatures, and Oblation of other
precious things: they shall then make way for my second Argument, viz. That,

Secondly, Because illumination came between, therefore Sacrifices must needs
be from God, and not of man. In which I shall be put to prove, first, That
illumination came in, and, secondly, that it amounted to a Law; and then I
shall be rid of this too.

Now in the touching upon this Point, methinks I cannot but foresee that my
Adversaries are ready to compound with me by some concession, viz. That God is
not deficient to them that use their right reason, to illuminate them some way;
yet as by the use of their own natural reason, and not by ungrounded infusions,
or outward revelations, any more than he did in the Case of Bezaleel, (whom he
filled with the Spirit of God, Exodus 31.3, 5.
in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, to fit all things for the
Tabernacle) and yet he wrought as an Artist still. But I am not so much afraid
of my Argument, as to admit of any composition with them. I grant to them
likewise that Bezaleel was enabled and overruled (so as they say) to
workmanship only; but I say, That neither he nor any other did ever begin or
continue any true way of worship, without a previous revelation, in an
extraordinary manner, from God.

It cannot be denied (in the first place) but, That if illumination may be a
medium betwixt an imperative Law, and the use of reason, that then there may be
(what we call) an indicative Law, betwixt these extremes, amounting in effect
unto some express of positive Command. Let us therefore begin with this, and
show, first, That there was such a thing; secondly, That it amounted to as high
a Law to the First Adam to sacrifice, as this word did after the Second Adam
had spoken it, As often as you do this, do it in remembrance of me.

First, The first appears, viz. That there was illumination before Sacrifice,
these two ways:

1. In that Cain's Sacri^ice was not forbidden, when it did not please God for
the manner of the Offering; for the Text says, Genesis 4.
that after, God had respect to the Offering of Abel, and not of Cain; so that
his countenance fell. God was so far from excusing his obedience, that he
rather put him in mind to amend it than to refrain, If thou do well, says he,
shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door;
(and Cain knew what that was by his Father Adam's punishment for sin) but if
thou do well, unto thee shall be Abel's desire, and thou shall rule over him.
Judge you therefore, whether Cain or Abel first invented sacrificing. If it had
been wicked Cain, would God have spoken so indifferently to him? If it had been
righteous Abel, the younger Brother, whom Cain hated, would not Cain have
disdained to take example from him? But unto such straits are these reduced,
who because they do not read that Adam sacrificed, would take it for granted
that he did not at all; and so that Adam lived without any Form of Religion,
(it may be a hundred years or more) till his Sons invented one. Let us hear one
of their Quotations to prove it, R. Levi Ben Gerson ad Genesis cap. 4. in h^c
verba, (...) i. e. Cainus and Abel viri valde sapientes erant: atque i^a
sactum, utcum ad laborum suorum sinem pervenissent, uterque ex facultatibussuis
munus Deo off^rret, etc.
from a Jewish Rabbin, which they take to be pat unto their purpose. Cain and
Abel, says he, were very wise men; [whereas the Scripture notes the
wickedness and folly of the first, and the righteous simplicity only of the
latter] and it came to pass when they came to the end of their labors, they
either of them offered a Present unto God, out of their increase [as viz. Cain
when his Fruits were ripe, and Abel when his Ewes had yeaned, once or twice a
year] and the reason of such Oblations, as it seems to me (says the Rabbin)
was this, Because they knew that all things were created and governed by God,
as the true cause of all. But Abrabenel thinks that Adam also sacrificed as
well as his Sons; both forgetting that God did afterward require daily
Sacrifices, and that not only as Presents, but as matter of atonement and
expiation for sin: as he had expressly told their Forefathers, Lev. 17.11.
The life of the flesh in the blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar,
to make an atonement for your souls; for it is the blood that makes an
atonement for the soul. However the modern Rabbis would blanch the matter, to
make their own way more plausible unto the (...)Gentiles, or out of hatred to
Christianity; because we say, and prove, That their bloud-shedding of old, was
a Type of the blood of our Christ, to be shed, once for all, in the latter days.

But indeed the Sentiments of such Reprobate Jews are most agreeable to
Socinus's Disciples, Socinos ^bi supra, respondendo ad 1 Pet. 1.20.
who hold, That Christ was no Sacrifice, nor made any atonement for sin, nor was
absolutely decreed to be crucified at all (notwithstanding that express place,
Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world; but was
manifest in these last times for you) but foreseen only; or, if decreed at all,
conditionally, that if men did sin, then Christ should be given to be slain.
For why? To make one sin more than was before, but not one less!

CHAP. V. The 2. way laid down to show an indicative Command, viz. Abel's
Offering by a twofold Faith, First, Of the Object, viz. his Duty to sacrifice,
which faith he had in common with Cain. Secondly, Of the promise, which was
siducial, wherein his Sacrifice excelled, as being offered with blood (which
Cain's was not) and with respect to Christ. The Socinian varnish washed off.
The second Head proved, viz. That Sacrifices were by a certain Law ab origin,
because a certain penalty accrued to the omission of them before the Law of
Moses.
2. BUT for that which we are to allege, as the second way whereby it may
appear, That there was some indicative or implicit precept, involved in some
gracious revelation from Christ himself, (as the eternal Word of God) previous
unto these' Sacrifices, the Adversaries have been made sensible, and are well
aware of it: I mean the Sacrifice of Abel, more accepted than his Brothers.
Which having been said by St Paul (or the Author to the Hebrews) to have been
offered unto God by faith, Heb. 11.4.
as a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain's; by which he obtained witness that
he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts; and by it, he being dead yet
speaks: we may clearly conclude, That he sacrificed in a right obedience to
some gracious intimation of the good pleasure of God, which was instead of an
imperative Command, if there were none (though we conceive there might be,
though it be not mentioned) before. On that therefore we will not insist,
because it is not to be proved; but on the intimation, or indicative Command,
we will proceed and answer their dilutions.

Let it be observed that Socinus does not call in Question the Authority of
this Epistle (whatsoever the Arrians did, Vt neq^e Crellius, qui in han^
Epistola^ vary Commentatus aut commentus est.
whose Heresy he absorbs, together with the Pelagian) since he quotes it to
prove (as I noted before) that the knowledge of God is not by Nature, but by
Faith; for without faith (says the Author) it is impossible to please God. For
he that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. And he also says, that by faith Abel offered
unto God. Is not this argumentum ad hominem, if after this he affirm (as his
Followers do) that Sacrifices were of humane excogitation only? For cannot God
be known but by faith? And can Abel offer by faith, and yet according unto
humane excogitation only (reasoning in it self what was fittest to be done, and
so doing) which in Socinus's sense is taken to be an exclusion of faith, and
directly contrary to it?

And if Abel had offered without faith, the Apostle testifies that he could not
have pleased God; but in that he did please him, with a witness he shows, that
it was by such a faith as Cain had not, though he could not have offered
without revelation neither. Now when the Apostle says, that without faith it is
impossible to please God, we will take Socinus's Grant for a ground, viz. That
the true object of Faith is some kind of supernatural revelation, and not any
thing that is excogitated by a rational man; so that if Abel had offered
without such a revelation, he had sinned; nay, if he had but done such a thing
in doubt, whether he had warrant for it, or no; those other words of the
Apostle might have been sit to be applied, Romans 14.23.
He that doubts is damned in the case: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.
Wherefore Cain sinned not in sacrificing, according to the revelation of God to
his Father Adam; for he sacrificed with faith, or belief of the Duty to be
done, and he obeyed the outward part, as many men do at this day (who have not
the faith of Abel, or of right Believers) but he sinned in his hypocrisy,
having malice in his heart, and no love to God, nor respect unto his promise.
And this you may take for a good reason why his Sacrifice could not be so
acceptable as his Brothers. For it is manifest by the Text, Genesis 4.3.4.
that he offered only of the fruit of the ground an Offering unto the Lord;
whether it were a viler or a fairer Offering, it makes no matter (let the
Rabbis In oblationibus spontaneis, holocaustis itid^m spontaneis, and votis
(pro vario personarum, ac rerum discrimine) praeter preces, gratiarum actiones,
benedictiones, constitisse cultum illum Divinum, ad quem genus humanum
obligatum esse voluere Ebraei, idque ^x jure naturali. -- In holocaustis autem
cruentis, seu a^imalium sacrisiciis, ^g^e omnino consumendis, part
nullapolluta, sex comesa... atque tune temporis (sc. ante Noacbum) sacrificia
illa ignita ex jussu, seu inspiratione Numinis, originem habuerunt... Et totum
animal pro victima oblatum, excoriatum tamen pro more, and dissectum [Tamen
quaere number Abrabamus ita fecerit, cum arietem pro Isaaco immolaret]
concremandum erat, in gratiarum actionem, favoris conciliationem, peccatorum
expiationem, velut per symbolum... Vnde Abel primogenita Ovium, ^aque optima in
holocaustum immolavit, Numinique sic placuit: Cainus vero tantum absuit ab hoc
tam eximio Numinis hominibus indultu agnos^^^do ut nondum admitteret animantium
immolationem; ac si baberet caedem licitam magis fuisse, as homicidium; parilem
enim (ut Ebraei reserunt) hominibus censuit, ac animantibus caeteris fuisse
exitum. Atque inde cum res viliores, seu fruges terrae obtulit, ^o demum nomine
Deo displicuit. Ut Seldenus, ubi supra, ex Rabbinis.
argue that) but Abel brought of the firstlings, or firstborn) of his flock,
and of the fat thereof, and the Lord had respect unto Abel and his Offering;
but not to Cain's. Why, wherein was the difference? Abel offered with
bloud-shedding, but Cain a dry Offering, Heb. 9.22.
And without shedding of blood there is no remission. Abel's Offering was like
the humble supplication of the Publican, a Sinner; Cain's like the Pharisees,
who offered praises more than prayers, as if he had no need of mercy. Abel had
respect to Christ; for so he is reckoned in the Catalogue among the rest, Heb.
11.39.
And all these having obtained a good report through faith, received not the
promise, but eyed and expected it. But since Cain was fallen into the
temptation of the first Tempter, the Serpent, he could have but little comfort
in looking forward toward this (which made against him) viz. That the seed of
the woman should break the Serpents head.

And is this the reason why Socinianizers would be content to take that blind
Gloss of the Hebrews, for sense enough to be made of those words, viz. That
they import no more but that men should hate Serpents, and Serpents men; and
that they should lie in wait for one another? Or to hold, That there was no
such thing as a Sin-Offering (but only Peace Offerings at the most, or
Oblations of Gifts and Presents, without a Type) before Moses? Or, That men
were never at all justified by their Offering of Sacrifice in Faith? But let us
hear what they say now to this instance of Cain and Abel? Tantum abesse
judicant, at hic laudata Abelis fides explicato ullo Dei jussu niteretur, ut
boc ex loco contrarium potius effici posse arbitrentur, etc. A p. Outr. l. 1.
c. 1.. 4.
They say, That this place, wherein the says of Abel is commended, is so far
from proving that it did rely on any explicated Command of God, that the
contrary may be rather proved from it. For if Abel sacrificed in obedience to
some Law of God, what shall we judge of Cain? For if he sacrificed on the same
account that Abel did, he had the same Faith that Abel had, which is quite
contrary to the Apostle. The Answer rises of its own accord from what has
been said before, That ( secundum fidem credendam) he offered with the same
faith that Abel did, but ( secundum fidem qua creditur, seu qua debuit credere)
he offered without any such faith at all, as the Apostle speaks of in that
Chapter. Thus a multitude partake of the Lords Supper, believing it to be his
body and blood; but a few receive in faith: yet all are bound to come that
profess any hope in Christ, or any interest in him. And if we say, That Cain
sacrificed according to the faith of his Father Adam, more properly than his
own; it may well be said further, Whether there was an explicit Command or
not, yet he had an implicit Faith at least, to believe as the Church believes.

2. Now that these reve^^tions amounted to no less than a positi^^ or
imperative Law, remains to be showed next, by this (as invincible an Argument
as any other) Where there is no Law, Romans 4.15.
there is no transgression; and where there is no transgression, there is no
legal penalty; but where there may be manifest transgression and just
punishment, there an undoubted Law must be presumed, or the Government called
in question about the equity of the matter. The Law of Moses was not given till
they came into the Wilderness; Exodus 5.3.
but in order to their marching thitherwards, God commanded Moses to speak thus
unto Pharaoh, The Lord God of the Hebrews has met with us; let us go, we pray
thee, three days journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the Lord our God,
lest he fall upon us with pestilence or the sword. Ergo, This Law was ab
origin to the people of God, viz. That they should offer Sacrifice unto him,
for their own good, or at their peril. The Lord Christ, when he instituted his
Communion (as I noted before) only gently said, As often as you do this, etc. And
it has been let pass for an Ordinance of his: and there is no penalty upon the
omission of that, though the Apostle lets them know that for the sake of eating
and drinking unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.30.
many were weak and sick amongst them, and many slept. But in this Case
omission only is to be punished with extreme mortality.

CHAP. VI. Socinus's second Topic propounded to be examined, viz. Whether,
because men might possibly invent Sacrifices, as not against the Law of Nature,
it must needs follow that they had their rise from thence. A contrary way of
arguing propounded, by way of demonstration, and the subtilty of his way noted.
That there were diverse other Laws before Moses, in force; showed also that he
did not record the Laws, but the practice only.
AND now, that I may bring Socinus (or his Adherents) off with the more
advantage or disadvantage, which may happen, since we have contrary designs;
they to admit as little need of Christ, and so, to do as little honor to him,
as needs must; and we do him all the Right that the Scriptures or the Catholic
Church has ever done: I come to his second Topic, A possibili ad necessarium,
that because it was possible (or not impossbile, but) that by the light of
Nature (reasoning and excogitating what was fit to be done in honor to the
great Creator, to set up some conspicuous service to be performed to him) the
Offering of Sacrifices might come into their minds, that therefore it must
needs be so, and no otherwise; there being nothing in it contrary to the Law of
Nature, since God did afterward confirm it.

In answering of their former reasoning, from a particular Negative to a
general Affirmative, we proceeded by the way that is as strong as theirs was
slight; I mean, by demonstration from the effects to the cause (the same way
that we prove a God) for where there was example, encouragement and penalty
demonstrated, there the Law it self (the cause of these) was also demonstrated,
by a necessary consequence. And so in handling this their other Topic, A
possibili ad necessarium, I shall go near to requite them by arguing quite
contrary, A necessario ad impossible.

But, first, What kind of arguing is this? There is no Command revealed about a
matter of such moment as sacrificing; and therefore there was none, nor any
reason to be given why such a thing should be omitted. And yet to say that it
is possible and likely (of as great moment as it is)that men should find it out
by the use of right reason, whereas this is less revealed than the other? And
less reason to be given why or how it should be first devised? We say still, it
was absolutely necessary, that after the Fall there should be sacrificing; but
that it was utterly impossible that man should invent it of himself. And if
Socinus does not ground his own Hypothesis upon Scripture, wherefore does he
call for Scripture, Scripture? And when we show him Scripture, what avails it
in the case of Sacrifices, when he shall set the same reason that invented
them, above the Scriptures; giving it authority to expound them (not so as
right reason, but) as the reason of Socinus shall allow? Is not this to appeal
always to himself? And what has he deserved of the truth, that we (that revere
the Scripture indeed) should defer so much authority to him? Do we not see that
he alleges Scripture only to baulk us, and admits it not to inform
himself? But let us appeal, however, unto such as will hearken what the
Scripture says, and believe it.

Genesis 22.2.13.
Was not Abraham expressly commanded to offer up his Son Isaac, and did not God
provide him of a Ram in the stead of his Son? Genesis 22.2, 13.
And, said not God unto Jacob, -- 35.1.
Go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an Altar unto God? The
Question is, Whether God commanded these things, because Cain (suppose) being a
very wise man, had invented them before, or because God himself had commanded
the like before; what do you think? Is it more reasonable that men should
prescribe a modus of his own worship unto God, or he to men? Or do you think it
proper that God himself should second a project of the wicked Cain, or the
decayed Adam?

And what though the first Law be not recorded, (as many Laws of England,
depending on the ancientest Customs of all, are not; and yet are held to be
such, as out of which Magna Charta was composed, and which, without so much as
mention in any Statute, are accounted to be prime Law amongst us) does it
therefore follow that there was none? What think you of Murder before Noah?
Genesis 38.9.24.
of burning for Adultery afterward? or of the Law of Leviration, obliging the
Brother surviving to raise up Seed unto his Brother; for the breach of which,
God Almighty being provoked (besides the other aggravation) cut off Onan in his
prime? Show me the Laws, if you are able; and yet they were of such moment,
that their breach (you see) was Capital. I instance in Laws (which is ad idem
to the Question) since it nothing moves them when we show, That diverse things
are recorded in the New Testament as delivered by Moses, (who was directed unto
brevity) which we cannot find at all in him: Jude 14.
as Enoch's Prophecy, Lot's perturbations for the wicked Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.5,
7, 8.
Noah's preaching to the old World, etc. In a word, the fourth Chapter of
Genesis was not the place wherein Moses was to set down the Law of Sacrifices,
which he was after to reform.

So that these two Points remain, in the whole, to discover the fallacies of
our Adversary, and to vindicate the truth, viz. first, That after the Fall,
Sacrifices were absolutely necessary toward the reparation. Secondly, That it
is utterly improbable, and morally impossible, that any man should invent them;
so that from the very first they should have been acceptable unto God on that
account.

CHAP. VII. What makes the Socinians talk so slightly of Sacrifices. The
inconcinnity and implications of their opinion, in part detected.
IN this it is that the Socinians trifle much, when they talk (profanely)
concerning Sacrifices, as if they had been but complemental or superstitious
things; nay, but fond in their imaginations, and such as they should have never
liked if they had lived then: which will represent their opinion to the more
prejudice, if it shall at last appear that God himself was the Director of them
only as a merciful remedy for man. But what though? Will they be any more
ashamed in this, than in their sleighting of both the Sacraments of the New
Testament, (of which they acknowledge Christ himself to have been the Author)
while they drive them to another scope, and question the necessity of their
continuance? For what is there in water now, more than in fire before? or in
Bread and Wine now, more than in the Cakes and Libaments, with the flesh and
blood of Sheep, before?

They say, (as it were by a scomma or a sarcasm) Nobis, quibus alii mores, etc.
To us, Vt supra, cap. 3.
that are inured unto other manners and religious Rites for a long time, it is
in vain to judge, after so long a time before, what might come into the mind of
another concerning Sacrifices; as if Adam and the Patriarchs were no other in
their account but as old exotic Heathens, that had invented some way of
worship: acknowledging, however, lest they should be free in any part from
contradiction, Haec, and hujusmodi instituta, quae ratio naturalis excogitavit,
tanquam ad conspicuum Dei cultum, Ita nimirumprimevoshomines naturae lumine
institutos judicant, ut cultum, and honorem conspicuum Deo adhibendum viderent,
idque optime si^ri potuisse, si quod quisque optimum habuit, id ritu sacro Deo
redderet. Ibid.
satis apta suisse, and idonea. That these Sacrifices, and what pertained to
them, were apt and proper enough (though invented by men) to render a certain
kind of conspicuous service unto God.

And so when they say, It is no wonder that they should consume these
consecrated things by fire; for how else could they prevent their reservation
(possibly) unto profane uses, after once they had been dedicated? They
themselves, that pretend to take their refuges in reason, do but raise us unto
admiration of their considence, when they tell us, that there is no wonder in
such a thing, whereof they can give no other but an illusory or ridiculous
reason, while they say, There is no wonder. For if this be strange to us, how
it should come into the Patriarchs heads, to think to please God, by slaying of
a Beast, without such revelation; how should it seem less strange, that burning
it, when they had done, should enter into the same heads, for any one reason
more than another? Certes, the reason which these Socinians give, viz. That
nothing might remain of that which they had thus devoted unto God, does but
edge upon the brim of two other contradictions of their own, or some of theirs.
Hec enim sic intellig^ volunt, ut sinis di^rum Cai^o messis ^xitus esset: Abeli
aut^^ tempus illud, qua pecorum setu au^tus erat. sect. 5.
For they say, That Cain brought only of the fruits of the Ground at the end of
Harvest; explaining themselves so, as if they did not think he burnt them,
(whatsoever he did with them) nor is it likely that he ^id: nay, in after
times, God accepted of diverse kinds of Gifts and Offerings, which were not to
be consumed; but conserved rather for his Priests, or for his Tabernacle, or
Temple, and the Utensils and Ornaments thereof. And as for Abel, Hugo Grotius,
not to be excused of favoring them in this particular opinion (however it
stand in others) does upon the matter bring it into Question, Whether Abel
himself o^fered by fire.

For being pressed with this Argument, That if there had not been some
revelation from God, men would scarce have thought of offering their own food
to God, (which anciently were the only Offerings) he being of the opinion, That
the old World (so much given to the flesh) did eat none before the Flood; falls
upon this broken shift to say, That Abel offered not the flesh it self, but
only the Milk and fine Wool thereof. ( Cujus tamen sententiae, says my Author,
nescio an quenquam adjutorem habeat.) But in the mean time he leaves us as much
to admire what he did with the Beast, if he did not burn it, being slain: Did
he rather bury it, to withold a Sacrifice by fire? Or did he spare all his
Flock to be immortal, while Man alone was subject to mortality? Or what need
had Abel to bring such Sacrifices as these but once a year, the profits whereof
arose daily? Or how was Abel's Sacrifice of more value than Cain's? Or indeed,
a thousand Head of Sheep or Cattle of any great worth, if their Flesh were not?
Which of the contradictions of these rational Querists shall we embrace, since
they cannot all hold together, nor yet agree one with another? In fine, if such
a conceit as this might by natural reason have entered into the heads of some of
the Ancients, it is a wonder why it should not into theirs also, who set Dishes
before their Idols (to which some passages of the Prophets seem to allude) for
them to feed upon? For if they had thought of burning them, the Priests, who
would not defraud their own Genius's, could not have defrauded their Idols in
the Night. Or why might not we, at this day, have discovered such an use of
consuming by fire those Presents, which the Chinese, Tartars, or Americans do
offer unto their Pagods?? which I cannot learn to be true from the report of
Travelers, although they make fires, and rings, and feasts, and the like, as
barbarous people have been still accustomed. But I will tell you more anon, why
God required and directed fire; and not He that was to be tormented with it
hereafter, together with all his Accomplices.

CHAP. VIII. The sum of our opinion related in the words of Eusebius
Caesariensis. Slight exceptions against them noted. Our opinion stated more at
large. That it implies an inconvenience to oppose Socinus, and our opinion too.
The Subject of the next Chapter laid down.
Point I.
BUT to come up closely to the Question: Our first Parents, after their
transgression, must either fall immediately to sacrificing, (especi^lly by
fire) or else yield themselves to go into that fire of Hell, which they had
deserved without remedy. Neither have we forgotten that all this comes in upon
occasion of showing how they repented, believed and were restored unto Grace by
the Church, whereof the promised seed was the Head, in the use of the means of
Grace. To proceed therefore in our purpose.

The sum of all is contained in that passage of Eusebius, quoted by my Author
(though by him so qualified, as if either Party might take their advantage of
it, and ^bound in their own sense; which we (for our parts) think ought not to
be left to an indifferent liberty.) I do not think (says he) that the thought
of sacrificing came by chance, (...). Eusebius. Caesariens. de them. Evang. l. 1.
c. 10.
or by design of man. For the godly (then) and such as were familiarly
acquainted with God, and were enlightened by his Divine Spirit in their souls,
sa^ what manner of need they had of a great means of healing, for the doing
away [or expiation] of their mortal sins; and therefore thought a recompense
was to be made [or a redemption] for their salvation, to the Giver of life and
soul. And since they had nothing better or more worthy than their own souls to
consecrate unto God, in the stead of these they sacrificed unreasonable Beasts,
laying down [or offering] up their lives as hostages [or pledges] for their own.

There are two shifts obtended over this authority to avoid the manifest
pertinency and cogency of it. First, That he makes no mention of inanimate
Offerings in the Case; but it is confessed that he had spoken somewhat of them
before, viz. That they availed little to the Point in hand, the expiation of
sin.

Secondly, That he does not say, that the Beasts which Abel, Noah, or Abraham
sacrificed, were offered unto God, explicata aliqua ipsius Lege, by any
manifest Law of his; but only by some Divine enlightening (it may be) of their
minds, not common unto all, but imparted only unto some of the best of men: And
this they think makes not at all against their own supposition. Which trifling
baffling, I shall also endeavor to uncase presently, that when I do proceed I
may the sooner wind up all that does remain of this Argument upon its last
bottom.

We say in sum, That the Law of sacrificing was revealed unto Adam, and no
other; and only taught by, and derived from him: That no Sacrifice apart was
ever of any avail at all, without respect to that which was made by blood. And
we have proved how the first illumination or direction amounted to a Law; and
shall show the manner, in order, as we can come to it. We utterly reject the
fallacious insinuation, as if only extraordinary men did sacrifice; and we say,
That Cain and all his did sacrifice (one way or other) as well as Seth, there
being no need of any second illumination. But the main subtilty lies about the
(...) of the first, viz. Whether Adam and Eve did excogitate Sacrifice, or no;
and if they did, Whether by their own natural reasons, with nothing else but
some remote assistance of illumination, such as a man may have by study? When
we therefore say further, That Sacrifices were absolutely necessary after the
Fall, for the reparation of Adam and his Posterity; we must distinguish against
the Sons of Cain, or the Magnifiers of his Sacrifice by inanimate things (if
they were of more worth) above Abel's, which was by the choicest Animals that
he had; as if both alike were no more but returns of thanks to God, by a
visible token, for his outward benefits, according to their several kinds: I
say, we must distinguish betwixt Sacrifices of expiation, or atonement for sin,
(which they deny) and those others, whatsoever they were, that were
Propitiatory only, or Eucharistical. And we say, That they were all absolutely
necessary (but especially the first) and all alike revealed, before they could
be tendered unto God.

Now why Socinus thinks so meanly or indifferently of Sacrifices, as not
belonging to salvation, is not far to seek. For he holds, (as we have hinted
before) 1. That the light of Nature alone, without this excogitation, was
sufficient; 2. That natural Religion is only moral, which Sacrifices are not;
3. That there is no such thing as expiation, or satisfaction for sin; but that
it is done away by merely pard^ning: Qui Socini^norum Scripta leg^rit, ita de
morte I^s^ Chris^i, ita de illius Sacrificio (quod ^ morte ejus semper
sejungunt) judicasse sentiet, ut alteri omnem plane detraxerint poenae vicari^e
rationem, nihilque nobis gratiae apud Deum al^^ro impetratum exislimaverint: ut
qui licet mortis ejus vi^^ aliquo modo circa Deum, vim tamen Sacrificii ejus
circa bomines primo versari statuerint. Outram. in Praf. --
4. That Christ (therefore) s^^^^red no vicarious punishment for sin, ^^gured
by any Sacrifices, which themselves impor^ed no such matter; but that he was
only sacrificed as a good man for the public good. But what should move any
man to grant unto Socinus, that Sacrifices might be found out by men; and that
they became not figurative, or expiatory, until Moses, and yet oppose him; I
cannot imagine, unless it be to gratify a more modern Father; or because they
are well enough assured of sufficient Arguments (besides) out of the Old and
New Testaments, to overthrow the Socinian suppositions; and so to let this
opinion of revelation go how it may to them that are fonder of it; suppose some
or other of the Calvinists.

Let it favor or disfavour any Party whatsoever (as it may happen) I doubt not
but that passage of Eusebius, which I have borrowed from my Author, contains
the Catholic Doctrine; to be seconded by the authority of more Fathers, when I
come to prove, Vnam esse omnium fidem. In the mean while, (in prosecution of my
first Argument, set down in the close of the sixth, and beginning of the last
Chapter) I shall endeavor to show, 1. How this revelation of the will of God
concerning Sacrifices may be conceived; and then, 2. That it was necessary to
be received and obeyed.

CHAP. IX. The Offering of Sacrifice revealed, 1. By the light of Grace. The
ends of Sacrifice showed, and the true reason of consuming it by fire. 2. By
the light of Prophecy, as the Day of Christ to Abraham. That hereupon our first
Parents must needs obey.
1. FOR the first, we may conceive two ways, whereby it pleased God to reveal
his will unto Adam, concerning Sacrifices, as a means of his recovery,

Lumine Gratiae, and Lumine Prophetiae.
First, In a way of Grace and Mercy; which was not so obscurely as obliquely
tendered to him. For after his Fall, Expositors have observed, that Gods
beginning with the Serpent first, to sentence him (who was the first in fault)
imported a reservation of greater mercy to them that were but drawn in, and so
betrayed. And when he had said, Genesis 3.14.
I will put enmity betwixt the Woman (a Type of the Church) and the Serpent
(the Devil) and betwixt his Seed (the Reprobate World) and her Seed (the Elect)
that they were given out of hand to understand that they should not dye
presently, as they had deserved; but should live to see a various Seed. And
when they heard, in the close, that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the
head of Satan, whereas his Seed should only bruise the heel of the other, by
temporal tribulations; they had light enough given them to perceive that they
should not only obtain a redemption by that blessed Seed promised, but also a
certain Victory at the last: which some of the ancient Rabbis understood as
relating to their Messiah. But if any one will rather choose to be frivolous
with the modern Jews, it is in vain to stand to beat the truth into them with a
Mallet.

Surely, none found the effects more of God's severity or goodness, imported in
the whole judgment, than our first Parents themselves; since they both suffered
more troubles in the flesh, and obtained more favor than any of their
Posterity. Sidetrahas primos 60. annos Mathus^lae, aetatem p^rfectam
praecedentes, sacile inde conjici potest, quanto longior ^^erit Adae vita. In
sent. did 17.. 1.
For (as Estius counts) Adam was a longer Liver (being created in perfection)
of nine hundred and thirty years, than Me^husalah of nine hundred forty nine;
who began not to procreate (for ought appears) till seventy; Genesis 5.15. Only
Mabaleel began to generate at 65.
unless it be said, that Children of lesser note are wholly omitted in the
Genealogy.

Wherefore, when our first Parents saw themselves delivered from the utmost
fear to some certain hope, they must needs conceive that somewhat was thereupon
to be done by them in hope. But what that was, how could they have possibly
imagined, if the same Grace that gave the promise, had not both enlightened the
eyes of their minds, to know the meaning of it, and what to do in order to
obtain it, or in expectation of it? So that according to Eusebius it must needs
be some way or other mercifully insinuated to them; that whereas they had
deserved death in their own persons by transgression, they should put to death
in their own steads the fairest of their living Creatures, ^ictimae enim
piaculares peccata, di quibus immolabant^r, p^ena vica^ia expia^^^t. C^e^^^a
Sac^is^^ia omnia ad Dei gratiam vel impetrand^m, vel (...). Outr. in Praef.
that were clean (and not the Serpent) and then offer them up unto God above by
fire, that their prayers might ascend therewith, and their sins be forgiven, as
if they were utterly consumed. And here may be a place to show the reasons of
offering by fire.

If we consider the ends of sacrificing in the general, Dr. Lightsoot's
Temple-Setvice, chapter 8.
it will soon afford some light into it. Which were, 1. To represent, and to be
a memorial of the great Sacrifice of Christ to come, who should once be offered
up in behalf of Sinners. 2. To lecture to them the desert of sin and Sinners,
death, and fire, in the death and firing of the Sacrifice before their eyes. 3.
Continet hoc Sacrificii genus protestationem, quod homo totum, and omne bonum
suum accepisset a D^o, cum recognitione, and gratiarum ac^ione. Id^oque totum
Ill^d Sacrificium, nulla part reserva^a, igne consumi debebat in honorem Dei.
Est. in lib. 2. did. 25.. 27.
To acknowledge their Goods received from God, in offering up to him somewhat
of all they had. 4. To be a matter of Worship and Religion in those times of
ceremoniousness; wherein all did acknowledge their homage to God, and true
Believers acted their faith on Christ's sufferings. 5. To be signs of
repentance, and pledges of expiation; when they should see (that is to say) the
innocent slain instead of the nocent, and their sins to pass away (as it were)
with the smoke that ascended from the Altar.

To these others add, That the Sinner was hereby admonishe^ to burn up (as it
were) all animal-concupiscences within him, which have their rise from blood
and fat; and so, to eradicate all vice within them. But the main reason is that
which God has given us himself; for whereas the Patriarchs offered whole
Burnt-offerings, without any curious ordering of their Sacrifice, when God
directed Moses afterward how to wash the Inwards, and divide the parts, and
how then to put them again together, and burn them on the Altar, he says, It
is a sweet savor, Exodus 29.18.
an Offering made by fire unto the Lord. Levit. 1.9.
Therefore they were to burn their Offering then, that the odor thereof might
ascend with their prayers into the nostrils of God, at whose right hand the
Mediator was (even then also) to do the same Offices for his Church and people
that he does now, as it is described in the Revelation, that he stood at the
Altar, Rev. 8.3.
having a golden Censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he
should offer it up with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which
was before the Throne. And the smoke of the incense which came with the prayers
of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angels hand. Say not
therefore, that the savor of Beasts, being burnt, could not be sweet of it
self, any more than that of the sinful prayers of men. De precibus vero
sacrificalibus quales erant. Vid. Outr. l. 1. c. 15. and Jo. Seld. de jure not.
and Gentium juxta discipl. Ebr. l. 3. c. 8. and Lightsoot c. 9.. 6.
God smells not as men do; but though under Moses's order, other things were
added unto Burnt-offerings, that there might be no evil savor (possibly) in
the Temple, as to men; yet all received another scent, with a sweet perfume and
odor, as it passed through the ministration of the Angel, the Mediator of
either Testament, before it came into the nostrils of his Father.

Secondly, Lumine Prophetiae; Whether it were by vision, Adami, seu praeficti
Eccles^e moderande duplex fuisse videtur ofsicium: unum Prophetiae, alterum
Sacerdotii... Saepius iteravit, and exposuit Vxori increpationem, and
promissionem sibi sacram, item and Liberis suis, ^osque Genuinum Dei cultum
doc^it: atque ita proph^tam ^git, ut and suit. Bertr. de Rep. Ebr. cap. 2.
or any other way of Prophetical revelation, Adam as a Prophet might have all
this and more (as no doubt he had) from God; for else how should the first
Church of all have been informed or directed according unto God or godliness?
We may not therefore suppose Adam little the worse for his Fall, as Socinus; or
as deprived of his natural endowments, (the Image of God) but only of all the
extraordinary improvements and comforts that he had before, when he had
ordinary communion with God. Est. in l. 2. did. 23. sect. 3.
So that it is still held in the Schools, That Adam was absolutely the wisest
of all mortal men, (not Solomon excepted, whose wisdom was Government) and that
he did not after cease to know those Creatures which he had named in Paradise.
Genesis 2.20.
And as he was the first that received Grace, so we may well think that he
received it not in the least measure. Wherefore, since our Savior does assure
us, (and yet it is not to be proved out of Moses) that Abraham longed to see
his day, John 8.56.
and that he saw it, and was glad; Most like it might be then, when he was
about to set his Knife to Isaac's throat; and lo, a Ram was provided ready for
him to offer up instead of Isaac, Genesis 22.11, etc.
and the Angel from above staid his hand from such a sad issue of obedience:
and the Angel swore, saying, By my self have I sworn, says the Lord, because
thou have done this thing, In blessing I will bless thee. And had not Abraham
reason to be glad? We may doubt no less of Adam, at some one time or other,
when he received this Ordinance of Sacrifice, to be continued in their
Generations, until Shiloh came.

2. Then (after this) they must needs receive and obey this enlightening from
above; for if we think upon Adam's Case, he must needs at first be
thunderstruck with the terrible appearance of God, calling him to judgment, and
passing sentence on him. For if Moses said, (which is not to be proved in
terminis, out of his own Books neither) I exceedingly fear and qu^ke, Heb.
12.21.
when he received the Law in the Mount; how much more out first Parents, when
they hid themselves, and made such weak and lamentable excuses (being forced to
appear) for their transgression? But what should they do at last? Should they
rest in despair, and in dejection? Or should they rather strive and endeavor
to rise again? Certainly, to rise: but if so, must it not be by a right
repentance? And was that possible without hope? Or such an hope, without a
ground of faith? Or such a faith without a clear evidence to support it? And if
you say they might repent, believe and pray; and that that might be enough
without Sacrifice: I answer, That there was never any faith without the Church,
never any Church without Ordinances, whereby a right faith might be supplied,
and the Object of faith (in some measure) conveyed unto right Worshippers. It
is in vain to imagine that they should have some faith, and no practice; or any
right practice without a certain faith before, without which it is impossible
to please God. Heb. 11.
These therefore put together, did constitute a true Church, in the persons of
Adam and Eve, and the Head of the Church (two or three, till they bred more)
and a sure Religion unto them and theirs: of the nature of which it is, that if
it be not imposed by another (but excogitated only) it is no Religion; which
signifies a bond or tie, such an one as a man cannot lay upon himself; and if
he do, it b^nds not his God to accept it, or reward it in the least; or, so
much as to approve of it, lest it be a thing incongruous, or disagreeable unto
himself.

We cannot therefore imagine any time at all betwixt the Fall, and the
introducing of some Religion, by the benefit of which our first Parents might
recover. But the So^inians must needs suppose it, if the Offering of Sacrifices
were indeed the first Religion, which they deny not; and yet, that it hung in
suspense, till a certain space of excogitation: they care not, though it be
till Cain and Abel were grown unto maturity. In the mean while, is not this
true, that they which live without a right Religion, do live without God in the
World, and are in a kind of reprobate estate? Which doleful apprehension about
our first Parents, I have showed you before how much the Catholic Church
abhors.

CHAP. X. The last shift of the Socinians discussed, wherein is showed, That
Sacrifices, neither probably nor (morally) possibly could be invented by men,
so as to be approved by God. And that they had been unnatural, if they had not
been ordained toward a mystery. Socinus not so pious as Pelagius, or Homer.
IN fine, Point II.
Whereas the Socinians do distinguish betwixt the Laws of Nature, (...)
sacrificandi Ritum ad Naturae Leges proprie dictas, aeternas utique and
immutabiles non reserre; sed ad ^jusmodi in^titata, q^ae ratio naturalis
excogitav^rit, tanqua^ ad conspicuum D^i cultum apta satis, and idonea... Neque
ipsa animalia ab Abele, Noa and Abrahamo, Deo immolata, explic^ta aliqua ipsius
Lege, sed Divina quadam ration^, que non omnium communis erat, sed potius
optimi c^ju^q^^ prop^ia* Outr. ubi supra.
that were eternal and immutable, and those which excogitating reason might
ordain, toward the setting up of some conspicuous and idoneous worship, to be
rendered unto God; and affirm, that Sacrifices had their original from the
latter, inasmuch as they were not contrary to the former; (granting that they
were not necessarily implied in the former) and say (besides) that what Abel,
Noah and Abraham might do (in this kind) might be indeed by some especial
Divine way; so that it was not common unto others, but only proper to
themselves, or such excellent men as they: they have given us the last hints of
Argument to proceed, and to conclude on somewhat in the close.

We have showed before, the vanity of their reasoning, a possibili ad
necessarium, from a thing possible to the certainty of the thing, or to the
probability either. For who ever thought, that a thing not repugnant must needs
be, or be most likely, at the least? How many instances might be given to
expose such a supposition to laughter? But the way which I propounded last was,
to detect their legerity, by arguing, a necessario ad impossible, from a thing
necessary to a thing impossible. I have showed, that Sacrifices were necessary
to do away sin: if they like not that, yet they seem not to deny, but that they
were apt and fit enough to set forth some conspicuous worship and service unto
God. And if this sacrificing for either end, was a Duty not revealed, nor
likely, nor possible to be excogitated by any man; then man was obliged to an
impossibility by nature (at least excogitating) which is absurd, Quia nemo
tenetur ad impossible.

Will they say, that it was not necessary from the beginning to offer any
Sacrifice at all, but only to set up some way of worship; and that another way
might have been invented, if this had not been fit enough? They themselves are
not able (in this light of day) so long after, to show what that other way
might have been. Will they say, they deny not some direction; but that it came
in use ( divina quadam ratione) they know not how, but by men's using of their
right minds, the government of God (it may be) overruling them? This, I have
noted before, was the shift of the old Pelagians; who finding some Grace to be
undeniable, Vt supra cap. 2.
would have it all to be placed in the natural gifts of knowledge, Free Will
and moral Virtues, together with the benefits of Gods Providence and
Government: but all this (as I have also showed before) is not enough to
constitute a Religion, which must needs come from some Law imposed, and
revealed from God himself; much less a Covenant betwixt God and man, or a
certain sign thereof, as Sacrifice was, viz. Of our first Parents thereby
entering into the Covenant of Grace, Gather my Saints together unto me (he says,
Psalm. 50.5.) those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. Which was
not the sign of the Covenant by Moses, but only circumcision. But from which of
the first reasons (however overruled) should it proceed? From Adam's? He was
at an utter loss, and if he had gone about such a thing (of his own head) more
apt to fall into the snare of the Tempter again, than to hit it right toward
God; From Cain? He was a Reprobate; From Abel, Noah and Abraham, according to
such respective enlightnings as they had? Then so many good men, so much
variety of sacrificing; which was all but uniform until the Law of Moses.

Let us therefore come to the last winding up of the botom. 1. It was not
probable, 2. It was morally impossible, that any man should invent sacrificing,
so as to please God thereby, upon their own accounts.

1. It was not probable, that either Adam or Abel should invent the sacrificing
of living Creatures, (since of Cain there remains no further Question, as to
his own person, whatsoever his Descendents did, because he brought only of the
fruits of the ground) as any acceptable service unto God. For Adam and Eve (for
their parts) they being due to death themselves (from which they were but
reprieved only in respect of temporal death) it cannot well be imagined, that
one of the first thoughts that should enter into their minds, should be to kill
any of their lower Fellow Creatures; as being a^raid in themselves to see what
natural death might be, much more a violent one, Romans 8.20.
in any other; more especially, wrought by their own hands, which had brought
all other things into bondage with themselves, howsoever innocent. And as for
Abel, he could have no less estranged apprehensions from the like slaughter,
Prove. 12.10.
For a righteous man regards the life of his Beast, but the tender mercies of
the wicked are cruel; even as the very Sacrifices of the Heathen. And Abel
besides was a Shepherd, which sort of men are so tender of their Flocks, that
David encountered a Lion and a Bear in their defense; and our Savior himself
says, John 10.10, 11.
The Thief comes not but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy; but the
good Shepherd gives his life for the Sheep.

2. So that it was morally impossible, that such good men as these should ever
devise such a way as this of their own heads, or approve of it in their own
conceits, if they had not been informed of a mystery in the Case. For it would
have been a sin against the Creator to have slain his Creature, (for no
mischief done, nor yet for food) if he had not required Sacrifice, or the death
of the innocent (which he valued less) instead of the nocent, which he loved
more. What was his speech to Jonah? Should not I spare Niniveh that great City,
Jonah 4.11.
wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons, that cannot discern betwixt
their right hands and their left, and also much Cattle? The Children and the
Cattle being innocent alike, and so far Objects of Divine compassion, according
to their different worths and natures.

We hear what they say, That these did it to acknowledge the right and dominion
of the Lord of life and death, and that it was not unnatural, because that God
confirmed it afterward by Moses, and Christ in fine abolished it, which he
never did any Law of Nature, which is eternal and immutable.

But if they did this to acknowledge the right of the Lord of life and death
only, why did they take his right from him? Was that the proper way to
acknowledge it? For if they slew the Creature in their own right (before God
had put it into their hands) they wronged the Lord of life by bare killing,
much more by presenting of such a death, as an acceptable token to him. To the
Lord of life, a living Present is a fitter token than a dead; for he delights
not in the death of any of his Creatures, he wills not so much as the death
of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn and live. But as the same is the
Lord of death by his own free dispensation, for again he says, Psalm. 90.3.
Return ye Children of men; so he will be avenged on them that take this out of
his hand, Deuteronomy. 32.35
to hasten the end of any of his Creatures, Psalm. 94.1.
having once said, Romans 12.19.
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, Heb. 10.30.
says the Lord.

In a word, if there had been no mystery in Sacrifices, they had been as
un^atural in themselves, as Zipporah counted Circumcision; or, as we may
account the severities of Moses, and of Ioshuah, and more especially of David
(who was a merciful man in his own nature) who put the Ammonites under Saws, 2 Samuel 12.31.
and Harrows of Iron, and hewed them with Axes, and cast them into the
Brick-kilns, 1 Chronicles. 20.3.
(or made them pass through them) not only those that resisted at Rablah, but
all the Children of Ammon. A thing, which even Turks and Tartars would at this
day shrink from committing, as contrary to the Laws both of Nature, and of
Nations. So that God's confirming of Sacrifices afterward does only prove,
that they were his Ordinance before; and Christ's abolishing of them, that they
were ordained only for a time.

In this, at last, we find Socinus to exceed Pelagius, viz. That he holds but
one way of salvation from the beginning to the end, (which is very true, if he
had assigned the right) namely, by living according unto Nature; whereas
Pelagius held, that that endured but till the Law, and that that was another
way, and Grace another after that. And that he does not so much as come up to
the Heathen Philosophers, who though they sometimes speak lightly of prodigal
Sacrifices, which God (they thought) delighted not in for themselves; (as he
also testifies of himself in many places of the Scripture) yet they generally
acknowledged Sacrifices to be piacular of offenses, and pacatory of their
offended Deities; according to the advice of Calchas unto Agamemnon, for
removing of the Plague brought upon the Grecian Army (as he said) for
Agamemnon's offense in using roughly of Apollo's Priest, and detaining of his
Daughter.

(...) Hom. 11.1.


(...)

(...)

(...)

He will not from the Plague withhold his hand,
Until the black-ey'd Maid be sent to stand
Before her Father, and an hundred Head
Of Bullocks be presented to his meed,
To sacrifice, and then we shall appease
Apollo's wrath --
CHAP. XI. Why Abel cut off, and why without issue, viz. That the curse and the
promise might obtain their respective turns. The Sentence of the Woman, as the
weaker Vessel, lightest; and a blessing restored to her in the birth of the
Seed promised. That Cain inherited Adam's curse, by his own choice. Of the City
that he built, and how it might be peopled, so as to leave retinue enough to
his Father Adam, and Brother Seth, besides.
BUT was this the reward (at last) of the Grace and favor showed unto Abel's
Sacrifice more than Cain's, that he should be delivered up into those hands
which God himself did hate, to be vilely murdered by them? So God, it seems,
esteems (otherwise than men do) this to be the greatest honor that he can do
his Saints, that they should suffer for his sake in this World, to the end that
Abel might become the first Prophet upon record, Luke 11.51.
(by which we may observe how he came, besides his Fathers directions, to be
better informed about his sacrificing than his Brother) the first Martyr, and
the first Inheriter of eternal life and Glory^* as also, Matthew. 23, 35.
that on the persecuting World might come all the righteous blood shed upon the
earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the utmost crucifying of Christ
and of all his Members.

Nor was Abel suffered to live so long, as to leave any Issue of his own,
wherein he might have survived here on Earth in another manner, (which might a
little have alleviated the loss of him toward his brokenhearted Parents) God
reserving for him a better name than that of Sons and Daughters. But, very
probable it seems, that both his death was permitted, and his issue prevented,
for two other ends, which I may point at here, viz. 1. That the Curse, and 2.
That the Promise, might both obtain their respective turns.

For God had said first unto the Serpent, Genesis 3.
Because thou have done this, thou art cursed; and I will put enmity between
thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed. It shall bruise thy
head, and thou shall bruise his heel. And unto the Woman he said, I will
greatly multiply thy sorrow. And unto Adam, Cursed is the ground for thy sake;
in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns also and
Thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and in the sweat of thy face shall thou
eat thy bread, till thou return unto the ground whence thou wast taken.

For the first,

It was denounced against the Serpent, and against the man, more extensively;
but against the Woman ( tanquam medium tantum participationis) as the weaker
Vessel, more remisly, though sad enough, In sorrow shall thou conceive. But the
benefit of the promise it self passes through the Woman by a stroke darted
through the Serpent, and reaches to the man ( tanquam objectum tantum
participationis) as the primary object of mercy only; since the Woman was of
the Man, and all Mankind was to be the like thereafter, till the very promised
Seed should come from the bowels of a Woman only. So that as Woman was taken
out of Man at first, Man was taken out of Woman afterward, without generation
in both; but the regeneration that came by the latter to all Mankind, was
infinitely a greater benefit than the constitution of a certain Sex or Species
of Womankind before.

And for so much of the Serpents Curse as glanceth also terribly on the
Posterity of man, Genesis 3.
the Lord had said, I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between
thy Seed (poor Woman! that She herself must bear against her will!) and her
Seed (which God should choose, and She not know which was which) but the Seed of
the Serpent was named first. This was Cain, the first, that was conceived in
iniquity and born in sin; which yet was no more imputed unto him than unto
Abel: what reason shall he therefore have to murmr? Genesis 4. cain est
possessio (...) In ^o ^. p^tabant redemptionem else in ^oribus: ergo Letum
(...) nomen impos^^nt. (...) Ae^le (...), ideo vanitatis nomine p^tius illum
insig^^^b^^. Fagius.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin
lies at the door. And yet poor Eve hoped that this had been the promised Seed,
wherefore She called his Name Cain, Gen 4.1.
saying, I have gotten a man from the Lord. Unto Adam God had also said, Cursed
is the ground for thy sake. And this did Cain also obtain for his inheritance
(as a double portion) by his own choice; for whereas Abel was a Keeper of the
sheep, Cain was a Tiller of the ground.

Of the competition likewise betwixt the two Seeds it is said further, It shall
bruise the Serpents head, but the Serpents Seed shall bruise the others heel.
Now the Seed of the Woman (if that was Abel) was so far from beginning at all
with the Seed of the Serpent (so much as to tread upon its tail, much less to
bruise his head) that it was not only bruised in the heel by a small hurt from
the Serpent, but in the head it self, by the death of Abel, quite contrary to
what might be expected.

But the Answer is, Though Cain knocked his Brother in the head, yet the Seed
of the Serpent did but bruise the heel of the Church (which was the Woman's
Seed) in the person of Abel, who was the first Type of Christ, qui patiendo
vicit, who overcame, and so broke the head of the Serpent by his sufferings.
For Daemona, non armis, sed morte, subegit JESUS. Wherefore as Christ arose
from the dead the third day, and then triumphed gloriously over Principalities
and Powers; so did Abel rise again (to the benefit of the Church) in the person
of his Brother Seth, Genesis 4.25.
For God, said Eve, has appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain
slew; by whom the Serpent was to be sped at last.

In the mean while, there are two further Points to be discreetly traversed, 1.
Genesis 4.3.4.
That Adam lived nine hundred and thirty years (and it is likely Eve somewhat
near the matter, whether more or less) and begat other Sons, not mentioned, and
Daughters, whereof the name of never an one is at all recorded. 2. That some
penitent issue is not obscurely shown to have issued from Cain himself.

ver. 19, etc.
For all the Sons of Adam, not named, we may take it for granted that they
either abode in their Fathers Tents (taking their Sisters to Wives, who were
next to be taken) or went off with Cain to help him build and replenish his
City; being nevertheless of the Seed of the Woman (or of the true Church) so
long as they retained the Worship, the Rites, the Rules, and the Moral Laws,
that they carried off from their Fathers house. And others of them cleaved unto
Seth, and holp to make up his Family, because the Earth must needs be
replenished, and Children go off to further distance. And thus we may conceive
that the true Church was far from failing betwixt the death of Abel, and the
birth of Seth, howsoever the necessity of livelihood, or civil accommodation
might divide the Members of it. But as Adam had lived a hundred and thirty
years before he had Seth, so Seth live a hundred and five years more before he
had Enos. In which long tract of time, and increase of Generations, Genesis 6.1, ^.
when men began to multiply on the face of the Earth, and that Daughters were
born unto them; so that the Sons of God saw the Daughters of men that they were
fair, and took them Wives of all they liked: then the true Worshippers were
^ain to gather unto one House, or Tribe. And how they might attain to any
consistency there, I refer you to the Letter of a learned Gentleman in the
Postscript. All that remains to be said here is this, That when the House of
Seth came to degenerate too, God brought a Deluge on the World, as it is
commonly accounted 1656 years after the Creation.

CHAP. XII. Why God preserved Cham and Japhet in the Ark, as well as Sem. That
though they followed the way of the old World, yet they were increased in
dominion (which was not the blessing promised) more than.Sem Nay, that he
himself was greater in temporal accessions by other Sons, than by Eber.
NOW one might think, since God Almighty was so much offended with the sins of
the old World, as to say, Genesis 6.
It repented him that he had made man on the Earth, and it grieved him at his
heart, that he would have taken such caution about the next succession, that no
generation like to that of Cain's should have survived the Deluge. Yet as he
preserved some of all kinds (even of noxious Creatures) in the Ark, so he dealt
by the entire Family of Noah. He would not prejudge the Cases of Iaphet and
Cham, who were under the same protection, discipline, and common blessings with
Sem, till they came to be severed in their habitations and progenies. Among the
Sons of Noah (says Sir Walter Raleigh) there were found strong effects of the
former poison. First Book of the History of the World. part 1. chapter 6. sect. 2.
For as the Children of Sem did inherit the Virtues of Seth, Enoch and Noah; so
the Sons of Cham did possess the vices of Cain, and of those wicked Giants of
the first Age.

As for Iaphet, we read no hurt of him, but it is rather recorded to his
commendation, Genesis 9.23.
that he joined with his Brother Shem, to make some amends for the villainy of
Ham. who had exposed his Fathers nakedness. However, it is not obscurely
employed that Iaphet was either fallen or about to fall off to degenerate
worship; because this is added to his blessing (for that act of silial Grace
and Duty) That God would at last enlarge or persuade Iaphet to dwell in the
Tents of Sem, Genesis 10.21.
who, though chosen by God, is for the most part concluded to have been the
younger Brother: Which Prophetic Promise to Iaphet, as the like Curse to Ham,
were not to be accomplished in either of their persons, but in their
posterities, some Ages after. Wherefore, for all the love and great savor that
God showed unto Noah, he would not hinder the accursed race of enmity from
spreading out of his Loins also, to be two ways branched, for the greater
afflictions of Sem's choicest Descendents, until the time appointed.

For as the Sons of Noah descended from Mount Ararat, (where the Ark rested,
whether it was Caucasus or Taurus) Ham and his Sons seized on all that they
were able to occupy, from the parts of Mesopotamia to the ends of Africa, which
was the Road that a part of them took. Genesis 10.
Of his Son Cush descended Nimrod,the Founder of the ensuing Babylonian
Greatness, as also Ashur (who gave the Name of Assyria) that built Niniveh. And
of his Son Canaan descended the Sidonians, Hittites, Iebusites, Ammonites,
Girgasites, Hivites, Arkites, and other reprobate Hoards or Nations. Of his Son
Mizraim descended also Pathrusim, the Father of the Philistines, and Casluhim,
the original of some of the Bordering Arabians. And such of his Race as aimed
further Southwards, peopled all Egypt and Ethiopia, to the Lands end, so far as
their number or increase could seize on Lands without resistance. So that out
of Ham proceeded the Princes and people which held the great Kingdoms (as they
grew) of Babylon, Syria and Egypt, for many Descents together, toward the
future oppression of the Sons of Sem; Sir Walter Raleigh Book, 1. part, chapter 8.
2.
the blessings of Shem and Iaphet (as my Author has it) taking less effect,
until the time appointed. So that the first great Lords of the Earth were of
this accursed Race, that they might thresh in the Theshingfloors of Israel, and
bring their Fans in their hands, whenever the House of God was to be purged
by the affliction of his people. And to show besides that God accounts not,
as men do, of Worldly Greatness, he lets it go (to choose) unto the Heathen:
who thereupon do idolize the Fortunes of their Princes, and set them up for
Gods. The first of which this Ham is counted to have been, by the Name of
Jupiter Hammon; and the places where he was adored most, do countenance that
opinion. And who was ever set up for an Idol, but the worst of men?

From Iaphet also and his seven Sons, the Medes, Seythes, Thracians,
Macedonians, Grecians, and the most part of Lesser Asia were replenished;
together with the Isles of the Gentiles, by which name the ends of the
habitable World were only known unto the Hebrews. From whence came Alexander
first, and his Captains, and after them the Romans, to subdue and to waste
Eber. Which events seem to have been more clearly revealed unto Balaam, than
unto any of the better Prophets, even in the infancy of this people, while they
traveled in the Desert toward this Land of Promise. And Ships shall come,
Numb. 24.24.
says he, from the Coasts of Chittim, and shall afflict Ashur, and shall
afflict Eber, and he also shall perish for ever

Nor did no other, but the holy Line, run through Sem himself: For from his Son
Elam the Elamites or Persians did derive their name; from Arphaxad the
chaldeans sprung; and some say, from his Son Ashur (and not Nimrod's) the
Assyrians: as from his Son Aram the Aramites or Syrians; and from his Son Lud
the Lydians (what people soever they were) became known, according to the names
of their Progenitors.

CHAP. XIII. The knowledge of God dispersed in other Families, besides Sem's:
but corruption in his also occasioned the Call of Abram. Why Lot came with him,
and why he was driven into Egypt, and brought back so soon. Piety in Canaan
while Sem lived there. Nor was the whole election at first restrained to the
House of Abraham.
Though goodness may be repaired in our selves, yet it cannot be, propagated
unto ours....Doubtless their education was holy: for Adam, though in Paradise he
could not be innocent, yet was a good man out of Paradise, says Bishop Hall.
Contemplat. on Cain and Abel.
NOW as Adam taught his Children, as he himself had been taught by God, how to
sacrifice and keep the Sabbath, with certain Rites of Worship, and Laws of
life; so Noah also taught his Children all alike the same true Worship that had
been delivered from Adam, (who dyed not much above an hundred years before the
birth of Noah, since he lived nine hundred and thirty years, and Noah was born
in An. Mundi 1056.) together with the true meaning of the Covenant after the
Flood, betokened by a Rainbow. And because Noah lived three hundred and fifty
years more, and the dispersion happened not in his life, Ut fuse explicat
Bertramus, l. de Rep. Ebr. cap. 2. and Jo, Seld. l. 3. de Jure Nature. and
Genesisetc. cap. 8.
the knowledge of God must needs be far and wide dispersed in the Tents of Cham
and Iaphet as well as in those of Sem, before the Rout at Babel; and they that
went off in that confusion of languages, could not choose however but carry off
some rudiments or other of their first breeding. But when true Religion came to
be corrupted in Sem's Family too, as well as in the rest, in the eighth
Generation (about five hundred and two years after the Deluge) in the person of
Terah, who became an Idolater, as the Scriptures do expressly Josh. 24.2,
3.Isal. 51.1, 2.
testify (however Bishop Montague Montag. apparat. c. 1. Sect. 28.
comes to have a better opinion of him) Then it pleased God to call forth his
elect Vessel Abram from his Fathers house, to go into a Land that he would show
him, where his Seed should in time to come be planted alone by themselves in
the middle of the Earth, and become a peculiar people unto God.

And Abram brought his Brother Haran's Son Lot with him by God's permission,
because he was a righteous man; and yet neither he nor his were to be comprised
in the same Covenant with Abraham and his Seed. Jos. Antiq. l. 1. c. 8.
Josephus says, That Abram brought him along with him, with intent to make him
his Heir, because as yet he had no Issue. But the same Providence that brought
them forth together, within a while did sever them, that Moab and Ammon (that
should hate the Seed of Abraham as much as Lot and Abram loved one another)
might arise out of Lot's incest, and be ready planted in the Land of Canaan, to
be Thorns in the sides of Israel.

As for Abram himself, God had no sooner showed him the Land of promise, but he
forced him and Lot from thence by famine into Egypt, Egypt gives relief to
Abraham, when Canaan could not afford him Bread, which yet he must believe
shall flow with Milk and Honey to his Seed... Thrice had Egypt preserved the
Church of God; in Abram, in Jacob, and in Christ. Bishop Hall. Cont. of Abraham.
to try whether he would not stagger after such a promise, seeing such a defeat
immediately upon it; as also to make him a Type of the Seed promised, who was
to be driven into Egypt as soon as he was born; as also to begin the sufferings
of Christ in his Body the Church. For it was from this time to be accounted,
that the four hundred years should be accomplished in him and his Seed; of
which he had received this threatening (after such a promise of Grace) for some
show of lesser faith than he had expressed before, Genesis 15.13.
Know of a surety that thy Seed shall be a Stranger in a Land that is not
theirs (as Egypt and the parts about, for in Egypt it self they remained but
two hundred and ten years) and shall serve them four hundred years. Genesis 12.19
-- 20.4, 8.
But while Abram sojourned here, he found more piety than he expected; as he
after did in the same Case, at Gerar of the Philistines. However, Pharaoh's
mistaken kindness unto Sarah, occasioned the dismission of Abram and Lot,
Simson. Chronici Catholici part 1.ad An. Mund. 2086.
with all their substance, into Canaan (as it is thought) the very next year,
where their substance being greatly increased, they were fain to part;
Wherefore God enjoined Abraham's Posterity in after Generations to speak, and
say before the Lord their God, A Syrian ready to perish was my Father, and he
went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a
Nation, etc. Deuteronomy. 26.5.
their Companies also being great, Abram was put to show his power in falling
upon four victorious Kings for the rescue of his Genesis 14.
Nephew Lot, who had been taken captive by them: for it is said, that Abram was
very rich in Cattle, Chapter 13.2.
in Silver, and in Gold. And for his great Retinue, when he treated with the
Sons of Heth for a Burying-place for Sarah, they said unto him, Chapter 23.6.
Hear us, my Lord, thou art a mighty Prince amongst us; in the choice of our
Sepulchers bury thou thy dead: As if there had been yet some civility among
these Hitties, of the Race of Cham, somewhat of kin to piety.

But when Abram returned with victory over the Kings which he had pursued, then
Melchizedeck King of Salem came forth to meet him, Chapter 14.18, etc.
and he brought forth bread and wine, (Whether to refresh his little Army, or
to sacrifice, or both.) Qui Melchisedecum nihil ad Sacrificia, nisipane and
vino usum censent, and rebus tantum inanimis sacrificasse arbitrantur, hi sane
quantum mihi videtur, quare fiejudicent, nihil habent. Imovero, se a Sacerdotio
ejus aliena suissent cruenta Sacrificia, qui sactum est, ne ipse Christus cujas
idem Sacerdotii genus sanguine suo sacrificaret? Outr. l. 2. c. 1. [Ubi Vir Cl.
coactus est sareri Sacrificia Typica, ac proinde instituta ante Mofen.]
because he was the Priest of the most high God. And he blessed him, and said,
Blessed be Abram of the most high God, Possessor of Heaven and Earth. And Abram
gave him tithes of all [his spoils] as the Apostle does expound it, Heb. 7.4.
So that here we are pointed to observe another Church, without the House of
Abram, which has an High Priest, whereas Abram himself had no greater Title
than that of a Prophet; Genesis 20.7.
nor any greater Right to handle Divine Mysteries, than any other Father of a
Family, (which derived Priesthood down from Adam) so that Abram paid Tithes
unto him.

Not to enter into the whole Dispute about Melchisedeck, Gal 3.
Saint Paul preferring ancient things before the latter, sets the Covenant of
Grace before the Law four hundred and thirty years; and thereby proves the
excellency of it above the latter. And to show that our Lord Christ was of a
Royal Priesthood, far above the Tribe of Levi, he proves that Levi, himself
paid both tithes and homage to him, by Abraham in his Antitype Melchisedeck
(while Levi was in the loins of his Progenitor Abraham) as Priest of the most
high God, and King of righteousness, and King of peace, by augmentation of his
titles, (King and Priest from ancient times agreeing in the same person, till
God appropriated the Tribe of Levi, for the better preservation of purity,
after many of the Heads of Families were found so prone unto degeneracy)
whatever proper name he might have besides. The generality agree that he was a
Videsis tamen quid de hacre senferit P. Cunaeus de Rep. Hebraeorum, l. 3. c. 3.
mortal man (immortal only as a Type of Christ) and some think (as a Corn. a
Lap. in locum. Qui interimpios pie and jusle vix. it...
Lapide quotes the Authors) that he was one of the Roytelets of Canaan, who by
God's Providence was preserved to be both a faithful man, and a good King
amongst them. Accuratissime v. Matthew. Po. lus in Synopsi ad Heb. c. 7.
Which to me ( prophanum quoddam sonat, and audax) seems to be too bold a sense
to agree with that expression of our Apostle, Now consider how great this man
was, Sine Patre, sine Matre, quia sine Genealogia, quod in aliis omnibus viris
magnis contra a Mose fieri solebat: Imo nallis parentibus esse dicti sunt magni
and illustres Viri, quorum Parents non memorantur. Nam Seneca duorum Regum
meminit, quorum alter, inquit, Patrem non habet, alter Matrem. Ep. 108. In
Outr. l. 1. c. 4. cujus Libri Cl. de Sacrif. ad manus meas non pervenere, nisi
post exaratas, and propemodum fi^itas hasce Chartas; quaeratio est, cur in
ipsis Columnis postea non citentur.
unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils. Which words
are surely imcompatible unto the best of the race of Canaan. But the
circumstances agree well, that this Melchisedeck should be the great Patriarch
Sem, the high Progenitor of Abram, from whom in a direct Line Abram was of the
ninth Generation: for Sem begat Arphaxad, and He Salah, and He Eber, and He
Peleg, and He Re^, and He Serug, and He Nahor, and He Terah, and Terah Abraham.
And Sem lived in all, six hundred years, whereof a hundred and fifty in
Abraham's life time: so that very venerable must his presence needs be to
Abraham, who was so much a Puis^e among the Great, Great, GrandChildren of Sem.

Now if any wonder how this Sem should come to dwell and have a Kingdom among
the Canaanites, it is to be remembered what Noah had said when he cursed Canaan,
Genesis 9.26.
Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and Canaan shall be his Servant. So that for
a time Shem might have an habitation amongst them, and he built the City of
Salem (as it is conceived) amongst them, all other Nations becoming (soon) a
confused medly of people, besides the Israelites, whom God preserved entire to
himself. And so, it may be, this branch of Sem (after his death) that dwelt at
Salem, might come to be incorporated with the other Nations, that were
afterward to be destroyed for their idolatry. But the blessing went away with
his Son Arphaxad only, Genesis 10, 21, etc.
of all his Sons mentioned before, whither he went; and followed only his
Posterity, according to election, till the time of promise was complete, and
the iniquity of the Canaanites full, that the Sons of Sem by Eber alone might
have it all at last.

Only this we may observe, That for a long time after Adam, and after Noah, the
Church of God was in diverse Families, and in diverse Kindreds. But as in the old
World, the Children of men came to be distinguished from the Sons of God by the
House of Seth, and his Son Enos, Genesis 4.26,
when men began to call upon the name of the Lord, in Assemblies apart from the
other: So after the Flood, the like happened to the House of Sem, the whole
House of Sem; till out of this it pleased God to make a more particular
election of the Seed of Abraham, for his peculiar people, to be his visible
Church on Earth; to which all Nations owed reverence and obedience, as they
hoped to share in the blessings of his holy Covenant (not to dispute here
whether the whole Election or the whole Covenant of Grace, as to the inward
part, was not larger than the Covenant of Promise, Genesis 4.26.
entailed only unto Abraham and his Seed, with the outward privileges annexed
to it) But before the Call of God to Abraham, Genesis 9.26.
he disdained not to be called the Lord God of Shem; Montague's Acts and
Monuments (with is his Apparatus otherwise accommodated) chapter 1. 29. Genesis 17.7.
yet after that, it was said to Abraham in appropriated terms, with addition
above Sem, for his posterity, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed after
thee. By which new way of entailment, (...), God common, and as common
appertaining unto all, was, says Chrysostom, made his by peculiar interest
and appropriation; since when it is delivered, declared and averred by God
himself, for him and his Seed, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob; this is my name for ever, this is my memorial from generation
to generation. And so he continued known, and distinguished in the World of
old, until the incarnation, the God of Israel above other people. Let us
therefore next consider how it pleased God to form them.

CHAP. XIV. That God's Command to Abram might not seem too hard, it pleased him
to mollify it with an ample Promise, only general at the first: Which he
delayed about twenty eight years to exercise the faith of Abram, and repeated
with some variety to the sixth time, after long intervals, Abram running diverse
hazards between. Abram is terrified by seeking of a sign, and why. Sarai
thinking the promise not to be to her, weakly gives Hagar to her Husband: yet
diverse mysteries in the coming of Ishmael betwixt the promise and the Son of
promise.
IF Chaldaea had not been grossly idolatrous (says Bishop Hall) Abraham had not
left it: Con empl. of Abraham, Book 2.
(But how could he choose, since God had called him from thence, Acts 7.2.
even out of Mesopotamia, which is environed with the two great Rivers of
Euphrates and Tigris, about which Tracts the Garden of Eden is thought to have
been situated?) But whither must he go? to a place he knew not? to men that
know not him? The Text says no more, at the first word, but only unto a Land
that I will show thee. Gen 12.^, 2, 3 --
Wherefore, that this Command of God might seem the less hard or strange to
Abram, he thought it not too much condescension to his chosen Vessel, to
mollify it with a rich and gracious promise, both temporal and spiritual, I
will make of thee (says he) a great Nation, and I will bless thee, and make
thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing. And I will bless them that bless
thee, and curse him that curses thee; and in thee shall all the families of
the earth be blessed.

In which promise it is contained, 1. That God would make of his Seed a great
Nation; 2. That that Nation should be a blessing, in that it should become his
only true Church; 3. That God would bless the friends and blast the enemies
thereof; 4. That at last all the faithful, throughout all the Families of the
World, to the World's end, should become the Children of Abraham through faith
in the blessed Seed promised, who was to be made of God the Heir of all things
visible and invisible; by which faith they should be after blessed, as Abraham
himself was before.

Now to exercise this faith of Abraham, and to make him a pattern to all
posterity, it pleased God to delay this promise for the space of twenty eight
years, Ab Anno Mun. (ut Simson computat) 2077 ad An. Mun. 2108.
till there was little hope in Abraham, and none at all in Sarai of obtaining
any Issue; and yet still to continue this promise, after diverse tedious
intervals, to a sixth repetition, with some seeming variation in the terms.

He no sooner had received the first general promise (mentioned above With a
second assurance, delivered as a new promise, pointing out the Land in
particular, which he had been commanded to survey.
) but God drove him out of Canaan into Egypt by famine (as was touched before)
where he was in fear of being killed for Sarai's sake. Genesis 13.7
Then he soon finds himself (after his return) engaged in a War to rescue Lot,
leading forth three hundred and eighteen of trained Servants, born in his own
house; besides some Auxiliaries of the Amorites, his Confederates, under the
Conduct of Aner, Eshcol and Mamre, (in whose Plain at that time Abram
sojourned, when the tidings were brought unto him) which happened after the
promise renewed the third time, in these words, Lift up now thine eyes, Genesis
13.14, 15, 16.
and look from the place where thou art, Northward, and Southward, and
Eastward, and Westward. For all the Land that thou see, to thee will I give
it, and to thy Seed for ever. And I will make thy Seed as the dust of the
earth, which cannot be numbered. In which promise the temporal blessing is only
pointed at, and that Land in particular, more amply than before.

Some considerable time seems to have passed between, e're God appeared unto
Abram again with these comfortable words, Genesis 15.1.
Fear not, Abram; I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward. Abram is
sensible that these words relate to the three former promises; yet doubting,
lest he should be mistaken in the meaning of them, he makes bold to complain
unto God, That (for all his former promises) he remained Childless still, and
no other Heir but Eliezer, his Steward (a Stranger of Damascus, though born in
his house) appeared likely to inherit all his Substance. Which moved God to
compassionate his Case, and to condescend to him in a fourth promise, that he
should have an Heir out of his own Loins, Genesis 15.6, etc.
And he believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for righteousness. Yet
after that, presuming farther, to ask a sign, though God vouchsafed to
condescend to his request; yet he caused an horror of great darkness to fall
upon him in his sleep, in (or after) which he gave him to know, that his
posterity should serve unto the fourth Generation, till the iniquity of the
Amorites was full. However, when this heavy agony was over, God was pleased to
amplisie his temporal promise, in extending the bounds of it from the River of
Egypt, unto the great River Euphrates.

In the mean time, Sarai, thinking these promises to be made to her Husband
only, and not unto her self (finding how the Case stood with her) gave her
Egyptian Handmaid Hagar to him, Genesis 16.2.
desiring (at least) to have some little part in the Land promised, by her own
Maid; which She was not like to have by another. This was the tenth year after
the promise at the least; but as soon as She conceived, Sarai was jealous of
her, Ver. 3.
and by hard usage wrought her flight: and so gave birth unto a great mystery
or two, before the Son of the Concubine could be produced.

What made Abram so continent hitherto, and so constant to his barren Wife
Sarai? Did he think it unlawful to take a Concubine? And if so, why did he now?
He might have had, it seems, a nearer Heir than Eliezer before this, and if he
had gone this way; for Ut probat Jo. Seldenus de jure, etc. libr. 5. cap. 7.
Concubines were accounted as Wives, only different in their Rank; and diverse
of their Sons did inherit among the Sons of As Dan and Naphtali, Sons of
Bilhab; and Gad and Ashur, Sons of Zilpah.
Israel, whereas Bastards only were excluded, as in the Case of Judge. 1 1.2.
Mar. 19.4. Alii dicunt, Filios Concubinarum (ejusdem Gentis) Haeredes quidem
esse, seu posse; non item ancillarum alienigenarum, ut Agar. Vide que Sarah
suggerit, cap. 21.10.
Iephthah. It may be Abram understood about Concubinacy (what our Savior
taught expressly) that, God having made Man Male and Female (one and one) from
the beginning it was not so: yet that it might have been permitted unto him, as
well as his Progenitors, for the supply of Issue, if it had not been to grieve
his beloved Wife, and Sister-in-Law, Sarai. But now She puts Hagar to him, as
if it were on purpose to restrain his choice of any other: What shall He do? Is
He glad of the occasion for the further satisfying of his flesh? Or does he do
it the better to please his Wife, even as Adam pleased Eve, and fell by it? Or,
in sine, is not he himself also touched with a little spice of unbelief, in his
obtemperance unto Sarai, as well as she?

In my opinion (howsoever some Expositors do seek to blanch it) the faithful
Abram was at this time imposed on by his Wife Sarai, and not excusable of some
infirmity in the Case. Though he steadfastly believed the promise, yet hitherto
it had not been revealed to him, that it should be by Sarai: By whom should he
therefore try, but by her whom Sarai herself had recommended to him? It
happened therefore as a punishment unto Sarai's diffidence, that her Handmaid
Hagar (having conceived, and thereupon imagining that she and hers should go
away with all at last) began to despise her; and to Abram himself, that he
should have such a Lout as Ishmael, by a foul Egyptian. Of whom yet (as a Son
by Nature) he was so fond, Genesis 15. ult. and 17* 1.
that when God renewed the promise the fifth time of the blessed Seed, thirteen
years after the birth of Ishmael, enough to let him know that Ishmael was not
the Seed intended; yet he could not forbear to intercede for him after this
manner, O that Ishmael might live before thee: Gen 17.18.
As if Abram could even have been contented that Ishmael might have been the
man.

But it may not fare better with Abram than with his Forefathers, Adam and
Noah, before him; for as Adam had Cain for his Firstborn, and Noah one, or
other of the Aliens; so must Abram too (the election of Grace having seldom
been observed to have followed primogeniture, while all other privileges were
annexed to it). And as Cain and Cham were born to persecute the true Church,
before it was yet in being, or but yet in its under growth; (like the red
Dragon, Rev. 12.4.
in the Revelation, that stood before the Woman that was ready to be delivered,
for to devour her Child as soon as it was born) so it was to fare with Ishmael,
Genesis 21.9.
who first scoffed at the Feast of Isaac's weaning, and was after planted in
his own Issue upon the skirts of the Land of Canaan, among the Canaanites, to
be ready to join as far as any of them, with the enemies of the Race of Isaac.
So that God would have out of the same Loins of Abram both the Curse and the
Blessing to have their appointed course, according to his own purpose, without
respect unto the favor that he bore to Abram!

In fine, Gal. 4.24, etc.
the Apostle himself warns us of a further mystery, Why Ishmael should come
between the promise, and the fulfilling of it; and why he was to be born before
Isaac the Heir of the promise, Tell me, ye that desire to be under the Law, Do
ye not hear the Law? For it is written, That Abraham had two Sons, the one by a
Bond-maid, the other by a Free woman. But he who was of the Bondwoman was born
after the flesh, but he of the Freewoman was by promise. Which things are an
allegory; for these are the two Covenants, the one from the mount Sinai, which
gendreth unto bondage, which is Agar: for this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia,
and answers unto Jerusalem, which now is, and is in bondage with her
Children. But Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the Mother of us
all,etc.

So that the further mystery beyond this (that Israel should first suffer under
Egyptian bondage before they should be free) was this, That the Law which
engenders unto bondage must needs come first; whereof this Hagar and her Son
Ishmael were a Type or Allegory. Which do answer (says the Apostle) to the
unbelieving Jerusalem, (...)
that now is, or still remains fixed to the Law of Mount Sinai, the Law of
the old Covenant or Testament. But Sarah and her Son Isaac, the Son of the
promise, do answer unto that Jerusalem, which is from above, viz. the Church of
the Gentiles, called by wonders from Heaven, 1 Cor. 10.11.
with the descending of the Holy Ghost. Which Church is free both from all the
burden of the Law, Evidenter ergo Paulus pronunciat, quod omnis, qui per sidem
a Chrislo consequitar lib^rtatem, Filius sit Liberae; and hanc dicit esse
sursum Jerusalem, quae libera est, quae est Matter omnium nostrum. Orig in
Cantic. homil. 2. tom. 1. Hi vero qui ex Gentibus crediderunt, Domino
crediderunt, and non videntur sub hujus viri, i.e. sub Legis vixisse poteslate,
nec unquam habuisse virum Legem -- Vt Esaias declarat, dicens, Laetare
slerilis, quae non paris -- Et ollenait eam quae habet virum, Synagogam quae
habet Legem -- Post Christam Lex everta est -- Et tunc mortuus est Vir ejus,
i.e. secundum literam Lex. Idom ia E.p. ad Romans c. 7.1.6. tom. 2. Frobenii.
and from all its defects, as having that joy in the Holy Ghost, which by the
Law it could not possibly have attained to. Unto which Church it is further
promised, that the desolate (which was) should have more Children than she
which has (the Law for) an Husband. But what says the Scripture? Cast out the
Bondwoman and her Son; for they cannot live together, by reason of the Spirit
of persecution that is in one against the other; much less can they inherit
together, that lay claim by titles so opposite to one another, as the Law and
Works, the Gospel and its Grace.

CHAP. XV. At the fifth renewal of the promise God augmented the names of Abram
and Sarai. And required a Covenant from Abraham and his Seed; the effect of
which was, That he would be their God, and they should be his people. Why God
required such a sign as Circumcision to be the token of the Covenant. Wherein
the Glosses of Philo and Maimonides are detected. How Circumcision came to be
in use in Egypt, and who of them received it. The right state propounded, as it
was to be accommodated to the times of the Old Testament.
NOW, when it pleased God to renew his promise, at the fifth course when Abram
was ninety nine years old, and Sarai past Childbearing, according unto Nature;
he added an ^ of augmentation in the midst of Abram's name, and in the end of
Sarai's; that the one should thereafter be called Abraham, and the other Sarah:
the reasons whereof (to refer the rest unto the Cabbalists) are given in the
Text. And so the promise it self is exhibited in ampler terms than before, and
Sarah expressly showed to be, in her own Person, the Woman that should conceive
this Seed, and the set time, viz. at that set time in the next year, after God
had done talking with Abraham, Genesis 17.21, 22.
and went up from him. But Abraham is now given to understand, that according
unto this Grace, he must enter into a Covenant with God for himself, and for
his Seed after him; wherein God would also condescend to be one Party of the
Covenant with him; which in effect was this, That God would be the God of him
and his Seed, and that he should be their only God. In token of which Covenant,
(as a recognizance or acknowledgment of it) God required of Abraham, that he
and his Seed, every male at eight days old should be circumcised in the
foreskin of the flesh; and all that were born in his house, or bought with
money of any stranger, which was not of his seed; under penalty of being cut
off from his people, whosoever should break the Covenant, in remaining
uncircumcised after this. So Abraham began with Ishmael, or with himself, it is
uncertain whether; but to me it seems that it was with himself. So that
Abraham's heart being formed by faith before God would also now have all of the
same profession to be signed with the same Sign, whereby his visible Church and
people should be distinguished from others, and Sacramentally sanctified unto
himself. Which mystery is therefore next to be enquired into with the greater
diligence.

It appears by it self what circumcision is: The only thing to be admired is,
Why it should please God to make an holy Ordinance of so obscene a thing as
Circumcision, ( saltem in adultis) at the least in grown men, that were to be
made Proselytes; whom, one would think, the pain should not more keep off than
the shame of the thing, in the eyes of common men: And to what ends
(especially) he did require it: Which may draw in all the Question here, so far
as it does relate unto the times of the Old Testament: for of the remainder (if
God permit) there is more to be said hereafter. And because this is no
Polemical Discourse in its first intention, I shall endeavor to be the briefer
in the stating of it.

This Question therefore may be considered, First, As it has been blanched or
colored, to make it more plausible unto the Philosophical apprehensions of the
learneder sort of Heathens. Secondly, As it was accommodated to the state of
the Old Testament, from Abraham until Moses, Joshua, David, and the times of
the Maccabees. Thirdly, As it was a Type, a Figure, a Mystery, or a Sacrament,
referring unto Christ, and the state of his Church to come, under the
ministration of the New Testament: Which are all worthy to be weighed by
themselves.

In Comment. Loriniad Act. 15.1. Ant Plato Philonizar, ant Philo Platonizat.
Vulg. dict. Jos. Antiq. ^^ 18. cap. 10.
First, I find that Philo (a Jewish Philosopher) of Alexandria imitating Plato,
descended from one Class or other of the Chief Priests, and sent as an
Ambassador from the Jews of that place unto the Emperor Cains, about seven
years after the death of Christ) endeavoring, as his manner is, to apologize
for Judaism, that it might seem the more gentile among the Gentiles, among
other reasons why Circumcision was introduced by their Ancestors, and
transmitted to their Posterity, speaks thus: The Circumcision of our
Ancestors is derided; but it is had in no small honor among other Nations,
especially the Egyptians, who excel no less in sapience than in populacy of
men. And Herodotus informs us, In Euterpe ubi mores Antiquorum Aegyptiorum dei
scibic.
That diverse other Nations, as the Ethiopians, Phoenicians, and Inhabitants of
Colchos, etc. derived this Custom from the Egyptians. Philo goes on, and says,
That one cause of it is, For that Circumcision is a good prevention of a foul
Disease called the Carbuncle: Whether he mean the same that was since known in
these Parts by the Neapolitan Disease, let the learned judge; and enquire
whether this Disease was known in those times and Countries when Philo wrote,
or not; and whether this (...)were a preventive remedy against that Disease.
Another reason (he says) was, That the whole Body might become the purer; so
that the Egyptian Priests did add rasure to it, over all their Bodies, that
they might come the purer to their Offices.

Now as for this, Virilia circumcldunt munditiae gratia, plaris sacientes te
mundos esse quam decoros.
Herodotus (indeed) says, That the Egyptians circumcised themselves for
cleanliness, making more account of that than to be decorous. But on whatsoever
trust Herodotus took this, it could not escape the search of the learned Father
Origin, that this pretended cleanliness was for some reputed sanctity amongst
the Egyptians; and that they did not admit their Vulgar unto Circumcision, but
their Priests only, or their Soothsayers, and Students of their Hieroglyphics,
and their sacred Sciences, as they reputed them.

Apud vos (inquit) O Gentiles, Orig. in Ep. ad Romans cap. 2.l. 2. Gelenii Edir.
a Frobenio.
it a magni habetur Circumcisio, ut non passim Vulgo ignobili, sed solis
Sacerdotibus, aut Mystis credatur. Nam apud Aegyptios, qui in Superstitionibus
vestris and vetustissimi habentur, and eruditissimi, a quibus prope omnes
reliqui Ritum sacrorum, and Caeremoniarum mutuati sunt, apud hos, inquam,
nullus, avt Geometriae studebat, avt Astronomiae...... nise Circumcisione
suscepta.... Hoc igitur apud Iudaeos turpe, and obscoenum judicatis, quod apud
vos ita honestum habetur, ac magnum?

Now if any one ask, How come the Egyptians, who were fully peopled before
Abraham's time, and of the Offspring of Cham, to have any Circumcision at all
among them? Was Circumcision ancienter than He?

Some are of opinion that they might learn it in aftertimes from the
Ishmaelites, Genesis 37.
who when they traded into Egypt, sold Joseph there: But that they rather
learned it from the Israelites themselves, while Joseph was in much authority
there, Theodor. qu. 67. in Genesis and Perer. in c. 17.
relieth on the opinion of diverse ancient Fathers, and modern Interpreters; and
that with reason, since Joseph lived in Egypt about ninety three years in all,
and Israel came to him thither when he was but young, viz. about thirty seven
years of Age: Allen's Chain. Notes upon the ^ Period, 32. He lived 110. years,
Genesis 50, 26.
Time enough to bring the Egyptians to some odd conformity or other!

To go on with Philo a little further: Another reason (says he) is for the
sake of better propagation; for the circumcised Nations are said to be most
populous. But this agrees little with a passage of R. Moses Ben Marmon. Qui
tloruit Cordubae A.D. 1150. aut circiter.
(who has carried away the reputation from all the modern Jews, and who seems
also to philosophize, for plausibility, as Philo had done before him) for he
says, Vt libido h^minum diminustar, and Membru^ b^e, quantam sieri potest, a.d.
actum istum debilitetur. Atque haec est principalis ratio, meo quidem judicio.
More Nevochim. par. 3. c. 49. Lorinus ubi supra.
That in his judgment Circumcision was instituted unto this end, that the lust
of men should be thereby abated, and that Member which is the Instrument
thereof impaired; which he takes to be the principal reason. If impaired,
never the better to propagate; but if debilitated, one would think (as the
Rabbi says) the less prone to lust. But this (says Lorinus) is not much
credited amongst us, who hear that the circumcised Turks and Saracens are more
inordinate in their lust, than the generality of uncircumcised people.

Secondly, To consider therefore this Question (not as it is wire-drawn to
avoid prejudice, but) as it is to be accommodated to the state and times of the
Old Testament.

CHAP. XVI. The true ends of Circumcision, I. Civil, to distinguish them from
other Heathen people or corrupted Worshippers; which was a Bridle to them, as
restraining them from mixed marriages and fornication, and given as a mark to
make them odious to the Gentiles, and the Gentiles an abhorrency to them. 2.
Moral, to put them in mind of purity of heart. 3. Spiritual and Mystical, in
respect, First, Of Abraham; Secondly, Of his Seed, and thirdly, household. 4. Of
the whole Church. Why Ishmael must be circumcised, Arminius taxed; why the Sons
of Keturah were also to be circumcised, and in fine all the Servants.
THE ends of Circumcision (in reality) seem to be partly Civil, whereby the
Jewish Nation should be severed from others; partly Moral, to teach them
purity; and partly Typical, or Spiritual, in respect to the holy Seed, and the
Mysteries thereafter to be revealed.

1. For the first of these Maimonides himself strikes in with the right,
immediately after the words cited before, But (says he) there is also another
reason, viz. That all such as are of this Faith, have one certain sign of
conjunction against any that should thrust in amongst them: For Circumcision is
such a thing as no man will admit but for Religion sake. And thus Circumcision
is a Covenant [St Paul calls it a sign and seal of a Covenant] which our Father
Abraham made, and so many as are circumcised enter into the same, viz. to
believe the Unity of God; as God faith, I will be a God unto thee, and unto thy
Seed after thee. And this reason (says he) is as firm and valid as the former,
and it may be more solid.

(...) 1. c. 11
To which Josephus was agreed before, viz. That God commanded Abraham that his
Posterity should be circumcised in their Privities, by reason that he would not
that Abraham's Posterity should be intermingled with other Nations. To which
purpose St Chrysostom speaks thus, See (says he) the wisdom of God: For
knowing what evil impressions the Hebrews were like to take, he imposed the
Sign of Circumcision as a Bridle on them, Signum Circumcisionis quasi Fraenum
quoddam ^is imposuit, ut sua Gente cont^nti essent, and ita Patriarche Semen
inconsusum, atqat incontaminatum maneret, ut sic in to Di^ promissa compleri
possent. Homil. 39. in Genesis apud ^^rer.
lest they should mix themselves with other Nations; that so the Seed of the
Patriarch Abraham might remain unmixed and undefiled in them, to the end that
the promises of God might be accomplished in his Seed.

But how a Bridle? Why, Genesis 6.1, 2.
when men began to multiply, and Daughters were born unto them, the Sons of God
saw the Daughters of men that they were fair, and they took them Wives of all
which they chose. Which brought in both Idolatry and all uncleanness, and
provoked God (before) to send a Deluge. Now Circumcision was not only given
them as a mark, to warn them against the like wandering, but to shame them if
they did; if they should but offer to uncover their nakedness unto any
Stranger: for it served both to make the Israelites a scorn to Foreigners, and
the uncircumcised a like abhorrency unto them; that the due enmity betwixt the
Seed of the Woman, and the Serpent might be the better stated.

Among the Romans, Iudaes Apella was a term of derision: Neither may there seem
to be any greater reason why Tacitus should write foeda superstitio upon the
Jewish Religion than, Taci^. Annal. lib. 15.
this; since in their worship there was nothing like to the Rites of Bona Dea,
or Priapus, to be observed.

And on the other hand, it was the greatest reproach which the Jews thought
they could cast upon other people, Genesis 34.14.
to call them Uncircumcised. We cannot give our Sister (say the Sons of Jacob)
to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us. 1 Samuel 14.6,
17, 26.
Let us go over unto the Garrison of these uncircumcised Philistines, said
Jonathan: Who is this uncircumcised Philistine? said David. And it may be for
this reason St Paul reckons the Maltese but as Barbarians, Acts 28.1, 3, 22,
28.
while he counts it an honor to himself that he was a freeborn Roman. Nay,
whereas the Greeks and Romans looked upon other Nations as barbarous only out
of scorn, the Jews looked on all alike as barbarous, with the more bitterness,
because they were not circumcised. But of this we shall have somewhat to
observed further when we come into the Wilderness.

2. Circumcision was also ordained for a Moral End. In which alone Philo does
acknowledge some part of the truth; Tertia (inquit) cause, pars be Corporis
circumcis^ Cordis ^militudinem quandam habi^ Viraquesane Generations servit:
siquidem ab altera Spiritus animales, ex altera Genitales procreantur, and
proslu^. Quocirca prisci equum censuerunt, potiori illi fonti, visibilem (...)
partem [circumscindendo] assimilare.
but in such an Heathenish manner, that his similitude is not only filthy, but
as false, and unworthy to be conceived to have ever entered into the purer
thoughts of God; but that the outward Circumcision taught the Israelites the
circumcising of their hearts, ears and lips, the Phrase of the Scripture does
often teach us.

3. But as for that intention of this Ordinance, which was Spiritual, Typical
and Mystical, there is much matter of disputation involved in it, according to
the several Branches or Divisions of the Subject, as it had respect, first, to
Abraham's Person, secondly, His whole Seed, and thirdly, Family, and fourthly,
the whole Church of Israel, to which Proselytes were thereafter to be joined.
Under some of which Heads it will fall in to be considered how Circumcision was
a Sign, and of what? How a Seal, and of what Covenant? and whether it might be
imposed?

As to Abraham's Person in particular, one of the ancientest of the Fathers
has left us this to observe, viz. (...) J. Mart. Qu. 102. ad Orthodoxos.
That whereas Abraham was old and unapt for Generation, God had appointed him
this suffering in the flesh, that being the more debilitated in that part, his
faith might become the stronger in God, when he should find his strength
repaired above Nature. A thing to be the more regarded, because God had said to
Abraham when he talked with him, Genesis 17.21.
My Covenant will I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear unto thee, at
this set time in the next year. An vero Circumcisio debili^^^ partem illam ad
actum generandi, and hominum libidines aliquatenus diminuat, supra in quaesitis
suit, asserent^ Maimonide, and reclamante Lorino. Aquinas tamen par. 3. qu. to.
Artic. 3. ^tiam hanc inter causas recenset, quare circumcisio fier^et in hac
part, potius quam in front, a^^ alio quovis membro, scil. ad diminuendam
concupiscentiam, que praecipue in istis membris viget, propter abundantiam
d^^ectationis venereorum. Et Maimonides qui them consititur, (...) gandere
pontius in circumcisis Viris; ac Medici, cum praeputio, partem quandam
titillationis (...) praescindi Viris etiam antumant. Videtur igitur, quod
Circumcisio nihil physice operatur ad coercendam illam, quae intus ^rit,
libidinem, aut ad impediendum externum generandi actum. At moraliter tamen
Signo est homini Circumciso, (...) se inspexerit, quo ad (...) moneatur carnis
concupiscentiam, and ad omnis delicias (ej^smodi) superstuas amputandum. Quod
coincidit, ad extremam, cum secundo fine h^jus instituti, quem supra attigimus.
And lo! that very day Abraham circumcised himself, and so must needs be unfit
for Sarah's Company, till he was cured of it.

But this (in fine) was most pertinent to Abraham in particular: Whereas, at
the making of the promise once before, Abram had said, Genesis 15.8.
Lord God, whereby shall I know? He has now a Sign or a Token given him in his
own Flesh, The wound was notso grievous, as the signification was comsortable;
for herein he saw, That from his Loins should come that Blessed Seed, which
should purge his soul from all corruption. Bishop Hall.
whereby he might rest the more assured (thereafter) that Christ should be born
of his Seed, according to the Flesh, out of his Loins, and of the Womb of
Sarah, and no other.

Secondly, Then if we look upon Circumcision with respect unto his Seed, as an
Ordinance for ever, to be begun with Ishmael (his Reprobate Issue) before the
Son of Promise was any otherwise conceived: But in the faith of Abraham we
shall find some further matter worthy to detain us in the way, even though we
were in haste before.

This is (indeed) one of the true reasons assigned by the Fathers and the
Schoolmen why Circumcision was given unto Abraham, as to his Person, viz. To
be a Sign to him of that faith whereby he believed, and was to believe, that
Christ should be born of his Seed. But had this been all, it had sufficed that
Abraham's alone bad been circumcised in his own Person; whereas, if it had been
so, there could no Covenant have ensued, comprehending all his Seed, and all
his household, together with himself. The Questions that arise for the clearing
of this Point are three, Firth, Since Isaac, who was to be born, was declared
to be the Son of the promise, and Ishmael not; why must Ishmael be circumcised
into this Faith, and be comprehended in this Covenant, and that before Isaac
was born? Secondly, Why the Sons of Keturah afterward? Thirdly, Why the
Servants born in the house, or bought with money, who were all Aliens from the
Seed of Abraham?

For the fifth of these: Must he that was an Enemy by Nature, in that he must
lose the inheritance that he stood so fair for before, and an Enemy by God's
appointment; be circumcised into a Covenant of thankfulness and obedience for
Isaac, who was to be his Supplanter, as much as Jacob (after) was of Esau?

We must take all together: The whole promise made to Abram (at the very first)
amounted unto thus much, I will bless thee, and make thy name great, Gen: 12.2,
3.
and thou shall be a blessing; and I will bless them that bless thee, and in
thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. And again it is said, Chap.
18.18, 19, and 22.18.
not only that Abram should become a great and mighty Nation, but that all the
nations of the earth should be blessed in him. And that he should command his
Children and his household after him, to keep the way of the Lord, that the Lord
might bring upon Abraham that which he had spoken of him. Ishmael had been
hitherto brought up in his Fathers house, (to the twelfth year of his Age) and
taught to sacrifice, which he understood no more than Circumcision; but he must
submit to both. He was so far from being excluded from the state of Grace, or
the hope of Glory, that he was a principal Member of the visible Church, before
the Son of promise was conceived. Neither was he circumcised into the blessings
of Isaac's house in particular, but of his Father Abraham's, the Father of the
Nations to descend by promise from Ishmael, and of all the faithful; and into
him that was the utmost Object of all faith, Hag. 2.7:
the desire of all nations: which whoseover should bless, he should be blessed.
It was not sufficient therefore that only the very promised Seed should be
circumcised, for Isaac himself did not afterward know whether his Son Efau, or
his Son Jacob should be the man, till he was as blind with Age as he was with
fondness of his elder Son. I am not of the mind of Arminius, Ishmael and Isaac,
Esau and Jacob non in sese, sed ut Typi, ilis quos Apostolus adsert locis, sunt
considerandi... Quod moneo ne quis necessum esse putit, ut is qui repraesentat
filios carnis, sit ips^ filius carnis ejusdem difinitionis modo. in cap. 9. ad
Romans v. 9, 10.
that Ishmael, or Esau, though Types of rejection from the temporal promise,
annexed unto Isaac, were not also examples of a real reprobation. But if the
privileges of Nature, or of the outward pale of the Church, had been of any
regard in the Point of Election, the elder surely had not been rejected.

Yet it cannot be said but that the house of Abraham was enough to season both
the Mother and the Son with some piety, as appears by diverse passages of Hagar,
and by Ishmael's returning, after he had been turned out of doors, to assist
Isaac in the Burial of his Father. Genesis 25.9.
However, as he had been a Scoffer in his own Person, so he continued to be a
Persecutor in his Posterity, which instead of the blessing inherited the curse,
which was opposed to it, Genesis 12.3.
viz. I will curse him that curses thee. We read of no good man of his descent
at all, so far as I remember.

Secondly, But for the Sons of Keturah, I know not whether any Persecutors
descended from them, or no, unless the Midianites; out of some of which
(however) the Subjects of Iethro, and the Kenites befriended Israel, and became
Partakers of his Blessing. So that their Circumcision served to carry the true
worship of God abroad into remoter Parts, when Abraham gave them gifts, and
sent them father off from Isaac. Genesis 25.6. Job 1.1.
Of the Race of Edom, or as bad, we are sure enough that Job descended, and his
zealous friends. And that our Lord himself, according to the flesh, drew a vein
of his blood from humble Ruth, a Moabitish Woman, whose Nation was abominable
for its insectuous Original. Bishop Hall's Contemplation upon Lot and Sodom.
The chaste Bed of holy Parents has sometimes bred a monstrous Generation; and
contrarily, God has raised sometimes an holy Seed from the drunken Bed of
incest or fornication.

But, Bertr. cap. 2. Adam, inquit, eliam tempore Mosis, illuxisse alibi quam in
polleris verae Religionis aliqua vesligia, etc.
as Bertram does observe, the knowledge of God by such means came to be
propagated far, in other parts, even in the times of Moses. And although
Cunaeus does collect (in favor, it may be, of some opinion) that the Church of
old was still restrained unto one Family, as from Adam to Seth, and so to Noah,
and to Sem alone of his, and to Abram alone of his, Cujus Familia Ecclesie
nomen atque dignitatem inessabili ratione, velat per successionem, sibi
vindicaret. Caeli^^ Gentes, tanquam prophanae, spectea spectae Numine,
posthabiteque (...) donec Messiah terranum orbem ingressus, intergevinam
disjecit parictem, etc. de Rep. Hebr. 1.3. c. 2. It may be noted (besides) that
after Circumcision Salah and Sem survived as true Worshippers, in other places,
and Eber longer than Abraham himself. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 17.
and to Isaac alone of his line; and that God despised all other Nations as
profane, until the coming of Christ; yet it seems to me, that although many
Families and Nations did not escape corruption, yet some true Worshippers there
were here and there, without those houses, and without that Nation. But the
first Church was the Metropolis (only) of all the rest.

Thirdly, And now we may perceive the reason why Abram's Servants also must be
circumcised, to the solution of the Question (with favor) against Pererius,
That Circumcision was to be imposed, since it was not free for Servants, bought
with Abram's money, to obtain liberty upon the pretense that they would not be
cirumcised. Nor was ever Hyrcann's blamed in later times for compelling the
Edomites, when he had subdued them, to be circumcised, but commended rather.
The reason of their Circumcision (besides the share which they had in the
desire of all Nations) was partly to propagate the knowledge of God, if they
went off; and partly to constitute and fortify the Body of the Church, if they
continued in the Tents of Abraham. Such was the Church which it pleased God to
form to himself from the beginning; such the Materials of it! And how many of
these had true Grace in their hearts, besides Abraham himself, and his Wife
Sarah, and (it may be) his Steward Eliezer, before Isaac was born; I leave the
Brethren that are most concerned to enquire. But that part of this Question
which relates to the whole Church of the Old Testament with reference, as a
seal unto some Covenant (that we may not be delayed in our progress here) will
fall in, in a proper place in order.

CHAP. XVII. Abraham's obedience so acceptable unto God, that he makes himself
known to him in a more familiar way than ever before. That Abraham knew nothing
to the contrary why there might not be more righteous people in Sodom than his
Brother Lot. His various peregrinations are recounted, and further Questions
propounded to be enquired into.
SUCH has been the acceptance of a liberal obedience in the hearts of
generous Princes, both of ancient and later times, that they have not thought
much to go out of their way, and to come incogniti to visit one or other of
their meaner Subjects whom they have known by such a Character: In the like
manner, after Abraham had circumcised all his Males, it pleased God, not to
defer, as in former times, but, (...) quasi per praei^^ia, incarnationem (...)
praeveniente, (...) patribus nonnulii nobis (...)
to make haste to come and see him ( incognito, but) in a more familiar manner
than before, to make the last promise, or to confirm all the former to him, to
be surely made good to him within the set time mentioned before; so that to
keep reckoning, Genesis 18.20.
we may account it to have been within a month or two after the last appearance.

To this was added the great favor of Almighty God (for when did he ever do so
by any other mortal man?) to commune with Abraham about the destruction of
Sodom, and to hearken to his intercession: In which it appears, that Abraham
thought no other but that there might be many righteous persons there (whom God
would not destroy with the wicked) besides his Brother Lot.

Acts 7.2.
Some are of opinion that Abram remained five years at Charran of the Chaldees
(or that part of it to which Mesopotamia may be reckoned) after he had received
the first promise. And then (upon the death of his Father Terah, who as St
Chrysostom observes, (...). Hom. 31. in Genesis
though an Idolater, had a fatherly affection for his Children) he came as far
as Sichem in the land of Canaan, in the seventy fifth year of his Age; and
there he received the second promise, Genesis 12.6, 7.
and built an Altar to the Lord for remembrance; because the Lord had there
appeared to him. It is only said that he came unto the place of Sichem, unto
the Plain of Morch. And that the Canaanite was then in the Land. So that it
seems not likely to me that he entered into the City at all, whether it were a
walled City (as is most probable, it being a great and ancient one) or only a
City of Streets, as we find such accounted in the number, before the Nations
were replenished. But he removed, journeying southwards, Genesis 28.19.
and about Luz or Bethel (which was after called so by Jacob) he built another
Altar for constant worship, Genesis 12.8.
and there he called on the name of the Lord.

But the very next year (as it may seem) he was driven into Egypt by famine, An
Mund. 208 (...) 1918. secundum supputarionem Nostratis Simson. Genesis 13.
and the year after that returned again to the place, where he had erected his
second Altar: and here he remained (if conjecture fail not) about a year or
two; when, obeying the command of God, he went about surveying the Land of
promise, and came the third year to the Plain of Mamre (about Hebron, which was
after called so) and there built another Altar to the Lord, viz. as a place
where he designed some residence, if it should please God to permit him. And
hereabouts he continued eighteen years, even till he had received the last
promise; Genesis 20.1, etc.
and then he journeyed again toward the South Country, and dwelt between Cadesh
and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar, where he made a Covenant, Chapter 21.27, 33.
by mutual Oath, with Abimelech, a King of the Philistines, at Beersheba. And
Abraham planted a Grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of the Lord,
the everlasting God. And he sojourned in the Philistines Land many days. Chapter
23.1.
But by the death of Sarah in Kiriath-arba, which is Hebron in the Land of
Canaan, we may learn that though the Son of Promise was born among the
Philistines, yet Abraham returned at the last to Hebron, where he had his place
of worship, among the Hittites. And there he had his last blessing, of increase
by Keturah, Quae utram eadem suerit cum Hagare, consulatur Simsonius ad A. M.
2181. and Jo. Scld. de jur. etc. l. 5. c. 7. Heb. 11.
according to the fullness of the promise of God, to the rise of many Nations
from him. And there he left in his Tents Isaac and Jacob, Heirs of the same
promise with himself, having lived a hundred and seventy five years (whereof
one hundred hereabout) and leaving Isaac about seventy years of Age, and his
Son Jacob fifteen. Genesis 23.9.
And his Sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him with Sarah in the Cave of Machpelah.
So that all the expeditions of Abraham were 1. from the remoter parts of
Chaldea unto Charran; from thence, 2. unto Sichem; from thence, 3. to Bethel;
from thence, 4. to Egypt; from thence, 5. back again to Bethel; from thence, 6.
to the Plain of Mamre (which is Hebron or Kiriath-arba;) from thence, 7. to the
Parts of Gerar; and from thence, 8. back again to Hebron of the Sons of Heth.

That which remains to be enquired, is, first, What use Abraham made of his
Altars; secondly, How he governed his own Hoard; thirdly, How he lived amongst
the Canaanites and Philistines; fourthly, In what estate he left his whole
Posterity.

CHAP. XVIII. Letters and Writing (most probably) from Adam, as also Altars. Of
Cain and Abel, and the difference of Sacrifices; and of theirs in particular.
Whether they offered in one place; and whether Adam offered for them, or they
for themselves: Why Abel more accepted, and how Cain knew it.
THough it has been thought by many (studious of the Pagan Antiquities,
Literas semper arbitror Assyrias suisse: sed alii apud Aegyptios a Mercurio, ut
Gellius; alii apud Syros repertas volunt. Utl^; in Graeciam intulisse Cadmum
16. numero. Plin. lib. 7. Not. Hist. c. 56. Phoenices primi, famae si creditar,
ausi Mansuram radibus vocem signare figaris. Lucan. lib. 3. v. 220. Videsis
quid de hoc commentitio Oraculo disserit P. Cunaeus de Rep. Hebr. lib. ^ cap.
1. Et quid de literis St Walter Raleigh, lib. 1. part 1. cap. 7.. 10. 4. ut ^:
ante nos sensit D. August.
and too much addicted to credit them) that the Patriarchs before the Flood
delivered unto their Posterities all the learning which they had, by Oral
Tradition only; and that Writing was first expressed by certain Hieroglyphics,
and after Letters formed by the cunning of the Phoenicians, or the Greeks; yet
I must confess I take it to be but an heathenist conceit, and not fit to be
imagined, that the Church of God did ever want its Scriptures, out of which by
Divine Instinct Moses drew the Abstract of the things that were before his
time. Which it pleased God to allow only, as to be preserved unto after Ages,
whatsoever is reported about a certain Prophecy of Enoch, Jude 14, 15.
to which St Jude is conceived to refer: But there is also reference in other
places unto certain current Traditions among the Jews. It is as easy for me to
believe that our Father Adam could as well write and read, (and teach his
Children so to do) as speak, and set the names on every Creature. Should we
think it to be too hard for him, or that he had not time enough in the nine
hundred and thirty years, that he lived, to accomplish it? I cannot so much as
think, that the Church (or the World either) could want the use of Letters so
long as Jos. Ant. lib. 1. cap. 3. S^th natus est A. M. 130. Enoch 622 s^cund.
Allen, etc.
Seth, (whose engraven Pillars are spoken of) much less as Enoch, who was born
so long after him, though both in the life of Adam Adam vero suit omnium
hominum (excepto (...)) sapientissimus: sicus quam senti^nt Hebraei, qui more
suo nugantes, fingunt Adamum, and Evan creatos suisse (tanquam infantes)
simplicissimos. Est.in l. 2. sent. did. 23.. 3.
.

The like conceit I must needs retain concerning Altars. When God had
vouchsafed to reveal unto Adam this Grace and Mystery, That whereas he had
incurred the guilt of sin, and the punishment of death by his transgression, an
atonement should be accepted for him, through the shedding of the blood of
certain clean Beasts, Bert. ubl supra.
(which are thought to have been revealed to him, together with the first
Notion of Sacrifice it self) with respect to the Seed of the Woman, promised in
some uncertain time to come; it was so natural to him to erect an Altar for
Sacrifice and Oblations, that he could not conveniently do any otherwise, any
more than men can eat without a Table: Yet that a standing Altar was not always
necessary, Genesis 22.9.
appears by Abraham's building one in haste, when he was tempted to sacrifice
his only Son Isaac. How Cain and Abel did (to begin from thence) may worthily
be doubted, as it is. But to set it free as much as may be, we must know, That
whereas not only death eternal, but also temporal, with many calamities,
besides the Curse of the Earth, were the consequents of sin; not only bloody
Sacrifices (or whole Burnt Totum Animal pro Victima oblatum, excoriatum tamen
ex more, and dissectum, concremandu^ er at. Seld. de jure l. 3. c. 8.
Offerings, as they knew no other before Moses) were to be offered for the
expiation of sin; but also other Offerings, in acknowledgment of the Dominion
of the supreme Majesty over all; in way of thankfulness for plenty and
prosperity; in way of supplication for increase and blessings; in way of vowing
and devoting themselves, and the Goods which they enjoyed, unto God's service
in some acceptable manner.

The Queries are, (1.) Whether Cain and Abel offered apart, or in one place?
(2.) Whether they offered, as for themselves so, by themselves, or whether they
brought them to their Father Adam, Vt Hebraeorum primogeniti homines essent D^o
sacri, nec aetatis suae Praerogativa, nec jure ad Sacerdotium sactum est, sed
sal^te sibi praestita dum primogeniti Aegyptiorum subito excidio interivent,
Numb. 3.13^and 24.5. ^nde postea redimendi, Numb. 18.10. N^que Levitae
Sacerdotes erant, sed little Min^stri.... Ego in antiquissimis seculis ita
comparatum suisse judico, ut in sacris pro se uno factis, sibi quilq^e suus
Sacerdos esset. Nam Cainus and Abel, sua ipsi sacra per se Deo osser^bant...
Qui autem Cainum and Abelem sacra Deo destinata ad Adamum adduxisse judicant,
hi ca^ sic judicent, nihil asserunt. In sacris autem pro familia quavis
destinatis nihil dubium quin ipse Paterfamilias Sacerdotii obeundi ^as babuer
it. Aeoque jure Noa, Genesis 8.20. and Jobus c. 1.5. pro se, sulsque immolabant.
Outr. lib. 1. cap. 4. Sect. 3.
as the only High Priest then on Earth, and the first Prophet, to offer for
them? (3.) How the difference stood or appeared in respect of what they
offered, and how they were accepted?

For the first: No doubt, while they were young, and lived in their Fathers
house (which necessity would teach him to build, as well as to make himself
Clothes) but that Adam offered for himself and all his Children; but when they
were able to go abroad, and set up a Tent of their own, to be filled with their
younger Brethren and Sisters, and their Children; then of common Right,
Paterfamilias, the head of the house, was their Priest, and in Case he
sacrificed, all the household were sufficiently consecrated to assist him by an
implicit Ordinance of God, because that which he required could not otherwise
be done.

Some are of opinion, (Bert. secutus (ut videtur) Ab. Ezram) Pro cis autem
Coetibus, qui variis ex familils constabant, mos ^rat, ut cujusque princeps (si
modo ipsi visum ess^t) publica Deo sacra factret. Ibid.
that Adam appointed a certain place of meeting for Divine Offices for all his
Children; where (most likely) he erected an Altar; which of old did (as it
were) constitute a Temple sub dio: and that continued some Ages, both amongst
the people of God, and the Heathen. There he instructed them, there he prayed
and offered up praises unto God (more especially on the Sabbath Day) and did
all, in substance, that belonged unto Sacrifices ever after. But against this
that passage seems to make, that when God demanded of Cain, Where is Abel thy
Brother? He replied, I know not: Am I my Brothers Keeper? As if God knew they
did not use to meet every Day or every Week together. So that possibly they
might offer in diverse places.

(2.) It might so happen that one or other of them might be absent; and yet
their Father (who led a careful and penitential life) might offer for which of
his Sons came; Job 1.5.
as Job did for all his Sons when they were absent. Yet I know nothing to the
contrary, but that Cain and Abel, when they had households of their own, might
have Altars so too, the mystery of oneness of Altars being not as yet revealed.

(3.) For the last Query, Why Cain's Sacrifice should not be accepted so well
as Abel's; Josephus Jos. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 3.(...)
gives us this reason, Because Cain, being covetous, offered only that which he
had forcibly extorted (as it were) from Nature by the Plow, whereas Abel
offered things produced of themselves. (...) videre est in Seldeno loco ci^^t.
p. 18.
The Rabbi's tell other Dreams relating to the wickedness of the Person, and
the niggardliness of his Oblations. But a clearer reason is hinted in the Text
it self, when it is said, That Cain brought only of the fruits of the ground,
which was no expiatory Sacrifice for sin, but a superfluous Oblation (it may
be) of more splendid things than Abel; whereas St Paul assures us, Heb. 9.22.
that without shedding of blood, there is no remission for sin: Which things
have been touched before.

But how should these know the difference of their acceptations? If they came
to their Father Adam, and his Altar, by him; who was both a Priest and a
Prophet, and though not in former favor, yet not wholly left by God, or
deprived of all his manifestations to him: But if they sacrificed otherwise,
God did not leave himself without witness, till he raised up sufficient Seers
to advise them that had to do with him. And thus the worship of God came to be
transmitted unto Abraham, unless any small circumstances might be added to his
worship, after God had given certain Precepts unto Noah, Genesis 8.20. Where we
read of the first Altar, built by Noah, to offer some of every sort of clean
Beasts and Fowls; though (we do not doubt but) multitude of Idol-Altars
(imitating the true) had provoked God to drown the World before --
with a kind of Covenant, by the token of the Rainbow.

CHAP. XIX. Altars of Monument for mercies and deliverances. Of Tokens for a
Testimony or a Covenant betwixt God and man, and man and man. Of service for
adoration, vows and sacrifices. Of the matter and form of them. Of those which
Abraham made at Sichem, Mamre and Beersheba, with his Grove there, which was
drawn into an ill example, and the like afterward forbidden.
WE read, first, of Altars of Monument and Testimony (which were usually
magnificent:) Secondly, Of Altars for Burnt-Sacrifice, Meat and Drink Offerings
and Peace Offerings and the like; and thirdly, Of an Altar of incense, in
aftertimes, all opposed to the Idolatry of the Heathen.

Of the two first (which belong only unto this place) we may consider the
matter and the form. For the matter, they were simple, of Earth or Stone, (and
not of Brass, as they after were in settled times) as we may learn by the first
Institutes that were delivered by Moses, who according to God's direction
digested many things into Law and Rule, which were but only of good example
before. Exodus 20, 24, 25. and Deuteronomy. 27.5, 6, 7.
An Altar of Earth (says he) shall thou make unto me, and shall sacrifice
thereon thy Burnt-offerings, and thy Peace Offerings, thy Sheep and thine Oxen:
In all places where I record my name I will come unto thee, and I will bless
thee. And if thou will make me an Altar of Stone, thou shall not build it of
hewn Stone The Patriarchs had no time for that, nor, it may be, ready Workmen;
possibly by Providence, as the next words may show the reason
: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou have polluted it.

For the form therefore, if it was for remembrance only, as for thanksgiving,
and a glory; they made it greater, or it may be neater; but yet so, that it
might be sit to be used as an Altar for service upon all occasions. Let us see
what examples we have of any of these, since it may be questioned whether they
did not more hurt than good (as in process of time it happened unto Moses's
Brazen Serpent) for the Heathen finding them, might either demolish them in
revenge, Exodus 34.13 and Deuteronomy. 7, 5.. etc. 12.3.
(because the Israelites were commanded to abolish theirs) or else profane
them by some new Dedication or Consecration to an Idol; and so offer
Sacrifices, even unto Devils, upon the same Altars; or else they might become
occasions of division among themselves, which we are about to note hereafter.

It was in use from ancient times, as from Seth's Pillars (if there be any
truth in that) and from the Tower of Babel, for men to raise some Structure or
another, in remembrance of their achievements or fortunes: And (it seems) that
the true Worshippers delighted rather in erecting Altars, than any other
Fabrics: But if they were not intended directly for the service of
sacrificing, why should they do so?

I find therefore, as I hinted, that before the Law, Altars were erected for a
threefold end. First, For Monuments of thankfulness for some mercy or
deliverance; Secondly, For tokens of a Covenant, (or for a Testimony) whether
betwixt God and man, or betwixt man and man; Thirdly, For ordinary resort to
the whole acceptable service of God, not only on their Sabbaths, but on every
Day of the Week, and on all occasions: All of these pious, and allowed by God;
not only before the Law, but till the Temple was built; and (upon some
occasions) even after that.

First, We find of Abram, that after God had appeared to him in the Land of
Canaan, and had assured him that that was the Land which he would give unto his
Seed; Genesis 12.7, 8.
that he built an Altar upon the Plain of Moreh, near unto the place of Sichem:
But that he forthwith removed thence, unto a Mountain on the East of Bethel,
(called so proleptically, since Jacob was the first that named it so, that is,
the House of God; which for diverse mercies and manifestations of God became a
place famous to posterity) and pitched his Tent, and there he built an Altar
unto the Lord, and called upon the name of the Lord: as if he had not done so
at the Altar before, but had only set it up as a Monument of thanksgiving unto
God, who had so graciously appeared to him near Sichem. Which Notion is
favored the more by this circumstance, that when Abram returned from Egypt, he
repaired unto the place betwixt Bethel and Hai, Chapter 13.3, 4.
where his Tent had been at the beginning, and there called on the name of the
Lord; returning not to the Altar at Sichem at all, by any thing that we can
find. Neither might it seem lawful or expedient for him to demolish any Altar
of thanksgiving, or any other, that by erection he had consecrated and
dedicated unto God, for fear left the Heathen should profane them, who might
be likelier to slight them, as having Altars enough of their own, called by
the names of one or other of their Idols. As the true Worshippers did also call
the Altars which they erected by some special name, Genesis 13.18.
for a Memorial.

Genesis 14.24.
And when Abram removed from thence to the Plain of Mamre, Cum cultus interior
sit, qui consistit in conjun^tione ad Deum, summaque ejus reverentia per
intelle^tum and affectum: exterior autem, qui inprecibus and laudibus
effundendis, Adorationibus, Sacrificiis, Oblationibus cernitur, neque hic sine
illo rita exhiberi possit; consequitar ad ultrumque obligatos etiam Proselytos
Domicilii, and qui eorum instar fuere (adulti scil. nec rationis expertes; and
pro rerum suarum sive copia, sive inopia) censuisse Ebraeos. Seld. lib. 3. cap.
8. supra citat.
(so called from Mamre the Occupant and Colleague of Abram) he built another
Altar (as a place where he might likely spend some time of sojourning) and
there also he called on the name of the Lord; that is, instructed all his
people, offered up prayers, thanksgivings, sacrifices and such Oblations or
Peace Offerings, as God had so far directed him, or any of the Patriarchs
before.

But in fine, when Abraham came into the Country of the Philistines, (where
Isaac the Son of the Promise was born, as God appointed it) and was entered into
a League with Abimelech, Quum Abrahamus ad Quercetum Mamrae consedisset, ibi
Sacrarium and Altar quoddam ordinariis family suae coetibus destinavit.
Sacrisicavit, Genesis 15.9, etc. Docuit, Genesis 18.19, -- Propheta dicitur, Genesis
20.7. Ipse Domi familiae suae Sacerdos erat; and ubi Altaria erexit, D^i ^omen
invocavit, i. e. universum Dei cultum celebravit, qui nomine orationis,
invocationis and adorationis vary nancupatur. Bertr.
by exchanging of Presents on either hand, so that Abraham took himself to be
settled for a time, He planted a Grove in Beersheba, and called there on the
name of the Lord the everlasting God. Genesis 21.33.
Which Grove, it seems to me, Abraham only made for shelter, (since he and his
lived only in Tents) against the heats and wets, that his Altar and place of
Worship might be the better defended. But it came indeed to be drawn afterward
into ill example, and to be expressly forbidden; Deuteronomy. 13.2, 3.
as the offering of Children unto Molech, Levit. 18.21.
upon pretense of imitating the same Abraham's obedience in the Offering up of
his Son Isaac. John 4.12, 20.
Even so did the Well and Mount at which Jacob worshipped, (in his time) prove
a pretense to the Samaritans to oppose the Temple at Jerusalem. But I will
leave the Altars standing in this imperfect state, till I turn this way again,
which I foresee will happen speedily.

CHAP. XX Abraham had many Tents, and, as a Prince, had a Despotick Power over
them, that (through all their Tents) were born in his house. That the
Patriarchs occupied much Land, and were no burden, but a profit to the
Countries wherein they sojourned, viz. Freely in the wastes, where the Pasture
was; and by Purchase, Covenant and Compromise, when they pitched near to any
great City, or populous place. Of Abraham's purchase of a Field, and Jacob's of
a parcel of one.
Now whereas we read that Abraham and, after him, Isaac and Jacob pitched their
Tent, in the singular number; it may seem that this is not to be restrained
more than needs, but to be extended so as the circumstances do direct us. And
lot also had Flocks and Herds and Tents, (in the Plural Number) Genesis 13.5.
The enquiring into which will lead us to consider and perceive what manner of
temporal or spiritual lives they enjoyed in their respective pilgrimages; God
having so provided for the honor of his Church, that he would not therewithal
afford them all kind of temporal enlargements or accommodations; nor leave them
(long) in any uncomfortable state.

Saint Paul tells us, Heb. 11.9.
that by faith Abraham sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange
Country, dwelling in Tabernacles (in the Plural Number) with Isaac and Jacob,
the Heirs with him of the same promise. By which we may collect that the Tents
were many, and Abraham's only like a Praetorium to the rest. Out of which
Abraham drew three hundred and eighteen men, to pursue the Seizers on his
Nephew Lot, Genesis 14.14
(who was permitted to be taken, that Abraham might redeem Lot, and
Melchizedech might thereupon bless Abram) which were all said to have been born
in his own house. Certes, if all in one Tent (and you cannot imagine that they
all lodged continually under the Cope of Heaven) it must have been a very large
one; but if it had been so, Genesis 18.4, 5, 6.
he would not have entertained three Angels (whom he took to be but Strangers)
under a Tree, without the doors.

As for his power over all these, it was absolutely Despotical, as the Princes
round about him. He taught them the Laws that they were to obey; and he might
punish as he thought sit, without account to any other Prince, any more than
the Prince to him, whosoever he was. Which is sufficiently declared by Bertram
in the same Chapter, cited more than once before.

And if we think sit (in the next place) to consider what extent of Grounds
these Sojourners might occupy, and by what Right, since they were but Strangers
in the places where their Dwellings or their Changes were, it may dart a little
further light unto us.

It cannot be doubted, but Abraham and his Herdsmen, with their several Ten^s
and Families, took up much Ground, because that Lot and He were forced to part,
since the Land was not able to bear them, (...) 13.6.
that they might dwell together, because that both their substance was
exceeding great; which was in Flocks of Sheep and Goats, and in Herds of other
Cattle, as Bullocks, Horses, Camels, Asses, Mules, and such other Breed as
those Countries did afford.

Now although it be said, that the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in
the Land; yet Abram said unto Lot, Is not the whole Land before thee? If thou will take the left hand, then I will go to the right. And Lot beheld the Plain
of Jordan, that it was well watered, and he dwelt in the Cities of the Plain,
and pitched his Tent toward Sodom: But Abram dwelt in the Land of Canaan. Nor
could Isaac and Jacob afterward when the Stock was much increased, and the
Families (it is likely) more, but occupy Land accordingly.

The Question is, Quo jure, by what Right these Strangers took up so much
Ground in a Strange Country, and escaped wars about Plats, wherein they sat
down, and (in all probability) entrenched themselves, for the better security;
and about the Tracts round about them, which they filled with their Herds and
Flocks.

We must remember (to set us right here) that from the Flood to the promise
made to Abram, there is but about four hundred and twenty two years reckoned,
which is too little to imagine all places to be replenished in; so that while
the Inhabitants that were, lived in walled Towns for safety; and studied Arts
and Sciences (to which the Canaanites and Phoenicians ever were addicted) and
were employed in the cultivating of the nearer Fields, and planting of their
Vineyards, the coming of these Strangers with their Stocks, and pitching about
them, (like a standing Fair or moveable City) brought both Trade and plenty to
them, while the waste Grounds might be left at large, without prejudice unto
any Native of the Country; which brought also increase of Gold and Silver to
the Patriarchs.

As for Abraham himself, he kept at a distance from all the idolatrous Cities,
and entered not at all into them without some great occasion, Genesis 12.16 and
20.1. and 23.3. Chapter 13.12. and 14.16. and 19.1.
as Famine and Distress once or twice, and to treat with the men of Kiriah-arba
for a Burying-place for Sarah but Lot being indiscreetly mingled amongst the
men of Sodom, happened once to be taken captive amongst them by the four Kings,
and after hardly escaped from being destroyed with them.

And if it ever fell to their convenience to pitch nearer to any City, or
better peopled place, so that there might be any danger of interfering with
them. Then they either made some Purchase, or some Confederacy, or Compromise,
with the Princes or people there, to preserve an inviolable peace amongst them.
And when Abraham was about Gerar, he did all at once.

Genesis 21, 22.
For when Abimelech and his Chief Captain Phichol observed that Abraham grew
great, they thought it good policy to take caution of him by a solemn League,
made by Oath, That he should not thereafter deal falsely by Abimelech, or his
Son, or Son's Son; but according to the kindness that he had found in the Land,
wherein he had so long sojourned. And Abraham swear, and both of them made a
Covenant. At the making whereof, Abraham did reprove or gently contend with
Abimelech, about a Well of water which Abimelech's Servants had violently taken
away from his, though Abraham himself had dug it. And he made a Present to
Abimelech, that he might enjoy the better Right to it: But of the Land about,
there was no Question made between them. However, when Abraham planted a Grove
about the Well, and set up an Altar there, sojourning many days in the Land of
the Philistines, no doubt he became a Purchaser; at least of some Tenant-right
or other for the time: both the Grove and the Well being to rest to him and
his, as their propriety In the Plain of Mamre, Abraham had also such a
Confederacy, that he got Mamre himself, with Aner and Eshcol, to join with him
in the pursuit of the four victorious Kings; which was a bold and brave attempt
of theirs. Genesis 14.13, 24.
.

And when Abraham bought the Field and Cave of Machpelah, it may seem that he
intended to make no other use of it, but for a Burying-place, though it cost
him four hundred Shekels of Silver, of current Money with the Merchant, which
amounts to about an hundred Dollars, Jun. in not. A Shekel of Silver,
argenteus, 2f 6d. Matthew. 26.15.
as Iunius does account, (which before Navigation came to an height, was no
inconsiderable Sum;) but as others, it might amount to two hundred and fifty
Crowns.

Once more, (and no more that I can find) When Jacob came to Shalem a City of
Shechem, Genesis 33.18.
which is in the Land of Canaan, when he came from Padan Aram, and pitched his
Tent before the City; he bought a parcel of a Field, where he had spread his
Tent, of Hamar Shechem's Father, for a hundred pieces of money. And he erected
there an Altar, and called it El-Elohe-Israel, that is, God, the God of Israel.
So that his Purchase seems to have been partly to prevent exceptions, in that
he had pitched his Tent upon part of Hamar's Patrimony, and partly, that he
might erect his Altar of Worship in the most convenient place, wherever the
other Tents were pitched, for the benefit of the Drove. The Purchase it self,
as the price, was but small, a parcel of a Field. But why? Must not he, as well
as his Grandfather Abraham, leave it all behind him, at the next remove?

CHAP. XXI. Why the Patriarchs made it their first Work to erect Altars
wherever they came. What their outward form of Worship was. Of the restraints
and incommodities of the Patriarchs, as living in Tents, frugality of Diet,
pa^city of entertainments, want of Fields, Gardens, Vineyards; whereby being
hindered from sowing for themselves, they were ost distressed through Famine, if
there was any scarcity abroad.
HItherto we have seen somewhat of the best of the Patriarchs state, as, viz,
that they had Gold and Silver and Stock and a great Retinue, together with some
favor in the places where they most conversed. As for their outward form of
Religion, there being no retiring places in Tents for the exercise of devotion,
Genesis 24.63.
( Isaac being fain to go forth into the Field to meditate) they made it their
first work to erect Altars wherever they came; which were their places of
resort to pray and pay their Vows, and receive instructions and directions from
God, (whether Oracularly, or by the mouth of the Priest, who was the Father of
the Family) as it is said of Rebekkah, Genesis 25.22, 23.
that when the Twins struggled in her, She went to enquire of the Lord. And the
Lord said unto her, Two Nations are in thy Womb; which was said unto her, while
Abraham was yet alive. Here they offered their Sin Offerings for expiation, and
their propitiatory Sacrifices, or Peace offerings, for reconcilement, and for
further blessings. To these their Eucharistical Oblations of thanksgivings by
First Fruits and Tenths and Spoils; which Abraham thought meet to make
Melchizedech, as a greater Priest than himself, Heb. 7.7.
Partaker of (since the less is blessed by the greater) because he had a
certain knowledge of this before the Law. As also, Ver^simile e^l unum quemque
in sua familia Principem, and Sacerdotem fuisse, atque inde has dignitates ad
primogenitos p^rvenisse: ita ut primariae familiae primogenitus eas semper
obtineret; ali rum vero familiarum primogeniti tum ad Rempublicam, tum ad sacra
p^ agenda adhibiti sunt. Bertr.
As also, that though every Father of a Family was Priest in his own Tents, yet
when he came to a greater Father in such a Tribe or Kindred, as were true
Worshippers, that the younger was to serve the elder, and to pay such a
reverence to him, as if he reserved none unto himself.

Let us next consider (before we leave them) some of their restraints and
incommodities, under which it pleased God to discipline and train them up unto
a growing Church.

We have a kind of Emblem of it in the Case of the Rechabites, Jer. 35.6, etc.
whose Father Ionadab commanded them, saying, Ye shall drink no Wine, you, nor
Your Wives, nor your Sons, nor your Daughters for ever: Neither shall ye build
house, nor plant Vineyard, nor have a Field, nor any Seed. But all your days ye
shall dwell in Tents, that ye may live many days in the Land, where ye be
Strangers. Only, for fear of the Army of the Chaldeans, (say they) we dwell at
Jerusalem, for a time, even as Abraham might do in Gerar, or in Hebron, whose
example that devout man seemed to recommend unto his Children and their
Posterity for ever; and so to become more extraordinary Votaries than any of
the Nazarites.

For Wine indeed, it was not forbidden to the Patriarchs; but they could not
have it of their own, since they could not be so well settled as Noah, Genesis 9.20.
who began to be an Husbandman, and planted a Vineyard, and he drank the Wine,
and was drunken, belike as unaccustomed to it too. Genesis 19.23.
Even as it happened unto Lot, whose Daughters got the Wine (no doubt) from the
inhabitants of the Land: But since the Patriarchs had no such intimacy with
their wicked Neighbors, Genesis 18.5, 6, 7, 8.
we read of no other Beverage that they had, but Milk and Water. And such were
their frugal entertainments, with Cakes made ready upon the hearth, and a
little Butter, Veal, or Kid, fetched (as occasion served) from the Flock. And,
that we may likewise think, might much conduce to their increase of Wealth,
since they made much ado about the approach of any Visitant, that came for
kindness only, as a rare thing.

As for the Fields, which Abraham and Jacob purchased, we have noted before,
that the one was for no other use but a Burying-place, and the other for his
Booth and his Altar, even as men at a Fair pay for the Ground they break or
occupy for the time. Acts 7.7.
For St Stephen tells us, That God gave them no inheritance in the Land,
(...), not so much as to set their foot upon; but a promise only unto Abraham's
posterity. And St Paul, Heb. 11.9.
that Abraham by faith (only) sojourned in the Land of promise, as in a strange
Country. And, in opposition unto houses, that he dwelt in Tabernacles (which
are no more comparable unto Houses, than the Ship-Cabins to the Chambers of a
Palace) with Isaac and Jacob, the Heirs with him of the same promise; though
for Isaac it seems that he was not lodged under the same Roof with Abraham, but
was enlarged enough in Family to have a Tent of his own, Genesis 24.^3, 67.
when he went forth to meet Rebekkah; and having met her, he brought her into
his Mother Sarah's Tent, or (...), for mutual joy, and Rebekkah's better
welcome.

Having therefore no Lands, what should they do with Seed? This might be the
Cause why they were so often distressed by Famine, if there were a little
Drought; because the Husbandmen of Canaan seem to have been but few, and might
easily be brought to have little enough for their own necessities. And by these
occasions happened the chiefest of the troubles of Abraham's life, that have
been touched before.

Which things considered and weighed, I cannot but wonder at some men's
accessions, so near unto that Socinian fancy; as if the Fathers of the Old
Testament did but only live according unto temporal promises, as they were in
part from time to time fulfilled to them. So apt are men sometimes to dote upon
Antiquity, as if nothing in the latter Ages could either happen or be done like
what was then; and at other times to look upon the same as mere dotage, even as
young men when they hearken to old men's Tales think that they themselves are
able to do much more and better. Or, as others pretend, that the modern Ages
must needs be far more knowing, because they stand upon their Shoulders, while
they are but growing up unto their Elbows; at least more pious by revelation
and experience: whereas more knowledge is lost than can possibly be repaired,
and more piety than the declining Age of the World is likely to restore.

CHAP. XXII. Adam and Eve earnestly looked toward the promised Seed. Enoch
lived an heavenly life, and Noah. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob much in private
devotions. The Saints of the Old Testament lived not by temporal promises, nor
rested in them: But they lived, and were saved by faith in Christ; Proved out
of both Testaments, and one Objection answered.
WE may perceive by what has been hinted before, what manner of life our
Father Adam lived after his transgression, viz. praying and sacrificing in
earnest expectation of the Seed promised, in whom all Sacrifices were to cease:
And poor Eve (to make amends) traveled continually with the desire of
obtaining it (as She hoped) in her own person. Wherefore when She brought forth
her firstborn, Genesis 4.1. 25, 26.
She said, I have gotten a man from the Lord. And when She came again in process
of time with Seth, She said, For God has appointed me another Seed instead of
Abel, whom Cain slew. So that the first promise being to the Seed of the Woman,
it is conceived to be some reason why they were allowed usually to name their
own Children. And when Seth had Enosh, it is further said, That then men began
to call upon the name of the Lord, that is, the Sons of God began to sever
themselves from the Sons of men, or the Race of Cain, and to worship apart from
them.

And Enoch also, Jude 14, 15.
the seventh from Adam, Genesis 5.24.
(of whom it is said, that he walked with God, and was not, for God took him)
showed by his prophecy what manner of Spirit he was of. Behold (says he) the
Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and
to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds, which
they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly
Sinners have spoken against him. Behold his faith in the Point of the
Resurrection and Judgment, his foresight of the Flood, and his great zeal
against all sin; especially those of the times wherein he lived. Behold what
Record is left of his exactness, his heavenly mindedness, his holy
contemplations, and indesinent Communion, and familiarity in walking with God;
who had endued him with the Spirit of Prophecy and sanctity to such a measure,
that (wanting nothing else but Vision) God translated him from Earth to Heaven
in the middle of his days, Hebr. 11.5. in the 365. year of his life. Genesis 5.23.
Genesis 6.7. 1 Pet. 3.20. and 2 Pet. 2.5.
That he should not see death: for before his translation he had this
testimony, That he pleased God.

When it is therefore said of Noah, That he was a just man, and perfect, and
one that walked with God; and that he endured long (as a Preacher of
righteousness) the contradictions of Sinners, while the Ark was in preparing
(which was about a hundred and twenty years by account) we may guess whether he
was not also like to Enoch. And whether the holy speculations of these
experienced Long-livers, were dry, or more unlearned, than the shorter-lived
and shorter-sighted casts of the Ages following, may be well conjectured by the
Book of Job, Job 42.16, 17.
who lived hundreds, and died full of days.

Now for all the Saints (in general) of the Old Testament, let us see what
their inward piety was; from Abraham the Father of the faithful, till the
coming of Christ: that I may clear this Point, Vnam esse omnium fidem, that
there was but one faith of all Believers, the same with ours, faith in Christ,
which was the strength of all their lives and hopes; and not any carnal
blessings whatsoever. Which I think worthy, in this place (as if it were once
for all) to state and prove, and answer such Objections as may be made against
it.

As for Abraham's private Devotions, they appear in his Visions, Expostulations
and Intercessions with Almighty God. Isaac's in his meditation and prayer
recorded; Jacob's in his vows and wrestlings, whereby he did prevail with God,
and obtain the name of Israel.

For the state of the Question moved, it needs no further explication, when it
shall be remembered, that it speaks not of faith under any common Notion, (by
which it might be diversely divided) but of faith taken properly and strictly
for faith in Christ; of which it is asserted, that such a faith was in all
Believers from the beginning; more especially from the promise made to Abraham,
that in his Seed all the Nations should be blessed. And, according unto true
method, the next Proceeding must be to prove it by Authority and Reason.

First, In the Old Testament, (not to cite all places, Job 19.25, 26, 27. Docet
Iobi cum aliis fidelibus consensum. Quatenusamicis respondet, sensus est; Licet
me pro impio habeatis, in Redemptorem vindicem unice spero: fiduciam non
abjeci; Conqueror a Dio me ad tempus derelictum, sed tamen credo. Varii
Commentatores in Poli Synopsi.
but to point out to the diligent Reader how to find more) Job is express when
he says, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter
day upon the earth. And though after my skin Worms destroy this Body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me. In which words
it is plainly manifest that Job understood that the Seed promised was to be the
Redeemer, that he should come in the Flesh, and after that to Judgment at the
Day of the Resurrection, when he should glorify them that had believed in him.
All these even as we believe now. In the Prophecy of Isaiah we read this, Thus
says the Lord who redeemed Abraham Isai. 29.22.
.

Secondly, In the New Testament our Savior testifies thus much more of
Abraham in particular, John 8.56.
Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad.
First, He might see it by the Scriptures, which were extant before him: for (as
I hinted before) it is not safe to think that God had left his Church for above
two thousand years, without Record, only to favor unwarrantable Tradition,
which in such times might have been erroneous, or in others corrupted; or too
weak (without any Monuments) to have kept so many important Genealogies, as
have been collected and digested by Moses as the Spirit of God directed him,
(and therefore thought fit to save no more but his Books unto Posterity) and so
to have transmitted them by memory alone. Nor may it be convenient to imagine
that God by revelation only discovered unto Moses all that had passed before,
as if he had left himself in the Ages before without witness. Secondly, He
might know it by the Sacrifices, which he was to offer for the doing away of
sin, which he knew to be the life of the lower Creatures instead of man, till
the Redeemer should come; and this he might know (in a more especial manner) by
the Precept dispensed with, which he had received, to offer up his only Son.
Thirdly, He might know it by Vision and Revelation; since when God had admitted
Abraham himself, as a Type of Christ, to be a Mediator for sinful Sodom, Genesis
18.17, 18.
he had said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do, seeing that
Abraham shall become a great and mighty Nation, and all the Nations of the
Earth shall be blessed in him; and since he will instruct his Children after
him, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him?

Object.
And if it be asked further, Why, what could he see in this day that should make
him glad, more than the Jews that descended from him, who expected nothing more
than temporal greatness at the Messiah's coming, which seems to be the literal
meaning of the promise? Let us hear how our profound Bishop Andrews descanteth
on it: Resp. Sermon. 8. on the Nativity.
Why should Abraham (says he) so desire to see this day two thousand years,
and more, after his own were at an end? How was he concerned in it? Yes,
Christ's birth he needed, and he had good by it. Will ye hear it from his own
mouth? Thus he sets down his Case, Genesis 18.
Ecce ego pulvis and cinis; Lo! I am but dust and ashes: Dust refers us to Dust
thou art, and into dust thou shall return. But why Ashes? He was not made of
these: This sure refers to somewhat else. Ashes (we know) come of fire: Without
it they are not made. So that besides death to resolve him into dust, he saw a
fire to turn him into ashes. He saw it in his Vision when the Sun was down,
Genesis 15.
and it was Night, and a great fear or horror fell upon him; he saw Clibanum
fumantem, a fiery Furnace. Blame him not, if after such a Night he desired to
see such a Day, and was glad when he beheld it.

Besides, it is a vulgar error which represents the Jews of the ancient times
(whatsoever the modern think) as looking for no other than a King, when their
Messiah should come; for they looked for such a Savior as should be withal the
greatest Prophet that they had ever had. Wherefore Judas Maccabaeus, when he
had pulled down the Altar that the Heathen had desiled, 1 Mac. 4.46.
he laid up the Stones, by advice, until there should come a Prophet, to show
what should be done with them. And was not this the Question put to John the
Baptist, John 1.21.
Art thou that Prophet, or do we expect another? And the Woman of Samaria spoke
(no doubt) the sense of Israel when she said, John 4.25.
I know that Messiah comes, which is called Christ: when he is come he will
tell us all things. But however the Jews were mistaken in their day, our
Savior himself after his resurrection, Luke 24.27.
beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, expounded [unto his Disciples] in all
the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. Acts 3.18.22, 24. and 15.16, etc.
And the like method did the Apostles use toward all men, when they had
received the Holy Ghost.

This especially they studied to clear, That they brought in no new faith by
Christ. Acts 15.11.
But we believe (says St Peter) that through the grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ, we shall be saved even as they, viz. the Fathers, which had born the
Yoke of the Law before, till they were weary: signifying that they were also
saved by the same Grace of Christ (and not by the Law) before it was revealed
by the Gospel in a clearer manner. 2 Cor. 4.13.
We having the same spirit of faith (says Saint Paul) by which the Psalmist
spoke in the place he cites. And if it be necessary to insist on more Texts,
they will be apt (some of them) to fall in with the Reasons which I shall set
in order.

CHAP. XXIII. The Church of the Old and New Testament but one. Christ made
known in all his Offices before his incarnation. That he was King and Captain
of his people, 1 Cor. 10. illustrated. That Christ was Mediator also of the
first Covenant delivered by Moses.
THEY amount (in effect) to these, First, One Church; Secondly, One Head; and,
Thirdly, The same Operations of the Spirit before and since. Which do all prove
the unity or sameness of that saving faith, which was common unto them and us.

For the first of these, Quis unquam negavit? Who ever denied or doubted but
that the Saints of the Old Testament made up the same Body of the Catholic
Church, to which we hope to be joined, Heb. 12.23.
The general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are written in
Heaven, and the Spirits of just men made perfect? Or who ever questioned but
that those were saved by some faith or other equivalent unto ours? Matthew. 17.1,
2.
Wherefore Jesus also took with him Peter, James and John to be transfigured
before them, In hujus rei [scil. unitatis fidei] mysterium transfigurationi
Christi intersuerunt, duo ex veteri Lege, and tres ex nova, ut omnium justorum
utriusque temporis unam esse fidem, quae in Christum est, insinuaretur. Est. in
lib. 3. sent. did. 23. sect. 12.
when there appeared also Moses and Elias talking with him; that his Apostles
might be joined to his Prophets by himself, the Mediator (not only betwixt God
and man, but) of either Testament. For there is but one Body, and one Spirit,
and one Lord, and one faith, and one hope, and one God and Father of all, who
is above all, and through all, and in us all, as St Paul expresses it, Ephesians.
4.4, 5, 6.

P. Lumbard, did. 1. lib. 3.
For the second, Ex sponsione facta ab antiquo (as the Master of the Sentences
speaks) by a certain compromise betwixt the Father and the Son, our Blessed
Lord and Savior exercised all his Offices of King, Priest and Prophet, and was
so obeyed and believed in (according to the measure of revelation) before he
was incarnate; and, tanquam in praeludiis, (as the Fathers took the Phrase from
one another) he made himself manifest in sundry manners before he came in
Person. He appeared and communed with many; but with Jacob only he vouchsafed
to wrestle hand to hand, and to name him Israel, because he had prevailed with
God, And Jacob called the place Peniel, Genesis 32.21, 28, 30.
for I have seen God (says he) face to face, and my life is saved.

To exemplify the appearances of Christ in these his Offices (apart and
severally) through diverse passages or places of the Old Testament, may seem
superfluous; since they are to be found exerted there (in act) more than once,
and sometimes all at once. In our Systems of Divinity they serve for better
method, or clearer illustration of some particular Points or Questions. If he
guided their Kings, they expected another kind of Kingdom; if he inspired their
Prophets, they expected another kind of Prophet, when the time should come; if
they repaired to their Priests according to the Law, they knew that they needed
another Advocate or Intercessor in many Cases; neither were they satisfied with
any of their Sacrifices, Psalm. 51.
For thou desire not sacrifice, else would I give it. Purge me with Hyssop,
and I shall be clean. Create in me a clean heart; and -- Deliver me from
bloud-guiltiness, that my tongue may sing aloud of thy righteousness, etc.
Neither was this the Notion of so choice a Spirit as David's only, but it
passed into the Vulgar Doctrine of the Scribes; for one of them replied upon
our Lord in these terms, Mark 12.32, etc.
Well master, thou have said the truth: for there is one God, and to love him
with all the heart, is more than all whole Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices. To
whom our Lord again, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. Not as if
Sacrifices, the Ordinances and Sacraments of God, Lightfoot's Temple-Service.
chapter ^.sect. 1.
could be neglected (without which there was no remission of sin) but because
in Sacrifices there might be more or less profusion (being partly
Eucharistical, even their very Sin Offerings) according to the wealth or
liberality of the Offerer; as also, because the thing signified was of more
worth than the sign thereof.

Yet it shall not be amiss to consider the headship of Christ two ways, viz. as
to (1.) Power; and (2.) Mediation, whatsoever Offices may be comprised under
these, during the state of the Old Testament.

Heb. 11.24, etc.
Of the first we read, That Moses, when he was come to years, did by faith
refuse to be called Pharaoh's daughters son; esteeming the reproaches of CHRIST
(to whose Kingdom he belonged) greater riches than the treasures of Egypt: for
he had respect unto the recompense of reward, viz. in the Kingdom of Christ.
And of all the people of Israel it is said. Ver. 29.
That by faith they passed (under Christ's conduct) through the Red Sea, as by
dry Land. Which passage of theirs is more fully cleared in another place, 1
Cor. 10* 1, 2, etc.
Moreover, Bre^hren, I would not have you ignorant, how that all our Fathers
were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea. And were all baptized
into Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea. And did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that
spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was CHRIST. But with many of
them God was not well pleased -- Which things were our examples. Let us not
therefore lust as they did, neither let us tempt CHRIST, as some of them also
tempted HIM, and were destroyed of Serpents; neither murmur, as some of them
also murmured, and were destroyed of the Destroyer, Numb. 14.37.
that is, the Pestilence. Was not therefore the Regiment of the Church of the
Old Testament under God the Father? Or, if any delegation of Government was
unto Christ, under compromise (as was mentioned before) did he himself destroy,
who was said to be the Mediator (likewise) before of either Testament? The
Answer unto this will fall in better with the next consideration, viz. of the
Mediation, or Mediatorship of Christ, which may chance to clear more obscure
Texts all together.

(2.) Wherefore, as Mediator, our Blessed Lord (under the state of the Old
Testament at least) seemed in one respect to have been but as a Moderator unto
temporal punishments; and in another, an Intercessor, not only that all
punishment should be remitted, both temporal and spiritual, but also that all
Grace and Favor, necessary unto that estate, should be afforded. Neither will
I be curious to divide these Parts of his Office of Mediator, more than of the
other; but I shall show what I find in reference unto any part at all relating
unto this Head, or remaining Headship of Christ, as it may happen to conduce
unto the first purpose.

First, The Apostle tells us, Gal. 3.19.
That the Law it self was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. Heb.
9.19, 20.
And that, When Moses had spoken every Precept to all the people, according to
the Law, he took the blood of Calves and Goats, with Water and Scarlet Wool and
Hys^op, and sprinkled both the Book and all the people, saying, This is the
blood of the Testament, which God has enjoined unto you. Whereupon neither the
first Testament was dedicated without blood: for almost all things were by the
Law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission.

As the Apostle would therefore have the Corinthians know, that by the ministry
of Moses all the Israelites were baptized into Christ, by the Type of the Cloud
over their heads, and the Sea round about their bodies; and did in effect and
virtue partake of the like Sacraments, by which they ate and drank of the
fullness of Christ (the Rock that followed them when they left the other behind)
and so had the like privileges as the Corinthians had: Yet as God was
displeased with many of them to their destruction, so he might with these too.
He takes not the Government from God the Father, while he shows who had the
conduct from the beginning hitherto. Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa.
But if the Son be despised now, as heretofore, God the Father may extend his
justice where the Mediator is wickedly set aside by men, for whose redemption
he had satisfied. But whether it was ever committed unto Christ to destroy his
own enemies (in any other than a spiritual way) before his coming, or since his
exaltation, is beyond the Question. Heb. 8.6. and 9.15. and 12.24.
But St Paul would have his Galatians and the Hebrews know, not only that
Christ is the Mediator of a new and better Covenant than that which Moses made
in the behalf of the people; but also that Christ himself, in the person of
Moses, was indeed the Mediator of that too; or else that it had been the worser
for them.

CHAP. XXIV. It was necessary by reason of the Curse annexed to the first
Covenant, that it should be delivered in the hands of a Mediator, who could be
no other than Christ himself. God caused the Covenant of Works to be shut in a
Chest under the Mercy-seat, and why? The benefit of Christ's mediation
otherwise. The Unity of the Spirit in both Testaments.
THE thing that troubled St Paul, and the Churches of his Plantation, (more
than any other) was this, Certain men which came down from Iudaea, Acts 15.1.
taught the Brethren, saying, Except ye be circumcised according unto Moses, ye
cannot be saved. Against whom St Paul disputes in most of his Epistles, and
having showed the Churches, Gal. 5.3.
that this Doctrine made them Debtors to the whole Law (as to keep the Jewish
Sabbaths, Newmoons, and other Fasts and Feasts; as also to their vows and
purifyings; to their abstinence from all unclean meats, and from all such
Companies as ate so; and from all uncircumcised persons whatsoever, though
Believers in Christ; In sine, to repair to Jerusalem to sacrifice, as the
Head-City and Mother Church, as often as the Law of Moses required) he takes the
Question it self soundly to task, to discover the danger and the ill
consequents of it.

Amongst his other Arguments, these are strong and pressing: 1. That the free
promise was made to Abraham four hundred and thirty years before the Law was
given by Moses; Gal. 3.17, ^9. etc.
so that Abraham being justified by faith without the Law, the Law could not
render the promise void to any that believed as Abraham had done before. 2. But
that the Law, so far as it contained Types and Figures of things to come, was
it self abolished by Christ, in whom they were all accomplished. 3. And as for
the Moral Law, That none was ever justified by that, or ever could be; neither
was it given for that end, but only added because of transgressions, or
delive^^d in a terrible manner to that backsliding (...) corrupting people, as
a Bridle, till the Seed should come to whom the promise was made. 4. In fine,
Because the whole Law had this dreadful Codicil annexed to it, Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things, which are written in the Book of the
Law, to do them; that they had in those times been miserable, if the Law, which
was delivered by thundering Angels, had not been ordained in the hand of a
Mediator; which is the Point that (...) closest to that which we are now about.

Who was this Mediator then? And why must the Law be needs ordained in the hand
of such an one? The Mediator, in a Type and true Vice-gerency, was Moses,
beyond all doubt; Exodus 19.9, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.5. and Heb. 12.18, etc.
and the end why he was sitted to interpose at the giving of the Law, was
because the people was affrighted at the sound of the Trumpet, and the voice of
words, and the Mount that burned with fire, entreating that the word should not
be spoken to them any more: for they could not endure that which was commanded.
So Moses stood between the Lord and them, at that time, as a Type of Christ,
who breaks the Majesty of the Father, delivering us from the terror of his
Justice and Power. But in effect and virtue it was the good will of him that
dw^lt in the Bush, that was the true Mediator then (though not after the same
manner as he is of the New Covenant) the same that appeared in the Cloud upon
the Mercy-Seat; Levit. 16.2.
and upon the Tabernacle, to guide them and protect them from the heats; Numb.
9.15.21.6, etc.
that cleft the Rocks when they were thirsty, and gave them Manna when they
hungered; Exodus 17.11, etc,
that delivered them from the fiery Serpents; and by the same Moses's
intercession, holp them to prevail against. Amalek Patrem per silium dedisse
Legem consentiunt Veteres, and Recentiores, Graeci and Latini. Sensus est,
Legem per Angelos ordinatam ( uno Angelo denuntiante, ut Act. 7.38.) in mana
Chr^ni dispositam esse, qui pro nobis ^am pr^slitit: Vel, Legem Israelitis
traditam suisse per manum, five directionem, Christi Mediatoris, populum illum
in su^m adventum ho^ modo praeparantis. Varii.
Nor did he leave his Office neither as soon as he had brought them into the
Land of promise: But his Mediation, in whatsoever we may discover it, was
profitable to them, to the end. For, after their first restipulation with God
by the hand of Moses (who returned this Answer from them unto him that sent
him, Exodus 19.8.
All that the Lord has spoken we will do) it pleased God to cause this
Covenant of Works to be shut up in a Chest, called the Ark of the Covenant or
Testimony [betwixt God and them] but to be covered with a Mercy S^at, Exodus
25.16, 17. 1 Kings 8.^, etc.
and then placed according unto his direction; which in Solomon's Temple was in
the Oracle of the most holy place: and the reason of his prayer, why God should
hearken to the supplications of his people (in any Case, or without any
Offerings) whenever they shoud but look toward that holy place, and pray. By
which we know where the Throne of the Mediator was under the Old Testament.

If they transgressed, the Covenant enclosed was a Testimony against them; but
there was a Mercy-seat above it, as though God would oblige himself to his
Covenant of mercy, though they should break their Covenant of obedience to him.
And this was a gracious Argument to him, not to cast them off upon every
provocation, but rather to chastise them gently, and to restore them to his
former favor, by virtue of his elder Covenant of Promise, made unto Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, Psalm. 78.37, 38, 39
their Progenitors. So that when their hearts were not right with him, neither
were they steadfast in his Covenant, he being full of compassion, forgave their
iniquity, and destroyed them not, yea, many a time turned he his anger away,
and did not stir up all his wrath.

O ye Seed of Abraham his Servant, Patriarch. Faederis hanc promissionem
accepere, Ero Deus vefler, and prosteritatis vestrae. Hinc persaepa in sacro
codice, cu Israelitae veniam ab irato Deo, and insuper magna impe^rant
beneficia, Coelesti voce monentur, uti hoc totum acceptum s^rant majoribus suis
Abrahamo, Isaaco, Iacobo. Creber ille sermo est in Pentateucho, and in Vatum
Scriptis. Porro Foederis illius quod cum patriarchis sancitum diximus, Sponsor
Messiah ^uit, qui ^deo appellatur Angelus Foederis: Propter ipsum Messiam
igitur salus Israelitis data erat, etiam propter majorem sidem. P. Cunaeus lib.
3. cap. ult.
ye Children of Jacob his chosen. -- He has remembered his Covenant for ever,
which he made with Abraham, and his Oath unto Isaac. And confirmed the same
unto Jacob for a Law; and to Israel for an everlasting Covenant -- He remembered
his holy promise, and Abraham his Servant.

And though God suffered at last the Assyrians to destroy this Ark (together
with his Temple) so that the second Temple wanted this inestimable pledge of
Grace; yet when the people humbled themselves with Nehemiah, and other of their
Reformers, and renewed their Covenant with God by their repentance, they were
accepted without the Ark, so as to stand upon their good behavior more than
ever, like a Fort dismantled, or a City that is disfranchized of its former
privileges. But the time was short then, after the Lord had said so long
before, Heb. 10.7.
Lo, I come (in the Volume of thy Book it is written of me) to do thy will, O
God.

In fine, as they had the same Head, so they had the same Spirit that we have
now; which may serve for a Close to all the Arguments. That I may not seem to
skrew or wire-draw any Text of Scripture, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11.
St Peter is express, Of which Salvation (faith he) the Prophets have enquired,
and searched diligently, who prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you,
Searching what and what manner of time the Spirit of CHRIST, which was in them,
did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of CHRIST and the
glory that should follow. -- Which things the Angels desired to look into, as
having been appointed ministering Spirits, before and since, united also to this
Church of Christ.

And if we look upon the operations of the Spirit, and see how it wrought
before and since; we shall find the same breathings of the Saints of both
Testaments in their Confessions, As may appear by Psalm. 51. alone.
Prayers and Arguments; save only that what we ask for Christ's sake, by virtue
of his death, his resurrection and his intercession for us; they asked by the
mercies of God (not at large, as Heathen-men, but as) annexed to his Promises
and his Covenant, and his faithfulness therein, with respect unto him that was
to come, whatsoever Notions they had of him: Which we shall take account of in
the last place, by answering two or three more Objections, to attain the
clearer light in this particular; trusting that the Reader will think it as
worthy of his perusal, as I of my digesting. In the mean while we leave the
Saints of the Old Testament, as endued with the samehope, love and patience, as
these of the New; and have thereupon inferred, according to the connection of
the Graces of the Spirit, that they must needs have the like faith. Idem and
ratione ducta a simili ostenditur. Est una spes omnium, qua ad tandem
felicitatem tendunt; and una charitas, qua omnia propter Deam diligant: ergo
and unasides. Eft. ubi supra.
And for their outward Worship, all the people were sprinkled with the blood of
Heb. 9.19, 20.
Mediation, often shed, as ours are, by the blood of Christ, once shed for all,
unto the Worlds end.

CHAP. XXV. Second Objection propounded, How that little which they knew could
answer unto that justifying faith which we have now. First, The things that
they believed considered, and showed, That they amounted to as much as our
Creed, less than which may be a ground of justifying faith. Secondly, For the
manner of their faith, it was explicit. The distinction of explicit and
implicit weighed; How much faith in them. Fiducial faith.
THE first Objection was, That a few choice persons only had any special notion
of the Messiah to come. Obj. 2.
The next is, That of those very choice persons so little was known, as could
not be a sufficient ground of such a faith as we account to be a justifying or
a saving faith in Christ; since of the Prophets, to some one was revealed one
part of this mystery; to some others a little more; to no one the whole. Nay,
it is to be gathered from that place of St. Peter quoted before, that some of
them had Commission to prophecy more than the meaning whereof was revealed
even to themselves For he says, Of which salvation the Prophets (that
prophesied) have enquired and searched diligently of the Grace that should come
unto you, (and not unto themselves) unto whom it was revealed (at the last)
that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things which are
now reported unto you. Which things (for all their Prophecies) the Angels
desired to pry into.

Let us, Resp.
first, consider the things believed (or to be believed) betwixt them and us;
and, secondly, then demodo, of the manner of their Faith and ours, how far they
agree or differ.

First, If they and we do agree in the same Creed (which is called the Apostles
Creed) then certainly we both agree in side credenda, in the Faith which is to
be believed. But why we should not be taken to agree in this, since every
Article of it may be articulately proved out of the Old Testament, there can
(indeed) be no other reason given than that which is insinuated, viz. That
though the substance be there; yet it lies scattered, and was not revealed (so
much as in the matter) all at once; nor the end clearly understood by them, to
whom the matter it self was revealed.

Now if this Creed (which is sufficient) be but understood confusedly by many
of ours, and yet we take it to be ground enough for a saving faith to be built
upon it, as they know in part; how much more may we extend our latitude of
Charity to the Saints of the Old Testament, who believed upon the matter as
much as some of ours, before it was propounded in such an order?

Let me say further, Aug. in 1 Timothy 2. Ep. 89, Vnus (inquit) est Mediator, quia
unum Christum ad justificationem nobis prodesse commemorat Apostolus: ut
sciamus etiam Antiquos justos, non nisi per candem fiden liberatos, qua and
nos: sidem scil. incarnationis Chri^ti, quae illis praenuntia^ata^, sicut a
nob^s sacta annuntiatur.
That it was enough for them to know in the general that Christ should be born
in the time appointed, to redeem us (without any circumstances) to ground even
a Fiducial Faith upon that alone. But let us see how much they knew more. We
have proved that our Father Adam offered Sacrifices according unto revelation.
And if they came in use by revelation, it is reasonable to imagine that the end
also was some way or other revealed from the first, viz. That Christ himself
should be offered up unto God (in the appointed time) to do away that sin which
Adam had contracted; the punishment whereof deserved death and fire, as the act
of Oblation required true repentance and contrition, with compassion on the
innocent that was to dye in the sread of the nocent. And was not Abraham taught
as much as this, (do you think?) when God commanded him to offer up his only
Son Isaac, and in sparing Isaac, provided Abraham of another Sacrifice? But
when we come to the Book of the Psalms and the Prophets, both the death and
resurrection and ascension and sending of the Holy Ghost are all described to
the life; so that the Object of Faith was but only more comfortably enlarged
than before, and left under less obscurity, as the Day Star and the dawning
drew the nearer. Nor was all the Scripture of the Old Testament of no profit in
its own time, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
( which was given by inspiration of God, 1 Cor. 10.11
for their instruction in righteousness) though many things happened unto them
as Types unto us, and are also written for our admonition, upon whom the ends
of the World are come.

Upon all which, St Augustine is here producible with a clear Verdict: Ante
adventum Christi praecesserunt jus^i, sic in ^um credentes venturum, quomodo
nos credimus in ^um qui veni^. Tempora variata sunt, non sides, quia and ipsa
verba pro tempore variantur, cum vary declinantur. Eadem tamen fides introsque
conjungit, and ^os qui venturum esse, and ^os qui ^um venisse crediderunt,
diversis quid^m t^mporibus, sed u^rosque per unum sid^i os^ium, hoc est per
Christum videmus ingressos. Nos credimus dominumi nostrum natum ex Virgin,
venisse in carne, etc. Tract. in Joan 45. Et alibi: Sine side incarnati^nis,
and mortis, and resurrectionis Christi, ne^ antiquos juslos ut jus^i essent, a
peccatis potuisse mundari, and Dei gratia justificari, veritas Christiana non
dubitat..... vel ante diluvium, vel inde usque ad datam Legem, vel ipsius Legis
tempore, non solum in filiis Israel, sicut fuerunt Prophetae, sed etiam extra
eundem populum, sicut Job. Et iplorum etiam corda ^adem mundabantar Mediatoris
side, and dissundebatur in ^is charitas per Spiritum Sanctum, qui ubi vult,
spira^, non merita sequens, sed ^tiam ipsa merita faciens. Lab. de pecc.
origin. cap. 24. Quaescunque sacrae scripturae ^nca probant neminem salvari sme
Christo Mediatore, eadem valent ad probandam fidei necessitatem. Est. in lib.
3. di^^. 25. s^ct. 4.
Before the Coming of Christ (faith he) there were righteous men, so believing
in him to come, as we believe in him come: The times are varied, not the Faith.
We believe that our Lord was born of a Virgin, suffered, rose again, and
ascended; They that all this should be thereafter, etc.

Secondly, But because neither they nor we could be saved by believing any
Articles only, howsoever clear; let us next consider de modo, or de fide qua,
by what manner of faith they might believe in Christ as well as we, unto
justification by him.

To this we have also an Answer in the general from the same Father, Quicunque
ab exordio generis buma^i in eum crediderunt; eumque (...); intelle^erant, and
secundums ejus Praeceptapie, and just vixerunt, quandolibet, and ubilibet
suerint, per eum proculdubio salvi sacti sunt. Aug. Ep. 49. ad Deogratias, Qu.
2.
Whosoever (says he) from the beginning have believed in him, however
understood, whenever it was, or wheresoever they were, without doubt they
were saved by Him.

But this Answer will not serve the turn, since the late distinction of the
Schoolmen about explicit and implicit faith; so that we must endeavor to give
a clearer and more particular Reply to the thing in Question.

Sum. 1, 2. Qu. 2. Artic. 5. Lumbard. lib. 3. dis^. 25. b.
The Distinction it self seems to have been first coined by Aquinas in his
Comments on the Master of the Senteces, who called this explicit Faith, ( Fidem
distinctam in aperto, and the other Fide^^ velatam in mysterio) such a distinct
Faith by revelation as Abraham and Moses had, and such a veiled Faith in the
mystery as they received from them in the aftertimes; to whom no more was
revealed, but that they must believe as Abraham and Moses had done before,
having no distinct knowledge of all the Articles of the Faith that were
delivered to them. But Aquinas's explicit Faith is described to be, Qua quid
creditur secundum se, and in particulari, the believing of a thing by it self,
and in particular; and his implicit to be, Qua quid creditur in alio, tanqu^m
in universali, the believing of a thing that is contained in another, as in the
general. Which at last was wrested to this sense, Eft. in 1.3. d 25. sect. 2.
Velut si quis ex animo profiteatur se credere quicquid credit Ecclesia, as if
any one should profess that he believes from his heart what the Church
believes; which we take to be no faith at all, but only a blind obedience.

But of the Believers of the Old Testament we say, first, that they had a
certain explicit Faith in Christ, in some measure, every one of them according
to the Word of Grace that was any way revealed or transmitted to them. And then
that there was implicitly more contained in that which they received (which was
indeed veiled in a mystery) than they could possibly conceive: Whether they
received it in Doctrine, or in the Promises, or, more especially, in any of the
Types and Figures of the Law. But an implicit Faith in their own Church they
had not; neither could they be saved by the faith of their Progenitors, like
little Infants, Etiam^i multitudo nihil cognitum, perceptumue habuisset de
Messia, nihilo tamen minus Coe^estem beatitudinem dari illis potuisse prop^er
Patriarchas, qui Messiam mente intuiti sunt, and Foaderis hanc Promissionem
accep^re a Numine, Ero Deus vester, and Pos^eritatis vestrae. Hinc persaepe
v^niam, and magna impe^trant beneficia majoruma suorum gratia... Sic Infantibu^
ad salutem pi^tas Parentum valet. Ubi supra.
(as Cun^us is apt to think that some of them might be) but every one by his
own faith; and that a Fiducial Faith too, wherein I follow Cunaeus for the
rest: But to avoid that Question of the Schoolmen, (or to refer my Reader to
them) How much or how little it was necessary for the ordinary people, before
the coming of Christ, to believe concerning him; as also to make way for my
more direct proceeding; Quod si Prophetae, and ill^s^riores, qui videbant^r in
illo populo, non omnes omnia liquido ^^^^liter agnoscere valueru^t, sed alii
plus, alii minus; quanto magis simpliciores qu^que ju^ti, sine detrimento
salutis, salvationis modum, tempus, and ordinem ^escire p^tuerunt; qu^ tamen
certa spe, and side, ^ti promissa suerant, firmissi^e ten^erant? Bern. in Ep.
77. ad Hugonem.
I cannot but take that passage of St Bernard in my way. If the Prophets (faith
he) and choicest of them did not all know all alike, but some more, some less;
how much more might the simpler sort, without any detriment unto their
salvation, be ignorant of the time and manner; while they held fast the things
promised with a certain faith and hope?

Yet I cannot but wonder how the Fathers and Schoolmen could all beat about so
much (as they have done) in this suit; and not withal bethink themselves, that
this faith of the Believers of Israel (at least) was not wholly toward a
Mediator to come; but was also in him, as having him with them in every time,
even as they had ever since they had the name of Israel: For I have showed how
he wrestled with Israel (in particular) and was with them all in the Red Sea,
and the Desert. To proceed therefore a little further, and you shall know what
manner of explicit and siducial faith they had, and how far it was implicit or
veiled, (take which term you like the better) and how agreeable unto that Faith
which we conceive to be saving now.

CHAP. XXVI. That the Israelites were not saved by a blind obedience, or any
mere implicit faith only; but by a fiducial trust in the mercies of God, as
they were exhibited in the Ark of the Covenant, and the Mercy-seat erected over
it. That the Cherubims, erected at either end, represented the same Church, of
one piece, of either Testament, looking toward Christ; who really dwelt (by
his Divine presence) betwixt them, and so showed himself their King and
Prophet. The Argument of the next Chapter propounded.
WE are never nearer to a bright Morning, than when we pass through an early
foggy Mist. When we are told that the Israelites (for their parts) might be
saved by a mere obedience, without any explicit Faith at all in Christ, tanquam
per opera operata, (as they speak abusively to the very terms;) or else by the
faith of their Forefathers, as if it could be imputed unto them to
justification, as Christ's righteousness is to us: Or, in fine, by believing
that God, who could do wonders, would redeem them, and all Mankind, one way or
other, in the general (they knew not how) we are left in a maze.

But when we come to this result, viz. That as the Patriarchs before the Law
worshipped God in Christ at many Altars; so after the giving of the Law, the
Children of Israel worshipped him in his holy Tabernacle, at one only Altar; as
having Christ there in the midst of them, sitting on the Mercy-Seat as his
Throne, and dwelling betwixt the Cherubims, who was the Keeper of their
Covenant; and that their trust in the mercies of God (shadowed there by the
wings of the Cherubims) according to all his promises, was their ^iducial faith
in God, through Christ Jesus; I say, when we come to this result, methinks we
have found a certain Clue, to bring us out of all perplexity, and to show us,
that the Saints of the Old Testament had (at least) enough to stay their
Stomachs till the Word it self should be made flesh, and come to dwell among
them, in a larger place.

In this posture we therefore find the Mediator of both Testaments, as
exercising all his Offices under the first; for protection, direction and doing
away of sin, in such an extraordinary way as all the other expedients of the
Ceremonial Law could not come near. The Ark it self contained the Law of the
ten words, which when the people had accepted, Exodus 19.8.
saying, All that the Lord has spoken we will do, it became a Covenant of
Works to that people, and to no other, though a Rule and Obligation unto all
Mankind, that should come to know it. And when God had commanded that this
should be laid up before him in the Ark, and placed in the Holy of Holies; the
Ark came to be called the Ark of the Covenant, or of Testimony. However, he
that gave the Law, knowing their proneness to ^^ansgress, was graciously
pleased to command that it should be covered with the Mercy-Seat; remembering
his elder Covenant of Grace, made with Abraham, Is^a^ and Jacob, in whom not
only one people, but all the nations of the earth should be blessed. And for
Supporters to the Mercy-Seat, as a Royal Throne, Exodus 37.6, etc.
he caused two Cherubims of Gold, beaten out of one Piece, to be set at either
end of it, which spreading out their wings on high, covered the Mercy-Seat
therewith; and having their faces one toward another, looked both toward the
Mercy-Seat.

Now in that the Cherubims were both of one Piece, looking both toward this
Mercy-Seat, (which was also made of pure Gold, that we might know the worth of
mercy) they served aptly to set forth the posture of the Saints of both
Testaments, which in their faces look toward one another, and both toward
Christ: and in the spreading of their wings, they reach the two sides of the
World, while they touch in the middle, and so do sweetly join to one another,
Temple, chap. 15. sect. 4.
as Dr Lightfoot speaks. But betwixt these was the strength and glory of
Israel, the most pregnant and proper resemblance of our Savior, in whom God
dwells among men: Nor was it a mere resemblance, 2 Kings 19.15, etc. So Psalm.
80.1. and 99.1.
but it was truly so. For Hezekiah (in his distress) prayed before the Lord,
and said, O Lord God of Israel, which dwell between the Cherubims, bow down
thine ear and hear; open thine eyes, and see and save us, that all the Earth
may know, that thou art the Lord God, even thou alone.

1 Samuel 4.4. and 2 Samuel 6.^, etc.
This Ark the Priests were therefore ordered to carry forth to Battle, while the
Tabernacle stood, and it was the Palladium of Israel, they were either
victorious, or invincible, while they had it with them; for the King of Glory
went along with it: And, Who was that King of Glory? Psalm. 24:
The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle; The Lord of Hosts is
the King of Glory. So that when the Philistines had once taken this Ark,
(though they could not hold it long) the Wife of Phinehas fell in travail, and
dyed; having first named her Son Ichabod; 1 Samuel 4.22.
because, said she, the glory is departed from Israel, since the Ark of God is
taken. In fine, when it pleased God to deliver them up to the Assyrians for
their incorrigible Idolatry (which was not a breach of the Covenant in part,
but in the whole) he suffered this Ark, Mercy-Seat and all, to be burned with
the Temple.

To this, the same Ark was their Oracle, 1 Kings 6.16.
and gave name to the whole Room, the Holy of Holies, to be called the Oracle,
Exodus 25.12.
For there I will meet with thee (said God) and I will commune with thee from
above the mercy-seat, from between the two Cherubims, which are upon the Ark of
the testimony, of all things which I will give in commandment unto the Children
of Israel. And thus it was of frequent use so long as the first Temple did
continue.

But that which is most to the purpose (to understand the Object and the manner
of the faith of the Saints of old) is that which presents it self to our next
thoughts, about the Priestly Office of Christ within this inner Temple, beyond
the ministry of the Sons of Levi, which was in the outer Sanctuary, (once a
year excepted, when it was permitted to the High Priest alone to enter in
hither.)

I hardly can forbear to deliver my own opinion expressly here, although I know
no other authority to fortify it by, besides the very Scriptures themselves,
or what an ingenuous man may accept for a reasonable inference upon them. I
take the Ark it self to have been a kind of Altar.

CHAP. XXVII. The Kingdom given unto Christ for his Priesthood-sake; who as of
the order of Melchizedek had an inner house and Altar, to which the house of
Aaron owed reverence: That it was not properly an Altar, but bore some analogy;
and was needful for the people. That the promises of God before the Law were
virtually concealed in the Ark. A new Objection started.
IT was in contemplation of Christ's Priesthood, that God the Father bestowed
the Kingdom on him, according to that of the Royal Psalmist, Psalm. 110.
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool.... The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a
Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchizedek, Heb. 7.15.
that is, after the s^militude (as the Apostle does expound it) of that King of
righteousness; which word does indifferently signify mercy in the use of the
Old Testament.

Within this inward Temple (therefore) it was convenient that another kind of
Altar should be reserved for another kind of Priest than Aaron was, (who had
the Ruler of the people over him; and many Laws lying on his Order, from which
Melchizedek was free) For the Law made nothing perfect; Heb. 7.19.
but the bringing in of a better hope did, by which we draw nigh unto God....
Chap. 6.19, 20:
which hope ^e have as an Anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast; and which
enters into that within the Veil. Whither the forerunner is for us entered,
even Jesus, made an High Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek, who
was a Type of him; as the Holy of Holies, within the Veil, was of Heaven;
having the Throne of God in the midst of it, and a multitude of Cherubims
besides it, after Solomon had put the last hand to it. And as our hope is now
(above all) in the intercession of Christ in Heaven; so was theirs of old
within the Veil, more than it was without, as I am about to show.

But because it does not consist with the oneness of the Body of Christ, that
there should be more Temples or Altar^ (properly so called) than one; I shall
first address my self to some accommodation Nec quis miretur (insup^r) auratam
mensam, cui panes sacierum apponi solebant, tanquam oblationes, in Ararum
censum referri. Sicut enim Ara Mensa Dei (Mal. 1.12.) ita Mensa D^i Ara quedam
^rat, Araeque plane vicera praeslabat. Neque viro apud Iudaeos tantum, sed
etiam apud prophanas Gentes, Mensas rite dedicatas Ararum vices praeslitisse
legimus. In papyria^o enim j^re evidenter relatum es^ Arae vicem p^estare posse
mensam dicatam. Outr. lib. I. cap. 8.
.

Besides the Altar of Oblation, there stood apart (and nearer to the Veil) the
Golden Altar, or Altar of Incense, by God's appointment; which served to set
forth the intercession of the Angel of the Covenant, who is represented to us
in the Revelation, Rev. 8.3, etc.
as standing at the Altar, having a golden Censer, with much incense, that he
should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was
before the Throne; the smoke whereof ascended up before God out of the Angels
hand, and then the Angel took his Censer, and filled it with fire of the Altar,
and cast it to the Earth (as a return of prayers) and then the judgments of God
began to work below. Which Altar therefore stands not in opposition to the
other; nor this that I am about to speak of to either of them. But now I will
show what analogy, and what need or use there was of this token.

Quod prius praestantius, was the great Rule that St Paul went by in preferring
Christ's Priesthood before Levi's, in that it was according to the likeness of
Melchizedek's, unto whom Levi himself had paid Tithes in the Loins of his
Father Abraham. Heb. 8.4, etc.
And in this he shows the excellency of the New Testament above the Old, Gal.
3.17.
that it was four hundred and thirty years (indeed) the elder of the two. This
I say (says he) that the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ,
the Law which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul, that it
should make the promise of no effect. And that it might not do so, God laid a
Mercy-Seat over the Law, and put all together behind the Veil; where he kept
the Archives of his first promise made to Abraham, and to Isaac, and to Jacob,
concerning Christ: In reference whereunto he bad Moses tell the people from the
very first beginning of his vocation, Exodus 3.13.
The Lord God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob, has sent me unto you. This is my name for ever; and this is my
memorial unto all Generations. This was his name within the Veil, covered with
the wings of Angels, while the Lord of life was yet in the Loins of his
Progenitors.

Obj. 3.
So that if any one be ready to object further against the knowledge of Christ
of old, that Moses put a veil [of Types and Ceremonies] over his face, [on
purpose] that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of
that which is abolished [ viz. the Ceremonial Law.] But their minds were
blinded so, that until this day, the same Veil remains on them in the reading
of the Old Testament; we are as ready to meet them with another passage of the
same Apostle.

Resp.
Wherefore then serves the Law? [Was it given to the prejudice of the Grace of
Christ?] Gal. 3.19, 21, 23.
It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come, to whom the
promise was made; and it was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator: Is
the Law then against the promises of God? God forbid. But before faith came, we
were kept under the Law, shut up unto the faith, which should after be revealed.

Now the strength of the Objection seems to bear against the multitude of the
Children of Israel, and not against any choice men amongst them; who (for all
this Objection) as they drew nearer, might see the clearer into this mystery of
Christ, on coming. But I shall endeavor to take things in such an order, that
that which remains of the former Objection, may go off as well satisfied as can
be with this that comes last.

CHAP. XXVIII. What resemblance the Ark bore unto an Altar; and how the Altar
of Burnt-Offering was sanctified by it. That a Censer was only a necessary
Vtensil, belonging to the Holy of Holies, to be used once a Year. That the
whole Temple was hallowed by the Covenant and Mercy-seat, showed by Solomon's
Dedication of it.
OF the whole Law, how far it is a privilege or a burden, a light or a veil,
(that I may not too much anticipate the design that I have in hand) there will
be a proper place hereafter. In the mean while, whatsoever was defective
((...)) in the Sanctuary, Heb. 9.2, 3.
was supplied ((...)) in the Holy of Holies, or most holy place. And whatsoever
blindness happened to the later Jews, it was not so much by the Veil, that
Moses drew over his own face (which was, as it were, but of Cypress) as by the
grosser Veils, that the Scrib^s and Pharisees, in the later times, had drawn
over all.

Lev. 16,
On the tenth Day of the seventh Month, T^ri or September, the High Priest was
to make an atonement for the people by Sacrifice, to cleanse them, that they
might be clean from all their sins before the Lord. But this was to be done the
same Day, after he had performed all that was required to be done in the Holy
of Holies.

He was first to make an atonement without, for himself and for his house, by a
Sin-Offering, which was to be a Bullock. Then he was to carry a Censer full of
burning Coals of fire from off the Altar, with his hands full of incense within
the Veil, where he was to burn it upon the Coals, that the Cloud of the incense
may cover the mercy-seat that is upon the testimony, [thus it resembles the
Altar of incense, as it was in form somewhat like it] and he shall take of the
blood of the Bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger Eastward; and before the
Mercy-Seat shall be sprinkle of the blo^d with his finger seven times [thus
does he dedicate it to the Lord with some of the same Ceremonies that he used
toward the Altar of Oblation] Then shall be kill the Goat of the Sin-Offering
that is for the people, and do with that blood as he did with the former,
sprinkling the blood upon the mercy-seat, and before it. And then he shall
there make an atonement even for the San^^uary it self, because of the
uncleanness of the Children of Israel, and because of their transgressions in
all their sins. In fine, (as if this were the Altar of Altars Quod sacit tale,
to magises^ tale. So that if we suppose a third Altar, we do not ^rigere Altar
contra Altar* but rather set all three to agree in one, according to the
Mystery of the Trinity.
, that imparted holiness Quod sacit tale, to magises^ tale. So that if we
suppose a third Altar, we do not ^rigere Altar contra Altar* but rather set
all three to agree in one, according to the Mystery of the Trinity.
unto both the other, as well as unto all the people) he shall go out [again]
unto the Altar that is before the Lord, and make an atonement for it, and shall
take of the blood of the Bullock, and of the blood of the Goat, and put it upon
the horns of the Altar round about. And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it
with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleanness
of the Children of Israel. And then, to the Sacrifice of atonement mentioned
before.

Now because St Paul reckons that there was a golden Censer (which belongs to
an Altar) within this Holy of Holies, whereof there was no need, since the
Priest carried one in with him; it might occasion that error of St
Augustine's, that the Altar of incense was in this most holy place; which is
sufficiently detected by Cunaeus. P. Cun. l. 2. c. 4.
And when Expositors have toiled much about this superfluous Censer; it may be
it was but for Ornament alone, as the multitude of Palm Trees and Cherubims,
with which Solomon adorned the Oracle; whereas Moses had ordained two only
Cherubims at the ends of the Ark it self. Or else St Paul might intend no other
than that which the Priest brought in (as the only Ut^^sil belonging unto the
service of that place) though he carried it out again.

But is was not once a Year only that the Mercy-seat and the Covenant were of
any use unto this people. For if the Altar of Sacrifice was ( Non solum ^rbes
Levitarum Asyli gandebaut privilegio, verum and Altar Templi, licet perquam
dispari, tum respectu sacinorum, tum and more, etc. Joan. Seld. de jure Not.
and Gent. jux^a Heb. lib. 4. cap 2.
Asylum) a certain refuge whereunto to flee, and to repair for succor; this
was much more, both for all the people, and for each particular person, in
ordinary and in extraordinary, whether at home or abroad. Let us mark how they
might use it.

This awful place, into which the High Priest might not presume to enter above
once in the year, at the time appointed, not without Typical blood (to
safeguard him) and incense (to procure a gracious acceptance, by the
intercession of the immaculate Lamb, Levit. 16.2, 13.
slain from the beginning of the World) lest he dye (as it is twice said in the
same Chapter) gave its dignity unto all the Temple.

1 Kings 8.22. and 2 Chronicles. 6.12, etc.
So that when Solomon had fini^hed the whole, he stood before the Al^ar of the
Lord [upon a Brazen Scaffold, which he had erected] and kneeling down in the
presence of all the Congregation, he prayed, saying, Lord God of Israel, who
keep Covenant and mercy (there being little comfort in the one without the
other, as also to show us that it was the Covenant and the Mercy-seat together
that was the glory of the whole) although the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain
thee, much less this house that I have built; yet have thou respect unto the
prayer of thy Servant, O Lord my God, (which Pronoun possessive is to be
observed as bearing respect to the promise that he had mentioned before, made
unto his Father David) that thine eyes may be open toward this house night and
day, even toward the place of which thou have said, My name shall be there. And
hearken thou to the supplication of thy people Israel, when they shall pray
toward this place, and when thou hear, forgive, and relieve, reckoning up
the needs that might happen. And among the rest of his petitions, what prayer
or supplication soever be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, which
shall know every man the plague of his own heart, (and not of his Body only)
and spread sorth his hands toward this house; then hear thou in Heaven thy
dwelling place, and forgive, and do; moreover, concerning a Stranger that is
not of thy people Israel, (that it might be known that this house was also
sacred unto him, in whom all the Nations of the Earth were to be blessed) but
comes out of a far Country for thy names sake; (for they shall hear of thy
great name) hear thou in heaven thy dewlling place, and do according to all
that the Stranger calls unto thee for. Which proved a Rule (if not mistaken)
in aftertimes to admit Heathen Princes to offer Sacrifices in the Temple.

This is therefore the frequent compellation (or adjunct to the blessed
Attributes) of God in the Old Testament, who keeps Covenant and mercy. If you
please to know how often, the Concordances are at hand; to which I may refer
you with favor, and not oblige my Reader to pay twice for a single
sa^i^faction. Only this remains to be enquired into, What Covenant they meant,
and with what respect unto the Temple.

CHAP. XXIX. They intended that Covenant which God had made with Abraham, Isa^c
and Jacob, by the sign of Circumcision, (and not that which they consented ^o
when they received the Law) upon which fundamental Covenant it was that God
proclaim^d his Attributes of mercy to them; yet they were bound ^o renew their
own Covenant when ^hey sought for mercies. The presence of God in the Temple an
Object of their faith; of which presence Christ was the Angel, otherwise known
by the name of the loving kindness or tender mercies of God, to which they
trusted more than to any of their services.
ONCE we may be sure, that it was not that part of the Covenant which they had
broken, which was added because of transgressions, or annexed as a Codicil unto
the first Testament, to keep them in awe, and fear of sinning, by its
threatenings, they being always prone to trespass upon the God of Israel: Gal.
3.17.19.
But the Covenant which they intended was that which was confirmed before of
God in Christ, viz. with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, their Progenitors, till the
Seed should come to whom the promise was made. 1 Chronicles. 16.
So that when David had brought the Ark, and set it in the midst of a Tent,
which he had pitched for it, they offer^d Burnt-sacrifices, and Peace Offerings
before God: and then he delivered the hundred and fifth Psalm unto Asaph and
his Brethren, to be tuned by them unto praise, in which there is this special
passage, But in the Psalm, v. 6. it is, O ye seed of Abraham his Servant --
O ye seed of Israel his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen ones; Be ye
mindful always of his Covenant: the word which he commanded to a thousand
Generations. Which Covenant be made with Abraham, and his Oath unto Isaac. And
confirmed the same unto Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an everlasting
Covenant. Unto all which the temporal promise of the Land of Canaan (a Type of
^he eternal rest) is joined and knit.

Upon which fundamental Covenant it was that God proclaimed the name of the
Lord, at the second giving of the Law, in this manner, The Lord, Exodus 34.5, 6
the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and
sin.

This is the Covenant that they were to flee to in all their adversities, so as
still to renew their own, which they had made with God by the mediation of
Moses, when the Law was given. In such manner, 1 Kings 23. Ezra 8. Nehem. 8.
and 9.
as we may read distinctly in the examples of Josiah, Ezra, Nehemiah, and
whatever Reformers or Restorers there were besides. All the Sacrifices of their
Land were of no avail to appease or please God, without this. And this was to
be done either in the Temple, with their faces toward the Mercy-Seat; or
toward the Temple, when they were at a distance from it. This was the use of
the Covenant of mercy, as to all the people: Let us see next what the faith of
particular men might be, and of what use or help, this within the Veil.

Jonah 2.4, 7.
It was the Object of Ionah's faith directly, I said, I am cast out of thy
sight, yet will I look again toward thy holy Temple: When my soul fainted
within me I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came in unto thee, into thine
holy Temple. Lect. 11. on Jonah.
Of all places (says Archbishop Abbot) he pitcheth on the Temple, where God
had put his name, and was more apparently conversant by his ^pecial Grace.
Which did make that House and City to be counted an holy Mansion, the joy of
the Earth, the beauty of the World, the Palace of the Great King, the delight,
Paradise and Garden of the Highest. There was the Ark of the Covenant, the
Tables of the Testimony, [that we may not take these latter alone to be the
whole Covenant] the Cherubims and the Mercy-Seat, all being strange things of
much excellency: But the summity of all happiness was the residence of God's
favor there.... Wherefore the Jews observed this evermore in the earnestness
of their prayer, in what land soever they were, to turn them toward the Temple;
not tying superstitiously the power of God to that place, but knowing that the
same house was not erected in vain. And witnessing withal their obedience unto
the Lord, and to men the constancy of their profession, who held that place as
the Seal of the Lord's assured protection over them. Dan. 6.10.
So when Daniel in Chaldaea would pray, he set his Windows open toward
Jerusalem, to the hazard of his life. Let us therefore next consider his
example.

When Daniel knew by Books, Dan. 9.
that the seventy years were expired, he set his face toward the Temple (though
it was demolished, because the blessing was that way still, and a promise of
its restitution) and prayed, saying, O Lord, the great and dreadful God,
keeping the Covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his
Commandments.... To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though
we have rebelled against him. O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, I
beseech thee, let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy City
Jerusalem, and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary that is desolate, for
the Lord's sake. Nos cum Synodo Sardicensi, simpliciter h^c verba accipimus,
Propter Dominum, h. e. propter Messiam, sive christum. Junius in locum.
Eademque suit in Veteri and Novo Testamento salutis impetrandae ratio. Nec
Iudaei hic renit^ntur, quo minus hec verba de Messia intelligantur. Yarii.
Which if any one think to be not the same as if he had said, For Christ's
sake, who was wont to dwell in the Sanctuary, that lies now in ruins, it
might be fit to put him in mind of our Savior's Question to the Pharisees,
saying, What think ye of Christ, whose Son is he? They say unto him, The Son of
David. He says unto them, How then does David in spirit call him Lord, saying,
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine
Enemies thy footstool? -- And no man was able to answer him a word. The Prophet
said, I beseech thee, O Lord, for the Lord's sake; The Question is, For what
Lord's sake? or what congruity in the sense? For the words are not, I beseech
thee for thine own sake, or for thy mercy-sake; But for the Lord's sake:
Neither is it questioned, but that the Lord Christ was revealed to the
Prophets, in a great measure; nor yet that their Writings were so obscure, as
that others besides themselves understood nothing of the meaning of them: for
they were written (as all Scripture) for instruction, which has been pointed at
before

There are indeed of opinion that hold, That by the Types they were little the
wiser; but by the Prophets, they knew to the very Day of Christ's coming,
Matthew. 14.33. -- 26.63. -- 27.43, 54.
not only that he was to be the Son of David; but also the Son of God: A Notion
common unto all that expected the Messiah in any manner.

But, (...), Joh. 1.49. -- 6.69. -- 11.27. -- 20.31, etc.
to speak the rest in a word, What is the Son of God, but the loving kindness
and mercy of the Father, begotten in himself by eternal Generation, to be made
manifest in the flesh, according to the time appointed by the Father? In this
loving kindness (therefore) and tender mercies of God, with respect to him that
was to come, they put their trust; even as we do, in the same mercies, through
him, that is come since, and now for ever lives to make intercession for us.

So that in their prayers there was nothing but the name of Christ concealed,
because it was not yet revealed to them; the same Petitions, the same
Arguments, and the like Confessions. In all which, if there were not a Syllable
of Christ, how could we use the fame Forms and Phrases still? If they were not
according to the Spirit of Christ, how could we be sanctified or comforted by
the Scriptures of the Old Testament? A thing that has been little weighed by
the Antinomians, when they spoke so contemptibly of an Old Testament-Spirit, as
if it were all legal, and of bondage only in blindness and darkness.

Alas! they knew as well as we, that faith and repentance (whether with or
without Sacrifices or other outward services) was the only way to please God:
Neither had they any Sacrifices, but if it were a Sin-Offering, Levit. 1.4. and
3.13. and 4.24. Dr Lightfoo^'s Temple-Service, chapter 8. sect. 1. Et Outr. l. 1.
c. 15.
the Offerer was bound to put his hand upon the head of the Burnt-Offering.
Which was accounted amongst them to have been a Rite of transmission, as it
were, of the man's sin unto the Sacrifice that was to dye for him (which was a
Figure of the transferring or our sins on Christ.) And in laying of his hands
on the Bullock's head, he confessed his sin after this manner, I have sinned, I
have done perversely, I have rebelled, and done thus or thus; but I return by
repentance before thee, and let this be my atonement. And once a year they had
a scapegoat let loose with all their sins into the Wilderness, Levit. 16.9.22.
to teach them that God delighted not in the blood of Beasts; and that there
was another mean to do away their sins, besides the slaying of the dumb
Creature.

For if had been otherwise, what should David have done, when he was convicted
by the Prophet of his two great sins, of murder and adultery? All the Beasts of
the Forest, Psalm. 30.10, 11.
and the Cattle upon a thousand Hills (which were all God's own) had not been
enough to sacrifice for the expiation of such sins as those. Psalm. 51.
Wherefore he says, Thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it; Thou
delightest not in Burnt-Offering. How then? The Sacrifices of God are a broken
Spirit. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness, according
to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions..... Wash
me, and I shall be whiter than Snow. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and
renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take
not thy Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and
uphold me with thy free Spirit.

Nor was this a mystery known only unto choicer men: For one of the Scribes
approving of our Lord's Answer, when he had told him which were the two great
Commandments, replied, Well, Mark 12.32, 33.
Master, thou have said the truth; for to love God with all the heart and soul,
and to love his Neighbor as himself, is more than all whole Burnt-Offerings
and Sacrifices.

And if that passage of Isaiah be well considered, it will show us what kind of
piety it was that did impregnate the Spirits of the people of God from Moses
unto Christ: Isai. 63.7, 8, 9.
I will mention the loving kindnesses of the Lord, according to the great
goodness toward the house of Israel, which he has bestowed on them, according
to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses: for he
said, Surely they are my people: so he was their Savior. In all their
affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them. In his
love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all
the days of old. Wherein the church stands clear off from any merits of her
Progenitors; or of Moses, Aaron, and the Prophets, relying only on her Savior,
the Angel of the presence of the God of Israel. They believed therefore in
Christ as we do only by the name of the tender mercies of God, both for pardon
and for every Grace beside.

CHAP. XXX. Christ clothed in his Word and promises, the adequate Object of
saving faith; which he was to them as well as unto us: No naked Christ without
these: No plerophory without them. So much of any promise as the Ancients laid
hold of, so much of Christ they received in an implicit manner. There is
somewhat implicit in faith, even in these days too.
Ut B^za, Zanchius, etc. ut etiam videre est in Tactic. sacr. D. Arrowsmith.
NOW if Faith be to be defined per modum (...) (as some Divines have followed
Calvin over strictly in such a Notion, from which they are much come off of
late) to be a certain full persuasion of particular Election in Christ; I must
confess I know not how to accommodate such a faith to the times of the Old
Testament; or to find that they had (then) an agreeable faith unto such as are
of that persuasion. Or if the Object of Faith be precisely (and abstrusely)
set, to be the very person of Christ, a naked Christ, divested (almost) of his
Word and Ordinances; I shall not be able to make out any thing that way neither.

But as the Lutherans speak about their Consubstantiation, that Christus
vestitus, Christ clothed in the Elements, is there received by the worthy
Communicant; so I doubt not but I may safely say, that Christus vestitus verbo
suo, Christ clothed with his own Word, ever was and is the adequate Object of
the Faith of all Ages; wherein he was and is received to salvation, and to all
other ends and purposes whatsoever. More especially according to the measure of
promises, as they have been revealed, and made from time to time Crediderunt
quidem in Chrislo per promissa, and prophetias partim revelato: intra
Cherubinos tamen, and in Typis, aliter velato.
.

I think I have gone somewhat near to prove to indifferent men, that many of
the Saints of the Old Testament had a greater insight into the main scope of
the very promise about the person and merits of Christ, than diversmen might
have thought before; and that they had the right use of their faith unto
justification, as we have now. The only Point wherein it may seem that some may
stick, is, whether in the multitude it was not a confused faith, and not
distinct enough to be what ours must be.

To this therefore it is to be considered, That saving faith relyeth not on any
one promise whatsoever (abstractedly) by it self; nor yet that all the promises
which are certainly to be believed are of use to all men: so that all together
are of no more consequence unto us than unto them.

Next it is to be remembered what St Paul tells us, 2 Cor. 1.20.
that all the promises of God in Christ are Yea, and in him Amen. So that how
much or how little soever the Saints of the Old Testament embraced of the
promises, they embraced of Christ, as implicitly contained in them: which
wrought in them the like obedience, hope and perseverance as in us, so as to
carry them beyond carnal things, to the things heavenly and spiritual. Which St
Paul (again) elaborately proves to us, in the eleventh to the Hebrews; and that
they looked more toward that Seed wherein all the Nations should be blessed,
Heb. 11.10, etc.
and another Country and City, which has foundations, whose Builder and Maker
is God, than toward the Land of Can^an. And all the Worthies which he reckons
up, he says obtained a good report through faith, having not received ^he
[special] promise, God having provided some better thing for us, that they
without us, should not be made perfect.

In fine, we shall find somewhat that is implicit in the best faith of any of
ours; and if we shall consider how short that faith may be, which others of
ours may have, (unto salvation t^o) and so compare it with theirs, we shall
think the less strange of any thing that has been said of theirs before.

Do we not all believe the Gospel, not knowing how much may be contained in it?
Do we not engage ourselves in Baptism to obey, not knowing what shall be
required of us? Like Abraham, who when he was called, obeyed, and went out, not
knowing whither he went. Are we not in frequent doubts and fears both about the
promises that we embrace as we are able, and about our practice, to be ordered
so that at last we may obtain them? Was it a weak faith in that Martyr, that
went drooping to the Stake, not so much for fear of death, as for the pressure
of desertion that then lay upon him? And yet he durst not recant to save all,
(as they might think) both Soul and Body too. But the Spirit of Glory came upon
him in an instant to bear him up above all. In fine, when we shall consider how
many of ours that have some faith of adherence (as we otherwise distinguish)
and, in the judgment of Charity, do stand fair toward salvation in the end,
are ignorant of the mystery of Christ, whom they profess; not knowing how to
apply themselves to the mercies of God, through him alone, nor the Virtue of
his merits, or benefit of his intercession for them; in a word, nor the power
of his death and resurrection in any comfortable measure to their own souls;
what need we wonder much, though it be said, That (as many which were first
shall be last, and many of the last, first, so) the Saints of the Old Testament
shall be found in comparison with us at the latter Day? For better were those
of them who knew how to apply the mercies of God in Christ, not knowing the
name of Christ; than such of ours as have heard the sound of the Gospel, and do
not understand so much of the meaning of it, as they before.

CHAP. XXXI. Wherein the Saints of the Old Testament could not attain to so
much as has been since revealed. That the generality of them were blinded most
(1.) by God's Providence, who would have 'Christ to come in the worst times,
that he might be crucified; and so obtain his Kingdom. And that the Disciples
themselves should be held in like obscurity with other misled Disciples of the
Scribes, lest they should indis^r^etly offer to hinder the ministry of Christ.
(2.) By Satan's malice, to work the destruction of the Jewish Church and
people; chie^ly by the perverseness of the Pharisees. Different apprehensions
concerning Jewish Learning. The close of this Argument.
BUT here the Objectors may close again, and say, Is there (then) no privilege
or no advantage by the Gospel? or by the explicit faith of Christ, exhibited in
the New Testament, more than there was before? Has St Paul magnified his own
ministry, and this ministration all in vain?

God forbid! But it is not within my verge (in this place, though I have
stretched to bring in this Question) to show the difference betwixt the two
Testaments; but only in discovering the state of the first, to manifest that
they had the faith of Christ amongst them. But for a better relish in the
Close, I will add a passage or two of the Fathers, whose Authority may go
further than any Comments of my own.

Saint Augustine thus, Licet magnam jucunditatem habu^rint Prophetae, quando in
Spirit^ videbant ^utura de Chrislo, tamen volebant, si ficri posset, in hoc
tempore nobiscum vivere, and videre impleta, quae Spirit^ prophetabant. Praef.
in Psalm. 96.
Although the Prophets conceived much pleasure, when in the Spirit they foresaw
the things to come concerning Christ; yet they would (if it could have been)
have lived in the same times with us; and to have seen those things fulfilled
which they prophesied by the Spirit.

And St Bernard upon those words of our Savior [ Blessed are your eyes, Matthew.
13.16, 17.
for they see; and your ears, for they hear: for verily I say unto you, that
many Prophets and righteous men have desired to see these things which ye see,
and have not seen them; and to hear these things which ye hear, and have not
heard them] descanteth thus, Quare volaerunt videre, and audire? Vt videlicet
clarius, ^argiusque perciperent, quod vix ten ^iter obscureque praesinserant.
Alioqui quid erat opus, soris videre carnem, and carnis audire sermones, si
intus ^ Spriritu su rint instructi perfect de omnibus? Epist. 77. ad Hug. de
S. Victore.
Why would they see and hear? To wit, that they might perceive more clearly and
largely that which they scarcely discerned, but slenderly and obscurely before.
For what need had there been to see with their fleshly eyes, and to hear with
their outward ears, if they had been inwardly and perfectly instructed as much
before as they could ever learn thereafter?

There remains nothing to be cleared more, but what is shadowed by the Veil of
Moses, in the latter end of the last Objection: For if the Veil of Ceremonies
was but thin, and the Prophecies so clear; why were all the Jews so ignorant,
especially the Disciples of our Lord himself, about any true or proper thing
relating to Messiah when he came?

It has been hinted before, that they generally knew how he was to be both the
Son of God, and the Son of David, to be born at Bethlehem, and to be the
greatest Prophet and King that they ever had. Now it is a further Question
among the Schoolmen (to whom I may refer you) whether Moses knew more of the
Messiah to come than Abraham, and David more than both: and so onwards of all
the Prophets, home unto John the Baptist, even as his coming was the nearer.
But I confess my opinion carries me to think, That the Prophets ceasing after
Malachi, and the Pharisees arising to repute under the first beginnings of the
Maccabees, (which will be noted in its place) and not long after combining with
the Scribes to the corruption of the true Religion; that this mystery was on
purpose veiled (more than before) by the Providence of God, and malice of the
Instruments of Satan.

(I.) By God's Providence, who would have, the Restorer to appear in the worst
of times. Luke 18.8.
Could the Son of man then (any more than at his second Coming) find faith upon
the Earth? If they had known him generally, Acts 3.15.17.
durst the rest of them have crucified the Lord of life and glory? Wherefore
when St Peter preached to their conviction, that they might not be driven to
despair, but to repentance of such a sin; he is permitted thus to insinuate
with them, And now Brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as also
did your Rulers. And had not Christ suffered, and so entered into Glory, how
could he have obtained the Kingdom promised of his Father?

So that left the Disciples themselves (that had been trained under the
Paedagogy of the Scribes and Pharisees) should become impertinent Hinderers of
their Masters ways, if they had known to what they tended; the spiritual
mysteries of Christ were sparingly delivered to them before he suffered, and
fully after he was risen. Once, when our Savior had said unto them* Luke 9.44,
45.
(somewhat to prepare them for a change) Let these sayings sink down into your
ears; for the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men; they
understood not this saying, but it was hid from them, that they perceived it
not: and they feared to ask him of that saying. Matthew. 16.21, 22, 23.
And again, when Jesus began to show unto his Disciples how he must suffer and
be killed, and rise again the third day; Peter took him up, and began to rebuke
him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord; this shall not be unto thee. (for Peter
meant to fight for him) But Jesus turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind
me Satan, thou art an offense unto me: for thou savourest not the things that
be of God, but those that be of men. Such a check had never trusty Peter, or
any of the Disciples before. Luke 24.27.
But after his resurrection, he began from Moses and all the Prophets, and
expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself.

(2.) As for the malice of Satan, and his Instruments. He himself could have no
greater stratagem (so far as he could discern the tokens of Christ's coming,
more than mortal men) than to blind their eyes beforehand that they might not
know the day of their visitation; but that they might be defeated, and
disappointed of all their perverted, carnal expectations, and so become
offended in him to the death: In sine, that by the murder of the Son of God, he
might bring many souls to Hell; and the ancient people and Church of God to
final ruin and destruction, as shortly after happened. And who knows but Satan
might understand the Prophecies of these things, and so set himself to work, as
the readier instrument to bring them all about, as he desired?

But for his Under-Instruments, they chiefly were the Scribes and Pharisees,
whose corruptions our Savior therefore bends himself to discover and reprove
on all occasions. And if you ask me, what could they do? I answer, they had in
a long tract of time before, put such carnal glosses on the Scripture, out of
their designs (sometimes against their own Princes, sometimes against the
Romans; but always to get both gain and authority among the people of the Jews)
that sitting in the Chair of Moses, as Expounders of the Law and of the
Prophets; they utterly perverted the true sense and meaning thereof: and that
especially about the Messiah, who was generally expected (almost throughout the
whole Roman Empire, and beyond it) when he came. And when he was come, Matthew.
2.4.
who should be enquired of but the Pharisees whether he was indeed the Christ,
or no? And they generally denied him; for the Character of his Person agreed
not with their ancient Glosses, or their present ends or interests.

And here I cannot omit what different Notions learned men have of the Jewish
Rabbis, especially of such whose Writings remain as accounted written before
our Lord was born, or shortly after. Cunaeus says, Talmudicorum omnium,
Rabbinorumque gravissima judicia, semper apud omnes cordatos permagnum pondus
habue^re, quoties de Patriis Ritibus eorum, Ceremoniisque orta disceptatio est.
l. 2. c. 4.
That their authority was always great among ingenuous and prudent men, as often
as any Question does arise about their Countrey-Rites and Ceremonies. And
another speaks thus, Mt Vines in his Treatise of the Sacram^, chap. 1.
Let all blind and bold Expositors know, that if they expound not many Phrases
and things in the New Testament out of the old Records of Jewish Writings or
Customs, they shall but fancy and not expound the Text, as may be confirmed,
says Scaliger, sexcentis Argumentis, by very many Arguments. And what account
Mr Hugh Broughton, Mr Seldom, and Dr Lightfoot, Alib. in l. praed.
have made of these (it may be because they could have no better) appears by
their elaborate Collections from them. On the other hand Chemnitius (whom Mr
Vines esteems as the learned of all the Lutherans) has entered abundant
caution with us about these Writings of the Jews.

Chemn. in examp. 1, par. Conc. Trident, page 12, Agens de similit^dine and
assinitate Traditionum Pontificiarum, cum Pharisaicis and Talmudicis.
The Disputation (says he) about unwritten Traditions, whether to be joined or
opposed to the Scriptures, is no new thing; but it is the very panoplia of
Jewish perfidy against the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God in the
Scripture. That the purity of the sound Doctrine of the Word was corrupted
amongst them in the time of Christ, the Evangelical History does manifestly
show; and that it sprang partly from Oral Traditions, and partly from other
holy Books (so esteemed) which they received with the like veneration as the
other, Matthew. 15.9.
is likewise to be gathered from their teaching for Doctrine the Commandments
of men. (Which have ever used to be written.) And if Andradius (against whom
the Author writes) cannot bear the indignity, that their Traditions should be
compared with the Pharisees, which were but false and feigned; whereas theirs
are derived by a continual succession from the Apostles themselves; the Jews,
says he, will be as ready to pretend as much from Moses and the Prophets by a
like succession. And if the Talmud had not first been written, I should rather
have thought that the Rabbis had learned from the Pontificians, than these
from them, -- Ita a^tem Commentum suum concinnant Talmudici: They feign, that
at Mount Sinai, Moses received from God, not only what he wrote, Verum etiam
mysticam, and arcanam Expositionem Legis, but also a certain mystical and
secret Exposition of the Law, which he neither wrote nor would have written,
but to be delivered by word of mouth from one to another, and so to be
transmitted to Posterity. And they say further, that both of ^hese are the Word
of God, and to be received with the like veneration...... And that after these
had been long transmitted from the Priests and Prophets, (whose succession they
name) they were thought fit (at last) to be compiled in the Talmud...... Unto
whose Expositors the poor Jews are in such bondage, that they must believe
against their own sense and reason, whatsoever their Rabbis do impose upon
them.

And why the Jews are so zealous of this Talmud, may be learned from the
circumstance of time when it was compiled: for when the Jews saw many of their
Nation converted to Christianity, by the evidence of the Scripture; the Rabbis
about the year of Christ 150. began to write the Talmud, comprizing their
Traditions. Finding the success whereof, they after infinitely encre^sed the
number of them: so that few Jews were after that converted to Christianity.

So that in the opinion of Cheminitius all the errors and perverseness of the
ancient Pharisees are couched in the Talmud (which is one of the most ancient
Jewish Books we have) The Talmud it self has been replenished and corrupted
more than it was at first. All that is in it (howsoever) has given Rules and
Bounds to all the Rabbis that have written since; from whence it follows, that
we can hardly tell wherein to believe or trust the most applauded of them. They
contradict the Scriptures (often) in relating of their own Customs, and one
another no less; and if any man thinks to illustrate one part of a Text by some
of their suggestions, he may be as apt to leave the other darker than before.
In fine, the Jews of later times know what they know of their own Rites by
learning only, and have ever had concurrent Christians to study with them, and
exceed them, as the more concerned to gain such knowledge, and to gainsay such
friends as they. But we are no such Enemies unto Learning (howsoever) though we
cannot get the light we seek from them, as to burn their Books for a blaze at
once, and after that to stand in need of such a Guide as we might have gotten
(rather than none at all) in the Quarters of an Enemy.

And thus have I endeavored (not to say all that may be said, but) to travel
through a Question that has sometimes puzzled me before; and which being well
cleared (if I have attained unto that happiness) may prevent perplexities and
more digressions, that may else be^al me hereafter in my proceeding: But
chiefly upon Cunaeus's encouragement, Dix illud inter homines eruditissimos
disceptalum est, quid de summo salutis auspice speraverit olim, credidertive
antiquior illa Hebraeorum Natio? Habit ^a res magnum momentum ad rectam
interpretationem: otius sacri codicis, Adio late patet illius ambitus. Lib. 3.
cap. ult.
(who has offered fine things upon the same Subject) viz. That this Point is of
great moment toward the interpretation of the whole Bible, and such as does
deserve to be discussed with diligence.

CHAP. XXXII. Showing the providence of God over his people Israel, according
to the Blessing promised of their multiplying; in respect of fruitfulness, and
of protection in Egypt (however hardly used otherwise) from Famine, War and
Pestilence. That the indulgence of Concubines might contribute much to the
number of their increase. That in an ordinary way of computatio^ (without
flying unto Twins, or any other miracles) out of seventy persons only, the
Muster-Roll of Moses might easily arise.
NOW when it had pleased God to sever from the Tents of Abraham and Isaac whom
he pleased, and to plant them so as they might either afflict or befriend the
House of Israel in the times to come; he brought the whole House of Jacob, by
another Providential Famine, into Egypt, whither he had brought Joseph (as if
he had been but a lost man) before, to provide for all the rest.

Genesis 46.26, 27.
It is said, that all the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out
of his loins, besides Jacob's Sons Wives, were sixty six. And the Sons of
Joseph, which were born to him in Egypt, were two souls: All the souls of the
house of Jacob; which came into Egypt, were seventy. And again, Deuteronomy. 10.22.
(...)
Thy Father went do^n into Egypt with seventy persons [or names] and now the
Lord thy God has made thee as the Stars of Heaven for multitude. Neither does
Josephus reckon more. Antiq. 1.2. c. 4.
But when they came forth of Egypt (after two hundred and nine years) the
Children of Israel, Numb. 1.45, 46.
being numbered from twenty years old and upward, were found to be six hundred
and three thousand, five hundred and fifty, all able to go forth to Battle:
(Judge how many more the Women and Children might be.) And when the Tribe of
Levi was numbered by it self, every Male from a month old and upward, Chap.
3.15.39.
it amounted to twenty two thousand more, (to which we may allow as many
Females;) so that we can hardly imagine less than a million and an half of
these people in the whole. And how this account may be stated to ^ reasonable
man (to save him the labor of adjusting it) I have begged the assistance of a
learned Gentleman, who has obliged us both with this return. Which I give you
clearly in the Postscript, as I received it, though it seem in diverse passages
to contravene some of my own opinions, as they are here and there delivered in
these Papers. See the Postscript, where the Contents intended in this Chapter
are annexed.

CHAP. XXXIII. That a great number came along with the house of Jacob; for
Abraham had a great Train, Isaac more, Jacob all they left, and such as he
brought with him from Padan-aram. Six Objections propounded: And two
fundamental Arguments for the Thesis.
BUT if all that be not ample satisfaction, what If I should pro-pound another
thought (fortified with its probabilities) unto other searching Spirits? Which
is, that the seventy names or persons were only of such as came out of Jacobs
loins, Heads of Families, which were to be the Princess of Israel; and that
indeed a great number came along with them.

We cannot but remember what a Band of his own trained Servants, bred in his
own Tents, Abraham carried forth against the Kings, when he rescued Lot; and no
doubt he left others with the Women and the Cattle at home. It seems to have
been about thirty years after, that Abraham being much more en^reased in wealth
and power, Genesis 21.22, 23. Dr Simson. Genesis 26.12, etc.
was sought unto by Abimelech to enter into League with him. And it was about a
hundred years after (if my Chronologer guess well) before another Abimelech
entered into the like Covenant with Isaac; when he sowed in the land, (which is
more than Abraham had done) and received in the same year an hundred fold, and
waxed great, and went forwards, and grew until he became very great: for he had
possession of flocks, and herds, and great store of Servants; so that the
Philistines envied him.

And as for Jacob, Genesis 35, 27.
he returned out of Padan-aram (or Mesopotamia) to his aged Father Isaac at
Hebron, -- 32.10.
where Abraham and Isaac (for the most part) so-journed, with much more Cattle,
and with two Bands in his Retinue; together with both his Wives (only Rachel
fell in travail of Benjamin, and dyed by the way, falling short of Hebron no
more than Bethlehem is distant from it) and his twelve Sons, besides his
Daughter Dinah (mentioned, it may be, on occasion only, and that Jacob might
have more See Genesis 46.7 Jacob came into Egypt with his Sons, and Sons Sons, his
Daughters, and his Sons Daughters, etc. yet again ver. 15. Dinah alone seems to
make up the number of seventy souls.
; at least by Bilhah and Zilpah, the Concubines that his Wives had given him
out of their emulation unto one another:) So that after Isaac's death, he must
needs be, not only enriched with the inheritance but, powerful in the number of
Chap. 37.35. it is said, that all Jacob's Sons, and all his Daughters, rose up
to comfort him after Ioseph's loss.
all his people. A specimen whereof we have in the attempt of Simeon and Levi
(alone by themselves) who took each man his sword and came upon the City of
Shechem boldly, and slew all the males; Chap. 34.25.
unless any man will have it so, that two single men stormed a walled City, and
put all the males to the sword, who (however sore) might have been defended by
the very Women in such a Case.

Now as the absence of Jacob from his aged Father before was very long, (some
twenty years) so it is not to be expected that Isaac's days should be extended
much longer by the Providene of God; since the Heir of the Promise was restored
home to him. Bish. Hall.
Of all the Patriarchs, none made so little noise in the World as Isaac, none
lived either so privately, or so innocently. He used no Concubine, although
Rebekkah was twenty years barren...... And now that Rebekkah's Darling was come
back, he left all to him in the hundred and eightieth year of his life. Which
Jacob managed, not above ten years longer (upon account) before he was enforced
by God's Providence to descend into Egypt with all his house. The Question is,
Whether they were but seventy Males in all (to wave the Question, whether they
were so many, for some are of opinion that some of Jacob's Sons Sons are
reckoned by anticipation, and might for all that be born in Egypt, after they
were planted in the Land of Goshen.) Let us hear what may be said on either
side. And first, that they were but Stephen reckons. For, Acts 7.14.


First, Obj. I.
It is safe to keep to the Letter of the Scripture (in Historical Passages
especially) and not to wire-draw it, or extend it more than needs; for fear of
wresting, or of worser consequences that may be drawn from more remote
constructions, than from the very words. Now of Jacob and his Sons it is
expressly said,

Genesis 42.
First, That Jacob sent his ten Sons (and no more) into Egypt, to buy Corn; by
which it may seem, that he had no such number to spare as has been suggested:
Or that his Sons were but as the rest, by the errand that they went on.

Obj. 2.
Secondly, When Joseph returned their moneys, it was to every man in the mouth
of his Sack; and being searched, Chap. 44.
upon their second return (when they had Benjamin with them) the search began
from the eldest to the youngest, and could proceed no further, because (it
seems) they were no more.

Obj. 3.
Thirdly, Their dealing was for little, since so few Asses could carry what they
came for; and their Sacks not so full, but that they could contain Provender
besides: proving nothing else, but that these being laden, the poor Ass-Riders
must go on foot home.

Obj. 4.
Fourthly, By Jacob's mean Present, and Judah's fear of losing the Asses, Chap.
43.10, 18.
when they were taken, it seems they were but poor; and so when Joseph returned
an answerable Present with Wagons to his Father, to bring him into Egypt

Fifthly, Obj. 5.
Besides, that there maybe no doubt of the number, it is carefully recorded how
many came with Jacob, and were there before, viz. seventy souls. Genesis 46 --
And so Josephus, Jewish Antiquary, does account, and no more.

Sixthly, Obj. 6.
In fine, it would be a strange extravagancy to put so many Supernumeraries (of
we know not what Aliens) unto this account; which must needs reckon them to
Israel, and the Seed of Abraham, (and so to the only Church of God;) or else
give some other clear account what became of them at the last.

Secondly, Notwithstanding which Israel descended into Egypt with more than
seventy person, by these two Arguments (which will be proved by answering the
Objections only) 1. Because he descended with all his household. 2. Because he
neither could nor ought to part with his circumcised Servants, and their Wives
and Children.

CHAP. XXXIV. Certain Corollary Rules preliminary to the answering of the first
Objection. That Jacob sent his Sons to Joseph, as a foreign Prince, for a
favor; but not unaccompanied; considering, 1. Their concern; 2. What weight of
money they might take with them in so many Bundles, if only to lade ten Asses.
3. What the length and hazard of the way. The four next Objections briefly
answered.
TO the first good Rule, these others may be joined as succedaneous
Corollaries. First, That the sense of the Scripture is its own authority, more
than the Critical position of the words; warranted by several Quotations in the
New Testament, out of the Old. Secondly, That necessary consequence is all one
with the Text it self; neither was a good Inference ever slighted. Thirdly,
That in such Historical Passages of Scriptures as do veil (or are invelop'd
with) a mystery, we are, in a manner, Gal. 3.22, 23.
directed to a further indagation by St Paul, where he tells us, (what else we
should have hardly found) that one of Abraham's Sons by a Bond-maid, and
another by a free Woman, did by an Allegory exhibit to us the difference of
state betwixt Mount Sinai and the New Jerusalem, or betwixt the Law and Grace,
Bondage and Liberty. Fourthly, That by comparing Passages, one Scripture does
best expound another. After which Preliminaries, I address my self to answer
the first Objection, thus:

First, Answer to Object. 1.
It is still to be remembered, that it is above two hundred and ten years since
Abram armed three hundred and eighteen trained Servants born in his own house,
to pursue the Kings that had taken Lot Prisoner: And if seventy Persons only in
two hundred and ten years (or thereabouts) might become such an incredible
number, (as the possibility has been demonstrated) what may we think of three
hundred and eighteen more, in the same Family, Partakers of the like Blessings,
so far as their increase was the increase of Abraham's wealth and strenght? But
(not to be entangled with too many difficulties) to think modesty, Jacob could
scarce have less than a thousand souls within his Tents.

Secondly, But why (then) did he send his ten Sons only, with their ten Asses,
to buy Corn for them all? Could they bring enough? Or did they only bring for
Jacob's own Tent, and leave the rest to live on Roots, or Nuts and Almonds,
with which (it seems, by the Present, that) the Land abounded?

You must remember Ioseph's Dreams, Gen 37.7, 9.
that their sheaves should do obeisance to his sheaf, and the Sun and the Moon
and the eleven Stars also; and then you must consider his present state, and
the condition of all the Nations thereabouts. Chapter 41.38.
Joseph was advanced to be chief Minister of State under Pharaoh; and according
to his own advice, he was appointed to take up the fifth part of the Land of
Egypt, for seven years together, of plenty, against seven other to ensue of
certain famine, according to the interpretation of Pharaoh's Dream. Ver. 54.
And when the famine came in all parts, Chapter 42.1.
Jacob heard that there was Corn in Egypt (for Joseph had gathered Corn as the
sand of the Sea, very much, until he left numbering, for it was without number)
but not to be had, save only from the hands of Pharaoh, or his chief Minister;
and therefore (you may know) he sent his ten Sons (and not his Servants) to do
their obeisance for Corn; But not without Attendance, as we may easily collect
from diverse circumstances: as, 1. From the Concern that they had; 2. From the
money that they carried with them; 3. From the hazard of the Journey, and the
length thereof.

As for their Concern, they had every man his own Family, and did not always
eat in Jacob's presence: Nor could they live on Nuts or Almonds any more than
the Egyptians on their Fruits, Genesis 47.19.
who were forced to sell their Lands, and their Persons too, to Pharaoh, that
they might have Bread.

For their money, Chapter 43.35. Ver. 21. We opened our Sacks, and behold every
man^ money wa^ in the mouth of his Sack, our money in full weight --
every of the ten carried a Bundle in his Bag: Think you that a Bundle of
Silver (as money went then) was but enough to buy one Asses burden? Weigh the
Bundle, and the burden, and consider!

For their Journey, it could be little less than two hundred miles directly
from Hebron unto Caire: If they brought but each man an Ass-Load, what might
they spend by the way? Or what might they have to divide amongst them when they
came home? Certainly so little, that there would have been no end of going or
coming; whereas (by virtue of what they brought) they were able to subsist (it
seems) a good while e're Jacob could be prevailed with to venture Benjamin,
though Simeon lay at stake till their return. And for the way, it was never to
be passed without a lusty Caravan, Genesis 16.12.
for fear of the Ishmaelites, (of whose Progenitor it was said, That he should
be a wild man, and that his hand should be against every man, and every man's
hand against him) and the Arabians, who wanted Cornespecially.

Answer to Object. 2.
And now the Answer is the easier to the second, viz. That in the search they
went not so much by Pole, as by Companies, the Heads of which were the Leaders
and the Purse-bearers for all the rest of their Retinue. And in Benjamin's own
Sack (as it was designed) the prize was found.

Answer to Object. 3.
To the third, we answer, That if there were any Servants at all, there might be
Asses enough, so that the Masters needed not to foot it back, or to return home
with so slender provision, as is imagined. And if there were no Servants, Chap.
45.^1.
Joseph gave his Brothers not a little trouble when he gave them Wagons also,
without any one man (mentioned) to assist them.

It may seem rather by Judah's fear about the losing of the Asses that they
were not a few, Answer to Object. 4.
than that his Father was poor; and for Jacob's Present, let it be compared
with other Presents of the same time; nay, 1 Samuel 25.18.
with Abigail's a long time after, when one would think that she should have
stretched to pacify the wrath of David.

That the seventy are recounted only to keep the Genealogy of the Head^ of
Israel, Answer to Object. 5.
Wherein the Servants had no share.

CHAP. XXXV. The last Objection answered, by showing, That the circumcised
Servants were part of Jacob's household, that could not be parted withal,
without loss, scandal and prejudice to the Church of God; as being, 1. Children
of the faith of Abraham. 2. Graffed into his Seed by intermarriages. 3.
Distinct in Genealogy. 4. Yet (possibly) some snare unto the Israelites, by
retaining a smack of their old Idolatry.
Answer to Object. 6.
NOW I cannot be unsensible how loath some will be to admit many rude Herdsmen
(who were still apt to be at debate with their Neighbors) into the number of
Abraham's Seed, the only Church of God; lest it should be profaned by them,
and prove an interruption to the promise: yet I must needs show them that these
were no Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, but were really constitutive
members of that growing Body.

1. I think it will not be questioned but that these were part of Jacob's house
or household, who dwelt in the Tents of Jacob: and then it is expressly said, Gen
46.1, 31, etc.
that Israel took his journey with all that he had. And Joseph said unto his
Brethren, and unto his Fathers house, (distinct from them) I will go up, and
say unto Pharaoh, My Brethren and my Fathers house, which were in the Land of
Canaan, are come unto me. And the men are Shepherds; for their trade has been
to feed Cattle, and they have brought their Flocks and their Herds (more than
twelve men could manage) and all that they have, that ye may dwell in the Land
of Goshen, which was a fertile Tract about the mouth of the Nile, or the tongue
of the Red Sea, nearest unto Canaan, and neglected by the Egyptians. For every
Shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians. Videsis Cun. de Rep. Heb. l. 1. C.
5.
Out of superstition (say some) because they worshipped some fort of Beasts;
and (say others) out of niceness, because they more affected Towns and Trades.
Chap. 47.11, 12.
And Joseph placed his Father and his Brethren in the best of the Land, in the
Land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded. And he nourished them and all his
Fathers household with bread, according to their Families. Which shows that some
of the Servants also were of some account, and had their own Families, enough
to people the rest of Goshen: So that Joseph wisely kept them at a distance
from the sight of Pharaoh, for fear of State-jealousie.

2. As these could not be left behind without loss, so neither was it lawful
for Jacob or his Sons to turn them off, or abandon them. For their Circumcision
was an indelible Character; so that it would have been a reproach to Israel to
have exposed any of his unto the Heathen, or to have cast them into temptation
of revolting to Idolatry, after once they had been joined to the Church by the
sign and seal of the righteousness of faith, even of the same faith with
Abraham, in whose Seed all the Nations of the Earth were to be blessed; and
these (in particular) as the first fruits of the Gentiles, Children of the
faith of Abraham, and Heirs of the better part of the promise; and not excluded
from their lots in the other part neither, as we trust to show hereafter.
Neither was there need to put off these for any misdemeanour, since every Head
of an house had power of life and death, and other punishments, and that
without appeal to the Supreme, Genesis 38.24.
as is manifest in the Case of Judah and Tamar, when it was told Judah, that
she was with Child of whoredom; says he, Bring her forth, and let her be
burnt. And though specious things are said about the ancient use of
Excommunication in the Church; Videsis Bertr. cap. 2. and Godwin's Jewish
Antiquities, Book 5. chap. 2. Exodus 4.24.
yet it seems to me, that hitherto (and long after) there was no cutting off
from the people, but by death: wherefore an Angel met Moses with a drawn Sword,
and sought to have slain him, for his neglect of circumcising of his Child.

3. Nor let any one admire at this that follows. They became the Children of
Abraham by a kind of adoption or insition into the Stock of Abraham, by
marrying of the Daughters of Israel; and so, in course of time, they became one
Kindred with them. For who should they give them to besides? Genesis 34.15, 16.
We cannot give our Sister to one that is uncircumcised (said the Sons of
Jacob) for that were a reproach unto us. But if ye will be as we be, then will
we give our Daughters unto you, and take your Daughters unto us, and we will
dwell with you, and we will become one people. Trouble not your self about
disparagement; for they were been nati, wellborn, who were born in the same
house; emancipate also ( tanquam liberi aut liberti) by Circumcision, and they
lived all upon one Stock, so that there could not be any want amongst them. But
the truth is, the dignity of Degree and Pedigree went to the prime Descendents
male, from the Loins of the twelve Patriarchs of Israel; which may seem to be
the true reason why we find in the Genealogies such an account as this, Numb.
26.35.
viz. These are the Sons of Ephraim (for instance of one) after their families,
of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhites; of Bacher, the family of the
Bachrites; of Taban, the family of the Tabanites -- And the rest are numbered in
gross only, to be in all thirty two thousand, and six hundred Families. But the
Patriarchs themselves were put to harder shift for Wives (even unto trespass)
because they could not take their Sisters, or go any more to their Unkles
houses to be matched, as Isaac and Jacob had done before. It remains
(therefore) that these Hinds, Husbandmen, Genesis 15.2.
or Stewards (such as Eliezer was to Abraham) were far from being
Supernumeraries, or Aliens from the Covenant, or Church of God; and that they
never went out of it after once they were called or brought in, and joined to
it by the sign of Circumcision.

Only this may be doubted, viz. That these people (taken out of Chaldea, Syria,
Arabia, or any other parts) and joined only by Circumcision, (some of them (no
doubt) by compulsion, lest others should be cut off for them) might not prove
so good Members as could be wished; but they retained still a smack, and had an
hankering after their old Idolatry. Which sin continued uncontroulably amongst
all, (one seducing another) till the captivity of the Tribes: And after their
return, when Hyrcanus forced the Edomites to be circumcised, he prepared a way
for Herod to come and to subvert their whole Estate. But however it was for
that, God himself foresaw these inconveniences; and yet he would not prevent
them: as some of the Separation think they are able to do in their Societies,
by so often drilling of them, that at last they lose their first matter, order
and consistency.

CHAP. XXXVI. That the simplicity of the Scripture (contrary to the Romances of
the Heathen Writers) makes little state of great Secular matters, relating to
the Church; Showed by instances of Abraham and Jacob; yet Joseph (as a
Statesman in Egypt) observed Ceremonies in the reception and introduction of
his Father and Brethren. That the Israelites built not in Egypt, but by
constraint.
WE may see (in part) by this how little state the simplicity of the Scripture
makes of great matters, in things Secular, that are incident unto God's Elect;
who are also as humble in themselves as Servants in all Conditions. For after
Abraham had obtained a famous Victory over four Kings, that had (immediately)
before been themselves victorious over five; Genesis 18.1, etc.
we find him sitting at his Tent-door in the heat of the day, and he espied
three men, and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the Tent-door, and
bowed himself toward the ground, and said, My Lord, if now I have found favor
in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy Servant. Let a little water,
I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest your selves under the
Tree. And I will fetch a morsel of bread. And Abraham hastened into the Tent
unto Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it,
and make Cakes upon the hearth, (as if poor Sarah had never a Maid to help
her.) And Abraham stood by them under the Tree, while they did eat -- And after
they had eaten, Abraham went with them to bring them on the way. Genesis 23. De
Abrahamo magnifica etiam tradidere Ethnici, ut Jos. Antiq. l. 1. C. 9. and
Eusebius. praepar. l. 9.
And when he was to bury Sarah, and to sue for a Sepulcher, he bowed himself to
the people of the Land, even to the Children of Heth, who complemented him,
saying, Hear us, my Lord, Thou art a mighty Prince amongst us: In the choice of
our Sepulchers bury thou thy dead. And when he sent Eliezer, Chap. 24.
the eldest Servant of his house, who ruled over all that he had, he set him
forth (indeed) in some Equipage, with Jewels and other Presents, Genesis 11.26,
etc. and 24.15.24.
that he might obtain Rebekkah (the Daughter of Bathuel, the Son of Nahor, the
Brother of Abraham) for his Son Isaac. But Rebekkah (who was to be presented
with Jewels, and had ten Camels to bring the errand to her) is brought forth
with a Pitcher on her shoulder, as ready to make the Camels drink as the
Stranger, wondering at the fine things, and straining no courtesy about
accepting of them; but as coming and forward, as a simple Country-Lass: and her
Brother Laban no less officious. Yet this Rebekkah it was that overreached the
Old Man Isaac, and her elder Son Esau.

Genesis 28.1, etc.
As for Jacob himself, though he went forth with his Fathers Blessing (and not
by mere flight) on his way to Laban, his Mothers Brother; yet we read neither
of Ass, nor Camel, nor Camerade, nor any Servant, given to attend him in his
journey (which was for a Wife too, of one of Laban's Daughters) and it was a
long step further (I trow) than into Egypt. His adventures are thus described:
first, He lighted on a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the
Sun was set; and he took the Stones of that place, and put them for his pillow,
and lay down in that place to sleep. And by his vision there, it appears no
otherwise, but that he was alone; save only that it is said, He took the stone
that he had put for his pillow, and set it up for a Pillar, and poured Oil upon
the top of it. Which it is not like that he should carry about him, with other
necessaries, unless you should imagine him to have been a kind of
Walking-Tavern in a Wilderness. However, that we may be assured that Jacob was
not overmuch accommodated; let us hear his own devout acknowledgment unto God,
Genesis 32.10.
I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth which
thou have showed unto thy Servant; for with my Staff I passed over this Jordan,
and now I am become two Bands. With a Staff (says Bishop Hall) goes he over
Jordan, doubtful and alone, (not like the Son of Isaac) and is fain to lie sub
dio, when an Angel appeared to comfort him. And when Laban heard of his Sisters
Son, he might expect a like Equipage as fetched Rebekkah -- but now as he
comes, so he uses him. He fled from a cruel Brother to a cruel Uncle: And as
his Mother had cunningly (by deceiving Isaac) substituted him for Elder; so now
Laban as cunningly deceives him, by giving him the Elder instead of the
Younger, whom he loved. Wonder not therefore that the Equipage of the Sons of
Jacob, and of their whole descent into Egypt, is described without any pomp at
all; for so I could lead you forward to Gideon's Threshing-floor, and to
David's Flocks; and show you how great thing were always veiled, and good men
lowly: But these also were both of the principal Families of Israel, as may be
observed hereafter.

In the mean while, considering that Joseph was a great Courtier, and a
Politician; and that we have observed his cunning in getting the fairest and
fertilest Tract of the Land of Egypt, for his Father and his Brethren, on
color of their being Shepherds: In the next place let us note some of his
Ceremonies (howsoever) whereby he wrought the ingratiating of his own Kindred
with Pharaoh and his Egyptians.

Genesis 42.
When his Brethren came first into his presence (he knowing them, but they not
him) they bowed down themselves before him, with their faces to the Earth;
knowing what kind of reverence the proud Egyptians did expect. Then Joseph
remembered the dreams which he had dreamed of them, and like a crafty Statesman
(to get what he could out of them, and to make them fit for what he presently
apprehended) he spoke roughly to them, and dealt as hardly, keeping them three
days in ward, and speaking to them by an Interpreter; nay, he took Simeon from
them as a Pledge, and bound him before their eyes, and sent them away (the
first time) in fear.

But the next time, Genesis 43.
as soon as Joseph spied Benjamin in their Company, he said to the Ruler of his
house, Bring these men into my house, and slay, and make ready (a place that
will trouble them to answer, who would persuade us, as if the Egyptians then
did eat no living Creature) for these men shall dine with me at noon. Then he
brought Simeon forth unto them (who, no doubt, looked never the worse for his
detainment) And they made ready the Present against Joseph came in, and made
many low obeysances; but he spoke very kindly to them.

Then that Joseph might reserve Dignity to himself in the sight of the
Egyptians, he caused himself to be served at a Table of State; and that there
might be no interfering, he caused his Brethren (knowing their scruples about
eating of unclean meats, or with uncircumcised men) to be served at another
Table by themselves: And knowing also the superstition of the Egyptians, (who
looked upon the Hebrews as profane to them, as the Egyptians could be unto the
Hebrews, if they did not also scorn them as Shepherds) he caused them to eat in
the same presence apart; so that all admired, and there was no exception: but
they drank and were merry, as Joseph had ordered the matter; and, no doubt,
obtained favor with such Egyptian Courtiers as there were then admitted at the
entertainment.

Genesis 46.28.
Now when Jacob drew near unto Goshen, he thought it a fit Ceremony, for his
part, to send Judah before (as his Harbinger) to prepare for his reception by
his Son Joseph, in the state wherein he then was. And Joseph hastened in his
Chariot (to meet him as a Prince) and to do honor to his aged Father. And so
instructed all his Company how to behave themselves before Pharaoh.

But since policy did require that Pharaoh should not see all, civility and
gratitude seemed to prompt Joseph that he should present (at least) the chief
of Pharaoh's beneficiaries before his face; and he thought it enough to present
but five of them to do or to receive that honor. It is like, the most
personable and fashionable of his Brethren, that were the Sons of Rachel and
Leah, rather than of the Concubines; who, we are not to doubt, made their
reverence unto Pharaoh, as the Master of the Egyptian Ceremonies should direct
them.

But as for his venerable Father, he brought him in, (after them, which was
ever esteemed the more honor) and set him before Pharaoh. Genesis 47.7, 10.
And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, (after his own way, whether as a Prince, and Priest
of the most High God, or as a congratulation only of his favors.) And so when
he went out (after short communication by Interpreters) he blessed him again.
And Pharaoh accepted of their addresses, and seems to have been pleased and
satisfied with them.

Thus was the way made for Israel and his Children, to be planted in Rameses,
(which I take to be a fenced place, with a Territory, situate upon the jaws of
the seven-mouth'd Nile) and for his Hinds and Herdsmen to pitch where they
liked in the Province of Goshen, So the former of these needed Tents no longer;
for when Joseph sent for them, he had said from Pharaoh's mouth, Genesis 45.20.
Come unto me, and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt. Regard not
your stuff; for the good of all the Land of Egypt is yours.

It Is true, the place might be called Rameses, by anticipation, as that which
was called Luz, was after called Bethel, by Jacob's nomination; but that there
was an habitable Town or City before Jacob came thither, I doubt not; both
because of Ioseph's recommendation of his father to a good place, and because
of the situation of it, as a necessary Fortress against Out-livers of another
Nation. However, some are of opinion, that the Israelites themselves might
build that City (as the English did Calais) while they were in Egypt, Exodus
1.11.
(before the Taskmasters set them to work to fortify it more, as a
Treasure-City, and a Bridle to themselves, from escaping, as well as to keep
out others) against common sense; for throughout their prosperity they were
instructed that the Land of Canaan was their inheritance, expecting (daily) as
good a Call to return out of Egypt, as ever they had to come thither. Said not
God unto Jacob at his first descent, Genesis 46.4.
I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will also surely bring thee up
again? And said not Joseph on his deathbed unto his Brethren, Genesis 50.24.
I dye, and God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this Land unto the
Land which he swear unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Ye shall carry up my bones
from hence. Heb. 11.22.
Which he did by faith (as St Paul witnesses) bearing up the like in his
Brethren and Posterity.

In this estate the Children of Israel lived in prosperity the remaining
seventeen years of Jacob's life, and about fifty four more of Ioseph's, through
the Reign of more Kings than one, as Historians tell us. (Even as it happened
(after) unto Daniel, for the sake of the same people, when they were a second
time to be redeemed from their bondage.) As large a time of felicity as God
does usually grant to his Church at once; that their hearts should neither
fail, nor wax gross* But before any change arrive, we will leave them in their
best condition, in a foreign Country, only eying in the close what their
spiritual state was, as the only remaining visible or (at least conspicuous
Church of God under Heaven.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Israelites had toleration in Egypt, as to offer Sacrifices
during Ioseph's life; Afterward, denied them. That contrary Religions are
sooner tolerated than diversities of the same. That there was but one Religion
in Satan's Kingdom, how many Gods soever the Heathen worshipped. Jews (at this
day) tolerated much at the like rate that they were before.
THERE are three Questions emergent here, if I may dare to handle the Argument
that I have in hand, viz. first, Toleration; secondly, Division; and, thirdly,
The Unity of the Church. The first from the indulgence of Egypt, during
Ioseph's life; The second from the piety of Ioseph's house, while separated
from his Brethren; And the third, from the adoption of the whole house of Jacob
(whereas but one of Abraham or Isaac's Sons were comprehended in the blessing)
even of the Sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, in opposition unto Hagar and Keturah.

It is not only said, that every Shepherd was an abomination unto the
Egyptians; Locis cit^tis.
but also, that the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is
an abomination to the Egyptians; as if it were so to those, more than to the
Hebrews to eat with them. I would gladly know (then) how they could hold any
time together: for I take it for granted, Genesis 33.19 -- 35.1, 2, 4, 7.
that Jacob would rather starve than want an Altar at Rameses, or some other
part of Goshen; it being the first thing he did to erect one (and to purge his
house from Idols) in other places. Or how the Egyptians could bear their
Sacrifices better than their Trade or Diet?

I cannot doubt but that there were Egyptians in Goshen before a fertile Plat,
and a Frontier; and some of these, Shepherds, and Hersmen too, (however scorned
by the Citizens) because Pharaoh had said unto Joseph, In the best of the Land
make thy Father and Brethren to dwell; in the Land of Goshen let them dwell:
and if thou know any man of activity A vulgo multum diversa su^^ terita
qu^dam populi pars, quae seorsim in Campestribus Aegypti, ac prope paludes
degebat; ii Pastores suere, actuosi illi quidem gnavique, sed cunctis Aegyptiis
execrabiles, propte^ea quod ignaviam ^orum semper sollicitam ten^bant. Cunaeus
lib. 1. cap. 5. The Flood ceased Anno Mundi 1657. Jacob descended into Egypt
An. Man. 2298. So that by the Scheme before, you may guess to what magnificence
they might be grown by this.
amongst them, then make them Rulers over my Cattle; Which whether they
consumed in Egypt, or sold abroad, (as the Jews after did their Swine) it
matters not. But this was enough to ground such a Commerce as was fit to hold
the Israelites and Egyptians in the fairer terms; especially since no man durst
to mutter against the Kindred of Joseph, (that came in with so high a hand of
grace and favor, and) who himself had preserved alive the people of Egypt.
Neither is it to be doubted, but that these Parts were at this time more
populous than Canaan, by reason of fertility, and the multitude of the Sons of
Ham, that betook themselves this way (as fast as they increased) from the
Mountains of Armenia.

We must also suppose, that the Egyptians (and all other Nations) offered
Sacrifices Adeo ut ineptire (quasi) gestian^, qui Aegyptios ab omni mactatione
aversari praetegunt; sintientes divinum aliquid in animalibus inesse: Vt and
alii, qui Iosephi tempore, nullam in Aegypto Idololatriam agnosc^nt, sed in
Syria tantum; quum Israelitae bic sacrificare Vitulo didicerint, and dum in
Aegypto degerent, idolis eorum inquinati sunt. Ezech. 23.3
, as well as Israel; (for both Adam and Noah taught all their Sons alike to
sacrifice.) And this perhaps might be a worser eyesore to the Egyptians than
any other, the Israelites worshipping another God before their faces, in
another manner than they did; since the Rites were changed wheresoever Idolatry
came instead of the right Worship.

Now to this it may be said, that two different Religions were always accounted
more tolerable than the same divided. For such would be sure to go far enough
apart, and not to interfere with one another. Nay, all Religions (besid^s the
true) which had Satan for their Moderator, agreed well enough with one another.

As in the Roman practice, there are Churches dedicated by diverse names in
sundry Regions, which have Relics, Miracles and Altars with indulgences
annexed to them; so that there is curiosity in pilgrimage and merit too:
Sand^^'s Socculum, page 6.
more particularly, the places that bear the superscription of the Blessed
Virgin, are the most celebrated and visited: for their stateliest Churches are
lightly hers, and in Churhes hers the fairest Altars. Where one prays before
the Crucifix, two before her Image; where one voweth to Christ, ten vow unto
her, and not so much to her self, as to some peculiar Image, which for some
select Virtue or Grace, together with greater power of operation of Miracles,
they chiefly serve, as the glorious Lady of Loretto, the devout Lady of Rome,
the miraculous Lady of Provenzano, the Annunciata of Florence; whose Churches
are so stuffed with vowed Presents and Memories, that they are fain to hang
their Cloisters also, and Churchyards with them. Then as their vows are, such
are their pilgrimages, etc.

Consulatur Chemnitius part 3. Exam. t^t. de invocatione and veneratione
Sanctorum; and recentiores adversus Bell.
In like manner,, the Heathens had always some sumptuous Temples, or wondrous
Stories, to draw Strangers and devotion, and to raise a name to the places
where they lived. If they would see a stately Structure (compared with the
Temple of Solomon by some Writers) and a wonder by report, What man is there
that knows not how that the City of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the
great Goddess Diana, and of the Image that fell down from Jupiter? Acts 19.35.
If they would be cured, they must go to Aesculapius or Apollo (choose they
whether) or to any other God or Goddess that had a same, whether in their own
or in another Country, for some particular aids or remedies. If they would
have counsel and success, Ciceron comp^e 6. Hercules; Varron 43. and plus de
300. Jupiters. Le' Tresor Polit, l. 3. chap. de ce mot Brindes
these were reserved chiefly unto Jupiter (in great Cases, and) in those few
places where Satan would vouchsafe to speak by his Oracles. But it was observed
that Venus had more Votaries than any other; whether Men or Women would be
married, or obtain any other Love; or be fruitful, or be barren; or agree
(after they had fallen out) Quoties inter Virum and Vxorem aliquid jargii
intercesserat, in Sacellum D^^^ Viri-plac^e, quod est in palatio, veniebent;
and ibi invicem locuti quae voluerant, con^entione animorum deposit^ concordes
revertebantur. 1.2. c. 1. Invenit tamen medium sioi (...) mortalitas Numen:
Toto q^ippe m^ndo, and locis omnibus, omnibusque horis, omni^m vocibus,
fortuna, sola invocat^^: Vna nominat^r, una accusatar, una agitar rea, una
cogitatur, sola laudatur, sola arguit^r, and um convitiis colitur... ^deoque
obnoxiae sumus sortis, u^ 'ors ipsa pro Deo sit, qua Deus probatur incert^s...
^nnumeros autem credere, a^que etiam ex virtutibus, vitiisque hominum, ut
pudicitiam, concordiam, etc. majorem ad socordiam accedit. Plin, Not. Hist.
lib. 2. cap. 7. Quinetiam surtorum, and s^elerum Numina esse tradiderunt.
Coluerunt Romani Ioven adulterum and slupratorem, and sebri publicum sanum in
palatio dedicarunt, and Aram malae sortunae in Exquiliis. Corn. Agrippa de Van,
scientiarum cap. de Relig. Sic nos. Te sacimus Fortuna Deam, Caeloque locamus.
Juv. Sat. Sed (ut Plinius pergit) irridendum, agere curam rerum humanarum
quicquid est summum: a^ne tam trisli, atque multiplici mixisterio non pollui
credamus? Et oftendens paulo post, quid Deus possit sacere, v^l non, asserit
express... Non mortales aeternitate donare, aut revocare desunctos, nec
facere, ^^ qui vixit, non vixerit, etc. nullumque habere in praeterita jus,
praeterquam oblivionis. Ibid.
ad Sacellum Deae viri-place, which is described in Valerius Maximus.

Wherefore, though some Nations of the Heathens entitled themselves to
particular Gods or Goddesses, and so preferred them above others, as their
Protectors; yet they never opposed or vilified the Gods of other Countries,
when they came into the places where they were adored, (although both at Rome
and Athens they were fain sometimes to take caution against admitting too many
Foreign Religions within their own Walls) whereof I will allege but two
Instances, for fear of an impertinent digression.

Xen. de Exped. Cyri minoris
When Xenophon had returned safe with his Army out of the Locks and Bars of
Persea and was now within the protection of the Grecians, he consulted with a
famous Soothsayer about his Affairs (having always been a superstitious and
industrious man) why he should get nothing howsoever: His Soothsayer advised
him to sacrifice to Jupiter (...) (or the Gentle) who was adored in those
Parts: And after this service performed unto that Idol (of a fine Title)
Xenophon struck into a small and short exploit, and enriched himself more than
by all his former Travels. Which he imputed unto that direction.

And of Pompey the Great, Plut. in vit. Pomp
Plutarch tells us, that he enriched and adorned the Temples of the Gods in the
Eastern Parts with his Spoils; Jos. Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 8. and de Bello lib.
1. cap. 5.
and Josephus, that he not only abstained from spoiling the Temple at
Jerusalem, when he had taken it by Storm (through the reverence he had of God)
but also caused such as had the charge of the Temple, to purge the same, and to
offer Sacrifices unto God the next day, according to the Law; whereof we shall
have more to say hereafter in its proper place; where we shall observe (that
according unto Solomon's prayer) Alexander and diverse other Princes also were
admitted to offer their own Sacrifies or Oblations there.

But the Question of toleration returns still for a fuller Answer. It seems,
that they enjoyed it no longer than Ioseph's life: for the first message that
Moses brings to Pharaoh complains of this oppression, and demands redress of
it, Let us go three days journey into the Wilderness, Exodus 3.18. and 5.3.
that we may sacrifice unto the Lord our God; lest he fall upon us with
pestilence, and with the sword, for having thus long deferred it out of fear.
Chap. 8.25, etc.
And when Pharaoh (after dreadful judgments) would have yielded that they
should sacrifice in the Land; Moses replied, So shall we sacrifice to the Lord
our God the abomination of the Egyptians, and will they not stone us?

When the same people were in Babylon (where Sacrifices ceased with the Temple,
so that they were the less to be observed) they were sometimes overlooked, and
sometimes not; even as they are at this day in Turkey and Christendom; whereas
the Turkish Mussulman hates the Persian Mohammedan, even more than either Jew or
Christian. and the Papists would extirpate Protestants, if they were able; and
inferior Sects (howsoever plausibly they speak when they are low) would even
do the like by one another. Only our Mother Church of England is of no Sect at
all.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How Joseph might live in Pharaoh's house, And be free from
Egyptian superstition. What private Religion he might have; What godly people
near him? What Union he had with the Church Catholic, or his Fathers house.
That he lived by faith, like Daniel in Babylon; yet the want of Ordinances such
a trouble to him as to David.
1. IF any one admire how Joseph could Potiphar's, and then in Pharaoh's house,
so as to escape the Egyptian idolatry or Superstitions; they may observe, that
he was noted in both places to have a Diviner Spirit in him than the Magicians;
and so to have been left the more to himself in Egypt, as Daniel (after) was in
Babylon, till a particular charge was brought against him concerning his
Religion. Nay, Genesis 44.18. and 45.8.
Ioseph's being as Pharaoh and a Father unto Pharaoh (after he came to Court)
exempted him from any jurisdiction or inspection whatsoever; for who durst say
unto Pharaoh, What do thou?

2. If it be further questioned, What private Religion Joseph could have unto
himself, or what exercise or practice of it, in the house of Pharaoh? Could he
have any private Altar? Or, if he had, any one to serve at that Altar, or to
worship at it, besides himself? Or, could he have any Closets adorned with the
Relics of Noah, Sem, Eber, Abraham, etc or any other holy things? or what did
he do? I answer,

First, He did as his Father Jacob had done before in the idolatrous house of
Laban; where I cannot think that he either had or needed any Altar, or any
other circumstances of devotion. In his way to whose house (notwithstanding) he
set up the stone that he used as a pillow, Genesis 28.28.
for a pillar, and poured Oil upon the top of it, and called the name of the
place Bethel, that is, the house of God; vowing that it should be so to him, if
God should restore him safe to his Father's house, and that he would offer the
tenth unto him, of all that God should give him; as if he would make that Stone
an Altar, and that place such a place of worship, as Gilgal and Shiloh after
were. But this Pillar (you see) was erected pro futuro only.

Secondly, Yet I doubt not but Joseph might have erected an Altar of testimony
or thanksgiving, or for Peace Offerings (at the least) as others did upon
special occasions, (before and after the Law) even till the building of the
Temple, if such occasion were. But we read not of it; peradventure God would
not suffer his own name to be profaned by setting up an abomination to the
Egyptians before their faces, nor Ioseph's service, to be prejudiced thereby.
For although the Father of a Family was the ordinary Priest of his own house;
yet any man apart (as Jacob) might erect an Altar, and offer his thanksgivings
thereupon, using such as he had about him like so many Levites* all sanctified
by the Sacrifice, if the occasions of the Altar and the Sacrifice were right.

Thirdly, If Joseph had any outward part of Devotion to accomplish, it may be
he might have found some (of his Retainers) not unmeet to be assisting to him.
Genesis 42.18.
For in his handling of his Brethren (while they took him for an Egyptian) he
said unto them the third day, This do and live; for I fear God: As if he would
have them think no other, but that there was some piety in Egypt as well as
amongst them whom he knew. And when they made Apology unto the Steward of
Ioseph's house about their money, the Steward said unto them, Genesis 43.19, 23.
Peace be to you, fear not: your God, the God of your Father has given you
treasure in your Sacks, I had your money. As if this Steward could speak the
language of Israel, and was not unacquainted with the God of Jacob.

Fourthly, It may seem that Joseph worshipped God with the like respect to his
Fathers house, and the Sacrifices offered there; and with the like respect unto
the Land of promise, as Daniel did in Babylon, when he opened his Window
toward the Temple, and prayed for the restitution that was promised: in the
mean while they were both abridged of the outward Ordinances, and lived by
their faith in the promises of God. We have spoken enough of Daniel before; St
Paul is as clear for Joseph when he says, Heb. 11.22.
By faith Joseph when he was a dying made mention of the departing of the
Children of Israel, and gave commandment concerning his bones; reckoning him
among the rest, who through faith obtained a good report, not having yet
received the promise.

Fifthly, Nay, by the History it is manifest, that as Moses by faith when he
was come to years refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, esteeming
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; so it had
fared with Joseph before. All the pleasures of that Heathen Court, and all the
submissions of that Heathen People, infused no other satisfaction into his
spirit, but that he must be contented (that he might be Protector of Israel) to
abide without, as an Alien from his Fathers house, and to be deprived of the
holy Ordinances of God: For when he was about to dye, Genesis 50.24.
he said unto his Brethren, I dye, and God will surely visit you, and bring you
out of this Land (of bondage, where I have been detained and afflicted with
you, in expectation of the promise made unto our Fathers) unto the Land which
he swear to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob: God will surely visit you; and he
took an Oath of them about carrying his bones from thence. Nor was David in his
worst Quarters when he said, Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, Psalm. 120.5.
that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar. For although good men may be saved without
the Ordinances, where God himself debarrs them; yet they cannot live
comfortably without them: Which they may do well to consider, who (if they have
but a reasonable excuse for it) had as lief be planted in the utmost Indies, as
in the midst of Churches. So we see what union Joseph held in his separation
both with the Church Catholic of all Believers, and also with the house of
Jacob in particular.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Unity of the Church in respect to Election, in the general
(perplexities noted) more especially in respect to the house of Jacob, wherein
all were chosen; whereas in the house of Abraham and Isaac, there was but one
received as Heir of the promise. Reasons to be given for their rejection: and
so, might have been in Jacob's house too, whose errors are recorded.
NOW concerning the Unity of the extra Ecclesia^^ non est salus) without the
Church there is no salvation. Which occasioning a distinction betwixt the
Church visible and invisible, it has made the wide World the Subject of some
men's charity, as much as any Church visible; the rather because some men think
there may be an inward Call by the Spirit, where there in so outward Call of
the Church visible. And so for Election; Whereas St Paul gives us ground for
two distinctions uncontrollable, viz. 1. Of a general Election both of Jew and
Gentile, unto the state of Grace, by believing of the Gospel, answering to the
Election of the Jews alone (from the times of the Law) unto special Covenant
and privilege. 2. Of a certain Election of persons (not so large as the other)
unto eternal life, according to the foreknowledge of God. This has occasioned
the Schoolmen and the modern Polemical Divines (by scanning of the terms, and
sisting what might be drawn from them) to come in with a distinction between
(like a kind of superfo^tation) of particular Election absolute or conditional
(for of the general Election of some people more than others unto special
means, they dare not question over boldly; or enter farther into this Secret of
Providence, than Travelers dare into that Stove of St Germans in Italy, the
mouth whereof I have been in; only, some presume to say, that there are
sufficient means granted unto all) which modern distinction of the Popish
Schoolmen, and our Common-place-men, has raised much stir and heats both in
the Roman and Reformed Churches: For if the^e be an absolute positive Election
of a ^ew, the Question is not so much, Whether it be without respect of
persons, as without respect of sin? If there be a particular Election of
persons, conditionally only; then, Whether Election hangs in suspense? or,
being from eternity, proceeds according to God's foreknowledge ( vel saltem
per scientiam mediam) with a respect to his own Decree, according to works
foreseen, of merits condign or congruous, (as the Schoolmen speak) or according
to faith or Evangelical obedience (at the least) foreseen and foreknown; which
pleases some of ours well enough, though they have much difficulty and
difference in the explaining of their meanings? In the mean while perhaps there
cannot be much more proved from St Paul, than that Election bears no respect
to the Works of the Law, by which neither Jew nor Gentile can be justified; but
that both must be brought to cry, Grace, Grace, unto the Gospel.

But the Bounds of my Discourse confine themselves naturally within the general
Election of Grace, whereby it pleased God to choose some particular persons to
be the Body Constitutive of his Church, to the exclusion of ^^hers, that might
seem to have stood as fair as they.

If it be asked, Why Abel was accepted, and Cain not? it is ready to be
answered, That Abel offered a better Sacrifice, and that from a better mind;
wherein God himself is our Warrant: for he said unto him, Genesis 4.6, 7.
Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countonance fallen? If thou do well,
shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door.

If it be asked again, Why was Sem chosen rather than Ham and Iaphet? A reason
may be given against Ham; but there is no manifest reason against Iaphet, but
the Economy or Providence of God, secundum beneplacitum: Whoever presses
further, may engage himself beyond recovery, unless he do content himself in
this, that there was a time to be (when it pleased God) that the fullness of the
Gentiles should come in.

So a reason may be given against Ishmael, He was not only the Son of the
Bondwoman that misbehaved her self toward her Mistress, but a malicious
Scorner of the true Heir, the Son of the Freewoman, and a Wild-man; but of the
Sons of Keturah, what have we to say more than of Iaphet, save only, that of
Midian, one of them, came Iethro and the Kenites, friends and partakers of the
house of Israel?

What wonder though Esau was permitted to seek his Fortunes in Mount Seir, he
having matched with the Daughters of Heth and Ishmael, to the grief of his
Parents (and so, without their liking) and being otherwise profane; not only
as a common Hunt, but as an Hunter like to Nimrod, so far as God permitted?

But what have we to say at last, that all the Sons of Jacob (his Concubines
and all) should be taken in, and never an one rejected? Did ever Ishmael or
Esau play such pranks as some of these? Reuben the eldest went in to Bilhah,
Genesis 35.22.
(the Concubine which Rachel, and not his Mother Leah, had given unto Jacob)
and lay with her, Chapter 49.4. Chapter 34.25.
and defiled his Fathers bed. Simeon and Levi fell upon the Shechemites, not
only cruelly, but perfidiously, after they had made them Proselytes. Judah (the
next preferred above all) went down from his Brethren, (who had little
converse, beyond their commerce, with the people of the Land) and turned in to
a certain Adullamite, Genesis 38.
whose name was Hirah. And Judah saw there a Daughter of a certain Canaanite,
whose name was Shuah, and he took her, and went in unto her. And she bare him
Er, Onan and Shelah. Er married Tamar, and was wicked (following his Mothers
kind) and the Lord slew him, and Onan after him. And then Judah dissembled
about giving the third Son Shelah unto Tamar, lest he should perish too. So
Judah himself fell into Tamars Gin, and was disgraced by her at the present,
but got more honor from her incestuous Issue at the last, than from his own
marriage with the Canaanite. For the Sons of the Concubines, Chap. 37.1.
Dan, Naphtali, Gad and Asher, Joseph was wont to bring their ill report unto
his Father, for which they envied him: And for Issachar and Zebulun, Ver. 18.
they were also in the Conspiracy against the life of Joseph. Only Reuben's
pity was commended, (though he was agreed with the rest to conceal it with
fraud from Jacob) in that he would have saved Joseph altogether, (which might
be a reason why Joseph bound Simeon, the second when he let Reuben, the first,
go free) and Judah so far, Genesis 42.22.24.
as that he would rather fell him for a Slave than slay him. Thus the Scripture
concealeth not their vices: Only Joseph (the Son of Rachel) is extolled, and
his Brother Benjamin blameless.

CHAP. XL. The Sons of Jacob compared in their virtues and vices: The latter
aggravated, and excused. Why Pharez, born of incest, should be so great in
Judah, and inherit the promise at the last.
NOW to compare the good and bad qualities of these Patriarchs with one
another. It seems to some, Chapter 35.22.
that when Reuben had committed his incest with his Mother-in-Law, and that
Israel heard of it, his Father was afraid to take notice of it, Es^ius.
( quia Reuben ferox erat) because Reuben was a fierce man: It may seem
likewise as if he defiled his Father's Bed, in contempt of Bilhah, Rachels
Handmaid; and so that there was some malice mixed with his lust. But the pity
that he alone had of Joseph, the Son of Rachel, shows that he was neither
fierce (as Simeon and Levi) nor yet so envious as the rest: But most like it is
that the beauty only of Bilhah did inflame him (as a fine Creature, for Rachel,
to present to Jacob, whereby to estrange him a little more from Leah) since
Jacob, who was to denounce his punishment to him at the last, Genesis 49.3, 4.
said no more but that though he was the beginning of his might, he should not
excel only because he was unstable as water, when he went up to his Fathers
bed, and defiled it; high water being such as will break any Bounds whatsoever.

And though some Expositors doubt not of his repentance, (by the tokens of his
good nature toward Joseph, both when he was betrayed, and after in his
Embassy) yet God did not think fit to remit the temporal punishment unto him
and his posterity, of being deprived of Primogeniture and number. But whether
it was Judah or Joseph that had his Right, we shall consider by and bye.

As for Simeon and Levi, after their bloody fact, Chap. 34.30, 31.
when their Father said unto them, Ye have troubled me, to make me stink among
the inhabitants of the Land, so that I being few in number (incomparison of the
Canaanites and Perizzites) they shall gather themselves together against me and
slay me, and I shall be destroyed, I and my house (showing their blind and rash
folly as well as wickedness) they had so little Grace as to return this surly
Answer, Should he deal with our Sister, as with an Harlot? Nor had they any
more remorse about their Brother Joseph afterward, in whose blood they would
(for their parts) have had an hand. Which might occasion Joseph to seize on
Simeon (to choose) as has been noted. Yet (no doubt) he was famous in his
Generation (for some Virtue Reuben for one fault, lying with Bilha, his Fathers
Concubine, lost all: and yet for himself, in his particular, Joseph excepted,
he was (otherwise) the best of the Brethren. Bishop Mont. acts, etc. cap. 1. 37.
or other) because so many bore the name of Simeon or Simon in the succeeding
Ages. So that he had but one and the same Sentence with his Brother in
iniquity, even with Levi, I will divide them in Jacob, Genesis 49.
and scatter them in Israel. Which was accomplished in Simeon's posterity, by
having their lot shut up (in a manner) within the Confines of Judah, and its
Borders; and in Levi's, by having no lot at all among the rest in the Land of
promise; saving a lot extraordinary, which God had assigned to them (they say)
as good as the best: So God over-ruleth in his gracious Providence, even
turning his chastisements into blessings! And for Levi's own person, Exodus 6.16.
he lived a hundred and thirty years, (what Age he might be when he came with
Jacob into Egypt, is uncertain.) And a hundred and thirty years after Jacob's
descent was Moses born, the younger Brother of Aaron, the Redeemers of Israel,
descended both immediately from Levi So long as Joseph lived, so long as Levi,
who survived all his Brethren, they adhered to God, and to his Service alone,
wherein they had been brought up and instructed by tradition [so it likes him]
from Jacob, Isaac, Abraham. After which they degenerated (as Ezekiel. 23. cited
above.) Bishop Montague's acts, etc. cap. 1.. 32.
.

Now for Judah, his faults and failings have not been spared; upon which (says
Bishop Hall) I find not many of Jacob's Sons more faulty than Judah: But Bishop
Montague Id. Sect. 37.
says (according to Josephus) that Judah, being (...) a bold, daring,
putting-forth man, was well enough disposed in his own person to be the
Lawgiver, and to have the Scepter, although it was not (indeed) conferred on
his person, but his Tribe. Methinks (in truth) he was (like Peter among the
Disciples) the forwardest to undertake with his Father, to lead his Brethren,
to expostulate with Joseph, to be Jacob's Harbinger, and the likeliest to be
presented (as one of the five) in the presence of the great King Pharaoh. And
though he consented to Ioseph's slavery, Genesis 37.27.
yet said he, Let not our hand be upon him; for he is our Brother, and our
flesh. And as he was of a fervent Spirit, and presently passed Sentence upon
Tamar to be burnt; so when she convinced him, he did not deny, or hasten
execution to conceal it, but ingenuously said, She has been more righteous
than I: And he knew her again no more. To him therefore, as a man of great
sufficiency, was the Scepter given, and the promise of Christ, (which was much
more) and yet the birthright of Reuben was translated unto Joseph. 1 Chronicles.
5.1, 2.
Of which (peradventure) more at large when I come unto the lots.

Only, this is too much to my purpose and design to be omitted. Not only Judah
with all his faults (which poor Jacob's pious soul must bear withal amongst
them) is admitted to the prime Prerogative; but his base-born Pharez, after
him, becomes the immediate Heir of the Promise, and not his elder Son Shelah,
begotten in the state of Wedlock; to the disparagement likewise (as it might
seem) of the rest of the Seed of Jacob. Let us make the account thus: Reuben is
deprived of his birthright for the Cause of Bilhah; Simeon was next, and Levi
next to him: but they are both removed farther off for the sake of Shechem.
Judah is (thereupon) the next in order; and (if there be any fault in him, or
however, if it were possible) one would think that Jacob should transfer this
blessing unto Joseph, who was the eldest Son of his best beloved Wife, and now
a Father to his Brethren, as he was to his own Father too, so far as he was a
Father unto Pharaoh, under whose protection and beneficence they were to be
cherished and flourish; or else (by Ioseph's leave) to his own Brother
Benjamin, the Son of Jacob's right hand, with whom no fault is found; nor, it
may be, ever was, since his posterity held steadfast to the Covenant, and the
blessing, when Ioseph's had revolted.

Why, there was fault enough to be found with Judah to stop his mouth, and bar
his claim to any Excellency amongst his Brethren. It was a kind of debauch in
him, to go rambling among the accursed Canaanites, (from whom he ought to have
kept an holy distance) and there to be enamoured or inveigled with their Shuah;
and to marry according to his lust, rather than his reason. It was like that
sin of the old World, which hastened the deluge, Genesis 6.2.
when the Sons of God saw the Daughters of men that they were fair, and they
took them Wives of all that they chose. If you ask, Why, where should he have
had another? Think you not that Esau guessed shrewdly (though he hit amiss)
when hearing that Jacob was to be sent to Padan-aram for a Wife of the Mothers
kin; he himself was resolved to mend the matter, Genesis 28.6, 9.
by taking one of the Fathers side, in marrying the Daughter of Ishmael the Son
of Abraham? But if there had not been choice enough of kin of either side at
hand, better an Alien of any other Country than of Canaan; which he knew to be
the very Land that God had promised to his Father and Forefathers for an
everlasting possession, not without the destruction of the inhabitants, as the
very Seed of the Serpent and Coar of enmity. Thou shall not (therefore) take a
Wife of the Daughters of Canaan, had Isaac said unto his Father Jacob. For must
such a mixture be? Or such a Seed proceed from the Bowels of a Canaanitish
Woman, as shall be proper to destroy the Canaanites?

Was not this (then) as just an exception against Judah now, as it had been
against Esau before, and for the sake of which his own Mother could not love
him, Genesis 26.34, 35. and 27.46.
but procured his disherison? For Esau when he was forty years old married two
Hittites, (before Ishmael's Daughter) which were a grief of mind to Isaac and
Rebekkah: and she said, I am weary of my life, because of the Daughters of Heth.

Now if any one ask here, Why, what choice had he or the other Brothers?
Whither should they go? Whom did the other Brothers marry? Genesis 47.^2.
Did not Joseph (for his part) marry the Priest of On's Daughter (an Egyptian)
for whose sake it may seem that he left the Egyptian Priests demesns entire,
when he cunningly bought all the rest of Egypt, for his bread, into bondage
unto Pharaoh? Or who ever blamed Abraham for his taking of Hagar or Keturah for
his Concubines? Or Jacob himself, for taking Bilhah into his bosom (who proved
not honest to him) or Zilpah, and had been bred amongst the Idols of Laban,
which Rachel stole, whether for love or hatred is a Question?

Although it has been taken for an opinion, that the Hebrews took their Wives
only ( ex Ingenuis) out of freeborn women, and their Concubines ( ex Ancillis)
out of Handmaids; De jure Not. and Gent. sec. Heb. l. 5. c. 7.
yet Mr Seldom proves that these did not differ in the quality of Wives, but
only in the inequality of conditions; Genesis 25.1.1 Chron. 1.32.
forasmuch as Keturah in Genesis is called Abraham's Wife, and in the
Chronicles his Concubine, (which some do therefore improbably think to be the
same with Hagar reassumed) We may observe that Hagar had been seasoned with
the same Religion before Abraham took her, by being bred in his house; insomuch
that she prayed in her distress, and had an Angel to comfort her. But she was
repudiated for her rebellion against her Mistress, and her Son sent away with
gifts (which followed) because it is said, Genesis 25.6.
that unto the Sons of the Concubines (both of them) which Abraham had, he gave
gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his Son, while he yet lived But after they
were separated, it seems, that they both revolted: for Ishmael dwelt in the
wilderness of Paran, and became an Archer. And his Mother took him a Wise out
of the Land of Egypt. Genesis 21.20, 21.
. And by Keturah (whose true Religion we have no ground to question) he had
some Issue which retained their profession in the time of Moses, who married a
Wife out of Iethro's house, descended from Midian, a Son of Abraham by this
Keturah. Among some or other of these (therefore) the Sons of Jacob might have
found Wives, as well as Moses, who is not blamed for it.

Or else, among the Women that Rebekkah, Rachel and Leah had brought with them,
(if they were more than two) or the Daughters born of them, in the space of a
hundred and fifty years; or as they might give their Sisters to their choicer
Servants, so they might take their Daughters, and so contain themselves within
themselves; which might be the reason of their leviration, (which God did after
establish by a Law) or Brothers marrying of a Brother's Widow, in case he dyed
before he had any Issue by her. Indeed, it is not mentioned whence the other
Sons had their Wives, Genesis 38.8.
only Judah seems to be blamed.

As for Ioseph's taking the Priest of On's Daughter, 1. Pharaoh gave her. 2.
God himself, who was able to sanctify her unto him, as it is like he did by
the towardly Children which she bare him; which pleased Jacob when he blessed
them. 3. If Joseph spared the Priests Lands, it is an Argument that he feared
Sacrilege, as many of the Heathen (after) did, with the like regard unto the
Jewish Priests: And this is delivered (by Josephus) as a Law among the Jews:
Antiq. l. 4. c. 8.
Let no man speak evil of those Gods which other Countries and Cities suppose
to be Gods. Amiq. l. 4. c. 8.
Let no man spoil any strange Temple, nor take that which is dedicated unto any
God.

And as for Jacob's taking of Bilhah and Zilpah, the same may be said as of
Abraham taking of Hagar and Keturah. They came from Padan-aram with him, and
abode with their Mistresses after he had purged his house from Idols; Labans
and all, (if any did remain) which it may seem that Rachel stole away to please
her Husband Jacob (when time should serve to discover it) not fearing her
Fathers displeasure, rather than out of any love to them, because she may be
understood to have been of the forwardest, when Jacob purged his house, Genesis
35.4.
to bring all the strange Gods and earrings unto him: As also because she had
the blessing of the two more pious Sons.

CHAP. XLI. Pursuing the same Argument, and opening the Law of Leviration, by
which Pharez was restored. Other marked persons not blot to the Genealogy of
Christ.
BUT the failing of Judah concerning Tamar (if it were not greater) might yet
seem more unlucky of the two, and more prejudicial in the consequence unto the
house of Israel, than the other; inasmuch as two misbegotten Children came
thereby to be reckoned to the ruling Tribe of Israel, and not only to have
equal part with others, but to have inheritance from Judah, all alike with
Shelah. Does God abhor incest and adultery, and yet suffer the choicest
Blessings of all to descend to their Issue? Or how is it that David and Christ
should come to descend from this Pharez, rather than from Shelah?

Now about the first failing of Judah we may say, That if Jacob had had the
power of the blessing in his own hands (as he had not) it was not exception
enough against him to put him by; nor in the streights wherein they were, can
one be sure that there were no more strange Wives within the Tents of Jacob,
but only Shuah's Daughter. However, God was pleased to take the punishment of
Judah's fault home unto himself, and he brought it home to Judah; for whatever
Shelah was, he gave him but three Sons in all, two of which he permitted to be
such wicked Canaanites as were not to be born withal; so that the Lord himself
slew them, and in the stead thereof made him father other two, which he least
intended.

But on second thoughts, neither was the latter fault so great as the first,
nor the consequence so bad as you imagine.

See what an Acquaintance had Judah gotten by wandering away from the Tents of
Israel, and searching out for some good house or other wherein to solace and
caress himself; Genesis 38.1.
He turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah. And he, it seems,
as having a design upon his Friend (so called) hold him unto Shuah's Daughter,
with whom Judah was taken in his vagary. Which friendship (howsoever) continued
till after her death, (good men being seldom forward to shake off even their
Back-friends:) So that Hirah, being with him to comfort him, was as ready to
help him at another turn, (even as lewd Suburbers delight to draw in
Countrymen into the Stews) and to wait for him (like a Pander) and conceal his
prank, while he suffered him (rather than himself) to go aside unto a seeming
Harlot: and when Judah came back, to carry a Kid for him unto the Woman, to
redeem Judah's pledges, because he was ashamed to send by any but a Stranger.
So that Judah seems to have continued still under the same or like temptations,
as long as he retains this acquaintance. And it is by his temptations that we
must endeavor to excuse him; whereof this Heathen Hirah was the first.

Then we must consider, that it was but simple fornication, upon surprise (and
without design) that Judah suffered himself to be drawn in by; whereas his
marriage was a settled resolution. And that God suffered him to be thus betrayed
(punishing one sin by another, and the consequences of it) for his injustice in
denying his third Son Shelah unto Tamar; which he was bound to do by a known
Law amongst them: Or for his distrust in God, lest he should take away Shelah
for doing his Duty, as he had done the other two for wickedness.

Add to this the subtilty of Tamar (who was a Freewoman of Israel, by her
marriage unto Er the eldest Son of Judah, whatsoever she was before) that knew
where the soft place was in Judah's Head, and meant to be meet with him,
inasmuch as she had been of a long time wronged, and saw no other likelihood of
redress but this: for the Law (as we may learn more clearly by the reviving of
it) was this, Deuteronomy. 2^.5, 6.
viz. If Brethren dwell together, and one of them dye, and have no Child, the
Wife of the dead shall not marry without, unto a Stranger; her Husband's
Brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to Wife, and perform the duty
of an Husband's Brother unto her. And it shall be, that the firstborn which
she bears shall succeed in the name of his Brother, which is dead, that his
name be not put out of Israel.

The Law (then) obliging Tamar to live within, under a Widow's guise, and not
to marry without, but expect; she had (indeed) Onan given to her; but he hating
to raise up Seed unto his Brother (more than to lie with a taking Woman) spilt
his Seed upon the ground, thinking (it may be) after that to go into fruitless
dalliance. Genesis 38.10.
And the thing displeased the Lord, so that he slew him also after his Brother
Er. The reason of Onan's sin is to be understood, viz. Because he would have
the eldest Brother's Right extinct, and be eldest himself; whereas if he had
begotten a Son on Tamar, even that Son should have carried the birthright from
him. And when Tamar had remained still a shady Widow, in hope of Shelah, and
she saw that he was grown, and not given to her, she began not only to despair
of an Husband, but of an interest in the house of Judah, which ought not to be
denied her: It was the least of her intention (therefore) to play the Harlot,
whatever Judah meant; for being sped by him, she put on her Widows Garments
again, and betook herself to her former place. So that she may seem no more to
blame than an honest Woman, that puts her self into an Harlots place, and so
defrauds her own Husband.

Ay, but the Law was, That the Brother and not the Father-in-Law should raise
up Seed unto the first Husband, How then can Tamar be excused for tempting, and
lying with the Father?

We must not take Tamar for a scrupulous Casuist, (though she meant not to be
an Harlot, but contained ever after, as it is most likely Judah did, of whose
refraining there in mention, but of his marrying again we read not) but for an
interested, wronged Person, that sought to right herself the best she could:
For if she conceived, she should be wrapped up in the inheritance of her Issue,
which Judah could not abandon; or if not, yet Judah could not wrong her any
further.

But take the Case as it will bear: For a Brother to lie with his Brothers Wife
or Widow, in any other Case than this, is incest; And it is no more incest in
the Father-in-Law, so far as touching of blood is intended (for the
Father-in-Law has no more blood in his Son's Wife that never conceived) than in
the Brother: There is only the reverence of Descent, that is more. And the
reason of another Descent ( viz. of inheritance) being the reason of the Law
that allows the dispensation, it is the less wonder that Tamar should lay aside
the respect of reverence only to a Father, that would hold her still under
greater wrong, unless she laid this Veil aside, and put another on: which is
all that I have to say for her.

But as for Judah, as his soul hated incest, so neither was he guilty of it (in
the least) as he was beguiled. And though his two Sons Pharez and Zarah were
misbegotten (by mistake) on Tamar; yet they were not base-born, but came by due
Right into their Father Er's Lot, as much as if Shelah had begotten them, who
ought to have endeavored it: So that Judah (by God's permission) did but
supply his Son's place as a punishment for his withholding him. And when God
had pardoned all this to Judah, neither his Father, nor his Brethren eyed him
the worse; but God himself prospered him the more: For whereas his Brethren had
all more Children than he, when they came to be numbered, at their going out of
Egypt, Judah had seventy four thousand, Numb. 1.^6, 27.
and six hundred males, from twenty years and upwards, whereas no other Tribe
could come within ten thousand of His.

If all this does not satisfy, let us hear the pious Bishop a little further:
Bish. Hall's Contemplation of Judah and Thamar.
I find not many of Jacob's Sons more faulty than Judah, who yet is singled out
from all the rest to be the Royal Progenitor of Christ, and to be honored with
the dignity of the birthright, that God's Election might not be of merit.
Else, however he had sped alone, Thamar had not been joined in this Line. Even
Judah marries a Canaanite: It is no marvel, though his Seed prosper not. Yet,
that good Children may not be too much discouraged with their unlawful
propagation, the Fathers of the promised Seed are raised from an incestuous
Bed. And (as I may add) in Christ's Genealogy we have Rahab the Harlot, Ruth
the Moabitess, and Bathsheba (to choose) the adulterous Wife of David. But (as
the Apostle speaks) he put no difference betwixt us and them, Acts 15.9.
purifying their hearts by faith.

Such was the state of the first visible Church (which produced afterward such
admirable Spirits) so far as I can discover. But if the Masters were
indifferently such (as I have described) what think you were the Men? If it had
so seemed good to God, he could have set them all alike without blemish: But he
would rather take in all (now) than leave out one. And so must we, leaving them
in the good Land of Goshen all the life of Joseph, and some time after; for the
Text says, that Joseph dyed, and all his Brethren, and all that Generation,
Antiq. l. 2. c. 5.
before a new King (Josephus says of another Race) arose up over Egypt, which
knew not Joseph. And that the people were so increased, that Goshen could no
more contain them, but that the Land of Egypt was filled with them.

(...)

FINIS.
A LETTER In ANSWER to a QUESTION Propounded by the Author, viz. CONCERNING
The multiplying of the Children of Israel in Egypt.
SIR,
SINCE You were pleased to request my poor assistance in the solution of the
following Question, to show my readiness to serve You, I set my self about it:
I confess, at first I expected nothing but dry Arithmetical matter to work
upon; but upon farther consideration, I found the Subject You had given me, of
a more extensive nature than so, fit to be replenished with other more useful
considerations, and capable of a more noble improvement than I am able to
bestow upon it; yet such as that is, here You have it. Your Question is this,

How from seventy Males only, Genesis 46.47.
in no longer space than two hundred and ten years, Deuteronomy. 10.22.
(as your Chronologer reckons) wherein the Israelites sojourned in Egypt, there
could be produced at their first numbering in the Wilderness no less than six
hundred and three thousand, Numb. 1.46. and 3.39.
five hundred and fifty, from twenty years old and upwards, besides the Tribe
of Levi which amounted to two and twenty thousand Males, from a Month old and
upwards; and how the probability of this may be demonstrated, so as to stop the
mouths of such as Porphyry and Celsus, without refuge to a vast multitude of
Twins, or a miraculous continuance of the power of generation in that people
more than any other, of which we have no mention in profane Writers?

To this I doubt not but to return such an Answer as shall satisfy any
reasonable man, and your self in particular; and having done that, I think I
shall have done all that You expected from me, toward the silencing such as
are of Celsus's and Porphyry's Creed in this matter; if such as they may
properly be said to have any Creed, whose Faith reversed, consists in
disbelieving.

Nor is this the only good effect of such undertakings, (if duly performed) For
although Christians, believing the holy Scriptures to be from God who cannot
lie, do generally take God Almighty's word for the truth of those things that
are there revealed, without a strict scrutiny and examination of the things
themselves; yet if after assent given to the holy Scriptures as the word of
God, those amongst them who are qualified with abilities, especially such as
Your Self who serve at the Altar, and whose lips preserve knowledge, do search
and dive into the particular Circumstances of any thing there related, of an
unusual and surprising nature, such as this seems to be at first view; and when
upon such search, the thing appears upon rational grounds, not only possible
but, very likely to be effected: This not only puts to silence the ignorance of
foolish men, but highly confirms Believers themselves in their most holy faith,
and encourages them on other occasions to acquiesce and rely entirely on the
truth of God's word, when their limited finite faculties cannot fathom the
reasons either of the thing or Command revealed.

Without any farther Preface therefore: Give me leave, Sir, to affirm, That in
the matter before us there is no need of flying to an extraordinary
multiplication by Twins; I say, Extraordinary; for there is no reason to
exclude it in the ordinary course of nature, because we see it frequently
happen amongst our selves, and I believe (...) might be more frequent among the
Israelites, even from natural causes, such as the simplicity of their Diet
above ours, and the more fertile pregnancy of that Climate, where Nature is
more perfect, and better digested by the nearer approach of the Sun who
quickneth all things, and is reputed by Philosophers to have a peculiar
influence in the work of generation; insomuch that it passes for an
uncontrouled Maxim amongst them, and a kind of Postulatum, that Sol and homo
generant hominem.

And as little need is there of a miraculous power of Generation, unless we
will multiply miracles unnecessarily, by styling every eminent Blessing by that
Title, which is sent in performance of a promise; then indeed the great
increase of this people would pass for a miracle of the first rank: For never
was any promise oftener reiterated than this, as if the Benediction vied in
proportion and analogy to the nature of the Blessing it self, which consisted
in number. Had the Israelitish Women been all old Sarahs, nay had they been
young Rachels or Rebeccahs, and their Husbands confined to them, nothing less
than a miracle could have done it: But as it is, it holds no higher
denomination than that of a very great Blessing, which I look upon as a medium
betwixt the ordinary course of Nature and a Miracle, and much nearer of kin to
the former than the latter; because there is nothing in it either praeter or
contra Naturam.

The several promises of increase before mentioned, being the foundation
whereon I shall build my Superstructure, it will not be amiss to take a
transient view of some of them, and the wording of them; where we shall find a
most remarkable exuberancy, good measure, pressed down, and running over; such
as these, Genesis 13.16. I will make thy seed, says God to Abraham, as the dust of
the earth: so that if a man can number of dust of the earth, then shall thy
seed also be numbered. Genesis 15.5. And God brought Abraham forth abroad, and
said, Look now toward Heaven, and tell the Stars if thou be able to number
them; So shall thy seed be. Genesis 22.16, 17. By my self have I sworn, says the
Lord, That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply
thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is upon the Seashore.
And although we may think that this promise was partly made good in Ishmael and
Abraham's other Sons, and also in Esau; from all which great Nations were
descended: yet that is a mistake, for although they did seem materially to make
good these promises of increase, yet formally they did not, quatenus a promise;
but they were thrown in by God ex abundanti, and on the account of other bye
promises, such as that to Hagar, Genesis 17.10, 11. and were mere Anomala's in
respect of the main Promise, Genesis 21.12. For in Isaac shall thy seed be called:
To whom the Promise is renewed in Person, Genesis 26.3, 4. I will perform the oath
which I swear unto Abraham thy Father, and I will make thy seed to multiply as
the Stars of Heaven. Then the same promise is renewed again (twice) to Jacob,
not to Esau, Genesis 35.11. where God ushers it in with this remarkable Preface, I
am God Almighty, and therefore able to perform what I promise in spite of all
opposition from Men or Devils: The Promise it self runs thus, Be fruitful and
multiply; a Nation and company of Nations shall be of thee. Where the first
part is but a repetition of the Blessing given to Adam for peopling the whole
World at first, and afterward to Noah and his Sons for re-peopling it, when it
had been destroyed by the Flood; as if little Goshen were to be equivalent to
the whole World besides: at least, it was to be God's Nursery or Seed-plot,
where he raised almost his full number of Stocks, and only transplants them
into Canaan, insomuch that if they had continued but twenty years longer in
Egypt, they would have increased to a greater number in that short space than
they did in four hundred seventy three years that they were in the Wilderness
and Canaan, as I shall demonstrate. So that it was Egypt where all these
several promises, as to number, do chieftly terminate at last and discharge
themselves, as all the Rivers do into the Ocean: And this appears farther yet
from the last of all these Promises, Genesis 46.3. Fear not, Jacob, to go down
into Egypt: for I will THERE make of thee a great Nation. Which Promise is
limited to the time of the Israelites sojourning in Egypt, and is exactly
contemporary with the two hundred and ten years in the Question now handled: So
that the veracity of God himself was highly concerned to see this Promise
performed within that compass of time: and when once that is expired, then they
who were preserved before, entire as it were in the hollow of his hand (as I
shall make appear at large) were delivered up to several wasting judgments in
the Wilderness, such as the Earth opening her mouth to swallow up the two
hundred and fifty Numb. 16.2, 3, 5.
Princes of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, men of renown, their
Wives Ver. 27.
and their little Ones, and all that appertained Ver. 33.
or adhered to them in that revolt; besides this, they are smitten with four
several Plagues of Pestilence, and in several Battles great numbers fall by
their Enemies Swords. And Numb. 21.6. The Lord sent fiery Serpents among the
people, who bit them: so that much people of Israel dyed. And that mighty power
which was wholly employed for their preservation during the two hundred and ten
years of their abode in Egypt, is, after their delivery thence, employed to
their destruction on several provocations from their sins, When Iesurun waxed
sat and kicked; whereas their miserable and afflicted condition in Egypt was a
means from God of making them more humble, and therefore more fit for the
Divine protection, till such time as he had made good that promise to Jacob
before recited, Fear not to go down into Egypt, for I will there make of thee a
great Nation.

Besides these several promises to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, we read Genesis
48.16. that when the last of these upon his deathbed, adopting Ephraim, and
Manasseh for his own, transferred this Blessing upon them also, saying, Let
them grow into a multitude, the Margin reads it, As Fishes do increase; and
that You will allow, Sir, to be even faster than by Twins. Their great
Sacrament also of Circumcision in partibus genitalibus, I take to be a most
proper Memorandum and Token of this Promise of increase. But although this
Promise had never been made, nor Circumcision instituted; yet would it be but
reasonable to suppose, That that Primitive Blessing, Be fruitful and multiply,
which was given in the Garden, should have a more eminent accomplishment in
God's own enclosure the Church, than amongst His and His Church's Enemies;
especially considering the Circumstances of the Jewish Church and people, that
they were to subdue Nations great and mighty before they could be settled in the
promised Canaan: And when they were settled there, they were environed with
Nations round about, like a Garden in the midst of a Forest of wild Beasts, who
would be continually breaking in upon them to devour them, if God had not
proportioned their numbers to a competency of defense and resistance, and the
whole Church would have wanted that Privilege and Blessing, which was the lot
of many private Believers, viz. Not to be ashamed when she spoke with her
Enemies in the Gate.

Having spoken of the Promise, the next thing will be, to consider the means of
its accomplishment; which I take to be two especially: The first is, The
advantage of the Concubines; which they could not cashier without differing
from the examples of their Ancestors. And doubtless that Custom which was
introduced at first by Lamech, was not only connived at (but encouraged by
God's appearing to Hagar, and promising so bountifully in the behalf of
Ishmael, Genesis 17.10, 11.) in order to fulfill the Promise of Increase in due
season, and in God's appointed time, and in imitation of Abraham and Jacob, did
that Nation retain that Custom, not only in Egypt, but even till Shiloh came. I
shall confirm the truth of this by two or three Quotations only, out of the
learned Seldom, De Iure Naturali Gentium, etc. where he cites Maimonides
saying, Fas est cuique quotcunque, etiam centum Vxores, sive siniul omnes, sive
alteram post alteram ducere, neque potestas Vxort antea ductae virum heic
impediendi, modo illi potestas fuerit praestare alimenta, vestitum, atque
debitum conjugale, The other Citation is of an Author with a deadly hard Hebrew
name, which I therefore omit; who says, Qui dicit, Plures Vxores simul
interdictas esse, notum sit, eum nec morum nee juris esse peritum, nam multi
justi acceperunt binas Vxores, velut Elcana, David, Solomon: Et in Libro
Paralipomenwn multi memorantur, quibus binae Vxores. Mr Seldom in the same
Chap. 7. Book 5. quotes St Augustine saying, Prolis gratia Patres sanctos ex
Abraham and ante Abraham, quibus Deus, quod ei placuerint, perhibet
testimonium, usos fuisse conjugibus, neminem oportet dubitare Christianum,
quando quibusdam etiam singulis plures habere concessum est, ubi ratio fuit
prolis multiplicandae, non variandae appetitio voluptatis. But because we are
so overrun with Grotius in England of late years, that nothing will go down
with our modish Divines but what Grotius has chewed for them; and if He does
but say it, down it goes, right or wrong; insomuch that they can no more write
without Grotius, Grotius, than a Carmelite Nun can drop her Beads without
exhibiting particular devotion to the Virgin Mary, her peculiar Patroness, the
Lady of Mount Carmel; I therefore refer You to his Second Book and Fifth
Chapter de Iure Belli ac Pacis, where he speaks to the same purpose with Mr
Selden's Rabbis. And if it were both lawful and commendable to have secondary
Wives of Concubines, it is not to be doubted but that it was generally
practiced, though the Scriptures speak but little of it; because there is but
little occasion to speak of any Concubines. In the 20th of Judges there is a
Relation concerning a Levite, who with his Concubine came to lodge in Gibeah of
Benjamin, where the lustful Inhabitants forced his Concubine till she dyed in
the Street; whereupon the Levite makes no more Bones of his old Familiar, but
slices her in pieces, and sends a part to every Tribe, except Benjamin, where
the fact was committed; who refusing to deliver up the men of Gibeah to
Justice, the other Tribes, to revenge the murder and the injustice of the
Benjamites in protecting the Murderers, proclaim War against them; which cost
the blood of above fourscore thousand men: And upon this great and remarkable
occasion the Levites Concubine is mentioned, which otherwise would never have
been taken notice of in the Scripture. But although neither this Concubine nor
her Husband had been mentioned, it would have been but a weak Argument to have
said that no Levite ever had a Concubine, because then none had been mentioned
at all; for this Levite had had a Concubine, though this fatal accident had
never happened, which was the only occasion of informing us particularly that a
Levite ever had a Concubine. The like may be concluded of the twelve
Patriarchs, and their Descendents in Egypt, though the Scriptures say nothing
of their Concubines; for I have already observed, that that was the main
critical time to make use of that advantage for increase, and that liberty was
too pleasant and agreeable to corrupt Nature to be laid aside upon a sudden, or
waved; we see both Reuben, Genesis 35.22. and Iuddah, Genesis 38. were brisk and
sanguine men, and therefore more likely to be fond of having Concubines than
their chaster Progenitors. Flesh and blood is highly pleased to be indulged in
matters of this nature; and our Saviors denying this Privilege by reducing
marriage to its primitive institution between one Man and one Woman, and paring
away the Appendix of Concubinage, making no medium between such marriage and
fornication, might be no small stumbling block to the Jews, and might make some
of them like the young man in the Gospel, to go away sorrowful, for that they
had, or at least intended to have, beloved possessions of this nature. And as
it might be and still is some disadvantage to the ready embracing of the
Christian Religion, the abridging of this liberty; so the allowing and
encouraging of it was the Masterpiece of Policy in that great Impostor
Mahomet, and proved too powerful a Bait to draw the World after him. And
although the present Jews are not over-fond of this Privilege, and make but
sparing use of it; yet the reason of this abstemiousness is not at all on the
account of Conscience, (for they do in some measure practice it to this day)
but by reason of the inconvenience of it: For since the destruction of their
Country and Temple by that Heathen Emperor Vespasian, and his Son Titus, (who
yet by God's Providence were made the Revengers of the precious blood of
Christ) they have been scattered abroad upon the face of the Earth, and by the
just Judgment of God they are generally looked upon with an evil eye, and are
become ludibrium humani generis, liable not only to the just and real disgust
of Princes, but to their very Capricio's, and to be banished at every turn out
of their Domions; and they who have occasion to remove households often, have
little reason to be fond of increasing their luggage and their lumber.

From what has been said, I think it appears highly improbable that the
Patriarchs and their Posterity in Egypt should on a sudden quit that Custom
which claimed the possession of so many years as from Lamech, long before the
Flood, down to Jacob; and therefore we are not to measure their Corn by our cut
Bushel, nor their increase by what is now adays, when that advantage of
Concubinage is (or at least should be) taken away. And yet we are not without
examples of prodigious fertility where there has been neither Miss nor
Concubine in the Case: I my self have seen a Woman within four miles of my own
house at Winchfield, whose eldest Son John Hawkins (that dyed but last year at
about ninety years of Age, being healthy and strong, and a man of a very good
understanding) told me, that there were no less than seventy five in a Room
together at one time that asked his Mother blessing, Children, Grandchildren,
and Great Grandchildren, besides above forty more that were not present.
Famianus Strada, lib. 1. de Bello, tells us Iuliana, Mother to the famous
Prince of Orange, lived to see a hundred and fifty ask her Blessing, that were
descended from her. And our own Chronicles mention one William Somerset Earl of
Worcester, who was so numerous in his Offspring, that he could reckon more
Children of both Sexes than all the Earls of England besides, and this was
within this hundred years. And Fuller in his Worthies of England speaks of a
Lady Temple, who saw above six hundred that were descended from her own Body,
if I am not mistaken; whereas Jacob himself had but twelve Sons: And although
each of them might have the like number, yet the eleven that went with him into
Egypt had but about five a piece at the time of their going thither, reckoning
one with another, which yet is as great a number as I shall have occasion for
in this matter.

Before I dismiss this business of Concubinage, it will not be amiss to enquire
whence the Hebrews were stocked with such a number of Women more than Men; for
every Man having but one Concubine besides his Wife, the number must be double,
which is the most probable proportion: For though some like Jacob might have
more one, yet it is probable that others might imitate Isaac, and have none at
all. I find in my Lord Chief Justice Hale's most learned and judicious
Discourse of the Origination of Mankind, a little Book quoted with a great
commendation, written as I think by one Captain Grant, who among other most
ingenious Observations from the Bills of Births and Burials in London for
almost a hundred years together, demonstrates that the number of Males to
Females is as fifteen to thirteen, which is eight Men to less than seven Women;
the wife Providence of God allowing that redundance in the Males for Wars and
Shipwracks, and other accidents, to which Men are more exposed than Women. But
although Providence should have furnished the Israelites with as great a
redundance of Women (the same Providence sheltring this people from Wars under
the protection of the Egyptians, and they being Shepherds, not Mariners) yet
still there will want a great supply to make the number of Women double to that
of Men: And whence can this supply come, but from the neighboring Quarters of
the Midianites and others? We see Moses takes one of his Wives from thence, the
Daughter of Iethro, who seems, Exodus 18.9, 10, 11, 12. to be a pious good man,
and a true Worshipper, and not tainted with Idolatry as most of the Midianities
were, Numb. 25. notwithstanding their descent from the Father of the faithful,
and their retaining Circumcision; for those Texts, Exodus 4.25, 26. are grossly
misrendred, as Mr Mede has evidently proved. Nay, it is not improbable, that
the Isrealites might be furnished with Handmaids or Concubines from their
Neighbors the Egyptians; for that abomination or antipathy which the Egyptians
had for eating Bread with the Hebrews, Genesis 43.32. seems to have been on the
account of their Prosession only, as they were Shepherds, Genesis 46.34. and to
have been little else but an aversion to the smell of a Tar-pot, which by
mutual converse would easily wear out, and be laid aside. For that reason which
Interpreters give of this abomination, viz. Because the Israelites eat Flesh
from which the Egyptians abstained, and more than that, the Flesh of the Ox
and Sheep which were the Idols or Representative Gods of the Egyptians; this
seems to me to be of little force; for then they must have had all other
Nations in abomination that eat Leeks or Onions, as well as the Israelites for
Flesh.

Porrum and Caepe nefas violare, and laedere morsu:
Faelices Gentes, quorum haec nascuntur in hortis
Numina! --
-- Quis nescit qualia demens
Aegyptus portentae colit?
The more probable account of this antipathy is given by Bochartus in his
Canaan; and by Grotius out of Manetho, the most ancient Egyptian Historian, who
says, that on the account of the different manner of life of the Shepherds of
Egypt from the rest of the people, there arose in ancient times dreadful Wars,
and the Shepherds getting the mastery revenged themselves with fire and sword,
and burnt down the Cities, which made them be hated ever after; so that the
antipathy seems to have been of the same nature with that of French and
Spaniards now, and of French and English heretofore; when Wars and emulation
stirred up hatred, which in the ordinary people is not forgotten to this day:
Notwithstanding, this spite and emulation was among the men only, who were the
mutual Rivals, and was not extended to different Sexes on either side, so as to
abate that kindness and inclination which was ingrassed by Nature for its own
preservation, as appears by the intermarriages of French and Spaniards now, and
of French and English formerly; as our Histories abundantly testify. The like
may be said of the Hebrews and Egyptians; for we find there was a friendly
correspondence and neighborhood amongst them, nay they sojourned with the
Israelites in their houses, Exodus 3.22* And Exodus 1. the Egyptian Midwives are
made use of by the Hebrew Women in their extremity of Childbearing, and
express so much compassion toward them as to disobey Pharaoh for their sakes,
and then excuse their so doing with a lie, notwithstanding they are said to
fear God. But that which is more than to take a Concubine, we find that Joseph
takes to Wife the Daughter of the Priest of On, and by her had Ephraim and
Manasseh, who gave denomination to one of the greatest Tribes, an honor denied
to the rest of Jacob's Grandchildren; their Mother being an Egyptian was no
Bar in the way, the Males only in all the Genealogies of the Hebrews being
accounted for the Seed. So then if Joseph might take a Wife notwithstanding the
abomination which the Egyptian men had for the Hebrews, much more might others
take Concubines in imitation of that great Hebrew of the Hebrews, Abraham
himself, whose beloved Agar was an Egyptian. Thus much I thought fit to say of
this matter, that when I had stated the numbers of Men and Women among the
Israelites, I might not be brought to an after-reckoning about the Concubines.

The next advantage for increase and multiplying, one would think should be the
longaevity of those times; but I confess I question whether that were any such
advantage; for as they continued to get Children longer, so they began later.
Isaac and Esau were forty years of Age before they married, Abraham and Jacob a
great deal older; and perhaps Nature was not so forward then as it is now; but
as it came to its period later, so likewise to its maturity; and the reason why
it arrives at its journeys end the sooner now, may be because it treads swifter
paces to perfection, Nature observing a due proportion in its three great
Stages, Maturation, Vigor and Decay: according to that true Proverb, Soon
ripe, soon rotten; to which answers, Later ripe, later rotten: And we see, that
those Creatures which are ripe for Generation at two or three years old, as
Horses and Cows, though they far exceed Man in strength, yet they seldom live
to be much above twenty years of Age. Now although the first Descendants into
Egypt for a hundred years or more, might in all probability live to a greater
Age than Men do now; so from what I have now said, I think it is probable also
that they married later, whereby we should lose a part ante almost as much as
we should gain a part post, by continuing the work of generation longer: I
shall therefore suppose the Age of Man then to be the same that it is now, for
it seems to have had a gradual decrease from the time of the Flood till the
time of Moses, or a little before, who in the 90th Psalm, which was of his
Penning states the Age of Man at threescore and ten, and that Men were so
strong that they came to fourscore years, which is usual in our days. We must
not therefore state the Age of the Israelites in Egypt at a hundred and ten, or
an hundred and twenty years, because Moses, Aaron and Joshua arrived to those
years: For doubtless Moses speaks not in that Psalm as a Prophet of what would
be hereafter, but as a Divine Philosopher and Observer of Nature in the people
whom he led, and these turns that Observation into Devotion and pious
Contemplation of the vanity of our nature. And the great Age which those three
Worthies arrived at was a peculiar Blessing from God on their particular
Persons (not common to others) for the ends of his Providence, they being
highly favored of God, and chosen Instruments for that great and wonderful
administration in the Wilderness, and for the plantation and settlement of
God's Church and people in the promised Canaan: And of Moses in particular it
is said, that his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7. at
a hundred and twenty years of Age; which could not be by the ordinary power of
nature, when the generality of Mankind attained but to fourscore, and that with
labor and sorrow, Psalm. 90. but by the extraordinary blessing and support of
the God of Nature, in whom we live and move and have our being; nor is this to
be looked upon as any other than part of the recompense of reward to him who was
faithful in all God's house, Numb. 12.7. Nay, the kindness of God seems to
extend even to his dead Body, as well as to his living, bearing it away (as it
were surreptitio^sly) in his owns arms, digs his Grave with his own hands, and
covers him with Earth; thus bereaving the rebellious. Tribes of the honor of
his Interment, to perform his Obsequies Himself, Deuteronomy. 34.

This longaevity therefore of the Patriarchs affording little or no advantage
above the shorter lives, but more early pregnancy of the latter Generations in
Egypt; I proceed to that which You will say was a great advantage indeed, which
is the second means that conduced to bring about the accomplishment of the
Promise of multiplying the Posterity of Jacob exceedingly, that is, with more
than the usual increase of the rest of Mankind; and that is, The watchful
Providence and protection of that God who promised: And indeed I am apt to
think, that the vast increase of the Israelites proceeded more from God's great
care in the preservation of those that were born, than from their own
extraordinary fertility above all other people, that had both Wives and
Concubines as well as they. For although the Promise contained fruitfulness as
well as multiplication, yet that was promised only as the means conducing to
that end; so that if their fertility sufficed for that, both parts of the
promise were exactly fulfilled, though there were no exuberant Numbers of
Super-numeraries, as it were for food for those three great Devourers, Famines,
Wars, and Pestilences; they being exempted from those three Calamities by the
special Providence of God over them: But lest this should be thought to be said
gratis, I shall therefore endeavor to prove it.

And in order to that, it is worth observing, That Moses, who writes the
History of this people from the very Creation, dispatches that great interval
of above sixteen hundred and fifty years from the Fall to the Flood, in three
Chapters, viz. Genesis 4, 5, 6. whereas the rest of the Book, which is no less
than forty four Chapters, is spent wholly on no longer an interval than to the
death of Joseph, which is searce six hundred and sixty years; and still the
nearer he comes to his own times, the more his History swells, like great
Rivers, the farther from the Spring the larger they grow, by the confluence of
more streams: For although his inspiration to write truth, was equal
throughout, yet the Tradition, which (for the most part) furnished him with the
Subject matter of that truth was not equal; the Tradition of the first Ages
being very scanty, and almost worn out as it were by passing through so many
hands: whereas those things which were transacted at a less distance of time,
could not so easily either be forgotten or corrupted; so that these came in
greater number, more entire and certain, and clothed in their particular
circumstances: whereby it seems to me highly improbable that Moses should be
ignorant of any considerable Calamity that besell this people, that was of so
late a Date as their coming into Egypt; which was but about thirteen years
before he himself came into the World, and therefore the knowledge of it had
been easily handed down to him from so small a distance, without the help of
supernatural revelation, which he was also furnished withal, to supply the
defects of Oral Tradition in that History which he wrote. Now if he could not
be ignorant of it, and yet concealed it, I conceive this cannot be supposed
without questioning his fidelity as God's own Historiographer, who yet has this
testimony even from God himself, That he was faithful in all his house, Numb.
12.7. that is, in all that wherewith God entrusted him, whereof the penning
this sacred History was a part. But besides his fidelity, his tender affection
to this people, for whose sake he quitted the glory and pleasures of the
Egyptian Court, refusing to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, and
afterward in the Wilderness desires God to blot him out of his Book, rather
than they should be destroyed; I say this tender affection could not suffer him
to omit the recording any considerable calamity that befell their Community, and
that with as much commiseration, and in as relenting a strain, as he does the
business of the Taskmasters. And though they had fallen into the hands of God
himself, by some raging Pestilence, and not of man (as the other was) yet
doubtless his great piety would not have failed to have pointed out those sins
which provoked that judgment, nor to have celebrated God's mercy for saying to
the destroying Angel, It is enough. This therefore being cleared, That Moses
could neither be ignorant nor silent of any considerable Calamity that besel
this people in Egypt, let us in the next place see whether he mentions or but
hints at either Famine, War or Pestilence.

As for Famine, we read of none, ^ave that which first brought them into Egypt;
and when Jacob and his Family came down to settle there, it was to this very
end, That they might be preserved from the evil effects of that Famine which
was in Canaan, and in all those parts, whereof there were five years yet to
come, Genesis 45.11. There is as little also said of their being oppressed by War
or Invasion on their small Territory by the Neighboring Midianites and
Arabians, or any others: nor is it probable that the Kings of Egypt made any
use of them in their Wars, they being Strangers charitably sheltered for their
Brothers sake, under the protection of the Egyptians. For when they were but
few, they could afford but sorry assistance; and when they became many, 'twas
no policy to arm a Province of Strangers in the Bowels of the Country, and
teach them the Art of War: And when they began to multiply, the Egyptians were
so far from this, that they grew jealous of them, Exodus 1.10. lest when there
fell out War, they should join unto their Enemies, and fight against them. As
for the Pestilence, we find not one word of that neither: That they were very
subject to the Leprosy, is very certain; and though it be as certain that that
was very in^ectious, fore and noisome, and called a Plague, yet that it was
frequently mortal seems to me very improbable ^or two reasons; the first is,
Because we ^^ver read of any that dyed of it, or (...) least of any
considerable numbers; which is sufficient to my purpose: The ^ther reason is,
Because the Law seems ^o suppose the recovery of those that ^ad it, as much as
it did Women in Childbed, because it appoints Rites and Offerings after
recovery in both Cases, and both together, Lev. 12, 13, 14. I confess it
appoints more large Offerings and more Rites for cleansing the recovered Leper,
than in the oath Case, to denote the impurity of the one to be far greater than
that of the other; the one being according to the Law of Natures Economy, the
other an accident and a disease and the consequent of sin. But although this
denotes the impurity to be of a different nature, and far greater; yet does it
not denote the danger to be greater: the Law by appointing the Rites of
cleansing seems to suppose in general the recovery of both; and though some
might dye of the Leprosy, so likewise did some in Childbed: but that it was
any way comparable to the Plague, properly so called, is no way credible; there
b^ing no Rites nor Offerings appointed (...) that in particular, because the
Law ^^pposed the Plague mortal. I remember I have read in some Author, whose
name I have forgot, as not worth remembering, of the same stamp with those
Gentlemen You mention, Celsus and Porphyry, How that the Egyptians desired
nothing more than to be rid of the Israelites, and that that Army wherewith
Pharaoh pursued them according to Moses's relation, this Author says went to
drive them out of the Country as a Herd of unclean Beasts and noysom Lepers.
Now although this account be notoriously false, yet it affords this
Observation, That the Leprosy was not accounted mortal, like the Plague of
Pestilence; for surely then this Author, who seemed to me to be more Knave
than Fool, would not have made the Egyptians to have followed the fatal scent
so close at the heels with their King at the Head of them, by whose life they
swore. Nor had it been any more for Moses, but only to have commanded out a
Brigade or two of Lepers, and by that means have seen that literally fulfilled
which was promised afterward, Josh. 23.10. One man of you shall chase a
thousand; or else he might have faced about, and placing death and destruction
in the Front, easily have saved the expense of a Miracle, and in this posture
have marched back again to their beloved old Quarters, as this Author supposes
them. The Leprosy therefore being (...) no such mortal Nature, and there b^ing
no hint of any other Epidemical Disease of a fatal Nature amongst this people
during their abode; I therefore conclude that they were guarded by God's
especial Providence in this respect, as well as from the direful effects of War
and Famine.

But this will yet appear with greater evidence, if we take a view of God's
tender affection and care over this people in supporting them under those
afflictions which he was pleased to suffer to be brought upon them. During the
life of Joseph all was well, and they lived at great ease by means of his
interest at Court, nay their happiness seems to be of equal continuance with
the memory of that good man; but he being gone to his Fathers, and to his Grave
in peace and honor, at length in process of time, it is said, ( Ex. 1.8.) that
there arose a King which knew not Joseph, nor how serviceable he had been both
to Prince and people in the time of Egypt's calamity. And he taking notice (
ver. 9.) that the Israelites were more and mightier than his own people, he
seems resolved to put a stop to their growing numbers, to keep Jacob from
overflowing, and Israel within his Banks: Come, says he ver. 10. let us deal
wisely with this people, lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that when
there falls out any War, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against
us, and so get them out of the Land: By which means part of his Territories
would have been unpeopled, and he would have lost above half his Subjects, or
rather Slaves. And in order to accomplish this Project of checking their
numbers from growing to an ungovernable bulk, ver. 11. therefore did they set
over them Taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens: Nor were these
Taskmasters negligent in the execution of their Office, as appears by these
several words which the Holy Ghost makes use of to set forth the misery of this
poor distrested people, such as Affliction, Oppression, Rigor, Burdens, cruel
Bondage, all manner of Service, fighting, crying, groaning, anguish of Spirit,
and ver. 14. life it self is become bitter; and chap. 2.11. there Moses finds
an Egyptian bastinading a poor Hebrew Slave at such an inhumane rate, as it
provoked the meekest of men to become both his Judge and his Executioner upon
the place. And doubtless, the slavery of the Spanish Mines at Peru and Mexico,
no nor of the Turkish Galleys, is to be compared to this of Egypt; for there
the Masters interest pleads for the preservation of the Slave, whereas the very
design of this seems with more than barbarous drudgery to make their Souls quit
their harrassed Bodies, and by destroying a great part of the present
Generation, prevent their multiplying in the next. But what is the effect of
all this barbarous cruelty, Exodus 1.12. The more they afflicted them, the more
they grew; though the Bush was on fire, yet was it not consumed.

The second Project of Pharaoh's to give a check to their increase was, By
tampering with the Midwives; But here God defeats him again; for they feared
God ( ver. 17.) and did not as the King commanded them. Then in the third
place, the same Command is issued out by Proclamation to all his Subjects
whatsoever, ver. 22. And then Moses is born, and strangely preserved, even by
the Tyrants own Daughter, whom God afterward employs as the chief instrument
of their delivery, in spite of all Egyptian policy and force: So vain is it to
fight against God; and if He be for Israel, let Pharaoh do his worst. It is
also remarkable, that besides the destruction which fell to the share of the
Egyptians at the Red Sea, two of the ten Plagues are of the same nature with
those which Pharaoh intended against Israel: For as he intended to diminish
their numbers, by crushing them into their Graves by heavy burdens and
intolerable, Exodus 1.11. Exodus 5.45. Exodus 6.6. so God diminishes Pharaoh's
people with the Plague of Hail, which crushed all that were abroad in the
Field, even to the Earth, Exodus 9.25. And the death of the first born of Egypt
seems to retaliate what he would have done by the Midwives; though this be
threatened indeed on a more general account, Exodus 4.22, 23. Thus faith the
Lord, Israel is my Son, even my firstborn; let my Son go, that he may serve
me: And if thou refuse to let him go, behold I will slay thy Son, even thy
firstborn. Now if God appear thus eminently, not only to preserve Israel
entire from being diminished in his promised numbers in the midst of this
Furnace of afflictions, but even to repay in kind that vengeance which was
intended against them, certainly he would not destroy them himself by Famine or
Pestilence; nor is there any reason to suppose that there was not an even hand
of Providence over them for good in one respect as well as another, and at one
time as well as another. Can we think that God who promised Jacob, Genesis 46.3.
to go down with him into Egypt, and surely to bring him thence again, would
leave him one minute whilst he was there, unless we think the God of Israel to
be some times like booted Baal, whom the Prophet Elijah wittily upbraids to be
taking of a journey? I therefore conclude, that as they were extraordinarily
supported under their afflictions from Pharaoh, so likewise that they were
guarded from those three Calamities, Famine, War and Pestilence; and that it
may be truly said of these, as it is of the Plague of Hail, Exodus 9.26. Only in
the Land of Goshen, where the Children of Israel were, was there no hail.

Seeing then that these People were thus cherished under the wings of Gods
special Providence and protection from those sweeping Calamities which the same
God inflicts upon other particular Nations; and that frequently, not only as
the Punisher of sin, but as the great Governor of the World, and for the good
of the whole, in order to keep the Race of Mankind within such Bounds, that the
Creatures may suffice for food and clothing, which they could not do if those
three great Correctives were wholly intermitted but for one Century; I say what
wonder is it, that they who were thus cherished by God as a Father and Sponsor,
and under his immediate protection, (unless that protection it self be a
wonder) should be so very fruitful in respect of adult numbers, though they
were not prodigiously fruitful above the Egyptians and other people, in respect
of the number of Infants born, who had both Wives and Concubines as well as
they? For as other Nations, so particularly the Egyptians, are frequently
subject to very considerable abatements in their numbers, by those three
calamities before mentioned, especially the Pestilence in that sultry Climate,
where the River Nile every June, which is a hot time of Year also, leaves
abundance of mud upon the surface of that flat Country at his return into his
old Channel, which must needs send forth noysom smells and vapors into the
Air; from whence arise Plagues and other Epidemical Diseases, especially where
people live at ease and luxury, and crowded together in Cities: whereas the
Israelites manner of life, they being Shepherds, whose business lies abroad in
the fresh open Air, might be a means from God of the preservation; and that
which Pharaoh intended for their ruin, in all probability was a means to
secure them from Epidemical Pestilential Diseases. For it is a great truth,
that the Plague it self is no Plague to clean and pure Constitutions, and
seises those only whose Bodies, by feeding plentifully and living at some ease,
contract vicious humors, which the infectious Air sets into a high
fermentation, which it could not do if those humors were not there, they being
the only Fuel of that fatal combustion: and certainly all the College of
Physicians, though Galen and Hippocrates and Aesculapius himself were joined
with them, could not prescribe a more Sovereign remedy against the increase of
humors than Pharaoh did to these poor Drudges, viz. the Leeks and the Onions,
the Garlic and Cucumbers of Egypt; and if they would mend their Commons with
Bread, they must get it, not with the sweat of their Brows only, but of every
joint and limb: so that they were as clean as Horses for a Race, and might bid
defiance to all infection. But when once they remove out of Egypt, and from
making Bricks without Straw, and had little to do but only to stalk easy
marches in the Wilderness, and sometimes to lie at Anchor, and to surfeit upon
Quails and Manna, till it run out at their Nostrils, Numb. 11.20. Then while
the luscious Flesh was between their teeth, Numb. 11.33. they are smitten with
a very great Plague: and at the 14th Chapter, those who went to search the Land
of Canaan, dye of a second Plague; and at the 17th Chapter, there fourteen
thousand and seven hundred dye of a third Plague; and Chap. 25. there twenty
four thousand dye of a fourth Plague; they being now both naturally sitted by
their luxury, and morally qualified by their sins, for this Judgment. But we
hear not a syllable of any one Plague amonst this great people during their
bondage in Egypt, who were therefore great and numerous, because guarded from
this and the like Judgments. For should God have exposed them to those
devouring Judgments of Famine, War and Pestilence, that had been but the way to
have unravelled the means of performing his own promise, like one who travels
in a Circle, and having traced the whole Circumference, arrives at length (and
not advances) but to the same Point from whence he first set forth.

I can never think that the Egyptians (whose wisdom is celebrated even in
Divine Writ, Acts 7.22. as an Ornament and excellent Qualification in Moses
himself, whom God chose out of all the Tribes to be his own Lieutenant or
Deputy in governing the Israelites) were such ill Politicians, or that they
whom the annual Overflow of their great River taught to be the great Masters of
Practical Geometry even to Greece it self (which it is impossible to perform
without good skill in Arithmetic) should be such ill Arithmeticians, as not to
be able to do that which I do now, viz. sit down and compute the number that
would arise from seventy men by their Wives and Concubines, though every man
had been as fruitful as Gideon, who had threescore and ten Sons; and then judge
whether these Strangers might not in time become dangerous to the State, and
with a less auspicious inundation than that of Nile, overflow the whole
Country, and like the Frogs enter even into their Kings Chambers. Now the
reason why this fagacious people did not foresee this vast increase of the
Israelites must proceed from hence, That they saw no such prodigious fertility
in them to make them increase faster than themselves, and they being many
thousands for one Israelite. Nature (they thought) would still hold the
proportion the same. They could not but foresee by former experience,
mortalities and plagues, those Correctives of the excels of humane generations,
whereby God seems to say to the overflowing Ocean of Mankind, Hitherto shall
thou come, and no farther. But then they looked upon this Judgment in the same
Notion that David does, Psalm. 91.5. As an Arrow that flies by day: And for
that reason they thought they saw it with their eyes falling promiscuously on
the Israelites, as well as on themselves, not dreaming of that Pestilence,
Psalm. 91.6. which walks also in darkness, and beside the track of all humane
conjectures, raging in the Cities of Egypt according to its usual Periods in
that hot Country, but making a skip or passover at Israel, and forbearing to
curtail his promised numbers in their Geometrical Progression toward infinity,
which I now come to state more particularly.

And what wonder is it if every man under these circumstances which I have
discoursed of, should have five or six Sons apiece, and as many Daughters,
reckoning one with another; for though some might not have so many, so others
might have a far more numerous Issue: Many a poor Cottage here in our less
pregnant Climate can furnish out a larger Stock, honestly begotten, by one Wife
only. Certainly, no man that considers what has been said, can think this an
unreasonable supposition, especially if he consider also what David says, Psalm.
127.4. Lo Children and the fruit of the womb are an heritage and gift that
comes of the Lord, and also how eminently this truth appeared in the Wives of
their famous Progenitors, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who were all successively
barren till God made them otherwise; and it is very probable, that as there was
not one feeble Person, Psalm. 105.36. so there was not one barren person among
their Tribes. But because that by accidents and natural infirmities some of
these may reasonably be supposed to dye before they come to maturity, or at
least, before they have the like number of Children; I will therefore suppose
no greater number than four Sons live to contribute their Parts to the next
Generation, by getting five or six Sons likewise, whereof four live to do the
like, and so on till two hundred and ten years be expired.

In the next place I will suppose that every one of these four may be Father of
his firstborn at twenty four years of Age complete; for the life of man being
now contracted, as I have before shown, to seventy years, it is but reasonable
to suppose that they made more haste than their long-lived Ancestors to secure
an early share in the promise; and if they might be Soulders at twenty years of
Age, Numb. 1.45. certainly it is no unproportionable supposition to think they
might be Fathers of their Firstborn at twenty four. This will appear more
probable yet, if we consider the more early pregnancy of that Climate, being
almost under the Tropic; whereas it is a common thing in our colder Situation
of 52 Degrees latitude to anticipate that Age: Add to this what the learned
Seldom tell us, lib. 5. cap. 3. De jure Naturali Gentium apud Hebraeos:
Necessitatem Matrimonii Praecepto fructificandi seu propagationis
multiplicationisque, eo usque sanciri docent Rabbini, ut ita eo teneri Masculos
omnes, ut quicunque expleto vigesimo aetatis anno (and sunt qui de minori
aetate heic pronuntiant) Vxorem non duxerit, eum in illud committere seribant:
nisi aut assiduo Legis studio incumbat, aut, etc.

But because of this early commencing Fathers, it is probable (as I have before
observed) that they continued Proletarians the less time, I will therefore
suppose that these four Sons are all born in twenty four years more, that is,
by such time as their Father is forty eight years of Age complete, and upon
these three suppositions I frame the Calculation annexed.

The usual way of reckoning Generations, and calculating their numbers, is by
Geometrical Progression, and in this present Case according to the suppositions
premised, the proportions of every Generation would run thus: 1, 4, 16, 64,
256, 1024, etc. But I find that at last in the Conclusion this way does not
give a distint view of the Grand-Sons, whereof a very considerable number are
born within that Period which is allowed to the immediate Sons only, and by
that means the account is intermixed and confused at last, and therefore I have
thought of another way. And although the eldest Son may have his first Child
before the Father has his last; yet for clearness sake, and to avoid confusion,
I suppose the Father to have all his four Sons before his eldest Son has ever a
Child; not that it was always really so, but to keep the account of each
Generation distinct by it self, from interfering with that which succeeded,
which would have been more intricate if I had supposed the Father and Son to
have had Children born the same years both together; I therefore suppose in the
Table annexed, that every man has one of his four Sons every six years: so that
his youngest Son is born six years before his eldest Son has a Child. This
Table has but two Columns or Ranges of Figures, the first contains every sixth
Year from Jacob's coming into Egypt, in every of which and no other (for
distinctness sake) I suppose the Children to be born, the number of whom is
placed in the other Column over against each Year. But this Column contains the
number of Children which will arise from one man only, as suppose from Adam, in
two hundred and ten years on the suppositions laid down; if multiplied by
three, it will give the numbers arising from the three Sons of Noah; if
multiplied by seventy, it will give the numbers of the Children of Israel,
which are as follows: Of Males up to 80 years of Age -- 1437310 Of Females the
same -- 1437310 Besides Concubines -- 400000 Sum Total -- 3274620 This account
agrees exactly with that of Moses at their first Muster in the Wilderness,
Numb. 1.46. where all of twenty years old and upwards, fit for War, are
computed at six hundred and three thousand, five hundred and fifty, and in the
next Verse it is said, that the Levites were not numbered among the rest, but by
themselves, Numb. 2.39. where the Males from a Month old and upwards amount but
to two and twenty thousand: Now if you allow eight thousand one hundred and
eighty of these to be twenty years of Age and upwards to sixty eight, and then
add that number to the number of the other Tribes fit for War, which is six
hundred and three thousand, five hundren and fifty, then the total Sum will be
the same with that which arises by my Computation, viz. six hundred and eleven
thousand, seven hundred and thirty, where none are taken in that were born
before the hundred and forty fourth year from their coming into Egypt; so that
none are above sixty eight years of Age of these six hundred and eleven
thousand, seven hundred and thirty, at their going thence, and none under
twenty: which being so near the mark, I think the Total number of Males and
Females cannot be very wide from the truth.

As for that ascititious Tribe, the Concubines, I have put them down at a
venture at four hundred thousand, which is not so much as two thirds of the
Males from twenty years old and upwards to sixty eight, by eleven thousand
seven hundred and thirty. For though I have formerly hinted, that one Concubine
to each man was the most probable number; yet perhaps they might be without
Concubines for some years after they were married, till such time as their
appetites beginning to be cloyed with one and the same Dish, their stomachs
began to hanker after second Course.

As to the way of computing the Table annexed, I need not say as St John does,
Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the number; for he that
has but so much understanding in Arithmetic as to perform Addition only may do
this, and therefore, Sir, I will trouble You no farther about that. You will
find that I have not confined my self precisely to two hundred and ten years,
but to two hundred and twelve; which yet is less than either St Walter Raleigh,
Helvicus or Petavius do allow for the Israelites stay in Egypt; and yet I have
not supposed any Children to be born after the two hundred and tenth year, but
only that they stayed two years more, to this end, that I might begin my
Computation of those that were twenty years old, and upwards, fit for War, with
those that were born in the Year 192. But having such good authority as those
three learned Chronologers, I think I need make no farther Apology, Petavius
allowing no less than two hundred and fifteen years for their abode there.

But I must not forget my promise that I made, to demonstrate that if the
Israelites had continued in Egypt multiplying at the same proportion that they
did whilst they were there, they would in eighteen or twenty years time have
increased to a greater number than they did in four hundred and seventy three
years afterward. For so many years it was, according to Helvicus, from the
time of their deliverance out of Egypt to the time that David caused Ioab to
number the people, whereof I find two Lists returned, 2 Samuel 24 and 1 Chronicles.
21. This last is the larger List, and therefore I will pitch upon that, it
amounts to eleven hundred thousand. But Levi and Benjamin were not counted
among them, 1 Chronicles. 21.6. For the King's word was abominable to Ioab. But if
ten Tribes give eleven hundred thousand, what shall two Tribes give at the same
proportion? And the Answer is, Two hundred and twenty thousand; which added
together make, One million, three hundred and twenty thousand men that drew the
Sword, that is, that were twenty years old and upwards, to about seventy. Now
if we suppose that the Israelites said twenty years more, that is, to two
hundred and thirty years, then they who were born in the two hundred and tenth
year will be full twenty years old, and therefore if we begin there, and add
all the numbers together up to the year one hundred and sixty two inclusively,
they make nineteen thousand and fifty two; which being multiplied by seventy,
make one million, three hundred thirty three thousand, six hundred and forty,
which is, thirteen thousand six hundred and forty more than they were at the
latter end of David's Reign; Quod erat demonstrandum.

And now, Sir, do You judge whether God Almighty was not as good as his word to
Jacob, Gen 46.3. Fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will there make of thee
a great Nation; and whether this might not be done without multiplying of
miracles for their production, only by covering them under the shadow of his
wings till their calamities were past. For my part, I think they do equal
disservice to the Christian Religion, who needlessly swell and aggrandize
passages of Scripture into Mysteries and Miracles, such as this I have been
speaking of, and that of St John 6.53, 54, 55. by the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; and those who will solve all the Phaenonema of God's
Providence and Proceedings, and the greatest Mysteries of Faith, such as the
Doctrine of the Trinity, the Incarnation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
by bringing them down to the Level and Comprehension of our frail
understandings, as the Pelagians and Socinians. For they who maintain, that
this vast increase of the Israelites could be effected no otherwise than by
constant Twins, they do by that means make it look like an absurd Romantic
Tale, as if it were impossible to be effected, unless every Israelitish Woman
were like a Dorsetshire Ewe, which seldom brings forth less than two Lambs at a
time; whereof their own History does not so much as pretend to make mention.
But I hope I have in some measure evinced the probability of the thing upon
rational grounds, at least in such a measure as could well be expected from a
Batchelour, who was never versed in this work of generation: And perhaps it was
for that very reason that You were pleased to single me out to discuss this
Question, from among the rest of your more learned Acquaintance that were
married, as having a charitable regard to that Chessboard-Proverb, (which You
know We have sometimes occasion to make use of) That a Stander-by sees more
than the Gamesters.

But I must not part with You so, without a more serious farewell and reflection
on this occasion, and expressing my hearty thanks for putting me on this useful
and pleasant undertaking; for by that means You have ministered to me an
occasion of searching more narrowly into the series of God's Providence over
the Children of Israel, bringing the greatest events to pass by despicable, nay
contrary means in all humane appearance at the time when they were transacted:
Ioseph's Brethren by selling him to the Ishmaelites thought verily to have
defeated the accomplishment of his aspiring Dreams, and by that very means send
him (notwithstanding he passed through a Prison too) to be no less that the
Viceroy of Egypt, and in that capacity their Sheaves come above twenty years
after to do obeisance to his Sheaf, and the Sun, Moon and Stars to fall down
before him, Genesis 37. and he becomes their great Patron and Protector, and in
the place of God to them and their Posterity, Genesis 50.19. I have before
observed how God defeated at every turn the secret Plots and Machinations that
were designed for the ruin of his Church and People; and have not We seen
fresh instances of the same nature even among our selves at this day, as well
as in every Age since the time of the Reformation, wherein God Almighty has
hitherto delivered us from the hands of our Roman Taskmasters, and I trust he
will yet deliver us? For the reviving and cherishing of which hopes and trust
in the good Providence of God, I must own my self more beholden at this time
to your obliging injunction, than You can be to me for my slender performance;
which yet if it contribute, though but remotely, to the clearing of any weighty
truth which You shall undertake, it will be an additional satisfaction, as it
was the only design and intent of,

SIR, Your most obliged humble Servant, JAMES RUDYERD.
Winchfield, November the 10th 1681. Anni a migratione Jacobi in Aegyptum.
Filii nati quolibet anno sexto. 1 1 6 1 12 1 18 1 24 1 30 2 36 3 42 4 48 4 54 5
60 7 66 10 72 13 78 16 84 20 90 26 96 35 102 46 108 59 114 75 120 97 126 127
132 166 138 215 144 277 150 358 156 465 162 605 168 785 174 1016 180 1315 186
1705 192 2213 198 2871 204 3721 210 4821 212 0000



A SECOND QUESTION Propounded by the Author, viz. CONCERNING The multiplying of
Mankind until the Flood.
Honored Sir,
ALthough in contemplation of your great pains and bounty to my self and the
Commonwealth of Learning, I should not (in civility) come in with another
Question, tanquam ex postliminio; yet, Extremum hunc, Arethusa, mihi concede
laborem! It is said, That Cain, being cast forth from the presence of God, in
process of time begat Enoch, and built a City after his name (being, it is
likely then, at man's estate.) After which it is set forth, in order of Writing,
though not of time, that Adam begat Seth, in the hundred and thirtieth year of
his Age, who had Enos by name; in whose time men began to call upon the name of
the Lord, or to be divided (as I take it) in Religions: I would fain know how
far the World might be peopled by that time Enos was fit to go forth from his
Fathers Tents, and to have a Tribe, Hoard, or Family of his own; so that still
the chief Family might retain to Adam, and the next numerous to Cain, and more
people yet, to make up the house of Seth, or any of his Descendents. And if
this appear for three hundred years in all, both the true Church and the false
may be discovered, and what numbers of people may be conjectured to have been
destroyed by the Flood. Which is the humble request of,

SIR, Your most obliged Servant, THO. TANNER.
December the 10th 1681.
Mr RUDYERD's ANSWER TO THE Second Question.
SIR,
YOUR kind acceptance and favorable interpretation of my former Essay, obliges
me to do no less than to attempt the answering Your other Queries, ex
postliminio, as You call them. And in order to that, I have calculated the
numbers that might arise from Adam and Eve, and their Posterity, upon these
following suppositions:

1. That they had a Son every fourth Year, and a Child every second Year; so
that there is one Year for breeding, and another or nursing: For it is not to be
imagined, that Eve bred up her Children by hand, or that, when Mankind began to
multiply, they should be guilty of that unnatural curiosity and gentile
ninceness which prevails so much nowadays, of nourishing their Infants at a
strange Dugg. But that there might be such frequent births as this amounts to,
is not improbable; considering that Mankind was at that time for especially
under the Divine Benediction of increasing and multiplying, in order to
replenish the Earth, which was nothing else but a Wilderness, and altogether as
useless (except for wild Beasts) as the Chaos it self, till such time as it was
furnished with Inhabitants.

2. That these Children, being born of Parents of a far more durable althletick
Constitution than men are now, and being formed out of the more pure principles
of Nature, as She came untainted out of the hands of her Creator, were not such
Rickety Pulings as they are now in the decrepit Age of the World: there were no
mala stamina vitae derived from diseased, feeble, intemperate Parents; but
fortes creantur a fortibus. I therefore suppose that they very rarely made such
untimely Exits as frequently happen among us, but that every one of these
attained to perfect Age; or at least, that at such a time as God Almighty's own
Colony, the Earth, wanted Planters, He might bless them extraordinarily with
such a number of Twins as might make ample reparation for those who were cut
off young by accidents and infirmities; so that they might increase as fast as
that proportion which I have stated, though not according to it: And yet I am
not of the general opinion of the Rabbis, that upon this great occasion of
peopling the World, there were few single births, but all were Twins; and Mr
Seldom out of them, and the Oriental Traditions, gives us the name of Cain's
Sister Twin, and of Abel's two Sister Twins: But perhaps this may be but a
Rabbinical fancy.

3. That Cain and all that were born after him, had their firstborn at sixty
five years of Age, as is recorded of Mahalael and Enoch: For although none are
said to begin so early besides in that whole Genealogy, Genesis 5. down from Adam
to Noah; yet we are not to think the eldest Son is always named. And St.
Augustine is clearly of this opinion, libs 15. cap. 15. De Civitate Dei, Video
esse credibile, inquit, non hic primogenitos filios ^sse commemoratos, sed quos
successionis ordo poscebat, with much more to the same purpose a little after.
For Moses's great aim is to draw down the direct Line only of Abraham the
Father of the Jewish Nation. The like appears plainly in the Genealogy of our
Savior in St Matthew, where Abraham is said to beget Isaac; Isaac, Jacob;
Jacob, Judah; Judah, Pharez; Iesse, David; David, Solomon; whereof not one was
the eldest Son of his Father. Nay, Methodius out of Oriental Traditions says,
That Cain's eldest Son was born, when his Father was but thirty years old: And
Mr Seldom quotes Cedrenus affirming, that Adam had thirty three Sons and twenty
seven Daughters, and yet none of these are mentioned by Moses, save only Cain,
Abel and Seth, and not so much as one Daughter, without which the Race of
Mankind must have come to a full stop immediately. And if Adam and his
Posterity to the Flood had no more Children than whose names are recorded by
Moses, there had been little need of opening the Windows of Heaven, and pouring
out an Ocean to drown them; for as to the quantity of water, they might all
have been drowned in a Trash-pool* And seeing there were many more than what
are mentioned, what necessity is there to suppose that those which are
mentioned were always the eldest? Credat Iudaeus --

4. I suppose that Adam might continue getting Children till six hundred years
of Age, seeing Noah had Sem, Ham and Iaphet after five hundred, Genesis 5.32. But
I shall have no occasion to carry on my Calculation so far in order to answer
your Queries, which require no more than to the Birth of Cainan, when his
Father Enos was ninety years old, which is just three hundred twenty five from
the Creation. As for the numbers that might be destroyed by the Flood, they
cannot be conjectured from any Calculation which falls short of that time (as
You imagine) for the Calculation keeps no certain proportion that I can find:
only You may guess the World to have been thoroughly stocked with Inhabitants,
and perhaps more than at this day. For Petavius in his 9th Book de Doctrina
Temporum, c. 14. and Temporarius in his Chronology before him, gives an evident
demonstration (as my Author says) that within the compass of two hundred and
fifteen years after the Flood, the number of coexisting Individuals would
amount to a vast multitude, and I believe more than is in the World at this
day, viz. above twelve hundred millions. Which is a swifter way of increasing
than arises by my computation; for in 325 years there arise but 116779 Males,
and adding the like number of Females there will be in all but 233558; which
yet I think is abundantly sufficient to answer your Queries about Seth and
Enos, though there were but half this number, or, which is all one, if I had
supposed them to have had a Son but every eighth year.

The only seeming difficulty is, to find out Inhabitants for Cain's City; for
by my Computation I can make but a hundred eighty seven Males in the World at
the birth of Seth; and Cain, according to my former suppositions, could have
but sixteen Males of his own Posterity, and certainly none else would accompany
the wretched Murderer, and thereby banish themselves from the face of the
Earth, and of God himself, Genesis 4.14, 16. Now seventeen Males would constitute
but a large Family, nor is it to be supposed that so small a number, whereof a
good part were but Children too, could give a Place the denomination on of a
City, or of a Town, though we should suppose it such an one as Caesar describes
our British Towns at his first footing here, Commentariorum lib. 5. Oppidum
Britanni vocant, quum Sylvam impeditam vallo atque fossa munierant, quo
incursionis hostium vitandae causa convenire conjueverunt. But to solve this
doubt I answer, That what is here said, Genesis 4.17. That Cain's Wife bare Enoch,
and that He builded a City, and called it after the name of his Son Enoch, is
spoken by way of anticipation; as if Moses should have said, This is that Enoch
whose name Cain gave to the City which he afterward built in process of time,
when his Posterity began to increase. And al^hough this be the first City
mentioned, yet it is very probable that Adam built the first City, being so much
longer in the World at Man's Estate, wherein he was created, as to be Cain's
Father; And what need Cain have given any name to his City, if there were no
other City in the World beside? For names are for distinction, and are useless
where there is but one of a kind. In Genesis 9. it is said of Sem, Ham and Iaphet
These are the three Sons of Noah, and of them was the whole earth overspread;
and the next Verse says, Noah began to be an Husbandman, and planted a
Vineyard: But no rational man can conclude from hence that the whole Earth was
peopled before Noah began to be an Husbandman, and planted a Vineyard. So I
say, Although Cain's City be mentioned before the birth of Irad and Mehujael,
Genesis 4. yet it does not at all follow that therefore it must be built before
they were born, because we see many things in this History hinted at in order
of Writing first, which fell out last in order of time; as in that instance I
mentioned of Noah's Sons, and you your self instance in your Letter, in this
History of Cain and his Posterity, which Moses seems to clap in a Parenthesis:
And supposing Enoch the Son of Cain to be Contemporary with Seth, though it be
probable he was something later, the Parallel will run thus.

Seth Contemporary with Enoch Enos Contemporary with Irad Cainan Contemporary
with Mehujael Mahalael Contemporary with Methusael Iared Contemporary with
Lamech Enoch Contemporary with Tubal Cain Methuselah Contemporary with Lamech
Contemporary with Noah Contemporary with
And yet the History of Tubal Cain is dispatched before Seth is spoken of,
though he were Contemporary with Enoch, who is five Generations removed from
Seth: So that there is no reason to conclude that Cain's City was built before
Irad was born, only because it precedes in the History. And perhaps it was not
built in a hundred years after, nor received the name of Enoch many years after
that, till such time as there were more Cities in the World, and Cain himself
grew old, and weary of the splendid toil of Governing, and so admitted his
eldest Son to a Partnership in his Superintendency; thereby to ease himself of
part of his care, and secure the Succession in the right Line; for which Cain
seems to have been very zealous: For by calling his City Enoch, no man could
mention it, but at the same time he must declare, by the very name of it, to
whom it did belong. In this, Cain seems to me to have played the Machiavel; and
no wonder, since our Savior himself tells us, that the children of this world
are wiser in their generation than the children of light. But certainly it was
no policy for Cain to secure the Dominion of this City to his Son, by calling
it after his Son's, and not after his own name, till such time as he himself
grew old, and willing to resign up his cares as well as his Glory: For had he
done it whilst he was young and likely to live, unless Enoch was an honester
man than his Father, it would have been a greater temptation to him to have
murdered his Father, than ever Cain had to murder his Brother. Artaxerxes
seems to have gone this way to work; for he settled his Son Darius in the Throne
during his own life, and a common thing it was among the Persian Emperors: Nay,
David himself did so by Solomon, to prevent his elder Son Adonijah from coming
to the Throne, and many of the Roman Emperors assumed those whom they intended
for their Successors, in Consortium Imperii: And perhaps this part of
King-craft might derive its Original from Cain. But if any are so wedded to
their own opinions, as to think that this City must needs be built before Irad
was born, because it is related first, I shall not be averse to that fond
conceit, provided they allow this definition of their City, that it was
Spelunca Latronum.

And whereas it is urged by the Prae-Adamites, that the World was peopled very
well before Cain slew his Brother, because Cain says Every one that meets him
will slay him: All that I can gather from hence, is, That Cain spoke more
reason than the Prae-Adamites: For what reason is there, now that the World is
peopled, for a Murderer to conclude that every one that meets him will slay
him? Does not many a Murderer escape by flying amongst men, and hiding himself
in the Crowd? So that there is no need of putting a mark upon such an one for
fear he should be killed, Genesis 4. there is more need of a mark now that he may
be known, and brought to Justice. Nay, the Prae-Adamites are so far from
establishing or strengthening their opinion from this Text, that Cain spoke
greater reason, by how much the World was the lesser; for that was an high
aggravation of the murder, and made it look more black and notorious than it
would do now that the World is well stocked with Inhabitants, as it would have
been a greater crime to have robbed the good Samaritan of his Twopence, than to
have stolen the same Sum out of Craesus's Treasury. And by reason of this
scantiness of the Race of Mankind, the matter became the more known, even to
all the World, who would be sure to tell their Children of this inhumane act,
which made him the discourse of all, -- cunctorum volitare per ora, and they
would be sure to describe the villainy from head to foot; and the Race of
Mankind continually increasing and spreading farther from its Center, Nature
seemed to send the Hue and Cry after him, and Cain might well conclude, that
that and vengeance would overtake him both together, and that every one that
meets him would slay him. But lest I should seem guilty of something of the
like nature, by murdering Your patience with a tedious long-winded Epistle, I
here take occasion to tell You, That I have done; or, which is all one, to
subscribe my self,

SIR, Your faithful Servant, J. RUDYERD.
December the 12th 1681. Anni a Creatione Filii nati 1 1 5 1 9 1 13 1 17 1 21 1
25 1 29 1 33 1 37 1 41 1 45 1 49 1 53 1 57 1 61 1 65 2 69 3 73 4 77 5 81 6 85 7
89 8 93 9 97 10 101 11 105 12 109 13 113 14 117 15 121 16 125 17 129 19 133 22
137 26 141 31 145 37 149 44 153 52 157 61 161 71 165 82 169 94 173 107 177 121
181 136 185 152 189 169 193 188 197 210 201 236 205 267 209 304 213 348 217 400
221 461 225 532 229 614 233 708 237 815 241 936 245 1072 249 1224 253 1393 257
1581 261 1791 265 2027 269 2294 273 2598 277 2946 281 3346 285 3807 289 4339
293 4953 297 5661 301 6476 305 7412 309 8484 313 9708 317 11101 321 12682 325
14473 Total 116779 Males



Books Printed for, and Sold by RICHARD CHISWELL.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.
Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2. Vol. Dr. Cary's Chronological
Account of Ancient Time. Wanley's Wonders of the little World, or Hist. of Man.
Sir Tho. Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc. Holyoak's large Dictionary, Latin
and English. Sir Rich. Baker's Chronicle of England. Wilson's Complete
Christian Dictionary. B. Wilkin's real Character, or Philosophical Language.
Pharmacopaeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis. Judge Iones's Reports in
Common Law. Cave Tabulae Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum. Hobbs's Leviathan. Lord
Bacon's Advancement of Learning. Sir Will. Dugdale's Baronage of England in two
Vol. Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity. Winch's Book of Entries. Isaac Ambrose's
Works. Guillim's Display of Heraldry with large additions. Dr. Barnet's History
of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2. Vol. -- Account of the
Confessions and Prayers of the Murderers of Esquire Thynn. Burlace's History
of the Irish Rebellion. Herodoti Historia Gr. Lat. cum variis Lect. Rushworth's
Historical Collections the 2 d. Part in 2. vol. -- Large account of the Trial
of the Earl of Strafford, with all the circumstances relating thereunto. Bishop
Sanderson's Sermons, with his Life. Fowlis's History of Romish Conspir.
Treas.andUsurpat. Dalton's Office of Sheriffs with Additions. -- Office of a
Justice of Peace with additions. Keeble's Collection of Statutes. Lord Cook's
Reports in English. Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World. Edmunds on
Caesar's Commentaries. Sir John Davis's Reports. Judge Yelverton's Reports. The
Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments, and resolutions of
the Judges; with other Observations thereupon, by Will. Cawley Esquire William's
impartial consideration of the Speeches of the five Jesuits executed for
Treason. 1680. Iosephus's Antiquities and Wars of the Jews with Fig.
QVARTO.
DR. Littleton's Dictionary, Latin and English. Bishop Nicholson on the Church
Catechism. The Complete Clerk: Precedents of all sorts. History of the late
Wars of New England. Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis. Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from
Popery. Spanhemii Dubia Evangelica, 2 Vol. Dr. Gibbs's Sermons. Parkeri
Disputationes de Deo. History of the future state of Europe. Dr. Fowler's
Defense of the Design of Christianity against John Bunnyan. Dr. Sherlock's
Visitation-Sermon at Warrington. Dr. West's Assize Sermon at Dorchester 1671.
Lord Hollis's Relation of the Unjust Accusation of certain French Gentlemen
charged with a Robbery 1671. The Magistrates Authority asserted, in a Sermon,
By James Paston. Cole's Latin and English Dictionary. Mr. James Brome's two
Fast-Sermons. Dr. Iane's Fast-Sermon before the Commons. 1679. Mr. John James's
Visitation Sermon April. 9. 1671. Mr. John Cave's Fast-Sermon on 30. of Ian.
1679. -- Assize Sermon at Leicester July 31. 1679. Dr. Parker's Demonstration
of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature and the Christian Religion. Mr.
William's Sermon before the Lord Mayor 1679. -- History of the Powder Treason
with a vindication of the proceedings relating thereunto, from the Exceptions
made against it by the Catholic Apologist and others; and a Parallel betwixt
that and the present Popish Plot. Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter against
Baxter. Mr. Hook's new Philosophical Collections. Dr. Burnet's Relation of the
Massacre of the Protestants in France. -- Conversion and Persecutions of Eve
Cohan a Jewess of Quality lately Baptized Christian. -- Letter written upon
Discov. of the late Popish Plot. -- Impiety of Popery being a second Letter
written on the same occasion. -- Sermon before the Lord Mayor upon the Fast for
the Fire, 1680. -- Fast Sermon. before the House of Com. Dec. 22. 80. -- Sermon
on the 30. of January 1681. -- Sermon at the Election of the L. Mayor. 1681. --
Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Houblon. 1682. -- Answer to the Animadversions on
his History of the Rights of Princes, 1682. -- Decree made at Rome 1679.
condemning some Opinions of the Jesuits and other Casuists. Published by Dr.
Burnet, with a Preface. -- A Letter giving a Relation of the present state of
the difference between the French K. and the Court of Rome. Bibliotheca
Norfolciana, sive Catalogus Libr. Manuscript. and impress. in omni Art and
Lingua, quos Hen. Dux Norsolciae Regiae Societati Londinensi pro sci^ntia
naturali promovenda donavit.
OCTAVO.
ELborow's Rationale upon the English Service. Bishop Wilkin's Natural
Religion. Hardcastle's Christian Geography and Arithmetic. Dr. Ashton's
Apology for the Honors and Revenues of the Clergy. Lord Hollis's Vindication
of the Judicature of the House of Peers in the case of Skinner. -- Jurisdiction
of the H. of Peers in case of Appeals. -- Jurisdiction of the H. of Peers in
case of Impositions. -- Letters about the Bishops Votes in Capital Cases.
Duporti Versio Psalmorum Graeca. Dr. Grew's Idea of Philological History
continued on Roots. Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice. Dr.
Brown's Religia Medici: with Digbies Observations. Dr. Salmon upon the London
Dispensatory. Brinsley's Posing of the Accidence. Several Tracts of Mr. Hales
of Eaton. Bishop S^nderson's Life. Dr. Tiliasen's Rule of Faith. Dr. Simpson's
Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; with a Discourse of the Original of
Hot Springs and other Fountains. -- His Hydrological Essays, with an Account of
the Allum-works at Whitby, and some Observations about the Jaundice. 1 s. 6. d.
Dr. Cox's Discourse of the Interest of the Patient, in reference to Physic and
Physicians. Organon Salutis: or an Instrument to cleanse the Stomach. With
diverse New Experiments of the Virtue of Tabaco and Coffee: with a Preface of
Sir Hen. Blunt. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three Parts. A Discourse
of the Nature, Ends, and difference of the two Covenants, 1672. 2 s. Ignatius
Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness. 1 s. 6 d. A free Conference touching
the present State of England, at home and abroad, in order to the designs of
France. 1 s. Mystery of Jesuitism, Third and Fourth Parts. Doctor Sanway's
Unreasonableness of the Romanists. Record of Urines. Doctor Ashton's Cases and
Scandal and Persecution. Cole's Latin and English Dictionary. The Trials of the
Regicides in 1660. Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in Arguments
Civil, Moral, Natural, etc. with a large account of all his Works, by Dr. Tho.
Tennison. Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of England.
Dr. Saywel's Original of all the Plots in Christendom. Sir John Munsons
discourse of Supreme Power and Common Right Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on
select Texts. Mr. Seller's Remarks relating to the State of the Church in the
three first Centuries. The Country-mans Physician; for the use of such as live
far from Cities or Market Towns. Dr. Burnet's account of the Life and Death of
the Earl of Rochester. -- Vindic. of the Ordinations of the Church of Engl. --
History of the Rights of Princes in the Disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices
and Church Lands. -- Life of God in the Soul of man. Markam's Perfect Horseman.
Dr. Sherlock's Practical Disc. of Religious Assemblies. -- Defense of Dr.
Stillingsleet's Unreasonableness of Separation. -- A Vindication of the defense
of Dr. Stillingsleet in Answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob about Catholic
Communion. The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of
York, Octavo. Sir Rob. Filmer's Patriarcha, or Natural Power of Kings. Mr. John
Cave's Gospel to the Romans. Dr. Outram's 20. Sermon. preached on several
occasions. Dr. Salmon's new London Dispensatory. Lawrence's interest of Ireland
in its trade and wealth stated.
DVODECIMO.
HOdder's Arithmetic. Grotius de Veritate Religionis Christian^. Bishop
Hacket's Christian Consolations. The Mothers Blessing. A Help to Discourse.
New-Englands Psalms. An Apology for a Treatise of Human Reason, written by M.
Clifford Esquire. The Queen-like Closet, both parts.
VICESIMO QVARTO.
Valentine's Devotions. Guide to Heaven. Pharmacopoeia Collegii Londinensis
reformata.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
AN Historical Relation of the Island of CEYLON in the East Indies: Together
with an Account of the detaining in Captivity the Author, and diverse other
Englishmen now living there, and of the Author's miraculous Escape:
Illustrated with fifteen Copper Figures, and an exact Map of the Island. By
Capt. Robert Knox, a Captive there near 20 years, Fol. Mr. Camfield's two
Discourses of Episcopal Confirmation, Octavo. Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons
never before extant. Mr. John Cave's two Sermons of the duty and benefit of
submission to the Will of God in Afflictions, Quar. Dr. Crawford's serious
expostulation with the Whiggs in Scotland, Quarto. A Letter giving a Relation
of the present state of the Difference between the French King and the Court of
Rome; to which is added, The Popes Brief to the Assembly of the Clergy, and
their Protestation. Published by Dr. Burnet. Alphonsus Borellus de motu
Animalium, in 2 Vol. Quarto. Dr. Salmon's Doron Modicum, or supplement to his
new London Dispensatory, Octavo. Sir James Turner's Pallas Armata, or Military
Essays of the Ancient, Grecian, Roman and Modern Art of War, Fol. Mr. Tanner's
Primordia: or the Rise and Growth of the first Church of God described, Octavo.
A Letter writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion; together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English and
Examined by Dr. Gilb. Burnet, Octavo. Dr. Cave's Dissertation concerning the
Government of the Ancient Church by Bishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs:
more particularly concerning the ancient Power and Jurisdiction of the Bishops
of Rome, and the encroachments of that upon other Sees, especially
Constantinople, Octavo. -- His History of the Lives, Acts, Death, and Writings
of the most eminent Fathers of the Church that flourished in the fourth
Century: (being a Second Volumn) wherein amongst other things is an Account of
Arianism, and all other Sects of that Age. With an Introduction containing an
Historical account of the state of Paganism under the First Christian
Emperors, Folio.
Books in the Press.
DOctor John Lightfoot's Works in English, Fol. Mr. Seldom 's Ianus Anglorum
Englished, with Notes: To which is added his Epinomis, concerning the Ancient
Government and Laws of this Kingdom never before extant. Also two other
Treatises written by the same Author: One of the Original of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of Testaments; the other of the Disposition or Administration of
Intestates Goods; now the first time Published, Fol. Mezeray's History of
France, rendered into Engl. Fol. Gul. Ten-Rhyne Med. Doct. Dissertat. de
Arthritide, Mantyssa Schematica, and de Acupunctura. Item Orationes tres de
Chemiae ac Botaniae Antiquitate and Dignitate. De Physiognomia and de Monstris.
cum Figuris and Authoris notis illustrata, Octavo. D. Spenceri Dissertationes
de Ratione Rituum Iudaicorum, etc. Fol.

