To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of your Majesty's
most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commissioners of your Leiutenancy, and of
the Officers, Citizens and Soldiers of the several Regiments and Companies of
the Militia and Trained Bands, within your City of London, and the Suburbs and
Liberties thereof.
Humbly Shows,
THat your Petitioners being infinitely satisfied, with your Majesty's Most
Gracious and firm Resolutions of using your utmost endeavors to preserve the
Government as it is now by Law established both in Church and State,
sufficiently made known, and secured to us and to all other your Majesty's
Dutiful, Loyal and Obedient Subjects, by your late most Gracious Declaration,
published for that purpose, Giv's us encouragement with all Duty, Loyalty and
Submission Humbly to beg leave to tender to your Sacred Majesty our Most humble
and Hearty thanks for the same, and to give you a perfect assurance that we are
unanimously resolved, to venture our Lives and Fortunes for the Preservation of
your Majesty's Life, (which we pray God long continue) and for maintenance of
the Government, as it is now by Law Established, both in Church and State; in
opposition to, and defiance of, all the Enemies and Opposers thereof, of what
Sect or sort soever.

And your Petitioners (as in Duty bound) shall ever Pray, etc.
Mercurii, 18 die Maii, 1681.
By His Majesty's Commissioners of Leiutenancy for the City of LONDON.
Agreed and Ordered,
THat Sir Thomas Bludworth, Sir William Prichard, Sir George Jefferies, Mr.
Sergeant Richardson, Sir Jonathan Raymond, Sir William Russel, Sir John
Matthews, Sir Benjamin Newland, and John Buckworth Esquire be desired to wait on
His Majesty to morrow at Hampton Court, to present the Humble Petition annexed,
in the Name of the Commissioners of Leiutenancy, and of all the Officers,
Citizens and Soldiers of the several Regiments and Companies, of His Majesty's
Militia and Trained Bands of His City of LONDON.

By the Commissioners Command Geo. Evans.

TO which Petition His Majesty was Graciously pleased by the Lord High
Chancellor of England, to Declare that this Petition, was a Dutiful Loyal, and
Seasonable demonstration of the Duty and Loyalty of the Leiutenancy, and of the
Officers, Citizens and Soldiers of His Militia of London, and that His Majesty
was very well pleased with the same, though it was but what in Duty and Loyalty
they ought to do.

Printed for Will. Leach at the Crown in Cornhill. 1681.


