A Sober Whisper, CONCERNING The EVIL of Things present, AND The GOOD of Things
to come.

By THO. NARJENN.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1665.

A Sober Whisper, etc.
FLy misty Fogs, black clouds that dark the Skies, Romans 13. 11, 12.

The Day does dawn, the Sun begins to rise:
Dark Ignorance, avaunt, that hides the way,
The Path is now discerned by th'light of the Day.
No longer grovelling pore, look up and see,
Your KING approaches in his Majesty. Isa. 33. 17. Mal. 4. 2. Psalm. 2. 6, 7.
Luke 1. 32. Col. 1. 15, 16 17, 18.

Fear not to yield obedience, nor fall down
Before the undoubted Heir to the Crown:
He Is no Usurper, hates all Tyranny,
To bring him home, he needs no Treachery.
H' has sent his Declaration to us all,
With His Privy Signet signed. A Council call
Ye Nations, accept the Indemnity,
Offered by him, who is Truth and cannot lie. Numb. 23. 19. Amos. 9. 11.

His gracious Act of Pardon he will seal,
To heal the Breaches of his Commonweal:
No Bishops, Priests, nor yet a Parliament,
His Act once past, in it can make a rent.
No corrupt Lawyer shall once find a flaw
Or querk in our King's plain and equal Law. Psalm. 19. 7. Hos. 14. 9. Isa 1.
26, 27

Nor dare the Judges their trust falsify,
One Subject to deprive of 's Liberty,
Or his Estate: assure your selves no crime
Against him committed to this very time,
Shall ever rise in Judgment: nor your name Isa. 1. 18. and 43, 25. Psalm. 100.
5.

(Though once a Rebel) stained for the same.
Our King can do no wrong; his righteous Law
Ever endures: fear not, but stand in awe,
Ye blessed Subjects, wait for him, and pray, Luke 18. 1, 7. and 12. 36.

That for your sakes he shorten may the day
Of his all-glorious Coming. He Will affright
The wicked world, whilst his Saints with delight Isa. 33. 14.

And joys unspeakable will sweetly sing,
With Hallelujahs to their Heavenly King. Rev. 19. 1.

Unto his People he brings all content,
There shall be no end of his Government.
No Pantaloons, nor a debauched fry Isa. 9. 7.

Of hellish scum attends his Majesty,
But thousands of his Saints all clothed in white,
The Wicked to subdue, and free the Upright Rev. 7. 9. Jude 14. 15

From all their burdens, and to give them ease
From their Oppressors: Blessed Prince of Peace,
Our Father Everlasting, Mighty God,
In Counsel Wonderful: His heavy Rod Isa. 9. 6.

His Enemies implacable shall feel,
At his most glorious Presence they shall reel. Psalm. 2. 9.

The Crew of Maypolizers in those days
Dare not appear the Whorish Pole to raise
Of wicked Flora; nor no frisking Whores,
Nor cap'ring Rogues shall dare peep out of doors: 1 Samuel 2. 9.

No roguing Fiddlers, nor base dancing Crew,
Swearers, Health-drinkers, who are the Devils due,
Shall their ungodly Meetings more enjoy,
Nor power have the Godly to anoy. Isa. 11. 19. Deuteronomy. 32. 35 Rev. 6. 15, 16,
17. Ier. 3. 23. Is. 47. 7, 8, 9 Rev. 18. 7, 8 Rev. 14. 11. Isa. 41. 11, 12, 13.
Zech. 2. 8, 9

Fly, Fly, ye black-mouthed, hellish, dammee crew,
Your day is lost, Vengeance o'retaketh you:
Implore the Rocks for shelter, the Hills try,
And Mountains of your lying vanity.
Seek, seek for help, but (alas!) all in vain,
Your brags and vapors shall increase your pain:
Your pain and torment never shall have end,
Now know what it is with Heavens King to contend.
Know what it is his Saints to crucify,
He takes it as done to his Majesty.
But you his Subjects who have loyal bin,
In patience waiting for his coming-in:
Bid sorrows fly, all tears wipe from your eyes,
Traitors and Rebels never more shall rise Isa. 25. 8. and 51. 11. and 54. 17.
Rev. 5. 10.

To persecute or grieve you, for you shall
For ever be Kings, Priests, and Prophets all.
Prepare to meet him, and your selves array Rev. 19. 8.

With rayments suitable for such a day;
No gaudy garbs, nor with fantastic stuff, Zeph. 1. 8.

Trim not your selves with Periwig and Muff.
No Antic garments see that you put on,
Shun all the wares of cursed Babylon.
Our King has long ago decreed what shall
Be the fair Liv'ry of his Subjects all.
Put on the whole Armor of God, and then: Ephesians. 6. 11.

You may withstand Devils and devilish men:
The Girdle of Truth it is a comely dress, ver. 14.

The Breastplate then put on of Righteousness:
Your feet being shod with the preparation ver. 15.

Of Gospel-peace, then fear you no temptation.
'Bove all, defend your selves with Faiths bright shield, ver. 16.

The wickeds darts shall never make you yeed:
Put on the Helmet of Salvation, ver. 17.

Which is Gods Word, and you may venture on
Against worldly Governors, dark Princes too, ver. 12.

The force of Flesh or Hell cannot you undo.
This habit to your Prince will testify
Your true Obedience, and firm Loyalty.
Rich Royal Robes on you he will bestow, Isa. 61. 10.

You and the rest shall make a glorious show,
With Triumph make the holy City ring Isa. 61. 3. Ier. 30. 18. Hab. 2. 3. Micah
7. 7. Isa. 61. 4, 5. Psa. 89. 34. Lam. 3. 32, 33. 2 Pet. 3. 9. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Psalm. 2. 9. Heb. 1. 8. Psalm. 76. 4.

With Hallelujahs to your heavenly King.
Wait patiently, think not his stay too long,
Though in the mean time you do suffer wrong,
He Will you require; great Privileges grant;
Inviolably he will keep his Covenant.
No malice lodges in his Royal Breast,
Butchrous revenge both he and his detest:
His Subjects bodies he will not enslave,
And he in mercy all men's souls would save;
But such as are implacable must fall,
With Gold or Iron Scepter he will rule all,
And all with equal Justice. Perjury
Shall injure none, when he his Foes does try;
No picked corrupted Iury-men shall stain Psalm. 94. 20. and 72. 14. Isa. 1. 26.

Their consciences, a Verdict to obtain
Against any: Nor shall a corrupt Judge be,
To impose a Fine, if they will not agree.
For righteous are his Ways; his Judgments right,
Innocent Blood is precious in his fight. Hos. 14. 9. Psalm. 72. 14.

He Is not attended with a Ruffian Crew,
Who serves for naught but wast his Revenue:
No Whoremongers, nor filthy drunken Swine,
Whom nothing pleases but lewd Whores and Wine; Isa. 52. 1.

No profane wicked dammee Pantaloon
In our King's glorious Court shall find a room:
Holy Attendants, blessed in every thing,
With Hallelujahs serve our heavenly King. Rev. 7. 15.

No Taxes to maintain his luxury,
Against heavy burdens people need not cry; Isa. 60. 17, 18.

Nor Custom, nor Excise shall be their yoke,
Nor shall they suffer cause their Chimnies smoke.
For he will judge the Poor, the Needy save,
On their Oppressors he will no mercy have. Psalm. 72. 4. Isa. 28. 16, 17. Zeph. 3.
13, 19.

No Laws of Antichrist under this Power
Shall be in force, the Godly to devour.
No lewd Confederates in Parliament
Shall dare to pass an Act for Banishment
Of Conscientious men. For ever blessed
JESUS our King shall give his People rest. Isa. 14. 3. Psalm. 72. 3.

The Mountains shall with Peace the people bless;
The little Hills shall flow with Righteousness:
Whilst Sun and Moon endure, the people shall,
In holy fear of him, be prosperous all. verse. 7.

He shall like rain on grass, on them distill
Refreshing showers of his holy Will. verse. 6.

Dominion he shall have from Sea to Sea, verse. 8.

The utmost parts of the Earth shall him obey:
Kings must obey, their stately Crowns must fall
Before him, who is King of kings, and Lord of all. ver. 11.

All hail, great King, blessed be thy holy Name, Psalm. 67. 4.

Let the whole Earth be filled the same:
His Anger to prevent, Kiss ye the Son; Psalm. 2. 12. Mat. 6. 10. Zeph. 3. 14.

Let the Common prayer be, Thy Kingdom come.
Ye blessed Saints rejoice, the time is near,
Transcendant Glory, amongst you shall appear:
The Stone has smote the Image on his feet, Dan. 2. 34.

Ye blessed Saints with joy each other greet;
The Clay and Iron now disjointed be, verse. 43.

The fall is near of the fourth Monarchy:
The Rule's divided amongst many Kings,
In whose days shall be seen most glorious things,
Which were foreseen of holy men of old,
And by God's Prophets were to us foretold.
The God of Heaven a Kingdom erect shall,
Which cannot be destroyed, but to all
Ages to last: inherit it none can,
JESUS alone must rule, not mortal man.
It shall in pieces batter and lay wast
All other Kingdoms, and for ever last.
Before our King's arrival, Saints shall sway,
The Scepter, and the wicked world obey. Dan. 7. 22, 26, 27. Rev. 13. 1. ver. 4.

Down must the Horns of the Beast, ye Kings o'th Earth,
Who from the cruel Beast have had your birth,
And he his power received from the Devil,
The Dragon, who is the author of all Evil,
Who being from Heaven cast, and full of ire Rev. 12. 9. ver. 13.

Against the Saints, has kindled a fire
Of Persecution; and Authority
He gave unto the beastly Monarchy.
His head adorned he has with Blasphemies Rev. 13. 1.

Against God's Name, and fills the world with lies
Against his People, Church: his Leopards skin
Clearly informs us he is the Man of Sin: verse. 2.

He gave him feet, like to a fierce Bears claws,
To execute the Dragon's sinful Laws:
A Lion's mouth, God's People to devour:
Thus from the Devil had the Beast his power.
Ye Earthly Potentates behold and see
Your Coats of Arms! here is your Pedigree.
Here likewise may be seen your destiny,
If you have led into captivity
God's holy Sa^^ts, be sure in the same state verse. 10.

You shall be led, this is your certain fate:
If any you have killed by the Sword,
You shall be served so, so says God's Word.
Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints,
God in due time will surely hear their plaints.
He once received almost a deadly wound Rev. 13. 3.

On one of his heads, some peace then was found
Among the Nations, and God's People all
With joy expected for to see his fall.
But now that is healed which was rent in sunder,
The worldly people follow him with wonder;
With joy they worship Beast and Dragon too,
Bragging, what power can the Beast undo? verse. 4.

But from the Earth another Beast did rise, verse. 11.

Horned like a Lamb: his mouth speaks blasphemies,
The Dragon like; pretended to reform,
Made the Image of the Beast, called it a Form verse. 14.

Of Worship, Prayers, or the Lyturgie,
Commanded all to it to bow the knee:
If to this Image you will not down fall,
Be it enacted, you are Traitors all. verse. 15.

All sorts and sexes hearken to the Command,
You must be marked in the forehead, or in the hand; verse. 16. verse. 17.

That is, conform, or else you must not trade,
The Beastly Priest swears such a Law is made,
And all must it obey: Let every soul
Be subject to the Powr's, who dare control
The Dragon, Beast, the beastly Scarlet Whore?
If any dare, they perish shall therefore.
But must this Serpents broad for every sway?
Full fain they would, but God himself says nay.
The Government of the Saints now draws near, Rev. 12. 12.

Read ye the Prophets, they are full and clear,
This devilish crew must stoop, and them obey,
Before King JESUS will the Scepter sway.
The Mountain of God's House exalt he will Isa. 2. 2.

O'th top o'th Mountains, above every Hill;
All Tongues and Nations that are here below
Unto God's holy Church for Truth shall flow:
And he himself will teach them all his Ways, ver. 3.

And how to tread in his Paths to his praise:
From Sion shall the Law go forth to them,
God's holy Word too from Jerusalem.
Then they shall judge the People all in right, ver. 4.

Rebuke their Enemies: learn not to fight,
But into Plowshares beat the warlike Sword,
Your Spears to Pruning Hooks; for why the Word
Of great JEHOVAH shall your Enemies
So quail, that they shall never against you rise.
Proud man's high looks by him shall humbled be, ver. 11. and 12. ver. 13.

The lofty mind he will place in low degree.
Lebanons Cedars that are high and tall,
And Bashans Oaks the Lord will level all:
Idols and Idol-priests he will destroy, ver. 14.

Look up on high ye Saints, and sing for joy.
Howl ye Malignants, fly, your selves to hide,
The presence of our King you cannot abide.
Haste to the Rocks and fly into dark Caves ver. 19.

Of your beloved Earth: tremble ye slaves
Of Satan, fore his glorious Majesty,
Who is now come all people for to try.
What you have devoted to Idolatry, ver. 20.

To the Moles and Bats throw all, as vanity.
Let Priests and Tyrants too retire with shame,
To the loathsome lake of Hell, from whence they came. Isa. 30. 33. Nah. 1. 9.

What mean ye Tyrants God's Laws to contemn?
What mean you thus his People to condemn,
Though innocent? Whatever you intend,
God has decreed to make an utter end ver. 8.

Of all his and his Peoples Enemies,
The second time Affliction shall not rise.
Whilst you as sharp thorns with each others twist, ver. 10.

And think to tyrannize even as you lift:
Whilst Drunkards like, ye drunken are with blood,
With your confederates hope to encrese the flood
Of Persecution, and to tyrannize
Yet more and more; hear what God does devise:
Like Stubble fully dry, his mighty Power
Shall kindle you, with Fire you devour
Although you many be, and live at ease, verse. 12.

Though you full Pleasures have, and are in peace.
Ye Counselors of Belial that do plot:
Mischief against the Lord, you're not forgot,
God will pass through, and oversee you all,
And in a moment great shall be your fall.
But to his People that to him do pray,
With yearning Bowels kindly he will say,
Though I have you afflicted heretofore,
I Will turn my hand and you afflict no more.
And I will break the Yoke that you oppress,
In sunder burst the Bands of your distress. verse. 13.

Then God's Command to his foes shall be known,
No more of their name amongst you shall be sown. verse. 14.

The Bastards brood he will root out of the Land,
His People they shall never more withstand.
The filthy Idols Temples he will race,
Molten and Graven Image with disgrace
He will turn out; and condemn to the Grave
The Vile and Swinish Priests that you enslave.
Over the Mountains look, behold and see! verse. 15.

How beautiful the Messengers feet be
That in this dismal day glad Tidings bring,
And published have the Reign of Sions King. Isa. 52. 7.

Ye poisonous Dragons brood, away, fly, fly,
This news your very souls will terifie:
Run, run, but all in vain, you're all cut off
By them who were the objects of your scoff Isa. 65. 12, 13.

And laughter, whom in your prosperous days
You did reproach, and Persecution raise
Them to destroy, and made them all your prey, Ier. 30. 18.

Unless they would walk in your dirty way.
Open your eyes, blind People, now and see
Who Is in the right, who the Phanaticks be,
Who are the Rebels, Traitors, Heretics;
Now you may see such terms were but the tricks Act. 17. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

OF the cunning Dragon, People to delude
To brand God's holy Saints, the multitude
Against them to provoke: The Magpy Priest Act. 4. 1, 2, 6

He is the Agent of this ugly Beast:
And he persuades you by his Masters wit,
That to oppress God's People 's very fit.
For what he says he will pretend a Reason,
And prove them to be guilty of high Treason,
Because they will not obey the King (says he) Ioh. 19. 12.

Nor yet serve God, What greater Crime can be?
If you're so stubborn that this will not do,
Then he will prove the point by Scripture too.
That the three Children were damnd to the fire,
'Cause they withstood their Sovereigns desire,
They would not him obey, nor serve his god,
Who can suppose but they must feel his rod?
Within his fiery Furnace they must burn,
'Cause from their Heresy they will not turn.
Phanatick Daniel too, he will not obey,
But pray he will, though's gracious King says nay:
Then take him Lion, him in pieces tear;
For in those days no Bishops Courts there were:
Nor yet had Parliaments come to so high.
A pitch (as now they have) of Policy
To Banish them into some unknown Land,
Because they would not obey their Kings Command.
Many such places with these do agree,
To plead compelling to conformity;
If this will not Phanaticks satisfy,
The Priests can say no more, no more can I.
Ye Babylonish Panders cease your joy,
The Lord, the Whore (your Mistress) will destroy. Rev. 17. 14. ver. 16.

The Horns o'th Beast, Kings, shall the Strumpet hate,
Present her naked, make her desolate;
God in their hearts shall kindle such an ire
Against her, to eat her flesh, burn her with fire.
Wait for God's powerful Angel; ye Upright,
The Earth from's Glory 'gins to receive light. Rev. 18. 1.

Hear, hear! his Voice proclaims destruction
Unto the great and mighty Babylon, Verse. 2.

Its fallen, fallen, and in every Nation,
Of Devils is become the habitation;
A hold of loathsome spirits, and a cage
Of filthy hateful Birds in every Age.
All Kingdoms (since her reign) and every Nation, Verse. 3.

Have drunk her wrathful Wine of Fornication:
Kings of the Earth have easily been drawn in
With this lewd Whore, to act that beastly sin:
The earthly Merchants too have made a prize
By the abundance of her Merchandise.
Your Faces from her turn, hark to the call
Of God from Heaven to his People all:
Come out of her, partake not of her crimes;
Delay not, it relates to the present times. Verse. 4.

If of her sins you will venture to partake,
Share you must in her plagues; your soul's at stake.
Her sins, even unto Heaven, do loudly cry,
And God remembers her Iniquity. Verse. 5.

Happy, thrice happy Sons of the Separation,
It Is you shall see, yea, work her desolation,
It Is you must her requite, and her reward,
To her and to her Brats have no regard; Verse. 6.

Heavens vengeance execute, Give her her due,
Repay her double what she did to you:
Fill up the Cup of her Affliction,
And give it her, yea, give her two for one.
Survey her Glory and delightful sport, Verse. 7.

So much of grief and torment give her for it.
Now in her heart she says, She sits a Queen,
No Widows sorrow on her shall be seen,
Yet in one day her plagues shall her undo,
Pale Death, sad Mourning, pining Famine too. Verse. 8.

With Fire she shall quite destroyed he,
For the Lord God is Judge, and strong is he.
Ye Earthly Kings what signifies your power,
See what our King can do even in one hour;
See what is become of your beloved Whore,
With whom you have sinned, and perish must therefore.
Howl, howl, bewail, lament with her, alas! Verse. 9, 10.

With smoke and burning she away must pass.
Ye Earthly whorish Merchants that have sold Ver. 11, 12.

Men's souls and bodies; your beloved Gold,
Fine Linen, Purple, Silk and Scarlet too,
Both Pearls and Precious Stones, all will not do;
None, none of these can save her from the hand
Of Great Jehovah, none can him withstand:
Your Trade must fail, your costly VVares and all,
All that belongs to her with her must fall.
VVeep, weep, and mourn all who on her depend,
Your Riches and your Glory has an end.
Rejoice and sing for joy ye Saints on high, Verse. 20.

Sound praise ye Heavens to God's Majesty,
Holy Apostles, and blessed Prophets too,
Praise ye the Lord, God has avenged you.
Prophets, Apostles, and the Martyrs blood, Verse. 24.

And all the slain that ever her withstood,
Is found in her. O bloody drunken Whore!
Thy full destruction's come even to the door. Rev. 17. 6. Genesis 49. 8, 9, 10.
Ezekiel. 1. 16.

Rouse; rouse, good People, why are you so dull?
The Heavens, the Earth, of symptoms clear, are full;
The work goes on, the Wheel moves in the Wheel,
God's Word and Works do stir you, cannot you feel?
Where is your Faith? open but one faithful eye,
And you will see our King's approach is nigh:
How like a Queen does sit the Scarlet Whore? Isa. 47. 7.

Secure she is, no sorrow knows; therefore
One hour shall complete her misery; Hag. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5. Isa. 51. 12. 1 Ioh. 2.
15.

Out of your Ceiled houses, your Tents fly,
Shake off your slavish fears, your worldly pelf
Slight as the stinking dung, away with self,
Away with self-concernments, do not pause, Rev. 3. 16. Isa. 40. 27, 28.

Be not lukewarm in God's most holy Cause.
Why are you faint? what is become of your might?
God will increase your strength if you are right.
Let the Wicked faint, the Ungodly weary be,
And let the untamed Youth fall utterlie.
Let lustful Dammums, that are Frenchifi'd, Verse. 30.

Faint, and be shook in pieces, when they are tried.
But they that wait upon God's holy Will,
He will renew their strength, and teach them skill, Verse. 31.

To mount on high, as with an Eagles wings,
They shall with ease perform the hardest things:
They shall not weary be, although they run;
Walk, and not faint: what God wills, shall be done.
Keep silence, O ye Islands, before the Lord;
Hark what the Lord does say; peace, not a word! Isa. 41. 1.

Let his choice People now their strength renew,
It must be so, he has said, and it is true.
Ye Wolvish Priests, cease roaring, silence keep,
Fly to your dens, leave worrying the Sheep:
Be silent, roaring Lions, Bulls and Beats,
The time draws near we shall be freed from fears:
Pray hold your swearing, for it is decreed,
God's People from your fury shall be freed.
You are resolved to ruin, banish, kill
The Innocent, your own lusts to fulfill, Exodus 15. 9, 10. Lam. 3. 37.

The righteous God your wrath so order shall,
That it shall wound your selves, and work your fall.
That God who raised the Righteous, to's foot brings, Isa. 41. 2.

Subjects unto them Nations and Kings,
Makes them like dust before his Sword to fly,
Drives them before his Bow, like stubble dry:
That God will plead his Peoples cause, their wrong
He will avenge, and you shall see it ere long. Jer. 50. 33, 34. Isa. 41. 14.

Though mean and low even as a worm they be,
The Holy One of Israel is he,
Their blessed Redeemer, he shall them uprear,
To thresh the Mountains, and the Hills to tear, Verse. 15.

Until like dust and chaff they fly away, Verse. 16.

Ye wicked ones expect this dreadful day.
Zion, put on thy strength, awake, awake, Isa. 52. 1.

Jerusalem thy costly Garments take,
From henceforth into thee shall come no more,
The uncircumcised children of the Whore.
Arise, and shake thy self, in purity Verse. 2.

Sit down, O Zion, thy Captivity
For ever fly: though thou were sold for naught, Verse. 3.

Without money, thy Freedom God has bought.
Prepare to meet thy holy heavenly King, Luke 12. 35, 36, 37.

Who of all Grace and Mercy is the Spring:
Behold he quickly comes to the sons of men;
Even so, Lord JESUS come, Amen, Amen. Rev. 22. 20.

FINIS.

