To the high and Honorable the Legal Earthly supreme Power of England, the
representive Body thereof, the Commons elective, in Parliament Assembled with
Authority only for the weal, but not for the woe of the people.
The just petition of the freeborn Commoners of the County of whose names are
hereunto subscribed, earnestly desiring, the prosperity of the Gospel, the
removal of bad, the setlement of just Laws, the freedom of this Nation, and
the peace and tranquilely of all men.
Shows,
THat whereas the life and spirit of true Magistracy does essentially consist
of Justice and Mercy, and the weal and happiness of all pollitick Bodies in
the free and impartial execution thereof; insomuch, that neither just
Magisteriall Authority can be without the one, nor yet the safety of a people
without the other, those being the maine Pillars, whereon all human
Authority, and all public safety are settled, and stayed; so that, no sooner
that those Divine Pillars are battered, and ruined, but the Fabric of the
Commonwealth tumbleth down (as it were headlong) into utter confusion, and
has its being dissolved forthwith: Government if degenerate from Mercy and
Justice loses its true Magisteriall Being, and every po^^tick Body deprived
of Execution thereof, loses its freedom, and falls into Bondage; And that
people are thereby (even from the principles of nature) instated into a just
capacity of resistance, and utterly from their obedience to such Rulers
absolved, except (to use your own words) Declar. 2. Novem. 1646. Bo. Dec 1.
par. p. 696. and page 150.
. that obedience binds men to cut their own throats, but that your selves do
deny, and plainly in the said Decl. affirm that in such cases nature teaches
every man to provide for his safety, and elsewhere you tell us; Decl. 19. May.
1642. 1. par. Bo. Dec. p. 207.
. that this Law is as old as the Kingdom, that the Kingdom must not be
without a means to preserve it self; the Kingdom and people while the own
and the other has being, must ever be supposed and granted, to have this
radical principal of nature inherent, to provide in all straits for their
safety, as a thing justisiable by the Law of God, of nature, and of Nations; or
else were we worse then the bruit Beasts of the field, who by the very
instinct of nature engraven in their hearts, will to the utmost of their power
save and defend themselves from all violence, mischief: and sure no just
priveledg or prerogative in Rulers can desire, King Iam. Speech in par* at
White Hall, 1609. pub. by his pres. par
that men should be worse then Beasts: and this principal is backed with the
Testimony of King James, who Positively said that a King Governing in a settled
Kingdom leaves to be a King, and degenerats into a Tyrant. as soon as he
leaves of to rule according to his Laws: and if no longer King no longer
obedience is due for Regall^ty and obedience are relative.

And therefore the late Politic Government of this Kingdom being degenerate
from just Royalty, to lawless Tyrany, the Parliament and people rose up in
Arms as one man against the King and his party, for their preservation, for
redemption and recovery, of their Laws and Freedoms out of the hands of
violent Usurpers and Tyrants in which just expedition your Petitioners have
liberally and freely engaged their blood and Treasure, etc. faithfully with you
persevering to the end.

Yet now so it is Right Honorable your Petitioners find themselves in no wise
eased or redressed, but on the contrary, themselves and the whole Commons of
England, especially the well affected Party, your most faithful friends and
Assistants encumbred and (...) with Oppressions and Oppressors no less (...)
and Tyrannical than the Former; new devices daily hammered and hammering out
against them to disinherit and deprive them of the Purchase of their blood,
their National freedom and safety: and which to the public is most
obnoctious and dangerous of all, the Fundamentals and Pillars upon which the
whole Fabric of this Commonwealth is founded and errected we find most
desperately undermined and almost ruined, the great Charter of, England,
whereby we hold our Lives, our Lands, our Goods and Freedoms (formerly (...)
times by several Parliaments confirmed to us and our posterities is now
through the insolent domination of the Prerogative men of the Kingdom made so
void and of so little effect, that the maintainers and strict observers
thereof are therefore imprisoned, tossed and tumbled from Goal unto Goal,
Sentenced, Fined, Dragged worse then Dogs, (without all remorse or respect
either to tender infancy, weakness of Sex or constitution) headlong through
the dirt and the mire, beat and abused by merciless Goalers, laid in fetters
and irons, the husband deprived of wife, the wife of husband, the one thrown
into one Goal, the other into another, and their innocent helpless children
like destitute Orphans exposed to the mercy of the World, etc. and yet
notwithstanding no relief can be obtained from this House, though daily
solicited and Petitioned by themselves, and lately in their behalf by almost
ten thousand of the Gentlemen and Yeomen the Counties of Buckingham Shire, and
Hartford Shire, whose requests for them were so reasonable equal and just, as
might justly expect acceptance from Infidels, Pagans, and Turks, to wit, that
they might be forthwith brought to the trial and determination of this House
(to whom they have appealed) either for their speedy condemnation or
justification, a benefit not to be denied to Murderers, Burglars and Felons,
and yet (to the great dishonor of this House vexation of your Petitioners, and
of other the free men of England) our brethren and fellow Commoners of the
aforesaid Counties, could not obtain from this House (after 8. or 9. days
attendance and solicitation) so much as a reading of their petition therein,
but being slighted and rejected, were forced to depart to their Counties
again, much displeased and discontented at this House, even in despair, and
hopeless of any benefit thereby. Though formerly this Parliament has
declared, Decl. 2. Nov. 1642. b. Decl. 1 part. page 720. 1 par. bo. Decl. page
123.201.202.209.548.
that they are bound to receive Petitions for the removal of things though
established by Law, that by experience are found grievous or burden some: If
so, then how are your honors degenerate now, thus to slight the Countries, and
reject their petitions, which are according to the Fundementall Laws of the
Land, and for no other relief then according thereto* These and manifold other
oppressions, cruelties, and tyrannies (like Egyptian Grasshoppers) overspread
and devour the Land, nothing but confusion, and disorder appearing,
privileges and prerogative unbounded, will, lust and ave^ice advancing into
the Throne, etc.

But now Right Honorable be not offended with us at our grievous Complaints,
it is the Commons which are oppressed; give therefore the oppressed leave to
Complain, for it is most barberous and inhumaine to oppress, and then to stop
the mouth of the oppressed; let therefore our cries come freely before you, and
obtain speedy redress: it is that which we expect, and that which you cannot
justly deny us without violation even of the very end of your Parliamentary
being, your Election and Session therein.

We therefore your Brethren and fellow Commoners being in this distressed
dangerous condition, and not being able to suffer our Laws and freedoms to be
utterly laid wast and destroyed, and not to endeavor our and their just
preservation and defense, have thought it our duties to God, to our native
Country, to our selves and posterities; to present (amongst manifold other)
some certain public disorders and oppressions, with some wholesom^ means o^
(...) to your wise and grave consideration, earnestly desiring (as you tende^
the weal and glory of this Nation, the interest and freedom of the commons
thereof) to grant us without all further delays or demmurres a happy
consumation of these out subsequent just desires, hereunto Annexed.

And your petitioner as in duty bound shall ever pray etc.

Articles concerning your Petitioners in this Capacity of Commoners or free men
of England, which on the behalf of themselves and all others their fellow
Commoners of England they do humbly desire as follows.
1. That the fundamental Birthright and propriety of the people, in their
Election and constitution of Representors and Deputy, to sit and act in their
Parliamentarie affairs, may be fully restored, settled and secured ^o entire
and inviolable in the hands and power of the free Commoners of England, that no
pretended prerogative, or other privilege whatsoever may suspend, obstruct or
make void the a mission or session of any Members which are or shall be Elected
and constituted by the Counties, Cities, Towns and Burroughes of the Realm
for their respective representor or deputies. And that for the futurre, the
Election and expulsion of the Elected may be so settled in the Electors that
that none may be hindered, debard, or expulsed from serving his Country under
any color or pretense whatsoever, or for refusing the Covenant or otherwise
without order ^^rst, assent or con^urrence of their Country. And that from
henceforth the Commons of the several Country, Cities, Towns and Buroughs
of the land, may have full power to remove and displace their respective
Representors and Deputies in Parliament (elected only for their weal) which
shall falsify their trust, betray their Countries Rights or freedoms, or
shall do any thing apparently tending to the introduction of an arbitraty
Power or government whatsoever, Or shall refuse to present the Petitions,
complaints or grievances of their respective Counties, Cities, Towns and
Buroughs to this House, or shall not endeavor their redress. And upon such
expulsion or removeall to elect and send others which shall be more faithful
and serviceable in their trust. 2. That there may be a due and equal number of
Members to sit in Parliament, for the future elected in all the Counties of
England according to their respective extents and limits, quantity for
quantity* That all Member in the House may be equally Representative and all
the parties of the Kingdom be equally represented, and none have greater
privilege then other; but as all must be subject to the executative power of
the Law, so all may have an equal title and interest in the Legislative power
of the Law. Provided that it be so ordered, ^s that the several Counties,
Cities, Towns, and Buroughs elect in the general, no more then a Competent
number. 3. That every English man, which must be subject to the Laws and Acts
of Parliament, may have his free admission of voice in the Election of Knights
and Burgesses, with the greatest Subject. 4. That for the better security of
the interest and power of the People all titles, by Prerogative, Priviviledge,
Pattent, Succession, Peerage, Birth or otherwise to sit and act in the Assembly
of Parliament, contrary to, and without the free choice and Election of the
People, be utterly abbrogated, nuld and made void, and that all such so
sitting, may be removed from sitting therein. 5. That all Statutes, Acts and
Ordinances whatsoever, be from henceforth drawn up and published only in the
name of the representative body of the Commons of England assembled at
Westminster or where else shall be the place of their Session. 6. That the
authority of this Honorable house may be preserved and secured for the future
from the obstructions and prejudice of a negative voice in any person or
persons whatsoever, which may disinable your Honors from the passing and
establishing any act or acts, for the weal and safety of the people. 7. That
no man may be admitted to the office of Member ship in Parliament, or any other
Office in the Land, but for one year, except by a new free Election, and that
at every years end, to give an exact account of his fidelity and service upon
his removal, and before his readmission, in case of a new Election. 8. That
every County may have liberty to choose some certain number amongst
themselves, to inquire and present to the Parliament, what be the just Laws,
Customs and Privileges of each County* And that those County Commissioners,
be bound to receive all and every impeachment, and impeachments by any person
or persons whatsoever, of the respective Counties, against any of their own
respective Knights or Burgesses in Parliament, for falsifying and betraying his
or their Countries trust, or any wise indeavonring the introduction of an
arbitrary power in this Land. And that the said Commissioners have power and be
firmly bound to impeach and attach in the name of their respective Counties,
their said Member or Members, and to bring him or them to a legal and public
trial. That in case such be found guilty, justice may be executed and others
in their room, by the free choice of the people be sent. And in case any such
Commissioner, or Commissioners shall refuse to prosecute any such complaint or
impeachment, that then he or they be adjudged guilty of treason.

9. That the House of Commons shall not agree unto, or make any Statute Law,
contradicttory to the just maxims of the Common Law, or any of them. Neither
shall any such Act, be binding for the time to come But that strong provision
be made against all such Acts past or to be past.
Articles concerning Courts of Judicature, offices and Officers of the Law.
1. That all Courts which are not established by the old Law of the Land: and
all illegal offices, and officers, belonging to the same, and all other
vexations and unnecessary Courts, be abolished by act of this present
Parliament. And that provision be made that for time to come, no Courts or
Officers whatsoever may be obtruded upon the free Commoners of England, either
by royal grant, Patent, Act of Parliament, or otherwise contrary to the old
Law of the Land. 2. That according to the old Law and custom of the Land, long
before the Conquest. There may be Courts of Judicature for the speedy trial
and determination of all causes, whether Criminal or Civil, erected and
established in every Hundred, for the ease and benefit of the Subject, to be
holden according to the old Custom twice every month, for the ending of all
causes Criminal and Civil whatsoever, which shall happen in the respective
Hundreds. That the Free men of England may have a sudden, quick and easy
dispatch of their suits, and be eased olso of their vexations and chargeable
travelings from all parts of the Kingdom, for process and trial of their
suits unto Westminster Hall. 3. That all such Officers, as by the ancient and
common Laws of this Nation, are illegible, and to be chosen by the free
Commons, as Mayors, Sheriffs, Justice of peace, etc. may be left to the free
Election of the people, in their respective places, and not otherwise to be
chosen. And that all such public affairs (now in being) Not so elected and
allowed, may be forthwith removed, and others by the free choice of the People
be constituted into their rooms.
Articles concerning Gaoles, Gaolers and Imprisonment.
1. That the extortions, and oppress^ive foes of Gaolers may be redressed and
eased, and that strict and severe prevision be made against all Gaolers, and
their deputias, to restrane them for the future from the like extortions and
Cruelties, now frequent in all the Gaoles of the Land. And that there may be a
strict and severe Inquisition after the blood of such prisoners as have been
murdered and starved by the cruelties of Gaolers, that so the persons, guilty
thereof may have justice execmed upon them. 2. That no Prisoners be put in
Irons, or to other pain before conviction and condemnation. 3. That there may
be cleanly and wholesome provision made in all the Gaoles of England, for the
lodging of Prisoners at the charge and cost of the State, And that no Fees for
Chamber-rent, for entering or diliverance or any thing in lieue thereof, be
exacted or demanded under a severe penalty upon the Exactors who are in that
case to be proceeded against, and judged as for matters of theft. 4. That all
persons committed for treason or murder, that shall breeke prison or attempt
an escape, if discovered and apprehended, be taken pro Confiss^, and dye
without mercy. And that such as are committed for theft and shall make an
escape, upon their apprehension, be put to perpetual Servitude for the benefit
of the State. 5. That neither the high Court of Parliament, nor any other
inferior Court or Magistrate whatsoever may commit any free man of England to
Prison upon any pretended contempts as is frequent in these days, but only for
transgression and breach of the known Laws of the land. And for the future
(to award the free Commons of England from the revenge of Arbitrary Spirits.)
That strong provision be made by the Authority of this present Parliament to
that end. 6. That there may be a severe penalty provided against all Gaolers
and their Deputies which shall receive any person or persons whatsoever,
without a lawful charge or commitment drawn up in writing according to the
true form of the Law, with a lawful cause therein expressed, and with a
lawful conclusion him safely to keep until he shall be delivered by due
process of Law, according to Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, and not
at the will and pleasure of the Committer. 7. That strong provision be made
against all such Gaolers as shall detain any person or persons in prison after
a lawful discharge, as is frequent in all the Gaoles of the Land, whereby many
poor free Commoners of England have been starved and dyed of hunger. 8. That
all such Commoners as are imprisonned for the just maintenance of any lawful
interest and propriety, of the Commons of England, be forth with dischargad (by
order of this honorable House) from their respective imprisonments, and that
ample and due reparations. according to their respective damages and
sufferings be an swerably and effectually conferred upon them. 9. That all
criminal persons that are condemned and reprived may be acquit, and set free,
and all persons in prisoned for debt or for any other pretended offenses
contrary to the fundamental laws of the Land, may be delivered and set free
out of prison.
Articles concerning the Laws, and corruptions thereof with other public
Grievences.
1. That all the Laws of the Land (locked up from common capacities in the
Latin or French tongues, may be translated into the English tongue. And that
all Records, Orders, Processes, Writs, and other proceedings whatsoever may be
all entered and issued forth in the English tongue, and that in the most plain
and Common Character used in the Land, commonly called Romand or Secretary, and
that without all or any Latin or French Phrases or terms, and also without
all or any abreviations or abridgements of words, that so the meanest English
Commoner that can but read written hand in his own tongue, may fully
understand his own proceedings in the Law. 2 That all exorbitant fees of
Offices, and officers belonging to the Law of the Land, may be regulated and
abated. 3, That a more sure and speedy way of dispatch of the suits of such
persons, as through extreme proverty are not able to recover their properties
and rights, may for the time to come be established and settled in the Land. 4.
That no free Commoner of England be enforced or put either by the high Court of
Parliament, or by any subordinate Court, Officer or Minister of Justice,
whatsoever in the Land to make oath, or to answer upon (...) to any
Interrogatories concerning himself in any criminal case, concerning his life,
liberty, goods or freehold. And that neither the High Court of Parliament, nor
any subordinate court, officer or Minister whatsoever, before Indictment,
presentment, verdict of 12. men, or other due process of Law, may take away
any free Commoners life, liberty, goods, or freehold, contrary to the State of
Magna Charta, cap. 29.25. Ed. 3. c. 4.28. E. 3. c. 3.42. Ed 3. c. 3.1. Eliz.
^ar. 1. etc. 5. That all Statutes made for the compulsion of persons to hear
the Common Prayer Book, and for the exercise of other Popish Rits, and
Ceremonies, may be abrogated and taken away, and that all and singular persons
indicted, imprisoned, or otherwise molested upon the aforesoid Statutes, may be
enlarged and relieved. 6. That all Statutes made concerning Hunting, and
preservation of Game may be repealed. 7. That all single Orders, made by the
House of Lords, may be made void. 8. That whosoever whether Parliament man,
Noble man or Commoner shall imprison, indict, or otherwise molest any free man
of England, and shasl not by due process of Law make good the charge and
accusation against him, that the same person that prosecutes, (whatsoever he
be) may suffer the same penalty, which by Law is due to such crimes and
offenses, so uniustly charged. And that in such cases there may be a certain
and effectual mean Provided, that the meanest Commoner so molested, wronged
and abused, may obtain speedy and exemplary Justice against the greatest
person or persons whatsoever in the Land. That neither Member ship in
Parliament, office nor function, whatsoever in the Magistracy of the Land, may
be any protection or demurre in any wise against the due process or course of
the ancient and common Laws of this Realm, but that in all cases of treason,
murder, Burglary, and felony, in all Actions, Suites; and civil proceedings
whatsoever, the greatest Man or men in the Realm, may be made equally liable
at all times and seasons, and in all places in the Land to the trial, sentence
and execution of the law, with the meanest Commoner.

10. That no man may be condemned, put to death, or otherwise judged for any
capital or trivial offense, whatsoever, but by the oath of two witnesses, of
good and honest conversation. 11. That no man be outlawed but in case of
treason, murder, burglary and felony, and that all outlaries for other
offenses or causes whatsoever heretofore promulgate be from hen^forth void. 12.
That all wicked persons that shall bear false witness against any free man of
England concerning his life liberty, goods or free hold upon legal discovery
and probation thereof, be adjudged, and condemned of their lives, liberties,
and free holds, according to that which they would have done unto their
Neighbors 13 That according to the Law of God, and the old law of this land,
(long before the Conquest, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, limb for
limb, wound for wound, blood for blood, that the like may be recompensed and
replied upon Malefactors respecively according to their crimes. 14. That the
cruel practice of imprisoning Debtors may be provided against, and that due
Rights and properties may be recovered upon more merciful terms then by way
of Imprisonment, that the Ordinance for Debtors, now in the hands of Mr Henry
Martin (Chairman to a Committee formerly by this House Appointed for that end)
may be passed, confirmed and established by the authority of this present
Parliament. 15. That according to the Law of God, and the old law of the land,
matters of Theft may not be punished with death, and that such malefactors may
make satisfaction either by just restitution to the party wronged, or by an
answerable servitude, and that such offenders upon the second conviction
(lawfully had) be brand marked visibly in the most eminent part of their face,
and confind to a singular habit, with badges on their sleeves. And upon the
third lawful conviction, to be put to perpetual servitude, for the benefit of
the State, saving to the party wronged, a competent deduction thereout, for
restetution according to the theft* that upon all occasions of war, such Bond
men may be taken for the Military service, and the impresting of free men on
that behalf in some measure spared. 16. That every English Native, who has
goods, wares and Merchandise, may have free dome to transport the same to any
place beyond the Seas, and there to convert them to his own profit, it being
his true and proper inheritance to do, according to the Statutes of 14. Ed. 3,
2. 12. Hen. 7.6, and therefore to the end the old trade ingrosing Company of
Merchants, may be dissolved, and the like for the future prevented. 17. That a
more strict and severe law be provided against all S^ewes. Bawdes, and
Whore-houses, and against unlawful Games and Gamesters, and against all
excessive drinking and revelling 18. That there may be a reduction of a
multitude of Alehouses, that none but such as have been and are of honest and
good conversation, by the sufficient testimony of honest men of their
Neighborhood, and through losses and crosses are decayed in their estates or
otherwise through age, sickness, or the like* are disabled from the necessary
maintenance of their charge, may only be admitted to sell drink, or to keep
victualling* 19. That suppression of all vagrants and Beggars in all parts of
the Realm may speedily be provided for, by some wholesome and effectual
course, as by the ordination and erection of public workhouses for the
State, as their shall be occasion and necessity in the several Counties,
Cities, Buroughs of the Realm.
Concerning the Clergy.
That the grievous oppressions by Tithes and forced maintenance for the
ministry be removed, and that the more easy and evangelicall practice of
contribution be granted and confirmed for the benefit of the Subject, and his
freedom therein, for prevention of the Lordlinesse, in and the Commosions,
oppressions and tyrannies, that might happen by the Clergy.

Concerning Reparations
That according to the Declarations and engagements of this present Parliament
every person and persons whatsoever, which have sustained any damage or lose
in pursuance of the service of the State, or by reason of their good affection
thereunto, may have their Reparations accordingly.

Concerning Physicians.
That by the authority of this present Parliament, strong provision be made,
that all Practitioners in Physic from this time forward, write all their bills
to the Apothecaries for their Patients in the English tongue, without all
abreviations, unknown Characters, or figures, strange terms or titles, for
their ingredients, whereby they use to blind the eyes of their Patients* and
possess them with strange apprehentions of their receipts for their value and
worth. And that all Apothecaries Drugs, Symples, Compositions and ingredients
may be tituled in their shops, on all their pots, glasses, and in all their
books, bills, and writings for their Patients in their proper English Phrase,
and no otherwise upon a severe penalty. Thot the free men of England, may be
freed and eased from the unreasonable extortions and abuses of Doctors and
Apothecaries.

Concerning Schools.
That all ancient Donations for the maintenance and continuance of Free
Schools which are impropriate or converted to any private use, and all such
free Schools which are destroyed or purloyned of any freedom for propriety
may be restored and erected again, and that in all parts or Counties of this
Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales destitute of Free Schools (for the
due nurture and education of children, ^^learning to write and read) may have a
competent number of such Schools, founded, erected, and endowed at the
public charges of those respective Counties and places so destitute, that few
or none of the free men of England may for the future be ignorant of reading
and writing.

Concerning Hospitalls.
That all ancient charitable donations, toward the constant relief of the
poor impropriate, and converted to other use, and all Hospitalls that are
either impropriate, corrupted or vitiated from their primitive constitution and
end, or be deprived of any of their franchise, profits or emoluments, may be
restored, relieved, and rectified and safely preserved to the relief and
maintenance of poor Orphants, widows, aged and impotent persons, etc. And
that there be a convenient number of Hospitalls, founded, erected and
constituted in all the Counties of England and Wales, at the public charge of
the respective Counties, for the good education and nurture of poor
fatherless or helpless children, maintenance and relief of poor widows,
aged, sick, and lame persons. And to that end, that all the Cleabe lands in the
Kingdom, may be converted to the maintenance and use of those charitable
houses.

Concerning Commons enclosed.
That all grounds which anciently lay in Common for the poor, and are now
impropriate, enclosed and fenced in, may forthwith (in whose hands soever they
are) be cast out and laid open again to the free and common use and benefit of
the poor.

Concerning Petitions.
That strong provision be made that neither this honorable Court nor any
inferior Court Officer, or Minister of the Law whatsoever, may in any wise let,
disturb, or molest any person or persons, from contriuing, promoting or
presenting any petition or petitions concerning their grievances, liberties, to
this honorable House.

Concerning Delinquents.
That no Delinquents, nor any that has adheared to the Enemy either in
bearing. Arms or in giving contribution to the war, be permitted to bear
any Office or authority either Martial or Civil in this Nation, neither to
give any voice in the Election of any Officer of State, and to that end that
Commissioners may be directed to every County, to enquire and certify, the
names of all such as have borne Arms, Office, or given contribution to or for
the Enemy, to the intent their names may be recorded both in the Exchecqure,
and in the County Courts, that it may be known who by their delinquency have
made themselves uncable of either Vote or Voice. And that all such as are all
ready crept in, or stepped up into any Office or authority, may be forthwith
removed. And that all Offices of places and trust of the Kingdom may be
secured and setied only in the hands of such as are men approved faithful to
the freedoms of the Commoners of England. That all notorious Delinquents, and
Rebels to the State, with all such as have betrayed their trust, in the
surrendering of any Towns, Forts, or Castles, or have underhand complied with
the Enemy, either by intelligence, contribution of moneys or Arms, or
otherwise, with all such as are impeached with Articles exhibited in this
House, or which may lawfully be impeached, may be delivered up, and speedily
brought forth to a legal trial.

Concerning Texes, Imposts, Excise, etc.
That for the easing of this Nation from the many great Assessements and taxes
under which it groneth, That Commissioners under the great Seal, may be issued
out for every County, to take the occompts of all Committees, and other
Officers, who have been receivers for the State, of moneys that way raised in
every County, City, Town, and Brough.

That the Impost or Excise, may not be any longer continued upon meat and
drink for prevention of Insurrections, tumults, and mutanies, and for the ease
and favor of the Poor.

That until the public debts be paid, there may be a due levying of the
estates of all Delinquents in every County, who have not yet compounded and are
not yet Sequestered.

And that none of them be admitted to composition, until they shall have
accomp^^^ for the proffets of their Lands, from the time of their Reduction to
the obedience of the Parliament.

Conclusion.

And lastly, (may it please this honorable Assembly) we humbly desire that
all the Laws, freedoms and properties of the People which are here presented,
or which shall be added hereunto, for the weal and safety of the People, may
be with all expedient brevety digested, and collected into an orderly form,
and be granted, ratified, and confirmed by this present Parliament, as the
great Charter of Liberties and freedoms o^ England, to us and our posterities
for ever. And that a Book thereof be provided, and that it be printed in the
English tongue, and a Book thereof be provided for every Parish throughout the
Realm, to be kept for the public use and service of the Inhabitants of every
respective place, as oceasion shall afford.

FINIS.

