AN UPRORE IN THE NORTH, AT HVLL, About a month since by a company of
soldiers against their Captain.

With the particular speeches spoke on either side before the said Captain
EDWARD WALBRUCKE was miserably wounded and slain.

Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft.

By H. T.



Printed Anno Dom. 1647*

AN UPROAR IN THE NORTH, AT HULL, By a Company of soldiers against their
Captain Edw. VValbrucke.
TO desine war is to speak of a bloody Theme: of which the subject on which
I write forces me unto.

Pax ubi non est ibi nilhonesti, says one: where there is no peace honesty
has little to do, as may appear by the ensuing subject. In Hull (the situation
of which place I believe few are ignorant of, was a Regiment of Soldiers, who
having some distaste of their Captain, scorning to be controuled; told him, as
he was their Captain and commander they honored him, but if that he went any
way to tyrannize over them, he should find a soldiers malice not inferior to
a Captains, they said they came thither to fight for their King and country,
for whose sakes the best blood in their bodies they would spend, all shouting
forth with a general consent cursed be he which fears to die in a just cause,
truth we love, but falsehood contemn.

One better minded Soldier then all the rest answered most wisely after this
manner: Do but give me the hearing and you shall soon grant how rediculous this
uprore is; wise men never attempt impossibilities; it is more easy and lawful
for any single arm to quell an army, as to effect with loyalty your intented
enterprise. We come hither to fight for our King, and to relieve our country
from slavery, but not to raise civil wars amongst our selves, which of all
dissension is the worst: then turning to his Captain he speaked thus:

What Magic has transformed thee from thy self? Where is thy wonted valor?
How have thou lost thy boasted freedom? What new fire burned up thy scorched
entrayles? What unknown desires invade and take posession of thy soul? All
virtuous objects vanished? Hastthou stood the shocks of fierce encounters? Stopped
thine ears against all siren notes moving to the least distemper against thy
Soldiers? What monster is it, which has drawn thy bark of clemency, (that
which wonder has kept, an honored and constant course:) into the gulf of a
deserved ill fame? and in a moment with thine own hands dig up a grave to bury
the momumentall heap of all thy years imployd in noble actions: I sorrow for
thy fate: we obey thee, and willingly put our own fetters on to grace thy
triumph, it were therefore more then cruelty in thee to use us as a tyrant
uses to do his servants, for so we are, but not your slaves; wherefore I
desire your worship to take consideration.

The Captain with stern look answered thus: Hang consideration.

When you are hanged all, England is able to furnish me with more I have
courage to fetch them in. How durst you only entertain a grumbling syllable in
my command? In me great Mavors spoke, my voice did echo in your ears his
thunder, and whilst you like so many seaborne Tritons armed only with the
trumpet of our iniunction you think you are safe now: who durst but dispute it
or make it questionable, if this moment I charge ye from yon hanging cliffe
that glases his rugged forehead in the neighbor lake to throw your selves
down head long: Or like fagots to fill the ditches of defended forts while on
your backs I march up to the breach.

One stout soldier answered, that would not I, (which forced the captain for
to frown) but yet said the soldier: I dare as much as any of great Britains
boldest soldiers.

At which the Captain answered, Add one syllable more, thou do pronounce a
sentence that Earthquake-like will swallow thee: but yet obey me according to
my mind and I am yours.

With a unanimus consent they thus answered:

Thy flatteries we despise, thus spit at them, and scorn them, and being armed
in the assurance of our innocent virtue, we stamp upon all doubts, all fears,
all tortures, thy barbarous, cruelty, or villainy can show upon us: thou art
false, falser than Romish religion, more savage than the beat or she Lion would
of her whelps, we have been long burdened with the yoke of your tyrannizing
command, and now at length are resolved to shake it off, we do intend to make
no Idol of you, nor as our late Temporizers did to the Altar, bow and bend to
you any more upon these terms, for since you seem to forget your love to us,
we scorn to tender our servie to you: At which like so many ravening wolves to
devour a sheep or lamb, so ran they upon him and took away his life.

He exercised Tyranny over them, and they inhumanity over him, they acted
their parts tragically, and he died most miserably. Alas! who knows whither
with his body they slew his soul also. Commanders of what degree soever, mark
this my admonition, Let not your rage, excel reason let not pride oversway you
which is a vice by which many fall. Let not your thought be lifted up higher
than it becomes.

If men be your servants, make them not your slaves, for fiery spirits are not
soon quenched witness the fierce fire which was kindled against this Captain.
It is scarce within the compass of patience to endure the tyranny of a King,
much less a Kings servant.

As it is the part of a King parcere subiectis, so it is also Vibellare
superbos. Who pluck down the proud, such whose spirits and ambitious thoughts
the highest sphere will not contain* with Icaris his wings, many will soar
aloft, although the son melt the wax, and they Christen more seas; also there
are many fool hardy, or rather arrogant Phaetons, whose ambitious mind, will
desire to rule Phoebus hi^ horses, although they burn the world, the little
world I mean, their own souls. I have done with my admonition to Commanders,
now in a few lines I will admonish all common Soldiers, and so conclude. You
which are common Soldiers let obedience steer your actions; let not rebellion
lurk privily in your hearts, I say make not your hearts like so many closets,
to keep privy conspiracies hid, for rebellion is a horrid crime which God will
punish either in this world or the world to come, be sure you obey your King,
and be not disobedient to your commanders; if they be bad pray unto God to
mend them, but do not you with your unpartiall sword end them.

Let this rebellious uproar at Hull be a cause to make others civil, llet their
enormities, make others cease to be vicious: let their cruelty teach others to
be merciful: let their malice be a cause of others love:

This GOD of his gracious mercy grant: Amen.

^INIS.

