To the Honorable House of Commons, ASSEMBLED in PARLIAMENT. The Humble
PETITION of diverse Persons of several Callings who keep the Markets in London,
in behalf of themselves and Hundreds more;
Humbly Shows,
THAT some of Your Petitioners having only Stalls in the said Markets, they are
compelled by the Farmers of the said Markets, to pay Excessive Fines and Rents
for the same; which, as they can prove, is much more than was ever paid
heretofore: And others of Your Petitioners who have only Sitting in the said
Markets and no otherwise, and having paid formerly some 2 d. some 3 d. and some
4 d. a Week, only for their said Sitting, toward Cleaning the said Markets, as
your Petitioners can prove; But the Farmers of the said Markets (contrary to
Law and Custom, as Your Petitioners Humbly conceive) have for some Years past
compelled some of them to pay, some 1 s. some 3 s. some 5 s. a Week, and some
more, for their said Sitting, which has occasioned many of Your Petitioners,
not being able to pay their great Demands, to be forced to abscond from the
said Markets, to the great Impoverishment of them and their Families; and those
of Your Petitioners who have still continued Sitting in the said Markets, are
so much Oppressed by their great Exactions, that they are scarce able to keep
them and their Families in Bread.

And some of Your Petitioners having formerly refused to pay such great Rates
for their Stalls and Sittings, as have been Imposed upon them, have been
Arrested and their Goods Seized, to their great Damage and Impoverishment; some
of them being Country People, have been forced to comply to the said Farmers
Demands, by reason they could not put in Bail, being Foreigners and unknown in
the City.

And others of Your Petitioners for some time past, by reason of the Deadness
of Trade, having been unable to pay so great Rates laid upon them, are daily
threatened by the said Farmers to be Arrested, and their Goods Seized for their
Arrears, which if they do, must inevitably Ruin them.

And forasmuch as Your Petitioners have oftentimes sought Relief from the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen of the City of London, and particularly delivered a
Petition on the 6th. of March, 1688. and thereupon had a Hearing before a
Committee, appointed to hear their Grievances; but Your Petitioners having no
Redress;

May it therefore please this Honorable House, to take the Premises into
Consideration, and to grant Your Petitioners Hearing, that so thereby they may
not hereafter be Burdened in the like kind, but may have their former Customs
and Privileges Restored.

And Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc. HAmlet Toone Rich. Farley John
Swelgrove James Bailey John Lillee Henry Hamman George Fane John Mainer John
Bishop John Linley Theophilus Piffs Bernard Serjant William Morris Walter
Watters Robert Tate James Ray William Weaver. Richard Cowderey Thomas Daves
Michael Turpin Mary Wright John New Thomas Perkins Aaron Withers Joseph
Tothill Edward Roakes Richard Roakes Richard Collman John Flowers George
Flowers Richard Mills John Preston John Gunter Edward Barrett Richard Breadcutt
John Bonsey Joseph Hollemoor Charles Trigge Henry Hunt Widow Sherman Widow
Linkhorn Widow Delaney Widow Thoarp William Springall Widow Gibson Ann
Bannister Henry Bartholocmen Thomas Hipwell Mich. Wheeler Ann Linsey Joseph
Homes Christopher Jone Widow Hooker William Sedgley Edwrrd Oakley John Ruff
Widow Cobb Henry Blewman Ann Batt James Whicheloe Frances Thomas With Hundreds
more not mentioned.



An Account of some of the Particulars of the Grievances herein mentioned, viz.
Butchers Grievances.
DAniel Mofen paid Formerly 2 s. 6 d. a Week. Now is compelled to pay 7 s. a
Week, and 17 l. a Fine. John Mofen paid Formerly 2 s. 3 d. Now 6 s. 6 d. and 26
l. Fine. Sarah Chambers Widow, Formerly 4 s. 6 d. Now 12 s. and 40 l. Fine.
William Child Formerly 2 s. 6 d. Now 9 s. and 17 l. 6 s. Fine. Robert Tatt
Formerly 2 s. Now 6 s. and 10 l. Fine.

And the Persons following, with many more, can prove, that they never was
demanded to pay any Fines; but were compelled of late by the Farmers to pay
Excessive Fines for their Stalls, as, l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. Henry Hamond,
23 13 00 Fine. John Lyngley, 26 17 06 Fine. John Mayner 26 17 06 Fine. William
Morris, 16 02 06 John Bishop, 21 10 00

Fruiterers Grievances.
CHarles Trigg was compelled by the said Farmers to pay 5 l. Fine, and 18 l. a
Year for a Shed or Stall, which is worth not above 5 l. or 6 l. a Building, as
is well known. But being unable of late, to pay so great a Rent, has been
Arrested by the said Farmers, and the Suit is still depending, likely to prove
his Ruin. John Presson also Arrested, and the Suit still depending. Ann
Lyndsey formerly paid 12 d. a Week. Now, 12 l. a Year, and 5 l. Fine. Henry
Hunt Formerly 1 s. a Week. Now, 4 s. 6 d. a Week. Michael Wheeler Formerly 1 s.
3 d. a Week. Now, 15 l. 10 s. a Year. Richard Mills Formerly 2 d. a Week. Now,
1 s. 6 d. a Week.

Gardiners Grievances.
HEnry Broomeman was compelled to pay 3 l. 4 s. 6d. for a Fine, and 2 s. 6 d. a
Week, which Formerly paid only 1 s. a Week. Francis Thomas paid only 6 d. a
Week Formerly. Now pays 1 s. 6 d. a Week. Elizabeth Baldwyn 1 s. 2 d. a Week
Formerly. Now, 3 s. 6 d. a Week. Christopher Hyon 9 d. a Week Formerly. Now, 2
s. 6 d. a Week.

Bacon-sellers, who formerly Sold their Goods upon their own Stalls, and paid 2
d. a Week for their Sitting, have been compelled of late by the said Farmers,
to take Stalls of them, which cost not above 2 l. 10 s. Building, and to pay 5
l. a Year for the same.

Ann Whittingstall is turned out, for not being able to pay so great a Rent for
a Stall, to her great Ruin.

Several Country People who only paid Formerly 2 d. a Week, are Now forced to
pay 1 s. a Week, and some more, having only Sittings in the Markets, and no
Stalls.

Herb-sellers, who paid some of them Formerly, but 2 d. 3 d. and 4 d. a Week
for their Sitting, are Now compelled to pay some 1 s. some 2 s. some 3 s. and
some 4 s. a Week, besides 20 or 30 s. a Year demanded of them in the nature of
a Ground-Rent, and are almost Ruined in paying so great Rates, their Gains
being so small.

Besides many more who are Burdened and Aggrieved in the like kind and nature,
which they can Testify, but too tedious to be here Incerted.


