To his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc.
The humble Petition of the Proprietors, Commoners and Mineral Bounders of the
Deserted and Drowned Mines within the Counties of Cornwall and Devon.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners observing the Experimental way of Mr. Bushell's
Proceedings, to be not only the most probable to discover the vast
Mineral-Treasure supposed to lie in the Metalloads of that Beacon-Hill called
Hingston-Down, Coome-Martin in Devon, and Guynop in Cornwall; But likewise the
only probable means to enrich these Western parts, and your other Territories
with inestimable treasure, by following his example in all drowned and deserted
Works; And because we find he has no more desire of Partnership then the
assistance of Providence, and your Highness patronising this his commendable
Enterprise, nor any other ambition then gratitude to the memory of that great
Philosopher, his deceased Master, the Lord Chancellor Bacon, and to make our
Age the president and honor of fulfilling the old proverb, Hingston-Down welly
wrought, is worth London-Town dearcy bought.

Now in regard the Lords of the Fee, and Commoners thereof, as well as the
major part of the Mineral bounders, have with all cheerful alacrity (for the
public good of this Nation) subscribed their affectionate Consents to this
great Work, in a Letter to Mr. Bushel hereunto annexed:

We your Petitioners do in the behalf of our selves and the Mineral Bounders of
Cornwall and Devon, implore your Highness speedy Confirmation of Mr. Bushell's
Articles, without his personal attendance in London, according to the gracious
signification of your Highness favors to his Petition, that no time may be lost
in so honorable a Design, nor he disabled or dismayed in so general a
Concernment; since we find him exceeding active to study the preservation of
your Honors and Dignities, with the Countries advancement, as to your Highness
wisdom may appear by the demonstration of his Mineral Overtures, and a draught
of his unanswerable Reasons likewise annexed.

Charles Trevanion Tho. Mainard Edw. Herle Jo. Chatley John Tremenhere Phi.
Lanyon William Edw. Wise Richard Arundell Fran. Buller jun. Ja. Lance David
Hawes Chr. Wood Will. Wise J. Boscowen Tho. Lower. John Coryton John Lampen
Tho. Gross John Fathers William Wrey Nath. Tarvanion Will. Rous.


SIR,
WE have seriously considered the proffered Civilities in your Letter, and the
plain Demonstrations in your ingenuous Reasons, to cut North and South through
the lowest Level of Hingston-Down, for crossing all such Metal-loads as lie
East and West, and for freeing the Mines from the impediment of water; by which
you may verefie the old proverb, Hingston-Down welly wrought, is worth
London-Town dearey bought: And therefore you may rest assured, that we shall
give our free consents and endeavors to procure other Gentlemen of our County
to further your most noble and unparralleld design, that a speedy dispatch may
be made thereof for the general good of the Nation, which is and shall be ever
very much desired by

Sir, November. 11. 1656. Your very ready friends and Servants, Edw. Herle. Cha.
Trevanion. J. Boscowen. Chicheste Wrey. Edw. Wise. William Wise. John Lampen.
Ja. Lance. Richard Erisey. Jo. Chatley. Phi. Lanyon. Natha. Tarvanyon. Hu.
Pomeroy. Tho. Gross. Richard Arundell. William Rous. N. Borlace. Tho. Lower.
Fran. Buller. John Coryton. John Harris. Nich. Sharsell. John Battersby. J.
Tremenhere Will. Wrey. William Coysgrave. Edward Wilcocks. John Fathers. David
Haws.

For our Noble Friend Tho. Bushel Esquire; These.
Mr. Bushels Letter to the Miners of Mendyp, and their Answer, with the Juries
Order.
Fellow Miners,
UPon the Overtures of my Mineral Discoveries taught me by the Theory of my old
Master the Lord Chancellor Bacon's Philosophical Conceptions; His Highness the
Lord Protector upon hopes of the like providence in all his other Territories
to ease the Nation of their Taxes, gave me power to try the aforesaid
Experiments, since it was conceived by the aforesaid Lord, that great riches
lay in the Bowels of our Mother Earth, and underneath the superficies of the
most barren Mountains; and in order to such his commands, I have not only
published the enclosed declaration for satisfaction to all moderate persons,
which have not unbyassed Principles against the honor of their native Country,
but also am setting on foot the drowned and deserted works in the naked
Promentories of Hingston Down, Coom-Martine in Devon, and Guynop in Cornwall:
And being likewise informed by your fellow Miners, that Millions of wealth lie
in Rowpits near Chewton-Minery, which yet cannot be recovered from the
inundation of water by the greatest Artists of former Ages: I have upon my own
deliberation and viewing the place, thought fit to render you the experience of
my practical endeavors, and with a willing mind to attempt the Forelorn hope of
their recoveries at my own charge, if I may have the well-wishes of you in
general, and the moiety or half, bearing equal charge, when the water is
drained; your speedy answer shall make me decline or prosecute the same with
effect, which is the only ambition of.

April 21. 1657. Your faithful Friend, T. B.

For his very loving Friends, John Phelps, Tho. Voules, Will. Cole, Alex. Jett,
Will. Betten, Rob. Radford, and Tho. Wood, with the rest, these deliver.
Right Worshipful,
MAnna from Heaven was not more welcome to the Pilgrims of Israel, then the
good news your Letter brought to us poor Miners of Mendyp, who now are like
Moses in the Mount, which saw the Land of Promise, and yet could not enjoy the
propriety thereof; even so fares it now with us: For a month or two of a
droughty Summer we behold the appearance of much treasure lying in the veins of
those metal Loads, and so soon as we are preparing for Harvest, to reap a mite
of its Mineral profit, the inundation of water takes away our present
possession, and leaves us exposed to a sad condition having no other Profession
for our livelihood. But if your goodness and charity will be pleased to extend
the interest of your knowledge to drain the Rake called the Broad Rake of Sir
Bevis Bulmars Works in Rowpits near Chewton Minery, which is known to be the
lowest Level, and Sole of those Works; We do herein engage our selves under our
hands and Seals, and on the behalf of all others that shall hereafter work in
the said Rake, that you and your Assigns shall have the moiety of the whole,
paying half the charge; and likewise procure the Lord of the Soil to do the
like, if you please to proceed with speed for the perfecting of the same; and
in token of our affection to serve you, we have presumed not only to petition
his Highness in your behalf for the better encouragement, but also oblige our
selves to tender you the first refusal of all our parts and shares of Oar,
paying ready money, and giving us from time to time the same rate as other
Merchants shall conceive it to be worth: And so we bid you heartily farewell,
resting

May 2. 1657. Your ever obliged Servants, Valen Tryme, for his part. Tho.
White. Ioh. Hoskins. Andrew Baller. Nich. Barrel. John Blackhouse. John
Johnsons. Will. Norman. John Thrisel. Tho. Atwood sen. John Naish. Edw.
Hopkins. Nich. Plumley. John Hinsh. Rich. Friar. Jam. Midleham. John Phelps.
Will. Voules. John Cole. Rob. Clark sen. Rob. Clark jun. Tho. Voules. Tho.
Atwood jun. Alex. Jett. Tho. Rowles. Nich. Parker. Will. Dudden. John Radford.
Rob. Radford.

For Tho. Bushel, Esquire;
Chewton-Jury, May 28. 1657.
Whereas we of this Mineral Grand Jury are credibly informed of the great
design for the public good of the Miners, which do adventure in Rowpits, and
is now undertaken by Tho. Bushel Esquire; which were formerly the deserted Works
left by Sir Bevis Bulmar in the time of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and whereas
many of the chief Adventurers in the said Rowpits do and have consented to
surrender the one half of their Works and Mines there unto the said Tho. Bushel
and his Assigns, when the said Tho. Bushel does make it appear, that by his or
their Workmanship they be freed of the inundation of their Waters, unto the
Mineral Court for the time being: We of this Jury do order and make this
Decree, that when it shall happen that the said Tho. Bushel does prove that he
has by his Workmanship done by him and his Assigns, cleared any Miners work as
aforesaid, unto the Jury as aforesaid, he shall enjoy the one half of the Works:
Provided always, the said Tho. Bushel and they shall be liable to pay all
Mineral costs and charges, as far as he and they are entrusted, agreeable to
the custom and Law of the Occupation; and to this we all agree, and have
subscribed our hands, the day and year first above written.

Andrew Baller. Jo. Phelps. Thy. Attwood sen. Nich. Barrel. Will. Norman. Nich.
Parker. Io. Cornish. Edw. Hopkins. Will. Dudden. Tho. Rowles. John Blackhouse.
John House. John Hoskins. John Thristle. John Johnsons. Tho. Attwood jun. Nich.
Plumley. Valen Dudden.


To his Highness the Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc.
The humble Petition of the Mineral-Bounders within the County of Somerset.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners observing the experimental way of Mr. Pushell's
proceedings to recover the vast Mineral Treasure known to lie in the drowned
and deserted Works of that ancient Forest called Mendyp-hill; And being
likewise the only probable means to enrich your other Territories, by
following his example in concealed places of the like nature:

We your Petitioners do in the behalf of our selves, and the generality of
laborious Miners, who have no other subsistence then Providence in those
harmless affairs, humbly implore your Highness confirmation of Mr. Bushell's
Articles without his personal attendance, that no time may be lost in such an
honorable concernment; since his active diligence in that Mineral proceed is to
study the preservation of the Poor's livelihood under ground, as well as the
riches, honor and profit it may afford to the Nation by this his invention,
according to your Highness trust reposed in him for that purpose, as appears by
the demonstrative Reasons of his Mineral Overtures.

The Grand Jury for the Liberty of the Castle of Richmond upon the Forest of
Mendyp.
Jo. Radford Foreman Will. Colliar Jo. Spiring Jo. Midell Jo. Liget Will. Ames
Roger Tegg Rich. Harris Walter Hoads Will Fry Tho. Vowles Mich. Curtis Hen.
Hutchins Tho. Chapman William Barrel John Barrel And. Spirrin Jo Bates Will.
Bush Jo. Haydon Will. Haydon Rich. Haydon Will. Chyles Rich. Filer Geo. Filer
Jo. Canby James Tucker Jo. Tucker Na. Brown Jo. Bary Jo. Martin James Hyden
Andrew Bath Sam. Cox Jo. Tegg Tho. Blackman Anth. Eggesfield Jo. Harris.
The Grand Jury for the Liberty of Charterhouse-Hydon upon the Forest of
Mendyp.
Robert Radford James Brown Mat. Chansler Jo. Plumley Peter Herler Leonard Fox
Geo. Colse Will. Bluning Will, Tucker Will. Lane sen. Jo. Lane Rich. Thomas
Clark Will. Lane jun. Geo. Whithead Jo. Chansler Fra. Ozer Walter Thutchen Jo.
Brock Geo Tucker Will. Cole Jo. Blackman Tho. Blackman Jo. Waker Geo. Hoskins.
Mr. Basbee's Affidavit.
Walter Basbee aged about eighty years, makes oath, That he was Saymaster to
Goldsmiths Hall about fifty years ago, and versed in Minerals ever since both
at home and abroad, and was by King James sent to the Emperor of Russia to make
him a Standard of Gold and Silver in his Mint in the City of Moscovia,
equivalent to the Tower of London; And no sooner was that service performed by
this Deponent, but his Imperial Majesty commanded him to refine the Gold of a
rich Copper-mine lying in Cyberea, five hundred miles beyond the river Volgo,
which held of Gold in every Tun to the value of three, four, or five hundred
pounds; where this Deponent did remain until he was taken prisoner by the
Tartars, and afterward exchanged by the Emperor to be sent for England; where
this Deponent has ever since spent most of his time, under Mr. Bushell's
Philosophical way, taught him by the late Lord Chancellor Bacon, which (in the
judgment of this Deponent) cannot be paralleled by any, and if now practiced
according to his printed Remonstrance, and the Mineral Grand-Jury's Order of
Chewton, this Deponent does verily believe that the Age we live in will exceed
all former Ages in Mineral Discoveries and their Separations.

Walter Basbee.
Sworn the 7. of December 1658. before me

one of the Masters of Chancery in ordinary, W. Glascock.



Christopher Wright's Affidavit.
CHristopher Wright aged fifty six years makes oath, That he was sent by Mr.
Joseph Hexeter of Cumberland to be in the same place of Steward for direction
of Mr. Bushels Minerals under ground, as the said Mr. Hexeter was under him in
Wales at 100 l. per ann. salary: And finding the said Mr. Bushel to give such
probable reasons for recovering the inundation of water out of the vast and
drowned Works of Rowpits, by persuing a Drift as a Common-shore, from the
Concaves of a natural swallow twenty fathom deep, after his industry had sunk
twenty shafts to discover the same, on purpose to come to the rich loads of
metal known to be buried in the adjacent groves of water: This Deponent and
others, upon confidence of making good his great undertakings therein (although
his judgment was then much questioned by the Inhabitants for the attempt) did
and do desire but half wages ever since (...) Mendip had invited the said Mr.
Bushel under the^ hancs and Decree of their Court, to have half the profit,
bearing half the charge, after the water was drained, which this Deponent does
verily believe will be in a short time perfected, and appear for precedent
sake, as well as for present profit, the greatest work that has been done by
any Mineralist these hundred years, if the malicious attempts of some
ill-natured persons do not now hinder the growth of his proceedings therein.
For this Deponent does depose, that by some wicked persons there was a great
Lake of muddy water turned about the hour of midnight, and upon a great flood,
into the Swallow, on purpose as is conceived to choke it, and so consequently
to drown his men that came from foreign parts, and were then working twenty
fathom deep, which this Deponent does aver were forced to save their lives by
running up their grooves at the same time, the swallow being not able to
receive the torrent of its water. And this Deponent does likewise depose, That
about the 10. of October last there was some other such envious person who
pulled down so much of the undertimber of his Shaft, that the whole groove of
earth fell into Mr. Bushels Drift, when his men were at work underneath; and it
was supposed by diverse never to be recovered: But thanks be to God, the danger
is past, and Mr. Bushels Drift goes on toward the rich works known to lie 150
fathom before him; for this Deponent was one of the workmen that landed 100l.
per week out of one Shaft this last summer, and saw 200l. per week out of
another; but the charge of drawing water, though in the drought of summer,
stood (as they reported) in 80 l. per week apeece, which Mr. Bushels Drift will
prevent; and likewise to 1000 more of the like nature as are supposed to be
within the verge of Rowpits.

Christopher Wright.
Sworn the 3. of December 1658. before me

one of the Masters of Chancery in ordinary, W. Glasco^^.



The Testimony of some Miners of Mendyp to the Council.
WE whose names are hereunder written, being Miners, and well versed in the
Mineral Rakes of Rowpits upon the Forest of Mendyp, are ready to testify upon
oath, That the great wrongs done to the works of Tho. Bushel Esquire; in Rowpits,
as is deposed by Christopher Wright before a Master of Chancery, are of a
certain truth; And we are likewise ready to testify our opinions upon oath,
That if the way of Mr. Bushels now proceeding to recover those drowned and
deserted works, may go on without molestation, according to the Orders of the
Grand Jury of Chewton made for (...) encouragement, we do believe in our
consciences that the^^ has not been these hundred years such a service done
(...) this Commonwealth, in advancing the knowledge of the Miners trade, for
profit and precedent. And we also humbly conceive, that if a binding Order be
made by your Lordship to confirm (on all points) the said Grand Jury of Chewton
Orders for deterring unrulie Miners from such exerbitancies as also that no
persons should lose any more their Summer work to follow the Mines of Rowpits
(which are now to (...) more purpose in matter of profit, then to wash the
Black* moor) until Mr. Bushels Drift can come up to drain their in undation of
waters, which (as we find expressed in his Remonstrance) he does undertake to
perfect in four years; and we do verily believe, that not only all the Oar may
be then landed for two shillings per Tun, but that we shall then also know the
inestimable riches of that place without further charge or ruining more
families in working upon Rowpits. And we do also confidently believe in our
consciences, that when Mr. Bushels now Drift from his Swallow does come up to
the o^^ works drowned, and that he does pursue likewise his Cross Rake from his
Swallow to the forebreast of Sir Bevis Bulmar deserted work, (as he says he
intends to do, so soon as he has secured the place according to agreement, and
the Grand Jury's Order of Chewton dated the 28. of May) the said Mr. Bushel
will make good his Marqus of a Thousand pounds per week: For there are men yet
alive that will justify, that the forebreast of Sir Bevis Bulmar's work was
nine foot wide in oar; and we our selves know, that a hundred pounds per week
out of one Groove in the old work is ordinary, when the suffocation of water
does not hinder them.

Jo. Bakehouse Tho. Bakehouse Jo. Doxie.



