TO THAT MOST LAMENTABLE AND MOST Incorrigible Scribler BAVIUS.
UNlucky Wretch, whom no Advice can Warn
From Rhiming of thy Self to public Scorn:
Cursed at thy Birth! And doomed for all the rest:
Of thy strange Life, one everlasting Jest.
What Dog Star Reigned at thy Nativity
And Damned thee to an Itch of Poetry:
Thou were excused, could thou but Write so well,
To Earn ten Groats for Dogrill at Snow-hill;
Such little Helps thy Poverty does need;
This would supply thee with often wanted Bread:
And of thy Ghastly Phiz, and Loc'rum Jaws,
It Is Evident that Hungar is the Cause.
But fatal Wretch should thou till Doomsday Write,
It Is so below all aim at Sense or Wit,
Thou could not get one Friendly Shilling by it.
But this last Piece, to thy immortal Shame
A hardn'd Blockhead has confirmed thy Name:
And for dull Nonsense Celebrates thy Fame.
Methinks I see the Posture thou were in
When this well maner'd Stuff thou did begin:
When to thy Pencive Garrat thou art come, He lies in a Garrat at Whitehall.

To do thy Necessary Jobbs at home:
By Sollitary Inch of Candle placed,
Thy Stoken neatly fitted to the Last;
Thy Right Hand managing the Needle well, Footing his Stockins.

Till Nonsense flows, then take by turns the Quill.
Thy double Talent thou at once do show,
And Playst the Poet and the Botcher too:
So Tailor did at once both Rhym and Row. The Water Poet.

Surely by Nature thou should have some Glimpse,
Some glimering Notion of a sort of Sense:
But Poverty has debac'd and dulled thy Strain,
And Emptiness sent Fumes into thy Brain;
This makes thee Rail in Language Billings-gate.
A Wapping Sculler vents more Jests for Wit.
Where Sense is wanting, truth should be Expressed,
That often Atones for Wit and make some Jest:
But Lies; Dull Lies in Saucy Fishwives strain,
Suits only such a Flownder-Mouth as thine.
That Nautious Mouth, from Ear to Ear the extent,
Proper such Beastly Fulsome Stuff to vent,
It Is Plague enough thy wretched Form to see
Shock not our Ears with Wretched Poetry.
So far below a Gen-tle man to write,
Shows thee as poor in Manners as in Wit.
Suppose I thee Pick-Pocket should call,
Or say thy Mangy Carcass in Whitehall;
To thy Adjacent Neighboring Garrateer,
Were such a Nuisance, as he could not bear;
(Though vilely out of Linen, as we see,
And Scanty Wardrob ly in Lumbardy,)
Or should I call thee Cheat, or Rogue, and Swear
(Cause Shabby) thou a Bailiffs-Follower were:
Would such dull Railing pass upon the Town
Be took for Wit, Jest, Satyr, or Lampoon?
To say a Woman's Old, and call her Whore,
Oh Dire Revenge! Some such dull Fops of yore,
Have Treated thus thy Cheated Wife before.
So vain a Coxcombe to upbraid my Rhiming
Yet set down Self and Help for exact Chiming.
My Muse disdains the servitude of Rhimes,
She Writes true Sense and leaves to Fools the Chimes;
Who have no other Motive for Damned Lines.
Why should I think more Breeding to expect,
Than those great Men thy Libel did Detect,
Thou'st yet not made me so Burlesque a thing,
As thy Vile Scandal represents the K --.
To think by thy Advice he would be ruled,
Was e're great Character so Redicul'd
And to complete what thou before had said,
Two large Long Ears thou'st fixed upon his Head.
As who to Bavius Politiques adheres;
Deserved to be adorned with Midus Ears.
Who so Accursed of Heaven, and all his Stars,
To Have not one Friend to tell him how he Errs:
Or art thou grown Incorrigable of late,
And turned to Fifty, Old and Obstinate.
Was there no Footman that could tell to Ten,
To mend thy for to's, and correct thy Pen.
To common Sense, thy Nonsense to Translate,
And Rescue thee from being Pointed at.
Or find out some Convenient With to be,
The kind Result of all thy Misery:
Before thoudst had the Fate to Encounter me.
Upon a mere suppose to rouse my Muse,
From her soft Theames of Love to rough Abuse.
Against my Nature, and below my Sense,
Deserves I should Chastise thy Impudence:
But you are a Tool, so far beneath my aim,
To touch but on thy Merry Andrew Name;
Gives thine Repute, and brings my Muse a Sham e
I Will Swear a hundred since I this began,
Cried -- Damn the Buffoon, he is not worth thy Pen;
The Aversion of thy Sex, and Scorn of Men.
This did my Mind with kind Compassion fill,
And I in pity dropped my Angry Quill.
Printed for the Coffee-houses, 1688.


