A CATALOGUE Of Such BOOKS As have been Entered in the REGISTER Of the Company
of STATIONERS: And Printed from the 25. of December, 1662. to the 25. of
December, 1663.

Published by G. T. Clerk to the Company of STATIONERS.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Speed, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Rainbow near the Inner Temple Gate in Fleetstreet. 1664.

A Catalogue of such Books as have been Entered into the Register of the
Company of Stationers, and Printed, from the 25. of December, 1662. unto the
25. of December, 1663. As follows; Viz.
Divinity and Sermons.
ANswer to the Reply made by S. C. a Roman Catholic, to Doctor Pierce his
Sermon: Printed for Tho. Basset.

Bridle for the Tongue: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst.

Cabala sive Scrinia Sacra, formerly in two Parts, and now United into one,
with Additions: Printed for Gab. Bedell, and Tho. Collyns.

Clavis Bibliorum, with the Book of Hymns or Praises. Printed for George
Calvert.

Divine Closet Meditations, upon Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven: Printed for
Joshua Conyers.

Duty of Man: Printed for Timothy Garthwait.

Discourse of Confirmation: Printed for Rich. Royston.

Divine Life, in three several Treatises, by Richard Baxter: Prnted for Francis
Tyton, and Nevil Simmons.

Exhortation to a holy life: Printed for Edward Thomas.

Geologia Norvegia, or a brief Instructive Remembrancer, concerning that great
Earthquake which happened almost throughout the South part of Norway on April
24. 1657. Printed for Samuel Tomson.

Observations, Censures and Confutations of notorious Errors, in Mr. Hobbs his
Leviathan: Printed for Nath. Brook.

Pastoral Office, opened in a Visitation Sermon preached at Ipswich, October. 10.
1662. by the Right Reverend Father in God Edward Lord Bishop of Norwich:
Printed for George Thomason.

Popish Posie, gathered out of a Popish new Book, called Fiat Lux: Printed for
Jo. Crook.

Question to whom it belonged anciently to Preach: as also what Preaching is:
Printed for Timothy Garthwait.

Relation of a Conference between the late Archbishop of Canterbury, and Fisher
the Jesuit: Printed for Rich. Royston.

Self-Examination, with the likeliest means of Conversion and Salvation:
Printed for David Maxwell.

Sermons nineteen, preached by Doctor Hammond: Printed for Timothy Garthwait.

Sermon preached before his Majesty at Whitehall, April 5. 1663. by the Lord
Bishop of Lincoln Elect: Printed for Timothy Garthwait.

Sermon preached at Christ Church Dublin, at the Funeral of the most Reverend
Father in God, John late Lord Archbishop of Armagh, by Doctor Tailor, Lord
Bishop of Down and Connor: Printed for John Crook.

Several Sermons, Eight written by William Shillingsworth, M. A. Printed for
Thomas Williams, and Andrew Clark.

Sermons Twenty Five, by Bishop Brownerig: Printed for Jo. Martin, and James
Allestre.

Staves of Beauty, and Bands, opened in a Sermon preached at Yarmouth, August
23. 1663. by the Bishop of Norwich: Printed for George Thomason.

Sermon preached at St. Paul's Church, November. 29. 1663. by Richard Lee, D. D.
wherein was delivered the Profession of his Judgment against the Covenant, and
the late Kings death: Printed for Rich. Royston, Jo. William, and T. Garthwait.

Translation of the Book of public Prayers, translated into the Welsh Tongue:
Printed for Edward Fowlks and Peter Bodvell.

Young Man's duty: Printed for George Calvert.

Law.
Abridgement of all the public Acts of Parliament now in force, made in the
16, 17. and 18. years of King Charles the First. And in the 12, 13. and 14.
years of King Charles the Second: By William Hughes of Grayes-Inn Esquire Printed
for Jo. Starkey, and Thomas Basset.

Articles to be Inquired of in the Visitation of the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury: Printed for Richard Royston.

Fortescutus Illustratus, or a Commentary on that Nervous Treatise de laudibus
Legum Angliae: Printed for Tho. Roycroft.

Mare Clausum, in Two Books, written in Latin by Jo. Seldom: Translated by I.
H. Printed for Edward Thomas.

The fourth part of a brief Register of several kinds of Parliamentary Writts:
by William Prin Esquire Printed for George Thomason.

Arts and Sciences.
Architecture, the First Book, written by Andraea Palladio; Translated out of
Italian by Godfrey Richards: Printed for Jo. Macock.

Arithmatical Questions: Printed for David Maxwell.

Ancilla Grammaticae, for the use of young Scholars: Printed for Thomas
Peirpont.

Complete Gardiners Practice: Printed for Tho. Peirpont.

Compendium of the new, and much Enlarged Sea Book, or Pilots Sea Mirror:
Printed for George Hurlock, Sen.

Childrens Diseases, both Outward and Inward, from their birth, to 14. years of
age: Printed for Jo. Playford.

Fax novae lingua Latinae, or a new Torch to the Latin Tongue. Printed for
Nath. Brooks.

Geographical description of the world. Printed for Ja. Bloom.

Introduction into the skill of music: Printed for Jo. Playford.

Purchasers Pattern in 2. parts: Printed for Tho. Peirpont.

Roberti Baronij Theologi ac Philosophi Celeberrimi Metaphysica generalis, etc.
Printed for Jo. Redman.

Renati Descartes Principia Philosophiae, Printed for Jo. Field

Humanity, Histories and Poems.
Account of the late Troubles in England, in 3. parts, written in Latin by
Geo. Bates D. M. now Translated into English: Printed for Richard Royston.

Assembly man, Written in the year 1647. by I. B. Printed for Richard Marriot.

Aeschyli quae extant cum versione and Commentario Thomae Stanleij: Printed for
James Flesher.

Alchymist unlearned, his Antidote, by Richard Mathews: Printed for Joseph
Leigh.

Appendix to the unlearned Alchymist: Printed for Joseph Leigh.

Academical discourses. Printed for John Playfere.

Bentivolia and Urania, The second part, in two Books: Printed for Rich.
Marriot.

Book of knowledge in 3. parts: Printed for Charles Tyus.

Birinthea. A Romance: Printed for Jo. Playfere.

Caveat for all Kings and Prelates: Printed for Theodore Sadler.

Chronological History exact, of Popes Intolerable usurpations: Printed for
Geo. Thomason.

Century of Reasons for subscription and obedience to the Laws and Government
of the Church of England* Printed for Rapha Harford.

Chronicle of the Civil Wars of England, Scotland and Ireland, from the year
1637. till this present year 1663. Printed for William Lee.

Case of Madam Mary Carleton: Printed for Sam. Speed.

Description of the mighty Kingdom of Japan and Siam: Printed for Sam. Brown.

Discourse touching the precedence of Kings, and consequently of Ambassadors:
Printed for Sam. Speed, and Christopher Eccleston.

Experimental History of Colors in English and Latin: Printed for Hen.
Herringman.

Familiaria Colloquia, opera Christopheri Helvici: Printed for John Redman.

History of the 7. wise Mistresses of Rome. Printed for Mary Wright.

History of Gavel kind; To which is added the short History of William the
Conqueror, in Latin. Printed for John Starkey.

History of the War of Italy in 18. books, Written originally in Latin, and
now Translated: Printed for John Macock.

Hudibras. The second part: Printed for Jo. Martin, and James Allestrey.

History narrative, concerning the life of Athanasius: Printed for David Maxwel.

Jornals de Mr. de Saint Amor. Dr. de Sorbone, etc. Printed for Humphrey
Robinson, and Geo. Thomason.

Interpretation of Dreams, by Artemodorus: Printed for William Lee.

Life of Don John de Castro: Printed for Hen. Herringman.

Legend of St. Cuthbert, with the Antiquities of the Church of Durham: Printed
for Christopher Eccleston.

Narrative of that Stupendous Tragedy late intended to be acted: Printed for
Tho. Newcomb and Charles Adams.

Portraitures containing 21. leaves: Printed for Jo. Marshall.

Pathway to knowledge: Printed for Edw. Thomas.

Precious Pearl in the midst of a dunghill: Printed for Joseph Leigh.

Preparatory to the History natural and experimental. Printed for Will. Lee.

Poems, By Mrs. Catherine Philips: Printed for Rich. Marriot.

Q. Curtii Rufi de rebus gestis Alexandri magni: Printed for Jo. Redman.

Reason and Judgment, or special Remarques of the life of the renowned Doctor
Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln: Printed for Hen. Marsh.

Royal Arbor of loyal Poesy, consisting of Poems and Songs, digested into
Triumph, Elegy, Satyr, Love and Drollerie: Printed for Elizabeth Andrews.

Relation of the Court of Rome, made in the year 1661* Printed for Jo. Playfere.

Scrinia Cecilliana* Mysteries of State and Government, in Letters of the late
famous Lord Burleigh: Printed for Gab. Bedell and Tho. Collyns.

Sales Epigrammatum, or the choicest Disticks of Martials Epigrams, And all the
Latin Poets that have written for the last two hundred years: Printed for
Christopher Eccleston.

Tutela Sanitatis, sive Vita Protracta. The protracting of long life, by
Everard Manwaring, Doctor of Physic: Printed for Tho. Basset.

Valerij Maximi Dictorum Factorumque memorab^lium, Libri 9. Printed for John
Redman.

Verses written upon several occasions by Abraham Cowley, Gent. Printed for
Hen. Herringman.

Youths behavior: Printed for Will. Lee.

Youths behavior, The second part; Printed for Will. Lee.

Plays.
Adventures of five hours. The Scene, Sevil: Printed for Henry Herringman.

Bellamira her Dream: or the love of Shadows, A Tragi-Comedy. Printed for Hen.
Herringman.

The Cheats. A Comedy. Printed for Gab. Beadell and Charles Adams.

Cicillia and Clorinda. Or Love in Arms. A Tragi-Comedy: Printed for Hen.
Herringman.

The Princes. A Tragi-Comedy, Printed for Hen. Herringman.

The Parsons wedding, A Comedy, Printed for Henry Herringman.

The Pilgrim, A Tragedy: Printed for Hen. Herringman.

The Slighted Maid, A Comedy: Printed for Thomas Dring.

Thomaso, or the wanderer, A Comedy: Printed for Hen. Herringman.

The Villain, A Tragedy: Printed for Hen. Herringman, and Sam. Speed.

FINIS.
The like Catalogue hereafter is intended to be yearly set forth by the Clerk
aforesaid.


