To the Sacred Memory of the Crown of MAJESTY, KING CHARLES I.
depiction of King Charles I at the block te domine (...), non timeo.




RIch Magazine of Virtue, in whose breast
The Graces centered, and You made their Nest,
And so conjoined, flowed a crystal stream,
Would richly add unto the rarest theme.
Pardon the impotence of my weak style,
Which would applaud -- but rather does revile,
In falling short of showing thy large spirit,
And so committing Rape on thy fair merit.
Graspe all the wit of man, you never can
Depute thy Ashes a fit Guardian.
Set Envy on the Tenters, urge a Reason
How spotless CHARLES could act a dram of Treason,
And she is dumb! Robbed of this one pretense,
He stole from England all her Innocence.
And could such worth be stifled? Oh! 't was thus,
His worthy Self was far too good for us.
Dear Saint! If thy blessed soul can think upon
Those crying judgments which are crowding on
Thy poor distressed England, let it be
A zealous wish to stop our Misery,
And not for public vengeance, that Gods hand
May scourge the Actors, not destroy the Land:
In which ripe time, we would be glad to see
Our common Prophesies made History;
But yet our fears presages understood,
Say, they will be writ in characters of blood.
And why not so? To save us God did cause
His Son to bleed, as thou did for our Laws.
For which (in spite of Power) thou shall have
Ineach true heart a lasting Tomb and Grave,
Which shall be seen by those that live to see
Thy Cause reviewed by thy Posterity.
Inthe mean time lie speechless all our Laws
That plead the Civil, or Diviner Cause,
Stabbed by thy Crowns-possessors. Who besides
Have gained the glory of bold Regicides;
And are exact Faith-breakers, but in this,
(Their only specious Parenthesis)
They are not wholly perjured, for we see
They Have made thee glorious to Eternity:
So by Red-art this Paradox approve,
The work of Malice, was an act of Love.
Thy words, and actions, Life and Death made good;
Our Rights were dearer to thee then thy blood.
And at the last, when seized on by proud Fate,
Thou for thy self would not capitulate:
Scorning to sell a Law, to save a Crown,
But that thou might preserve That, laid This down:
That so we can no more the worthiness
of what thou Were, then what thou Art express.
But when succeeding Kings thy story see,
May thy blessed Life their fairest pattern be:
And thy sad Death direction to prevent
Those dangers that to Crowns are incident,
By giving Power to that Monster rude,
The Hidra-headed fickle multitude:
And weep -- But here my limping Muse must stay,
Thy Cause is Gods, and God will have the day.
And with all reverence unto thy Hearse,
Write this weak Epitaph in Country Verse,
Which shall not dare once to approach thy Tomb,
But to shrink back to give more worthy room,
Who there will crowd, it, to Idolatrize,
And as thy Person, so thy Ashes prize.
EPITAPH.
BEhold, sad Reader -- Oh! behold here lies
The great contemner of proud Miseries.
The Extract of all Virtue beyond Sense,
The Cream and Crown of Christian patience.
The Conqueror of Passions, Prince of Hearts;
The rich Ingrosser of applausive parts.
The first great Charles that sat on Britans thrones,
The willing Martyr of two Nations.
The quintessence of Honor, who translated,
May be admired, but not imitated.
The Saint of England, who though dead here be,
Shall live with honor to Eternity.
Ramrahbocai

