To the Right Honorable Sir John Moore Knight. LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON,
and the Right Worshipful the ALDERMEN his Brethren, The Humble Petition and
Address of the Citizens of London, whose Names are Subscribed, for, and on the
Behalf of themselves, and all other Loyal Citizens of London,
Shows,

THAT we having seen a Printed Paper, being a Copy of what was Presented to
your Lordship and this Court Entitled A Fourth Paper Presented by diverse
Citizens of London the 12th of September. 1682. wherein the presenters on the
behalf of themselves, and of their Fellow-Citizens, take upon them to Protest
against the Election and Confirmation of Mr. North and Mr. Box, to be Sheriffs
of London and Middlesex; declaring that if your Lordship and this Court refuse
to call forth Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois to Seal their Bonds, and shall impose
Mr. North upon them as Sheriff, or cause a Common Hall to be called under
pretense of Electing any other Person to join with the said Mr. North. That the
same would be a Breach of your Trust, and Violation of their Privileges, which
(as they say) they are resolved to Maintain: And therefore demanded, That this
Court should immediately send for Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois to Seal their
Bonds, and take upon them the Office of Sheriffs of London and Middlesex.

WE do esteem the matter contained in the said Paper to be a presumptuous and
false Censure of your Lordships just Government of this City, which in this, as
in all other matters, your Lordship has managed by Advice of this Court.

And we hold it our Duty to declare to your Lordship and this Court, that we
utterly disown any Concurrence with, or Allowance of the Matters contained
therein. And we do assert and insist upon it, that the Confirmation of Mr.
North, and the Election of Mr. Box for Sheriffs of London and Middlesex for the
Ensuing Year were Lawful, and according to the Rights and Customs of this City.
And since your Lordship and this Court have permitted Mr. Box to Fine, and
thereupon discharged him; and that Mr. North has Sealed a Bond to hold
Sheriff. There is now but one Sheriff to be chosen for the next Year.

THEREFORE, We humbly pray your Lordship to issue out a Precept, to Summon a
Common Hall, for Electing one other Person to be Sheriff for the Ensuing Year,
in the Room of the said Mr. Box; And your Petitioners, etc.
Moore Mayor.
Jovis 14. die September. 1682. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secund. Ang. etc. 34.
UPon a Petition now presented to this Court by diverse Citizens for the calling
of a Common Hall to Choose another Person to be one of the Sheriffs for the
next Year and to join with Mr. North, in the stead of Mr. Box lately
discharged. And upon two other Petitions now likewise Presented, One from
diverse other Citizens, and the other from diverse Gentlemen of the County of
Middlesex, for the calling out of Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois as Sheriffs Elect
for the Year ensuing. This Court upon the Question put, did agree that the same
Answer should be given to the said Petitioners, as was given by this Court to
the Petition Presented on the 27th of July last: And the same was thereupon
read to them in the words sollowing, viz.

Gentlemen, This Court has considered of your Petitions, and will take care
that such Persons shall take the Office of Sheriffs upon them as are duly
Elected according to Law, and the Ancient Customs of this City: And in this and
all other things, this Court will endeavor to maintain the Rights and
Privileges of the Chair, and of the whole City: And wherein you think that we
do otherwise, the Law must Judge between us. And the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor did also acquaint them that his Lordship intended to call a Common Hall
on Tuesday next, for the choice of a Person to be one of the Sheriffs for the
Year ensuing, instead of Mr. Box.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1682.


