An Examen OF THE SERMON Of Mr. STEPHEN MARSHAL, About Infant Baptism, in a
Letter sent to him: Divided into Four Parts. 1. Concerning the Antiquity of
Infant Baptism. 2. Concerning the prejudices against Antipaedobaptists from
their miscarriages. 3. Concerning the Arguments from Scripture, for
Infant Baptism. 4. Concerning the Objections against Infant Baptism.
In which are maintained these Positions. 1. Infant Baptism is not so ancient
as is pretended, but as now taught is a late Innovation. 2. Antipaedobaptisme
has no ill influence on Church, or Commonwealth. 3. Infant Baptism cannot be
deduced from Holy Scripture. 4. Infant Baptism is a corruption of the
Ordinance of Baptism.


LONDON, Printed by R. W. for George Whitington. 1645.

Infant Baptism Is not so Ancient as is pretended: As now Taught, Is a late
Innovation.
PART I. Concerning the antiquity of Infant Baptism.
SIR,
. 1. The prologue Of the occasion, and en^ of this writing.
IT is now full nine months since, that being informed by one of the Members of
the Assembly, in which you are one, that there was a Committee chosen out of
the Members of the Assembly, to give satisfaction in the point of
Paedo-baptisme, and advised by the same person out of his tender love to me, to
present the reasons of my doubts about Paedo-baptisme, to that Committee; I
drew them up in Latin, in nine Arguments, in a scholastique way, and they were
delivered unto Mr. Whitaker the Chairman of the Committee, about nine months
since: to which I added after, an addition of three more reasons of doubting,
with a supplement of some other things wanting; which was delivered to Mr.
Tuckney, and joined by him to the former Papers. My aim therein was, either to
find better ground then I had then found to practice the baptizing of Infants,
from that Assembly of learned and holy men, whom I supposed able and willing to
resolve their Brother in the Min^st^ry; Or else according to the solemn
Covenant I have taken, to endeavor the reformation of these Churches according
to Gods word, by informing that Assembly what I conceived amiss in the great
ordinance of Baptizing. The success was such, as I little expected: to this
day I have heard nothing from the Committee by way of answer to those doubts;
but I have met with many Pamphlets, and some Sermons, tending to make the
questioning of that point odious to the People, and to the Magistracy. Among
others, reading the Sermon of Mr. Richard Vines, on Ephesians. 4.14. before the
Lord Major: and the Sermon you preached at Westminster Abbey. I perceive there
is such a prejudice in you, and it may seem by the Vote pass^d about the
members of the visible Church, in the generality of the Assembly, that he is
likely to be exploded, if not censured, that shall but dispute against it: and
therefore little or no likelihood that this matter will be argued, as I
conceive it does deserve, in your Assembly. And further, I perceive there is a
great zeal in your spirit against the denying of Children baptism, as if it
were a more cru^ll thing than Hazaels dashing out Childrens brains; That it
were an exclusion of them out of the Covenant of Grace, etc. Which I the more
admire, considering the report which has been of you, as a sober, learned,
holy, well-tempered man, that you should be so transported in this matter, as
to be so vehement in maintaining that which was accounted heretofore in many
ages, but an Ecclesiastical tradition, for which you are fain to fetch a
command from Circumcision, and conf^sse no express example in Scripture for
it: and go not about to prove it, but by consequence inferred from five
Conclusions, which though you call undeniable, yet others do not think so, nor
yet see reason to subscribe to your judgment. You are not ignorant, I pr^sume,
that Mr. Daniel Rogers, in his Treatise of the Sacrament of Baptism, part 1.
page 79. confessed himself yet unconvinced by demonstration of Scripture for
it. And whereas your Achilles for Paedo-baptisme, is the Circumcision of
Infants, me thinks Mr. Balls words, (Reply to the Answer of the New England
Elders, about the third and fourth Positions, page 38, 39.) cut the sinews of
that argument. But in whatsoever they agree, or differ, we must look to the
Institution, and neither stretch it wider, nor draw it narrower then the Lord
has made it; ^or he is the Institutor of the Sacraments according to his own
good pleasure; and it is our part to lea^n of him, both to whom, how, and for
what end the Sacraments are to be administered; how they agree, and wherein they
differ. In all which we must affirm nothing, but what God has taught us, and
as he has taught us. And whereas the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. are your
principal strength to prove the Covenant-holines of Infants of a believing
parent, Musculus a writer of good esteem, in his Commentary upon that place
confesses, that he had abused formerly that place against the Anabaptists, but
found it impertinent to that purpose. And for my part, after most careful and
serious reading and perusing of many Authors, and among the rest, your Sermon,
I cannot yet find it to be any other then an innovation, in comparison of many
other things rejected late, maintained by erroneous and dangerous principles,
having no true ground from Christ's institution, which alone can acquit it from
Will Worship, and which has occasioned many errors in doctrine, corruptions in
discipline and manners, unnecessary and vain disputes, and almost quite changed
the ordinance of Baptism. Wherefore, upon advise, I have resolved to examine
your Sermon, who are a leading man, and in respect of your eminency, either
likely to be a very good, or very bad instrument, as you are gui^dd; that you
may either rectify me, or I you; and that we may (if the Lord shall see it
good) give one another the right hand of fellowship, and stand fast in one mind
in the truth of the Gospel, and clear the truth of God to the people, whose
eyes are upon us. And so much the rather have I pitched upon your Sermon,
because I conceive it contains in a plain way as much as can be well said for
Poedo-baptisme; and your Epistle seems to intimate your publishing of it to be
for the ease of the Assembly, and possibly it may be all I may expect from
them. Now the Lord vouchsafe to frame both your spirit and mine, that we may
seek and find truth, in humility and love, in this great business, which
concerns the souls, and perhaps lives and estates of many millions, yea of all
godly persons; and the glory of God, and honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that we may trample under our feet our own credit, our own opinion, if it stand
not with the honor of Christ, and the truth of God.

. 2. Of the stating the question, partition of the Treatise, sum of the Answer
to the Testimonies of Antiquity for Infant Baptism.
LEtting pass the Epistle, and leaving the various Questions, and allowing the
stating of the Question, conceiving you mean it of baptizing by warrant of
ordinary rule of Scripture, without extraordinary revelation or direction.
Whereas you affirm, that the Infants of Believers are to be baptized with
Christ's baptism, by the lawful Minister according to ordinary rule.

I deny it.

That which you say for the practice of baptizing infants may be reduced, 1. To
the testimonies of Antiquity. 2. To the novelties and miscarriages of the
opposers of it. 3. To the arguments produced for it. 4. To the answering
objections against it. I shall by Gods assistence examine each of these. First
you affirm, That the Christian Church has been in possession of it for the
space of fifteen hundred years and upwards, as is manifest out of most of the
Records that we^ have of Antiquity both in the Greek and Latin Churches.

To this I answer, that if it were true, yet it is not so much as may be said
for Episcopacy, keeping of Easter, the religious use of the Cross, etc. which
I conceive you reject. 2. That the highest testimonies you produce come not so
high. 3. Those that be alleged, being judiciously weighed, will rather make
against the present doctrine and practice, then for it. 4. There are many
evidences that do as strongly prove (as proofs usually are taken in such
matters) Quod ab initio non fuit sic, That from the beginning it was not so;
and therefore it is but an innovation. The first of these I presume you will
acknowledge, that for Antiquity not-Apostolicall, there are plain testimonies
of Episcopacy, keeping of Easter, the religious use of the Cross being in use,
before any of the testimonies you, or any other can produce for baptizing of
infants; and therefore I will forbear mentioning proofs so obvious to
Scholars. The second and third thing I shall make good in the weighing of the
Testimonies you produce, and the fourth in the close.

. 3. Of the pretended Testimony of Justine Martyr.
YOur Testimonies are either of the Greek or Latin Churches. Of the Greeks you
allege four. The first is Justine Martyr, of whom you say, That he lived Anno
150. which wants somewhat of 1500. years; and therefore you did somewhat*
overlash, in saying that it is manifest out of most of the Records of the
Greek and Latin Church; The Church has been in possession of the privilege
of baptizing Infants 1500. years and upwards; and then you say, In a Treatise
that goes under his name: By which it is manifest* that you know that it was
questioned whether it was his or no; and I conceive you could not be ignorant,
that it is not only questioned, but also proved by Perkins in his preparative
to the demonstration of the Problem, by Rivet in his Critieus sacer, by Robert
Cook of Leeds (if my memory fail me not, to which I am enforced to trust in
many things, being spoiled of my books) in his Censure, and confessed by
Papists, to be none of Justine Martyrs, but to be written a great while after
his days; for as much as it mentions not only Irenaeus, but also Origin and
the Manichees: Now what does this bastard Treatise say? You say Question 56.
Justine Martyr disputes the different condition of those children who die
baptized, and of those children who die unbaptized. The question propounded is.
If Infants dying have neither praise nor blame by works, what is the difference
in the resurrection of those that have been baptized by others, and have done
nothing, and of those that have not been baptiz^d, and in like manner have done
nothing. The Answer is, this is the difference of the baptized from the not
bapti^^d; that the baptized obtain good things (meaning at the Resurrection)
by baptism, but the unbaptized obtain not good things. And the^ are accounted
worthy of the good things they have by their baptis^^, by the faith of those
that bring them to baptism. You may by th^^ testimony see (what ever Age the
book was made in) what the reason of baptizing of Infants was: Not the supposed
Covenant of grace, made to believers and their seed, which you make the ground
of baptizing of infants: but the opinion that the not baptized should not
obtain good things at the resurrection (meaning the Kingdom of God, mentioned
Joh. 3.5.) but the baptized should; and that by reason of the faith of the
bringers, what ever the Parents were, and therefore they baptized the children
of unb^lievers, as well as believers if they were brought.

. 4. Of Irenaeu^ his Testimony.
YOur next Greek Author is Irenaeus, who was indeed a Greek, and wrote in
Greek, but now only we have his works in Latin, (except some few fragments)
for which reason we are not so certain of his meaning, as we might be if we had
his own words in the language in which he wrote. You say he lived in the same
Century, and it is acknowledged he lived in the same Century with Justine
Martyr but not with the Author of the Questions and Answers ad Orthodox^s, who
(as has been said) lived in some Age after. Irenaeus is by Usher placed at the
year 180. by Osiander at the year 183. so that though he were of that
Century, yet he flourished in the latter part of it, and so reaches not to
your 1500. years and upwards. Of him you say, that l. 2. c. 39. he says,
Christus venit per seipsu^ omnes salvare, omnes inqua^, qui per eum renascuntur
in Deu^, infantes and parvulo^ and pueros, etc. Now it is well known, say the
Glossers upon that text, renascenti^ nomine, Dominica and Apostolica Phrasi
Baptismum intelligi: You might have added what follows. Aperte confirmans
Apostolorum traditionem de baptismo infantium parvulorum adversus
Anabaptisticam impietatem. But I pray you, whose Gloss was this? Was it any
other then Fevardentius (if I mistake not) of whom Rivet. Crit. Sacr. lib. 2
cap. 6. Juniores tantum, qui in opera Irenaei incident monitos volo, ut caveant
ab illis Editionibus, quas impudentissimus ille Monarchus Fevardentius, homo
projecta audacia et nullius fidei, foede in multis corrupit, and annotationibus
impii^ et mendacibus conspu^cavit. And for the gloss its false: for no where
does our Lord, or the Apostles call baptism, Now birth, although our Lord
speak of being borne again of water Ioh. 3.5. and Paul of the washing of
regeneration. Tit. 3.5. and for the words themselves without the gloss, all
the strength lies in this, that the word ( Renascuntur) is used for Baptism by
the Ancients, which yet possibly was not the word Irenaeus used in his own
writing; and how the Latin translation alters the meaning of Irenaeus, you may
see somewhat in Rivet. Vossius Thesibus Theologic. de Padebapt. Thesi. 7.
intimates, that the proper acception is of sanctification, and that the word
may be so taken, yea and that it is not meant of Baptism, the words and the
whole scope of Irenaeus in that place show. For the scope of Irenaeus in that
chapter is to refute the Gnostics, who said that Christ did not exceed one
and thirty years of age; against whom Irenaeus alleges, that Christ lived in
every age, of infancy, youth, old age, that by his age, and example, he might
sanctify every age, so that here Irenaeus speaks not of being borne again by
Baptism: for it is said, who are borne again by him, that is, by Christ. Not
as if he had baptized infants, but because he was an infant, that by the
example or virtue of his age, he might sanctify infants, as the whole context
will show, which is this. Magister ergo existens, Magistri quoque habebat
aetatem, non reprobans nec supergrediens hominem, neque solvens suam leg^m in
se humani generis, sed omnem^tatem sanctificans per illam, quae ad ipsum erat,
similitudinem. Omnes enim venit per seipsum salvare, omnes inquam, qui per eum
renascuntur in Deum, Infantes, and parvulos, and pueros, and juvenes and
seniores. Ideo per omnem venit aetatem, and infantibus infans factus
sanctificans infantes, in parvuli^ parvulu^, sanctificans hanc ipsam habentes
aetatem, simul and exemplum illis pietatis effectus and justitiae and
subjectionis. In Iuvenibus Iuvenis exemplum Iuvenibus fiens, and Sanctificans
Domino: sic et senior in senioribus, ut sit perfectus Magister, non solum
secundum expositionem veritatis, sed secundum aetatem, sanctificans simul and
seniores exemplum ipsis quoque fiens deinde and usque ad mortem pervenit, ut
sit primogenitus ex mortuis ipse primatum tenens in omnibus princeps vitae,
prior omnium, et praecedens omnes. Which he confirms by the testimony of John
the Apostle, from whom he says, those that conversed with him related, that
Christ lived about fifty years, which all sorts of writers do reckon among
Irenaeus his blemishes, and thereby show how little credit is to be given to
the too much entertained Apostolical traditions.

. 5. Of the supposed testimony of Origin.
THe next Greek Author is Origin, who you say lived in the beginning of the
third Century, Perkins and Usher place him at the year 230. but for his works,
as of old they were counted full of errors and dangerous to be read, so as
now they are, we can hardly tell in some of them what is Origens, What not: for
the original being lost, we have only the Latin translation, which being
performed in many of his works, and particularly the Homilies on Leviticus, and
the Epistle to the Romans, by Ruffinus, it appears by his own conf^ssion,
that he added many things of his own, insomuch that Erasmus in his censure of
the Homilies on Leviticus says, Si igitur aliquis ante ^atu^ Pelagium vel ante
exortum A^ium in Pelagi^^orum and Aria^orum erro^es acer et vehemens, e^sque ex
professo quamvis Hereticorum nomine suppresso divexa^s pr^b^bile non est tale
Scriptu^ esse ^jus Authoris (...) nomen pref^rt Rivet. tract^t de Patrum
Auth^rit. cap 14.
that a man cannot be certain whether he reads Ruffinus or Origin; and
Perkins puts among Origens Counterfeit works his Comentary on the Epistle to
the Romans, as being not faithfully translated by Ruffinus: the like is the
judgment of Rivet and others, and I suppose did you read the passages
themselves you cite, and consider how they are brought in: and how plain the
expressions are against the Pelagians: you would quickly conceive, that those
passages were put in after the Pelagien heresy was confuted by Hierom and
Augustine, who often tells us that the Fathers before that controversy arose,
did not speak plainly against the Pelagiens: and of all others, Origin is most
taxed as Pelagianizing. Wherefore Vossius in the place aforenamed, though he
cite him for company, yet adds, sed de Origene minus laborabimus quia quae
citabamus, Graece non extant. But what says the supposed Origin? In one place*
that the Church received this tradition of baptizing infants from the Apostles:
in another according to the observance of the Church baptism is granted to
infants, you add, (as foreseeing that this passage would prove that then it
was held but a tradition) that then the greatest points of faith were
ordinarily called traditions, received from the Apostles, and you cite 2 These.
2.15. To which I reply, true it is that they did call the greatest points of
faith, though written, traditions Apostolical, as conceiving they might best
learn what to hold in points of faith, from the Bishops of those Churches
where the Apostles preached, and therefore in prescriptions against Heretics,
Tertullian, Irenaeus and others, direct persons to go to the Churches where the
Apostles sat, specially the Roman Church which seems to have been the seed
of Appeals to Rome, and the ground of the conceit which was had of the Popes
unerring Chair. But it is true also they called Apostolical traditions any
thing though unwri^ten, which was reported to have come from the Apostles; as
the time of keeping Easter, and many more, which was the fountain of all
corruptions in discipline and worship. And that in those places you cite, is
meant an unwritten tradition, not only the not citing any Scripture for
Baptizing of Infants, but also the very Phrases, Pro hoc et Ecclesia ab
Apostolis traditionem suscepit and Secundum Ecclesiae observantiam, are
sufficient proof to them who are acquainted with the Ancients writings of
those times. Consuetudo tamen Man is Ec^lesia in baptizandis parvulis nequaquam
sper^enda est, neque ullo modo superflua deputanda, nec omnino credenda nisi
Apostolica esset traditio. Augustine. lib. 10. cap. 23. de Genesi.
So that yet you have not proved that the baptism of Infants was time out of
mind, that it had been received in the Church, or was delivered over to the
Church in Origens time, and was of ancient use in the Church before his time.
But these passages prove that in the time when the framer of those passages
wrote, it was accounted but an Apostolical tradition, according to the
observance of the Church. Like speeches to which are found in Pseudo-Dyonisius
in the end of his Hierachy, and Augustine. lib. 10. de Genesi ad literam. c. 23.
and elsewhere, which argue that it was held as an Ecclesiastical tradition in
those times.

6. Of the Testimonies of Gregory Nazianzen and the Greek Church.
THe fourth and last of the Greek Church you name is Gregory Nazianzen, who is
by Perkins placed at the year 380. by Usher 370. much short of 1500 years and
upwards, you say that Orat. 40. in Baptismum, he calls baptism, signaculum
vita cursum in euntibus, and commands Children to be baptized, though
afterward he seemed to restrain it to the case of necessity. But does he
seem only to restrain it to the case of necessity? the words are plain,
that he gives the reason why Infants in danger of death should be baptized
(...), that they might not miss of the common grace, but (...), he gives his
opinion of others, that they should stay longer, that they might be instructed,
and so their minds and bodies might be Sanctified, and these are all you bring
of the Greek Church. By the examination of which you may perceive how well you
have proved, that it is manifest out of most of the Records that we have of
antiquity both in the Greek and Latin Church, that the Christian Church has
been in possession of the privilege of baptizing the infants of beleivers for
the space of 1500. years and upwards. Whereas the highest is but a bastard
Treatise, and yet comes not so high, if it were genuine; the next without a
gloss, which agrees not with the text, speaks nothing to the purpose, the
third is of very doubtful credit, the fourth which was sundry hundreds of
years after Christ restraines it to the case of necessity. But it is wonder to
me, that if it were so manifest as you speak, you should find nothing in
Eusebius for it, nor in Ignatius, nor in Clemens Alexandrinus, nor in
Athanasius, nor in Epiphanius, that I mention not others: to me it is no small
argument that baptism of Infants was not universally known in the Greek
Church, no not in Epiphanius his days, who is said to flourish in the year
390. because in his Panarium, disputing against the Hieracites, that denied
Infants inheriting the Kingdom of heaven, Lib. 2. heresi. 47 vel. 67.
because not striving. He brings the Infants killed by Herod, the words of the
Lord concerning Jeremiah Chap. 1. of his prophecy: Christ's blessing and
receiving of infants, the children crying Hosanna: but nothing at all of
Infants-baptisme, which had been as proper to his purpose if he had been
acquainted with it. But besides the continuance of the questions to baptized
persons, and answered by them, in many Authors mentioned, this is to me, and it
seemed so to Hugo Grotius, Annot. in Matthew. 19.14. No small evidence, that
baptism of Infants many hundred years was not ordainary in the Greek Church:
because not only Constantine the Great, though the son of Helena a zealous
Christian as its reported, was not baptized till aged, but also that Gregory
Nazianzen who was the son of a Christian Bishop, and brought up long by him,
was not baptized till he came to be a youth, as is related in his life. And
Chrysostom though (as Grotius says) according to the truer opinion, borne of
Christian Parents, and educated by Meletius a Bishop, yet was he not baptized
till past 21 years of age. Grotius adds, that the Canon of the Synod of
Neocaesarea held in the year 315. determines that a woman with child might be
baptized, because the baptism reached not to the fruit of her womb, because
in the confession made in baptism, each ones own free choice is showed. From
which Canon, Balsamon and Zonaras do infer, that an Infant cannot be
baptized, because it has not power to choose the confession of divine
baptism. And Grotius adds fur^her, that many of the Greeks in every age unto
this day do keep the custom of diff^ring the baptism of little ones, till
they could themselves make a confession of their faith. From all which I
infer, That the Anabaptists need not blush to say (which you seem to make a
part of their impudence) that the Ancients, especially the Greek Church,
rejected the baptism of Infants for many hundred years.

. 7. Of the testimony of Cyprian,
I Proceed to the Writers of the Latin Church, you allege for Baptism of
Infants. First Cyprian, one of the ancientest writers amongst the Latins:
which is true; He is placed by Perkins at the year 240. by Usher, at the year
250. Yet Tertullian was before him, and counted his master: Now in Tertullians
time, it appears (says Grotius in Mat. 19.14.) there was nothing defined
cencerning the age in which they were to be baptized, that were consecrated by
their parents to Christian discipline, because he disswades by so many reasons
(in his book of Baptism c. 18.) the baptizing of Infants. And if he did allow
it, it was only in case of necessity, as may appear by his words in his book
de anima, c. 39. But you say, Cyprian handles it at large, in Epist. 59. ad
Fidum. It is true, he does say enough in that Epistle for bapt^zing of Infants*
and more then enough, except he had spoken to better purpose. The truth is, the
very reading of that Epistle, upon which Hierom, and especially Augustine rely
for the proving of the baptizing of Infants, is sufficient to discover how
great darkness there was then upon the spirits of those that were counted the
greatest lights in the Church. You say, upon this occasion, Fidus denied not
the baptism of Infants, but denied that they ought to be baptized before the
eighth day. But you might have further observed, that Fidus alleged,
considerandam esse legem Circumcisionis antiquae, that he thought the law of
ancient Circumcision was to be considered. And, Vestigium Infantis in primis
partus sui diebus constitut^ mundum non esse dixisti: Thou have said that the
footstep of an Infant being in the first days of his birth, is not clean.
Whence it plainly appears, that there was a relic of Judaisme in him, and
that he did not well understand the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law: and the
truth is, the contentions about Easter, near that age, do plainly show, that
Iudaisme was not quite weeded out of the minds of the chi^fe teachers among
Christians. You say Cyprian assures him, that by the unanimous consent of 66
Bishops gathered together in a Council, baptism was to be administered to
Infantes, as well as to grown men; and not to be restrained to any time, which
is true, but you add, and proves it by such arguments as these. They are under
original sin, they need pardon, are capable of grace and mercy, God regards
not age, etc. But the resolution of Cyprian with his Colleagues is not so
lightly to be passed over, since the determination of this Council, as far as I
can by search find, is the very springhead of Infant Baptism. To conceive it
aright, it is to be considered, that you are mistaken, about the proof of
their opinion; the things you mention, are not the proof, but are produced in
answer of objections. The proof is but one, except you will make a proof of
that which is in the close of the Epistle, which is, that whereas none is to be
kept from baptism, and the grace of God, much less Newborn Infants, who in
this respect do deserve more of our aid, and Gods mercy, because in the
beginning of their birth they presently crying and weeping do nothing else but
pray. The only proof is this, the mercy and grace of God is to be denied to
none, that are borne of man, for the Lord says in the Gospel, that the son
of man came not to destroy men's souls, but to save them, and therefore as much
as in us lies, if it may be, no soul is to be lost, and therefore all infants
at all times to be baptized. Whence we may observe: 1. That they thought
baptizing, giving Gods grace, and the denying it, denying Gods grace: Secondly,
that they thought the souls to be lost that were not baptized. Thirdly, that
therefore not only Infants of beleivers, but all infants were to be baptized.
Whence Tossanus in his Synopsis, Notes this for Cyprians error that he taught,
Infantes Statim esse baptizandos ne pereant, quod eis misericordia non sit
deneganda Ep. 8. lib. 3. Then follow the objections, which are three. First,
That Infants are not capable being so young: this he answers by saying God
regards not age, which he proves by an allegorical accommodation of Elisha, his
stretching himself upon the little Child, to the applying of Gods grace to
Infants. The second objection is, But we shun to kiss Infantes as unclean in
the first days of their birth: to this he answers, that to the clean all
things are clean; and we ought not to decline the embracing Gods work. The
third objection, was the Law of circumcision, to this he answers, that in
Circumcision the eighth day was a figure of the resurrection of Christ: Which
is now accomplished, and we are to account now nothing common or unclean: and
therefore we are not to account this an impedinent to obtain grace by
Baptism. Then he adds further, if any thing could hinder from obtaining of
grace, greater sins should hinder men of years from it, now if greater
sins hinder not men of years from it, but that they when they believe
obtain forgivenes, grace, and Baptism, by how much rather is an Infant not to
be forbidden, who being newly borne, has not sinned, except in that being
borne carnally according to Adam, he has contracted the contagion of ancient
death in his first Nativity, who in this respect comes more easily to receive
remission of sins, because not his own sins, but another are forgiven
him: So that whereas you say, that Cyprian proves: that Infants are to be
baptized because they are under Original sin, they need pardon; You may
perceive that the argument is rather thus, they have lesser sins then others,
they need less pardon then men of grown years, and therefore there is less
hinderance in them to come to Gods grace, remission of sins and Baptism:
thus have I considered that famous resolution of a Council of 66. Bishops,
which for the nakedness of it I should more willingly have covered, were it not
that the truth has so much suffered by the great esteem that this absurd
Epistle has had in many Ages.

. 8. Of the testimony of Augustine.
YOu add next to Cyprian Augustine, who flourished about the year 405.
according to Perkins, 410. according to Usher, and I follow you to consider him
next; for though Ambrose and Hierome are reckoned somewhat before him about 30.
or 20. years, yet they lived at the same time, and the Authority of Augustine
was it which carried the Baptism of Infants in the following ages, almost
without control, as may appear out of Walafridus Strabo placed by Usher, at
the year 840. who in his book De rebus Ecclesiasticis cap. 26. having said
that in the first times, the grace of Baptism was wont to be given to them
only, who were come to that integrity of mind and body, that they could know
and understand, what profit was to be gotten in Baptism, what is to be
confessed, and believed, what lastly is to be observed by them that are newborn in Christ; confirms it by Augustines own confession of himself
continuing a Catechumenus long before Baptized. But afterward Christians
understanding Original sin etc. Ne perirent parvuli si sine remedio
regenerationis gratiae defungerentur, statuerunt eos baptizari in remissionem
peccatorum quod and S. Augustinus in libro de baptismo parvulorum ostendit, and
Africana testantur Concilia, and aliorum Patrum documenta quamplurima. And then
adds how Godfathers and Godmothers were invented and adds one superstitious
and impious consequent on it in these words. Non autem debet Pater vel matter de
font suam suscipere sobolem ut sit discretio inter spiritalem generationem and
carnalem, Quod si casu evenerit, non habebunt carnalis copulae deniceps
adiuvicem consortium, qui in communui filio compaternitatis spiritale vinculum
susceperant. To which I add that Petrus Cluniacensis, placed by Usher, at the
year 1150. writing to three Bishops of France against Peter de Bruis, who
denied Baptism of Infants, says of him, that he did reject the Authority of
the Latin Doctors, being himself a Latin, ignorant of Greek, and after
having said recurrit ergo ad scripturas, therefore he runs to the Scriptures:
he alleges the examples in the New Testament, of Christ's curing of persons at
the request of others, to prove Infants Baptism by and then adds, Quid vos ad
ista? Ecce non de Augustino, sed de Evangelio protuli, cui cum maxim vos
credere dicatis aut aliorum fide alios tandem posse salvari concedite, aut de
Evangelio esse quae posui si potestis, negate. From these passages I gather,
that as Petrus Cluniacensis urged for paedo-baptisme the authority of Augustine
and the Latin Doctors, So Peter de Bruis and Henricus appealed to the
Scriptures, and the Greek Church: Now the reason of Augustines authority was
this, the Pelagian heresy being generally condemned, and Augustines works
being greatly esteemed, as being the hammer of the Pelagians, the following
refuters of Pelagianisme, Prosper, Fulgentius etc. the Counsels that did
condemn it as those of Carthage, Arles Milevis etc. did rest altogether on
Augustines arguments, and often on his words, and Augustine in time was
accounted one of the four Doctors of the Church, esteemed like the four
Evangelists, so that his ^p^nion was the rule of the Churches Judgment, and
the schools determination, as to the great hurt of Gods Church Luther and
others have been of late. Now Augustine did very much insist on this argument
to prove original sin, because Infants were baptized for remission of
sins, and therefore in the Council of Milevis he was adjudged accursed, that
did deny it: But for my part I value Augustines judgment just at so much, as
his proofs and reasons weigh, which how light they are you may conceive.

August. t^m 1. Confess. lib. 1. c. 11 and Sig^abar signo Cru^is ejus and
con^i^b^r ejus sa^e jam inde ab ute^o matris m^ae, quae multum speravit in te
And then follows, how being young and falling sick, he desired, and his mother
thought to have him baptized, but upon his recovery it was differred.
First, In that whereas he makes it so Unive^sall a tradition, his own baptism
not till above thirty, though educated as a Christian by his mother Monica, the
Baptism of his son Adeodatus at 15. of his friend Alipius, if there were no
more, were enough to p^ove that this custom of baptizing infants, was not so
received, as that the Church thought necessary that all children of Christians
by profession should be baptized in their infancy. And though I conceive with
Grotius annot. in Matt^. 19.14. that baptism of Infants was much more
frequented, and with greater opinion of necessity in Africa, then in Asia, or
other parts of the world, for (says he) in the Counsels you cannot find
ancienter mention of that custom, then the Council of Carthage. Yet I do
very much question whether they did in Africa, even in Augustines time baptize
children, except in danger of death, or for the health of body* or such like
reason: I do not find that they held that Infants must be baptized out of such
cases, for it is clear out of sundry of Augustines Tracts, as particularly
tract. 11 in Johan: that the order held of distinguishing the Catechumeni and
baptized, and the use of Catechizing before baptism, still continued, yea and a
great while after, insomuch that when Petrus Cluniacensis disputed against
Peter de Bruis, he said only, that ther^ had been none but infants baptized
for 300. years, or almost 500. years in Gallia, Spain, Germany, Italy, and
all Europe, and it seems he denied not the baptizing of grown persons in Asia
still; whence I collect, that even in the Latin Church, after Augustines
days, in sundry ages the baptizing of persons of grown age did continue as
well as baptizing of infants, till the great darkness that over-spred the
W^sterne Churches, spoiled by Barbar^us Nations, destitute of learned men, and
^uled by ambitious and unlearn^d Popes, when there were none to Catechiz^, and
therefore they baptized whole Countries upon the baptism of the King of that
Country, though both Prince and people knew little or nothing of Christianity,
but were in respect of manners and knowledge Pagans still, which has been the
great cause of the upholding of Papacy, and corrupting of Christian Churches,
I mean this great corruption of baptizing, making Christians, giving
Christendom (as it is called) before ever persons were taught what Christianity
was, or if they were taught any thing, it was only the ceremonies and rites of
the Church, as they called them.

2. You may conceive how light Augustine's ju^gement was, Rivet. tract. de
Patrum authoritate, c. 9. Augustinus aeternis flammis adjudicat Infantes fine
baptismo morientes^
by considering the ground upon which Augustine held, and urged the baptism of
Infants so vehemently; which was, as all know that read his works, the opinion
he had, that without baptism Infants must be damned, by reason of original
sin, which is not taken away but by Baptism, yea, though he wanted baptism
out of necessity; urging those places, Joh. 3.5. Romans 5.12. continually in his
disputes against the Pelagian^, particularly tom. 7. de natura and gratia, c.
8. And tom. 2. ep. 28. he says, Item quisquis dixerit, quod in Christo
vivificabuntur etiam parvuli, qui sine Sacramenti ejus participatione de vita
exeunt, hic profecto and contra Apostolicam praedicationem venit, and totam
condemnat ecclesiam. And in the close of the Epistle, calls it, robustissimam
and fundatissimam fidem, qua Christi ecclesia, nec parvulos homines
recentissime natos a damnatione credit, nisi per gratiam domini Christi, quam
in suis Sacramentis commendavit, posse liberari. And this, Perkins in his
Problem, proves, was the opinion of Ambrose, and many more: And hence, as
Aquinas, so Bellarmine, proves baptism of Infants, from Joh. 3 5. And this
has been still the principal ground. The ground that you go on, that the
covenant of grace belongs to believers and their seed, I cannot find amongst
the Ancients. Yea, as you may perceive out of Perkins in the place alleged,
although Ambrose, and Augustine in his 4. book de Baptismo contra Donatistas,
c. 22. yielded, that either Martyrdom, or the desire of Baptism, might supply
the defect of Baptism, and some of the Schoolmen, Biel, Cajetan, Gerson, do
allow the desire and prayer of parents for children in the womb, in stead of
baptism: Yet we find no remedy allowed by them, but actual baptism for
children born into the world: So strictly did Augustine and the Ancients urge
the necessity of Baptism for Infants born.

3. You may consider, that Augustine held a like necessity of Infants receiving
the Lords supper, from the words, Joh. 6.53. as is plainly expressed by him,
lib. 1. de peccat. merit. and remis. c. 20. And accordingly, as in Cyprians
time, the Communion was given to Infants, as appears by the story which he
relates of himself, giving the Communion to an Infant, in his book de lapsis,
mentioned by August. epist. 23. So it is confested by Maldonat on Joh. 6. that
Innocentius the first, Bishop of Rome, held it necessary for Infants; and that
this opinion and practice continued about 600 years in the Church, though it
be now rej^cted by the Roman Church in the Council of Trent.

4. You may consider, that Augustine held such a certainty of obtaining
regeneration by Baptism, that not only he puts usually regeneration for
Baptism, but also he makes no question of the regeneration of Infants, though
they that brought them, did not bring them with that faith, that they might be
regenerated by spiritual grace to eternal life; but because by Baptism they
thought to procure health to their bodies, as is plain by his words, epist. 23.
ad Bonifacium. Nec illud te moveat, quod quidam non ea fide ad Baptismum
percipiendum parvulos ferunt, ut gratia spiritali ad vitam regenerentur
aeternam, sed quod eos putant hoc remedio temporalem retinere aut recipere
sanitatem: non enim propterea illi non regenerantur, quia non ab illis hac
intention offeruntur; celebrantur enim per eos necessaria ministeria. By which
last words you may perceive how corrupt Augustine was in this matter, so as to
excuse, if not to justify their fact, who made use of Baptism in so profane a
manner, as to cure diseases by it: which is no marvel, if it be be true which
is related, of the approbation that was given of the Baptism used by
Athanasius in play amongst boys.

5. You may consider, that in the same Epistle, when Bonifacius pressed
Augustine to show how Sureties could be excused from lying, who being asked of
the Child's faith, answered, He does believe, (for even in Baptism of Infants
they thought in all ages it necessary that a profession of faith go before) He
defends that act in this absurd manner: Respondetur credere propter fid^i
Sacramentum, And thence is he called a believer because he has the Sacrament
of faith. Which as it is a ridiculous playing with words, in so serious a
matter before God, so it is a senseless answer, since the interrogation was of
the Child's faith before it was baptized, and the answer was given before, and
therefore it cannot be understood of believing by receiving the sacrament of
faith, which came after.

6. It is apparent out of the same Epistle, that Infants were then admitted to
baptism, whether they were the children of believers, or not; it was no matter
with what intention they brought them, nor whose children were brought; yea it
was counted a work of charity to bring any children to baptism, and in this
case the faith of the whole Church was counted a sufficient supplement of the
defect of the parents or bringers faith: So that whereas the present defenders
of Infant Baptism, pretend Covenant-holinesse a privilege of Believers, it
was no such matter in the time of the Ancients, but they baptized any Infants,
even of Infidels, upon this opinion, That Baptism did certainly give grace to
them; and if they dyed without baptism^, they did perish. And thus I grant that
it is true, the Epistle of Cyprian is cited and approved by Augustine: but
neither is Augustine to be approved for approving it, nor does it advantage
your tenet, that you have cited his citation of it.

. 9. Of the testimonies of Hierom and Ambrose.
NExt to Augustine you place Hierom, and it is true that he cites and approves
Cyprians Epistle, in the end of his third book of his Dialogues against the
Pelagians; and he cites, and approves, and commends Augustine's books, de
peccat. merito, and remissione, ad Marcellinum, in which he maintains baptism
of Infants, and Infant-communion, as necessary to salvation, and the certainty
of regeneration and salvation to Infants that are baptized, and receive the
Lords supper. So that the same answer is to be given concerning Hierom, which
is to be given concerning Augustine. The last you allege, is Ambrose, who
lived about the same time, though he be placed some years before Augustine and
Hierom; And it is confessed that he was of the same judgment, and many other
of the Ancients of the same time, and in after-ages, but nothing comparable to
those already named, and therefore adding no more weight to the cause.

. 10. O^ the vali^ity of proof by these testimonies, and of the evidences that
Infant Baptism is an innovation.
NOw these, you say, you relate not to prove the truth of the thing, but only
the practice of it. It is well you added this, that you might disclaim the
validity of these t^stimonies for proof; for the truth is, they rather prove
the thing to be an error, than a truth, which was held upon such erroneous
ground as they taught and practiced it, to wit, the necessity of Baptism to
salvation, Joh. 3.5. The certainty of remission of original sin by baptism;
The denying of Gods grace to none, And the perishing of those to whom Baptism
was not given. Whether you have any better p^oofs, I shall consider hereafter:
in the mean time this I add. 1. That concerning the practice, your testimonies
prove not, that it was in practice, bu^ in case of supposed n^cessity. 2. That
there was still in use a constant course of baptizing, not only the converted
from infidelity, but also the grown children of professed believers, when they
were at full age. 3. That they did alike conceive a necess^ry of, and
accordingly practice the giving of the Lords supper to Infants. 4. That they
made no distinction between the Infants of believers and unbelievers being
brought to them. Chamier panstr. Cathol. to. 4. l. 5. c. 15.. 19. Denique hunc
morem quis non videt ejus temporis ^sse, cum vix mil^esimus quisque
bapt^zabatur non adultus, and in Catechumenis diligenter exercitus.

H. Hamond, A practical Catech. l. 1.. 3. page 23. And those other
fundamentals of faith which all men were instructed in anciently, before they
were permitted to be baptized.


5. That your ancientest testimony for practice, according to any Rule
determined, is Cyprian, near 300 years after Christ. 6. Lastly, there are many
evidences that do as strongly prove, as proofs are usually taken in such
matters, That it was not so from the beginning: As particularly, 1. The
continued propounding of the ordinary questions even to Infants, concerning
their faith, repentance, and obedience, before they were baptized, which in the
Schoolmen was still held necessary, and therefore Sureties thought necessary
to answer for them, yea even in Reformed Churches, unto this day: which as it
was conceived by Strabo, and Vives in his Comment on Aug. lib. 1. de civit.
Dei, c. 27. a clear evidence; so I conceive any reasonable man will think it
to be a manifest proof, that at first none were baptized but such as understood
the faith of Christ. 2 The examples before mentioned, of the baptizing Gregory
Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Augustine, Constantine the great, etc. being children of
professors of Christianity, is a manifest proof they did not then baptize
Infants ordinarily, but extraordinarily in case of necessity. 3. Specially if
we join hereto the disswasions of Tertullian, and Gregory Nazianzen
forementioned. 4. The plain testimony of the Council of Neo-Caesarea against
it, before mentioned. 5. The silence of the chief writers, Eusebius, etc.
concerning it. 6. The many passages in Augustine, and others, referring it only
to Apostolical tradition, and that usually proved by no higher testimony than
Cyprian, and that brought in upon erroneous grounds, is a strong evidence it
came not from the Apostles. To all which I may add the testimony of Hugo
Grotius before recited, concerning the Greek Church; the testimony of Ludovicus
Vives, Comment. in August. de civit. Dei, l. 1. c. 27. affirming, that he
heard, the old use continued in some Cities of Italy, of not baptizing, till
the party baptized did desire it. Which it seems Bellarmine, an Italian, when
he mentions that speech of Vives, did not deny. More testimonies and ^vidences
might be brought out of sundry authors: but these are enough to me, and I think
to any that search into Antiquity, to prove, that the custom of baptizing
Infants was not from the beginning, and therefore is but an Innovation:
especially that your tenet, and practice accordingly, is a very late
innovation, [ That Baptism is to be given to Infants of Believers only,
because of supposed Covenant-holinesse] not elder then Zuinglius, and so not
much above one hundred years old, so far as I can find.

Antipaedobaptisme has no ill influence on Church, or Commonwealth.
PART. II. Concerning the prejudices against Antipaedobaptists, from their
miscarriages.
. 1. Of the fitnes of placing the Narration of miscarriages of opposers of
Paedobaptis^e.
HAving examined the first part of that you produce for baptizing of infants, I
proceed to the second, taken from the noveltie and miscarriages of the
opposers of it. And here I wish you had remembered the order of the Areopagites
mentioned by Smectymnuus that in pleading causes before them prefaces should be
avoided, as tending to create prejudice in the Judges. For to what end serves
this your Narration of your adversaries, but to beget an Odium, hatred or
prejudice at least in your Auditors? which if it had come after other arguments
might have been more excusable, but placed as it is, neither suites with
serenity of mind fit for judging in you, or your Auditors. Unto which give me
leave to add, that the courses taken by too many, as namely by the Author of
the Frontispice to Doctor Featlies book, which is light and immodest, by Mr.
Edwards in his prejudices against the persons of his opposites, as, that none
that ever maintained Antipaedobaptisme, lived and died with repute in the
Church of God: the history of the Anabaptists, the Anabaptists Catechism,
with the invectives against this as an heresy, everting the Fundamentals, as
leading into all heresy, over-throwing all government, used in Sermons every
where to make Antipaedobaptists odious, and to forestall men with prejudice,
though, for the present they serve like Medusaes head, to astonish men,
specially the more unlearned, yet are they not right courses, but Artifices
serving only to prevent impartial discussing of things which is necessary that
truth may appear, and perhaps when truth shall appear will return on the
head of the Authors of them. But I resolve to follow your steps.

. 2. Of the opposers of Infant Baptism before Baltazar.
YOu begin thus. And indeed although some in those times questioned as
Augustine grants in his Sermons de verbis Apostol. yet the first that ever made
a head against it, or a division in the Church about it, was Baltazar
Pacommitanus in Germany in Luthers time, about the year 1527.

You say, in those times some questioned, as August. grants in his Sermons de
verbis Apostol.,. But you do not tell us who those some were, nor in which
Sermons, which might have been requisite for your Reader. Upon search I find
the 14. Sermon De verbis, Apostol. om. 10. entitled de baptismo parvulorum
contra Pelagianos, but it is plain out of that Sermon, and out of Augustines
books of Heresies, ad Quod vult Deum, Tom. 6. Here Is. 88. and else where, that
the Pelagians did grant the baptizing of Infants, because they durst not oppose
the custom of the Church, which in those days was accounted Sacred, only they
shifted ^ff the proof of original sin from it, by saying that they were
baptized not for the remission of sins to eternal life, for they had none,
but for the Kingdom of heaven, which shift Augustine does well refute in that
Sermon, and also opposes some others that taught, that the child not baptized
might enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

From Augustines time you make a great leap, and say, the first that ever made
a head against, or a division in the Church about it, was Baltazar Pacommitanus
in Germany in Luthers time, about the year 1527. But therein you are much
deceived. For Cassander in his Testimonies of Infants baptism in the Epistle
to the Duke of Cleve, tells us that Guitmund Bishop of Averse mentions the
famous Berengarius Anno. 1030. opposing not only the corporal presence of
Christ in the Eucharist, but also the baptism of little ones. And that a
little after sprung in Bernards time an heresy of an uncertain Original and
appellation, and he says that they were called Cathari or Puritans, and from a
Country of France, Albigenses, spread over France and lower Germany, and the
bank of the Rhine; of these, he says, Hireliquis erroribus quos a Manichaeis
et Priscillianistis mutuati sunt, hoc insuper addiderunt, ut Baptismum
parvulorum inutilem esse dicerent, ut qui prodesse nemini queat qui non et ipse
credere, et per seipsum Baptismi sacramentum petere possit, quale nihil
Manichaeos, and Priscillianistas docuisse legimus. And indeed Bernard, who is
placed by Usher, at the year 1130. just a 100. years after Berengarius,
Sermon 66. in Cantica, mentions the Heresy of some, that had no name, because
their heresy was not from man, nor received they it by man, but they boasted
themselves, to be the successors of the Apostles, and called themselves
Apostolicos: Now although he charge them with denying Marriage, and abstaining
from meats, yet you may smell out of his own words, that this was but a
calumny; but take the Character he sets down of them and weigh it, and you
would conceive he had spoken of Protestants. Irrident nos quia baptizamus
Infantes, quod oramus pro mortuis, quod sanctorum suffragia postulamus, and a
little after, Non credunt autem ignem purgatorium restare post mortem, sed
statim animam solutam a corpore, vel ad requiem tranfire, vel ad damnationem,
And a little after. Jam vero qui Ecclesiam non agnoscunt, non est mirum, si
ordinibus Ecclesiae detrahunt, si instituta non recipient, si sacramenta
contemnunt, si mandatis non obediunt. The same Bernard in Epist. 204. writes to
Hildefonsus Earl of S. Gyles, to take away Henricus once a Monk, then an
Apostate, quod dies festos, sacramenta, Basilicas, Sacerdotes sustulerit, quod
parvulis Christianorum Christi intercluditur vita, dum baptismi negatur gratia,
nec saluti propinquare sinuntur, and it is well known that Petrus Cluniacensis
who is placed by Usher at the year 1150. has written an Epistle to three
Bishops of France against Peter de Bruis and Henricus, as defending errors
digested into 5. Articles. First, That little ones may not be baptized.
Secondly, that Temples or Altars are not to be made, Thirdly, that the Cross
of Christ is not to be adored or worshipped, but rather to be broken and
trodden under foot. Fourthly, that the Mass is nothing, nor ought to be
Celebrated. Fifthly, that the benefits of the living nothing profited the
deceased, that we are not to chant to God. He says that the heresy of the
Petrobrusians, was received in the Cities of Gallia Narbonensis, and
complains, that the people were rebaptized, the Churches profaned, the Altars
dug down, the Crosses fired, on the day it self of the Lords passion,
flesh was openly eaten, the Priests scourged, Monks imprisoned, and by terrors
and torments compelled to marry wives. All this was done very near 400. years
before Baltazar Pacommitanus, or as others write him Pacimontanus.

3. Of Baltazar Pacimontan^^.
But perhaps you think however, that Baltazar was the first that opposed the
baptism of Inf^nts in the 16. Century, which possibly may be true, though
herein you follow Cochlaeus and Bellarmine, who adds that Erasmus himself had
sowed some seeds of it also, but Gerhard the Lutheran in the 40th Tome of his
Common places, where he handles this question, rather derives the Original
from Carolostadius, and alleges Melancthon, Com. on Coloss. and says, that
he is called the father of the Anabaptists by Erasmus Alberus. Now I do not
find in Melancthon that which Gerhard says of him, yet Sleidan says of him,
that he praised their opinion, and Osiander that he joined himself unto them,
and I find that Melancthon in his Comment on 1 Cor. 9.24. says of him that he
endeavored to promote the Gospel, though in a wrong course. Arnoldus Meshovius
hist: Anabap: lib. 1.. 2. says that the business of Anabaptisme began at
Wittenberg, Anno Christi, 1522. Luther then lurking in the Castle of Wartpurg
in Thuringia, by Nicolas Pelargus, and that he had Companions at first,
Carolostadius, Philip Melancthon and others, and that Luther returning from his
Patmos as he called it, banished Carolostadius and the rest, and only received
Philip Melancthon into favor again. Now they that know what was Luthers
vehemence and pertinacy on the one side, and Melancthons timerousnesse on the
other side, may well conceive, that as in the business of Images in Churches,
and Consubstantiation, so in this about Infant Baptism the temper of these two
men much hindered the clearing of this truth, perhaps fearing that a further
reformation then they had begun, would be an occasion of nullifying, all they
had done. Surely it has been the unhappy fate of the reformed Churches, that
they have so stuck to Luther, and Calvin, that they have scarce stepped one
step further in reformation then they did, but stiffly maintained only the
ground they had gotten. Cassander in his Epistle to he D. of Cleve before
mentioned reckons the error of Anabaptisme to have bin revived about the year
1622. by Nicolas Stork or Pelargus and Thomas Munzer; but it is not res tanti
to search any further into this matter, nor is it of any weight to enquire much
after this Baltazar. He is styled Baltazar Huebmer Pacimontanus, Dr. in
Waldshuot, in the Epistle Zuinglius writes to him, before his answer to his
book about bap^isme, and in the Epistl^ Zuinglius wrote to Gynoraeus, he
relates how he came to Zurich, and was there demanded by the Emperor, who it
seems sought his life, there he made some recantation, but it appears he was
afterward taken and burnt at Vienna in Austria Anno, 1528. For what cause I
know not. Zuinglius says this of him in his Epistle to Gynoraeus. Nos
dexteritatem spectamus in homine, ac mediocritatis studium, in eo autem homine
(falli cupio) nihil quam immoderatam rei gloriaeque sitim deprehendisse visus
sum ipse mihi. And Osiander at the yerae 1528. says only of him, he was Hom^
fanaticus et crassus Anabaptista. But I leave him to his Judge to whom he
stands or falls, only I marvel I read no worse, specially in Osiander, said
of one that is accounted a leader in so hated a sect.

. 4. Of rebaptizing.
YOu go on, Since that time multitudes in Germany have embraced his opinion,
who because they opposed paedobaptisme, were forced to reiterate their own
baptism, and thence were called Anabaptists. Before I proceed, because it goes
so current, that rebaptization is not only an error, but also an heresy, let
me beg of you one good argument to prove it unlawful in se, or intrinsecally,
I mean without respect to scandal, or the like cause by accident, for a man
that has been baptized rightly, to be baptized again: One baptism Ephesians. 4 5.
is not to me all one as once baptizing, no more then one faith once beleiving,
We are regenerated by baptism, and a man is borne but once. But are we not
borne again by the Word, and must that be but once preached? Is not sin
mortified, the Church sanctified by baptism, and are not these often? And for
example, if there were as good for paedobaptisme, as that Act. 19.5, 6. for
rebaptizing, the controversy were at an end with me. But if heresy must be
determined by the votes of men, Smectymnuus may be judged an Arian, and the
opposers of Pasche Heretics: this by the way, though not besides the matter.

5. Of the Anabaptists in Germany, and the Antiprelatists in England.
YOu go on, And soon proved a dangerous and turbulent sect, not only working
a world of mischeife about Munster, and other parts of Germany, but have with
this opinion drunk in abundance of other dangerous heresies and blasphemies,
and quickly grew into such divisions and subdivisions among themselves, that
Bullinger notes that they were grown to no less then 14. Sects in his time
which is indeed the common lot of all Sectaries.

To all which I only answer thus, that much of this is true I make no question,
though perhaps vehemence of opposition, has made matters more or worse then
they were, as it is wont to be in such cases, and I find that Gualter in his
Apology for Zuinglius, says of them, veritatis studiosi videri vellent, and
Cassander speaks favorably of some of them. But it is no marvel that when
men grow into sects, such things happen, especially when the reformation of an
abuse is denied men by an orderly Synodicall way, and the persons that seek
it, declaimed against, accused, and accursed, and persecuted as Schismatics
and Heretics; and unlearned and factious men, join with a discontented party
for sinister ends, so that the men that hold an opinion have no regular
Ministry, nor orderly meetings to debate or conclude of things amongst
themselves; and to agree upon a confession of their doctrine, to be by all
avouched. But have not the like, if not the same things happened in other
matters? Did not the like troubles happen in Q. Elizabeth's days in seeking to
remove Episcopacy and Ceremonies? Did not some of them grow a dangerous and
turbul^nt Sect? was not the practice of Hacket and his companions like that of
John a Leyden at Munster? Did not divisions and other miscarriages and
persecutions, bring the Non-conformists of England as low as the Anabaptists?
Did not Whitgift long ago compare the Anabaptists principles with the
Nonconformists of England, and Hooker in his preface to his books of
Ecclesiastical policy, their proceedings, manners and pretenses togethe^? and
yet Episcopacy is now found an abuse and so may in time be Paedo-baptisme.
Indeed these miscarriag^s were argumentative if they did arise from the nature
of the doctrine taught: but when they come only from the weakness, or rashness,
or malignity of the assertors, or from the violence of opposers, we must not
jumble things togeth^r, but by sifting the matter to the bran, sever the nature
of the doctrine from the quality and actions of the teachers, else we shall as
soon loose truth as find it: Now whether the nature of the Doctrine that
denies Paedobaptisme, infer any such turbulent effects, I shall consider in
examining that which follows.

. 6. Of Anabaptists opposing Magistracy.
And because this opinion and diverse others which depend upon it, begins
unhappily to take place, and spread among our selves in this Kingdom.

You do not express what those opinions are which depend upon it, Mr. Richard
Vines in his Sermon on Ephesians. 4.14. page 13. Having said what heresy ever came
abroad, without Verbum Domini in the mouth of it? and then after the Arians
plea, he says the Anabaptists from Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore and disciple
all nations; and when we shall be thriven to his (...) or full stature, he will
undermine Magistracy by that Romans 12.19. Avenge not your selves.

But how knows Mr. Vines this? I do not take Mr. Vines for a Prophet and to
infer this by reason, The Anabaptist urges Matthew. 28.19. against
paedobaptisme, Ergo, he will urge Romans 12.19. against Magistracy, is in my
slender apprehension a baculo ad angulum. I do not fear to averie, and doubt
not but to be able to make it good, that the principle by which he proves
paedobaptisme, from the reason and equity of the rule of circumcision, does by
just consequence undermine, I will not say all Magistracy, but much of the
Magistracy and Laws of the Kingdom of England, as they are at this day.
Perhaps he may say the Anabaptists heretofore have opposed Magistracy. I reply,
Have none of the adversaries of the Anabaptists undermined Magistracy? Since
the actions of Muncer and Munster I find not either in writing or action any
opposition but the Battenburgick after mentioned (which what they were I know
not) made by the Anabaptists against the Magistrates or Magistracy. I cannot
but think it necessary to insert the words of Cassander a Papist in his
Epistle to the Duke of Gulicke and Cleve. Hujus quem dixi Memnonis cui nunc hic
Theodoricus successit, sectatores fere sunt omnes, qui per haec Belgicae, and
inferioris Germaniae loca huic Anabaptisticae heresi affines deprehenduntur, in
quibus magna ex part pii cujusdam animi argumenta cernas, qui imperito quodam
zelo incitati, errore potius, quam animi malitia a vero divinarum literarum
sensu, et concordi totius Ecclesiae consensu descrverunt. Quod ex eo perspici
potest, quod Monasteriensibus, et hinc consequutis Batenburgicis a Iohanne
Batenburgo, post cladem Monasteriensem excitatis furoribus, Novam quandam
restitutionem regni Christi, quod in deletione impiorum per vim externa^
positum sit meditantibus acerrime semper restiterunt, et in sola cruce Regni
Christi instaurationem et propagationem consistere docuerunt, quo fit ut qui
hujusmodi sunt, Commiseratione potius et emendatione quam inse^tatione et
perditione digni videantur. How unlike is Mr. Vines his speech to the Lord
M^jor and City of London, to these words of Cassander a Papist, to the D. of
Clev^^ ^^pist. And for those in these days, that deny or question
Paedo-baptisme, as I know them not, or very few of them, so I cannot say what
they do, or hold, as being not privy to their tenets or proceedings, only
unde^standing by one of your assembly, that there was a little book pu^ forth
entitled the compassionate Samaritane, upon perusal I found that that Author,
who ever he were, accounts it a calumny to charge the Anabaptists with opposing
Magistracy. But concerning this, the confession of faith, lately put forth in
the name of 7 Churches of them Artic. 48, 49. will give best information. But
if you mean not this but some other error depending on the opinion of
Antipaedobaptisme, when I meet with them in your Sermon, I shall in their
proper place, consider whether they do depend on it or no, and for the opinion
it self, I say, if it be not truth, the spreading of it is unhappy, if it be
truth, the more it spreads, the more happy it is for the Kingdom.

. 7. Of the hindering of refo^mation by Anabaptisme.
YOu say further. And so the work of reformation without Gods mercy likely to
be much hindered by it.

Sir, you now touch upon a very tender point, in which it concerned you, and it
in like mann^r concerns me, and all that have any love to Jesus Christ, or his
people, to be very considerate in what we say. I have entered into Covenant to
endeavor a reformation as well as you, and though I have not had the happiness,
(as indeed wanting ability) to be employed in that eminent manner you have
been in the promoting of it (in which I rejoice) yet have I in my affections
sincerely d^sired it, in my intentions truly aimed at it, in my prayers
hea^tily sought it, in my studies constantly minded it, in my endeavors
seriously prosecuted it, for the promoting of it greatly suffered, as having as
deep in interest in it as other men. Now b^gging this Postulatum, or demand,
that Paedobaptisme is a corruption of Christ's institution, which upon the
reading of my answer, and the 12 reasons of my doubts formerly mentioned, will
appear not to be a mere Petitio principii begging that which is to be proved.
I say this being granted, I humbly conceive that Paedobaptisme is a
Mother-Corruption, that has in her womb most of those abuses in discipline
and manners, and some of those errors in doctrine that do d^file the reformed
Churches; and therefore that the reformation will be so far from being hindered
by removing it, that indeed it is the only way to further reformation, to begin
in a regular way, at the purging of that ordinance of Jesus Christ, to wit
Baptism, without which, experience shows how insufficient after-Catechizing,
Excommunication, Confirmation, Vnio reformata, solemn Covenant, Separation,
and the New Church Covenant, invented or used to supply the want of it, are, to
heal the great abuses about the admitting visible professors into the
privilege of the Church, from whence spring a great part, if not all the
abuses in discipline, receiving the Lords Supper, and manners of Christian
people. And therefore, I earnestly beseech in the bowels of Jesus Christ, both
you, and all others, that engage themselves for God, to take this matter into
deep consideration. I am sensible how inconsiderable a person I am, and how
inconsiderable a number there be that are aff^cted with this motion, I do
consider how much against the stream of the R^formed Churches, such a
reformation would be. Yet when I consider how far fetched the reasons for
Paedobaptisme are, how clear the institution of Christ is against it, how
happily truths opposed with as much p^^j^dice as this, have been in process
of time vindic^ted, of wha^ moment the knowledge of this point is to every
conscience, how exact a r^formation our solemn Covenant binds us to endeavor;
I do not despair but that this truth also may take place upon second thoughts,
^here it has been rejected at the first, nor do I doubt bu^ in time Gods
people will consider what an influence baptism had of old into the comfort and
obligation of conscien^es, and how little it h^th now. And truly Sir, though
it may be but my weakness, yet I suppose it can do you no hurt to tell it; I
fear you want much of that blessing, which was hoped for by your Assembly, in
that you do waste so much time about inconsiderable things comparatively, and
hastily pass over or exclude from examination this which deserves most to be
examined, but rather seek to stop the bringing of it to any trial. But having
told you thus much, I follow you in your Sermon.

. 8. The Antipaedobaptists principle overthrows not the Lords day; the
Paedobaptists principle reduces Judaisme, and Popish Ceremonies and adds to
the Gospel.
You say, I shall God-willing handle this question more largely then I have
done any other in this place, and the rather because of three other great
mischeifes which go along with it. First I see that all that reject the
baptizing of Infants, do and must upon the same grounds reject the religious
observation of the Lords day, or the Christian Sabbath, viz. because there is
not (say they) an express institution or command in the New Testament.

Give me leave to take up the words of him in the Poet, (...), What a word has
gotten out of the hedge of your teeth! They do, They must. Though I doubt not
of your will, yet I see you want some skill in pleading for the Lords day, that
others have: the truth is that it is neither so, nor so, They neither do, nor
must reject upon the same ground the Lords day. That they do not I can speak
for one; and your own words delivered after with more caution, Verily I have
hardly either known, or read, or heard, intimate that though few, yet you
cannot say, but you have heard, or read or known of some, that have not with
baptizing of Infants rejected the Lords day; but you have, I presume, heard or
read of whole, and those reformed Churches, that have upon such a ground
rejected the Lords day as not of divine institution, who yet are zealous for
paedobaptisme. Nor must they, And to make that good, let us consider their
ground as you mention it. Their ground you say is, because there is not an
express institution or command in the New Testament: this then is their
principle, that what has not an express institution or command in the New
Testament is to be rejected. But give me leave to tell you, that you leave out
two explications that are needful to be taken in; First, that when they say
so, they mean it of positive instituted worship, consisting in outward rites,
such as Circumcision, Baptism and the Lords Supper are, which have nothing
moral or natural in them, but are in whole and in part Ceremonial. For that
which is natural or moral in worship, they allow an institution or command in
the old Testament as obligatory to Christians, and such do they conceive a
Sabbath to be, as being of the Law of nature, that outward worship being due to
God, days are due to God to that end, and therefore even in Paradise,
appointed from the creation; and in all nations, in all ages observed: enough
to prove so much to be of the Law of nature, and therefore the fourth
Commandment justly put amongst the Morals; and if a seventh day indefinitely
be commanded there, as some of your Assembly have indeavourd to make good, I
shall not gainsay: though in that point of the quota pars temporis which is
moral, I do yet (...) suspend my judgment. Now Circumcision has nothing moral
in it, it is merely positive, neither from the beginning, nor observed by all
nations in all ages, nor in the Decalogue, and therefore a Sabbath may stand,
though it fall. 2. The other explication is, that when they require express
institution or command in the New Testament, they do not mean that in
positive worship there must be a command totidem verbis, in so many words, in
form of a precep^, but they conceive that Apostolical example, which has not
a mere temporary reason, is enough to prove an institution from God, to which
that practice does relate. And in this, after some evidences in the Scripture
of the New Testament, they ascribe much to the constant practice of the Church
in all ages. Now then if it be considered, that when Paul was at Troas, Acts.
20.7. the Disciples came together to break bread, and Paul preached upon the
first day of the week, and Paul, 1 Cor. 16.1.2. as he had appointed in the
Churches of Galatia, so he appoints at Corinth collections for the poor the
first day of the week; and Revel. 1.10. it has the Elogium or title of the
Lords day; and it was so Sacred among Christians, that it was made the question
of inquisitors of Christianity, Dominicum servasti? Have thou kept the Lords
day? to which was answered, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum, I am a
Christian, I may not omit it: it is clear evidence to me, that either Christ
or the Apostles, having abrogated the old Sabbath, Col. 2.16. subrogated the
first day of the week instead of it. Now if a moity of this could be brought
for Paedobaptisme, in the stead of Circumcision of infants, I should subscribe
to it with you. But Paedobaptisme not consisting with the order of Christ in
the institution, being contrary to the usage of it by John the Baptist, and the
Apostles, there being no foote-steps of it, till the erroneous conceit grew of
giving Gods grace by it, and the necessity of it to save an infant from
perishing, some hundreds of years after Christ's incarnation; I dare not assent
to the practice of it upon a supposed analogy, equity or reason of the rule of
Circumcision, and imaginary confederation with the beleiving parent in the
Covenant of grace. For to me it is a dangerous principle upon which they go
that so argue: to wit, that in mere positive things (such as Circumcision and
Baptism are) we may frame an addition to Gods worship from analogy or
resemblance conceived by us between two ordinances, whereof one is quite taken
away, without any institution gathered by precept or Apostolical example. For
if we may do it in one thing, why not in a another? where shall we stay? They
that read the Popish expositors of their Rituals, Vid. Rainold. Confer. with
Heart, c. 8.. 4.
do know that this very principle has brought in Surplice, Purification of
women, etc. that I mention not greater matters. I desire any learned man to set
me down a rule from Gods Word, how far I may go in my conceived parity of
reason, equity or analogy, and where I must stay; when it will be superstition
and will worship, when not; when my conscience may be satisfied, when no^? That
which Christ and his Apostles have taken from the Jews, and appointed to us,
we receive as they have appointed: bu^ if any other man, if a Pope, or
Occumenicall Council take upon them to appoint to men's Consciences any rite in
whole or in part, upon his own conceived reason from supposed analogy with the
Jewish ceremonies, it is an high presumption in such against Christ, and
against the Apostles command to yield to it, Col. 2.20. though it has a show
of wisdom, v. 23* And the Apostles example, Gal. 2.3.4 5. binds us to oppose
it, when it is likely to bring us into bondage. And for the other pillar upon
which at this day paedobaptisme is built, it is to me very dangerous, viz. That
the Covenant of Evangelicall grace is made to beleivers and their seed, that
the children are confederates with the Parents in the Covenant of grace. Which
without such restrictions or explications as agree not with the common use of
the words (which in the plain sense import this, that God in his Covenant of
grace by Christ has promised not only to justify and save beleiving Parents,
but also their children) is in my apprehension plainly against the Apostles
determination, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. makes an addition to the Gospel mentioned Gal.
3.8 9. and draws with it many dangerous consequences, which I abhor. You
add, Now God has so blessed the religious observation of the Lords day in
this Kingdom above other Churches and Kingdoms, that such as endeavor to
overthrow it, deserve justly to be abhorred by us. Upon occasion of which
passage I only desire to intimate to you, that from happy events its not safe
to conclude, that a thing pleases God. You know it is the way the Monks and
Prelates use to infer that their institution is of God, because their Orders
have yielded so many pious Confessors, Martyrs and Saints; and it too much
countenanceth the way of arguing for Independency (by which it has prevailed)
in Letters from abroad, and suggestions at home, still harping on this string,
that it is the way of God, because they that are in that way thrive and grow
more spiritual then others. And if this arguing be good, It prospers,
therefore it pleases God; then it will follow on the contrary, It prospers
not, therefore it pleases not God: And if so, we might infer Infant baptism
is of men, not of God, since if conscience and experience may speak, there are
but few Christians that have tasted the sweet and comfort of their baptism,
as Mr. Shepard, in his Epistle before Philips vind: of infant-bap. The other
note is this, that when you say, that such as endeavor to overthrow the
religious observation of the Lords day, deserve justly to be abhorred by us, it
must be taken cum grano salis, with cau^ion, of such as do it against clear
light, with a malicious spirit: Otherwise your words reach to foreign
reformed Churches and their teachers, yea in a sort to your self, who may be
said interpretatively to endeavor to overthrow it, while you build it on the
same ground with paedobaptisme. But I proceed.

. 9. Of the evil of separating from the Ministry and Communion of Christians
by reason of this opinion.
YOu say, Secondly the teachers of this opinion, where ever they prevail, take
their Proselites wholly off from the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and
all other acts of Christian Communion both public and private, from any but
those that are of their own opinion, condemning them all, as limbs of
Antichrist, worshippers and followers of the Beast.

This is indeed a wicked practice, justly to be abhorred, the making of sects
upon difference of opinion, reviling, separating from their teachers and
brethren otherwise faithful, because there is not the same opinion in
disputable points, or in clear truths non-fundamentall, is a thing too
frequent in all sorts of Dogmatists, and yet so contrary to common charity,
which teaches us to bear all things, to the rules of heathens, who could say,
Non eadem sentire duos de rebus iisdem incolumi licuit semper amicitia, It has
bin always allowed that friends should differ in opinion about the same
things, and yet continue f^iends, much more against that near concorporation
of Christians: that I look upon it as one of the great plagues of
Christianity, you shall have me join with you in showing my detestation of it.
Yet nevertheless, First, It is to be considered, that this is not the evil of
Antipaedobaptisme; you confess some are otherwise minded, and therefore must
be charged on the persons, not on the assertion it self, and about this what
they hold, you may have now best satisfaction from the confession of faith in
the name of seven Churches of them, Art. 33. and others following. Secondly, It
is fit when such things happen, that godly Ministers should look upon it as
their affliction, and take occasion excutere semetipsos; to search themselves
whether they have not by their harsh usage of their brethren, unjust charging
them, misreporting their tenants, stirring up hatred in Magistrates and people
against them, ^nstead of instructing them, unsatisfying handling of doubtful
qu^stions, and by other ways alienated them from them. And I make bold to let
you understand, that among others you have been one cause at my startling at
this point of Paedobaptisme, remembering a very moveing passage which is in your
Sermon Preached and printed on 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Concerning the hedge that God
has set about the 2. Commandment, that you admire that ever mortal man should
dare in Gods worship, to meddle any jot further then the Lord himself has
commanded.

. 10. Of the condition into which the opinion of Anti-paedobaptisme puts the
infants of believers, of original sin, salvation out of the Church, and
Covenant of grace.
I Come after you. Thirdly, this opinion puts all the Infants of all believers
into the self-same condition with the Infants of Turks and Indians.

And so does the opinion of Cyprian with his 66. Bishops, that would have Gods
grace denied to none. And so do the words of the grave confutation of the
Brownists, put forth by Mr. Rathband, Part. 3. page 50. Children may be
lawfully accounted within Gods Covenant, if any of their Ancestors in any
generations were faithful. Exodus 20.5. But it may be you do not so. I pray you
then tell me, wherein you make their condition different? Possibly if you open
your self plainly, there will be no difference between us. I will deal freely
with you herein. 1. Concerning Gods Election, I am not certain any more,
concerning the election of a believers Infant, then an unbelievers. I rest upon
Gods words, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, Romans 9.15.2. For the
Covenant or promise of grace, that is, righteousness and life in Christ,
though I acknowledge a peculiar promise to Abraham's natural posterity,
mentioned Romans 11 27. Yet I know not that God has made such a covenant to any,
much less to all the natural seed of any believing Gentile; if you can show
me such a Character, I shall count it a treasure: but I dare not forge such
grants. 3. Yet I grant that the present estate of a believers Infants has a
more comfortable likelihood that they are in Gods election, then the infants of
Turks and Indians, both because they have their parents prayers, and the
Churches for them, they have some promises, though general, indefinite, and
co^ditional; and we find by experience, God does very freque^tly continue his
Church in their posterity, though it often happen that the child^e^ of godly
parents prove very wicked, But this I dare not ground upon any promise of free
grace, made to the child of a believer as such, for fear le^t I incur
blasphemy, by challenging a promise which God does not keep; nor upon any
pretended law of friendship, lest that objection r^flect on me, Is there
unrighteousness with God? Romans 9.14. which the Apostle thought best to answer
by asserting to God the most absolute liberty, v. 15.18. 4. That the condition
in respect of future hopes of a believers Infant is a thousand times better
then of a Turk or Indian, because it is born in the bosom of the Church, of
godly parents, who by p^ayers, instruction, example, will undoubtedly educate
them in the true faith of Christ, whereby they are not only as the Turks
children, in potentia Logica, in a Logic possibility, or in potentia remota,
in a remote possibility, but in potentia pr^quinqua, in a near possibility to
be believers, and saved. And surely this is a great and certain privilege
enough to satisfy us, if we remember the distance between God and us: Nor do I
fear to be gored by any of the three horns of your Syllogism, of which one
you say must unavoidably follow. The first is, That either all are damned who
die in their infancy, being without the Covenant of grace, having no part in
Christ. But this follows not; there is no necessity from any thing said before
of their condition, that all of them should be damned, or be without the
Covenant of grace, having no part in Christ: God may choose them all, or some,
take all, or some into the covenant of Grace (which is, I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed, that is, mine Elect, Romans 9.8.11.) into communion with
Christ (who dyed for the Elect, Romans 8.33, 34.) notwithstanding any thing I
have said of their condition. The second is, Or else all are saved, as having
no original sin, and consequently needing no Savior, which most of the
Anabaptists in the world do own, and therewith bring in also all Pelagianisme,
universal grace, free will, etc. This I imagine is the error you conceive
depends upon Anti-paedobaptisme. I find Mr. Blake stands much upon this in his
Birth-right-priviledge, page 17. where he says, The Anabaptists in this
present age, well see, that all that join in this tenent sail between those
rocks, either to affirm, that infants die in their pollution, or perish in
their birth-sin, or else to deny this original pollution, or any birth-sin at
all. But for my part I see no reason of this, unless it be granted that no
infant can have sin forgiven, unless it b^ baptized. May it not be said, that
some, or all infants are saved, notwithstanding their birth-sin, by the grace
of God electing them, putting them into Christ, uniting them to him by his
Spirit, forgiving them their birth-sin through Christ's obedience, ^lthough they
be not baptized? As corrupt as the Schoolmen were, they could say, Gratia Dei
non alligatur Sacramentis, The grace of God is not tied to Sacraments. If most
of the Anabaptists hold universal grace, and free will, there may be as much
said of most of the paedobaptists, taking in a great part of the Papists,
almost all the Lutherans, and Arminians, and if they denied original sin, it
is their dangerous error, but it is not consequent on their denying
Paedobaptisme. But the late confession of faith made ^n the name of 7. Churches
of them in London, Art. 4, 5, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26. will abundantly answer for
them in this point of Pelagianisme. The third is, Or that although they be
tainted with original corruption, and so need a Savior, Christ does pro been
placito, save some of the infants of Turks and Indians dying in their infancy,
as well as some of the infants of Christians, and so carry salvation by Christ
out of the Church beyond the Covenant of grace, where God never made any
promise. Nor does this follow: for it may be said, all that dye in their
infancy are not damned, nor all saved because they have no birth-sin, nor some
of the Indians saved. For the some that may be saved, may be the infants of
believers, to whom God may forgive their birth-sin, without baptism. Thus you
may perceive, how the push of all the horns of your horned Syllogism may be
avoided. But you conceive it a great absurdity to say, That Christ does pro
been placito save some of the infants of Indians: it is true, it is a bold
saying, to say he does save them, but ^is as bad to say that God may not save
them pro been placito, according to his good pleasure. He has mercy on whom he
will have mercy. Bu^ then salvation by Christ is carried out of the Church,
where he has made no promise: if you mean by the Church, the invisible Church
of the elect, the Church of the firstborn that are written in heaven, of which
Protestant Divines, as Morton de Ecclesia, and others against Bellarmine
understand that saying, Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, without the Church is no
salvation: then it follows no^, that if the infants of Indians be saved,
salvation is carried without the Church, for they may be of the invisible
Church of the elect, to whom belongs the promise made to Abraham, I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed. But if you mean it of the visible, though I
disclaim Zuinglius his opinion (who was a stiff assertor of Paedobaptisme, and
I think the founder of the new way of maintaining it, by the new addition to
the Covenant of grace) that Hercules, Arist des, Socrates, Numa, and such like
heathens are now in heaven; yet I cannot say no persons without the communion
of the visibl^ Church are saved: He that could call Abraham in Vr of Chaldea,
Job in the land of Vz, and Rahab in Jericho, may save some amongst Turks and
Indians out of the visible Church. You will not call Rome a true visible
Church, nor will you, I think, say, that all are damned that are in Rome. You
add, That God has made a promise to be the God of believers and of their
seed, we all know. If you know it, yet I profess my ignorance of such a
promise; I read indeed of a promise made to Abraham, That he would be his God,
and the God of his seed, and I read That they that are of the faith of
Abraham, are the children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7.29. Romans 4.11, 12, 13, 16. But I
am yet to seek for that promise you speak of, to be the God of believers and
their seed. You say, But where the promise is to be found, that he will be the
God of the seed of such Parents who live and die his enemies, and the^^ seed
not so much as called by the preaching of the Gospel, I know not. Nor do I.
Only I know this, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have
compassion on whom I will have compassion, Romans 9.15. which is the Apostles
answer in this very case. Thus have I entered your outworks, I shall now try
the strength of your walls, I mean the third part of your Sermon.

Infant Baptism cannot be deduced from holy Scripture.
PART. III. Concerning the Arguments from Scripture for Infant Baptism.
. 1. Of the connection between the covenant and the seal.
YOu say, My first argument to ^his, The Infants of believing parents are
foederati, therefore they must be signati. They are within the Covenant of
Grace belonging to Christ's body, Kingdom, Family, therefore are to partake of
the seal of his covenant, or the distinguishing badge between them who are
under the Covenant of grace, and them who are not. The ordinary answer to this
argument, is by denying that Infants are under the Covenant of grace, only some
few deny the consequence, that although they were within the Covenant, yet it
follows not that they must be sealed, because say they, the women among the
Jews were under the covenant, yet received not circumcision, which was the seal
of the Covenant.

They that deny the consequence of your argument, do it justly, for the
consequence must be proved by this universal: All that are foederati, must be
signati, all that are in the covenant of Grace must be sealed, which is not
true. If it were true, it must be so, either by reason of some necessary
connection between the terms, which is none; for it is but a common accident to
a man that has a promise or a covenant made to him, that he should have a
special sign, it may adesse, vel abesse a subjecto, it may be present, or
absent from the subject: God made a special promise to Joshuah, that he should
bring Israel into the Land of Canaan; to Phineas a covenant of an everlasting
Priesthood, without any special sign or seal distinct from the Covenant; or
else it must be so by reason of Gods will declared concerning the covenant of
Grace, but that is not true. The promise made to Adam, which you confess was
the same in substance with the covenant of Grace, had no special sign or seal
annexed to it; Noah, Abel were within the covenant of Grace, yet no special
sign appointed them, therefore it is not Gods will that all that are foederati
in the Covenant, must be signati, Sealed; if they had been signati, though they
were foederati, it had been will worship, God not appointing it to them. But
you will say, all that are foederati should be signati, since the solemn
Covenant with Abraham. But neither is this certain, since we find no such thing
concerning Melchizedeck, and Lot, that lived in Abraham's time, nor concerning
Job, that it is conceived lived after his time. You will say, but it is true of
all the foederati in Abraham's family: but neither is that true, for male
children before the eighth day, and women, though federate, yet were not to be
signed. So that you see it is so far from being universally true, that all that
are foederati, must be signati; that this is all which is true, all the male
children of Abraham's family if they were eight days old, must be signed with
the sign of Circumcision, which never will be able to prove the consequence of
your Enthym^me according to true Logic.

But you say this receives an easy answer, the women were circumcised in the
males, else God could not have said, that the whole house of Israel were
circumcised in the flesh, else could not the whole Nation of the Jews be called
the Circumcision, in opp^sition to all the world besides, who were called the
V^circumcision.

It Is true, the answer you give is an easy answer, because easy to be
answered, but it is not a sufficient answer, to tak^ away the exception against
that universal proposition which must prove the consequence of your Enthymeme:
The answer is, That women were circumcised in the males. You express it thus,
page 28. where you repeat the same thing. This sign was actually applied only
to the males, yet the females were virtually circumcised in them: So this is
your meaning. The women were not circumcised at all, yet that the males were
circumcised, it was all one as if they had been circumcised in their persons.
Now then let us scan this answer: the conclusion to be proved was, that Infants
were to be sealed actually, not virtually. For if a virtuall sealing, or
baptizing were all that you would prove, we might grant it; we may say infants
are virtually baptized in their parents, and yet it may be unlawful to baptize
them actually; as it would have been unlawful to have circumcised women
actually, notwithstanding their virtuall circumcision. For it had been a
will worship, there being no command to do it. And indeed, to speak exactly,
women were not circumcised virtually in the males; for he is said virtually to
have a thing by another, as by a Proxy, or Attorney, that might receive it by
himself, yet quoad effectum juris, according to the effect of Law, another
receiving is as if he had received it: but so the males did not receive
circumcision for the females, for the females might not be circumcised in their
own persons, it had been their sin, if they had recieved it, God not appointing
it: As it had been a sin for a child to be circumcised before or after the
eighth day, in them that altered or swerved from the appointment of God: Now
then this being the conclusion to be proved, That infants of believing parents
are to be actually signed or sealed, the proposition must be meant of the same
signing or sealing, and the Syllogism thus framed. All that are foederati,
must be actually signati. All the infants of believers are foederati, Ergo, All
the infants of believers must be actually signati: If you do not thus frame
your Syllogism, but put in the pr^position virtually signed, and in your
conclusion actually signed, your Syllogism has four terms, and so is naught.
If you do not put actually signed in the conclusion, you conclude not that
which you should prove. Now this also occasions me to note another fault in
your argument, to wit, your concluding that which was not the question, which
was not of any sign indefinitely, but of baptism. You cannot say it is all
one, for there are other signs of the Covenant besides baptism, as
circumcision of old, so the Lords Supper now. If then I should grant the
conclusion, That infants of believers are to be signati, yet you would say they
are not to be pa^takers of the Lords Supper, because it is not appointed for
them. So in like manner if it were granted you, that infants of believers are
to be signed, yet it follows not that they are to be baptized unless you can
prove it is appointed to them; and the truth is, if it were granted, that
children were foederati, yet it were a high presumption in us to say, therefore
they must be signati, without Gods declaration of his mind, and if it were
granted they must be signati, it were in like manner a high presumption in us
to say, therefore they must be baptized, without Gods declaration of his mind
concerning that Ordinance. Though it may be good to a^gue thus, it is Gods
mind, therefore it is to be done; yet it is a great pride of spirit for us to
argue, This should be, therefore God has appointed it. As for the reasons you
bring to prove that women were virtually circumcised in the males, they prove
it not, for when it is said The whole house of Israel were circumcised in the
flesh, the sense is not, every person is either actually, or virtually
circumcised, but all the house of Israel is put for a great part, or the
greater, or the most eminent, as it is frequently elsewhere, 1 Samuel 7.3. Act.
2.36. Act. 13.24. as the whole Church is said to come together, when the most
of them come together. And in the like manner the people of the Jews may be
called the Circumcision, from the greater or more famous part, though the women
be neither actually nor virtually circumcised. As a field of wheat may be
called from the greater or most eminent part; as a Church of believers, from
the greater or most eminent part, though the rest be neither actually nor
virtually believers. And for your other reason, page 28. It was Gods express
order, Exodus 12.28. No uncircumcised person might eat of the Passover, which
we are sure women did, as well as men, therefore they were virtually
circumcised; Neither is this cogent. For, the Proposition is thus to be
limited, pro subjecta materia, according to the subject matter. No
uncircumcised person might eat thereof, that ought to be circumcised: Now women
were not appointed to be circumcised at all, therefore they need not either
actually to be circumcised, or to have any circumcised for them, or in their
stead, which you mean (I think) by virtuall circumcision. Now I have dwelt so
long on your Consequence, because I still stick at this, That no reason of ours
in positive worship, can acquit an action that is performed, from will worship.
Nothing but Gods will, manifest in his institution, gathered by some command or
example now in force, can do it. Nevertheless, because I conceive the
Antecedent of your Enthymem^ is not true, though your Argument be overthrown by
showing the inv^lidity of your Consequ^nce, I shall proceed to examine your 5
Conclusions, by which you endeavor to make good both your antecede^^, and whole
argument.

. 2. Of the first conclusion concerning the identity of the Covenant of grace
f^r subst^nce to Jews and G^ntiles.
YOur first conclusion is this, That the Covenant of grace for substance, has
always bin one and the same to Jews and Gentiles.

This conclusion I grant: but on sundry passages in the p^oofe of it, I think
it necessary to make these animadversions. 1. You carry the narration of the
Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. as if it did only contain the covenant of
Grace in Christ, whereas it is apparent ou^ of the Text, that the Covenant was
a mixed Covenant, consisting of temporal benefits, to wit, the multiplying of
his seed, v. 6. the possession of Canaan, v. 8. the birth of Isaac, v. 16. and
the spiritual blessings, v. 5 7. Yea, Cameron th^sibus de triplici foedere
Dei, thesi 78. says, That circumcision did primarily separate Abraham's seed
from other Nations, sealed the earthly promise, it signified sanctification
secondarily. And indeed this is so plainly delivered in the Scripture, that the
Psalmist calls the promise of Canaa^, the covenant made with Abraham, Ps. 105.8,
9, 10, 11. He has remembered his Covenant for ever, the word which he commanded
to a thousand generations, which Covenant he made with Abraham, and his Oath
unto Isaac, and confirmed the same to Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an
everlasting covenant; Saying, unto thee will I give the Land of Canaan, the lot
of your inheritance. If you should say that these promises were types of
spiritu^ll and heavenly things, the reply is, that though it be true, yet the
things promised were but carnal and earthly, as the Sacrifices were but
carnal things, though shadows of spiritual. 2. When you say thus: " The
manner of administration of this Covenant, was at first by types and shadows,
and sacrifices, etc. It had been convenient to have named Circumcision, that it
might not be conceived to belong to the substance of the Covenant. But of this
there may be more occasion to speak at page 35. of your Sermon. 3. Whereas,
page 14. you place among the third sort of Abraham's seed, "Proselytes, that
were selfe-justitiaries, carnal and formal professors: it behoved you to
show, where in Scripture they are called Abraham's seed, which I think you
cannot. Yea, the truth is, you herein join with Arminius, who in his Analysis
of the 9. to the Romans, makes this as the ground of his wresting that
Scripture, that there is a seed of Abraham mentioned, Romans 4.9, 10. and
Galat. 3. and 4. cap. Qui per opera legis justitiam and salutem consequuntur,
Who follow after righteousness and salvation by the works of the Law. To whom
Baine on Ephesians. 1.5. p. 139. answers. Beside, though the sons of the flesh may
signify such, who carnally, not spiritually conceive of the Law; yet the seed
of Abraham without any adjoined, is never so taken. But it is yet stranger to
me, that which Mr. Blake has, page 9. where he says, That there yet remains
in the bosom of the Church, a distinction of the seed of Abraham, borne after
the flesh, and after the spirit. And that now by virtue of being born after the
flesh, some have a Church-interest. And applies that of Gal. 4 29. Even so it
is now, to children born of believing parents after the flesh* as having there
by title to Church-interest. Which passages are very gross, though he makes
this the medium of his fourth Argument. For, first, whereas the Apostle, by
being born after the flesh, means not infants born of believing parents, but
those that are under the covenant of Mount Sinai, that is, who sought
righteousness by the law, and not by faith: Mr. Blake means, by being born
after the flesh, birth by natural generation of infants born of Christian
parents. 2. Whereas he says, that such are in the bosom of the Church; the
Apostle says, they persecute the Church, and are cast out. 3. Whereas ^e makes
such Abraham's seed, he therein joins with Arminius, against the truth, and
against the Apostle: for though the Apostle makes Ismael to be the son of
Abraham, and speaks of him as born after the flesh, whom he typically makes to
represent legal justitiaries; yet does he not call Abraham's seed simply such
justitiaries. 4. Whereas the covenant of grace is made the reason of baptizing
infants, by alle^ging this place for baptizing of infants; To be born of Hagar,
that is, to be in the covenant of works, should give a child interest into the
Church of Christ. For my part, I can see no other consequence than this, of
that cloudy argument. The rest of your explication of the first Conclusion, I
let pass without any further animadversions, as being unwilling sectare
minutias, to insist on small things, or to stand upon matters of expression,
where I think you mean right, and your words are likely to be so taken.

. 3. Of the meaning of the second Conclusion.
YOur second Conclusion is this. Ever-since God gathered a distinct number out
of the world, to be his Kingdom, City, household, in opposition to the rest of
the world, which is the kingdom, city, and household of Satan; He would have
the Infants of all who are taken into Covenant with him, to be accounted his,
to belong to him, to his Church and family, and not to the Devils.

This Conclusion you express so ambiguously, that it is a Cothurnus, a buskin
that may be put on either leg, right or left, which should not have been in
the main Proposition, upon which the whole frame of your Argument hangs. You
say, The Infants of all who are taken into covenant with God, are to be
accounted his; but you tell us not in what sense this is to be understood. For
whereas persons may be said to be accounted his, either before God, or in facie
Ecclesiae visibilis, in the face of the visible Church; 1. Before God, either
in respect of his election from eternity, or his promise of grace in Christ,
congruous to it; Or of their present estate of inbeing in Christ, or the future
estate they shall have. 2. In facie Ecclesiae visibilis, persons may be said to
be accounted God's, either as born among his people, and so potentially members
of the Church, as being in a way to be in time actual members of the Church of
Christ, or who already enquire after God, and profess Christ, though they do
not well understand the doctrine of Christian Religion, such as the Catechumeni
of old were: or they are to be accounted his, in respect of actual
participation of Baptism, and the Lords supper. 3. The accounting of them to
be God's, may be either an act of science, or faith, or opinion; and that
grounded on a rule of charity, of prudence, or probable hope for the future.
You do not declare distinctly in which of these senses or respects, The answer
of the Assembly of Divines to the reasons of the 7 dissenting br^thren, p. 48
praecog. 1. The whole Church of Christ is but one, made up of the collection
and aggregation of all who are called out of the world by the preaching of the
Word, to profess the faith of Christ*
the Infants of all who are taken into covenant with God, are to be accounted
his; so that I am almost at a stand, what to deny, or grant. It cannot be
denied, but God would have the infants of believers in some sort to be
accounted his, to belong to him, his Church and family, and not to the Devils,
(which expression I fear you use in this and other places, ad faciendum
populum, to please the people.) It is true, in facie Ecclesiae visibilis, the
infants of believers are to be accounted Gods, to belong to his family and
church, and not to the Devils, as being in a near possibility of being members
of the church of God, by an act of opinion grounded on probable hopes for the
future: But to make them actually members of the visible Church, is to
overthrow the definitions of the visible Church, that Protestant writers give,
particularly the Church of England, Art. 19. who make the visible Church a
number of Chr^stians by profession: to make a member of the visible Church, ^o
whom the note of a member of the visible Church does not agree, to make them
visible members that are only passive, and do nothing, by which they may be
denominated visible Christians. Yea, it will follow, that there may be a
visible Church, which consists only of Infants of believers; for a number of
visible members, makes a visible Church. It is also true, that we are not to
account Infants of believers to belong to God, before God, in respect of
election from eternity, or promise of grace in Christ, or present estate of in
being in Christ, or future estate by any act of science or of faith, without a
particular revelation: for there is no general declaration of God, that the
Infants of present believers indefinitely all, or some, either are elected to
life, or are in the covenant of grace in Christ, either in respect of present
in being, or future estate.

Mr. Cotton, [The Covenant of Gods free grace, p. 15.] Fifthly, it is ordered
in regard of the persons to whom it is given, Gal. 3.16. It was given to
Christ, and in Christ to every godly man, Genesis 17.7. and in every godly man to
his seed; God will have some of the seed of every godly man to stand before him
for ever.

Against this passage I except, That when he says, that the covenant of grace
is given in every godly man to his seed; he expr^sseth himself in an unusual
phrase, so obscurely, that his meaning is not easily conceived. For when he
says, it is given in every godly man; If he mean it as he said in the words
next before, in Christ to every godly man, that every godly man should be to
his seed, as Christ to every godly man; this were to make every godly man a
mediator to his seed, as Christ is to every godly man, which would be blasphemy.
If he mean that every godly man is a root of the Covenant, as Abraham, it is
most false, since this is proper to Abraham ^lone, to be the father of the
faithful, Romans 4.11. And the root that bears the branches, whether natural,
or ingrafted, Romans 11.16, etc. And when he says, it is given to his seed, he
speaks indefinitely, which may be understood universally to all his seed, which
is most manifestly false; or else particularly, as the words following seem to
import: But neither is this true, as shall be presently showed. Nor does he
tell us whether the covenant of grace be given to the godly man's seed,
absolu^ely as his seed; which if he affi^m, then he must affirm the covenant of
grace is given to all the seed of ev^ry godly man: for, Quatenus ipsum includes
de omni, That which is said of any thing, as such, agrees to all that are such.
Or whether it be given conditionally. Now it is true, that some promises do
s^pp^se a condi^ion, as justification presupposes believing: and if this be
the meaning, the Covenant of grace is given to every godly man, and in every
godly man to his seed, if they do believe, then it is no more then the Covenant
of grace is given to every godly man, and then it is but trifling to add, and
in every godly man to his seed, since nothing more is expressed, but what was
said before, nor any thing convayed from the godly man to his seed; some
promises have no condition, as the promise of writing Gods Laws in our hearts,
for if any condition be put, we shall fall into Pelagianisme, that grace is
given according to our merits. 2. That which he says, he says without any
proof at all, yea, contrary to the express words of the Apostle, Romans 4.11,
l2, 13. Romans 9.6, 7* 8. Gal. 3.7, 14, 29. who limiteth this promise, Genesis 17.7.
to the seed of Abraham, and the seed of Abraham he explains to be the elect,
and believers only, whether of Jews or Gentiles, and those of the Jews that are
in that Covenant, not to be in that Covenant, because Abraham's natural seed
(though God have more regard in his election and covenant of grace to Abraham's
natural seed, then to any other godly man's natural seed that has been since)
but as his seed by calling. And for that which he says, God will have some of
the seed of every godly man to stand before him for ever, meaning this, as I
conceive, of election and covenant of grace, or some state consequent upon
these, it is but a bold dictate without proof, imposing on Gods counsel and
covenant, especially since God has declared so expressly after the Covenant,
Genesis 17.7. That he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. Exodus 33.19.
whence the Apostle infers, Romans 9.18. an unlimited freedom notw^thstanding his
Covenant to Abraham, to show mercy on whom he will, any other being passed by:
and therefore that promise was made good to Abraham in the calling of the
Gentiles, Romans 9.24. Romans 4 16, 17. yea, John Baptist says, That God could
raise up children to Abraham out of stones, Mat. 3.9. And for the thing it
self, it is not true, That God will have some of the seed of every godly man
to stand before him for ever. For millions of godly persons die childlesse, as
Abel, etc. millions that have children, yet their posterity are rooted up. Were
there not other godly persons from Seth to Noah, besides th^se mentioned in the
Genealogy Genesis 5. yet it is certain that none of their seed stood before God at
the time of the Flood but Noah, and some of his. Is it not more likely that
none of Elies. children, or Samuels stood before God in Mr. Cottons sense?
Besides, if that which Mr. Cotton says were true, how is it that the
Candlestick is removed quite from some people, and the natural branches broken
off, and the branches besides nature, even of the wild Olive, graffed into the
true Olive? Then, suppose a godly man have but one child, that child must
infalliby stand before God. It is said indeed Jer. 35.19. and Mr. Cotton seems
to allude to it, Jonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before
me for ever. But this standing before God is not meant of election to eternal
life, and the covenant of grace, but of preservation in the destruction of
Jerusalem, and being after the Captivity of Babylon Scribes, as Junius annot.
in Jerem. 35.19. gathers from 1 Chronicles. 2.55. and for ever is in many places
meant of a temporal duration for some ages. This digression will not be
thought unnec^ssary by those that know how apt many are to swallow down such
men's dictates without examination. But I proceed.

Nor are we to account Infants of believers by an act of opinion according to a
rule of prudence, by which the Sacraments are to be administered, to belong to
God in facie Eccl^siae visibilis, in respect of outward profession, as the
Catechumeni, or participation of baptism and the Lords Supper, as complete
Christians. And as for being accounted by an act of opinion according to a rule
of charity to belong to God, it has no place in this matter. For judging of
men's present estate by a rule of charity, is when men judge of others the best,
that their words and works may be interpreted to signify, according to that of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.7. Charity believes all things: But infants do not show
any thing by words or works that may signify their thoughts, and therefore in
respect of them, whether they be good or bad, we can have no judgment, but
must only suspend our act of judging them. But if by judgment of chariry be
meant, as some express it, conceiving a thing to be so, because we know
nothing to the contrary, then are we to conceive all infants to belong to God,
yea almost all men in the world by the judgment of charity, because for ought
we know to the contrary, all may be elected. Wherefore I must either here stop,
or else gather your meaning by your expressions in other parts of your Sermon,
and the expressions of those with whom I conceive you concur in opinion; and
therefore if I should not exactly light on your meaning, you are to thank your
self, but not to blame me. This is then that which I conceive you mean. That
in the promise which God made to Abraham, That he would be his God, and the God
of his seed, as this promise comprehends Evangelicall blessings, the infants of
believers are comprehended, and therefore they are foederati, taken into
Covenant with their Parents. And yet I am at a stand, whether, when you say
they are taken into Covenant with their Parents, and that the promise, I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed, belongs to them in respect of Evangelicall
blessings, you mean it in respect of saving graces, or the privilege of
outward Ordinances, though the latter is no more true then the former, yet it
is less dangerous, and sometimes your expressions incline me to think you mean
no more, especially that which you say page 13. Secondly, All true believers
are Abraham's seed, Gal. 3.29. These only are made partakers of the spiritual
part of the Covenant, nevertheless, because the most of your expressions carry
it thus, that you conceive that God has promised according to the Covenant
with Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, to be the God of the
natural seed of believers, in respect of the saving benefits of the Covenant
of grace in Christ, and your proofs tend that way. I shall oppose that
assertion. But that I may not be thought to wrong you, or cum larvis luctari,
to fight with a vizour, the reasons why I conceive you mean, or at least your
readers are likely to take your meaning so, are these, you say pa. 8. My first
argument is, They are within the Covenant of grace belonging to Christ's body,
kingdom, family, therefore are to partake of the seal of his Covenant, or the
distinguishing badge between them who are under the Covenant of grace, and them
who are not. Page 9. You express your second conclusion thus. God will have
the Infants of such as enter into Covenant with him, to be accounted his, as
well as their Parents: You set down the substance of the Covenant of Grace.
page 10. to consist in those benefits, and then you often say, The children are
in the Covenant of grace with their believing Parents: and page 31. You reject
the asserting to the Infants of believers privileges peculiar to some, and
assert the privileges belonging to the Covenant of grace, which all that are
in Covenant may claim, which you say, God made to Abraham, and all his seed.
Besides, your Texts you produce tend to prove that, as Acts 2.39. etc. and you
say, page 15. They shall be made free of Gods City, according to Abraham's Copy,
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, which in respect of us Gentiles,
can have no other meaning, then in respect of justification, sanctification,
and salvation, and p. 16. speaking of Zacheus, you say, Let him profess the
faith of Christ, and the Covenant of salvation comes to his house, for now he
is made a son of Abraham, that is, Abraham's promise now reaches him. And page
26. The proving of the two first conclusions gains the whole cause, if the
Covenant b^ the same, and children belong to it, then they are to be owned as
Cov^nanters. page 37. The whole Covenant of grace, containing all the promises,
whereof this is one, viz. That God will be the God of believers, and of their
seed; that the seed of believers are taken into Covenant with their parents.
This is a part of the Gospel preached unto Abraham, and the Apostles were to
baptize them, that is, to administer baptism as a seal of the Covenant, to all
those who received the Covenant. And Master Vines in his Sermon, page 19. calls
them confederates with their believing parents, and Mr. Blake page 16. God
promis^s to be a God in Covenant to his and their seed, which people in
Covenant have also a promise from him of the Spirit. Nor do I doubt but that
your meaning is agreeable to the Directory, which directs the Minister at
Baptism to teach That the promise is made to believers, and their seed, which
promi^e, what it is, appears by the words following make this baptism to the
infant a seal of adoption, remission of sins, regeneration, and eternal life,
and of all other promises of tht Covenant of grace. And the truth is, although
in some passages, (especially Mr. Blake) you speak more warily, as if you would
avow onl^ a Covenant for outward privileges, as when Mr. Blake says page 14.
This birthright intitles only to outward privileges, yet in applying thos^
Texts, G^n. 17.7. Act. 2.39. Mat. 19.14. and others, you are enforced to
express your selves, as if you meant the Covenant whereby salvation is
promised by Christ, as knowing that those Texts you produce, do otherwise speak
nothing to the purpose, bring pl^inly meant of saving gr^c^s; and the Covenant
now of the Gospel is not of outward privileges, as the mixed Covenant made with
Abraham wa^, and therefore if there be not a promise of saving graces to
Infants, they are not now under an Evangelicall Covenant of free grace, and
that baptism seals only the promise of saving grace, remission of sins, etc.
and therefore if there be not a promise of saving grace to infants in vain are
they baptized, the seal is put to a blank, as some use to speak: And if that
there be no covenant of saving grace, to no end is so much weight laid on this
for the comfort of parents, and such an Odium cast on Anti-paedobaptists for
denying it, and therefore I see not but your assertion, if you do not revoke
your plea for paedobaptisme, must be conceived thus: That God has made a
Covenant or promise of saving grace in Christ, not only to believers, but also
to their seed, whom you baptize for this reason. The Author of the little book
entitled Infants baptizing proved lawful by Scripture, page 3, 4, 5.
Int^rpr^ts the Covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, thus, I
will be the God of every believer, and the God of every believers seed in
respect of outward Church Priviledges, to be members of the visible Church,
partakers of baptism, etc. to the natural seed, in respect of inward and
merely spiritual, to none but true Saints, in whom the new creature is formed.
But I say again [ Abraham] or [ thee] in that Covenant is put only for
Abraham, and not for ev^ry believer. For since the Apostle plainly interprets
believers to be Abraham's seed, Romans 4.13, 16. Gal. 3.29. to say Abraham is put
for any believer, makes the speech to have an inept tautology, I will be the
God of Abraham, that is, of every believer, according to that Authors sense;
and I will be the God of thy seed, that is, of every believer, according to the
Apostles sense. And that in that Covenant should be a promise to us believing
Gentiles, That to our seed should be conferred visible Church Priviledges, to
be members of the visible Church, partakers of baptism, etc. is but a dream,
the Scripture no where explaining it so, and being so understood, were not
true, there being many of the seed of believers, that neither de facto, in
event, nor de jure, of right, have those visible Church privil^dges, to be
members of the visible Church, partakers of bap^isme, etc. and if there were
such a promise, God could not take away the Candlestick from the posterity of
believers, which he threatens, Rev. 2.5. George Philips, vind. of Infant bapt.
p. 37. Calls the Covenant, an offer to become their God, and all along supposes
infants under the Covenant, because grace was offered in circumcision; and they
sealed, because it was off^red. But the Covenant is not an offer, but a
promise; nor is a man under the Covenant of grace, or in the Covenant of grace,
because an offer is made, for then refusers might be said to be under the
Covenant, but because God has promised, or performed to them. And if infants
are to be bap^ized (which is his ground) because the Covenant is offered to
them in baptism, then in effect, it is to argue, they are to be baptiz^d,
because they are to be baptized, which i^ nugatory. I h^ve discussed this
matter more fully, that I may show you how doubtful your speeches are, and
give you the reason, why I set down this as your conclusion to be denied by me.
That the Covenant of saving grace in Christ, expressed Genesis 17.7. In th^se
words [I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed] is made to believers and
their natural seed. Now I will show you the reason why I take this to be an
error, and that very dangerous.

. 4. That the Covenant of grace is not made to believers and their seed.
MY first reason is taken from the Apostle, Romans 9 6. etc. in which place this
very Text that is now the apple of our contention, was brought into question;
Beza thus expresses the question. Qui fieri possit ut rejectus sit Israel,
quin simul ^onstituendum videatur irritum esse pactum Dei cum Abrahamo, and
ejus semine sancitum. I deny not, but there was also some other promise
included in that objection, to wit, some promise made to Israel, or the house
of Israel, probably that Jer. 31.33 36.37. for so the words ver. 6. They are
not all Israel which are of Israel, do intimate.

But without question the promise made to Abraham, Genesis 17.7. was one which was
included in that objection. Beza, Twisse, Ames, and others, answering Arminius,
call it the Covenant of God with Abraham, which was that Genesis 17.7. and the
very phrase of Abraham's seed, Twisse vind. Great. cont. Armin. lib. 1. pa. 1.
digr. 7. Hujus autem promissionis (Genesis 17.7, 8.) fides confestim apparet in
discrimen ad^uci ex rejectione Judaeorum and exclusione eorundem ex foed^re
Dei, cum fint ex Abrahamo s^cundum carnem prosminati; sic inquit apparet primas
rerum facies intuentibus.

Walae cont. Corvin. cap. 15. page 377. Apostolus ostendit, ideo verbum
foederis and divinarum promissionum Israelitis factarum, non excidere aut
irritum fieri, licet magna Judaeorum pars esset incredula, quia promissiones
illae foed^ris factae sunt a Deo, non iis proprie qui ex semine Abrahami
secundum carnem erant orituri, sed iis qui secundum election^m gratuitam
Abrahami familiae ex vi di^ina promissionis erant inserendi.


In Isaac shall thy seed be called, ver. 7. The children of the promise are
counted for the seed, ver. 8. Sarah shall have a son, ver. 9. do evidently
show, that the promise objected to prove, that if the Jews were rejected from
being Gods people, then God failed in making good his word, was, that promise
to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Whereto I may add,
that the Answerers of Arminius, and the cited Remonstrants, to wit, Baine and
Ames do say, It was the word of promise, not of the Law, as Arminius conceived,
for the word of promise says Ames, Animadv. in Remonstran. script. Synod. de
praedest. cap. 8. Sect. 4. Is distinguished and opposed to the words of the
Law, Gal. 3.17, 18. Now the word of the promise there, is to Abraham and his
seed, ver. 16. and this is there called by him verbum foederis, the word of the
Covenant. Now let us consider how the Apostle answers it. He denies that Gods
word made to Abraham did fall, though the Jews were rejected: because that
promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, as it comprehended saving
grace, was never meant by God of all Abraham's posterity, or of any barely, as
they were descended from Abraham by natural generation, but of the Elect,
whether descended by natural generation from Abraham, or not. And this is
apparent both from the words, v. 7. Neither because they are the seed of
Abraham are they all children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, etc. v.
8. It is expounded thus: The new Annotations on the Bible, Annot. on Romans 9.8.
The children of the flesh, etc] Not all they who are carnally born of Abraham
by the course of nature are the children of God to whom the promise of grace
was made; but the child^en of promise, that is* those who were born by virtue
of the promise, those who by Gods special grace were adopted (as Isaac by a
special and singular promise was begot by Abraham) they only are accounted for
tha^ seed mentioned in the Covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed.
That is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the child^en
of God, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed; Whence it is
apparent, that the same are not always the seed by calling, which are the seed
of Abraham by natural generation, and that the children of the flesh are not
the same with the children of promise, and that the Apostle conceived this the
right way of answering those that objected, the falling of Gods word upon the
rej^ction of the Jews, by restraining the promise, of being God to Abraham's
seed, only to the Elect, whether of Abraham's natural posterity, or not, with
so little respect to any birthright privilege, that he not only rejected
Ismael, and took Isaac, but also loved Jacob, and hated Esau, by prophecy
declaring his mind, the elder shall serve the younger, and in this the Apostle
acquits God from unrighteousness, in that He has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will he hardens, notwithstanding his promise made to Abraham
and Israel, or any birthright privilege they could claim. That I may not be
thought to go alone in this, I will recite some others concurring with me in
this, Dr. Twisse vind. Great. l. 1. part. 3. digr. 2. Argumentu^ Apostoli ad
probandu^ foedus dei initu^ cum Abrahamo, non omnes Abrahae posteros fimbria
sua comprehendere sic simpliciter instituendu^ esse censemus: Esavus and
Jacobus erant ex posteris Abrahae, at horu^ ut^u^que non co^plexus est Deus
foedere suo, cum Abrahamo inito: ergo non omnes posteros Abrahami. Probatur
autem Deum non complexu^ fuisse utru^que foedere gratiae, quiae non complexus
est Esavu^ majore^, sed Jacobu^ minore^. Bain on Ephesians. 1.5. p. 138. He answers
the assumption of the latter Syllogism, by distinguishing of Israel and
children, denying that al Israelites are that Israel to which Gods word
belongs, or that all Abraham's seed are those children who^ God adopted to
himself, v. 7. but such only who were like Isaac, first begotten by a word of
promise, and partakers of the heavenly calling. The reason is to be conceived
in this manner, the rejecting of such who are not the true Israel, nor belong
not to the number of Gods adopted children cannot shake Gods word spoken to
Israel and Abraham's seed; but many of the Israelites, and Abraham's seed, a^e
such to whom the word of God belonged not, ergo, the word of God is firm,
though they be rejected. Page 139. A child of the flesh being such a one who
descends from Abraham according to the flesh. For it is most plain, that
these did make them think th^mselves within the comp^sse of the word, Estius
annot. ad Genesis 17.7. Colligit hinc Calvinus ^o ipso quo quis est semen Abrahae
ad cum pertinere pr^missionem Abrahae factam: sed responsio manifesta
pr^missionem illam de benedictione spirituali intellectam, non ad carnale semen
Abrahaemi pertinere, sed ad spirituale, quemadmodum eam ipse Apostolus
interpretat^^ est, Romans 4 and 9. Si enim carnale semen intelligas jam ad
neminem ex gentibus illa promissio pertinebit sed ad solos ex Abraham and Isaac
secundum carnem genitos.

Paraeus Comment. in Mat. 3.9 Docet quoque promissiones Dei non alligatas esse
carnali origini: sed pertinere tantum ad posteros fideles and spirituales. Non
enim sunt filii Abrahae qui secundum carnem sunt ex Abraham, sed qui secundum
spiritum.


because they were Israelites, and the seed of Abraham, in regard of bodily
generation propagated from him; and Arminius does decline that, in objecting
and answering which, this discourse consists. Beside that, though the sons of
the flesh may signify such who carnally, not spiritually conceive of the Law,
yet the seed of Abraham without any adjoined, is never so taken. The assumption
which is to be proved is this, That many of Abraham's seed are such to whom the
word belongs not. The word which belonged not to Ishmael and Esau, but to
Isaac and Jacob only, and such as were like to them; that word belonged not to
many of those who are the seed of Abraham and Israelites: But the word showing
Gods love, choice, adoption, blessing of Israel and Abraham's seed, belonged not
to Esau, Ishmael, and such as they were, but to Isaac and Jacob.

Amesius Animadv. in Remonstr. citat. scripta Synod. de Prae^estin. cap. 8.. 6.
thus expresses the Apostles scope. Multi sunt ex semine Abrahami, ad quos
verbum promissionis non spectat, ut Ismael, and Ismaelitae, si autem multi sunt
ex semine Abrahami, ad quos verbum promissionis non spectat, tum rejectio
multorum Judaeorum, qui sunt ex semine Abrahami non irritum facit verbum
promissionis. Out of all which I gather, if the natural posterity of Abraham,
were not within the Covenant of grace, by virtue of that promise Genesis 17.7.
then much less are our natural posterity: but the former is true, Romans 9.6,
7, 8 9, 10, 11, 12. therefore the latter is true: and the contrary, delivered
in that which I conceive your ^ssertion, false. A second reason is this, The
Apostles Exposition of the promise shows us best what is the meaning of it, but
the Apostle when he expounds the promise of God to Abraham, I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed, as it was a promise of saving grace, to wit,
justification, and life, expounds it as belonging to Abraham, not as a natural
Father, Ainsworth ann. on G^n. 12.7. Thy seed] That is, to all the children of
promise (the elect) who only are counted Abraham's seed, Romans 9.7, 8. and in
Christ are heirs by promise, as well the Gentiles as the Jews. Gal. 3.26.28.29.
Ames. Coron. art. 5. cap. 2. Seminis etiam inculcatio solos electos and
efficaciter vocatos notari docet Apostolo sic hunc titulum interpr^tante, Romans
9.8. Gal. 3.16. and 4.28.
but as Father of the faithful, whether of the Jews, or the Gentiles, and his
seed, not his natural, but his spiri^uall seed, Christ, and believers, Romans
4.11, 12, 13, 14 15 16, 17. Gal. 3.7.16.29. Whence George Downham of
Justification lib. 6. cap. 6.. 4. speaks thus. The other promises concerning
his seed are two: The former concerning the multiplication of his seed, that he
should be a father of a multitude of Nations, namely, in Christ, and that he
would be a God to him and his seed, he does not say to seeds, as of many, but
as of one, to thy seed, which is Christ, Gal. 3.16. that is, Christ mystical,
1 Cor. 12.12. Containing the multitude of the faithful in all Nations, both
Jews and Gentiles. This promise therefore implies the former, that in Christ,
the promised seed, Abraham himself, and his seed that is, the faithful of all
Nations should be blessed: And in confirmation of this promise, he was called
Abraham, because he was to be a Father of many Nations, that is, of the
faithful of all Nations, for none but they are accounted Abraham's seed, Romans
9.7.8. Gal. 3.7.29. Thus he opens the Apostles meaning, and thus frequently do
Protestant Divines in their writings. Now if only believers are in that
promise, as it was a promise of saving grace, then it is not made to the
natural posterity, as such, of any believer, much less of us Gentiles.

My third reason is this. The Covenant of grace is the Gospel, and so you call
it, page 37. when you say, This is a part of the Gospel preached unto Abraham.
Now the Gospel preached to Abraham, the Apostle thus expresses, Gal. 3.8, 9.
And the Scripture foreseeing, that God would justify the heathen through
faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, in thee shall all
Nations be blessed: so then, they which be of faith, are blessed with faithful
Abraham, and ver. 11. But that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of
God, it is evident, for the just shall live by Faith, it is Hab. 2.4. By his
faith. And generally, when Divines distinguish of the Covenant of grace, and of
works, they say the condition of the Covenant of grace is faith. They then
that say the Covenant of grace belongs not only to believers, but also to their
natural children, whether believing or not, these add to the Gospel, and the
Apostle says of such, Gal. 1.8, 9. Let him be accursed.

Fourthly, I thus argue: If God have made a Covenant of grace in Christ, not
only to believers, but also to their seed, or natural children, then it is
either conditionally, or absolutely; if conditionally, the condition is either
of works, and then grace should be of works, contrary to the Apostle, Romans
11.8. or of Faith, and then the sense is, God has promised grace to b^lievers,
and to their seed, if believers, that is, to believers, and believers, which is
nugatory. If this Covenant of grace to believers seed be absolute, then either
God keeps it, or not: if he do not keep it, then he breaks his word, which is
blasphemy; if he do keep it, then it follows, that all the posterity of
believers are saved, contrary to Romans 9.13. or if some are not saved, though
they be in the Covenant of grace, there may be Apostasy of persons in the
Covenant of grace, by which the Arguments brought by Mr. Prynne, in his
Perpetuity, and others for perseverance in grace are evacuated, and Bertius his
Hymenaeus desertor justified. The truth is, generally to be in the Covenant of
grace, and to be elect, and to persevere in grace, are meant of the same
persons, according to the Apostles doctrine, Romans 9.7, 8. etc. and the common
doctrine of the Contra-Remonstrants. And on the contrary, Bertius in his book
de Apostasia sanctorum, page 79. among other absurdities which he reckons as
consequent on their opinion that deny Apostasy of Saints, puts this as the
seventh. Baptismum non obsignare certo in omnibus liberis fidelium gratiam Dei
(quum inter illos quidam sint etiam antecedente decreto Dei ab aeterno absolute
reprobati) ac proinde dubitandum esse fidelibus de veritate foederis divini,
Ego sum Deus tuus, and seminis tui post te. And when this was urged by the
Author of the Synod of Do^t, and Arles reduced to the practice, Part. 3. Sect.
6. in these words. For to every person whom they baptize, they apply the
promises of the Covenant of grace, clean contrary to their own doctrine, which
says, that they nothing belong to the Reprobates of the world, Dr. Twisse
answers, that however in the judgment of charity they take all Infants brought
to be baptized, to be elect, yet the promises of the Covenant of grace do
indeed belong only to the El^ct, which he proves at large, by showing that
there are promises of the Covenant of grace, as of regeneration, circumcising
the heart, writing the Law in their hearts, Jer. 31.33. which must needs be
absolute. For no condition can be assigned of performing these promises, but
that it will follow, That grace is given, to wit, the grace of faith, according
to men's works, which is plain Pelagianisme. Whence he concludes. Now then who
are they on whom God should bestow faith and regeneration, but Gods Elect? And
accordingly Baptism as it is a Seal, and assurance of performing this promise
of Justification and salvation unto them that believe, so it is a seal and
assurance of the promise of circumcising the heart, and regeneration only to
Gods Elect. And after page 192. We are ready to maintain, that all who are
under the covenant of grace, are such as over whom sin shall not have the
dominion, Romans 6.14.

Besides, he that shall hear you preach, that the children of believers are in
the Covenant of grace, and that they that are in the Covenant of grace cannot
fall away, may be apt to conceive himself within the Covenant of grace without
repentance and faith, and that he shall be saved without obedience, and so lay
a groundwork for Antinomianisme, and consequently Libertinisme. And may not on
the other side believing Parents, when they see their children vicious, and
ungodly, doubt whether they themselves be true believers, because they see not
their ch^ldren in the Covenant of grace; and so while you think to comfort
parents about their children, you may create great discomfort concerning
themselves.

Lastly, if this were true, that the Covenant of grace is a birthright
privilege, then the children of believers are children of grace by nature, for
that which is a birthright privilege, is a privilege by nature: and if, as
Mr. Blak^ says, page 6. of his book, Christianity is hereditary, that as the
child of a Noble man is Noble, the child of a freeman is free, the child of
a Turk is a Turk, of a Jew a Jew, the child of a Christian is a Christian;
then Christians are born Christians, not made Christians, and how are they then
children of wrath by nature? which whether they may not advantage Pelagians,
and denyers of Original sin, it concerns those that use such speeches, to
consider.

But the Author of the writing entitled Infants baptizing proved lawful by
Scripture, mentions other promises besides that Genesis 17.7. to wit, Deu. 28.4.
Deuteronomy. 30.2.6. Isa. 44.3. Isa. 59.21. Exodus 20.6. Psalm. 112.2. and such like. To
all which the answer is plain, if men would conceive it. 1. That according to
the Apostles own determination, To. 9* 7, 8. these promises as they contain
such things as accompany salvation, must be restrained to the Elect, whose
children soever they be by natural generation, and this is agreeable to our
Saviors applying the promise Isa. 54.13. to them that are given of his Father,
John 6.45. And thus are we to understand Deuteronomy. 30.6. Isa. 44.3. 2. That the
text, Isa. 59.21. is plainly applied to the time of the calling of the Jews,
Romans 11.27. and therefore cannot be applied rightly to the posterity of any
believers at any time indefinitely. 3. That the promises, Deuteronomy. 28.4. Psalm.
112.2. are expressly meant of outward blessings, and therefore cannot prove a
covenant of grace in Christ. 4. That Exodus 20.6. does plainly include a
condition of obedience, and it is expressly mentioned Psalm. 103.17, 18. as
included in other promises of like kind, which condition God does not undertake
for any children of a believer, but the elect, nor is Christ surety for any but
the elect; and therefore till it can be proved that the Election of grace
belongs to the children of believers, it cannot be proved that the Covenant of
grace belongs to them by virtue of these promises.

. 5. It is not in Gods church, like other kingdoms.
I Now return to your Sermon. You tell us thus: As it is in other kingdoms,
corporations and families; the children of all subjects born in a kingdom, are
born that Princes subjects: where the father is a freeman, the child is not
born a slave: where any are bought to be servants, their children born in their
masters house, are born his servants. Thus it is by the Laws of almost all
nations, and thus has the Lord ordained it shall be in his kingdom and
family: the children follow the Covenant-condition of their parents; if he take
a father into his covenant, he takes the children in with him; if he reject the
parents out of the covenant, the children are east out with them.

This passage I might have passed over, as containing nothing but dictates; Yet
I think it necessary to observe, 1. That you do very carnally imagine the
Church of God to be like Civil corporations, as if persons were admitted to it
by birth, whereas in this all is done by free election of grace, and according
to Gods appointment: nor is God tied, or does tie himself in the erecting and
propagating his Church, to any such carnal respects, as descent from men.
Christianity is no man's birthright; The Apostle knew not that God had so by
promise, or other engagement bound himself, but he was free, as he said to
Moses after the promise made to Abraham, to have mercy on whom he would, Romans
9.15. Yea, to conceive that it is in Gods Church, as in other Kingdoms, and
after the laws of Nations, is a seminary of dangerous superstitions and errors.
Dr. Rainolds, in his Conference with Heart, has showed, that hence arose the
frame of government by P^triarchs, Metropolitans, etc. And is not this the very
reason of Invocation of Saints, that I mention not more of the like kind? 2.
When you say, if he take a father into his covenant, he takes the children in
with him; If he reject the parents out of covenant, the children are cast out
with them. If you mean this taking in, and casting out, in respect of election
and reprobation, it is not true, neither if you mean it of the Covenant of
grace, for that is congruous to election, and reprobation. Nor is it true in
respect of outward Ordinances; the father may be baptized, hear the Word,
Cotton, Way of the Churches of Christ in N.E. c. 4.. 6. Infants cannot claim
right unto baptism, but in the right of one of their parents, or both. Where
neither of the parents can claim right to the ^ords supper, there their Infants
cann^t claim right to Baptism. A^ therefore we do not receive an he^^hen to
the fellowship of the supper, nor their seed to Baptism, so neither dare we
receive an excommunicate person (who is to us an heathen) to the Lords supper,
or his children to Baptism, But after, ^ 7. 2. Or where either of the parents
have made such profession; Or it may be consi^ered al^o, whether the children
may not be baptized. where either the grandfather or grandmother have made
such prof^ssion, and are still living to undertake for the Christian education
of the child. For it may be co^ceived where there is a stipulation of the
Covenant on Gods part, an^ a restipulation on ma^s part, there may be an
obligation of the Covenant on both parts. Genesis 17.7. Or if these sail, what
hinders but that if the par^nts will de^^gne their infant to be educated in
the house of any go^ly member of the Church, the child may be lawfully baptized
in the right of its household governor, according to the proportion of the
Law, Gen 17.12, 13.
and not the child; and on the contrary, the father may be deprived, and the
child may enjoy them. Nor is it true in respect of Ecclesiastical censures;
the father may be excommunicated, and the son in the Church, and on the
contrary. And about that which you say, there is no certainty in the
Paedobaptists determination. Rutherford [The due right of Presbytery, p. 259.]
says, The children of Papists, and excommunicate Protestants, which are borne
within our visible Church, are baptized, if their forefathers have been sound
in the faith. But others will deny it. But it is true as well of Paedobaptists,
as of Anabaptists, that like waves of the Sea they beat one agninst another.

You tell us, That it was without question in the time of the Jews, Genesis 17.9.
And when any of any other Nation, though a Canaanite, or Hittite, acknowledged
Abraham's God to be their God, they and their children came into covenant
together.

That when Parents were circumcised, the Children were to be circumcised, is
without question, Gods command is manifest; Whether this make any thing for
baptizing Infants, is to be considered in its place. But that which you say, It
was in the time of the Jews, if God did reject the parents out of the covenant,
the children were cast out with them; is not true. Parents might be Idolaters,
Apostates from Judaisme, draw up the foreskin again, and yet the children were
to be circumcised. But in all this there is no Argument.

. 6. Of the Texts, which are, Act. 2. 38, 39. Luk 19.9.
THe first Text you dwell upon, is that, Act. 2.38, 39. and thus you speak. And
so it continues still, though the Anabaptists boldly deny it, Acts 2.38.39.
When Peter exhorted his hearers, who were pricked in their hearts, to repent,
and to be baptized for the remission of sins, he uses an argument to persuade
them, taken from the benefit which should come to their posterity; For, the
promise (says he) is to you and to your children, and to all that are afar
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call: if once they obey the call of
God, as Abraham did, the promise was made to them and their children. Whether
they who obey this call, were the present Jews to whom he spoke, or were afar
off: whether by afar off, you will mean the Gentiles, who as yet worshipped
afar off, or the Jews, or any who were yet unborn, and so were afar off in
time, or whether they dwelt in the remotest parts of the world, and so were
afar off in place; The argument holds good to the end of the world, Repent and
be baptized for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, for
the promise is made to you and your children, they shall be made free of Gods
city according to Abraham's copy. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed.

It is a very irksome thing to Readers, and especially to Answerers, when they
that handle a controversy, give a text for their assertion, and make a
paraphrase of it, but show not how they conclude from it, by which means the
enemy is more hardly found then vanquished. I wish, if ever you write any more
in this kind, you would distinctly expound, and then frame your arguments out
of the text you produce: for the present I shall devorare taedium, swallow
down the tediousnes of this defect as well as I can. You do not distinctly
tell us what that promise was, only I gather it is, that which you after
express, calling it "Abraham's copy, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed, But then you do not distinctly tell us, under which part you comprehend
the promise to them, whether under the first part, I will be thy God, or under
the second, I will be the God of thy seed. It may seem you thus paralleled
them: I will be thy God, with, the promise is unto you; and, the God of thy
seed, with that, the promise is to your children. But I must see better proof
then yet I have seen, before I assent to this construction, I will be thy God,
that is, of every believer: though the Author or infants b^p^izing proved
lawful by scriptures, page 4. s^ith, It is plain and manifest by the
Gramaticall construction of this promise* I profess that I neither know rule
in Grammar, Logic, or Divinity for that interpretation, and yet I think all
the strength of your proof lies in this imagined parallelisme. Nor do you
tell us of what thing this promise was, which you parallel with Abraham's copy,
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed; whether it was a promise of saving
graces, or outward privileges; Only that which you bring in of Zaccheus to
interpret it, let him profess the faith of Christ, and the covenant of
salvation comes to his house,seems to import that you conceive the meaning
thus; if you once obey the call of God as Abraham did, the promise of salvation
is to you and your children: and since you answer the second objection, which
you call a shift, by rejecting the limiting of [ to you and your children] with
those words [ as many as the Lord shall call] the sense must be this: The
promise of salvation is to you and your children, whether the Lord our God call
them or not. But this proposition I know you will not stand to, though as you
handle the matter, this is made the Apostles assertion. But it may be you mean
otherwise, thus: If you once obey the call of God, as Abraham did, the promise
of outward church priviledges, that is, to be members of the visible Church,
partakers of Baptism, etc. is to you and your children. Now what an uncouth
reason is by this made in the Apostles speech, that if they did repent, and
were baptized, the promise should be made good to them and to their children,
(I use your own words, expressing what you conceive the strength of the
argument lies in) that you and they shall be members of the visible church,
partakers of baptism, etc. So that the Apostle is made to say thus: If you will
repent and be baptized, the promise is to you and your children, that you and
they shall be baptized. What I conceive is the meaning, I will show afterward:
in the mean time, because (though on the by) you allege that Text, which Mr.
Tho. Goodwin also at Bow in Cheapside urged and insisted on for this purpose, I
shall by the way examine what you say. You say, Let Zaccheus the Publican once
receive Christ himself, be he a Gentile, as some think he was, be he a great
sinner, esteemed as an heathen, as we all know he was; let him profess the
faith of Christ, and the covenant of salvation comes to his, for now he is made
a son of Abraham, i.e. Abraham's promise now reaches him. Upon which I note, 1.
Though it be of little moment, whether he were a Gentile or no, yet I conceive
it more likely he was a Jew, partly because his name is more like the hebrew,
than the greek or latin; and partly because if he had been a Gentile, Christ
had plainly discovered the calling of the Gentiles, which he did not till
afterward: and it would have caused in likelihood greater offense in them to
hear a Gentile called a son of Abraham, who already murmured that he was gone
to be a guest to a man that was a sinner. 2. You thus expound [ a son of
Abraham.] that is, Abraham's promise now reaches him. But Bez^ more truly,
Filium esse Abrahae nihil aliud declarat quam gratis electum esse, Romans 9.8. Et
vestigiis fidei Abrahae insistere, Romans 4.12, Et opera Abrahae facere, Joh,
8.39. Ex quibus demum recte colligitur certa futurae salutis expectatio, Romans
8.29. 3. You only express [ this house] by [ his] as if you would have it
conceived that salvation came only to his children by his believing, whereas
Mr. Tho. Goodwin (if my memory deceive me not) comprehended the whole family
under the term house, discoursing thereupon that a houshold-Church was prima
Ecclesia, the first Church, which I marvailed to hear from him, as conceiving
it to overthrow the way of Government they call the Church Way, which is mainly
grounded on this, that the first Church (as Parker held) is a single
congregation out of many families, and is primasedes potestatis Ecclesiasticae,
the first seat of Ecclesi^sticall power. But I know no reason why, when it is
said, Salvation is come to this house, it should be stretched any further then
Zaccheus his person, in that salvation was come to him, salvation was come to
his house, and the whole Narration favors this Exposition, and Beza says that
Theophylact, and some others understand by house Zaccheus himself. I omit the
conceit of Erasmus, and Camerarius, as if (...) thee, did refer to (...) house,
for I think with Beza, it is absurd to say, This house is a son of Abraham. 4.
Although it be true, that (...) is often a Causall particle, yet it is true,
that it is sometimes a restrictive particle, as Acts 2.45. and Acts 4.35. and
therefore may be rendered by quatenus as, or in quantum in as much, or secundum
quod, according to what, as well as by eo quod quoniam, or quandoquidem,
because, or forasmuch. 5. In your paraphrase, you put instead of salvation, The
Covenant of salvation, which is not right, what ever Author you may follow
herein. Now let it be considered what an erroneous inference is made, by
expounding it of all the posterity or family, and making the particle Causall,
as if his believing alone did bring salvation to his house or posterity; from
whence this may be gathered, a man's whole house or posterity may be saved
barely by his believing, and you will see a necessity to make (...) a
restrictive particle, and to expound this house of Zacheus, his family only, in
reference to his person. And so what you take in by the way for the credit of
your conclusion, from Luke 19.9. is answered by showing the faultiness of your
paraphrase.

But you return to the Text, Acts 2.38 39. You say, neither can the evidence
of the place be eluded, by saying the promise here meant i^ ^f the
extrao^dinary gifts of the holy Ghost, to speak with tongues, etc. for we all
kn^w, that all who then believed and were baptized, did not receive those
extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost; and beside, this argument remained still
in force, to be used to the end of the world, who ever believes and is
baptized, shall receive remission of sins, and the gift of the holy Ghost,
which was not true, if by the holy Ghost was meant only those extraordinary
gifts.

Though I do not so expound the words, [ the promise is to you and your
children] of the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, yet the words next
before, and that which is before, verse 33.17, 18. of the same chapter might
very well induce men to conceive that this is the promise of which Peter meant,
verse 39. nor do I conceive your reasons sufficient to overthrow it: For what
though all who then, believed and were baptized, did not receive those
extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, yet Peter might assure them that it
should be so for the future, to them, their children, and all that are afar
off, as many as the Lord should call: though I do not say, the thing was true
in this sense; I only say it might be so true, notwithstanding your argument.
And whereas you say this argument remains still in force to be used to the end
of the world, Who ever believes and is baptized, shall receive remission of
sins, and the gift of the holy Ghost. Neither does this follow from the
exposition of the words, verse 39. by the words, verse 38. of receiving the
gift of the holy G^ost: For there is nothing in the text to prove that this
argument still remains in force as you speak, since it might be only a
particular benefit to them on their repenting, and baptism, for ought you can
infer from the text.

You go on. Nor secondly, can it be avoided by that shift of others who
interpret it thus, to you and your children, as many of them as the Lord shall
call, that is (say they) whether your selves or your children, or any other
whom the Lord shall call, if they repent and be baptized, they shall receive
the gift of the holy Ghost. If you put in stead of, [ they shall receive the
gift of the holy Ghost,] these words [ the promise is to you and them,] it is
no shift, but the genuine and necessary explication of the text. For let the
promise be what ever you can make it, you must put in that limitation if you
will have it true. If the promise be of saving graces, if of Christ sent, if of
the outward ordinances of baptism, etc. If of the holy Ghost in ^xtraordinarie
gifts; it is none of these ways true without that limitation. For neither God
promised saving graces, nor outward ordinances, nor extraordinary gifts, nor
sent Christ to them, their children, or all that are afar off without calling
them and every of them. But you tell us, it is plain, the strength of the
argument lies in this, That if they did repent, and were baptized, the promise
should be made good to them and to their children: and what comfortable
argument can this be taken from respect to their children, if the Apostle must
be interpreted as these men would have him, viz. you and your children h^ve
hitherto been an holy seed, but now, if you believe in Christ your selves, your
children shall be in no better condition then the rest of the Pagan world,
strangers from the Covenant of God; but if afterward any of them, or any of the
heathen, shall for their parts believe and be baptized, their particular
persons shall be taken into covenant, but their children still left out; had
this think you been a comfortable argument to persuade them to come in, in
relation to the good of their children after them.

You suppose here, that the Apostle used this argument only in relation to the
good of their children, whereas the maine matter was concerning themselves to
erect them, who being told that they had crucified Jesus who was both Lord and
Christ, verse 36. and had said, Matthew. 27.25. His blood be upon us and our
children, were pricked in their hearts, and said to Peter and the rest of the
Apostles, Men and brethren what shall we do? and was it not a comfortable
argument for men in that case to be told, that notwithstanding all this, the
promise of Christ, and remission of sins by him, was yet to them and their
children, on whom they had wished Christ's blood to be, and to all the Jews
that dwelt afar off in the di^persion, as many as the Lord should call: and a
great incitement to repent and be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus for
the remission of sins? However you conceive now, sure if your soul had been
in their souls stead, you would have conceived it a very comfortable speech in
this sens^ that I now give. As for that witless descant you put on your
adversaries, I know not whether it be their meaning or not, sure I am no such
thing follows on the applying the restriction in the end of the verse, to them,
their children, and all that are afar off. And that which you would burden
your adversaries tenent with, as if they put beleivers infants out of the
covenant, into the condition of Pagans children, it is a coccysme answered
before, and therefore I may well let it pass in this place.

You add, The plain strength of the argument is, God has now remembered his
Covenant to Abraham in sending that blessed seed, in whom he promised to be the
God of him and his seed: do not you by your unbelief deprive your selves and
your posterity of so excellent a gift.

In this passage I think you hit the mark, it is the very interpretation I
gave in the reasons of my doubts before mentioned, in answering the argu^ent
from this text: only the alle^dging the promise, Genesis 17.7 (...) that
expression, do not you by your unbelief deprive your posterity of so
excellent a gift; have a little relish of your interpretation of the promise
concerning the natural seed of believers: But letting that pass, in the maine
you expound it rightly. The promise is to you and your children; that is,
Annot. on the Bible, edit. 1645. on Acts 2.36. The promise is unto you] Christ
is promised both to Jews and Gentiles: but the Jews had the first place.
God has now remembered his Covenant to Ab^aham in sending that blessed seed,
in whom he prom^sed to be the God of Abraham and his seed, and the sense is
plain. The promise which is made to Abraham is now fulfilled in sending Christ
to you and your children, and to all that are afar off, as many as the Lord
our God shall call, that they might be turned from their iniquity, and
baptized in his name for the remission of their sins; And this agrees with
the Apostles exhortation to the same purpose; Acts 3.25.26. Ye are the children
of the Prophets and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying
unto Abraham, and in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed,
unto you first God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you in
turning away every one of you from his iniquities. And Acts 13.32, 33. And we
declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the
fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us their ch^ldren, in that he has
raised up Jesus again.

You add. And except in relation to the covenant, there was no occasion to
name their children; it had been sufficient to have said, a promise is made to
as many as the Lord shall call. Though I deny not their children are mentioned
in relation to the covenant in the sense I have given, or rather in allusion to
the form of expressions in the covenant, and predictions of the Prophets: yet
there was other occasion, to wit, their imprecation, Matthew. 27.25. and
especially because Christ was, as it is Acts 3.26. first sent to the Jews and
their children, and to be offered first to them, as it is Acts 13.46. But it
was not to intimate that which you would gather, that the promise is such to
them, if they did believe that their children, even their infants upon their
fathers faith, whether the children were called or not, were taken into the
covenant, either of saving graces, or visible church membership; which you
should have proved, but never will prove out of this Scripture. But taking your
Hypothesis, that these to whom Peter speaks were within the covenant made to
Abraham, and cirumcised rightly, and yet the Apostle requires these to repent,
before they are to be baptized; the Antipaedobaptists have hence a good argument
against baptizing infants, because Peter required of such as were in the
covenant, repentance before Baptism. I pass on to the next proof you bring for
your Conclusion.

. 7. Of the text. Romans 11.16.
YOu say, as plain it is out of the 11. Romans 16 etc. where the apostles scope is
to show, that we Gentiles have now the same graffing into the true olive which
the Jews formerly had; and our present graffing in, is answerable to their
present casting out, and their taking in in the latter end of the world, shall
be the same graffing in (though more gloriously) as ours is now. Now all know
that when they were taken in, they and their children were taken in; when they
were broken off, they and their children were broken off; when they shall be
taken in, in the latter end of the world, they and their children shall be
taken in; and that because the root is holy, that is, Gods covenant with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, extends yet unto them, when their unbelief shall be
taken away. The root being like Nebuchadnezars tree, the tree hewn down, and
the root bound with a hand of iron, until seven times were passed over it, and
then the bands should be broken, and the root should spring, and the tree
should grow again: So their present nation like this tree is cut down, and this
holy root the covenant made with their forefathers is suspended, bound with an
iron bar of unbelief, blindness being come upon them until the fulness of the
Gentiles were come in, and then all Israel shall be saved. And mark, that in
all this discourse, the holiness of the branches there spoken of, is not meant
of a personal inherent holiness, but a derivative holiness; a holiness derived to
them from their ancestors, the first fruit is holy, the lump holy, the root
holy, the branches holy, that is, the fathers holy, accepted in covenant with
God; the children beloved for their fathers sake, and when the vail of unbelief
shall be taken away, the children and their posterity shall be taken in again,
because beloved for their fathers sakes. Now then if our graffing in be
answerable to theirs, in all, or any of these three particulars, we and our
children are graffed in together.

Your argument needs a swimmer of Delos to bring it out of the deep. I will
dive as deep as I can to fetch it up; the thing, it seems, you would prove, is,
that we and our children are gr^ffed in together; but the words are
Metaphorical, and therefore obscure, they may be true in a sense, and yet not
for your purpose. The insition you speak of may be either into the visible, or
invsible church; the graffing in, may be either by faith, or by profession of
faith, or by some outward ordinance. Children may be either grown men or
infants, the graffing in may be either certain, or probable; certain, either by
reason of election, covenant of grace made by them, or natural birth, being
children of believers; probable, as being likely, either because fr^quently, or
for the the most part it happens so, though not necessary and so not certain.
The thing that is to be proved is, that all the infants of every believer are
in the covenant of free grace in Christ and by virtue thereof to be baptized
into the communion of the v^sible church: now it may be granted that infants of
believers are frequently, or for the most part under the election and covenant
of grace (which whether it be so or not, no mere man can t^l) and so in the
visible church and yet it not follow that every infant of a believer, in as much
as he is the child of a beli^ver, is under the covenant of grace, and therefore
by baptism is to be admitted into the visible church; now let it be never so
prob^ble, that God continues his election in the posterity of b^lievers and
accordingly has promised to be their God in his covenant of grace, yet if this
be the rule of baptizing children of beleivers, no other infants are to b^
baptized, but such as are thus: the practice must agree with the rul^; and so
not all infants of believers are to be baptized, but the elect in the covenant
of grace. If it be said; but we are to judge all to be elected, and in the
covenant of grace, till the contrary appears. I answer, that we are not to
judge all to be ^l^cted, or in the covenant of grace; because we have Gods
declaration of his mind to the contrary, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. and all experience
proves the contrary to be tru^; nor is the administration of an outward
ordinance instituted by God, according to such a rule as is not possible to be
known, but according to that which is manifest to the ministers of it; and
therefore since God conceals his purpose of election, and the covenant of grace,
which is congruous to it in respect of the persons elected; it is certain God
would not have this the rule according to which outward ordinances are to be
administered, because such persons are in the election and covenant of grace and
not others. You say, our graffing in is answerable to the Jews, and their
infants were graffed in by circumcision, therefore ours are to be graffed in by
baptism. But in good sadness, do you think the Apostle here means by
graffing in, baptizing, or circumcision, or insition by an outward ordinance:
if that were the me^ning, then breaking off must be meant of uncircumcising or
unb^ptizing. The whole context sp^aks of election of some, and rejection of
others; of the breaking off by u^beliefe, and the standing by faith, and your
self seem to understand the phrase so, when you say, page 43. to cut
miserable man off from the wild olive, and graffe him into the true olive. The
ingraffing, to me, is meant of the invisible church by election and faith;
which invisible church was first amongst the Jews, and therefore called the
olive, out of Abraham the root, who is therefore said to bear them. And
because Abraham had a double capacity, one of a natural father, and another
of the father of the faithful, in respect of the former c^pacitie, some are
called branches according to nature, others, wild olives by nature, yet
graffed in by faith; and when it is said that some of the natural branches
were broken off, the meaning is not that some of the branches in the invisible
church may be broken off: but as when our Savior Christ says, using the same
similitude, Joh. 15.2. Every branch in me not bearing fruit, he takes away;
The meaning is not, that any branch truly in him c^uld be fruitless, or taken
away; but he calls that a branch in him which was only so in appearance. So
the Apostle speaking of branches broken off, means it not of such as were
truly so, but in appearance: For similitudes do not run with four feet; but
vary in some things. Now if this be the meaning of your words, that the
insition of the Gentiles is the same with the Jews, and the insition is meant
of ingraffing by faith into the inv^sible church; it only proves this, that
now bele^v^rs of Gentiles are by faith in the church of the elect, as the
Jews: but neither the believing Jews Infants were in the covenant of grace,
because their children; nor are our children. But let us consider the three
particulars you speak of, that we may examine whether there be any show of an
argument for your purpose in this text. You say, as plain it is out of the
eleventh of Romans 16, etc. where the Apostles scope is, to show, that we
Gentiles have now the same graffing into the true olive which the Jews formerly
had, and our present graffing in is answerable to their present casting out;
and their taking in, in the latter end of the world, shall be the same graffing
in (though more gloriously) as ours is now.

The Apostles scope in the whole chapter is plain to answer that question, v.
1. Has God cast away his people? which he does, 1. by showing for the present
in himself, and others, perhaps unknown, That God had then a remnant
according to the election of grace. 2. For the future from ver. 11. to the end,
that he intends a calling of all Israel when the fullness of the Gentiles shall
come in, and ver. 16. is one argument to prove it. It is not the scope of the
Apostle, as you say, To show that the Gentiles have now the same graffing into
the true Olive, which the Jews formerly had; but to prove that the Jews,
notwithstanding their present defraction, shall be graffed into their own
Olive. But for the thing it self. You say, That the Gentiles have now the same
graffing into the true Olive which the Jews formerly had. But you must remember
your own distinction, page 10. of the substance of the Covenant, and the
administration of it: It is certain, that in respect of the substance of the
Covenant, we have the same graffing into the Olive, the Church of the
faithful, of which Abraham is the root, that the Jews had. We by faith are
partakers of the root and fatness of the Olive tree. ver. 17. or in plainer
terms, as the Apostle ^l^gantly, Ephesians. 3.6. that the Gentiles should be
(...), Fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in
Christ through the Gospel. In respect of which all believing Gentiles are
Abraham's seed, the Israel of God, one in Christ Jesus. But if you mean it of
the outward administration of this ingraffing by Circumcision, Baptism, etc.
nothing is more false. For indeed the outward administration is utte^ly taken
away, as separating the Jews from the Gentiles, of very purpose, that the
enmity betwixt Jews and Gentiles may be removed, and they made one in Christ by
his death, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. and if you mean this, when you say, we have the
same graffing in with the Jews (which your whole arguing tends to, and your
expression in those words [ for these outward ^ispensations] import you mean
it) you evacuate the blood of Christ in this particular. You say, Our present
graffing in, is answerable to their present casting out. It is true, our
present graffing in is an^w^rable to their (or rather for their) casting out;
that is, God would supply in his Olive tree the Church, the casting away of the
Jews, by the calling of the Gentiles, so much the Apostle says, v. 17. Thou
being a wild Olive, (...), that is, in ramorum defr^ctorum locum, into the
place of the branches broken off, as rightly Beza; if you mean it in this
sense, I grant it. You add, And their taking in (though more gloriously) as
ours is now. It is true, their taking in will be by faith, as ours is now;
concerning other particulars; as I doubt not but it will be more gloriously, as
you say, so for the manner, I must confess I am at a stand. I look upon it as
a mystery, as the Apostle calls it, Romans 11.25. You go on. Now all know that
when they were taken in, they and their children were taken in; when they were
broken off* they and their children were broken off; when they shall be taken
in in the latter end of the world, they and their children shall be taken in. I
grant it, they were taken in, and broken off togeth^r, in respect of Gods
election and reprobation, and when they shall be taken in, in the latter end of
the world, they and their children shall be taken in. Yea, I think, that as at
the calling of the Gentiles there was a fuller taking in of the children of the
Gentiles, then ever was of the children of the Jews before Ch^ists coming,
according to that Heb. 8.11. So at the calling of the J^ws, there shall be a
more full taking in of the children of the J^ws, then is now of the Gentiles,
according to that, Romans 11.26. and so all Israel shall be saved. But all this
proves not, that God would have either all Infants of believers counted his as
elect persons, or in the Covenant of grace in Christ, or in the face of the
visible Church admitted to baptism: which was to be proved by you.

You go on. And that because the root is holy, that is, Gods Covenant with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob extends yet unto them, when their unbelief shall be
taken away; and then after an illustration from Nebuchadnezzars dream, Dan.
4.14, 15. you say of the Jews, their present Nation like this tree is cut down,
and this holy root, the Covenant made with their forefathers is suspended,
bound with an Iron bar of unbelief, blindness being come upon them till the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and then all Israel shall be saved. In
this passage you somewhat alter the Apostles resemblance, who does not make the
Jewish Nation to answer the tree, but the branches, nor does he say the tree is
cut down, but the branches broken off; and here you make the Covenant the root,
but a little after your words import, when you say, a holiness derived from
their ancestors, etc. that by the root you mean their Ancestors. And you say,
The Covenant made with their forefathers is suspended, which in some sense may
be true, that is thus, the effects of Gods love to Israel are for the present
suspended from those generations, and so in our apprehension the Covenant is
suspended; but in exact speech it cannot be true, since Gods Covenant according
to his intention and meaning, cannot be suspended or stayed, but does always
take effect irresistibly. In that wherein you alter the resemblance of the
Apostle, by putting in the cutting down of the tree, instead of breaking off
the branches, you much pervert the Apostles meaning; who makes the tree, that
is, the Church of believers, still standing, and some branches broken off, and
others graffed in. And for that of the root, it is true, it is variously
conceived by Interpreters, some understanding with you the Covenant, some
Christ, some Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and some Abraham only, which last I
conceive to be genuine, for the expressions of some branches (...), according,
to nature, So also the new Annot. on Romans 11.16
and others (...) besides nature: Some natural, some ingraffed, our not
bearing the root, but the root bearing us, are plain evidences to me, that by
the root, Abraham is meant; Nor know I how to make the resemblance right, but
by this Exposition. Now to say, the root, that is, Abraham, is bound with an
Iron band of unbelief, cannot have any handsome construction. But you tell us:
And mark that in all this discourse, the holiness of the branches there
spoken of, is not meant of a personal inherent holiness. Then Master Thomas
Goodwin is answered, who in urging 1 Cor. 7.14. for Paedobaptisme, says, in
the New Testament, there is no other holiness spoken of, but personal or
real by regeneration, about the which he challenged all the world to show the
contrary: whereas here is according to you, a holiness which is not personal,
or as Mr. Blake speaks, qualitative, and inherent. But to go on. You say, But
a derivative holiness, a holiness derived to them from their Ancestors, the
first fruit is holy, the lump holy, the root holy, the branches holy; that is,
the Fathers holy, accepted in Covenant with God, the children beloved for their
Fathers sake; and when the vail of unbelief shall be taken away, the children
and their posterity shall be taken in again, because beloved for their fathers
sake: Now then, if our graffing in be answerable to theirs in any, or all of
these three particulars, we and our children are graffed in together. Object.
But here is no mention of our Infants graffing in. Answ. We must not teach the
Lord to speak, but with reverence search out his meaning; there is no mention
made of the casting out of the Jewish Infants, neither here, nor elsewhere,
when he speaks of taking away the Kingdom of God from them, and giving it to
the Gentiles, who would bring forth fruit; no mention of the Infants of the
one, or of the other, but the one and the other, for these outward
dispensations are comprehended in their parents, as the branches in the root,
the infants of the godly in their parents according to the tenor of his mercy,
the infants of the wicked in their parents according to the tenor of his
justice.

There are sundry things in this passage you would have to be marked, that
deserve indeed to be marked, but with an Obeliske, not with an Asteriske, as 1.
That you oppose personal inherent holiness to derivative, as inconsistent.
The truth is, the holiness the Apostle speaks of, is, first in respect of Gods
Election, holiness personal and inherent, in Gods intention, He has chosen
us that we should be holy, Ephesians. 1.4. Secondly, it is also holiness
derivative, or descending, not from any Ancestors, but from Abraham, not
barely, as a natural father, but as a spiritual father, or Father of the
faithful, and so derived from the Covenant of grace, which passed in his name
to him and his seed. And lastly, it shall be inherent actually, being
communicated by the Spirit of God, when they shall be actually called. But this
is such a kind of holiness, as is more then you mean, to wit, not only an
adherent, or relative holiness, which they have by enjoying outward
Ordinances, but also inherent, by faith, whereby they a^e holy, as the root,
that is, Abraham the father of the faithful.

2. Whereas you make it the case of any believers to be a holy root, to their
posterity, especially in the following words, when you say, The infants both of
the Jews, and Gentiles for these outward dispensations, are comprehended in
their parents, as the branch in the root, the infants of the godly in their
parents, according to the tenor of his mercy, the infants of the wicked in
their parents, according to the tenor of his justice: Master Blake page 8. more
plainly, The branches of Ancestors are roots of posterity, being made a holy
branch in reference to their issue, they now become a holy root. This is not
true, for in the Apostles resemblance, Abraham only is a holy root, or at most,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in whose names the Covenant runs. No other man,
though a believer, is the father of the faithful, but Abraham: And the body of
believers is compared to the Olive, and each believer to a branch, that
partakes of the root and fatness of the Olive tree, not in outward
dispensations only, as you speak, but also in saving graces, which is mainly
here intended. I remember Master Thomas Goodwin, who has handled this matter
of Pae^obaptisme, by spinning out similitudes and conjectures (fit indeed for
the common people, that are more taken with resemblances then Syllogismes)
rather then with close arguments: endeavored to infer a kind of promise of
deriving holiness from believers to their posterity, out of the similitude of
an Olive, and its branches, compared with Psalm. 128.3. etc. but it is dangerous
to strain similitudes beyond that likeness the Holy Ghost makes. It is a
tedious thing to Auditors that look for arguments, to be deluded with
similitudes and conjectures.

3. Whereas you alluding to the words of the Apostle, v. 28. that the Jews were
beloved for their fathers sake, carry it, as if this were true of any believing
parents; the Apostle means it of those fathers only, in whose names the
Covenant was made, especially Abraham called the friend of God, Jam. 2.23. and
the father of the faithful, Romans 4.11. and in reference to the promises made
to them, they are beloved, and therefore it is added, ver. 29. For the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance.

Lastly, you say That the infants of the wicked for these outward
dispensations, are comprehended in their parents, according to the tenor of
Gods justice. I entreat you to consider, Arminius l. 1. Antiperk. p 3. Sect. 6.
Infantes in parentibu^, avis, abavis atavis, tritavis Evangelii gratiam
repudiarunt, quo actu meruerunt ut a Deo desererentur velim enim mihi, etc.

Perpetua enim est foederis Dei ratio quod filii in parentib^^ comprehendantur
and censeantur. Cui opponit Tuissus ibidem. Nec us piam in sacris literis
significatur Deum ejusmodi foedus cum homine lapso pepigisse ut si crederet,
adipisceretur gratiam and sibi and posteris; contra si non crederet and sibi
and posteris suis gratiam amitteret; cujusmodifoedus sub condition obedientiae
cum Adamo initum fuisse omnes Theologi agnoscunt.


whether this speech do not symbolize with the tenet of Arminius in his
Antiperkins on the fourth Crimination, and in the end of his Treatise, where he
makes the cause, why the posterity of some people have not the Gospel, to be
their forefathers fault in refusing it. Against which you may see what Doctor
Twisse opposes in both places, and Moulin in his Anatomy of Arminianisme, cap.
9. And thus it may appear, that you have very much darkened this illustrious
Scripture, by applying that holiness and insition to outward dispensations
only in the visible Church, which is meant of saving graces into the invisible
by faith, and made every believer a like root to his posterity, with Abraham to
his seed.

I Am now come to your principal hold, you say.. 8. Of the Text 1 Cor. 7.14.
And yet plainer (if plainer may be) is the speech of the Apostle in 1. Cor.
7.14. The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving
wife is sanctified by the husband, else were your children unclean, but now
they are holy.

By the way. Because you acknowledge in the Margin page 24. that "signifies to,
as well as in, and you conceive it may be here read [in] or [to] as well as
[by] and though our translators following the vulgar read [ by] yet Beza
dislikes that reading; it might have done well in the citing of this text by
you, to have given some hint of that variety. But to follow you. You say, the
plain scope and meaning thereof is this. The believing Corinthians amongst
other cases of Conscience, which they had sent to the Apostle for his
resolution of, had written this for one, whether it were lawful for them who
were converted, still to retain their Infidel wives or husbands. You do
rightly here express the scope of the Apostle, but you make another scope,
page 25. when you say; We must attend the Apostles scope, which is to show,
that the children would be unholy, if the faith or believership of one of the
parents could not remove the bar, which lies in the other being an
unbeliever, against the producing a holy seed; which I shall show in its place,
not to be the scope of the place; but only this which you first give. You then
say, their doubt seems to arise from the Law of God, which was in force to the
Nation of the Jews, God had not only forbidden such marriages to his people;
but in Ezra's time they put away, not only their wives: but all the children
that were borne of them, as not belonging to the Commonwealth of Israel: and
it was done according to the Law, and that Law was not a particular Edict which
they did agree upon but according to the standing Law of Moses, which that word
there used signifies, and in Nehemiahs time the children who were born of such
marriages were accounted a mungrell kind, whom Nehemiah cursed: Now hereupon
these Corinthians doubted whether their children as well as their wives, were
not to be accounted unclean: and so to be put away according to th^se examples.
You declared rightly the scope before: but the doubt is not rightly put by you.
The Corinthians had no doubt whether their children were unclean, and to be put
away; for the Apostle, argues from the uncleanes^e of their children, as a
thing that appeared absurd to them, they took it as a common received
principle, that their childr^n were holy, as rightly Master Thomas Goodwin at
Bow-church. And for the occasion of the doubt, though I deny not, but the
Corinthians might know that fact of Ezra 9. and 10. yet that the reading of it
was the cause of their doubt I see no evidence o^ likelihood, though Master
Blake page 12. takes it as granted, joining with the relations, Ezra 9. and 10.
that resolution, Hag. 2.12.13. as the occasion of the doubt, and Mr. Thomas
Goodwin seemed confident of it that it could be no other upon a supposed
agreement of matter and phrase. But for matter I see very little agreement, the
cases being f^r different of two persons not under the Law ma^rying in
unbelief, and of two persons under the Law, the one a Jew by prof^ssion, the
other a stranger. And for phrases, exc^pt the word [ holy] I observe no other
phrase used in Ezra which is used by the Apost^e; not the phrase of unbelieving
husband or wife, or sanctified to, in, or by the wife or husband, nor the
phrase of unclean children, Tertul. lib. 2. ad uxorem. cap. 3.

Fideles Gentilium matrimonia subcuntes stupri reos esse constat, and arcendos
ab omni communicatione fraternitatis ex literis Apostoli dicentis cum ejusmodi
n^c cibum sumendum.


and for the term [ holy] the Apostle does not use the phrase [ holy seed] as
Ezra does. In my apprersion it is far more likely that ^^e ^oubt arose from
the Epistle he wrote before to them mentioned, 1 Cor. 5.9. (...), ^.10 Not to
keep company with Fornicators or Idolaters, which might occasion the question,
whether they were then to continue with their unbelieving Yoke fellows?

But let us examine the Apostles resolution, you say. To which the Apostle
answers, no, they were not to be put away, upon what special, reason soever,
that law was in force to the Jews, believing Ch^^stians were not in that
condition. The unbelieving wife was sanctified in the believing husband, quoad
hoc, so far as to bring forth a holy seed. Were it with them, as when both of
them were unbelievers, so that neither of them had a prerogative to entitle
their children to the covenant of grace, their children would be an unclean
progeny: Or were the children to b^ reckoned in the condition of the worser
parent, so that the unbeliever could contribute more to Paganism, than the
believer to Christianity, it were so likewise. But the case is otherwise; the
believing husband has by Gods ordinance a sanctified use of his unbeli^ving
wife; so as by Gods special promise made to believers and their seed, they
were invested in, and to the most spiritual end of marriage, the continuance
of a holy seed, wherein the Church is to be propagated to the worlds end. And
the case is he^e in relation to posterity, for spiritual privileges, as in
other marriages for civil privileges: as, suppose a Prince or Noble man marry
with a woman of base and mean birth, though in general it be true, that the
children of those that be base, are born base, as well as the children of
Nobles are bor^ noble, yet here the issue has h^nour from the father, and it
is not accounted base by the baseness of the mother. This I take to be the plain
meaning of the Apostles answer.

And must your Readers, think you, take it on your word, without showing that
the terms are so used else where, or connection of the words, or the analysis
of the text lead you to it? But it is necessary that I discuss this matter
more fully, then by returning a bare denial, to a bare affirmation. Concerning
the answer verse 13. there is no difference, all the diff^rence is concerning
the reason of the resolution delivered ver. 14. and the meaning of it. There
are these terms doubtful. 1. What is meant by (...), in the wife; and (...) in
the husband. 2. What is meant by (...) is sanctified. 3. What is meant by (...)
unclean. 4. What by (...) holy. It is agreed, that (...) may be read, in, to,
or by. It is agreed, that to be sanctified, has many senses, and that the
sense wherein sanctification is taken for renovation of mind, is not here
meant, for so an unbeliever is not sanctified, and the speech is in sensu
composito, in a compound sense to be understood: An unbeliever, though an
unbeliever, is sanctified. Nor is it true of any kind of Ceremonial
sanctification, or sanctification for enjoying religious ordinances; for such
could not agree to an unbeliever. Therefore there remain only two senses, the
one of an isntrumental sanctification, as Mr. Goodwin calls it, for the
begetting a holy seed; The other of matrimonial sanctification, whereby the
one is enjoyed as a chaste yoke fellow by another, without fornication. The
former of these, your words intimate, you embrace, when you say, the
unbelieving wife was sanctified in the believing husband, quoad hoc, so far as
to bring forth a holy seed. But against this are these reasons, 1. This could
not have resolved the doubt in the case of those, who by age could not be
sanctified to this end, or by reason of accidental inability for generation,
they might depart each from other, notwithstanding this reason: whereas the
Apostles resolution is, of all husbands and wives; The unbelieving husband is
sanctified, that is, every unbelieving husband is sanctified. If meant of
Isntrumental sanctification, it were true only of those that are apt for
generation, yea that do actu^lly generate: whereas the Apostles determination
is concerning any husband or wife that were of different religion. 2. If the
Apostle, by being sanctified, meant instrumentally sanctified to beget a holy
seed, then the reason had been thus: You may live together, for you may beget a
holy seed. And so their consciences should have been resolved of their present
lawful living together, from a future event, which was uncertain; It had been
taken from a thing contingent, that might be, or not be: whereas the resolution
is, by a reason taken from a thing certain, a thing present, or past; and
therefore he uses the preterperfect tense, (...) has been sanctified; yea, in
probability he speaks of a sanctification, even when both were unbelievers: for
he says, (...) twice in the preterperfect tense, and he mentions the
unbelieving, distinctly; but the believer, without the expression of his, or
her faith, under the title of husband, or wife; and says, your children,
indiscriminatim, without difference, as well those you had before one of you
was a believer, as since. However, it is manifest the Apostles reason is taken
from a thing not contingent, but certain, not future, but present or past, and
therefore not from isntrumental sanctification for the begetting of a holy
seed, which was a future thing, and that contingent.

This was so manifest to Chamier, that, tom. 4. Panstrat. Cathol. lib. 5. c.
10.. 46. he proves, that sanctification here cannot be understood of
sanctification by conv^rsion of the unbeliever through the diligence of the
wife, from this reason: Primum quia incerta ratio est, etsi enim nonnunquam ita
factum, tamen plerumque etiam aliter, which I may apply to your isntrumental
sanctification, in the same words. And after, In praeteritum dixit;
sanctificatus est non autem sanctificabitur, rem jam constitutam, and peractam
non autem in futurum rem incertam, aut optandam, aut expectandam. 3. When any
person is said to be instrumentally sanctified for a purpose, this
sanctification is ascribed to God, as Jer. 1.5. Isa. 13.3. as selecting some
from others to such an use, but here the sanctification is common to all
unbelieving husbands in resp^ct of their wives, and comes from that common
relation, not special d^signation. 4. According to this Exp^si^ion, the words
following could not be true, Else were your children unclean, but now are they
holy: For in this form of reasoning, this Proposition is included. Their
children could not be holy without that sanctification, but that had been
false, understanding it of isntrumental sanctification; and of foederall, or
of real inherent personal holiness. For their children might be in Covenant,
and be regenerated, though their parents by reason of their unbelief had been
neither of them sanct^fied to the other, for the begetting of a holy seed. The
children of Infidel-parents may be in the Covenant of grace, and be sanctified.
It remains then that the sanctification which I call matrimonial, is here
meant, which I express in Beza's words, thus: Fidelis uxor potest cum infideli
marito bona conscientia consuescere (cur enim aliena conscientia eam pollueret)
idcirco dicitur infidelis ille non in sese, sed in uxore (id est uxoris
respectu) sanctus esse, idem quoque de altero membro judicandum est. That this
may be the sense, I gather from the like use of the word, (...) 1 Timothy 4.5.
where the creature of God is said to be sanctified, that is, lawfully used, in
opposition to that which is to be refused; so here, the unbelieving husband is
sanctified, that is, lawfully enjoyed as a husband, by, or to, or in respect of
his wife, whether believer, or unbeliever, in this case there is no difference.
And this your own words import, page 24. When you thus speak. He says indeed,
the unbelieving wife is sanctified in the believing husband, or to the
believing husband; that is, to ^is use, as all other creatures are, as the bad
he lies on, the meat he eats, the clothes he wears, and the beast he rides on
are sanctified to his use. And this sense is the more confirmed, in that,
(...), sanctification, is the same with chastity, 1 Thessalonians 4.7. So that the
sense is, the unbelieving husband is sanctified to his wife, that is, lawfully
or chastely, used as a husband, without fornication in respect of his own wife,
whether believer or unbeliever, and therefore not to be refused. And this sense
only serves for the purpose of the Apostle. The words are a reason why they
might lawfully live together: the reason must be taken from that which was not
contingent, but certain, as Chamier says truly, tom. 4. Paustrat. Cathol. l.
5. c. 10.. 66. Haec est meus Apostoli, ut doceat fideli non discedendum a
conjuge infideli, consentiente in habitationem; cui rei conficiendae ineptum
^st aeque ac paul^ ante argumentum ab eventu incerto ac per accidens, hinc
refutatur illo sententia quae imaginatur tandem cum etiam infidelis conversus
erit, generatum iri filios sanctos: Nam quid si nunquam fiat? Take it then in
your sense, it had been no satisfactory reason. You may live together, though
one party be an unbeliever, because you may beget a holy seed; but this wa^
merely contingent, uncertain, and by accident, not arising from their present
estate, but from something future, which might not be, possibly they might have
no children at all: how shall persons then be satisfied from this reason? But
in the other acception of matrimonial sanctification, the reason is plain and
satisfactory: Let them, if they will, live together, though one be a believer,
the other an un^eliever; for though there be difference in Religion, yet
marriage continues still, they are husband and wife, and are so sanctified to
each others use, in respect of their chaste enjoyment of each other, and it is
no sin for them to accompany together, notwithstanding the u^belief of the one
party; for marriage is honorable among all, even unbelievers, and the bed
undefiled, Heb. 13.4. And Holin^sse and Honor are terms of like sense in this
matter, 1 These. 4.7. And the like resolution the Apostle gives, verse. 17.20.
concerning circumcised or uncircumcised persons and servants, they might
continue circumcised and uncircumcised persons and servants to their masters,
notwithstanding their Christian calling, it did not dissolve those relations;
so that to me it is very clear, that the sanctification here spoken of is
matrimonial sanctification. As for isntrumental sanctification, for the
begetting a holy seed, I know not of any before Mr. Thomas Goodwin that has so
expounded it; But Beza and many others expound it of matrimonial
sanctification. Which is further confirmed in that the Apostle when he speaks
of the believing party says not the believing wife or husband, but the husband
or wife, which is to me a plain evidence, that the Apostle places the reason
of their sanct^fication, not in the faith of either party, but in the relation
of husband and wife. But of this more in the answering of your second argument.
Now let this be granted (as of necessity it must) then the uncleanness must be
understood of bastardy, and the holiness of legitimation; for no other holiness
follows necessarily to the children, in that their parents marriage is lawful,
and they borne of such parents, but legitimation nor any other uncleannes
follows upon the denying of it but bastardy. And therefore who ever they be
that interpret it of legitimation, they do it rightly, call them how you will.
And that I may clear it, let the Apostles reason be resolved.

To conceive it we are to consider, 1. That the words [ else were, etc.] are not
a resolution of another doubt, but an argument to prove that which was said
last, as the particle (...) shows; for the terms (...) else were, are
argumentative, as much as quoniam tum, because then, used so, 1 Cor. 15.14.29.
Romans 11.6. to prove that which went before. 2. That here the argument is ab
absurdo, from an absurdity, which would follow, if the thing to be proved were
not granted, and the speech must needs be Elliptick: and somewhat is to be
repeated to make the speech full, as when it is said, Romans 11.6. (...). If by
grace, it is no more of works, else grace were no more grace: To make the
sense full, you must add, (...), because if of works: So here, (...), etc. For
if the unbelieving husband has not been sanctifi^d to the wife, your children,
etc. So that this is the argument of the Apostle entire: If the unbelieving
husband were not sanctified by the wife, then were your children unclean, but
they are not unclean, but holy, Ergo, the unbelieving husband is sanctified to
the wife. Now the Major of this Syllogism is a conditional, and the s^qu^l of
it were not true, if this proposition were not true: All the children of those
Parents whereof the one is not sanct^fied to the other are unclean. Now if the
sanctification be here meant of Matrimonial sanctification, as I have proved it
must, and the uncleanness be meant of federall uncleanness, so as to exclude
them out of the covenant, whether of Saving-graces, or Church Priviledges, the
proposition were most false, since that children of parents, whereof one was not
Matrimonially sanctified to the other, but came together unchastly, as Pharez
and Zarah of Judah, and Tamar, Iepthe of Gilead, and many others were within
the Covenant of Saving graces, and Church privileges, and therefore to make
the Proposition true (without which the Apostle speaks that which is false) it
must be understood of uncleanness by b^stardy: for it is true of no other
uncleanness, that all children of those parents, whereof the one is not
sanctified to the other are unclean. And that this is the force of the
Apostles reasoning, Chamier saw, Panstr. Cathol. tom. 4. lib. 5. c. 10.. 67.
when arguing against the conceit ascribed to Augustine concerning Ceremonial
holiness, he says thus. De ceremoniali illa sanctitate quid dicam? venit in
mentem Augustino, sed Deus bone! quam aliena? profecto quaedam sunt tam absurda
ut refutari non mereantur. Euge. Dixit Apostolus, si non sanctificetur maritus
infidelis in vxore fideli futurum ut filij inde nati sint impuri, ergo omnes
sic nati sunt impuri aut falsum dixit Apostolus. Quid ergo? Omnesne nati ex ijs
parentibus quorum alter non santificatur in altero geniti sunt in menstruis?
Nunquamne Infideles utuntur uxoribus nisi menstruatis? ita oportet sane aut
hanc ridiculam esse interpretationem. I may apply the same words to Chamier his
interpretation of foederall sanctity. De faederali illa sanctitate quid dicam?
venit in mentem Chamiero, Calvino, etc. Sed Deus bone! quam aliena? profecto
quaedam sunt tam absurda ut refutari non mereantur; Euge. Dixit Apostolus, si
non sanctificetur maritus infidelis in uxore futurum ut filij inde nati sint
impuri, ergo omnes sic nati sunt impuri, aut falsum dixit Ap^stolus, quid ergo?
Omnesno nati ex ijs parentibus quoru^ alter non sanctificatur in altero sunt
extra foedus gratiae? Nunqua^ne parents infideles aut fornicantes gignunt
liberos intra foedus gratiae futuros, ita oportet sane aut ridiculam han^ esse
interpretationem. As for the other words, but now are they holy; the particle
(...) but now, is not an adverbe of time here, as Beza rightly, but as (...)
else were, so (...) bu^ now, is a particle of reasoning used in the assumption
of arguments, which shows it is the assumption of the Apostles argument, and
therefore it must be understood of holiness opposi^e to the uncleanness
mentioned, but that being no other then bastardy, the holiness can be meant of
no other, then legitimation. Nor is this any whit an unlikely sense, since
bastards were reckoned among unclean persons, Deuteronomy. 23.2. and the Apostles
expression may be allusive to the Jewish speaking or estimation. And why it
should be thought strange, that holy should signify legitimate, I know not,
when as Mal. 2.15. (...) a seed of God, rendered by your self, page 19. a holy
seed, is all one with a legitimate seed, as Calvin rightly expounds it, Grot.
annot. in Mat. 19 5. nulla autem arctior ami^itia qua^ mariti and uxoris quae
communionem requirit affectuum, corporis, prolis vitae denique totius: quam rem
esse vere sacram, id est, non humani^us, sed divinitus, repertam magno consensu
g^ntes ^^ed: derunt.
and the words must be understood; for they speak of the first institution of
marriage, which was not to seek a seed of God distinct from the wicked (for it
is spoken of the general end of all marriages) but a lawful seed: whereto I
may add, that marriage has had the reputation of a holy estate, as the
Liturgy calls it, and as that excellent book entitled, The union of Christ
and the Church in a shadow, by R. C. prov^s. As for Mr. Blakes quaere, page 11.
whether we will give the like interpretation of Gal. 2.15. which is, says he,
every way parallel, and answers in either of the branches? Does the Apostle
here mean we that are by birth legitimate, and not bastards of the Gentiles. I
may apply to him the words of him in the Poet. Cernimus, an qui amant ipsi sibi
somnia fingunt? Do we see? or do they that love, feign dreams to themselves?
for I cannot tell how to interpret this passage, that 1 Cor 7 14. and Gal.
2.15. are very way parallel, and the one to be interpreted by the other, any
otherwise then as a conceit in a dream, like as when the fancy from gold and a
mountain compounds a golden mountain. And for his argument which he draws
from the text, on which his discourse is builded, in that the Apostle contra
distinguishes, Jews by nature, and sinners of the Gentiles, (which the phrase
shows the Apostle uses after the vulgar manner; for otherwise Jews are by
nature sinners, as well as the Gentiles) to prove that the Infants of believers
are in the Covenant of grace, and have a birth-priviledge for baptism, it is a
riddle to me. The meaning of the words is plainly this; we are born Jews and
not Gent^les who are reputed sinner^, yet we know that a man is not justified
by the works of the law, to observe which by birth we were tied, and therefore
Peter did ill to compel the Gentiles to Judaize, to keep the law of Moses,
thereby dissembling the l^bertie they had in Ch^^st, and bringing them into
bondage; so that it is plain he mentions Jews by nature, to show their
obligation to the law by their birth, and he calls the Gentiles sinners,
according to the common expression of them, as not observing the law of the
Jews, and therefore when Mr. Blake says, That he contend^ to have the seed of
believing Parents under the Gospel, to be under the first member of the
division in the text. It is a strange speech, that he should contend to prove
this, The seed of believing Gentiles are Jews by nature, born to be
circumcised, and to keep Moses law. But let it be granted, that they are
called sinners in the sense he would have it, tha^ is, out of the Covenant, as
it is said, Ephesians. 2.12. the question is, in what sense the Gentiles were
without the Covenant, and the Jews in. It is certain the Jews had by Gods
appointment the privilege of circumcision, and the Covenant made with Abraham
did belong to them in special manner, and the Oracles were with them, Romans
9.4, 5. and the Covenant of Saving-grace was among them, till they were by
unbelief broken off, and that the Gentiles were dogs, unclean persons, aliens
from the commonwealth of Israel, without God, without Christ, etc. And so it
may be granted that the Jews had a birth privledge, though it is certain, that
their birth did not entitle them to the Covenant of grace, and that the common
privilege of circumcision belonging to the Jews, did not arise from the
Covenant of grace, accotding to the substance of it, but according to the
admi^ist^ation that then was, nor was a fruit of the faith of the parents, but
of Gods appointment according to the dispensation of his will, in that time of
the churches minority; but he that will prove, that therefore our children
have such a birth privilege, because the Jews had, must make our case as the
Jews, and so bring us under the Ceremonial law. But of this we shall have
occ^sion hereafter to ^peake more fully, only by the way I thought it
necessary to say so much, because Master Vines referres us to Master Blakes
Sermon as a learned treatise, and I heard it in like manner magnified by Master
Calamy, and therefore have thought it necessary some where or other to ^xamine
what has any seeming strength in it. And for the same reason I take notice of
that speech of Master Blake, page 11. Singular opinions put men upon singular
interpretations; which may as truly be verified of himself, as of his
adversaries, in that which occasioned him so to speak. Another book lately
published, being the treatise of one Mr. William Cook, and commended by Master
Francis Woodcocke, one of your Assembly, as I conceive, in the 62. page of it
says. Whoever before (but B^llarmine, or such Jesuitical interpreters of
Scripture) took it so, putting unclean for bastards, or holy for legitimate.
And in the Margin, Note Reader, that this is Bellarmines interpretation, and
after, whether A. R. borrowed this answer of Bellarmine, or invented it of
himself (as it is the happiness of the good wits, and holy affections of
Jesuitical and Anabaptisticall heads and hearts to jump in the same thing) let
others judge. Mr. Woodcock had done well to have left out this passage: For,
first, although I have not now Bellarmines book by me, to examine whether it be
his interpretation or no, yet I perceive by Chamier, Panstr. Cathol. tom. 4.
lib. 5. cap. 10.. 55. who says thus, Hoc observato Bellarminum e tribus quas
enumerat, non iudicare quam cui praeferat, quasi nihil interess^t, This being
observed, that Bellarmine, of the three senses which he reckons, does not show
which he preferres, as if it were of no behoof; That that Author did not well
heed Bellarmine, when he makes it his opinion, because he numbers it amongst
other opinions. Secondly, that Author not only erroneously, but also otherwise
in an unfitting way, makes it a Jesuiticall interpretation only, whereas he
might have perceived that Bellarmine cites others then Jesuits for that
interpretation; and if he be not to be believed, yet Chamier might be believed,
who says in the same place,. 50. Sic Ambrosium, Thomam, Anselmum exposuisse,
and hunc Suarez appellat literalem sensum: That Ambrose, Thomas, Anselme, so
expounded it, and this Suarez calls the literal sense. And before Bellarmine,
Musculus in his Commentary on 1 Cor. 7.14. alleges Ambrose and Hierome so
expounding it, and confesses that though he had abused formerly that place
against the Anabaptists, yet he found that of matrimonial sanctification and
sanctity, to be the right sense. And Melancthon, and Camerarius do expound it
of legitimation: Gagnaeus Parisiensis, in loc. also so expounds it: and
Osiander, Enchir. controv. cum Anabap. c. 2. q. 3. Mariana schol. in loc. And
as for that of Foederal holiness, I have rather reason to conceive it to be a
new exposition, the Ancients expounding it otherwise, None that ever I met
with, expounding it of federall holiness, till the controversy of the
Anabaptists in Germany arose.

You say, But this cannot be the meaning, I clearly prove by these four
arguments. First, uncleanness, and holiness, when opposed one to the other,
are never taken for civilly lawful. Nor do I like the calling of it civil
holiness, for it is not from the laws of men, but the institution of God, and
therefore I rather call it matrimonial holiness. You say, Uncleanness,
indeed, when opposed to cleanesse, may be taken in several senses, An unclean
vessel, an unclean cloth, an unclean garment, when opposed to clean, may
signify nothing but dirty or spotted: but when unclean^sse is opposed to
holiness, it is always taken in a sacred sense, referring to a tabernacle
use, to a right of admission into, or use in the tabernacle or temple, which
were types to us of the visible church; and holiness is always taken for a
separation of persons or things from common to sacred uses. It is hard for you
to make good, nor is it material for me to disprove that which you say, That
when uncleanesse is opposed to holiness, it is always taken in a sacred
sense, referring to a tabernacle use, to a right of admissi^n into, or use in
the tabernacle or temple, which were types to us of the visible church. For if
it were true, yet the sense I give might stand good, since uncleanesse for
bastardy might be taken allusively to the tabernacle, if the exclusion of
bastards from the congregation of the Lord, were an exclusion from the
tabernacle; and so the sense might be good, that uncleanesse is bastardy,
though that which you say were true, that uncleanesse, as opposed to holiness,
refers to a tabernacle use. Howsoever it is enough, that I have proved, that
the word uncleanesse must be taken here for bastardy, if the Apostles reason
stand good. Yet let me entreat you to look a little on that text, 1 These. 4.7.
and tell me, whether uncleanesse there be not opposed to holiness, and whether
it be taken in a ^acred sense, refer^ing to a tabernacle use, to a right of
admission into, or use in the tabernacle or temple, which were types to us of
the visible church. Me thinks, by uncleanesse is meant fornication, and by
holiness, chastity; and that comes very near the adjectives for bastards, and
legitimate, which are cons^quent on fornication, and lawful generation. And
the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.1. opposing filthiness of the flesh, to
holiness, makes me conceive you were mistaken in your speech, when you say, In
that opposition, uncleanesse is always taken in a sacred sense.And when you
say, that Holiness is always taken for a separation of persons and things,
from common to sacred uses. Me thinks you might have considered, that 1 These. 4
3. the holy Ghost says thus: This is the will of God, (...), your holiness,
i.e. says Beza, that you abstain from fornication. Now, abstinence from
fornication, you will not say is separation from common to sacred uses. And
when the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7.34. that she may be holy in body, is it not
meant, that she may be chaste?

You go on. Even the meats and drinks of believers, sanctified to them, serve
for a religious end and use, to refresh them who are the temples of the Holy
Ghost. Is it a religious end and use, to refresh them who are the temples of
the Holy Ghost? Then the godly, in eating and drinking, do an act of religion,
because they ref^esh themselves. It is true, when their meats are sanctified to
them, they use them religiously, but not because they refresh their bodies,
which are the temples of the Holy Ghost, but because they use them with the
word, and prayer. If refreshing the temple of the Holy Ghost, be a religiou^
use and end, then the inordinate eating of a godly man, or the feeding of a
godly man by a profane person, is a religious use and end. You add, So that
they have not only a lawful, but a holy use of their meat and drink, which
unbelievers have not, to whom yet their meat and drink is civilly lawful. This
is true; but how this proves, that unclean may not be taken for bastard, and
holy for legitimate, I see not.

You go on. And whereas some say, 1 These. 4.3 4.5. that Chastity, a moral
virtue found among heathens, is called b^ the name of Sanctification: Let every
one possess his vessel, not in the lust of concupiscence, but in
sanctification and honor. I answer, Chastity among heathens is never called
sanct^fication, but among believers it may be called so, being a part of the
new creation, a branch of their sanctification wrought by the spirit of God, a
part of the inward adorning of the temple of the holy Ghost. But this is bu^ a
shift; for why may not an unbeliever he said, as w^ll to possess his vess^ll
in holiness, is to be sanctified? Besides, are not sanctification, and
cleanness, and honor, all one in these passages? And does not the Apostle
say, Heb. 13.4. that Marriage is honorable among all, (even Infidels) and the
bed und^filed? And though the word (...) holiness, be not found among the
heathen writers, as being (so far as I can find) a word used only among
Ecclesiastical writers; yet (...) is used for c^st^moniam servo, I preserve
chastity: as Stephanus, in his Thesaurus, ^bserves out of Demosthenes (...),
where a Priest of Bac^hus speaks thus: (...), I am holy and pure from the
company of man. And the words, (...), chaste, to be chaste, to make chaste,
chastity; coming from the same root with (...) holy: whether (...) to
reverence, or (...) to admire, as Grammarians conceive, are used for holiness
and chastity, very frequently, both in Scripture* and in all sorts of Greek
writers. Gr^t annot. in Man. 5.8. So ent pro eodem usurpari (...) and (...).
So that what you say, that [ holy] cannot be taken for [ legitimate] but must
be taken for persons admissible into the Church; I^ is so far from being
true, that notwithstanding any thing you have said, yet that sense both may and
must be, if the Apostles reasoning be good. But you assault it with a second
Argument.

Secondly, this being so, had this been the meaning, Else were your children
unclean, but now they a^e holy; Else had your children been bastards, but now
they are legi^imate: The Apostles answer had not been true, because if then one
of the parents had not been a believer, and so by being a believer sanctified
his unbelieving wife, their children must have been bastards: whereas we know
their children had been legitimate, being borne in lawful wedlock, though
neither of the parents had been a believer. Marriage, being a Second
Table-duty, is lawful (though not sanctified) to Pagans, as well as to
Christians: and the legitima^ion, or illegitimation of the issue depends not
upon the faith, but upon the marriage of the parents; Let the marriage be
lawful, and the issue is legitimate, whether one, or both, or neither of the
parents be believers, or infidels: Take but away lawful marriage betwixt the
man and the woman, and the issue is illegitimate, whether one, or both, or
neither of the parents are believers, or infidels. Withal, if the children of
heathens be bastards, and the marriage of heathens no m^rriage; then there is
no adultery among heath^ns, and so the seventh Commandment is altogether vain
in the words of it, as to them.

This is indeed the principal reason that has prevailed with many, to
interpret this passage of federall holiness, not of matrimonial; because they
conceive here is a privilege ascribed to the believing wife, or husband, in
respect of the faith of the one person, not common to such with infidels.
Whereas the holiness here expressed is not from the quality of faith, but from
the relation of husband and wife. For that only was agreeable to the Apostles
purpose: to assure them that in the disparity of religion they might live
together still, because the unbeliever, though an unbeliever, notwithstanding
his infidelity, is and has been still lawfully enjoyed and sanctified to his
wife. So that the force of the Apostles reason is taken from the lawfulness of
marriage amongst infidels. This was so plain to Chamier. tom. 4. Panstr.
Cathol. lib. 5. cap. 10. sect. 63. that he writes thus; Hoc argumento
excluditur ea sanctitas quam nonnulli praetulerunt ab educatione, nam ab ista
peni^us delumbatur argumentum Apostoli. Haec enim incerta est: norunt enim
omnes, and docet experientia, neque omnes viros lucrifieri, quod etiam innuit
Apostolus, neque omnes liberos obsecundar^ sanctae educationi. Praeterea si qui
obsecundent, tamen hic effectus est accidentalis, non autem ex ipsius
matrimonii natura. And this is confirmed, that the sanctification of the
husband, and the holiness of the children, comes from the nature of marriage,
because the Apostle when he speaks of the unbelieving party, names him or her,
under the term of unbelieving husband or wife, because the doubt was of the
unbeliever, in respect of his unbelief; but when he speaks of the believing
party, how ever the vulgar Latin thrusts in [ believing] twice, and one old
copy Beza found, that had in the Margin, (...) and (...). believing wife and
believing husband, and a copy of Clermont had (...), to the husband a brother,
yet all the copies besides read simply without that Epithet [ to the wife, to
the husband] without believing. The reason cannot be conceived righ^ly to be
any other, but that although the person meant were a believer, as well as a
wife or a husband; yet in this passage they were considered only as husband or
wife, and not as believers; to intimate that the sanctification did not come
from the faith of the party, but from conjugall relation. So that whereas you
say, that upon the interpretation given, it would follow that there would be no
lawful marriage amongst heathens, or legitimate children, because you conceive
the sanctification and holiness here proper to believers and their children,
the contrary is most true, and most agreeable to the Apostles meaning, who does
not here ascribe the sanctification, either of the unbeliever, or the children,
to the faith of either party, but to the conjugall relation, and mentions here
no privilege, but what was common to all married persons amongst the heathens.
Thus is your principal argument answered; I pass on to the next.

You say besides S t Paul's reason had no strength in it, supposing the text
were to be interpreted as these men would have it. Their doubt (say they) was
that their marriage was an unlawful wedlock, and so consequently their
children bast^rds. You do not herein rightly set down your adversaries
explication of the Apostle; the doubt was only, whether the believer might
continue with the unbeliever in conjugall use: the Apostles resolution was they
might, for they were sanctified each to other, notwithstanding the unbelief
that was in the one party; for if it were otherwise, their children were
bastards. There was no doubt, as you say, of their childrens bastardy; the
Apostles reason supposes it was out of doubt with them. You add. Now mark
what kind of answer they make the Apostle give. Were you not lawful man and
wife, your children were bastards; but because the unbelieving wife is
sanctified in the husband, etc. because your marriage is a lawful marriage,
your children are legitimate. What strength of reason is in this? if this had
been their doubt or question, whether their marriage were not a nullitie; the
Apostle by his Apostolic authority, might have definitively answered, without
giving a reason, your marriage is good, and your children legitimate. But if
Paul will go about to satisfy them by reason, and prove them to be mistaken,
it behoved him to give such a reason, which should have some weight in it, but
this has none. Set their doubt (as these men frame it) and the Apostles answer
(as these men interpret it) together, and you will easily see the invalidity of
it. We doubt (say the Corinthians) we are not lawful man and wife, and that
therefore our children are bastards. No, says Paul, you are mistaken, and I
prove it thus; Were you not lawful man and wife, your children were bastards,
but because you are lawful man and wife, your children are not bastards. Is
there any argument or proof in this?

As you frame your adversaries meaning, it may be thought ridiculous, but your
mistakes must not be charged on them for their error. All this passage of
yours is built on this, that you make that the doubt which was not the doubt,
to wit, whether their children were bastards, and make that the conclusion,
which is the medium to prove the conclusion by; for it was so far from being a
doubt whether their children were bastards, that the Apostle argues from this
as an absurdity he knew they would not grant, and therefore supposed this to
be without doubt with them, that their children were not bastards, but
legitimate. And herein Mr Thomas Goodwin spoke rightly, that the Apostle
supposed it to be a received principle with them, though his paraphrase, but
now are they holy, that is, you see your children baptized, is his own
comment, and that not only a very bold, but absurd one, that I say no worse of
it. And whereas you say, the Apostle might by his Apostolic authority, have
definitively answered, it is true, and so he did, as appears from ver. 12. and
yet he might give a reason ad homines, to the men, to convince them, which it
may be, as you make it, is invalide, but rightly conceived, as the Apostle
framed it, is convincing and cogent.

You say. Fourthly, according to this their interpretation, the Apostles answer
could no way have reached to the quieting of their consciences; their doubt was
whether according to the example in Ezra, they were not to put away their wives
and children, as not belonging to God, as being a seed whom God would not own
among his people. Now what kind of quiet would this have given them, to tell
them that their children were not bastards? We know the Jews did not put away
their bastards, as not belonging to the Covenant of God, Pharez, and Zarah, and
Jepthah, and innumerable others, though bastards, were circumcised, and not cut
off from the people of God.

All this argument is grounded on a mistake, as if the question were, whether
they were to put away their wives and children, as not belonging to God, and
that according to the example in Ezra. Whereas that is but a conjecture, that
they had any relation in this matter to the action mentioned in Ezra: and some
other occasion is as likely, if not more likely, as has been showed, and it is
certain there were no doubts at all about the putting away of their children;
for the Apostles argument proceeds upon this as a thing undoubted with them,
that their children were not unclean, but holy. What their doubt indeed was,
and how the Apostles answer fits it is showed before.

You go on. And whereas some object out of Deuteronomy. 23.2. that bastards did not
belong to the Covenant among the Jews, because God there forbad a bastard to
come into the Congregation of the Lord. I answer, that is meant only of
bearing office in the Church, or some such like thing; and not of being under
the Covenant belonging to the Church; as is manifest not only by what has
been now said of Jepthah, and others, who were circumcised, and offered
sacrifices, and drew nigh to God, as well as any other, but the very Text
alleged gives sufficient light, that it cannot be meant otherwise, because in
that place who ever is an Eunuch or wounded in his stones, has the same
exclusion from the Congregation of the Lord, and I hope that none will dare to
say, that none such are holy to the Lord; if they should, the Scriptu^e is full
enough against them; that putting away in Ezra was of an higher nature then
illegitimation, and therefore it behooved the Apostle to give another manner of
satisfaction to their doubtful consciences, then to tell them their children
were not bastards: Therefore I conclude, that this holiness being the fruit of
one of the Parents being a believer, must be meant of some kind of holiness
which is not common to the seed of them whose parents are both believers, and
that is enough for our purpose.

What others object I know not, the Text, Deuteronomy. 23.2. was produced by me in my
papers in Latin, abovementioned, in these words, Et quidni simili allusione
ponatur (...) pro spuriis, (...) pro legitimis, nam spurius inter impuros,
Deuteronomy. 23.2. And why may not b^ a like allusion, unclean be put for bastards,
and holy for legitimate? for the bastard is put among the unclean, Deuteronomy. 23.2.
By which you may perceive, that I produced it not to prove, that basta^ds did
not belong to the Covenant among the Jewe^, or were to be denied circumcision,
or to be put away, and therefore in what respect they are to be excluded from
the Congregation of the Lord, is not to my purpose material, but only to
show, that bastards were reckoned among unclean persons by the Law; which I
think, you will not deny, since you confess they were excluded from bearing
office in the Church, or some such like thing; and therefore the Apostle might
fi^ly by allusion put unclean for bastards. Against this there being nothing
in your answer, nor any thing else, which has not been replied to before, I
pass to the two objections you bring in against your interpretation.

You say, Yet there remain two Objections to be answered, which are made
against this our interpretation: First, the unbelieving w^^e is here said to be
sanctified as well as the child is said to be holy; and the original word is
the same for both, one the Verb, the other the Noune; if then the child is
holy, with a federall holiness, then is also the unbelieving wife sanctified
with a f^derall sanctification; and so the wife, although remaining a Heath^n,
may be counted to belong to the Covenant of Grace. I answer, indeed there would
be weight in this Objection, if the Apostle had said, The unbelieving wife is
sanctified, and no more, as he simply says the children are holy; but that he
does not say: He says indeed, the unbelieving wife is sanctified in the
believing husband; or, to the believing husband, that is, to his use, as all
other creatures are; as the bed he lies on, the meat he eats, the clothes he
wears, the beast he rides on, are sanctified to him; and so this
sanctifiednesse of the wife, is not a sanctification of state, but only of use,
and of this use to be sanctified to the believing husband, whereas the
holiness and sanctification that is spoken of the children is a holiness of
state, and not only a sanctification to the parents use.

These words in your Margin [(...) the Greek Preposition, signifying to, as
well as in, as Gal. 1.16. 2 Pet. 1.5. Acts 4.12. 1 Cor. 7.15.] being the Texts
I produce in my Latin paper, that [(...)] may be translated [ to] as well as [
by] give me some occcasion to think that this Objection is produced in
reference to these words in my Latin paper, where arguing against the rendering
of [(...) by] as if the faith of the wife were the cause of the sanctifying the
unbelieving husband; I say thus: Nemo enim dixerit fidem uxoris sanctificare
virum infidelem foederaliter, ita ut baptismi capax sit infidelis maritus
propter fidem uxoris (quod tamen pace tantorum virorum dictum sit, tam been
sequitur ex hoc loco, quam filium sanctum esse foederaliter, and baptismi
capacem propter fidem parentis^) for no man will say, the faith of the wife
sanctifies the unbelieving husband federally, so that the unbelieving husband
should be capable of Baptism for the faith of the wife (which yet, with the
leave of so great persons be it said, does as well follow out of this place, as
that the son is federally holy, and capable of baptism for the faith of the
parent). In which words, when I say, it follows out of this place, my meaning
is, so translated and expounded as before; that the unbelieving husband is
sanctified by, that is, by the faith of the wife, as the child is holy, it
would follow, that the unbelieving husband should be in the Covenant as well as
the child, and so be baptized: for the faith of the wife is said to sanctify
according to this reading and exposition, the one as well as the other. And so
much I conceive you acknowledge, in saying in this Objection, there would be
weight if the Apostle had said the unbelieving wife is sanctified and no more.
But this only I put in by a parenthesis, as not building the main of the
interpretation I gave on it, knowing that Beza renders it [ in uxore, in the
wife] and then the Objection has no place. And seeing you do render [(...)]
in, or to, and expound the sanctification to the believers use, as all other
creatures are. I confess, against you that Objection is not in force, and
therefore your answer may be acknoweldged right in this particular. I pass to
the second Objection.

That holiness of the children is here meant, which could not be unless one
of the parents were sanctified to the other; which is the force of the Apostles
arguing, the unbeliever is sanctified to the believer, else were not the
children holy, but unclean; but federall holiness of children may be where
parents are not sanctified, one in, or to the other: as in bastardy. David's
child by Bathsheba, Pharez and Zarah Judah's children by Thamar, the
Israelites children by the Concubines, Abraham's son Ishmael by Hagar, etc. in
which case the children were federally holy, and accordingly were circumcised,
and yet the Harlot not sanctified, in, or to the Adulterer, or Fornicator,
though a Believer.

This Objection I own, having first proved that the santification of the
unbeliever, is meant of lawful conjugall copulation, only where you say, the
unbeliever is sanctified to the believer, I would say as the Apostle does, to
the wife or husband. Now to this Objection you say, "I answer, but I pray you
tell me where you answer it, I find no answer to it here, except it be an
answer to an Argument to deny the conclusion. In the Argument you neither show
faultiness in the form nor matter, which was the way of answering I learned in
the Schools where I was bred. You say, we must attend the Apostles scope: true,
but when we are to answer, we must attend to the Objection, and show the
weakness of it. You say, which is to show, that the children would be unholy
if the faith, or believership of one of the parents, could not remove the bar
which lies in the other, being an unbeliever, against the producing of an holy
seed, because one of them was a Pagan or unbeliever, therefore the child could
not be a holy seed, unless the faith or believership of the other parent could
remove this bar.

You made the scope at first right, to resolve them whether they might lawfully
retain their Infidel wives or husbands; but the scope you now give, is but a
mere figment, not the Apostles.

You say, now this can have no place of an argument in any case where one of
the parents is not an Infidel.

I know not what you mean in this passage, unless it be you would answer thus;
the Apostles scope is otherwise then the objector takes it, therefore he can
make no argument, nor objection, and so I need not make any answer, which is a
kind of answering I am not acquainted with.

You go on: But this was not the case amongst the Jews, Hagar and Thamar, and
the concubines, however sinful in those acts, yet themselves were Believers,
belonging to the Covenant of God, and that bar lay not against their
children, as it did in the unbelieving wife.

This passage is indeed a grant of the Minor in the objection, that children
may be federally holy, where the one parent is not sanctified to the other; and
that the Major is true, which rests on this, that the children could not be
holy, unless one parent were sanctified to the other, you will not deny it;
you do your self frame the force of the Apostles reason thus; both page 19.
when you say, were it with them, as when both of them were unbelievers their
children would be an unclean progeny: and page 21. when you say, the Apostles
answer had not been true, because then, if one of the parents had not been
sanctified to his unbelieving wife, their children must have been bastards.

In these and other passages, you acknowledge the force of the Apostles reason,
to consist in this: that holiness of the children is here meant, which could
not be, unless one of the parents were sanctified to the other; wherefore the
conclusion stands good, that the holiness here is not federall holiness.

But you add, (...), a wise remedy. Indeed, if a believing man or woman should
adulterously beget a child, upon a Pagan or Heathen, or unbeliever, there this
objection deserves to be further weighed, but here it comes not within the
comp^sse of the Apostles argument. This is just nihil ad rhombum, nothing to
the point; as if you had said, I will not answer the objection which is made,
but if you make it thus or thus, I will answer it; and thus I have at last
gotten your chief hold, which you had best manned, but in the close you quitted
it.

You add as over-measure, certain Reasons:

1. From Gods will, which were enough, if you could prove it.

2. From Gods honor, in which you say, so i^ i^ with the Lord, he having left
all the rest of the world to be visibly the Devils kingdom, will not for his
own glories sake permit the Devil to come and lay visible claim to the sons
and daughters begotten by those who are the children of the most High; which
speech, if true, well fare Cain and Cham, and Ismael and Esau, and innumerable
others, whom the Devil has had visible claim to by their works and
profession.

3. For the comfort and duty of these who are in covenant with him. Indeed it
were a very great comfort, if you could make it good which you say; but we must
be content with that comfort God is pleased to give, and not for our comfort
speak that of God which is not true.

You say, you have been the larger upon those two first conclusions, because
indeed, the proving of these gains the whole cause, and so I have been the
larger in answering, as conceiving by loosing these you loose the cause.

You say, The most learned of the Anabaptists do profess, that if they knew a
child to be holy, they would baptize it. It is likely they that said, or
professed so, did declare in what sense, and for what reason they so spoke. But
because these are but Rhetorical passages, I leave them, and pass to your
third Conclusion, which you ^hus express.

. 9. Of the succession of Baptism into the place, room, and use of
Circumcision.
THe Lord has appointed and ordained a Sacrament or Seal of initiation, to be
administered unto them, who enter into covenant with him; Circumcision for the
time of that administration which was before Christ's incarnation, Ba^tisme
since the time of his incarnation.

The conclusion, as you here set it down, may be granted, that the Lord has
appointed and (...) a Sacrament or Seal of initiation, to be administered to
them that enter into covenant with him, circumcision for the time of that
administration, which was before Christ's incarnation, Baptism since the time
of his incarnation. But this is not all you would have granted; for it would
stand you in no stead, and therefore, in stead of it, page 33. in the
Repetition, you put this conclusion for your third; that our Baptism succeeds
in the room and use of their Circumcision; and your meaning is, that it so
succeeds, that the command of circumcising Infants should be virtually a
command to baptize Infants, as you express your self, page 35. Now this I
deny. That which you allege for this is, First, the agreement that is between
Cicumcision and Baptism: Secondly, the Text, Col. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. I shall
examine both, and consider whether they fit your purpose.

You confess they differ in the outward Elements, and that is enough to show
that the command for the one, is not a command for the other, except the Holy
Ghost do so interpret it. But you say, they agree in five or six particulars.
The first, that they are both of them the same Sacrament for the spiritual
part; which is to be granted, but with its due allowance: For, though Baptism
signify in part the same thing that Circumcision did; namely, sanctification
by the spirit, justification and salvation by Jesus Christ, and faith in him;
yet it is true that there is a vast difference betwixt them, because
Circumcision signified these things as to be from Christ to come, and therefore
it was a sign of the promise of Christ to come from Isaac; but Baptism
signifies these things in the name of Christ already manifested in the flesh,
crucified, buried, and risen again. And because Circumcision did signify
Christ to come out of Isaac, therefore it did also confirm all the promises
that were made to Abraham's natural Posterity, concerning their multiplying,
their bringing out of Egypt, their settling in the Land of Canaan, and the yoke
of the Law of Moses, which was to be in force till Faith came, that is, till
Christ was manifested in the flesh, Gal. 3.19.23, 24, 25. Gal. 5.2, 3.

The second agreement you make, is that both are appointed to be distinguishing
signs betwixt Gods people and the Devils people. This must be also warily
understood; for though it be true they are both d^stinguishing signs, yet not
so, but that they may be Gods people, who were not circumcised, nor are
baptized. God had a people in Jobs and Lots families, who were not circumcised,
nor to be circumcised; and there may be a people of God, wh^ ^re not bapti^ed,
as the thief on the cross, the Catechumeni dying a^o^e baptism, many martyrs,
and others, that have dyed without Baptism. And in the signs themselves there
is a great difference, both in the acting of them; the one of them was with
blood, the other without; the one took away a part of the body, the other not:
and after the acting, the one was a permanent sign, the other left no
impression or footsteps of it that did remain.

The third agreement is, both of them the way and means of solemn entrance and
admission into the Church, which may be granted; yet in the solemnity there was
a great difference: the one to be done in a private house, by a private person,
the other openly by the Minister thereto appointed.

The fourth agreement is, both of them to be administered but once, which I
conceive true thus; to wit, that there is no necessity of administering either
of them above once; but a demonstrative Argument to prove it an heresy, or
unlawful in it self to rebaptize, I yet expect. Yet this parity has its
disparity: For Baptism is not restrained to any set day, but Circumcision was
limited to the eighth day in its institution.

Your fifth, And none might be received into the communion of the Church of the
Jews, until they were circumcised, nor into the communion of the Church of
the Christians, until they be baptized. If you mean by Communion to be
accounted members of the Church of the Jews, I cannot assent unto you: For not
only the children were accounted in that Church who were not eight days old,
but also all the uncircumcised in the time of the travel through the
Wilderness, until they cam^ to Gilgal, and all the females were members,
though they were not to be circumcised. The reason was, because God would have
all within that Church that were within the families of Israel; and therefore
he would have the servants born in the house, and that were bought with money
of any stranger that were not of Abraham's seed, circumcised. And if you mean by
the communion of the Church of Christians, the accounting of them as visible
members, it is not true that none might be received into the communion of the
Church of the Christians until they be baptized, unless you will with
Bellarmine deny the Catechumeni to be actual members of the Church, and oppose
Whitaker, and others of the Protestant Divines herein.

The last agreement is, that none but the circumcised might eat of the Pasch^^
L^mbe, which is true of those that ought to be circumcised, but it ^s not true
simply taken: for the females were to eat, though not circumcised. On the other
side you say, none may but those who are baptized be admitted to eat the Lords
Supper. This you affirm, but you bring no other proof for it, but the Analogy
conceived by you between Circumcision and the Passover, and Baptism and the
Lord Supper, which can make but a Topic argument, and that a simili, which i^
of all other the weakest Place to prove by, proportions are weak probation,
says R^^therfu^d, Due right of Presbyteries, Chapter 2. Sect. 2. p. 37. It Is true,
we find persons ordinarily upon their first call were baptized, and then after
received the Lords Supper; and it is true, that 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. and 1 Cor.
12.13. baptizing is put before eating and drinking, and therefore there is is
ground enough for ordering it so; yet I make question, whether, if a person
that professes the faith of Christ sincerely, and is not yet baptized, suppose
for want of a Minister, or out of scruple, at the way of baptizing only
allowed, or because the custom is not to baptize but at Easter or Whitsuntide,
as it was of old, or the like reason, should come to a Congregation of
Christians receiving the Lords Supper, and there receive it with love to
Christ, whether he should sin, because not baptized, as the Jews should sin,
that did eat the Passover not circumcised: For in the Jews case a command is
broken, not here, and so no transgression. If he come without examination of
himself, not discerning the Lords body, he sins, he breaks the command, 1 Cor.
11.28. But where is the command that he must be baptized first? And for the
same reason, I question, whether a Minister can justifi^ it before God, if he
reject such a Christian from the Lords Supper, because not baptized, for the
aforesaid reasons. By this which I have said, you may perceive how uncertain
your agreements are, and how many disagreements there are between Circumcision
and Baptism; and therefore how poor a proof, or rather none at all may be
drawn from the supposed agreements you make between Circumcision and Baptism,
for the making a command to circumcise Infants, a command to baptize Infants,
without the Holy Ghost declaring Gods mind to be so. All these agreements;
y^a, if there were an h^ndr^d more, cannot make it any other than an humane
invention, if the Holy Ghost do not show that they agree in this particular.
But to make the weakness of this Argument the more apparent, let me parallel
the Priests of the Law, with the Ministers of the Gospel, as you do
Circumcision with Baptism. As God appointed Aerg^s and his sons to Minis^e^ in
the time of the Law, so the Ministry of the Gospel now; the Apostle makes the
Analogy expressly, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. and far more plainly then the Text you bring
for the succession of Baptism to Circumcision, and they agree in many things:
As the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, Mat. 2.7. Deuteronomy. 33.10. so must
the Bishop be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2. As the Priest by offering the
sacrifices held forth Christ to them, Heb. 9. so the Minister by preaching,
Gal. 3.1. As the Priest was for the people of God, so the Minister of the
Gospel: As the High Priest was to have the people on his breast, so the
Minister in his heart; as the one was to bless, so the other was to pray for
them: As the Priest had a consecration, so the Minister is to have an
ordination: As none was to thrust himself into the one without a calling; so
neither in the other: And many more such agreements might be assigned; will it
therefore follow, that a command to a Priest to offer a sacrifice propitiatory,
is a command to a Minister to offer a sacrifice propitiatory, or a command for
a Priest to wear a linen Ephod, should be a command to a Minister to wear a
Surplice, as the Papists do just in your manner argue from Analogy or
resemblance; or, that therefore tithes are due to Ministers, jure divino, by
divine appointment, as Bishop Carleton, Dr. Sclater, and others, from Analogy
of Melchisedecs and Aarons Priesthood would infer: or that ordination may be by
the people; because the children of Israel laid hands on the Levites, as Mr.
Mather in answer to Mr. Herle; or that there must be an imparity in the Clergy,
and so Bishops above Presbyters, as the Prelates, Bilson, Daven^nt, D^terminat,
Quest. 42. and others were wont to argue; or that a Doctor in Divinity may be a
Justice of Peace, because Eli and Samuel were Judges, as the Prelaticall
Doctors; or that there must be a Pope, because there was an High Priest, as
Bellarmine and the Papists. If the consequence be not good in the one, neither
is it in the other. You say in the next words, that the Lords Supper succeeds
in the room of the Passover. This, I confess, goes current, but the Scripture
does not say so, that I know. The Scripture expressly says, that Christ our
Passover was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7. It i^ true, the Lords Supper was
appointed after the Paschal Supper, but it is but our collection, that thereby
the Lord would make an end of the Passover, and substitute the other in its
room. In other places we rather find the Lords Supper to answer the Manna, and
the Rock, or water out of the Rock in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. It is
true, the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. argues from the eating of the sacrifices
to the eating of the Lords Supper. But that was not only from the Passover,
but from the rest of the peace offerings as well as it; yea, from the Heathens
feasts upon their sacrifices. It is true, 1 Cor. 5.8. we are required to keep
the feast, and the allusion is to the Paschal Supper; but whether the keeping
the feast be meant of the Lords Supper, or as Beza paraphraseth it, totam vitam
in justitia and integritate consumamus, let us spend our whole life in justice
and integrity, or something else, sub judice lis est, is a controversy
undetermined. But let it be granted, that the Lords Supper imitates (I will not
say succeeds into the room of the Jewish Passover, for that was a sacrifice,
and Christ offered, is only in stead of it) the Paschal Supper, which because
of the time, and the form of words used in the institution, and such like
circumstances, is very probable, and therefore there is great Analogy between
them; yet he that should argue, therefore we must receive the Lords Supper with
unleavened bread, as the Papists; or that the bread and wine must be first
consecrated on an Altar, as was the Paschal Lamb; or that the Lords Supper is
not to be administered but in a Church, gathered after the Church Way, as the
Elders of New England, in answer to the nine Positions; or that we must keep an
Easter, and then have the Lords Supper, as in ancient and later times has been
conceived, you would reject these things as ill gathered, and perhaps call them
superstitious. But whether these, and more like to them, do not as well follow,
as baptizing of Infants, from circumcision of Infants, because of their
Analogy, I leave to your self to consider. You add, And this our Lord himself
taught us by his own example, who was circumcised as a professed member of the
Church of the Jews, and when he set up the new Christian Church, he would be
initiated into it by the Sacrament of Baptism.

It is confessed, that Christ was circumcised and baptized, but that it was to
teach us by his example, either your conclusion, or the agreements between
Baptism and Circumcision which you set down, or that which next goes before
your speech, the succession of the Lords Supper to the Passover, remains yet
to be proved, much more that which you drive at, that there is such a parity,
or rather identity between Baptism and Circumcision, that the command to
circumcise Infants, is a command to baptize Infants. The circumcision of Christ
was undoubtedly as his presenting in the Temple, and the offering for him to
accomplish the Law, under which it pleased him to be made of a woman, Gal. 4.4,
5. and it had a spiritual use to assure our circumcision in putting off the
body of the sins of the flesh, Col. 2.11. This is certain, we have clear
Scripture for it; if you shall show the like Scriptures for the inferences you
make from Christ's circumcision, I shall embrace them with both arms. The
Baptism of Christ was that Christ might fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3.15.
But how to expound this speech, has not a little difficulty. Various
conjectures there are about the meaning of it: this seems to me most likely,
that righteousness is there taken for that which was appointed by God, either
in secret instructions, or some particular Prophecy from God. But then if it be
asked why God did appoint it, this seems most likely, since it is plain that
this was the time of Christ's anointing with the Spirit, as appears, Luke 4.18.
that Baptism was used to signify his anointing by the Spirit for his great
function he was then to enter on, which me thinks, the story it self, and the
speech of Peter, Acts 10.37, 38. do evince. That which you say, That being to
set up the new Christian Church, he would be initiated into it by the Sacrament
of Baptism, seems not probable; partly, because Christ did not set up in his
own days on earth a visible Church, Discipline and Worship distinct from the
Jewish; partly, because his Baptism was of a far higher nature then our
Baptism, Who was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Heb.
1.9. and therefore his Baptism was of a transcendent nature above ours. But if
it were granted that Christ's Baptism were to teach us, that he that is a
member of the Church, must be initiated by baptism, it will rather
disadvantage your cause then advantage it, since Christ, who was the holy One of
God, and the Angel of the Covenant, and the seed of Abraham, in whom all the
nations of the earth should be blessed, to whom the promises were made, in whom
the Covenant was confirmed, Gal. 3.16, 17. yet was not baptized, till he began
to be about thirty years of age, Luke 3.23. So that you see how little help you
have from your parities, or Christ's example to prove a like reason of
circumcising and baptizing Infants. But you have yet another string to your
bow, out of Col. 2.11, 12. I will follow you to try the strength of that also.

You say, of this conclusion, there i^ no great doubt* but because some of the
Anabaptists do deny the S^crament of Baptism to succeed into the room, place,
and use of Circumcision, be pleased to observe how plain the Apostle makes it,
Col. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

It is necessary that I should first consider in what sense your Position is to
be taken, before I examine your proof for it. The thing that you say the
Apostle makes plain, is that the Sacrament of Baptism does succeed in the
room, place, and use of Circumcision: Succession properly notes a coming after
another, as we say, Kings succeed one another, High priests one after another.
To speak exactly, Baptism (I do not say the Sacrament of Baptism) was a
concomitant of Circumcision, if not ancienter; For it is well known, that
Baptism was in use among the Jews, in the initiating of Proselytes for many
years together with circumcision, as may be seen in Seldom, de jure naturali,
and gentium juxta discipl. Heb. lib. 2. cap. 2, 3, 4. Ainsworth Annot. on Genesis
17. There is much of this in many Authors beside. But I suppose you cannot be
ignorant of what Mr. Lightfoot has in his Sermon, entitled Elias Redivivus,
page 11. where he makes it as ancient as Jacob. Gratius Annot. in Mat. 3.6.
has these words: Cum vero peregrini abluti and non circumcisi solis legibus
tenerentur, quos Deus toti hominum generi dederat, intellectu facile est
ablutionem hanc fuisse inter vetera instituta orta, ut arbitror, post magnum
diluvium in memoriam purgati mundi: unde illud celebre apud Graecos, (...),
certe baptismum (...) esse diluvio etiam in Petri Epistola legimus. But it may
be the Sacrament of Baptism came after; neither is that in exactness of
speech true, since Circumcision was a great while in force after John began to
baptize, which you will not deny to be the same Sacrament with ours. But let it
be granted it succeeds, that is, comes after Circumcision, since it continues
now circumcision is taken away, yet the sense in which you can rightly make it
succeed into the room, place, and use of Circumcision, will be brought into a
narrow room, too strait to settle Baptism of Infants in it.

Room and place are properly either the same, or differ only as locus communis
and proprius, common place and proper; so Baptism, which is an action, has no
place or room properly. If you mean by the room and place, the subjects to be
baptized, or baptizing, it is not true, except in part; some of the baptized
and baptizers only were circumcised, and to be circumcised; some that were not
to be circumcised, as women, were to be baptized. If you mean by the room and
place the society into which both persons were to be initiated, it is not true:
For by the Sacrament of Baptism, persons were to be baptized into the
Christian Church, by Circumcision into the Jewish, as your own Conclusion
says. If you mean it of the commandment upon which both are seated, neither is
that true: the commandment of Circumcision was many age^ before Baptism was
instituted as a Sacrament. And for the succession into the use of Circumcision,
that is yet more untrue. Your self say a few lines after. The use of
Circumcision engaged men to the use of the rest of the Jewish Ceremonies. And
page 29. It is true indeed, that circumcision bound them who received it, to
conf^rm to that manner of administration of the Covenant, etc. And if you had
not confessed it, it might have been proved out of Gal. 5.2, 3. Acts 15.10.
from the custom in circumcising Proselytes, to bind them to the Laws, not
only common to all the Noachidae, but also to all the Laws of the Jews, as
Seldom, ubi supra, Ainsworth on Genesis 17. But I hope you will not dare to say,
that Baptism succeeds Circumcision in this use, if it do, then are we still
bound to keep the Law of Moses. Another use of Circumcision, was to signify
Christ to come out of Abraham's family, I think you will not deny it; if you
should, I might plead against you, Col. 2.17. Gal. 3.23, etc. the institution
of it to be in the males only of Abraham's family, by whom the Genealogy was to
be reckoned, in the member for generation, the expressions of the Covenant
confirmed by it, and the consent of innumerable learned men, both of the Jews
and Christians: And I think you will not say, Baptism succeeds into this use
of Circumcision: Another use of it was to be a partition wall between the Jews
and Gentiles, to distinguish and divide them, whence the one were counted
unclean, as uncircumcised, the other clean, Ephesians. 2.11.14. but you will not say,
that Baptism succeeds into this use, since the use of Baptism is to the
contra^y, Gal. 3.26, 27, 28. and surely these were the main uses of it. But you
will say, there was use of circumcision for initiation into the Church of the
Jews, and so of Baptism. But then, though Baptism do initiate as
Circumcision, yet not into the same Church: For Circumcision did not initiate
into any Church, but into the Church of the Jews, or rather into the family of
Abraham; but so does not Baptism. If it be said, that the one confirms the
Covenant, and so does the other; still I answer, that Baptism does not confirm
the same Covenant in every part that circumcision did: For the Covenant was a
mixed Covenant, a great part whereof Baptism does not confirm. This is all that
can be said, that they agree in that, as circumcision did confirm the
spiritual part of the Covenant, to wit, righteousness by faith, Romans 4.11.
and signified holiness of heart; so does also Baptism, the like whereof did
the Cloud, Sea, Manna, the water out of the Rock, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. the Deluge
or Ark, 1 Pet. 3.21. the sprinkling of the blood of the Sacrifices; and the
same are confirmed by the Lords Supper; and why then should we not say, that
Baptism succeeds the flood, sprinkling of blood, as well as Circumcision; and
that the Lords Supper succeeds Circumcision as well as Baptism? Wherefore I
conceive your Proposition so generally delivered, That the Sacrament of
Baptism succeeds into the room, place, and use of Circumcision, erroneous and
very dangerous. But how ever you think, the thing is plainly delivered, Col.
2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. let us examine that Text then.

You say thus: Where the Apostles scope is to dissuade the believing Christians
from the rudiments of the world, and Jewish ceremonies and observations upon
this ground, that we are complete in Christ, and that in him, as in the head,
the Church has all perfections. All this is very right, and the thing very
well expressed by Beza, Addendum fuit istud ut non tantum sibi, and in sese,
sed in nostrum etiam usum statuatur Christus esse talis and tantus, ut nihil in
ipso desideretur, and in eo uno omnia nanciscamur ad veram, and salvificam Dei
notitiam requisita: Co^plementum igitur in Christo adeptis quorsum vel humana
sapientia, vel vanis hominum commentis, vel ceremoniis, ullo denique extra
Christum ascito sit opus? Annot. in Col. 2.10. where mark that Beza rightly
makes us so complete in Christ, that there is no need of any thing added out of
Christ in stead of those ceremonies. You go on; and because he would take them
wholly off from Circumcision, the use whereof engaged them to the use of the
rest of Jewish ceremonies; he tells them that in Christ we are circumcised with
circumcision made without hands, a better circumcision then the Jews was, in
putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ.
You say rightly: First, that the Apostle would take them off wholly from
circumcision, therefore not teach them that they had another Ordinance in stead
of it, by virtue of that command: Secondly, That the use of circumcision,
engaged them to the use of the rest of the Jewish ceremonies, and therefore
that Baptism succeeds not in the use of Circumcision: Thirdly, In Christ we
are circumcised with a circumcision made without hands, a better circumcision
then the Jews was, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
circumcision of Christ, and therefore we have circumcision not in another
Ordinance, but in Christ and his circumcision. You go on; and whereas the
Jewish teachers would be ready to object, that the receiving of the inward
grace of circumcision, did not make them so complete as Abraham, and his seed
was, because they also had an outward sensible sign whereby they might be
further persuaded, comforted and confirmed. This is but a conceit that either
the Jews were ready thus to object, or the Apostle intended to answer such an
objection. The intent of the Apostle is to declare in what way and manner, and
by what means they became complete in Christ, to wit, Baptism and Faith,
whereby they had communion with Christ, and so were complete in him. But you
say, To this he answers, verse. 12. that neither is this privilege wanting to
Christians who have as excellent and express a Sacrament of it, being buried
with Christ in Baptism; the effect whereof he there sets down, and therefore
they needed not circumcision as their false teachers insinuated, thereby
directly teaching that our Baptism is in stead of their circumcision. It is
true, the Apostle teaches them that they needed not circumcision, but not
because they had Baptism in lieu of it, but because all was in Christ now, who
has abolished all these rites, or taken them away quite, verse. 14. as being
but shadows of good things to come, and the body is of Christ, verse. 17. in
whom, and in that which befell him all was accomplished. And Aretius therefore
in his Comment on Colos. 2. says rightly in this; not a rem ipsam vindicari
sanctis sine externo symbolo; quod tamen indesinenter urgebant advers^rii; s^c
Romans 2.29. and Phil. 3.3. Atque hoc beneficium in Christo habemus: est igitur
perfectum organum salutis, note that the thing it self is asserted to the
Saints without an outward symbol, which yet the adversaries incessantly urged:
so Romans 2.29. and Phil. 3.3. and this benefit we have in Christ, he is
therefore a perfect organ of salvation; so that it is utterly against the
Apostles scope and whole argument to say, that therefore they needed not
circumcision, because they had another Ordinance in the room of it. For the
Apostles intent is plain, to show, that Christ is in stead of Circumcision, and
all the rest of the Jewish ceremonies. and the truth is by this doctrine, that
Baptism is in stead of Circumcision, the Apostles argument for the disanulling
the Jewish ceremonies, both here, and Hebr. 9. and 10.1. and 13. in the Epistle
to the Galatians, chap. 3. and 4. and Ephesians. 2. is quite evacuated, who still
uses this argument to prove the abolition of the ceremonies of the Law,
because they have their complement in Christ, not in some new Ordinance added
in stead of them; for if there be need of other Ordinances (besides Christ) in
stead of the old, then Christ has not in himself fullness enough to supply the
want of them, and this abolition is not because of Christ's fullness, but other
Ordinances that come in stead of the abolished. And indeed, Baptism and the
Lords Supper, though they be Ordinances of Christ that may imitate or resemble
the Ordinances of the Jews, yet it cannot be said they succeed into the room,
place, or use of them: For Christ only, and that which he did, does so succeed:
So that if things be well weighed, this Text is against your Position, not for
it, and so your Ordinance is turned against you. You go on; And the Analogy
lies between two sacramental types of the same substance [regeneration] to
both Jews and Gentiles. I deny not but that there is Analogy between
Circumcision and Baptism, and so there is between the Deluge and Noah's Ark, or
deliverance from the Deluge and Baptism, 1 Pet. 3.21. they do resemble each
other in some things. But we are not to conclude thence, that Baptism succeeds
into the room, place, and use of Noah's Ark, or that therefore we are to baptize
married persons only, because in Noah's Ark only married persons were saved: For
in the administration of an Ordinance, we are not to be ruled by bare Analogy,
either framed by us, or delivered by the Spirit of God, but the institution of
God. But the truth is, in this place, Col. 2.11, 12. the Apostle rather
resembles burial to circumcision, then baptism, and so makes the Analogy not
between Circumcision and Baptism, but circumcision and Christ's burial. And so
Chrysostom on the place, and after him Theophylact, (...), and what he calls
circumcision, he again calls burial. You proceed thus: And in truth, had not
baptism come in the room of it, the Apostle could not have pitched upon a
worse instance then Circumcision, which was so much valued by them, and was so
great and useful a privilege to them. It is true, circumcision was a great
and useful privilege to them, in that estate they were before Christ's
incarnation, in comparison of Heathens, who had not a Schoolmaster to bring
them to Christ, yet absolutely it was a burden and heavy yoke, Act. 15.10.28.
and it would be a burden, not a privilege, for us to have an Ordinance in the
room, place, and use of it, now Christ is come, in whom we are complete. And
it is true, the Apostle pitched on circumcision, verse. 11. because the Jews
much valued it, but not to show, as you say, that Baptism is in the room,
pl^ce, and use of it, but to show, that in Christ we have circumcision, and are
complete in him. You close up this conclusion thus: Nor had there been any
reason to have here named Baptism, but that he meant to show Baptism to
Christians was now in the room of circumcision to the Jews.

This is said with more confidence, then truth: For another reason is plain
from the context; that therefore Baptism is named, because it is one of the
means by which Christians come to have communion with Christ, and to be
complete in him, which was the thing the Apostle intended in the 12th verse,
and therefore he joins faith with Baptism, they being the two special means
whereby we come to have communion with Christ, and to be complete in him. And
this is further confirmed by comparing this with other Scriptures: Gal. 3.25,
26, 27. the Apostle speaks thus: But after faith is come, we are no longer
under a Schoolmaster, meaning Circumcision, etc. For we are all the children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus: For as many of you as have been baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ; which Text is apparently answerable to Col. 2.8, 9,
10, 11, 12. And again, Romans 6.3, 4, 5. Know you not that so many of us as were
baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? therefore are we
buried with him, (...), by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised
up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of life: For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his
death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection. In which places
you may easily perceive, that by putting on Christ, we come to be exempted from
the Schoolmaster, that is, the Law, and so from Circumcision; that being
planted into Christ, we walk in newness of life, that is, as Romans 7.6. that
now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we were held, that
we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter;
and that the means hereof, is by Baptism by which we put on Christ, and are
baptized into his death, and by faith, whereby we are no longer children under
age, but sons come to their inheritance. Thus have I at last, waded through
your third Conclusion, and the Text, Col. 2.11, 12. the misunderstanding of
which has been the ignis fatuus, foolish fire, which has led men out of the
way in this matter into bogs.

.10. Of the notion under which, and the reasons for which persons were
circumcised, showing that all persons that were circumcised were not in the
covenant of Grace.
YOur fourth Conclusion follows; That by Gods own express order, Infants as
well as grown men were in the time of the Jews to be initiated and sealed with
the sign of Circumcision, whether Jews by nature, or Proselytes of the
Gentiles, one Law was for them all; if they receive the Covenant, they and
their children were circumcised.

It is true, this was Gods express order, and it is as certain that this
express order of God is now revoked, or repealed, Acts 15.10.20.26. Gal. 5.1,
2, 3. as belonging to that administration, which was before Christ came. That
which you add of the females virtuall circumcision in the males, has been
examined before. I pass on to that which follows: And whereas some, who see
which way the strength of this Conclusion tends, do allege, that though
Circumcision was to be applied to their Infants, yet it was not as a seal of
the spiritual part of the Covenant of Grace, but as a national badge, a seal
of some temporal and earthly blessings and privileges, as of their right to
the Land of Canaan, etc. And that Ishmael, though he was circum^ised for some
temporal respects, yet he was not thereby brought under the Covenant of Grace,
which was expressly said to be made with Abraham, in relation to Isaac and his
seed.

They that thus object, speak that which is truth, only whereas you make the
objectors say, That it was not a seal of the spiritual part of the covenant of
Grace, I would say, to all that were circumcised; and when you say, but as a
national badge, etc. that Ishmael was circumcised for some temporal respects,
I would leave out those words, and say, because God commanded it. Thus did I
express my self in my Latin paper, affirming, that not right to Evangelical
promises, I now add, nor right to any other benefit by the Covenant made with
Abraham, was the proper and adequate reason, why these, or those were
circumcised, but Gods Precept: For as much as persons were to be circumcised,
who had no right, either to the Evangelical promises, or any other in that
Covenant which was confirmed by circumcision; and I named Ishmael, concerning
whom, though God heard Abraham in giving him some blessing upon Abraham's
prayer, when he understood the promise was not intended for Ishmael, but to
Isaac, Genesis 17.19, 20. yet he expressly added his determination to hold, verse.
21. that he would establish his Covenant with Isaac, not with Ishmael: and on
the other side, all the females in the Covenant were uncircumcised, though some
of them had right to all the promises in the Covenant; and the Text expressly
makes the reason of what Abraham did to be Gods appointment, v. 23. and no
other. Wherefore those that say, that Circumcision did not seal the spiritual
part of the Covenant of Grace to all, and that Ishmael was not by circumcision
brought under the Covenant of Grace, say no more, then what the Apostle says,
Romans 9.6, 7, 8. Gal. 4.28, 29. and your self, page 13. where you say, only true
believers are made partakers of the spiritual part of the Covenant. Now the
end of this objection, is to prove that it follows not, because a person was
appointed to be circumcised, therefore he was within the Covenant of Grace, or
that because persons were within the Covenant of Grace, therefore they were to
be circumcised. Let us now see what you answer to this. You say, I answer there
is nothing plainer, then that the Covenant, whereof Circumcision was a sign,
was the Covenant of Grace.

It is granted, that the Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. was the Covenant
of Grace, though not a pure Covenant, but a mixed covenant. But what then? Does
it follow, that every one that was circumcised, was in the Covenant of Grace?
It is true, the sacrifices did confirm the Covenant in Christ's blood; but it
does not follow, that all that did offer sacrifices were partakers of the
Covenant. The like may be said of Baptism, the Lords Supper, Manna, etc. which
they that did partake of, yet were not all of them in the Covenant, as the
Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 10.5. Heb. 3.18, 19. It is one thing to be under the
outward administration, another thing to be in the covenant of Grace. This is
proper only to elect persons, the other is common to Elect and Reprobate, and
depends merely on Gods appointment without any other consideration. You go on,
Abraham received circumcision, a sign of the righteousness of Faith: Very
true, and the Apostle expounds this, when he says, which he had, yet being
uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all them that believe, though
they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them also,
Romans 4.11. So that the Apostle makes Circumcision a seal of righteousness, but
not to all, or only circumcised persons, but to all believers, whether Jews or
Gentiles; so that according to the Apostles doctrine, Circumcision, in as much
as it sealed to Abraham the righteousness of faith, which he had, being yet
uncircumcised, i^ a seal to the Gentiles that believe of the righteousness of
faith, though they be never circumcised. So that it is so far from being true,
that persons have the promise, therefore they must have the seal in their
persons; that it follows, persons have the promise, therefore they have the
seal in Abraham, though they never are, nor may be sealed in their own persons.
You go on, and the Jews received it not as a Nation, but as a Church, as a
people separated from the world, and taken into covenant with God. If you take
[ as] with reduplication, it is true, that neither the Jews received
circumcision as a Nation, for then every nation should receive it, nor as a
Church or people separated from the world, and taken into covenant with God,
for then every Church or people separated from the world, and taken into
covenant with God should receive circumcision, which is false, but they
received it as appointed them from God, under this formal reason, and no
other. But what is all this to the answering the objection, That it was not the
seal of the spiritual part of the Covenant of Grace to all circumcised
persons, and that circumcision was appointed to persons not under the Covenant
of Grace, and that the reason why persons were circumcised, was not because
they were under the covenant of Grace, but only Gods appointment? But you yet
add, It is true indeed that circumcision bound them who received it to conform
to that manner of administration of the covenant which was carried much by a
way of temporal blessings and punishments, they being types of spiritual
things. It is right which you grant, that circumcision bound them who received
it to conform to that manner of administration of the covenant, but then it is
to be considered, that circumcision was a part of this administration; and that
though temporal blessings, as of the land of Canaan, and rest in it, were
shadows of the rest of Gods people, and so in a sort of administrations of the
covenant of Grace, yet they were also part of the things promised in the
covenant made to Abraham; and when you say, circumcision bound them who
received it, to conform to that manner of administration of the covenant which
was carried much by a way of temporal blessings and punishments; it is hard to
show in what sense they were bound to conform to temporal blessings and
punishments: they were bound to conform to the sacrifices and offerings, and
washings, etc. For these were their acts to be done by them, but how they were
bound to conform to the administration by temporal blessings and punishments,
it is hard to understand, since they were Gods acts, not theirs. You add, but
no man can ever show, that any were to receive the Sacrament of Circumcision,
in relation to those outward things only, or to them at all, further then they
were administrations of the Covenant of Grace. The truth is, no man was to
receive the Sacrament of Circumcision in relation to these outward things only,
or to them at all, either as they were temporal blessings or types of
spiritual things, and so, as you speak, administrations of the covenant of
Grace, but in this respect only, and for this reason, and no other, because God
had so commanded; though I deny not circumcised persons were by faith to look
on the covenant of Grace through these administrations, yet the reason of being
circumcised was barely Gods command; so that if you abstract Gods command,
notwithstanding the covenant, or any other administration of it, they were not
to be circumcised: You go on: Sure I am, the proselytes and their children
could not be circumcised in any relation at all to the temporal blessings of
the land of Canaan, as they were temporal, because notwithstanding their
circumcision, they were not capable of receiving or purchasing any inheritance
at all in the land, sojourne they might as other strangers also did, but the
inheritance of the land, no not one foot of it could ever be alienated from the
several Tribes to whom it was distributed, as their Possession by the most
High: For all the land was divided into twelve Tribes, and they were not any
one of them allowed to sell their lands, longer then till the year of Jubilee,
Lev. 25. v. 3. etc. Yea, I may boldly s^y, that their circumcision was so far
from sealing to them the outward good things of the land, that it occasioned
and tied them to a greater expense of their temporal blessings, by their long
and frequent and chargeable journyes to worship at Jerusalem: This which you
say may be granted, and the thing which you would prove by it, That they which
received circumcision, did not receive it in relation only to these outward
things, yet this overthrows not this Proposition, That the covenant made with
Abraham had promises of temporal blessings, and that some were to be
circumcised, who had no part in the covenant of Grace. You add: And as for
what was alleged concerning Ishmael, the Answer is easy; God indeed there
declares, that Isaac should be the Type of Christ, and that the covenant of
Grace should be established, and continue in his family, yet both Ishmael and
the rest of Abraham's family were really taken into covenant until afterward
by apostasy they discovenanted themselves, as also did Esau afterward, though
he were the son of Isaac, in whose family God had promised the covenant should
continue. When you say, that Ishmael was really taken into the covenant,
meaning, of Grace, mentioned in a few words before, you oppose both the
Apostle, Romans 9.7, 8. Gal. 4.28, 29. as I have showed before, and Gods own
speech, Genesis 17.19, 20. To which I may add, that Isaac and Jacob only are said
to be coheirs with Abraham of the same promise, Heb. 11.9. And when you say,
that he and Esau were discovenanted by apostasy: you plainly deliver apostasy
from the covenant of Grace, which I will not call in you Arminianisme, but in
others it would, and that justly be so censured. But you will say, you mean
that Ishmael and Esau were Abraham's seed by profession, and outward cleaving to
the covenant, as you speak, page 14. But this is not to be taken into the
covenant of Grace really, as you speak; for taking really into the covenant of
Grace, is Gods act, either of election* or promise, or some act executing
either of these; but profession and outward cleaving to the covenant is man's
act; and therefore, how to salve your speech I know not. As for the objection,
I see not that you have answered it, but that still it stands good, that
persons were to be circumcised, who were not in the covenant of Grace, that
Ishmael was appointed to be circumcised, though it were declared Gods covenant
did not belong to him; and therefore the reason of circumcising persons, was
not the covenant of Grace, but only the will and command of God to have it so.
Your fifth Conclusion follows.

. 11. Of the privileges of Believers under the Gospel, and whether the want of
Infant Baptism be want of a privilege of the covenant of Grace which the Jews
had.
FIfthly, and lastly, the privileges of Believers under this last and best
administration of the covenant of Grace, are many ways enlarged, made more
honorable and comfortable then ever they were in the time of the Jews
administration.

This Conclusion, with its Explication and Application, have all their vigor
in ambiguity of speech; as the strength of the Coney is in its burrow; which,
that I may uncover, I must distinctly declare, what is to be held in this
matter, and then examine what you say. Privilege is a Law term, the Etymology
is, Privilegium quasi priva lex, quia veteres priva dixerunt, quae nos singula
dicimus: Privilege, as it were a private law, because the ancients called
those things private, which we call singular, Gel. noct. Attic. lib. 10. cap.
20. Joh. Calvinus Wett. in his Lexicon Juridicum voce privilegium. Privilegium
alii sic definiunt, jus singular in certae personae gratiam favoremve, others
so define a privilege, a singular right in favor of a certain person; so that
a privilege is a particular law, whereby some persons have benefit different
from common right. Calvin ibid. Item beneficium dicitur privilegium quia been
facit iis quibus conceditur contra legem communem, likewise a privilege is
called a benefit, because it benefits those to whom it is granted, against the
common law. If it do not benefit, it is not a privilege; Privileges therefore
may be privileges at one time, which are not at another time: and in
comparison of some which are not privileges in comparison of others. To have
Christ personally present with the Disciples, was a privilege for the time,
but it was a privilege that he was absent, when he went to heaven, and sent
his Spirit to them: The Laws delivered to the Jews were privileges in
comparison of the Heathen, but not in comparison of Christians. Privileges of
the covenant of Grace may be conceived, either in respect of the substance of
the covenant of Grace, or the administration. Now, when you speak of
privileges of the covenant of Grace, some passages s^em to mean it in respect
of the promises of grace in Christ, as when you say, Our covenant is
established upon better promises, we as well as they are called a holy nation,
etc. not only in the clearness of the administration, but also, etc. And those
especially which you have when you say, page 31. We are inquiring for
privileges, which are branches of the Covenant of Grace, which every man that
is in covenant with God, may expect from God, by virtue of the Covenant, which
cannot be understood but of the promises. Now the promises of the covenant of
Grace, are of the substance of the covenant, not of the administration: But
other passages refer to the administration. That yoke, that hard and costly way
of administration, which neither they nor their fathers were able to bear, is
taken off from our shoulders, the glory of theirs had no glory in respect of
ours, they were under the bondage of Infants under age, in comparison of our
freedom; which things belong to the administration, page 10.12. Now, if you
mean your conclusion of privileges of the substance of the covenant of Grace,
it is to be denied: For so the privileges of believers are not now enlarged
many ways, or made more honorable or comfortable. Your self, page 9.10.12.
say, they are the same to both Jews and Gentiles: but in respect of the
administration, it is granted they are many ways enlarged, made more
honorable; and in this sense, I grant it, that many Scriptures speak of the
enlargement of our privileges, and particularly, those that speak of the
removing the hard yoke, Acts 15.10. and bringing us into liberty to full age,
Gal. 4.1. and greater glory, 2 Cor. 3.10. And it is true that those things were
privileges to the Israelites, but it is a benefit to us, that we are freed
from them, and so no privilege for us, either to have them or any other thing
in lieu of them, but Christ already come, who is in stead of all. Now the thing
that you drive at, is this: that whereas you conceive that you have proved
before, that the Infants of those that are in the covenant of Grace, are
covenanters with their parents; that Baptism succeeds in the room and use of
their circumcision, that by Gods express order, Infants were to be
circumcised. You lastly conclude, that our privileges for our selves and
children, are at least as honorable, large and comfortable, as theirs, and
therefore our Infants are to be baptized. The answer to it is this: It is true,
our privilege is the same with theirs in respect of the substance of the
covenant, but neither was that made to the Jews natural posterity as such, nor
is it made to ours. As for Circumcision, it was indeed a privilege, but
belonging to the manner of administration not to the substance of the covenant
which is in variable, a privilege to the Jews in comparison of the Heathens,
but a burden in comparison of us; and it is so far from being a privilege to
our children, that they should have either it or any other thing in the place
and use of it, but Christ manifested in the flesh, that the truth is, it is a
great privilege to us and our children, that they have neither it, nor any
other thing in the stead of it but Christ manifested in the flesh: And so
parents loose nothing by denying Baptism to Infants in the place and use of
circumcision; but it is indeed, if rightly considered, a benefit to them to
want it, God not appointing it, nor making a promise of grace to be confirmed
by it to the Infants of Believers. Having premised this, I shall examine the
proofs of your conclusion, and see whether they make any thing against that
which I have delivered. The thing you should prove, is one of these two: either
that circumcision did belong to the substance of the covenant of Grace, or,
that the want of Circumcision, or some Ordinance in the place and use of it, is
a loss of privilege of the covenant of Grace to us and our children. That
which you allege is this: Many Scriptures speak of the enlargement of their
privileges, not one for the diminishing or depressing or extenuating of them;
that yoke, that hard and costly way of administration, which neither they nor
their fathers were able to bear, is taken off from our shoulders. True, and by
this, you yield that it may be an enlargement of privilege to have somewhat
removed that was a privilege formerly. The Scripture to which you allude, is
that, Acts 15.10. Now I pray you, what was this yoke, but circumcision, as your
self declare, page 39. and all the legal ceremonies which were great
privileges to the Jews; but yet to us it is a privilege that we are freed
from them, and if it be a privilege to be fre^ from circumcision, it is a
privilege to be freed from any ordinance in the room, place, and use of it.
Lastly, in that Circumcision is taken off from our necks, it appears, that it
belongs not to the covenant of Grace, which is invariable, and belongs to
Gentiles as well as to Jews, according to your conclusion. The next Scripture
you bring, is Heb. 8.6. where our covenant is said to be established upon
better promises. If this Scripture serve to your purpose, then the covenant of
Grace now has better promises then the covenant of Grace the Jews had: but
this I know you will deny, who hold that the covenant of Grace is the same both
to Jews and Gentiles. But that you may see how confusedly you thrust things
together in this place, I pray you consider what covenant it is of which the
Author to the Hebrews speaks there, that it had not so good promises; Is it
not expressly said to be that which God made, when he took the Israelites by the
hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which covenant they brake, verse.
9. Now, although Dr. Crisp, vol. 2. Sermon. 2. calls the covenant of Aarons
Priestood a covenant of Grace, though of less grace; yet you say thus, page
10. and four hundred and thirty years after the Law was added, with great
terror upon Mount Sinai, not as a part of this covenant; and after, plainly in
that giving of the Law there was something of the covenant of works made with
Adam in Paradise, etc. So that you do grant there was a rehearsal of the
covenant of works; though you do make it also to have something of the
administration of the covenant of Grace. The truth is, the Scripture plainly
makes it the covenant of works, Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.10.12. Gal. 4.24. Heb. 12.18.
though I deny not that which you say, that it was intended as a preparative and
means to fit them for Christ, and therefore may not unfitly be called foedus
subserviens, a subservient covenant, as Cameron in his Theses de triplici
foed^re. But this being so, to what purpose do you tell us, that our covenant
is established upon better promises; as if the Jews covenant were no better
then that on Mount Sinai, or as if the comparison concerning privileges were
between the covenant of Grace now, and the covenant of Works then; whereas the
question is, as you say, page 31. which are branches of the covenant of Grace,
and a little after, but were no part of the covenant of Grace, which God made
to Abraham and his seed. Now the covenant of Grace is that made with Abraham,
Gal. 3.15, etc. as your self allege, page 10. and you say there, that covenant
was for substance always the same, and the substance as you recite it, is the
promises and the condition; so that out of your own words it is clear, that we
have no better promises in the covenant of Grace now, then they had then, only
the administration of the covenant of grace is now better then it was to them;
then it was mixed with other particular promises, which because they are not
common to al believers in the covenant of grace, therefore belong not to the
covenant of Grace in Christ purely taken, such as the promise of deliverance
from Egypt, settling in Canaan, etc. For though it is true, that godliness has
the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, yet the
promise of the life that now is, is not a particular promise of possession of
such or such a land to us or our seed, or the coming of Christ out of our
posterity, as it was then, but only a general promise of Gods providing for
his children with persecution, Mark. 10.30. Then it was with expectation of
Christ to come, now with assurance of Christ already come in the flesh, and
accomplishing what was foretold of him; then Christ was shadowed in dark
types, now we see him unveiled in a plain history. So that though it be true
that the privileges of believers are now many ways enlarged in some respects,
yet simply the Covenant of Grace is not enlarged in respect of the substance of
it, the promises of Grace and the condition, they are still belonging to the
Elect and believers, and to no other. The next Scripture you thus express. The
glory of theirs had no glory in respect of ours; for this you quote 2 Cor.
3.10. But this passage is plainly meant of the Covenant at Mount Sinai, which
is called the letter, ver. 6. The ministration of death written and engraven in
stones so glorious, that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the
face of Moses for the glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done
away, ver. 7. The ministration of condemnation, ver. 9. Which I suppose you do
not understand of the Covenant of Grace, and therefore it is impertinently
alleged. Your next is, they were under the bondage of Infants under age in
comparison of our freedom. For this you allege, Gal. 4.1. etc. But this is
said of the administration in types and shadows and ceremonies, called the
rudiments of the world, ver. 3. Concerning which it is confessed our
privileges are enlarged: but they are not branches of the Covenant of Grace,
which every man who is in Covenant with God may expect from God by virtue of
the Covenant. You go on, We as well as they are called a holy Nation, a
peculiar people, a chosen Generation, separated to him from all other people:
It is granted we believers are such a holy Nation, etc. does it therefore
follow, that the privileges of believers under this last and best
administration of the Covenant of Grace are many ways enlarged? You allude to
that place, 1 Pet. 2.9. and Mr Blake, page 8. urges this text to prove a
birthright privilege of Christians, equal to the Nations of the Jews. But it
is answered, this passage is meant of the invisible Church, the living and
lively members of Christ. To which he says. The contrary to this in the Text
is clear. First, by looking back to the words that there precede: It is meant
of all those who do not professedly with the unbelieving Jews reject Christ. I
have looked back and find no such thing there. It is true, there is mention
of some who did reject Christ, ver. 7, 8. But that when Peter says, ye are a
chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, etc. it should be meant of any other
then true believers, who alone can offer spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God
through Jesus Christ, is an interpretation which I disclaim, much more that it
should be meant of all those who do not professedly with the unbelieving Jews
reject Jesus Christ. For then it may be said, not only of Simon Magus, and
other hypocrites, but also of all the salvages in the world that never heard of
Christ, that they are a chosen Generation, a royal Pries^hood, an holy Nation,
a peculiar people, that they should show forth the praise of him, who has
called them out of darkness into his marvailous light. Mr Blake adds, Which
will yet more fully appear by comparing the words of S t Paul, Romans 9.32, 33.
I desire Mr Blake to revise his Treatise, and to examine whether this and many
other passages answer to Mr Vines, and others commendation of it. To me the
Text he cites Romans 9.32, 33. compared with 1 Pet. 2.9. do as well agree to
prove that 1 Pet. 2.9. is meant of all those who do not professedly with the
unbelieving Jews reject Christ, as a harp and a harrow do consort to make
music. But perhaps we may see more by looking forward. Secondly, says Mr
Blake, by looking forward to that which follows in the character which the
Apostle (before he ends his description) adds: which in times past were not a
people, but now are the people of God. A speech taken from the Prophet to set
forth the case of the Gentiles, as it is also by S t Paul interpreted, Romans
9.26. but the Gentiles thus called, and of no people made a people, have all a
Covenant-holiness, and not always inherent holiness. Sure the word nation and
people, did so run in Mr Blakes mind, that he could think of nothing but a
national Church like the Jews; whereas if he had weighed the words, ver. 10.
of having obtained mercy, and considered that both Romans 9.25. and 26. are meant
of the same, of whom he said ver. 23. that they were the vessels of mercy,
which he had before prepared unto glory, he would have plainly perceived the
people and nation to be meant of the invisible Church of the Elect, and so
nothing in that Text for the holiness of a believing Nation, as some speak,
communicating a privilege of the seals to the infants of that Nation: which
how absurd a conceit it is, may be showed perhaps more fully in that which
follows. You add to whom as well as to them belongs the adoption, the
Covenant, the promises. You allude doubtless to Romans 9.4. but had you alleged
the whole Text, ver. 3, 4, 5. you would then have seen that it speaks of
peculiar privileges of the Jews, to whom the adoption, Covenants, that is, as
Beza thinks, the tables of the Covenant, the promises of their multiplying,
having the Messiah from them, etc. were peculiar in the sense the Apostle there
speaks: And so Mr Rutherfurd due right of Presbyteries, Chap. 4. sect. 5. page
192. That they had prerogatives above us is clear, Romans 3.1, 2, 3. Romans 9.4.
and that in other respects far more excellent we have prerogatives above them
it is as clear, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9. Mat. 13.16, 17. So that even in respect of
the Covenant made with Abraham it is plain the Jews had some privileges
above us, and therefore this place proves the contrary to your conclusion, and
that the want of some privileges they had, may be recompensed by some other
privileges we have: And therefore you may see how feeble a reason this is from
the Jewish privilege of infant-males circumcision to prove Infant Baptism.
But to follow you in your way. You say, we as well as they enjoy him to be our
Father, and with his dearest Son our Lord are made co-heires of the Kingdom
of Glory. All this is granted, but to what purpose it is produced I see not.
You add, we have all these things with advantage, not only in the clearness
of the administration, but in some sense in greater extent to persons with us;
there is neither male nor female. This is true also, we have the substance of
the Covenant of Grace, that is, justification, etc. with advantage not only in
the clearness of administration, but in some sense in greater extent to persons
with us. For now not only the small Nation of the Jews, but also of all
Nations, believers are brought into the Covenant of Grace. But this proves not
your conclusion, or any of those things that may serve for your purpose. You
add. And there is neither male nor female. Why you add this I know not,
except you mean to insinuate, that in the Jewish Church there was male and
female, because Circumcision was only of Males. But neither does the Apostle,
Gal. 3.28. intimate, that we are better than the Jews, as if their females
were not within the Covenant of Grace, nor will you say it. Now that which you
were speaking of, was the substance of the Covenant of Grace, that we are made
co-heires of the Kingdom of Glory, etc. not of the administration of it, and
so there was no more distinction of male and female with the Jews then with
us, nor more privileges of ours then of the Jews in this particular. Thus
have I examined all the proofs you bring for your fifth Conclusion, and
thereby you may perceive how you have heaped together many places of Scripture,
without any useful order or distinction or pertinency to the thing in hand.
You bring in next an objection thus; Some indeed go about to show, that in
some things the Jews had greater privileges then we have, as that Abraham had
the privilege to be called the Father of the Faithful, that Christ should be
borne of his flesh; Mary had the privilege to be the Mother of Christ, and the
whole Nation this privilege, that God will call in their seed again, after
they had been cast off for unbelief many hundred years; which privileges,
say they, none of the Gentiles have or can have.

It is true, that in answer to the argument from Circumcision, as it is
popularly framed (which yet I perceive many that either are or should be
scholars to examine things more scholastically, do or pretend to satisfy their
consciences with) thus; If the children of believers be not to be baptized,
then we have less privilege then the Jews; then the Grace of God under the
new Testament, is straightened more then in the old. To this argument as being an
argument of no weight, but only among vulgar and non-syllogizing capacities,
among other things I said thus in my Latin paper above mentioned, Nec absurdum
est dicere respectu aliquorum privilegiorum gratiam Dei contractiorem in novo
Testamento, quam in veteri, v. gr. Nulla familia habet privilegium quod
Abrahami familiae concessum est, ut ex ea nasceretur Christus, nullus vir
praeter Abrahamum pater fidelium, nulla faemina praeter unicam matter Christi,
etc. Yet it is not absurd to say, that in respect of some privileges the grace
of God is more contracted in the new Testament, then in the old: For instance;
no family has now the privilege that was granted to Abraham's family, that out
of it Christ should be borne: no man besides Abraham is called the Father of
the faithful; no woman besides one, the mother of Christ. By which I would
show, that it is no absurdity to grant that the Jews may have more
privileges secundum quid, in some things, then we, and yet our case and
condition, to speak simply, better then theirs, by reason of other privileges
we have above them, which recompense the defect of those privileges, whether
real or supposed, which is the very same which as Robinson did allege, so
Rutherford grants in the place abovenamed, and cites two Scriptures to prove
it, Romans 3.1, 2, 3. Romans 9.4. And the truth is, privileges are so arbitrary
and various, that God gives them as he thinks good, often times without
assigning any special reason, so that no argument can be drawn thus. God gave
such a privilege to the Jews, Ergo, we must have such a privilege too,
except we can prove it is Gods will it should be so. And therefore this
Argument is of no force, but rather an argument of arrogant presumption,
without an institution to attempt to prove, that because the Jews had a
privilege to circumcise infants, therefore we must have a privilege to
baptize infants, nor do any of the many Scriptures you have alleged, prove
that Baptism of infants is a privilege granted by God in lieu of
Circumcision: But you take upon you to answer this objection. You say, but
these things have no weight: we are inquiring for privileges which are
branches of the Covenant of Grace, which every man who is in Covenant with God,
may expect from God by virtue of the Covenant, were he a Jew or a proselyte,
not for any particular or peculiar favor to a particular man or woman, or
family, or tribe: All these forementioned things, and many other of the like
kind (as the ministry of the Tabernacle and Temple to belong to one Tribe, the
Kingly office to one family, such and such men never to lack a man of their
house to stand and before God) proceeded indeed from free grace, but were no
parts of the Covenant of Grace, which God made to Abraham and all his seed. For
could every man in Covenant challenge these things at Gods hand, and that by
virtue of the Covenant? Could every one of them promise that Christ should be
borne of his flesh? or every one of their women that she should be the mother
of Christ? Could every one whom God owned to be in Covenant with him, promise
by virtue of the Covenant, that their Children, if cast off by unbelief,
should after many hundred years be again called in? We speak only of such
privileges as were universal and common to all who were in Covenant, for
which by virtue of the Covenant they might rely upon God. Though you say, the
things objected have no weight, yet it may seem they are so heavy and press
your conclusion so hard, as that you cannot well ease it of them. The things
objected, you deny not: but you answer, that they are impertinent: you tell us
why, because you enquire for privileges which are branches of the Covenant of
Grace, common to all in Covenant, which they may challenge at Gods hand by
virtue of the Covenant, and such are not these. It is not material what you
inquire after, men may sectari Aquilam in nubibus, follow after an Eagle in the
Clouds. But sure I am the Scriptures you bring, prove not that believers now
have more privileges belonging to the Covenant of grace, which all may
challenge at Gods hands, then the Jews had. Yea your second conclusion
contradicts your fifth, understood in this sense. Beside, Circumcision was not
a privilege common to all in the Covenant of Grace: For besides all the
faithful before Abraham, and those of his time, Melchisedeck, and Lot, and
their households, and Job after his time, there was a sort of proselytes,
called strangers, or of the gate, who were not circumcised, yet the Scripture
reckons them among the worshippers of God. Such is Cornelius conceived to be by
Mede in his discourse on Acts 17.4. by Seldom lib. 2. de jure not. and Gent. c.
4. who is said to be (...), a godly or devout man, and one that feared God with
all his house, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God always,
Act. 10.2. and therefore within the Covenant of Grace. Besides the privileges
alleged in the objection do some of them at least belong to the Covenant of
Grace as well as Circumcision, as to be Father of the faithful, to be the
Mother of Christ, and the last belongs much more to the Covenant of Grace then
circumcision. And those Romans 9.4. are privileges which you allege as
belonging to the Covenant of Grace, to which I may join that Romans 3.2. that to
them were committed the Oracles of God, which yet were prerogatives of the
Jews, as Mr Rutherford rightly and according to truth. Lastly, the phrases,
Romans 11.21. of the natural branches, ver. 24. of the wild Olive by nature,
thou wast graffed in besides nature, these according to nature, do seem to me
to import, not that the Jews were in the Covenant of Grace by nature, but that
they had this privilege to be reckoned in the outward administration, as
branches of the olive by their birth, by virtue of Gods appointment which the
Gentiles have not. But you go on. Let any m^n show out of the Scripture, where
our privileges under the Gospel are cut short in any of these things, and be
says somewhat, and in particular for the case in hand, concerning our infants
right to the Covenant of Grace, and the seal of it: Once we are sure the
infant children of all Covenanters were within the Covenant, and the seal also
belonged to them, and by virtue of the Covenant (which is still the same) we
plead their interest in it. Let any man show when and where this was taken
away, when the infant children of believers were expunged out of the Covenant
of grace. It is unreasonable to require men to show what they do not avouch;
it were equal to exact this task at the hands of those who do expunge the
infant children of believers out of the Covenant of Grace: we neither write in
nor expunge out; but leave that to God only, from whom we learn, Esau have I
hated, Jacob have I loved. Though you think your self sure, that all the
infants of Covenanters were within the Covenant of Grace, yet I see no cause to
believe you, for as much as I think God never showed you the book of life,
that you may see who are written in, who expunged out of the Covenant of Grace,
and St Paul who was as well read in that book as you, says Romans 9.8. They
which are the children of the flesh, are not the children of God, but the
children of the promise are counted for the seed, which how to spell I have
showed above. But you add. Certainly who ever will go about to deprive them
of it, to cut off such a great part of the comfort of believing parents, must
produce clear testimonies before they can persuade believers to part with
either of them, either right to the Covenant, or to the seal of the Covenant.
And you add two reasons of it. You are now on your advantage ground, in a
vein of Oratory, and on a subject, of all others, aptest to move affections,
to wit, parents tenderness to their children. But we must not sacrifice truth
to either of these. You insinuate that Antipaedobaptists go about to deprive
infant-children of believers of the Covenant of Grace. They may tell you, it
were a madness for them to go about such an impossibility, as the putting out
or putting into the Covenant of grace, and that they hope so well of you, that
you come not so near the Papists, or Augustines opinion, as to think infants
dying unbaptized, are out of the Covenant of Grace. And as for cutting off a
great part of the comfort of believing parents, I pray you tell us what comfort
is cut off by it, you cannot say that either an infant is certainly regenerated
or saved by Baptism, nor can you say, he is lost for want of it. What comfort
then do you give them indeed which the Antipaedobap^ists do not give as well
as you? Or, what discomfort in truth, do they give them, which you do not? All
the comfort you can indeed give them, is that according to your Hypotheses,
they do their duty: But if it be proved that they profane the Ordinance of
Baptism by bringing Infants to baptism (which there is great cause to think
they do) it may rather bring discomfort to their conscience in fine, then
comfort. But to Believers indeed, Gods glory will be more dear then their own
comfort; and therefore they will be content to part with that which dishonored
God, though it seemed cause of comfort to themselves: they will imitate
Abraham, who quieted himself in the will of God concerning Ishmael, though
dear unto him; and Isaac, who perceiving Gods rejecting of Esau, yet submitted
to his will. And for your two reasons, because they are only a piece of
pathetick oratory, I pass them over. For though there be some strains that
Logically examined will not endure the test, yet having learned the rule about
reading the Fathers, not to account all their Rhetorical expressions their
Dogmaticall resolutions, I am willing to conceive the same of you. And as for
your recapitulation of your conclusions, and your inference thereupon, how
short they are of your conceit of them, I leave it to your self to consider,
and proceed to that which you say is the main and only Objection remaining
which has any color of weight in it.

. 12. That the command to circumcise male Infants is not virtually a command to
baptize Infants.
YOu say the Objection is this: There is no comm^nd, no express institution, or
cle^r ex^mple in all the new Testament of baptizing of Infants; and in the
administratinn of S^craments, we are not to be led by our own reason, or
grounds of seeming p^obabilitie, but by the express order of Christ, and no
otherwise.

This you justly count the main objection; which if you could answer clearly,
all the rest of your Discourse might be saved, and without answering it, all
that you have said else is to little purpose. For, though it were proved that
the children of Believers were in the covenant of Grace, Baptism succeeds to
Circumcision, our privileges greater then the Jews, yet all this cannot
acquit the practice of baptizing Infants from will worship, without an
institution, by Precept or Apostolical example. And therefore, as it concerns
Smectymnuus, so almost all the Divines of the Assembly, and Preachers of the
City, that have so often delivered in their Sermons at Westminster, now in
print, and in the City, that in Gods Worship we must not medd^e a jot further
then God has comm^nded, to show some institution of Christ, or example of his
Apostles for it, otherwise the Prelatists will tell you, that they can show
virtuall command from Analogy of the Ceremonial Law of the Jews, and
tradition Ecclesiastical as ancient as yours for Paedobaptisme, for their
Prelacy, Holidays, Surplice, etc. against which there have been so many, and
those just Declamations. If then you do not stand to it here you may yield up
your weapons. Let us then try it out on this ground: You begin thus; If by
institution, command and example, they mean an express syllabicall command,
etc. I grant that in so many words it is not found in the new Testament that
they should be baptized: No express example where children were baptized. Sure
this is a shrewd sign that you are not likely to make good your ground, when
you have yielded so much. But I grant, that if you make it good, by good
consequence, you may recover all. Let us then consider what you say of that.
But I also add, that I deny the consequence, that if in so many words it be
not commanded in the new Testament, it ought not to be d^ne; this is not true
Divinity, that Christians are not tied to observe that which is not expressly in
so many words set down in the new Testament. True, but whose consequence is
this? Infants are not to be baptized, because that which is not in so many
words commanded in the new Testament, ought not to be done? The consequence
rightly framed is this: In mere positive worship that ought not to be done,
which has not Precept, or Apostolical example equivalent to a Precept,
gathered by plain words, or good inference out of the new Testament: For, if it
have none of these, it is wilworship. And Baptism of Infants is such,
therefore it ought not to be done. The ground of it is this, because all the
ceremonial or mere positive worship of the Jews is now abrogated; and
therefore a Precept of God to them is not a warrant to us now, if it were, it
must be in one thing as well as another, and so we must bring on our necks the
yoke of bondage of the Mosaical Law. Now let us see how you encounter this
Argument: you answer by telling us; there is no express reviving of the Laws,
concerning the forbidden degrees of marriage in the new Testament, except of
not having a m^ns fathers wife, 1 Cor. 5.8. No express Law against polygamie;
no express command for the celebration of a weekly Sabbath; are therefore
Christians free in all these c^ses? I answer, no, but withal I say, that the
first instance is about a moral command, and yet there is for one branch of
incest, an express censure in the new Testament, proving the unl^wfulnesse of
it; whereas the business is now about a point of mere positive ceremonial
worship, and so there is not the like reason. Secondly, the same may be said of
Polygamie, that it is a sin against a moral Precept, and yet there is good
proof against it in the new Testament, from Mat. 19.5.9. And for the third,
enough has been said above, Part. 1. Sect. 8. to show how little advantage you
have in this instance. But you add, yea in the point of S^craments there is no
express command, no example in all the new Testament, where women received the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there is no express command, that the children
of Believers, when they are grown, should be instructed and baptized by their
parents; express command there is, that they should teach the Heathen, and the
Jews, and m^ke them Disciples, and then baptize them, but no command that the
children of those that are Believers should be baptized when they are grown
men; nor any example where ever that was done: will any man therefore say, that
Christian women are not to be partakers of the Lords Supper? I think none will
be so absurd as to affirm it. If it be said, though these things be not
expressly and in terminis in the new Testament, yet they are there virtually,
and by undeniable consequence, I confess it is true. You do in this perioch,
give two instances of practice, warranted by command, or example, gathered by
consequence in the new Testament, in the positive worship of the Sacraments, to
wit, women's receiving the Lords Supper, and the baptizing of children of
Believers, when grown persons, which you grant are virtually, and by undeniable
consequence in the new Testament, though not expressly and in terminis, in
terms. Now this thing you need not have proved, I readily grant it, that what
ever in positive worship is commanded in the new Testament, though it be not in
formal terms commanded, yet if it may be gathered by virtuall consequence,
ought to be done. Nevertheless, I observe: First, that you do well express
the institution of Christ, Matthew. 28.19. when you say, express command there
is, that they should teach the Heathen and the Jews, and make them Disciples,
and then baptize them, of which I may make further use afterward. Secondly,
that when you say, there is no express command, no example in all the new
Testament, where women received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, you imply
there is for males. Now, herein you, Mr. Vines and Mr. Blake, and generally
others follow Zwinglius, whose conceit this was, if he were not the first
inventor: And Mr. Blake expresses himself thus, page 22. No particular
president more then for this of Infant Baptism. But I pray you tell me, is not
that, 1 Cor. 11.28. (...), Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of
that bread, and drink of that cup, an express command in formal terms? And
does not (...) comprehend both Sexes? When the Apostle says, verse. 23. I
delivered unto you that which I received from the Lord, was not that a command,
and that to the whole Church, women as well as men? when he says, 1 Cor.
10.17. We being many, are one bread, and one body; for we are all partakers of
that one bread, and are not women as well of the body as men? And if so, here
is an express example in formal terms for women's receiving the Lords Supper?
The like may be said, of 1 Cor. 12.13. Acts 20.7. unless you will say, that
(...), himself, all, Disciples, comprehend not women, because they are of the
Masculine Gender, which from you that have learned that Logica non curat sexum,
Logic regards not sex, and that hundreds of places there be, where the
Masculine Gender is put, the matter so requiring it, for both Sexes, I do not
suspect. And for your other instance, as I do not remember any brings it but
your self, so it is as little to the purpose as the other: For that which you
say, that there is no express command that the children of Believers should be
baptized when they are grown men. It is true, except they profess the faith;
but there is an express command, as your self grant, to baptize Disciples, and
so to baptize the child of a Believer that professes the faith, not
otherwise; so that these your instances are brought to prove that which is not
denied, and yet the instances are impertinent to prove it. You say further: So
have we virtually, and by undeniable consequence, sufficient evidence for the
baptizing of children, both commands and examples. This assertion is full, if
you mean by children, Infant-children of Believers, prove this, and you need
prove no more. But your fetching such a compass about, makes me imagine your
attempt will prove but a Parturiunt montes, the mountains bring forth,
especially, when your proof is but from Analogy; concerning which, the rule
holds, as Mr. Bowls in his Sermon on Joh. 2.17. Allegorica Theologia, (unless
the Lord himself make the application) non est argumentativa, Allegorical
Divinity is not argumentative; but it is fit you should be heard. You say, For,
first you have Gods command to Abraham, as he was the father of all
covenanters, that he should seal his children with the seal of the covenant. I
grant we have Gods command to Abraham, who is indeed called, the Father of the
faithful, no where that I know, the father of all covenanters, to circumcise
his males of eight days old; and I deny not, but that this was a seal, that
is, a confirming sign of the covenant God made with Abraham; whence Gods
covenant was said to be in their flesh, Genesis 17.13. and it is called the
covenant of circumcision, Act. 7.8. But you have need of the Philosophers stone
to turn this into a command to baptize Infants of Believers, which you thus
attempt. You tell us, Now this truth, all our Divines defend against the
Papists, that all Gods commands and institutions about the Sacraments of the
Jews, bind us as much as they did them in all things which belong to the
substance of the Covenant, and were not accidental unto them. This is your
foundation for your undeniable consequence, it had need then be very
undeniable, and so you conceive it, because it is a truth all our Divines
defend against the Papists. But this is no undeniable Axiom, that what all the
Protestant Divines defend against the Papists must be truth undeniable, I do
not think all the Divines in the Assembly will subscribe to it; I for my part
do disclaim it, I give that honor only to the Holy Scripture, and have learned
from Art. 21. of the Church of England, that General Councels have erred, and
may err, and consequently all the Divines in the world: And one Paphnutius is
to be heard against a whole Oecumenicall Council sometimes. And for this which
you call a truth, all our Divines defend against the Papists, I marvel how you
can aver it, unless you had read them all, which I think neither you nor any
one else has; and for this Maxim, I question whether any one leading Author
have delivered that which you charge all our Divines with, because you direct
not where they deliver it, it is in vain for me to make search; it were to seek
a needle in a bottle of hay; but I will examine whether it be truth or no. You
suppose, that there are comm^nds of God about the Sacraments of the Jews, which
is granted: But then let me tell you, I do not assent to this, that
Circumcision and the Passover are all the ordinary Sacraments of the Jews; I
do approve of the words of R. C. that is, as I learn from Mr. Seldom, de anno
civili veter. Judae. c. 2. Mr. Ralph Cudworth of Cambridge, (whom he there
commends) in that book of his, which is of the true notion of the Lords Supper,
chap. 2. styled by Mr. Seldom, A witty and very learned book, where he says, I
know not what warrant there is for that divinity so m^gisterially imposed upon
us by some, that the Jews had but two Sacraments, Circumcision, and the
Passover, and that it should thence follow by inevitable consequence, that the
Lords Supper must (...), answer only to the Jewish Passover; sure I am, the
Jews had many more; for not to instance in that of Paul, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. nor
to examine all the other Sacramental ceremonies which they had, that were
almost as many Sacraments as Ceremonies, these feasts upon the sacrifices which
we have all this while insisted on, were nothing else but true and proper
sacraments joined with sacrifices. I add, that according to the received
definitions of a sacrament, all the sacrifices that were propitiatory, were
Sacraments, that is, visible sealing signs of invisible grace in Christ
appointed by God to that end. Secondly, you suppose, that of those comm^nds and
institutions of God, some did belong to the substance of the covenant, some
were accidental to them. This last expression is very ambiguous, whether you
mean by [ them] the Jews, or the Sacraments, which seems most likely; or,
whether you would, as the law of opposion requires, say accidental to the
Covenant. Again, you here contradistinguish the substance of the covenant, and
that which is accidental to it, which I construe in the same sense that you
distinguish between the substance of the covenant and the administration of it,
page 10. Conceiving by your explication that you call the substance of the
Covenant that which is invariable, and that which is accidental that which is
variable. Substance does not agree to Covenant, which is an action in proper
sense; but in Schoole^ it is usual to distinguish between the substance of the
act, and the circumstances of it, the essence and the accidents, but I do not
remember that Logicians do oppose the accidents of an act to the substance of
it, and so your expression of the substance of the covenant, and that which is
accidental, is not in my apprehension, after the usual speech of the
Schools, and therefore I cannot well tell what sense to make of it. If [ them]
refer to the Jews, then it is said, something of the Sacraments was
accidental to the Jews, but I know not how to make any handsome sense of
this. If you refer [ them] to the Sacraments, you make something commanded by
God, accidental to the Sacraments, which may be yielded you in this sense;
that there might something have the essence of a Sacrament without such
accidents, as it might be true Circumcision, though it were not the eighth day;
it might be a true Passover, though not on the right night. Yet, in this sense
it cannot be yielded that it was so accidental, that it might be omitted
without sin, any more then the thing it self: For, it was as well a sin, not to
circumcise the eighth day, or not to keep the Passover on the night appointed
by God, as not to do these acts at all, since a command was broken in one as
well as the other: For these reasons, I cannot well tell how to deny or grant
that which you suppose, that some commands of God about the Sacraments of the
Jews, were accidental to them. But that which is supposed, that some of the
commands of God about the Sacraments of the Jews, did contain things belonging
to the substance of the Covenant, meaning, of the covenant of Grace, I can in
no wise assent unto it: For, if either you mean by substance the essence of the
covenant, I utterly deny that any of the Sacraments of the Jews were of the
essence of the covenant, Gods Covenant was, and might be without them: If you
mean by substance, that which in no case might be varied, I deny it in that
sense also; Nothing of the sacraments of the Jews was moral and invariable.
And it is most true, that as the sacrifices, so Sacraments (according to the
common distinction) were belonging to the administration of the covenant for
the time, but never of the substance of the covenant; for that consists only in
the things you express for the substance, page 10. And for the maxim which
you f^ther on all our Divines, which I can hardly believe any one of our
Divines have delivered, as you have done, I utterly deny it, to wit, that all
Gods commands and institutions about the Sacraments of the Jews bind us as much
as they did them, in all things which belong to the substance of the Covenant,
as being contradictory to those words, Art. 7. of the Church of England.
Although the Law given from God by Moses, as touching Ceremonies and Rites, do
not bind Christian men, and on the contrary, I affirm, that they are all
abrogated, subst^nce and circumstance, whole, and part; and I thus prove it:
First, those things bind us not which had their complement in Christ, but all
the Sacraments of the Jews had their complement in Chtist, Ergo. The Major is
the force of the Apostles prohibition; and the reason of it, Col. 2.16, 17. the
Minor is delivered, 1 Cor. 5.7. Col. 2.17. Heb. 9.9. Heb. 10.1. And Beza in
Annot. in Col. 2.14. Hoc respectu ut Euangelicae gratiae adhuc exhibendae,
(...), ceremoniis finis erat impositus ipsius Christi, id est veritatis, quam
antea adumbrarant exhibitione, by the exhibition of Christ himself, that is the
truth, which before they shadowed, there was an end put to ceremonies in this
respect, as being seals of Evangelical grace yet to be exhibited. Secondly,
those things bind not us now, which were taken away by Christ's death; this I
suppose you will not deny, lest you evacuate the effect of Christ's death: But
Christ has by his death abolished all the sacraments of the Jews, comprehended
under the law of commands in ordinances or rites, Ephesians. 2.15. Col. 2.14.
therefore they bind not. Thirdly, those commands which were only to continue
till faith came, those bind not now faith is come: But the commands of the
Sacraments of the Jews were such, therefore they bind not now: The Major and
Minor are delivered, Gal. 3.23, 24, 25. Gal. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Act. 15.9, 10.
Fourthly, those commands bind us not, which were a partition wall between Jews
and Gentiles; but all the Sacraments of the Jews in whole and in part, were a
partition wall between Jews and Gentiles, therefore they bind us not. The Major
and Minor are delivered, Ephesians. 2.14. Fifthly, those commands which were
unprofitable, and weak rudiments of the world, contrary to Christ, beggarly
rudiments, these bind not a Christian now; but such are the Jews sacraments,
Heb. 7.18. Col. 2.8.20. Gal. 4.3.9. therefore they bind not. Sixthly, those
commands that belonged to another Priesthood then Christ's, bind not Christians,
but the Jews sacraments belonged to another Priesthood then Christ's, therefore
they bind not. The Major and Minor are both delivered, Heb. 7.12.16. Heb. 9.10.
Seventhly, those commands that belonged to another covenant then that which now
in force, bind not; but such are the commands of the Jews sacraments, Heb.
8.13. Heb. 9.1. therefore they bind not. Eighthly, those commands which were
proper to the Jews, bind not us Christians; but the sacraments of the Jews were
proper to the Jews, so was Circumcision, the Passover, the Sacrifices;
therefore they bind us not. Ninthly, If one part bind us, then all the commands
bind us; and if we be obliged to any one rite, then to all, for they had all
the same authority; nor has that authority dissolved any one part more then
another. Now it is a sure rule, that ubi lex non distinguit, non est
distinguendum, where the law distinguishes not, we must not distinguish;
therefore, either none binds us, or else we must revoke Judaisme. And indeed,
to say, so far a command of God binds, and so far not, without a plain
declaration of Gods will, is an high presumption, whereby man takes on him to
release or dispense with Gods Law, which is of equal authority with the making
of a law. Lastly, those commands bind us not, which the Apostle would not have
us subject to, no not in part, but such are the commands of the Jewish
sacraments, Col. 2.16.20. Gal. 5.1, 2, 3. and your self say, page 27. the
Apostle would take them off wholly from circumcision; therefore they bind us
not: Yea, it is to overthrow utterly our Christian liberty by Christ, which the
Apostle was so stiff in maintaining that he would not yield, no, not one hou^,
and blamed Peter for di^sembling this liberty, Gal. 2.5.14. to maintain that
all the commands and institutions of God about the Sacraments of the Jews bind
us as much as they did them in all things which belong to the substance of the
Covenant, and were not accidental to them. But you endeavor to make good your
Maxim by instances, and accordingly you say thus: As because Circumcision is
called a seal of the covenant, therefore our Sacraments are seals of the
covenant; though circumcision no where that I know, be called the seal of the
covenant, but only the seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. yet,
because it is called a sign or token of the Covenant, Genesis 17.11. it may well
be called a seal or confirming sign of the covenant with Abraham, and so of
the covenant of Grace; and our Sacraments may be so called likewise, they being
confirming signs of the new Testament, Luke 22.10. Acts 2.38. but not because
Circumcision was called so, but because that phrase expresses the truth of the
thing. But what is this instance to your purpose? Is there a command or
institution of God, binding the Jews to call Circumcision so? or a command or
institution for us by virtue of the command to the Jews to call it so? though I
should oppose him that should deny our Sacraments to be seals of the covenant,
because he should deny a truth, yet I should not say he did sin that did not
call them so. Your next instance is, because Circumcision might be administered
but once, being the seal of initiation, therefore Baptism being also the seal
of initiation is to be administered but once. However I conceive no necessity of
circumcision or Baptism above once, yet I profess my self unsatisfied in
this, that there is either a command, that a person be but once circumcised, or
a person once only baptized: However, if there were a command that a person
should be but once circumcised, and it could be proved that a person should be
but once baptized, yet I utterly deny, that the command to circumcumcise but
once, is a cammand to baptize but once; and therefore what ever any Divines may
dictate Magisterially, yet I do not think my self in Pythagoras his School,
that (...), he said it, should be my rule. You add: but that circumcision was
to be administered on the eighth day only, was an accidental thing, and
therefore binds not. I see no reason why once circumcising should belong to
the substance of the covenant, and to be circumcised on the eighth day should
be accidental; yea, if reason may rule the roast, there is more reason that
circumcising on the eighth day should belong to the substance of the covenant,
being commanded by God expressly, and as many of the Ancients conceive,
particularly Cyprian, Ep. 99. ad finem, typifying Christ's resurrrection on the
eighth day, then that to be circumcised but once, should be of the substance of
the covenant, which is neither commanded, nor is found in Scripture to typifie
any thing belonging to the Covenant: So vain are men's conceits, without the
light of the Word.

But you go forward in the other Sacrament. The Jewish Passover being to be
yearly repeated, binds us to have a repetition of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, which came in room of it, because this belongs to the substance of the
Covenant; both of them being Sacraments for spiritual nourishment, growth, and
continuance in the Covenant: (as the other was, for birth and entrance) but
that their Passover was to be e^ten in an evening, and upon one set evening in
the year, was accidental, and so binds not us. Here is a heap of dictats
without proof. I grant the Jewish Passover was to be yearly repeated, because
God so commanded it, but tha^ either this belonged to the substance of the
Covenant, or that this command binds us to the frequen^ use of the Lords
Supper, I deny it: if it did, it were a very good plea for the superstitious
custom of keeping Easter, and receiving the Communion once a year on that
day, which I think you will be ashamed of, though you lay the egg out of
which it may be hatched. I grant the Lords Supper is to be repeated often, not
because the Jewish Passover was to be yearly repeated, or because it is the
Sacrament for spiritual nourishment, growth, and continuance in the Covenant
(as the other was for birth and entrance) but because it may be plainly
gathered from the Institution or Command of Christ, and the Apostles
declaration thereupon, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. for (...) does imply (...), as often
does imply, not obscurely but plainly, a frequency, and if example must be a
rule, as it is conceived in many cases less clear, and that have less
reason; that example Acts 20.7. should bind that on the first day of the
week, when Disciples come together they have the Lords Supper, for the which
the meeting then was intended, and that action gave denomination to the whole
service; and by the relation of Justine Martyr (if my memory deceive me not)
and others, it was so in the primitive Church of Christians; but I desire to be
sparing in matters of command on men's consciences. As for that you make the
Evening accidental to the Passover, and so not binding us in the use of the
Lords Supper, it is but a dictate. The Evening of the Passover is no more
accidental then the day it self, they being commanded both together. And for
the Lords Supper, how we can be loose to receive it in the Morning or Evening
after Supper, when the Apostle does so distinctly mention in this relation of
the Institution, 1 Cor. 11.23. that it was done in the night; and verse. 25.
(...), after he had supped; I leave to your Assembly to cons^der; Especially
those of you that are so stiff for the sitting together at the Table, which is
not mentioned or hinted in the Apostles relation, and therefore may seem as
much occasional as the other. And for that which you intimate, as if Baptism
were not the Sacrament for spiritual nourishment, growth, and continuance in
the Covenant, as well as for entrance; I take to be but a dictate like the
rest, which upon exact examination will not hold: it seems to me somewhat near
of kin to that of Bellarmine and other Papists, that the efficacy of Baptism
extends not to the remission of the sins of our whole life, but of original
sin only.

But you have yet one more Instance, and thus you speak; The like Instance I
give in our Christian Sabbath; the fourth Commandment binds, as for the
substance of it, as much as ever it bound the Jews, there God once for all,
separated one day of seven to be sacred to himself, and all the world stood
bound in all ages to give unto God that one day of seven, which should be of
his own choosing. Now until Christ's time, God chose the last day of the seven
to be his Sabbath; and having by the death and Resurrection of our Lord Jesus,
put an end to the Saturday Sabbath, and surrogated the first day of the week
instead thereof to be the Lords day, we need no new Commandment for the
keeping of the Lords day, being tied by the fourth Commandment to keep that
day of seven which the Lord should choose; the Lord having chosen this, the
fou^th Commandment binds us to this, as it did the Jews to the former; so in
like manner, I say in the Sacrament of Baptism. What I conceive about the
Lords day, I have before declared Part. 2. Sect. 8. where also I showed you how
different the case of Paedobaptisme is from it, which I shall not now repeat;
Only whereas you bring the Sabbath for an Instance of a Command of God, about
the Sacraments of the Jews, binding us as well as the Jews; you forget the
mark at which you shoot, the Sabbath or Lords day being not to be reckoned
among the Jews Sacraments, or ours, according to the usual Ecclesiastical
acception and definition of the word. You see now your maxim, which is the
foundation of your undeniable consequence undermined, I presume you may see
quickly the superstruction it self overturned: one blow more will do it. You
piece things together thus; When God made the Covenant with Abraham, and
promised for his part to be the God of him and his seed; what God promised to
Abraham, we claim our part in it as the child^en of Abraham, and wh^t God
required on Abraham's part for the substance of obedience, we all stand charged
with, as well as Abraham; We as Abraham are tied to believe, to love the Lord
with all our heart, to have our hearts circumcised, to walk before God in
uprightness; to instruct our children, and bring them up for God, and not for
our selves, nor for the Devil, to teach them to worship God according to his
revealed will, to train them up under the Ordinances and Institutions of Gods
own appointment. All these things God commanded to Abraham, and charges upon
all the children of the Covenant, though there were no express reviving these
Commands in any part of the New Testament. And therefore consequently, that
Command of God to Abraham, which bound his seed of the Jews to train up their
children in that manner of worship, which was then in force, binds the seed of
Abraham now, to train up their children in ^onformitie to such Ordinances as
are now in force. Supposing you mean by what God promised to Abraham, the
spiritual part of the Covenant, and the persons claiming to be believers: I
grant this passage to be truth; for these duties are moral duties, and bind
at all times; but that which follows, I cannot tell how to take for any other
then plain Judaisme. You say, And the some Command which enjoined Abraham to
seal his children with the seal of the Covenant, enjoynes us as strongly to
seal ours with the seal of the Covenant, and that Command of God which
expressly bound Abraham to seal his with the sign of Circumcision, which was
the Sacrament then in force, pro tempore, for the time, does virtually bind us
to seal ours with the sign of Baptism, which is the Sacrament now in force,
and succeeds into the room of the other by his own Appointment. This is your
undeniable consequence, inferred from a Judaizing principle, without so much as
one Scripture to prove either the principle or conclusion; Whereas ^ have
brought ten arguments most of them out of the Scripture against your principle;
and for the Conclusion, what construction can be made of it, but this, that the
Command of God to Circumcise, binds us still? for that was the seal of the
Covenant God enjoined to Abraham, and so the Law given by Moses as touching
Ceremonies and rites, binds Christian men, contrary to Art. 7. of the Church of
England. Then must we Circumcise our Males at the eighth day, as they did. But
you say, it binds us virtually only to seal ours with the sign of Baptism; I
pray you then what mean you by this virtuall binding? The opposite Member was
expressly, and in Terminis, in terms. Is this then your meaning, that it does
not bind expressly and in terminis, but virtually, that is, implicitly, and by
Interpretation? Tell us then, I beseech you, by what rule of Divinity, Logic,
Grammar, or Rhetoric, is a man to conceive this Command, Cut off the foreskin
of the secret part of all the Males in thy house the eighth day. That is, let a
Preacher of the Gospel wash with water at any time after birth the young
Infants, male and female of Believers all over, or on the face. You call this
undeniable Consequence: if so, it is either Demonstrative from the cause, or
effect, or definition, or property, or the like; or it is only Topicall, and
then not undeniable; you say, it is by clear consequence, you may as well say,
this is good consequence, Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram, Thou art Peter,
and upon this rock; Ergo, the Pope is Monarch of the Church; or with Baronius,
Arise Peter, kill and eat; Ergo, the Pope may deprive Princes; if you can
apprehend clear consequence in it, you may enjoy your conceit; Nos non sumus
adeo sagaces, we are not so quick-witted. I pass to the next Command, which
you thus express.

. 13. That Mat. 28. is not a Command to baptize Infants, but contrary to it.
ANother you shall find, Mat. 28. where our Savior bids them go and teach
all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Where you have two things; first, what they were to do. Secondly,
to whom they were to do it; they were to preach and teach all things which he
had Commanded them; that is, they were to Preach the whole Gospel, Mark. 16.15.
The whole Covenant of grace, containing all the promises, whereof this is one,
viz. That God will be the God of Believers, and of their seed; that the seed of
Believers are taken into Covenant with their Parents; this is a part of the
Gospel preached to Abraham. The Gospel which was preached to Abraham, is
delivered Galat. 3.8, 9. And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify
the heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel to Abraham* saying, In
thee shall all Nations be blessed; so then they which be of faith, are blessed
with faithful Abraham. And Romans 1.16, 17. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, for it is the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes,
to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. For therein is the righteousness of
God revealed from faith to faith; as it is written, the just shall live by
faith. The like may be proved out of Romans 10. and elsewhere; but it is no wrong
to say it, that it is a new Gospel, to affirm, that this is one of the
Promises of the Covenant of grace, that God will be the God of Believers, and
of their seed; that the seed of Believers are taken into Covenant with their
Parents. I cannot derive it is pedigree higher then Zuinglius. But you go on:
And they were to baptize them, that is, to administer Baptism as a seal of
the Covenant to all who received the Covenant; this is a dark Paraphrase, you
express it clearer, page 35. Express Command is there, that they should teach
the heathen, and the Jews, and make them Disciples, and then baptize them. If
your meaning be the same in both places, I am content you should Comment on
your own words; you go on; Secondly, We have the persons to whom they were to
do this, all Nations, whereas before the Church was tied to one Nation, one
Nation only were Disciples, now their Commission was extended to make all
Nations Disciples, every Nation which should receive the faith, should be to
him now as the peculiar Nation of the Jews had been in time past. In a word,
Nations here are opposed to the one Nation before. I grant that Nations are
opposed to one Nation, and that the Commission was extended to all Nations;
which you express well, page 44. Whereas before they were to go to the lost
sheep of the house of Is^ael, now they were to go unto all the world. But
what sense those wo^ds may carry, Every Nation which should receive the faith,
should be to him now as the peculiar Nation of the Jews had been in time past
is doubtful. For either it may have this sense, Every Nation that receives the
faith, that is, Believers of every Nation, shall be to me a peculiar people,
as the Jews were, in the sense that Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 2.9. and so the sense
is good; or thus, When a Nation shall receive the faith, that is, a great or
eminent part, the Governors and chief Cities, and representative body, shall
receive the faith, that Nation shall in like manner have all their little ones
capable of Baptism, and counted visible members of the Church, as the
posterity of the Jews were in the time of that Church administration. This I
guess is the business that is now upon the anvill, by observing ^undry
passages in latter Writers, with whom your Sermon agrees, as if it came out of
the same forge. Mr Blake, page 20. has these words. In the same sense and
latitude, as Nation was taken in respect of the Covenant of God, when the
Covenant and Covenant-initiating-Sacrament was restrained to that one only
Nation, where their Commission was first limited: in the same sense it is to be
taken (unless the Text express the contrary) now this Commission is enlarged.
This cannot be denied of any that will have the Apostles able to know Christ's
meaning by his words in this enlarged Commission. But Nation then, as is
confessed, did comprehend all in the Nation in respect of the Covenant, and
nothing is expressed in the Text to the contrary, therefore it is to be taken
in that latitude, to comprehend Infants. Mr Rutherfurd in his peaceable and
temperate plea, Chapter 12. Concl. 1. Arg. 7. has these words; Seeing God has
chosen the race and nation of the Gentiles, and is become a God to us, and to
our seed; the seed must be holy, with holiness of the chosen Nation, and
holiness external of the Covenant, notwithst^^^ing the father and mother were
as wicked, as the Jews who slew the Lord of glory. And indeed those
Paedobaptists are forced to say so, who justify the practice of baptizing
foundlings, infants of Papists, excommunicate persons, Apostates, if they be
borne within their Parish; thereby directly crossing their own tenent, That
this is the privilege of a believer from the Covenant of grace, I will be the
God of a believer, and his seed; And the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 7.14. according
to their own exposition, which is, that the children whereof one of the parents
is not sanctified by the faith of the other, are federally unclean; nor
considering that this practice of baptizing all in the Parish, arose not from
any conceit of the federall holiness of a Nation, but from the conceit of
Cyprian, with his 66 Bishops, that the grace of God is to be denied to none
that are borne of men: upon which ground, and the necessity of baptism to
save a child from perishing, as of old, so still among the common people, and
officiating Priests, children are baptized, without any relation to
Covenant-holinesse, particular or national. But I leave this to the
Independents to agitate, who have in this point the advantage; and return to
the Text, Mat. 28.19. Concerning which the question is, what (...), or [them]
refers to in our Saviors words: whether all Nations must be the substantive to
it, without any other circumscription, or the word, (...), men and women, as
the Author of infants baptizing proved lawful by Scriptures, or (...),
Disciples, included in the verb (...), which may be translated, make
Disciples. That Author denies not, but that the verb may signify to make
Disciples, yet by the subject matter, which it is here taken and used to
express, it must be taken for to teach, and not to make Disciples: because to
m^ke Disciples was not in the power of the Apostles (upon whom the command lay)
it being the peculiar of God to frame the heart to submit unto and embrace the
Apostles teaching, and to cast them into the form and obedience of it, and so
to make them Disciples: but to teach and thereby endeavor (as much as in them
lay) to make Disciples, was in their power and duty: and is all the whole
meaning of the word here, therefore properly, and rightly rendered teach, and
not, make Disciples. But that the word does not signify only simply, to
teach, whether with effect or without, but to teach till they become disciples,
is plain by the use of it elsewhere, in all the places it is used in the new
Testament. Mat. 13.52. (...), Every Scribe that is so taught, as to become a
disciple. Mat. 27.57. (...), rendere^ ^y Beza, Vulgar, ours, etc. who also
himself was Jesus disciple: where the noune (...), disciple, is included in
the verb, and expressed by John, Cha. 19.38. (...), being a disciple of Jesus.
Act. 14.21. (...), which though our translatours render, and had taught many;
yet Beza renders it, Discipulos multos adjunxissent, and had joined many
disciples. So plain it is that the noune (...), disciples, is included in the
verb (...), to make disciples; and that it is put not for simple teaching that
is without effect; for then the Apostle might be said (...), when he did preach
to the Athenians who mocked, Acts 17.32. and the unbelieving Jews, Acts 28.24.
for they were taught: but for teaching, cum effectu, with effect, so as that
the persons taught became disciples. And Mr Edwards lately at Christ-Church
averred in all the Dictionaries he could peruse, it did not signify simply to
teach, coming from (...), to learn, he might have added coming from the noune
(...), a disciple. As for the objection; Christ should command them that which
was not in their power. I answer, it was in their power, and their duty not
only to teach simply, so as to propound things to them, but also so as to
bring them to be disciples, which they could do, not as principal, sole,
supreme agents, but as workers with God, (...), as it is 2 Cor. 6.1.
subordinate instruments to him they could, in which respect they are called
wise Master Builders, that beget men by the Gospel, save and convert them,
espouse them to Christ; etc. Even as the knife cuts, though not without the
hand; as an Ambassador makes peace, though not without his Prince. And this
might be rightly charged to them, as it was charged to Peter, to feed Christ's
sheep, and to strengthen his brethren, though he could do neither of
himself. But that Author has another exception, that (...), disciples, is of
the m^sculine gender, and if that were the substantive to (...), them, then
women should be excluded. To this I answer, that there be hundreds of places,
where the masculine comprehends both sexes, as Joh. 3.16. (...), every one that
believes, though in the masculine gender, yet comprehends women. Romans 5.12.
(...), upon all men, comprehends women too: and women are comprehended under
(...) disciples, Acts 1.15. etc. Besides that Author did not consider it seems,
that if (...), men, were the substantive, and (...), them, in the masculine
gender were the adjective, women if this reason were worth any thing, should be
excluded however. And for that which he says, " that some say (...), them,
cannot agree with (...), nations, because of a different gender, though it may
be a reason, an^ Piscator made use of it thus far, (...) syntaxi refertur ad
sensum, non ad vocem: nam praecessit (...), them, in the syntaxis is referred
to the sense, not to the word, for nations went before: yet I fasten nothing on
it, since it cannot be denied that Enallage, Heterosis, or change of gender is
frequent. But for my part, I conceive that the sense includes both, neither
separately, both conjunctly, and that (...), them, referres both to (...),
disciples, and to (...), nations; thus, (...), disciples of all Nations, and
must be thus expounded, make disciples of all nations, baptizing them, that is,
the disciples of all nations. And this is agreeable to your Paraphrase, page
35. teach the heathen, and Jews, and make them disciples, and then baptize
them; and page 38. make all nations disciples. And Beza annot. in Matthew. 28.19.
(...), id est, discipulos mihi f^cite ex omnibus gentibus, make disciples to me
of all nations: and a little after* (...), ergo hoc loco, non neutropassive pro
dis^ipulum esse, sed active accipitur quasi in Conjugatione Hiphil, ac si dicas
discipulare, to teach therefore in this place is not taken neuterpassively for
to be a disciple, but actively, as if it were in the Conjugation Hiphil, as if
you should say, to make to learn. Some do make the substantive credentes,
believers, and that parallel place, Mark. 16.16. may lead us to it; but
disciples and believers being all one in this matter, it comes to one pass. I
rather, as I said, make the substantive (...), disciples out of all nations,
for these reasons; first, because it suits with the expression, Joh. 4.1. (...)
he makes more disciples and baptizeth; where making disciples is put before
baptizing, and baptizing of Christ by his Apostles is of disciples: they that
were baptized by John, or Christ's disciples, are every where called the
disciples of John, and of Jesus, and the doctrine they taught them, their
baptism, Acts 19.1, 2. and elsewhere. Secondly, because usually hearing and
believing are put before baptizing, Acts 2.41. Acts 8.12.38. Acts 10.48. Acts
16.15.33. and so were called disciples, which shows that the Apostles so
construed the precept of Christ to baptize disciples. Besides, if [ them] were
referr^d to nations or men, without due circumscription of disciples or
believers, as a limitation, directing whom to baptize, it would follow, that
either they might baptize any man or nation in the world, whether taught or
not, and if so, then the Spaniards practice of forcing droves of Indians to
baptism, and that practice of baptizing a Kingdom upon the Kings conversion
and command, without sufficient precedent teaching, were justifiabl^; or else
they must baptize none till all men or all nations were to be baptized together.

There has been vented lately, in a little p^per, a very absurd one, though it
be licensed, entitled, A Declaration against the Anabaptists; in which the
Author says, that making Disciples, is to be done by baptizing them; which if
true, then the Apostles needed to have done nothing else, in observance of that
command of discipling, but to baptize, and it would serve for a good plea for
non-preaching, or mere officiating Priests: whereas in Mark. 16.15. which I
think will not be denied to be parallel to this, Matthew. 28.19. Disciple all
nations, is preach the Gospel to every creature. But this conceit is so absurd,
that I presume none that has any wit will entertain it, though the paper be
licensed. That which I have hitherto discoursed, tends to this, to prove, that
when Christ says, Teach all nations, and baptize them, his meaning is, by
preaching the Gospel to all nations, make them Disciples, and baptize those
that become Disciples of all nations. Now, concerning the Position, which after
Mr. Blake and Mr. Rutherfurd, you seem to embrace, concerning the federall or
external holiness of a believing or chosen nation, giving right to the
Infants of that nation to be baptized. Give me leave to argue a little: First,
if Infants may be baptized, because they are born in a chosen nation, or a
believing nation, then there may be a rule whereby we may know when a nation
may be called a believing, or chosen nation, when not; otherwise we should not
know when to make use of this title to baptism, when not: and it were absurd
to conceive God should give us a rule, and no direction how to make use of it.
But no rule can be assigned whereby to know when a nation is a believing,
chosen, or discipled nation, giving right to baptize Infants of that nation,
when not; Ergo, If it be said they may be known, in that they are descended
from such a Believer as Abraham. I reply, then God would have lef^ us a note to
know such a nation by, as he did Abraham's posterity by Circumcision: But there
is no such note, nor any such nation marked out; this were indeed contray to
the appointment of admitting all nations. If it be said when the king of a
country is a Believer, this is no rule; for it may be he may be a Believer,
and all the rest unbelievers, and then the practice of baptizing Infidels before
they are instructed at the command of Princes: As when Charles the great fo^ced
the Saxons to be Christians, were to be justified. If it be said, the nation is
a believing nation, when the representative body believes, and so the children
of that people may be baptized: I answer, the representative body may be
Believers, and the greatest part Infidels, Papists, etc. these Infidels
children must then be baptized; yea, the Infidels themselves, by virtue of an
implicit faith in their governors faith; for they are a part of the nation.
And therefore if Mr. Blakes Argument be good: The Infants of any nation make up
a part of the nation, and the nation where they came was to be discipled; and
therefore the Infants to be baptized: the same reason holds for Infidels of
age, for they are a part of the nation. If it be said, it is a believing
nation, when the greatest part are Believers, how shall that be known? How
shall a minister do when he cannot come to the knowledge of it? must he stay
till they be counted by poll, as the Sheriffs do at the election of Knights of
the Shire, and upon Certificate that the major part is believing, then baptize?
Why did not the Apostles so, nor any other Ministers to this day? How ill would
it fare with some poor Christians, who are but a handful in respect of the
multitude of unbelievers of their own nation, as in the Primitive times, when
Princes and States were adversaries to Christianity? If it be said, when all
adulti of ripe years are believers, then such a right is asserted as never was,
nor perhaps ever will be, except when all Israel shall be saved; and so no
Infants shall be baptized on this ground. Secondly, but, if it could be
resolved what number or sort of Believers make a believing nation, giving title
to Infant Baptism, yet there would be uncertainty concerning the kind of
believing, which might denominate a believing or chosen nation, having federall
or external holiness, such as may create title to the baptism of Infants of
that nation. There are some nations that are reckoned among Believers, which
yet are mis-believers, as Heretics, for instance, the nation of the Goths,
who were Arians; or grossly Idolatrous, as the Spaniards, shall they give title
to their children to baptism, when without repentance they cannot be deemed
capable of communion in the body of Christ? Thirdly, if Infants of wicked
parents be capable of baptism, because born in a believing nation, then this
privilege agrees to them, either in respect of their descent, or the place of
their birth, or both. If in respect of their descent, then either their descent
within man's memory, or their descent beyond all the memory of man. If of their
descent within memory and knowledge, then Foundlings have no title hereby to
Baptism, of whose parentage there is no knowledge, nearer or remoter, who are
nevertheless baptized: If of that beyond memory, it must be upon such a
ground, as is common to all Infants in the world, which are descended from some
Believer, in some precedent generation; or else such a rule must be set down,
as has no certainty in it, by which to administer that Ordinance: If from the
place of birth only, because the Church of God is there, then children of Turks
or Jews are to be baptized, because born in London: If by reason of both, when
they concur, and not otherwise, then the children of an English Ambassador at
Constantinople, or Agent at Aleppo, supposed to be wicked, as the Jews that
persecuted Christ, loose this privilege, because born out of England: If there
be any other national respect upon which this supposed privilege may be
fastened, it either has these or the like inconveniences consequent on it.
Fourthly, if there be such a federall holiness of a chosen, discipled, or
believing nation as may make the Infants of that nation, though their parents
be openly wicked, capable of Baptism; this right must come from some grant or
charter or other. We find indeed, God would have the posterity of Abraham, and
all the males in that nation circumcised: So God appointed it, what ever their
parents were, for reasons before rehearsed; but there is no such grant,
promise, covenant, or appointment now to any nation of Gentiles, as was then to
the posterity of Abraham, because the reasons now cease, the Messiah is now
come, and the prerogatives are now personal, not national, not one nation
has privilege above another as a nation, but personal, as a Believer in any
nation.As for the Text which Mr. Rutherfurd alleges, to wit, Romans 11.16. it
has been examined before, and showed out of the Text, that holiness of the
branches there, is meant personal by faith; and the objection against it which
he makes, to wit, that then the children of a believing parent should be all
sanctified, whereas the contrary is manifest: as in Absalom, the son of David,
proceeds upon this mistake, that by the root and first fruit, are meant any
Ancestor; whereas it is meant of Abraham the Father of the faithful, as
Deodate in his Annot. on Romans 11.16. or, at most, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in
whose names all the elect are comprehended, when God calls himself The God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as our Savior intimates, Luke 20.37, 38. Mat. 22.32.
Mar. 12.26, 27.And for that which he says, that the Jews in Paul's time were
holy by covenant, howbeit for the present, the sons were branches broken off
for unbelief, if it be meant of the Jews broken off through unbelief, in
respect of their present state, they were not holy by covenant. Only thus f^r
the Jewish nation in Paul's time is said to be holy, either in respect of the
remnant, according to the election of Grace, mentioned, verse. 5. of which he
was one; or in respect of the posterity that should afterward be called
according to the promise of God to Abraham, in which sense they were federally
holy; yet this did neither give right for the baptizing of children of
unbelieving Jews in Paul's time, nor now. And for that which he says that God
has chosen the race and nation of the Gentiles, it is not right: For God has
not chosen simply the race and nation of the Gentiles, but a people to himself,
out of the race and nation of the Gentiles, as it is said, Rev. 5.7. Thou have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and nation.
As for Mr. Blakes Argument, because it falls in with your reason, I shall
answer them together in that which follows. You say; Now we know, that when
that one nation of the Jews were made Disciples, and circumcised, their Infants
were made disciples (made to belong to Gods School) and circumcised with them,
when that nation was made disciples in Abraham's loins, and circumcised their
seed also was the same, when that nation was taken out of Egypt, and actually
made Disciples, their children were also with them. This is your first Argument
to prove a command by clear consequence, from Mat. 28.19. for baptizing
Infants. Now the strength of it lies in these suppositions, First, that Christ
did bid them baptize all nations, after the manner that the Jews did circumcise
one nation. And Mr. Blake does conceit this so strongly, that he says, this
cannot be denied of an^, that will have the Apostles to be able to know Christ's
meaning by his words in this enlarged Commission. Secondly, that the nation of
the Jews were discipled when they were circumcised. I do not impute it to Mr.
Blake through defect of ability to understand, but through the strong hold
which these points have in his mind, that Baptism succeeds Circumcision, in
the place, room, and use of it, and the covenant of the Gospel is all one,
with the covenant made to Abraham, that he imagines there should be such an
allusion to circumcision, as that the Disciples must understand Christ's
meaning, whom to baptize from the Precept of circumcision, Genesis 17. but in mine
apprehension, there is no color for such a conceit. It Is true, he enlarges
their commission, and bids them, Go and make Disciples of all nations; or, as
it is in Mark, Preach the Gospel to every creature, and then to baptize the
Disciples of all nations; but this enlargement of commission was not in
opposition to the restriction about circumcision, Genesis 17. but in opposition to
the restriction, Mat. 10.5, 6. as your self rightly express it, page 44. And
for that expression, that the nation of the Jews were discipled, that their
Infants were discipled, that the nation was made Disciples in Abraham's loins;
it is such a construction of the word (...), make Disciples, as I believe no
Lexicon, nor, I think, any Expositor to this day made of the word, which
plainly signifies so to teach, as that the persons taught do learn, and
accordingly profess the things taught; and our Lord Christ in Mark expresses
it by preaching the Gospel, and accordingly, the Apostles by preaching, did
(...), disciple, Acts 14.21. which how it can be said of Infants that can
neither understand, nor speak the doctrine of the Gospel preached to them,
without a miracle, I know not. I make no question, but Abraham did teach his
children, and make them Disciples, and that the Israelites did teach and make
Disciples of their children, as soon as they could understand the things of
God; but that they should be disciples in Abraham's loins, is such a piece of
language as I never read in the Bible, nor in any Author, but such as torture
words to make them speak what they would have them. And sure, if the Apostles
had understood our Saviors command thus: [ Disciple all nations baptizing
them; that is, Admit the infants of all nations to baptism, as the Jews did
the male Infants of that one nation to circumcision] they might have saved
themselves a great deal of labor of preaching before baptism, and of baptizing
females, and would have left us some precedent of such a practice. But you add
further: And we know, that in every nation, the children make a great part of
the nation, and are always included under every administration to the nation,
whether promises or threatenings, privileges or burdens, miracles or
judgments, unless they be excepted: So are they in families, in cities, it
being the way of the Scripture, when speaking indefinitely of a people, nation,
city, or family, to be either saved or damned, to receive mercies or
punishments, expressly to except Infants, when they are to be excepted, as we
see in the judgment that befell Israel in the Wilderness; when all that
rebellious company that came out of Egypt was to perish by Gods righteous
doom, their little ones were expressly excepted, Numb. 14.31. and in the
covenant actually entered into by the body of the nation, Nehem. 10. it is
expressly limited to them who had knowledge and understanding: And the Disciples
who received this commission, knew well, that in all Gods former
administrations, when any parents were made disciples, their children were
taken in with them to appertain to the same school; and therefore it behooved
the Lord to give them a caution, for the leaving out of Infants in this new
administration, that they might know his mind, had be intended to have them
left out, which that ever he did, in word or deed, cannot be found in
Scripture. The Lord has plainly given a caution in Scripture for the leaving
out Infants in this administration acco^ding to ordinary rule: For, in that he
directs them to baptize disciples upon preaching, he does exclude Infants, who
are not such disciples, nor according to ordinary providence can be. And this
the Apostles could easily understand, as knowing that under the term Disciple,
in common speech, and in the whole new Testament, those only are meant, who
being taught, professed the doctrine taught by such a one, as John's Disciples,
Christ's Disciples, the disciples of the Ph^risees, Luke 5.33. the disciples of
the perverters, Acts 20.30. and accordingly they administered Baptism. And in
that Christ appoints these to be baptized, he excludes others: For the
appointment of Christ, is the rule according to which we are to administer holy
things, and he that does otherwise, follows his own invention, and is guilty of
will worship; and thus we construe the meaning of the Holy Ghost in other
appointments: As, because it is said, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat, therefore Infants are excluded, though Infant-c^^^union was
held lawful and necessary for six hundred years in the Church: Wine is
appointed in the Eucharist, therefore not Water mixed with Wine, as the Papists
contend: Master Bal^y. A diswasion from the error of the times, chapter 8. p. 175.
argues from this very text in like manner, to prove that only Ministers have
power to preach the Word ordinarily.
Water in Baptism, therefore not salt, chrisme, spettle: the Preacher to
baptize, therefore not women, or private persons: Males to be circumcised,
therefore no females: two shall be one flesh, therefore no more then two,
against Polygamie, Matthew. 19.5. So that unless you will alter the definition
of will worship, according to Mat. 15.9. in point of worship, that is excluded
which is not expressed. And therefore, whereas you say, [it behoved the Lord to
give them a caution for the leaving out of Infants in this new administration,
that they might know his mind, if that be intends to have them left out, which
that ever he did, in word or deed, cannot be found in Scripture]. I may more
truly invert thus; it behoved the Lord to give them a Precept for the putting
in of Infants in this (which you truly call) new administration, as being not
the same with Circumcision, that they might know his mind, if that he intends
to have them put in, which that ever he did, in word or deed, cannot be found
in the Scripture. Certainly, you may as soon extract water out of a flint, as
draw a command to baptize Infants out of this Scripture, by any express terms,
or virtuall consequence: but the ordinary baptizing of Infants is, and may be
proved from this Text to be a will worship, if this Scripture be the rule of
administering ordinarily that Ordinance, which it indeed is, and has been still
taken to be. As for that which you say, The children make in every nation a
great part of the nation, so do the Infidels that are adulti, of ripe years;
and yet are not therefore included in this speech, Teach all nations, and
baptize them; and as for that which you say, the children are always included
under every administration to the nation, whether promises or threatenings,
privileges or benefits, mercies or judgments, unless they be excepted;
therefore here Infants are included, when it is said, Go teach all nations,
baptizing them. I answer: First, that this speech in so universal and ample
expressions, if understood of temporal judgments and mercies, is contrary to
Ezekiel. 17.20. Jer. 31.29, 30. Isai. 6.13. and 10.22. if of eternal, as it seems
you mean, when you say, [ to be either saved or damned] it is contrary to Romans
9.13.27.29. Romans 13.5. Secondly, if it were true, yet makes nothing to the
purpose, since this Prec^pt is not an appointment to baptize all nations as
nations without a^ further circumscription, for then every person in the world
might be ^aptized, but disciples of all nations; and therefore it is not a
national privilege, but a personal, belonging to Disciples or Believers of
every nation. And for that which you say, The disciples who received this
commission, knew well, that in all Gods former administrations, when any
parents were made disciples, their children were taken in with them to
appertain to the same school; if it be thus understood, that God required that
parents being called, should instruct their children, and so the children in
potentia propinqua, in a near possibility, were disciples, it is granted,
according to that which God speaks of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. and requires of the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 6.7. But if you mean it thus, that the Disciples knew, that
when any parents were made disciples, barely and precisely for this reason
without any other, the children were actually disciples, and so to have
Baptism administered to them, it is an untruth, that has no ground for it. But
you have yet somewhat more to say for Infants being disciples; and therefore
you thus answer an objection. If it be said they are not capable of being
disciples, I answer, as capable as the Infants of the Jews and Proselytes were
when they were made disciples. It is granted, but neither were the Infants of
Jews or Proselytes capable of being actually disciples in an ordinary way, nor
are ours. You go on: And besides, they are devoted to be disciples, being to be
trained up by their parents, who are from their Infancy to teach them the
knowledge of Christ. It is hard to say, that parents are to teach Infants from
their infancy the Knowledge of Christ: For, though it is said of Timothy, Thou
have known the Holy Scriptures, (...), 2 Timothy 3.15. yet our Translators would
not render it from an Infant, but from a child. But however, if their parents
be to teach them from their infancy, and the parents devote them to be
disciples, yet this does not make them disciples actually, but potentially,
they may never be disciples for all that. But you tell us: And at the present,
they are capable of his own teaching. I deny not but Infants are capable of
Christ's own teaching, yea, of actual faith, yea, of actual profession of
faith. The same power that could make John Baptist in his mothers womb sensible
of the presence of Christ's mother, and to leap for joy, that could open the
mouth of Balaams Ass, can out of the mouth of babes and sucklings perfect
praise. But then this is done in an extraordinary way, and extraordinary
accidents make not an ordinary rule. But you add: And su^e I am, in Christ's
own dialect, to belong to Christ, and to be a Disciple of Christ, or to bear
the name of Christ, are all one; and that such Infants do belong to Christ, and
bear the name of Christ, I have sufficiently proved already, and in the margin
you cite Mat. 10. 42. Mar. 9.41. Mat. 18.5. Mr. Blake page 21. seems to triumph
in this Argument, when he says: Who then is not afraid to refuse them, who
will receive Christ? Who will not baptize them, that is willing to baptize
disciples in the name of Christ? But this is a triumph before victory. The plain
truth is, there is never a one of all the three Texts, speaks of little ones in
respect of age. The first, Mat. 10.42. is meant of the Apostles; and as Beza in
his Annotations says rightly, Parvos vocat per concessionem suos discipulos,
homines nimirum coram mundo viles and abjectos, He calls his Disciples little
ones by concession, to wit, men vile and abject before the world; so that they
are called little, in respect of their outward estate in the world, not in
respect of age. The second Text, Mar. 9.41. has not the term little ones, or
children at all, and it is expressly meant of the Apostles, (...), because ye
belong to Christ. The third Text, Matthew. 18.5. is as little to the purpose.
For, first the word is not Infant, but little child, who may be one able to
speak: secondly, one such little child, is not meant of a little child in age,
but a little child in affection, though an old man in age, resembled by a
little child, as appears out of verse. 3. one that is converted, and made as a
little child, verse. 4. one that humbles himself as a little child, verse. 6.
one of those little ones that believe in him. And therefore Beza rightly on
verse. 5. has this Annot. Puerulem talem (...), id est, quempiam ita se
demittentem, ut puerum referat: nec enim proprie de pueris agit; such a little
child, that is, any one that does so humble himself, that he resembles a
little child: For he does here properly deal concerning children: And so the
Syriack Interpreter, qui sit sicut puer iste, who may be as this boy. But you
have yet one place to prove that Infants are disciples, which you thus
express. And I desire it may be seriously weighed, whether that expression,
Acts 15.10. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the necks of
the Disciples, do not necessitate us to give the name of Disciples to Infants,
as well as to grown men: For I reason thus; All they upon whose necks those
false teachers would h^ve put the yoke of Circumcision, are called disciples,
and to be called disciples; but they would have put the yoke of Circumcision
upon Infants, as well as grown men; therefore Infants ^s well as grown men are
called disciples, and to be called so. The Major is undeniable, the Minor I
prove thus: They who pressed Circumcision to be in force according to the
manner of Moses Law, and would put it upon their necks after the manner of
Moses his Law, they would put it upon Infants of those who were in convenant
with God, as well as upon the necks of those who were grown men; for so Moses
Law required: But these false teachers pressed Circumcision to be in force, as
is apparent, Acts 15.1. I have seriously weighed this Text, Acts 15.10. as you
desire, and I find no necessity nor color of giving to Infants the name of
Disciples from that Text. And in answer to your Argument, though you say, it is
undeniable, yet I have the boldness to deny the Major in your Prosyllogisme;
For, though it be true that they are called disciples upon whose necks they
would put the yoke of Circumcision, yet it is not said, they would put it only
on Disciples, it is more probable they endeavored to put it on the necks of
all, whether Disciples or others, as universally necessary to salvation, v. 1.
And therefore your M^jor is not certain, that all they, upon whose necks those
false teachers would have put the yoke of Circumcision are called disciples:
The Minor likewise in your Prosyllogisme, I deny and in your latter Syllogism,
framed to prove it, I deny the Major: For, though I deny not that they would
have had Infants as well as converted Gentiles circumcised; yet the putting the
yoke of Circumcision is not actual circumcision in their flesh, for that they
were able to bear for many ages; and at this day Mahometanes and Abassine
Christians do still bear, as well as Jews; bu^ the yoke of circumcision is the
necessity of it on men's consciences, and therewith the whole Law of Moses,
verse. 5. and that as necessary to salvation, v. 1. and therefore Peter having
said, v. 10. Why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the necks of the Disciples?
adds, v. 11. but we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus we shall
be saved even as they, plainly implying, that the yoke he meant, was the
necessity of Circumcision, and keeping Moses his law to salvation. Now, this
yoke was not put upon Infants, but upon brethren taught the necessity of it,
verse. 1. And thus, like another Sisyphus, the stone you roll returns upon you:
Volvendo saxum sudas, nec proficis bilum, you sweat in rouling a stone, and yet
profit not a whit; and you are so far from proving by virtuall and undeniable
consequence, a command to baptize Infants of Believers, according to ordinary
rule, that on the contrary, this Text, Mat. 26.19. clearly proves Infants are
not by ordinary rule to be baptized, because Disciples of all nations, and no
other, are appointed to be baptized; and therefore baptizing of Infants is
besides the institution, and so will worship. But yet Mr. Blake has one Text
for a reserve, which he thus puts in array: Let that Text of the Prophet be
well weighed, where speaking by the Spirit of prophecy of the rejection of the
Jews, and the glorious call of the Gentiles in their stead, in that ample way,
as it is there set out, has these words: Behold, I will lift up mine hand to
the Gentiles, and set up my Standard to the people, and they shall bring thy
sons in their arms; and thy daughters shall be carried on their shoulders,
Isai. 49.22. If there were but such an hint, as that by way of prophecy to have
left them behind, we should from some have heard of it with a noise. It may be
truly said, the alleging this Text for Infant Baptism, is but a noise, vox
and praeterea nihil, a voice, and nothing beside, as the Spartan said of the
Nightingal. To it I answer, that the allusion is to nursing-fathers and
mothers, carrying children on shoulders, and in their arms, and the speech is
metaphorical, as Junius says in his annot. in locum, Haec omnia allegorice
dicuntur, all these things are spoken allegorically, and may be either
understood, as he speaks, of the spiritual amplifying of Christ's Kingdom; and
so children were brought on arms and shoulders among Gentiles by preaching and
instruction, as when the Apostle says, he was gentle among the Thessalonians
as a nurse that cherishes her children, 1 These. 2.7. or, it may be understood
of the return of the Jews from captivity; and that the following verses make
more probable; nor is there a word in the Text that I observe, of the rejection
of the Jews, as he says, but of their restitution. But if it must be
understood properly, which has no likelihood, it may be as well conceived of
bringing their children to have laying on of hands, as baptizing of them. I go
on to that which follows in your Sermon.

. 14. Of examples in Scripture of Infants Baptism, particularly of baptizing
of households.
ANother command by good consequence for the baptizing of infants, you shall
find in the forementioned place: when the Apostle exhorts them to repent and
be baptized, etc. because the promise was made to them and to their children,
which as I showed clearly proves that the children of such as believe and are
baptized, are taken into Covenant, and therefore by good consequence they are
to receive the seal of the Covenant, the Text not only showing that they are
within the Covenant, but also that a right to Baptism is a consequence of
being within the Covenant. This text has been examined before, and it has
been proved that the promise there is the sending of Christ, who was raised up
to bless them and their children first, then those that were afar off, being
called, and that the promise does not belong to their children, as the children
of believers, but as called, and that the promise is not alleged as of it
self giving right for them or their children to be baptized, without any other
consideration, but as a motive and encouragement for them to repent, and so to
be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; for the remission of sins,
notwithstanding they had crucified the Lord of glory, and wished his blood to
be upon them, and their children; which being thus rightly understood, is so
far from proving a command to baptize infants, that on the contrary, it
proves they are not to be baptized. You say further; Thus for Commands: for
examples, though there should be none, there is no great argument in it, when
the rule is so plain, yet we have examples enough by good consequence. It is
true, if the rule were plain, there would be no need of an example; and on the
other side, if we had regulating examples, we should thereby know how to
interpret the rule. But whereas you say, we have examples enough by good
consequence, it may be well suspected, these examples will prove like the
commands, by consequence mere conjectures and conceits of men that would have
it so. But let us hear what you say. For you shall find, that the Gospel
took place just as the old administration, by bringing in whole families
together; when Abraham was taken in, his whole family was taken in with him;
when any of the Gentiles turned proselytes, ordinarily their whole families
came in with them; so in this new administration, usually if the master of the
house turned Christian, his whole family came in and were baptized with him;
the whole household of Cornelius, the first converted Gentile, Act. 11.14. the
household of Stephanus, the household of Aristobulus, the household of Narcissus,
the household of Lydia, the household of the Jailer: These are examples not to be
contemned. True: nor any part of holy Scripture which is written for our
learning, but in all these, there is no example of an infants baptizing in the
Scripture. You say, the Gospel took place just as the old administration, by
bringing in whole families together. By the old administration, you mean
circumcision. But we do not find the Gospel or Baptism took place just in
the manner or circumcision; for in circumcision, it was but in one family
singled out, of the males only, whether in the covenant of grace or not,
children or servants, elder or younger, at eight days old, in the house, by
the Master of the family, or others in his stead. But in Baptism it is clean
otherwise, so that you might more truly have said, the new administration of
Baptism is just opposite to that of circumcision, yea in respect of that one
thing wherein you make them agree so well, the bringing in of whole families
together, it was but contingently so, not always so, nor constantly so,
according to any promise or prophecy, and when it did so happen, we find not
any infant baptized, nor any intimation of baptizing households, in conformity
to the administration of circumcision. And this may appear by going through
the examples of baptizing in the new Testament. Concerning John the Baptist, it
is said, Mat. 3.5. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the
region round about Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their
sins. Luke 3.29. And all the people that heard him, and the Publicans
justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John; but the Pharisees and
Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of
him. Concerning Christ and his disciples, it is said, Joh. 4.1, 2. When the
Lord knew how the Pharisees heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples
then John (though Jesus himself baptized not but his disciples.) In these
examples the practice of baptizing, is not by taking in a family, but by
admitting all that would become disciples over all the Countries. After the
ascension of Christ, the first example of Baptism, is that Acts 2.44. and
there it is said, They that gladly received the Word were baptized; and these
were they to whom he had said, ver. the 39. the promise is to you and to your
children; and there were added unto them about three thousand souls, and yet
never an infant baptized, unless we shall take Mr Thomas Goodwins conceit for
an Oracle (possibly the more willingly taken up, that it might seem the more
credible, that the Church of Jerusalem was but one single formed Congregation
in a Church way) that therefore it is said, There were added three thousand
souls; to intimate, that there were men, women and children added: he might
have observed how ridiculous such a conceit is by that which follows, ver. 42.
And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayer, and fear came upon every soul, etc. Which
if he can apply to infants, Erit mihi magnus Apollo, I shall take his words for
Oracles. Now sure these three thousand souls were not one family. The next
example is of the Samaritanes, of whom it is said, Acts 8.12. That when they
believed Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the
name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized men and women. Where it is plain,
that in a manner the whole City were baptized; for ver. 6. it is said, The
multitude with one accord ga^e heed to that which Philip spoke; ver. 13. Simon
himself that did before lead them, now believed; and ver. 14. Samaria received
the word of God, and yet not an infant mentioned to be baptized, but those that
believed, and received the word of God; nor was this administration by taking
in of a family, but rather of a City. The next are of the Eunuch, Acts 8.38.
and Paul, Acts 9.18. which were single believing persons, not a whole family.
The next is of Cornelius, of whom you gather from Acts 11.14. " That his whole
household were baptized. But it is true withal, that his house was not an
ordinary family, but a garrison of Soldiers. 2. That he called together his
kinsmen and near friends, Acts 10.24. 3. That ver. 2. This whole house feared
God. 4. That no other are nominated to have been baptized, but those who had
heard the word, ver. 44. which spoke with tongues, and magnified God, ver. 46.
which received the holy Ghost, ver. 47. who were saved by Peter's words, Acts
11.14. which I presume will not be affirmed of infants. "Then you mention the
household of Stephanas, which is said to be baptized, 2 Cor. 1.16. and also
Chap. 16.15. is said to addict themselves to the ministry of the Saints. To
this household most aptly may be adjoined that which you omit, the house of
Crispus, concerning whom it is said Acts 18.8. And Crispus the chief ruler of
the Synagogue believed on the Lord, with all his house, and many of the
Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptized. Where under the term
household, those only are meant who believed, and those that among the
Corinthians were baptized, are said first to hear and believe. You put in the
household of Aristobulus, the household of Narcissus, and you do allude to Romans
16.10, 11. but these are only brought in to make a number. For though our
translators in the Text, read of Aristobulus and Narcissus household, yet in
the Greek it is (...), and (...), which cannot well be translated of the
household of Aristobulus and Narcissus, but rather as Beza, ex familiaribus, and
as our translators in the Margin, of the friends of Narcissus; and if it were
translated household, yet proves not that the whole families were Christians,
but some of them. The next you mention, is the household of Lydia, of whom it
was said, that she was baptized, and her household, Acts 16.15. But this must
be understood by other places, which when they express the baptizing of the
household, they express also the believing, or receiving of the Word by the
whole household, and by the frequent use of the Word, which is to put the house
for the people of growth in it; as, Mat. 10.13. Mark. 3.25. and 6.4. Luke
11.17. Joh. 4.53. Acts 10.2. 2 Timothy 4.19. The last you mention, is the household
of the Jailer; concerning whom it is said, that he was baptized, (...), Act.
16.33. I remember Mr Edwards at Christs-Church endeavored lately to gather
from this expression, that because it is said, [ all his were baptized]
therefore his young children or infants, but this is but a light conjecture, and
the Text sufficiently refutes this gloss: for ver. 32. immediately precedent
expresses who those [ all his] were, to wit, all those in his house to whom
Paul had spoken the word of the Lord; and ver. 34. immediately subsequent,
which says, that he rejoiced, believing in God, with all his household. But Mr
William Cook, page 46. has (...), a wise remedy to cure this: he tells us
thus, I conceive it might be rendered more agreeably to the signification of
the words, the scope of the place, and the avoiding of ambiguitie. And having
believed in God, he rejoiced, exulted, or testified his joy openly by words and
actions in all his family, or through his house, or all his house over. But it
is not worth while to refute this conceit at large, it is agreeable enough to
the scope, order, meaning and signification of (...), with all his house, to
join it with (...), believing, and to expound it as Beza, cum universa domo,
with the whole house, and the Vulgar, cum omni domo, with all the house, rather
then in domo, in the house, and to make it answer to (...), with all his house,
Acts 10.2. to (...), with all his house, Acts 18.8. so that a^ yet it does not
appear that either one infant was baptized, or that the Gospel took place
just as the old administration, by bringing in whole families together. Yea the
contrary appears out of the 1 Pet. 3.1. and 1 Cor. 7.13.16. that the husband
was converted sometimes without the wife, and on the contrary, 1 Cor. 7.21. and
1 Timothy 6.1. Phil. 4.22. in the house of infidel Masters were converted
servants, and on the contrary, Philem. 11.12.14, 15, 16. And our Lord Christ
foretold it should be so in the preaching of the Gospel, Mat. 10.35, 36.
Wherefore I much marvel at the speech of Mr Blake, page 22. We have examples
not to be contemned of the baptizing whole households, and whether infants were
there or no, as it is not certain, though probable, so it is not material,
the president is an household; He that follows the president, must baptize
households; It appears not that any wife was there, yet he that follows the
president in baptizing of households, must baptize wives, and so I may say
servants, if they be of the household. Which speech, though it contains only
dictates, and might be let pass, yet it is not fit to leave it without some
animadversions. For if it be true, that the president is an household, and we
must baptize households, I ask whether we must baptize wife and servants,
because they profess the faith, or because they be of the household: if the
first be said, then the president is not of baptizing households, but baptizing
a professor of the faith, which is the thing the Antipaedobaptists contend for;
if because of the household, whether professing faith or not, then an
unbelieving wife or servant should be baptized, because they are of the
household, unless it be supposed, that in an household when the Master or a
husband is a believer, the wife and servant cannot be an unbeliever, the
contrary whereof has appeared above: But this I believe, none will deny to be
absurd, and heterodox, and consequently that speech of Mr Blakes is very
absurd, that I say no worse of it. To which I add, that Mr Blake gives no
reason, nor I think can, why the baptizing of households, Acts 16. should be
the precedent for baptizing rather then the baptizing Samaria, Act. 8.12. the
3000. Acts 2.42. all Judea, Mat. 3.5. So that in fine, it appears that the
administration of Baptism is not just as the administration of circumcision,
and that though it be true, that sometimes households were baptized, yet it is
said, those households received the Word, and the word household, is often put
for the grown people of it, and therefore as yet there is no example in
Scripture to justify the baptizing of infants, according to ordinary rule. As
for the objection of the household, eating the Passover, and the answer to it,
I shall let it pass now, because it will come again in the last objection of
the fourth part of your Sermon. And thus I have at last examined your first and
maine argument. Your second, it seems, you make less account of, and
therefore I shall sooner dispatch the answer. Thus you frame it.

. 15. Of an infants capacity of inward grace; the Text Mat. 19.14. and of the
inconsequence of Paedobaptisme thereon.
THe second argument: to whom the inward grace of Baptism belongs, to them
belongs the outward sign, they ought to have the sign, who have the thing
signified, the earthly part of the Sacrament must be granted to those who have
the heavenly part: but the infants of believers, even while they are infants,
are made partakers of the inward grace of Baptism, of the heavenly and
spiritual part, as well as grown men: therefore they may and ought to receive
the outward sign of Baptism. The major proposition, that they who are made
partakers of the inward grace, may not be debarred of the outward sign, is
undeniable: it is Peter's argument, Acts 10. Can any forbid water, that these
should not be baptized, who have received the holy Ghost as well as we? And
again, for as much as God gave them the like gift, as he did unto us, what was
I that I could withstand God? And this is so clear, that the most learned of
the Anabaptists do readily grant, that if they knew any infant to have
received the inward grace, they durst not deny them the outward sign, and that
the particular infants whom Christ took up in his arms and blessed, might have
been baptized. The Question between us is, whether the infants of believers
universally, or indifferently, are to be admitted to the Sacrament of Baptism,
according to ordinary rule. Now I suppose you do not hold that the infants of
believers indifferently have actually the thing signified by Baptism, that is,
the Holy Ghost, union with Christ, adoption, forgiveness of sins,
regeneration, and everlasting life: for then they are all sanctified, and are
all believers, and if this could be proved, there would be no question about
Paedobaptisme, the texts, Act. 8.37. Act. 10.47. Act. 11.17. would undeniably
prove it, and therefore there is no Antipaedobaptist, I think, but will grant
your Major; That regenerate persons united to Christ, whose sins are forgiven,
adopted persons that have received the Holy Ghost, are to be baptized. But I
conceive, though in the laying down the Major, you use these phrases [ who have
the thing signified, who have the heavenly part]: and in your Minor [are made
partakers]; yet you do not mean in this Assumption, actual having, and being
made partakers of the inward grace of Baptism; concerning which, the
Antipaedobaptists do so readily grant the Major: but a potentiall having, or,
as you after speak, being capable of the inward grace; and so you use the
fallacy of equivocation: in the Major, [having] being understood of actual
having, and in the Minor of potentiall, which makes four terms, and so the
Syllogism is naught: Or, if you do mean in both actual having, you mean it
only of some Infants of Believers, not of all, of whom the Question is, and so
your conclusion is but particular, that some Infants of Believers, who are
sanctified actually, are to be baptized. But this will not reach home to your
tenet or practice, concerning the baptizing of all Infants of Believers, in as
much as they are the children of Believers, without the consideration of
actual faith or sanctification. It is true, the Lutheranes do teach, that
Infants have actual faith, and are regenerate in Baptism, and therefore, in
Colloquio Mompelgar^ensi, upon the fourth Artic. de Baptismo, they put these
among the Positions they reject, as contrary to the Scripture: Non omnes
infantes qui baptizantur gratiae Christi participes esse, and regenerari,
infantes carere fide, and nihilominus baptizari; that all the Infants which are
baptized, are not partakers of the grace of Christ, and regenerate; that
Infants want faith, and nevertheless are baptized. And I remember, when I
lived in Oxford, there was a book published in English, of Baptismal initiall
regeneration of elect Infants, the Position whereof was opposed, as favoring
the doctrine of conferring grace by Baptism, ex opere operato, by the work
wrought, and intercision of regeneration, since according to that doctrine, a
person might have the Spirit initially, in infancy; and though it could not
fall away finally, as being an elect person, yet might run out in a continued
course of sinning gross and scandalous sins with full consent until his dying
day; which does enervate the urging of that Text, 1 John 3.9. against Apostasy
of regenerate persons, when out of it is proved, that reigning sin is not in
the regenerate, and the like texts, which in that Controversy are urged
against Arminans. With that book Dr. Featley in his late feeble, and passionate
Tract against Anabaptists, and Antiprelatists concurs, page 67. in these words:
Nay, so far are they from excluding faith from Infants that are baptized,
that they believe, that all the children of the faithful, who are comprised in
the covenant with their fathers, and are ordained to eternal life, at the very
time of their baptism receive some hidden grace of the Spirit, and the seed of
faith and holiness, which afterward bears fruit, in some sooner, in some
later. And since I came to London, I met with a Book, entitled, A Christian
plea, for Infants Baptism, by S.C. who holds positions somewhat like to the
Lutherans, that though children of believing parents be not all holy and
righteous, they may degenerate, apostatize, yet the Infants of believing
parents are righteous by imputation, are believers and confessors imputatively,
etc. page 10. and elsewhere. And he has this passage, page 3. It is a sure
truth, that the sins of the parents, being forgiven, the Lord will not impute
the same unto their Infants. Original sin, I say, takes no more hold on the
Infants then on their parents; and touching actual sin, they are as clear as
their parents. Many more like passages there are in that Book, these I mention,
that you may see what stuff Paedobaptists do feed the people with. But I
suppose you do not hold, that all Infants of Believers, either actually or
initially, or imputatively, are sanctified, regenerated, adopted, justified, as
knowing how contrary this is to Romans 9.6, etc. to daily experience, to the
doctrine of Beza and his Colleagues, at Mon^pelgart, to the reformed Churches of
Geneva, etc. and what advantage it gives to Papists, Lutherans, Arminians, and
those that follow the way of Tomson in his Diatribe, of which I suppose you are
not ignorant; and therefore conceiving you orthodox in this point, the answer
to your Syllogism is either by showing it does not conclude the question, if
your Minor and conclusion be understood of actual having the inward grace, and
they be particular only. If you understand them of actual having, and they be
universal, then I deny your Minor. If your Major be understood of potentiall
having, I deny it, if of actual, and the Minor be of potentiall, there be four
terms, and so the Syllogism is naught. Take away the ambiguity of your terms,
and the answer is easy. But for the proof of your Minor, you say thus: And for
the Assumption, or Minor, That the Infants of Believers, even while they are
Infants, do receive the inward grace as well as grown men, is as plain, not
only by that speech of the Apostle, who says, they are holy, but our Savior
says expressly, Mark 10. That to such belongs the Kingdom of God, as well as
to grown men; And whereas some would evade it, by saying, that the Text says
not, To them belongs the kingdom of God, but of such is the Kingdom of
heaven, (...), of such like, that is, such as are graced with such like
qualities, who are humble and meek, as children are: and that Luke 18. is
parallel to this in the meaning of it: whosoever does not receive the Kingdom
of heaven as a little child, be shall not enter therein. But I answer, though
it be true, that in other places this is one use that Christ makes of an
Infants age and condition, to show, that such as receive the Kingdom of
heaven, must be qualified with humility, etc. like unto children; yet here it
cannot be his meaning, because his argument is, Suffer them to come to me, and
forbid them not, because of such is the Kingdom of God, that i^, my Church and
Kingdom is made of those, as well as of others. This was the very cause, why
the disciples rebuked those who brought the children to Christ, because they
were little, not fit to be instructed; and therefore not fit that Christ should
be troubled about them; this Christ rebukes in them, and tells them, that the
littleness of children, is no argument why they should be kept from him:
Suffer them, said he, to come, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom
of God; and what kind of argument had this been, if the Text should be
interpreted as these men would have it; Suffer little children to come unto me,
that I may touch them, take them up in mine arms, put my hands upon them, and
bless them, because the Kingdom of God belongs to them, who have such like
qualities, who resemble children in some select properties? By the very same
ground, if any had brought doves and sheep to Christ to put his hands upon
them, and bless them, the Disciples had been liable to the same reproof,
because of such is the Kingdom of God, such as are partakers of the Kingdom
of God, must be endued with such like properties.

The Minor to be proved is, that all the Infants of Believers, or the Infants
of Believers in as much as they are Infants of Believers, are actually
partakers of the inward grace of Baptism, else your Argument will not serve
for your purpose, as has been showed. Now neither does the Apostles speech, 1
Cor. 7.14. prove it, as has been showed above; nor does this Text, Mar. 10.14.
prove it. For, first, it is doubtful, whether these were Infants or no. I
presume you are not ignorant, that Piscator observat: in Mat. 19.14. does
maintain that the speech of Christ, is not of Infants, but of children which
were capable of instruction, which he gathers from this, that Christ called
them, Luke 18.16. And whereas it is said in Mark, he took up in his arms, the
word so translated, is used Mark 9.36. For the embracing of those that were of
some growth, whom he placed in the midst, and of whose scandalizing he there
warnes; nor does the word (...) used Luke 18.15. translated in English Infants
prove it, for it signifies a child capable of teaching, as when it i^ said,
Timothy knew the sacred Scripture from a child, (...), that is, ever sin he
was a boy, not an Infant; nor does the word (...) translated brought unto him
prove that they were Infants: For the same word is applied to them that were
guided, though they were not carried, but did go by themselves, as the blind
and deaf Daemoniake, Matthew. 12.22. and the lunatic child, Matthew. 17.16. To
this purpose Piscator. As for Mr. Thomas Goodwins reason from Julius Pollux,
that the word (...) does signify one that is madidus, moist or sappie, it is
of no force to prove that they were Infants: For besides, that not etymology,
but use must expound words; if it were so, yet we know children are moist, till
they be adolescentes, youths; we say, till they be of good years, they are but
a gristle, tender, green; so that notwithstanding this, the children brought to
Christ, might be of years sufficient to be catechumeni, and yet fit enough to
resemble humility and harmlesnesse by. Secondly, It is yet doubtful whether
our Savior said, of them is the Kingdom of heaven; for the word is (...), of
such, not (...), of these: And Luke 18.17. Mark 10.15. both add this speech,
Verily I say unto you, whosoever does not receive the Kingdom of God as a
little child, shall not enter therein; like to which is that Matthew. 18.3. But
you have two exceptions against this: First, because this had been no reason
why they should suffer these little children to come to him, because, of such
is the Kingdom of God: Secondly, he might as well have said, suffer sheep, or
doves to come to me; for of such is the Kingdom of God. To these exceptions it
may be replied, the reason may be thus conceived; therefore you should not
despise that age as profane, and keep them from me, for even they that are my
Disciples, must become children again, in putting off their vices, being
converted, unlearning what they have learned, becoming humble and docible,
which things could not be resembled by sheep and doves. Thirdly, but let it be
granted, that these were Infants, and that (...), is to be expounded as Beza in
his Annot. on Mat. 19.14. horum and similium, Grot. annot. ad. Mat. 9.18. notum
erat Judaeis solere Deum Prophetis hunc exhibere honorem, ut in alios dona sua
conferret ad prophetarum preces, quarum symbolum erat manuum impositio. Ad Mat.
19.13. pro pueris etiam eo ritu preces concipi solitas manifestum est ex Genesis
48.14, 15. Exinde Hebraeis semper observatum, ut ad eos qui sanctimonia
praestare caeteris crederentur pucros deserrent, ipsorum precibus Deo
commendandos, (...): qui mos body and apud ipsos manet. Hunc autem morem
Christus probans ostendit isti etiam aetati pr^desse aliorum fidem ac preces.
these and the like, yet there is no certainty, only conjecture, that they were
believers Infants. For, though Christ was in the coasts of Judea then, yet it
might as well be, that the children were brought by others as parents, and that
without faith in Christ, as the Messiah, upon the fame of his miracles, and the
conceit he was a prophet, and so they might bring children to him to be
blessed, as Jacob and Esau, by Isaac, Joseph's children by Jacob, etc. Fourthly,
but let it be granted they were the Infants of Believers, and that it is said,
of these is the Kingdom of God, it may be, as Piscator observes, referred not
to their present estate, as if for the present they were in the kingdom of
God, that is, believers and justified; but that they were elect persons, and so
in time of them should be the Kingdom of God: Now that which gives right to
Baptism, (...) the present estate of a person. Fifthly, but let that be also
granted, yet all this proves not your Minor, unless you can prove, that the
reason why the Kingdom of heaven belongs to Infants, is common with these to
other Infants of Believer^, and the reason why their^ is the Kingdom of God,
is, because they were the Infants of Believers, that ^o it may be true of all
the Infants of Believers. But this cannot be true, being contrary to express
Scripture, Romans 9.6, 7, 8.13. and inferring this error, that a child has
right to the Kingdom of God, in that he is the child of a Believer: And
experience proves innumerable of them have no interest in the Kingdom of God.
Besides, this reason may be given, why these Infants did belong to Gods
Kingdom, because they were such as Christ would bless, and then all that you
can gather from hence will be, that of the Infants of Believers whom Christ
blesses, is the Kingdom of heaven. But this will never prove your Assumption,
except you can prove that Christ blesses all the Infants of Believers. Lastly,
Christ's action in this business is proper to him, as the great Prophet of the
Church, and extraordinary, and therefore yields no ground for an ordinary rule
of baptizing by the public Ministry. And, if an ordinary rule should be made
in imitation, of it, it would serve better for the proving the Sacrament of
confirmation, which Art. 25. of the Church of England puts among things, grown
from a corrupt following the Apostles, then Baptism. And in all probability,
if Christ would have this accident to be a rule or precedent for bringing
Infants to him by a visible sign in the new Testament, as Mr. Thom^s Goodwin
at Bow dictated, he would have appointed his Apostles to have baptized these
Infants as a samplar. For which reason, it seems to me, that this example
rather shows Christ would not have Infants baptized, then that he intended to
make this accident a precedent for paedobaptisme. But you will prove your Minor
by reasons, and thus you reason:

Beside, what one thing can be named, belonging to the initiation and being of
a Christian, whereof Baptism is a seal, which Infants are not capable of as
well as grown men; they are capable of receiving the Holy Ghost, of union with
Christ, of adoption, of forgiveness of sins, of regeneration, of everlasting
life; all which things are signified, and se^led in the Sacrament of Baptism.
I may apply to you the words of Horace, Amphora coepit institui, currente rota
cur^^recus exit? A barrel began to be made, why the wheel running does a
pitcher come forth? The thing you should prove is, that all the Infants of
Believers, are actually partakers of the inward grace of Baptism; but in stead
of this, you prove, they are capable of it; they may have it, but does it
therefore follow, that they actually have it? It was once an Axiom in the
Schools; a posse ad esse non valet argumentum, from it may be ^o it is, an
Argument holds not; and I think it is so still. Besides, must children be
baptized, because they are capable of Grace? Then may all children be baptized,
for they are all capable of the inward Grace of Baptism. But you have yet
something more to say.

And it is further considerable that in the working of that inward grace, of
which Baptism is the sign and seal, all who partake of that grace, are but
mere patients, and contribute no more to it then a child^ does to its own
begetting, and therefore, Infants as fit subjects to have it wrought in them as
grown men; and the most grown men are in no more fitness to receive this grace
when it is given them in respect either of any faith or repentance, which they
yet have, then a very little child, it being the primary intention of the
covenant of Grace in its first work to show what free grace can, and will do to
miserable nothing, to cut miserable man off from the wild Olive, and graffe him
into the true Olive, to take away the heart of stone, ^o create in them a heart
of flesh, to forgive their iniquities, to love them freely; what does the most
grown men in any of these more then an Infant may do, being only passive in
them all? and of this first grace is the Sacrament of Baptism properly a seal.
That which you say, it is true, is further considerable; but to what purpose it
is here brought in, I cannot readily divine, whether it be for a proof of the
Minor of your Syllogism; or that which you said immediately before, that
Infants are capable of the inward grace of Baptism; or whether you would make
a further Argument for Infant Baptism thus: Baptism is to be given to those
that are capable of the first grace as well as grown men; and the proof of this
seems to be, because Baptism seals properly the first grace. But Infants are
capable of the first grace as well as grown men, and the proof of this seems to
be, because all who partake of that grace, are but mere patients, etc.
Therefore Infants are to be baptized as well as grown men. If this be your
Argument, the Major is to be denied: For, a person is not to be baptized
because he may have grace, but because he has it. And for the reason, that
Baptism seals properly the first grace, it is obscure, what you mean by the
first grace is not clear. If the free favor of God, mentioned before, when
you say, [ to love them freely] this indeed is the first grace simply Gods
eternal love and election; and I deny not but Baptism seals it in some sense
properly, and so does the Lords Supper as properly; if you mean by the first
grace the covenant of Grace, which is the first transient act of grace, that
also is sealed properly in Baptism, and as properly in the Lords Supper: if
you mean the first grace in execution, it is uncertain which you put first,
justification or regeneration, or, as some, adoption: And then which is the
second grace is uncertain, whether after-sanctification, cooperating,
concomitant, subsequent grace, sustentation against temptations, remission of
sins, hearing prayers, or eternal glory. Now, I do not well understand in what
sense, or why Baptism seals properly rather the first grace then the second,
since according to your doctrine it is a seal of the covenant of grace; and
therefore of all the promises in it; Nor can I tell, why it should be said,
that Baptism seals the first grace properly, rather then the Lords Supper. I
confess in exactness of speech, Baptism seals no grace, first or second,
properly, taking it for propriety of speech, but improperly, because
metaphorically, as sealing is taken for assuring. And if properly notes
propriety of right, or title, or possession in opposition to another; or that
which is alien, I see not how Baptism does seal, that is, assure the first
grace in respect of the propriety of right more then the second, or more then
the Lords Supper. And therefore your speech seems to me very ambiguous: And for
the Minor, as I conceive, you frame it, that Infants are capable of the first
grace as well as grown men, it is true, and so they are of the second, or at
least some of them; but both by extraordinary working. As for receiving grace
by ordinary means, they are not capable of one or other. And for the speeches
which you heap together, though I grant that in the first conversion, in the
sense that some learned men understand it, we are merely passive; yet I doubt
whether Dr. Twisse, and such as have most acutely handled the controversy
about the irresistibility of grace in the first conversion, will subscribe to
those speeches of yours, when you say, all who partake of that grace, are but
mere patients, and contribute no more to it, then a child does to its own
begetting; and therefore Infants as fit subjects to have it wrought in them, as
grown men, and the most grown men are in no more fitness to receive this grace
when it is given them, in respect either of any faith or repentance which they
yet have, then a very little child. What does the most grown man in any of
these, more then an Infant may do? being only passive in them all. If my memory
deceive me not, the Divines of great Britain at the Synod of Dort in their
suffrage, did set down some things which might be done in respect of faith or
repentance, when grace is given, by grown men, more then an Infant can do, and
so does in like manner Mr. Rutherfurd, The Trial and Triumph of Faith, Sermon.
14. page 109, 110. And though you say, The most grown men are only passive in
them all, yet D^. Twisse in his Vindiciae gratiae, lib. 3. errat. 9. Sect. 3.
thought this subtilty necessary, that the will in the first conversion, is
merely passive, as the willing of the will is taken for^ally, as being in the
subject; but as it is taken efficiently, it being a vital act, so it is not
merely passive in the first conversion. And Dr. Preston in his acute
Exercitation, De irresistibilitate gratiae convertentis, has these words: Nos
sustinemus voluntatem in primo actu conversionis, partim passive, partim
active, id est, prius passive, dein active se habere, ideoque cum Deo
cooperari; We hold the will in the first act of conversion, to be partly
passive, partly active, that is, first of all to be passive, then active, and
therefore to cooperate with God. It is true, the acts of taking away the heart
of stone, creating a heart of flesh, forgiving iniquity, loving freely, as they
are acts of God, a man is neither active nor passive in them, they are not in
man as the subject, nor from man as the agent; only we may be said to be
passive, or active, in respect of the terminus, or effect of them, a new heart,
faith, or repentance, produced by them; and in respect of this, in some sense,
we are merely passive, in some, partly active, and partly passive in the first
conversion, according to the doctrine of the two learned Doctors forenamed. You
conclude this Argument with this speech: And whoever will deny that Infants are
capable of these things, as well as grown men, must deny that any Infants dying
in their infancy, are saved by Christ. Concerning which speech, if you mean
that Infants are capable of these things as well as grown men simply, in
respect of the things, it is true that Infants are capable of them as well as
grown men, and he that denies it denies their salvation: But if you mean it in
respect of the modus habendi, the manner of having, then it is not true: for
Infants are not capable in the same manner of a new heart, faith and
repentance, by hearing, and outward ordinances, as well as grown men. But what
is all this to prove your Minor, which is not of potentiall having inward
grace, which is not denied, but of actual having? And so still it remains
unproved; that all the Infants of Believers, or the Infants of Believers as
such are actually partakers of the inward grace of Baptism.

And thus have I at last, examined the third part of your Sermon, containing
your Arguments from Scripture for Paedobaptisme. I proceed now to examine the
last part, which follows.

Infant Baptism, is a corruption of the Ordinance of BAPTISM. PART. IIII.
Concerning the Objections against Infant Baptism.
. 1. Of the first objectio^ from institution, Mat. 28.19. and the practice of
John Baptist, and the Apostles.
AGainst this argument several things are objected, which I shall endeavor to
r^move out of the way: First, it is said, that although infants are capable of
these things, and they no doubt are wrought by Christ in many infants, yet may
not we baptize them, because according to the Scripture pattern, both of
Christ's Command, Mat. 28. in his institution of Baptism, where this was
enjoined, and John the Baptist, Christ's disciples and Apostles, they always
taught, and made them disciples by teaching, before they baptized any.

It is true, the institution of Christ, Mat. 28.19. and the practice of John
Baptist, and the Apostles, are the great objections against Paedobaptisme; This
principle being laid down as a truth avouched against the Papists, by
Protestants generally, that it is a sin of profaning the Sacraments, when
the institution is altered, by substraction, as when the cup is denied to the
lay people, or by addition, as when chrisme and spittle, etc. are added to the
elements: and by the nonconformists conformists of England, that it is
will worship to administer the Sacraments any other ways, by addition of any
thing to them, but circumstances, which are alike requisite to civil actions;
now the persons to be baptized cannot be conceived a mere alterable
circumstance, but to belong necessarily to the administration or worship, as
the person baptizing, and as the persons receiving the Lords Supper, and
therefore there must be warrant from institution for it, else it is a sinful
invention of man. But neither Christ's institution, or John the Baptist, Cotton
in his way of the Churches of Christ in New England. Chap 4. sect. 6. And
indeed the Commission which Christ gave his Apostles, holds it forth that
they were by preaching to make disciples before they baptized them and their
children, Mat. 28.19. Now a disciple is a Scholar in Christ's school, and
therefore when the Apostles were directed to make disciples, before they did
baptize them, they were not only to co^vert them to the faith, but also to
gather them as disciples or scholars into a school of Christ.
or the Apostles practice, do warrant the baptizing of infants, therefore it
is will worship: that the institution, Mat. 28.19. does not warrant the
baptizing of infants, is proved. 1. Because the institution appoints only
disciples of all nations to be baptized; but infants are not such: therefore
the institution does not warrant their Baptism. The Major and Minor of this
Syllogism have been made good, Part. 3. Sect. 13. 2. Because the order Christ
appoints is, that teaching or preaching the Gospel, should go before Baptism;
now the order of Christ, is a rule of administering holy things, as we argue in
like manner, 1 Cor. 11.28. The Apostle appoints that a man is first to examine
himself, then to eat of that bread; ergo, Children are not to have the Lords
Supper; so in like manner we may argue, we must first teach persons, and then
baptize them; therefore children that cannot be taught by us, are not to be
baptized; To that which Mr Edwards answers to this argument, that John is
said, Mark. 1.4. to baptize and preach, I oppose the words of Beza annot. in
Mark. 1.4. Quod autem Erasmus subjungit Joannem prius baptizasse, deinde
praedicasse baptismum, ejusmodi est ut ne refutatione quidem videatur indigere.
Quid enim? cum diceret Joannes, Poenitentiam agite, appropinquat enim regnum
coelorum, non docebat quos erat baptizaturus? Imo ve^o nisi prius docuisset in
quem finem baptizaret, quis tandem ad ejus baptismum accessisset? Certe cum
sacramenta sint (...), necesse est ut praeeat doctrina quam obsignent. 3.
Because the institution is to baptize into the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, that is, with invocation of the name of the Lord, as Acts 22.16.
Paul is bid arise and be baptized, and wash away his sins, calling on the
name of the Lord. Which infants cannot do: with devoting themselves to the
service and adherence of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, which may be
gathered from this, that Paul said, 1 Cor. 13.15. he had baptized none into his
name, that is, he had not caused them in their baptism to devote or addict
themselves to him as their Master, but infants cannot so devote themselves to
Christ, therefore they are not to be baptized according to this institution.
Cotton: The way of the Churches of Christ in New England. Chap. 1. sect. 1.
prop. 4. In the times of John the Baptist, such as were received into baptism
they did first make confession of their sins, and therewith of their
repentance, and of their faith also in him who was to come after him, Mat.
3.13. Act. 19.4, 5. And in the times of the Apostles Philip received ^he Eunuch
unto baptism, not until he had made profession of his faith in Christ Jesus,
Act* 8.37. Cham. Panstr. Cath. tom. 4. l. 5. c. 15.. 19. Hiritus omnes
professionis fidei, etc. ab ipsae baptismi institutione habuerunt originem: nec
debe^t omitti, tantum proaetatis ratione dispensari.
4. Christ bids the Apostles presently after baptism teach them to observe
what ^ver he commanded them; but infants cannot do this, therefore they are
not to be baptized. Likewise baptizing, infants, does not agree with the
primitive practice of John Baptist, and the Apostles, who required expressions
of repentance and faith before Baptism, Mat. 3.6. Mark. 1.5. Luke 3.10. Acts
2.38. and 8.12, 13.37. and 9.18. and 10.47. and 11.17, 18. and 16.15.31, 32,
33. and 18.8. and 19.5.8.22.16. in which places, profession of repentance and
faith is still made the antecedent to Baptism: but this does not agree to
infants, therefore they are not to be baptized. Of these arguments you answer
only to the two first from institution, and to the last from example; to the
first from institution, you answered before, and there I examined your answer,
part. 3. sect. 12, 13. To the second from institution, and to the last from
example, you make some answer here, not denying that the order appointed by
Christ is first to teach, and then to baptize: for that is so manifest, that
your self page 35. do so paraphrase the words, when you say, express command
there is, that they should teach the heathen, and the Jews, and make them
disciples, and then baptize them: nor by denying that John Baptist, and the
Apostles required expressions of faith and repentance before Baptism, nor by
denying that the institution of Christ, and the Apostles example, are our rule
in the administering the Sacraments, so as that we cannot vary from them without
will worship, and profaning the worship of God by our inventions: for that is
so confessed a truth, that there has been a great while, scarce a Sermon
before the Parliament, but has asserted that rule, and pressed it on the
Parliament, and our solemn Covenant supposes it, the Churches of Scotland,
New England, etc. The Sermons in the City continually a vow it, and urge it,
and upon this ground former and later reformations are urged. But you have two
miserable evasions; You say, I answer. First, that of Mat. 28. is not the
institution of baptism, it was instituted long before to be the seal of the
Covenant, it is only an enlargement of their commission, whereas before they
were only to go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, now they are to
go unto all the world. Whereunto I reply, 1. If this be not the first
institution of baptism, yet it is an institution, and the institution of
baptism to us Gentiles, and therefore the rule by which Ministers are to
baptize, there being no other institution that I know of to regulate our
practice by, but such as is gathered from John Baptist, the Apostles practice
and sayings. 2. If institution or appointment of God must warrant our practice
in Gods worship, which you once held in the Sermon cited before, part. 2. sect.
9. then you must show another institution, else you cannot acquit paedobaptisme
from will worship, and your self from breaking the hedge God has set about
the second Commandment. But you add further; And beside it is no where said,
that none were baptized but such as were first taught, and what reason we have
to believe the contrary, you have before seen. Your self say presently in the
next words, It is said indeed, that they taught and baptized, and no express
mention of any other, then of the baptism of persons taught, and you assign a
reason of it. And page 35. your self paraphrase the institution, Mat. 28.19.
Express command there is, that they should teach the heathen, and the Jews,
and make them disciples, and then baptize them: and consequently, there is no
express command for any other; and for the reason you have to believe that
others are to be baptized which are not taught, it has been examined in the
weighing your virtuall consequence, which is grounded upon such a principle, as
in time you may see to be a dangerous precipice, how ever for the present the
great consent of Doctors in the reformed Churches dazzles your eyes; for my
part, I cannot yet discern, but that your grounds for paedobaptisme, are worse
then the Papists and Ancients, who build it on Joh. 3.5. Romans 5.12. But you yet
add. Secondly, it is said indeed, that they taught and baptized, and no
express mention made of any other: but the reason is plain; there was a new
Church to be constituted, all the Jews who should receive Christ, were to come
under another administration: You say right, therefore none other were to be
baptized, but taught persons, because though the invisible Church of the
Gentiles were joined to the invisible of the Jews, Romans 11.17. Ephesians. 2.14,
15, 16. by faith of the Gospel, as Ephesians. 3.6. it is expounded: yet the outward
estate of the Church is new, and as you say, even the Jews who should receive
Christ, were to come under a new administration, even those who were Jews by
nature and not proselytes, were to be baptized as unclean persons, contrary to
their former administration, in which they were only circumcised; and this is
a plain evidence, that the administration of Circumcision, is not the
administration under which we are now, but that it did belong to that
administration which is now abolished, which is enough to overthrow all your
virtuall consequence from circumcision, to baptism, and consequently all the
former dispute of your first argument, in which circumcision of infants is
indeed the alone prop of baptizing infants. As for that which you add, " And
their infants were to come in only in their right. This overthrows your second
argument; for that is grounded upon this, that infants of believers, and
particularly infants of believing Jews, such as those are supposed to be Mark.
10.14. were partakers of the inward grace of baptism, and if so, they came in
by their own right. But that one man's right to baptism, should give another
right to baptism, is a position that the Scripture does not deliver, and
inwraps sundry errors, which I now omit, because it comes in only upon the by.
But you go on. And the heathen nations who were to be converted to Christ,
were yet without the covenant of grace, and their children could have no right,
until themselves were brought in, and therefore no marvel though both John
and Christ's disciples and Apostles did teach before they baptized, because then
no other were capable of baptism. In this perioch, you grant many things which
do yield the cause; for, 1. you say, that both John and Christ's disciples and
the Apostles did teach before they baptized, because then no other were capable
of baptism; now by this reason you confess, 1. that baptizing of infants is
not according to John's and Christ's disciples and Apostles practice; 2. you say,
then no other were capable of baptism: Now this is true, either because then
there were no children of believers that might be baptized: but that is absurd,
that in all the time of John's and the disciples and Apostles ministry,
believers had no children to be baptized, and contrary to the allegation of
Mark. 10.14. and other Texts, or because they had no Commission; I cannot
conceive how else your speech can be true: But if John, the disciples and
Apostles had no Commission to baptize infants, neither have we, and so to do
it neither have our Ministers any commission, for we have no other commission
to baptize then they had. But you think to salve it thus; But when once
themselves were instructed and baptized, then their children were capable of it
by virtue of the covenant. Upon which I observe, 1. If the children were
capable when once parents were instructed, and baptized, then they were
capable, in John's, and the disciples, and Apostles times, and so this speech
overthrowes that before, that then no other but taught persons were capable of
baptism. 2. When you say, the children were capable by virtue of the covenant,
it seems you could produce no institution in the new administration, but the
institution of circumcision, the validity of which has been considered
before. Besides, the covenant being the same at all times, as your Conclus. 1.
holds, the children of believers were as capable in John's time as after. So
that your words plainly enterfere. But you put a case to be resolved. If any in
the Jewish Church had received commission to go and make other Cities
proselytes to them, their commission must have run thus, Go teach and
circumcise, would it therefore have followed, that none might be circumcised,
but such as were first taught? To this I answer, in this commission the precept
of circumcising should have had reference in the execution of it, either to the
old institution of circumcision, Genesis 17. and then they had been appointed to
circumcise males at eight days old not taught, or to a new institution, and
then it would have been told more plainly, what they were to circumcise and
whom, and so they might have resolved themselves. But what this makes for
baptism of infants, I see not, unless it be supposed that baptism and
circumcision are all one, which like the string in the Lampry is an error that
runs along through your whole Sermon.

. 2. Of the second objection, and therein of the condition prerequisite to
Baptism.
THe next objection you thus express; But it is expressly said, That he that
believes and is baptized, shall b^ saved; faith in Christ is the condition upon
which men may be baptized; and this is the most common objection among the
Anabaptists, unbelievers may not be baptized; children are unbelievers,
therefore they may not be baptized; we have, say they, clear evidence that
faith is a condition required in those that are to be baptized, no evidence of
any other condition that makes them capable of baptism. Others of them add,
that under an affirmative command, the negative is to be included, believing is
the affirmative, unbelieving is the negative, therefore where believers are
commanded to be baptized, unbelievers are forbidden to be baptized: this
objection they much glory in, and some of them dare all the world to answer it.
The objection framed in this later way I own not, and consequently I may well
let pass the answer; for the truth is, Mark. 16.16. is not a command, but an
enuntiation; only that text, with others, specially that, Acts 8. 37. where
when the Eunuch asked Philip, What lets me to be baptized? Philip answered,
if thou believe in the Lord Jesus with all thy heart thou may; and thereby
intimated, that faith professed is a prerequisite to baptism, and the defect
of it an hindrance, confirm the objection as it is the first way formed, which
may be further strengthened from the baptism of Lydia, the Jailer, Crispus,
etc. and is confirmed in that in the subsequent practice of baptizing a
Confession of faith was made by the person baptized, as appears out of plain
passages in the Ancients, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Cyprian, Videatur
Chamierus Panstr. Cath. tom. 4. li. 5. c. 15. Grot. annot. on Mat. 28.19.
and Augustine, lib. 8. confess. c. 2. where speaking of one Victorinus, who was
to be baptized, Denique ut ventum est ad horam profitendae fidei, quae verbis
certis, retentisque memoriter de loco eminentiore in conspectu populi fidelis
Romae reddi solet ab iis qui accessuri sunt ad gratiam tuam, etc. Lastly, when
it was come to the hour of professing the faith, which is wont in certain
words, and gotten by heart to be rendered from an higher place in the sight of
the faithful people at Rome by those that shall have access in thy grace; and
when it was offered him by the Presbyters, that if he would he might then make
his confession more secretly, he refused it and made his confession publicly,
with great acclamation. But this is a thing confessed by you, page 47. and it
is usually answered, that this was only in the baptism of grown men: but
infants might be baptized without such a confession. I reply, this answer might
serve turn, if either by institution or practice primitive, there could be
proved any other baptism then of confessors of faith: in the mean time, till
that be done, the argument is good, since primum in unoquoque genere est mensura
reliquorum; The first in each kind is the measure of the rest; and this was a
prerequisite condition in the first practice, therefore it ought to be so
still, especially considering that God in his providence has still preserved
in all ages an image of the first practice in the interrogatories propounded to
the baptized, even to infants, and thought necessary to be answered by some one
for them, and the altering of it has been a great cause of many corruptions in
the Church of God, that so men might see what evils have followed the swerving
from the rule: and might be directed what is necessary to be reformed. And so I
pass to the third (as you call it) objection, which you thus express.

. 3. Of the third so called objection, and therein of the knowledge requisite
concerning the person to be baptized.
But suppose they are capable of the inward grace of baptism, and that God
does effectually work in some of the infants of believers, is that sufficient
warrant for us to baptize all the infants of believers? if we knew in what
infants the Lord did work, then we might baptize those infants, say some of
them: but that he does not make known to us, we cannot know of any one infant
by any ordinary way of knowledge, that they are inwardly baptized with the holy
Ghost, and therefore we may not baptize any of them, but wait to see when and
in whom God will work the thing signified, and then apply the sign to them.
This that you here put among the objections, is rather an exception to your
second argument, grounded on Act. 10.47. and 11.17. In answer to which it is
granted, that those who have the inward grace, meaning it actually, are not to
be debarred of baptism, for then they are believers and disciples: But then it
is rightly added, that this can make no ordinary rule for baptizing the infants
of believers indifferently; since there is no certainty that any one infant of a
believer, now existent, has the inward grace of baptism: and it is certain
that all have not, and experience shows very many have not when they come to
age, nor can it be known who have and who have not, but by extraordinary
revelation, which if given, would be sufficient authority to baptize those
infants, though the ordinary rule be not to baptize infants of believers
indifferently. As the extraordinary spirit of Elijah, and Phinehas, and Peter,
in killing Ananias and Sapphira, were sufficient authority to them to do
those things which agree not with ordinary rule. And this I grant to Mr Blake,
that those that are thus entitled through want of an institution, are not to
be excluded: for according to this supposition, in this case, the institution
is clear for them; for they are sanctified persons, and so believers and
disciples of Christ, and besides the extraordinary revelation for that end,
would be an institution of that particular act. But the thing that he and you
would infer from this concession, is that we may then make it an ordinary rule
to baptize infants. But that can never be; for extraordinarium non facit
regulam communem, That which is extraordinary, makes not a common rule. If it
did, James and John might call for fire from heaven, as Elijah did; a man in
his zeal might kill a wicked man without a legal trial, as did Phinehas. But
let us hear what reply you make to this concession, you say thus; Our
knowledge that God has effectually wrought the thing signified, is not the
condition upon which we are to apply the sign, God no where required that we
should know, that they are inwardly and certainly converted, whom we admit to
the Sacrament of Baptism, the Apostles themselves were not required to know
this of those whom they baptized, if they were they sinned in baptizing Simon
Magus, Alexander, Hymeneus, Ananias and Sapphira, with others: we are indeed
to know that they have in them the condition which must warrant us to
administer the sign, not that which makes them possessed of the thing signified;
fallible conjectures are not to be our rule in adminis^ring Sacraments, either
to infants or grown men, but a known rule of the Word, out of which rule we
must be able to make up such a judgment, that our administration may be of
faith, as well as out of charity: In baptizing of grown men, the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ administered the sign, not because they conjectured, that
the parties were inwardly sanctified, but because they made that profession of
faith and holiness, of which they were sure, that whoever had the thing in
truth, were received by Christ into inward communion with himself; and that
whoever thus made it, that Christ would have them received into the communion
of his Church, though possibly, for want of the inward work, they were never
received into the inward communion with Jesus Christ. Indeed, when such a
confession was made, Christian charity, which always hops the best, and
thinks no evil, bound them to receive them, and think of them, and converse
with them, as with men in whom the inward work was wrought, until they gave
signs to the contrary: But this their charity, or charitable conjecture, was
not the ground of admitting them to the Ordinance, but the profession and
confession of the party made, according to the Word which they were bound to
rest in; yea, I greatly question, whether in case Peter or Paul could by the
Spirit of revelation, have known that Ananias or Alexander would have proved no
better then hypocrites, whether they either would, or ought to have refused
them from Baptism, whilst they made that public profession and confession,
upon which others were admitted, who in the event proved no better then those
were; so that I conclude, not our knowledge of their inward sanctification is
requisite to the admitting of any to Baptism, but our knowledge of the will of
Christ, that such, who are in such and such a condition should by us be
received into the communion of the Church.

To the assertion here delivered, I assent, that not our knowledge, that the
person to be baptized has inward grace, is necessary; but our knowledge of the
will of Christ, and the person to be baptized, his having the condition, which
is the profession of faith and holiness, is sufficient warrant to baptize him.
And I agree, that a judgment of charity, is not that a Minister is to proceed
by in this case, but a judgment of faith, as you speak, and of ministerial
prudence: For a Minister in this case is to act as a Steward, who is to deal
according to his Lords will, not his own mind, otherwise his own understanding
or affection, which are but a Lesbian rule, should be his rule, which would be
intolerable. Thus far I agree with you: only whereas in the case by you framed,
your resolution inclines to the negative, I rather incline to the affirmative,
and conceive they would have refused them, and that they ought; because I
conceive the end of such an extraordinary revelation would be to warn them not
to admit such persons, and so equivalent to a prohibition; and in that case the
baptizing them, would be a plain profaning the Ordinance, which is not to be
given to Dogs and Swine: And I conceive, that which Chamier tom. 4. panstra.
Cath. lib. 5. c. 15. Sect. 13. speaks in justification of the scrutiny
heretofore made in examining the competentes so strictly, confirms this
resolution. But to keep to the present business, that which is granted, does
neither prove that upon extraordinary revelation of the present inward
sanctification of an Infant, that Infant may not be baptized without staying
for its profession: For, though it be true that we are not to stay from
baptizing them that profess the faith, because we have not a spirit of
discerning to know them to be real Believers, yet we may, having a spirit of
discerning that an Infant that cannot profess the faith, yet has true faith,
or is inwardly sanctified, baptize that Infant without staying for his
profession, partly, because of the principle used by Peter, Acts 10.47. and
partly, because the revelation of the faith of that Infant to that end, does
authorize that act: Nor does this concession advantage you to prove baptizing
of Infants by ordinary rule, which is the thing you and Mr. Blake aim at. But
your words concerning the knowledge of the will of Christ, as the rule of
baptizing, rather advantage the Antipaedobaptists, who know no other rule to
baptize by, but the condition you truly propound of profession of faith, and
therefore conceive your words a good plea for them.

But you further say: And in this the rule to direct our knowledge, is as plain
for Infants as for grown men, the rule having been always this: that grown
men, who were strangers from the covenant of God, unbelievers, Pagans,
Heathens, should upon their being instructed, and upon profession of their
faith, and promise to walk according to the rule of the covenant, be received
and added to the Church, and made partakers of the seal of their entrance, and
their Infants to come in with them, both sorts upon their admission, to be
charitably hoped of, until they give signs to the contrary, charity being
bound from thinking of evil of them, not bound to conclude certainly of any of
them, because they ought to know, that in all ages all are not Israel who are
of Israel, and that many are called, but few chosen.

That the rule for baptizing Infants should be so plain, as the rule to direct
our knowledge about baptizing grown men, professors of faith, I wonder you
should say it, much more that you should preach and print it; since your self
confess, page 34. no express command in the new Testament that they should be
baptized; no express example where children were baptized: but on the other
side, page 35. you say, express command there is, that they should teach the
Heathen, and the Jews, and make them disciples, and then baptize them. And I
hope you do not imagine, that a rule gathered by virtuall consequence is so
plain as that which is express; it may be as true, but it is not possible it
should be so plain. But the truth of that additionall rule of Infants coming in
with their parents, has been examined, and as yet it has been found to me,
neither plain nor true.

. 4. Of the fourth Objection, and therein of the stipulation of Baptism.
YOu go on to the fourth Objection: But all who enter into covenant, and receive
the seal of the covenant, must stipulate for their parts, as well as God does
for his; they must indent with God to perform the Believers part of the
covenant, as well as God does to perform his part; as even this Text, 1 Pet. 3.
requires, that Baptism which saves us, must have the answer of a good
conscience to God. Now, although it be granted, that Infants are capable of
receiving the first grace, if God be pleased to work it in them, yet what
answer of a good conscience can there be from Infants unto God, they having not
the use of reason, and not knowing what the covenant means?

For my part, I own not this objection taken from the general nature of the
covenant, as if it did exclude Infants, or that particular text, 1 Pet. 3.21.
For the word used for a Covenant, may be as well translated a Testament; and
the Holy Ghost, Gal. 3. and Heb. 9. does use it in that notion, and it may be,
that covenants of another may be by interpretation of Law, as their covenant;
Cotton: The way of the Churches of Christ in New England, chapter 4. Sect. 5. The
Word of God receives none to the fellowship of the seals of the covenant, but
such as profess their tak^ng hold of the covenant.
as in the covenant of the Israelites with the Gibeonites. And for that text,
however Beza translates (...), by stipulation, and in his Annotation on that
place says, The Apostle had respect to the interrogations of Catechists, in
which the catechized even then did witness their inward baptism to be
confirmed by the outward, as Acts 8.37. whereto, says he, belongs the
Apostles Creed, and that translated from the baptism of grown persons to the
baptism of Infants by a greater error, if you consider the Infants themselves:
Do thou believe? I do believe: Do thou renounce? I do renounce. Whence that
of Tertullian, which is, as it were, in the stead of a Commentary on this
place, in his book of the resurrection of the flesh; The soul is established,
not by washing, but by answering. I say, though Beza do upon second thoughts,
and nearer consideration conceive this to be the meaning, yet I build not on
it, as being doubtful, and in mine apprehension, it rather notes an effect of
Baptism and the resurrection of Christ, then a prerequisite condition; and
there are other plain places before alleged which do prove the thing, that the
baptized were to profess and promise; or, to use your phrase, seal (which I
deny not to be the phrase of John Baptist, Joh. 3.33.) as Acts 8.37. etc. So
that the objection is the same with the second. Now let us see what you answer:
you say thus,

The Infants of the Jews were as much tied as the Infants of Believers under
the Gospel, every one who was circumcised, was bound to keep the whole Law,
Gal. 5. And these men profess that Israelitish Infants were within the old
covenant, when yet they knew not what it meant, nor could have the same use of
it with their parents and others of discretion; look what answer they will make
for the Jews Infants if true, will abundantly satisfy for the Infants of
Believers under the Gospel.

It is true, this answer serves turn against those that argue from the general
nature of a covenant; but it is no answer against those that only urge
Instituton and Apostolical practice as our rule. As for that which you here,
and all along in your Book, suppose that there is the same reason of the mixed
covenant made with Abraham, as with the pure Covenant of the Gospel, and of
every Believer, as of Abraham, and of Baptism, as of Circumcision, it is the
(...), chief error, which misleads you throughout your Sermon, and makes you
speak and write in a dialect, which in the Scripture is unknown. And for that
which you say, that the Infants of the Jews were as much tied as the Infants of
Believers under the Gospel; if you mean it of common duties, of Evangelical
obedience, it is true; if you mean it thus (which alone serves for your
purpose) that persons to be baptized now, are no more tied to make profession
of faith before Baptism, then Infants of the Jews were tied to make profession
of faith before Circumcision, it is false: For, there is now plain Text for the
requiring of it before Baptism, but not before Circumcision. But you say,
every one that was circumcised was bound to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5. True,
and therefore circumcision was in the use of it diametrally opposite to the use
of Baptism. You say, and these men profess that the Israelitish Infants were
within the old Covenant, when yet they knew not what it meant, and then say,
look what answer they will make for the Jews Infants, if true, will abundantly
satisfy for the Infants of Believers under the Gospel. If you mean this
concerning the reason why the Christians Infants should not be baptized, though
the Jews Infants were circumcised, this is a true and satisfactory answer, that
God commanded the one, but no where the other; and your self say, page 84. Our
knowledge of the will of Christ, is that which is the only direction we are to
follow.

But you add a second answer, which I let pass, because it is but a
declaration of your own conceits, how you conceive a child may seal the
covenant in his infancy, telling us, that their name is put into the Deed, and
that a child may seal, first in infancy, and then after agnize it; and that God
is pleased to seal to Infants while they are such, and to accept such a seal as
they can give, without any proof, but only spinning out the simile of a seal;
as if Gods ways were like man's ways, or a simile did g^^deare in omnibus, a
similitude were even in all things; only where you say, that in the mean time,
Jesus Christ, who is the surety of the covenant, and surety of all the
covenanters, is pleased to be their surety; this speech is further to be
examined. It Is true, Jesus Christ is the surety of a better Testament, Heb.
7.12. he is the surety of all the covenanters, he does strike hands, and
becomes a surety of the whole covenant, and of every condition in it, take it
in the largest sense, and this of all, both on Gods part and ours, as very
rightly and excellently Mr. Thomas Goodwin in his Teatise entitled, Christ set
forth. Sect. 3. Chap. 3. And to like purpose, Mr. Rutherfurd, The trial and
triumph of Faith, sermon. 7. But are any other among men covenanters, but the
elect who are purchased by the blood of the everlasting covenant? Heb. 13.20.
It is a very inconsiderate boldness in you, to make every baptized person, or
at least every baptized Infant of a Believer a covenanter, for whom Christ is a
surety, and one to whom God seals, when the Scripture makes Christ the surety
only for his redeemed ones, as may be gathered out of sundry places in the
Epistle to the Hebrews; but I doubt not but when you have considered it a
little better, you will easily epsy your error in these dictates, and
therefore I pass on to the next objection.

. 5. Of the fifth Objection, and therein of the benefit that comes by
Infant-Baptism^
But what benefit comes to children by such kind of sealing as this is? it
seems then (say they) by your own confession, that this is but a conditional
sealing on Gods part, viz. that they own it and ratify it when they come to
age; and if they then refuse to stand to it, all is then nullified; were it no^
therefore better to defer i^ to their years of discretion, to see whether
they will then make it their own voluntary act, yea or no.

In what sense baptiz^ng may be called sealing, I have above showed, Part. 3.
Sect. 12. but I cannot allow of this, Dr. Twisse: The doctrine of the Synod of
Dort, and Arles, etc Part 2. 3. p. 121. I willingly confess, that the
Sacrament of Baptism is the seal of the righteousness of faith unto us
Christians, as Circumcision was un^o the Jews, Romans 4. which is as much a^ to
say, that it assures us of the remission of our sins, as many as believe; and I
conceive it to be a visible sign of invisible grace, and that not of
justification only unto them that believe, but of the grace of regeneration
also, but how? not at that instant collatae, but suo tempore conferend^, to
wit, when God shall effectually call a man; and it is very strange unto me,
that regeneration should go before vocation. S^e more to the same purpose in
the same Author, part. 3.. 6.
to say, that God seals to every one that is baptized. It is true, that
Baptism is in its nature a seal of the righteousness of faith, 1 Pet. 3.21.
but yet God does not seal this to every one that is baptized, but only to true
believers: For, what is Gods sealing, but the confirming of his promise? But
God promises righteousness only to Believers; therefore he seals only to
Believers. As for the sealing by God upon condition persons agnize the
covenant, it is but a notion, the Scripture makes not Gods promise in the
covenant of Grace conditional in that sense: For Gods promise is for those he
enters into covenant with, That he will put his Law in their hearts, and in
their minds will write them, Heb. 10.16. Nor do I know any but Corvinus in his
Examen of Moulins Anatomy, chap. 9. sect. 6. and the Arminians, that do so
speak of Gods covenant of Grace, as if it were common to the elect and
reprobates, and conditional in this sense, as if God left it to men's liberty,
to whom he had sealed, to agnize or recognize that sealing, or to free
themselves, if they please, and so nullify all; yet so as to afford them a
while the favor and privilege of being in covenant with him, as you speak. I
appeal to them who have been conversant in the writings of the Arminians,
whether these speeches do not symbolize with their language. And therefore this
that you make an objection, I look on as a frivolous supposing a Chimaera, and
then disputing about it: But yet there are some things I shall take notice of
in your answer.

The question is, What benefit to Infants by such a sealing: you answer thus:
This objection lay as strongly against Gods wisdom in requiring the Jews
Infants, even in their infancy thus to seal; and therefore argues no great
wisdom, or modesty in man, who would thus reason with God about his
administrations.

It is true, God appointed the male children of Abraham's family to be
circumcised, and thereby they were bound to keep the whole Law, and it were a
sinful presumption to reason with God about it; and in like manner, if God had
appointed Infants to be baptized, it would silence all arguings about it,
though we knew not the reason: but how it is to be understood, that God
required the Jews, even in their infancy to seal, I do not well understand; our
sealing to God is believing, Joh. 3.33. I do not find that God required this
of the Jews Infants in their infancy, nor of our Infants; nor was Circumcision
it self the Infants duty, required by God of the Infant, though it were its
privilege, it was the parents duty, Exodus 4.24.

You say, secondly, God has other ends and uses of applying the seal of the
covenant to them who are in covenant with him, then their present gain, it is ^
homage worship, and honor to himself; and it behooves us even in that respect,
to fulfill all righteousness; when Christ was baptized and circumcised, he was
as unfit for the Ordinance through his perfection, as children through their
imperfection, being as much above them as children are below them.

It is true, Baptism is a worship of God; but Paedobaptisme, for ought yet
appears, is but a will worship. Christ's Baptism, it is true, was of a
transcendent nature, as is said before; that children are unfit for the
Ordinance, is not to be imputed to their imperfection, but to the defect of
Gods appointment; if God did appoint it, there would be no doubt of their
fitness. But you add further:

3. I answer, The benefit and fruit of it at the present, is very much, both to
the parents and to the children: to the parents, first, whilst God does
thereby honor them, to have their children counted to his Church, to his
Kingdom and Family, and to be under his wing and grace, whilst all the other
Infants in the world have their visible standing under the prince, and in the
kingdom of darkness, and consequently, whilst others have no hope of their
childrens spiritual welfare, until they be called out of that condition,
these need not have any doubt of their childrens welfare, if they die in their
infancy; nor if they live until they show signs to the contrary; God having
both reckoned them unto his people, and given them all the means of salvation
which an Infants age is capable of.All this passage is but dictates; what, or
how much of it is true or false, has been considered before, only that you
say; all the other Infants of the world have their visible standing under the
prince, and in the kingdom of darkness; and consequently, whilst others have
no hope of their childrens spiritual welfare, until they be called out of
that condition; If you mean by all other Infants, all that are unbaptized,
though the Infants of Believers in the Church, it is a very harsh and
uncharitable speech; and you oppose those that in dispute against the Papists
concerning the necessity of Baptism to salvation, do hold that Infants of
Believers are holy, and in the Church before they be baptized, and join with
Lutherans and Papists, denying it; if you mean only the unbaptized Infants of
Infidels, what comfort do you give more to believing parents, that have their
children baptized, then belongs to them, though their children were not
baptized? And when you say, that all others have no hope of their childrens
spiritual welfare,if you mean it of believing parents that baptize not their
children, it is in like manner an uncharitable speech, and does border too near
on the opinion of the necessity of Baptism for Infants to salvation; and when
you say, these need not have any doubt of their childrens welfare, if they die
in their infancy, if you mean it of parents, because their children are
baptized, you do speak like one that did hold that Baptism does confer
gratiam ex opere operato, confer grace by the work done; but for ought you
can show out of Scripture, a believing parent has as much ground of hope for
his Infant that dies unbaptized as for the baptized, and as much reason of
doubt concerning the baptized as the unbaptized. And therefore, what you here
speak, does no whit encourage parents to baptize children, if it be well
weighed, except there can be proved an institution and a promise. But you say,
secondly, here is much privilege and benefit to the children, when as (beside
what inward secret work God is pleased to work in them) they being members of
the Church of Christ, have their share in the communion of Saints, are
remembered at the Throne of grace every day by those that pray for the welfare
of the Church, and particularly, in those prayers which are made for his
blessing upon his Ordinances.

By your parenthesis, you intimate some inward secret work God is pleased to
work in the Infants baptized, by Baptism. If you conceive a bestowing of
grace, ex opere operato, by the work done: or, baptismall initiall regeneration
of the elect, supposed to be in the Infants in baptism, notwithstanding till
death they live wickedly, speak plainly that we may know what you mean, and
then an answer may be framed to your spe^ch. As for being members of the
Church, if you me^n the invisible Church, neither I nor you can affirm or deny;
its in Gods bosom alone; if you mean the visible, you must make a new
definition of the visible Church before Infants baptized will be proved members.
For their remembering at the Throne of grace daily, if you mean it particularly,
and by name, I do not find that to be in use after Baptism any more then
before, and I think they are remembered by the godly in general as well before
Baptism as after; and for the praying for Gods blessing upon his Ordinances,
if Infant Baptism be not Gods Ordinance, this prayer in reference to
Infant Baptism at that time might be better spared. You say; And lastly, it is
no small privilege to have that seal bestowed on them in their infancy, which
may afterward plead when they are grown, and come to fulfill the condition.

When, where, and how Baptism should be pleaded, as you show not, neither do
I well conceive. It is not Baptism of it self that will yield a plea of any
force, either in foro soli, in the Court of earth, or in foro poli, in the
Court of heaven, but the promise of God, and the condition of faith in Christ.
And these will be good pleas in praye^s to God, and in the court of conscience,
when Infant Baptism will stand in no stead. The plea of the Apostle will hold,
Romans 8.31, 32, 33, 34. which baptism rightly administered does strengthen, 1
Pet. 3.21. But I never knew any Saint that pleaded his infant baptism in such
cases.

. 6. Of the sixth objection, and therein of Infant-co^munion, by virtue of
their being in the Covenant, and the Lords Supper succ^eding the Passover.
YOu say further; But if their being capable of the spiritual part, must
entitle them to the outward sign, why then do we not also admit them to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is the seal of the Covenant of grace, as
well as the Sacrament of Baptism? And this is urged the rather, because (say
they) the infants of the Jews did eat of the Passover as well as were
circumcised; Now if our infants have every way as large a privilege as the
infants of the Jews had, then can we not deny them the same privilege which
their infants had, and consequently they must partake of the one Sacrament as
well as the other.

This argument is good, ad homines, against the party opposite, proceeding
upon the Paedobaptists hypotheses or suppositions; to wit, 1. That those to
whom the Covenant belongs, to them the seal belongs; 2. That to the infants of
believers, the Covenant belongs; 3. That the Lords Supper is a seal of the
Covenant as well as Baptism. And these are your hypotheses. Now then if this
be a good argument, children are to be baptized, because they are in the
Covenant, and the seal belongs to those in Covenant, by the same reason they
are to receive the Lords Supper, because they are in Covenant, and the seal
belongs to those in Covenant. Now this argument is strengthened from other
hypotheses, as that the Lords Supper succeeds the Passover, as Baptism
Circumcision, but children not of years of discretion had the Passover,
therefore they are to have the Lords Supper. And this is confirmed by the
practice and opinion of the Ancients that gave the Lords Supper to infants, for
600 years after Christ as well as baptism. To this you say;

I answer, that infants are capable of the grace of Baptism we are sure, not
sure that they are capable of the grace signed and sealed in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper.

This answer supposes that there is grace sealed in the Lords Supper, which is
not sealed in Baptism. To me that Sacrament that confirms the covenant of
grace, confirms all the promises in it, and therefore if Baptism be the seal
of the covenant, it seals all the graces and all the promises in it, and
therefore you are as sure that infants are capable of all graces annexed to the
Covenant, as of one. But you say; For both of them are seals of the new
Covenant, yet it is with some difference; Baptism properly seals the entrance
into it, the Lords Supper properly the growth, nourishment, and augmentation of
it; Baptism for our birth, the Lords Supper for our food. Now infants may be
borne again while they are infants, have their original sin pardoned, be
united to Christ, have his image stamped upon them; but concerning the exercise
of these graces and the augmentation of them in infants while they are infants,
the Scripture is altogether silent.

You spoke somewhat to like purpose before, which I examined part. 3. sect. 15.
To me it is yet as a paradoxe, that Baptism seals properly the entrance into
the Covenant, and the Lords Supper, the growth, nourishment, and augmentation
of it. If you make the entrance at remission of sins, justification, or
mortification; the Lords Supper that seals Christ's death, seals the entrance
into the Covenant, Mat. 26.28. And for Baptism, it seals dying with Christ,
and rising with Christ, Romans 6.3, 4, 5. Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.21. and
therefore not only the first work of conversion, but also after-growth and
exercise of holiness. And the Lords Supper, signifies the same receiving the
Spirit, which Baptism does, 1 Cor. 12.13. And according ^o the doctrine of
Protestants, Baptism seals as well the pardon of other sins, as of original
sin. And so Peter, Acts 2.38. and Ananias, Act. 22.16. And therefore this
difference you put, is a difference which the Scripture makes not; that I say
nothing of your strange phraseology of the growth, nourishment, and
augmentation of the Covenant. But you say; And what is said concerning the
infants of the Jews eating the Passover, to which our Sacrament of the Lords
Supper does succeed, there is no such thing mentioned in the Book of God. It is
said indeed that the several families were to eat their Lamb, if the
household were not too little for it, and that when their children should ask
them what that service meant, they should instruct them about the meaning of
it, but no word injoyning, nor any example witnessing tha^ their little
children did eat of it.

The Commands were, that all the males should thrice a year appear before the
Lord; one of which was the Passover, Exodus 23.17. Exodus 34.23. Deuteronomy. 16.16.
And at that time there was no other food to be eaten, but the unleavened bread,
and the paschall Supper. Therefore those males that could eat, though not come
to years of discretion fit to receive the Lords Supper, yet were to eat the
Passover. Ainsworth notes on Exodus 12.26. So both the outward rite, and the
meaning of it was to be taught to their children. Touching whom, the Jews hold
from the Law in Exodus 23.14.17. Deuteronomy. 16.14.16. that every child that could
hold his Father by the hand, Cotton: The way of the Churches of Christ in
New England. Chap. 1. sect. 2. To the Passover all Jews were admitted young
and old, unless defiled with some pollution.
and go up from Jerusalem (gates) to the mountain of the Temple, his Father
was bound to cause him to go up and appear before God with him, to the end he
might catechize him in the Commandments. And who sow as bound to appear, was
bound to keep the feast. Maim^ny in Hagigah, Chap. 2. sect. 3, 4. Also they
say. A child that is able to eat a marsell of bread, they catechize him in
the Commandments, and give him to eat so much as an Olive of the unleavened
bread. Maimony Treatise of leaven and unleavened bread, c. 6. sect. 10. But you
say;

If they say as some of them do, that those little ones who were able to
enquire concerning the meaning of that service, and capable to receive
instruction about it, did eat of the Passover with their parents; I answer,
(although the Scripture speaks nothing of their eating, yet if that be granted)
it is no prejudice to us, because the Gospel prohibites not such young ones
from the Lords Supper, who are able to examine themselves and discern the
Lords body.

True; but children that were to appear at the Passover, and to partake of
it, were many of them such as might be instructed concerning the meaning of
that service, and yet too young to examine themselves, or to discern the Lords
body: so that if the Lords Supper succeed the Passover, and a rule may be
drawn from the Passover to the Lords Supper, children unable to examine
themselves, may be admitted to the Lords Supper.

. 7. Of the first use, and the Anabaptists supposed bloody sentence.
THe rest of your Sermon is application, which being not argumentative, I shall
let it pass. Only whereas you charge Anabaptists with a rash and bloody
sentence, condemning infants as out of the state of grace, condemning all the
infants of the whole Church of Christ, as having nothing to do with the
Covenant of grace; and then tragically aggravate this thing, as parallel, or
rather exceeding the cruelty of Herod and Hazael, in slaying and dashing the
infants of Israel against the wall, till you produce some testimonies of those
you call Anabaptists, so determining, I shall take it to be but a false
accusation, and a fruit of passion, not of holy zeal. For the thing it self I
have showed part. 2. sect. 10. that it does not follow on the doctrine of
Antipaedobaptisme: and I conceive that if to be in the Covenant of grace be
rightly explained, to wit, so as to signify the having of the promise of
justification and salvation by Christ Jesus, (besides which I know not any
other Evangelicall Covenant of grace) your self will be found to exclude them
from the covenant of grace as much as they. As they dare not say that this or
that particular infant of a believer is in the covenant of grace, that is,
certainly elected, justified, and to be saved, so neither dare you. Your own
words are page 48. Charity being not tied to conclude certainly of any of
them: because they ought to know that all are not Israel who are of Israel, and
that many are called, but few are chosen. If you should, you would gainsay the
Apostle, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. And on the other side, as you will not say they are
damned, so neither will they I am persuaded: but suspending any sentence
concerning this or that in particular, leave them to God, who is the sovereign
Lord both of them and us.

. 8. The Epilogue containing some expressions and motions of the Author.
THus have I, at last, in the midst of many wants, distractions,
discouragements, and temptations, with the assistence of God, who has never
failed me (to him be the praise) examined your Sermon, and thereby showed that
it does not satisfy, and how little reason you had to say in your Epistle, I
am assured that it is Gods truth which I have preached, and which he will
bless. Notwithstanding which confidence, I presume you will see cause to
consider more exactly of this matter upon the reading of this answer. I dare
not think any otherwise of you then as of one who loves and seeks the truth.
Nor do I know any reason why you should conceive that I have taken this pains
for any ends cross to the finding of truth. My real intention in this work
is to discover truth, and to do what is meet for me in my calling, toward
the reformation of these Churches according to Gods Word: unto which we have
both bound our selves by solemn Covenant. I have endeavored not to let pass
any thing of weight, either in your Sermon, or Master Thomas Goodwins, which I
could well remember, or Master Blakes, or any other that have published any
thing about this matter of late. It is an endless business to make a several
answer to every one. I chose to answer yours, because you are styled the
antesignanus, Ensigne-bearer in print; and for other reasons given in the
Prologue. Mr Stalhams Epistle before a Conference at Terling in Essex.
My motion is that there may be an agreement among those that have appeared in
public in this cause, to join either in a reply to this examen of your
Sermon, or in some other work, in which I may see together the whole strength
embattailed, and not be put to weary out my self in reading every Pamphlet, of
which there are too many indigested ones now adays printed, even with License:
and for the buying of which, as now my estate is, I doubt whether my purse will
furnish me. If I may have (...), daily bread for me and mine in a narrow
compass, it will be as much as I may look for. The small stipend I had is
likely to be even now subtracted. If there be any willingness in you to have
any conference with me, to consult about a way of brotherly and peaceable
ventilating this point, I shall be ready upon notice to give you the meeting,
and I hope it shall appear, that I shall not be (...), stiff in opinion, in
case truth shining before me, present my error to my view; and I hope the like
of you. I shall wait a month after your receiving this writing, to know
whether any of these motions take place with you, hoping you will not disdain
to let me have advertisement of your mind, by some letter or message. I would
feign have truth and peace and love, go hand in hand, if it may be: though of
these three (...), it is meet to prefer truth, as Aristotle said long since.
It will be no grief of heart to you at the day of resignation of your spirit,
that you have done nothing against the truth, but for the truth. You have now
my writing, as I have yours: one day Jesus Christ shall judge us both. Consider
what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. Thus prays

From the house belonging to the Rectory of Gabriel Fanchurch in London.
December 7. 1644. Delivered to him Dec. 9. 1644. Your brother and
fellow servants in the work of Christ, JOHN TOMBS.

Inscribed thus; To the reverend and worthy Mr Stephen Marshall, B. D. these
present.
As it is now printed, it is enlarged in sundry places, occasioned by sundry
Books published since the first writing of it.

Colossians 2.11, 12. Proves not Infant Baptism.
An Appendix to these Treatises, in an Answer to a Paper, framing an Argument
for Infant Baptism, from Coloss. 2.11, 12.
SIR,
YOUR Paper exhibites an Argument for Infant Baptism in this form: That may be
said to be written, without which, that which is written cannot be true. This I
grant. But that which is said, Colos. 2.11, 12. of the compleatnesse, with
respect to Ordinances in the new Testament, could not be true, unless Baptism
were to Believers children, as Circumcision was of old; because it cannot be
understood of the compleatnesse that Believers have in Christ for salvation;
for that the Jews had in Christ in the old Testament; but yet they had a token
of the Covenant to their children; Ergo, so they must now, or else that cannot
be true.

Answ. This Argument supposes sundry things, whereof somewhat is true,
somewhat false.

1. It is true, That the believing Jews were complete in Christ for salvation.
For so was David, Abraham, etc. who were justified by faith, Romans 4. Gal. 3.
Heb. 11.

2. It supposes, that the Apostle, Colos. 2.11, 12. mentions Baptism, to show
that we are as complete as the Jews in respect of outward Ordinances, whereas
the Apostle speaks not, verse. 10. of compleatnesse by reason of outward
ordinances, but says, we are complete in Christ without outward ordinances,
and that is his very Argument to dissuade them from embracing the Jewish
ordinances, verse. 8. yea, it is plain, that the Apostle makes the Jews
incomplete by reason of their outward ordinances; and that it is our
compleatnesse that we have all in Christ, without outward ordinances, verse. 17.
Nor does the Apostle mention Baptism, to show that we are equal to the Jews
in outward ordinances, (for the Apostles assertion is, that we are complete in
Christ, exhibited without outward ordinances, and so the better for want of
them) but to show how we put on Christ, and so are complete in him, and
therefore he mentions Faith as well as Baptism; as in like manner he does.
Gal. 3.26, 27. Romans 6.3, etc. Besides, if that by being baptized we are
complete in outward ordinances, then we need no other ordinance, and
consequently the Lords Supper should be needless.

3. It is supposed, that Circumcision was a token of the Covenant to their
children. But this is ambiguous, in some sense it is true, in some sense it is
not true. It was a token of the Covenant made to Abraham, to wit, First, that
God made such a Covenant with Abraham. Secondly, that God required them to keep
the conditions of it. But it is not true in these senses. First, that every
person circumcised, or to be circumcised, of right had a title to the promises
of the Covenant. Secondly, that this title to the promises of the Covenant was
the reason why they were circumcised.

4. It is supposed, that if our children have not a token of the Covenant now,
as the Jews had, that it cannot be true that we are complete as the Jews. But
there is not a shadow of proof for it in the Text. And it is grounded on these
false assertions: First, that the Jews children were in the Covenant of Grace,
because they were Abraham's natural seed. Secondly, that a Believers children
now are in the Covenant of Grace, because they are a Believers children; which
things are expressly contrary to Romans 9.6, 7, 8.

5. It is supposed, that the Jews having salvation by Christ, had also a
compleatnesse by outward ordinances. It is true, that compared with the
Gentiles that served dumb Idols, they were complete by reason of outward
ordinanc^s: For, their outward ordinances did shadow Christ to come, and so did
not the Rites of the Gentiles. But compared with Christians since Christ
manifested in the flesh, so they were incomplete in respect of outward
ordinances; and so the Apostle determines, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3.

6. It is supposed, that without a succession of some ordinance in stead of
Circumcision, we are not complete in Christ, or, at least, not so complete as
the Jews. But this I account to be false, and very dangerous.

1. False, because it is contrary to that which the Apostle asserts, that we
are complete in Christ alone, because in him is the fullness of all that was
shadowed in the ordinances of the Jews.

2. It is very dangerous, because the same reason that will conclude, that we
are not complete without a succession of some ordinance in stead of
Circumcision, will conclude, we are not complete without a succession of
something in stead of sacrifices, Temple, Priest, Altar, etc. and so after the
Popish manner, all Jewish Rites may be reduced under new names, which would
overthrow Christianity.

As for our compleatnesse in Christ without outward ordinances, like to the
Jews, I distinguish of a twofold compleatnesse.

First, in all the will of God, Colos. 4.12. And thus we are complete without
such ordinances: we may do all the will of God believing in Christ, without
observing any of those ordinances.

Secondly, of means, in ordine ad finem, in order to the end, that is, to the
knowledge of God, and obtaining salvation: And so we are more complete then the
Jews without those outward ordinances or any answerable to them.

First, because they had Christ only promised and assured, we have christ
exhibited, and fulfilling all things. And surely they that have a promise
accomplished, are compleater then they that have it only assured, let it be
assured never so firmly.

Secondly, because they had Christ under shadows, we the body, Colos. 2.17. he
is the true Shecinah, or Divine Majesty, in whom the fullness of the glory of
God dwelt, Col. 2.9. he was circumcision, sacrifices, all. And the woman is
more complete that enjoyes her husband in person, then in a picture, messenger,
etc. that represent him. The Jews were complete in Christ as we, quoad rem, in
respect of the thing, but not quoad modum, and mensuram rei, in respect of the
manner and measure thereof. So that in the Argument, these Propositions are to
be denied:

1. That Colos. 2.11, 12. speaks of compleatnesse, with respect to Ordinances
in the new Testament.

2. That it could not be true, unless Baptism were to Believers children, as
Circumcision was of old.

3. That Colos. 2.11, 12. cannot be understood of the compleatnesse that
Believers have in Christ for salvation.

4. In some sense it is to be denied that the Jews had a token of the Covenant
to their children.

5. In what sense it is to be granted that the Jews had a token of the Covenant
to their children, in that sense the consequence is to be denied, that we must
have a token of the Covenant of Grace for our children now.

FINIS.
Latin passages En^lished in the second Treatise.
PArt 1. page 2. Achilles the champion of the Greeks proverbially put for the
strongest argument.

Page 5. Christ came to save by himself all; all, I say, who by him are born
again unto God, infants, and little ones, and boys.

Page 6. That Baptism is unde^stood under the name of new birth in our Lords
and the Apostles phrase.

openly confirming the Apostolic tradition of the baptism of little infants
against Anabaptisticall impiety.

Only I would have the younger who shall light on the works of Irenaeus
^dmonished, that they beware of those editions, which that most impudent Monk
Feuardentius a man of large boldness, and of no faith, has foully corrupted
in many things, and bespattered with impious and lying annotations.

Are born again.

Therefore being a master he had also the age of a master, not rejecting nor
going beyond a man, nor loosing the law of humane kind in himself, but
sanctifying every age by that likeness which was to him. For he came to save
all men by himself; all men, I say, who by him are new born unto G^d, infants
and little ones, and boys, and young men, and elder men. Therefore he went
through every age, and was made an infant sanctifying infants; among little
ones, a little one, sanctifying them that have this age: being also made an
example to them of piety, and justice, and subjection. Among young men being
made an example to young men, and sanctifying them to the Lord: so also an
elder to the elder, that he might be a perfect m^ster not only according to
the exposition of the truth, but also according to age sanctifying also the
elder, being made also an example to them. And then he went even unto death,
that he might be the first-b^rn from the dead holding the primacy in all
things, the Prince of life, before all, and preceding all.

Page 7. But we shall the less trouble our selves concerning Origin, because
the things we cited are not extant in Greek.

In the margin. If therefore any man before Pelagius was born, or before Arius
arose, be sha^p and vehement against the errors of Pelagians, and vexing them
professedly, although the name of the heretics be suppressed, it is not
probable that such a writing is the Authors whose name it (...)

Page 8. For this also the Church has received a tradition from the Ap^stles,
and according to the observance of the Church.

The seal to them that enter into a course of life.

In the margin. Notwithstanding the custom of our mother the Church in
baptizing little ones is not to be despised, nor by any means to be accounted
superfluous, nor at all to be believed, unless it had been an Apostolical
tradition.

Page 11. That infants are presently to be baptized that they perish not,
because mercy is not to be denied them.

Page 13. Lest little ones should perish if they should die without the remedy
of the grace of regeneration, they determined that they were to be baptized for
the remission of sins. Which also St. Augustine shows in his book of the
baptism of little ones, and the African Councels witness, and many documents
of other Fathers.

But the father or mother ought not to stand for their own child at the Font,
that there may be a difference between spiritual begetting and carnal. But if
it happen by chance they shall have after that no fell^wship of carnal
copulation, who have undertaken the spiritual bond of co-fatherhood in a
common son.

What say you to these things? Lo I have not brought out of Augustine, but out
of the Gospel, which since ye say ye chiefly believe, either yield ye at length
that by the faith of others others may be saved; or deny if ye can those things
which I have laid down to be of the Gospel.

Page 14. in the margin. And I was signed with the sign of his cross, and I
was seasoned with his salt from the womb of my mother, who much hoped in thee.

Page 15. in the margin. Augustine adjudgeth to eternal flames the Infants
that die without baptism. Likewise whosoever shall say, that even the little
ones shall be made alive in Christ, who go out of this life without the
participation of his Sacrament, he truly goes both against the Apostles
preaching, and condemns the whole Churcb.

The most strong and founded faith, in which the Church of Christ believes that
no not little ones most lately born can be freed from damnation, unless by the
grace of the name of Christ, which he has commended in his Sacraments.

Page 16. Neither let that move thee, that some do not bring little ones to
receive baptism with that faith that they may be regenerated by spiritual
grace unto life eternal: but because they think that by this remedy they keep
or receive temporal health. For not therefore are they not regenerate, because
they are not offered by them with this intention. For necessary ministeries
are celebrated by them.

It is answered he does believe by reason of the Sacrament of faith.

Page 18. in the margin. Lastly, who sees not that this was the manner of that
time, when scarce the thousandth person was baptized before he was of grown age,
and diligently exercised among the catechized.

Part. 2.
Page 21. These to the rest of the errors which they borrowed from the
Manichees and Priscillianists added this over and above, that they said, that
the baptism of little ones was unprofitable, inasmuch as it could profit none,
who could not both himself believe, and by himself ask the Sacrament of
baptism, of which kind we read not that the Manichees and Priscillianists
taught any thing.

They mock us because we baptize infants, because we pray for the dead, because
we ask the suffrages of the Saints.

They believe not that Purgatory fire remains after death, but that the soul
loosed from the body does presently pass either to rest, or to damnation.

But now they who acknowledge not the Church, it is no marvel if they detract
from the orders of the Church, if they receive not their appointments, if they
despise Sacraments, if they obey not commands.

Because he took away Festivals, Sacraments, Temples, Priests, because the life
of Christ is shut up from the little ones of Christians, while the grace of
baptism is denied, nor are they suffered to draw near to salvation.

Page 23. We perceive in the man dexterity, and a study of mediocrity.

But in that man (I desire to be deceived) I have seemed to my self to have
found nothing but immoderate thirst of wealth and glory.

A fanatique man, and gross Anabaptist.

Page 24. They would seem studious of truth.

Page 25. The word of the Lord.

From the staff to the corner. A proverbiall speech in Schools, when one thing
is inferred from another, which have no connection.

They who all along these places of Belgic and lower Germany are found
bordering on this Anabaptisticall heresy, are almost all followers of this
Mennon whom I have named, to whom now this Theodorick has succeeded. In whom
for a great part you may perceive tokens of a certain godly mind, who being
incited by a certain unskilful zeal, out of error rather then malice of mind
have departed from the true sense of Divine Scriptures, and the agreeing
consent of the whole Church; which may be perceived by this, that they always
resisted the rage of Munster, and Batenburgick that followed after, stirred up
by John Batenburg after the taking of Munster, who plotted a certain new
restitution of the kingdom of Christ, which should be placed in the destruction
of the wicked by outward force. And they tau^ht that the instauration and
propagation of the kingdom of Christ consists in the cross alone: whereby it
happens that they which are such may seem rather worthy of pity and amendment,
then persecution and perdition.

Page 28. What part of time.

Page 48. H^w it may be that Israel may be rejected, but that together the
Covenant of God established with Abraham and his seed should seem to be made
void.

In the margin. The credit of that promise, Genesis 17.7, 8. does presently appear
to be brought into danger by the rejecting of the Jews, and the exclusion of
them out of the Covenant of God, since they are born of Abraham according to the
flesh, so (says he) it appears to them that look upon the first f^ce of
things.

The Apostle shows, that the^ef^re the word of the Covenant, and divine
promises made to Israel failed not, or was made void, a^though a great part of
the Jews were unbelieving, because those promises of the C^venant are of God,
not to them properly who were to come from the seed of Abraham according to the
flesh, but to those, who were to be ingraffed into the family of Abraham by
virtue of divine promise.

Page 49. The argument of the Apostle to prove the Covenant of God entered into
with Abraham does not comprehend all the posterity of Abraham in its skirt, we
think should be thus simply framed. Esau and Jacob were of the p^sterity of
Abraham, but God did not comprehend both of these in his Covenant with Abraham.
Therefore not all the posterity of Abraham. It is proved that God did not
comprehend both in the Covenant of grace, because he did not comprehend Esau
the elder, but Jacob the younger.

Page 50. There are many of the seed of Abraham to whom the word of promise
does not belong, as Ismael, and Ismaelites. But if so there be many of the seed
of Abraham to whom the word of promise does not belong, then the rej^ction of
many Jews who are of the seed of Abraham does not make void the word of promise.

In the margin. Calvin gathers hence, in that any is the seed of Abraham the
promise made to Abraham belongs to him: but the answer is manifest, that
promise understood of spiritual blessing, pertaines not to the carnal seed of
Abraham, but to the spiritual, as the Apostle himself has interpreted it,
Romans 4. and 9. For if you understand the carnal seed, now that promise will
belong to none of the Gentiles, but to those alone who are begotten of Abraham
and Isaac according to the flesh.

He teaches also that the promises of God are not tied to the carnal birth;
but to belong only to the believing and spiritual posterity. For they are not
the sons of Abraham, who are of Abraham according to the flesh, but who are
according to the spirit.

Page 51. In the Margin. The inculcation also of the seed shows that only
the elect and effectually called are noted, the Apostle so interpreting this
place, Romans 9.8. Gal. 3.16. and 4.28.

Page 52. That baptism does not certainly seal in all the children of
believers the grace of God (since among them some are absolutely reprobated,
even by an antecedent decree of God from eternity) and therefore believers are
to doubt of the truth of Gods Covenant, I am thy God, and the God of thy seed
after thee.

Page 58. To be a son of Abraham does declare nothing else but to be freely
elected, Romans 9.8. and to tread in the steps of the faith of Abraham, Romans
4.12. and to do the works of Abraham, Joh. 8.39. From which is rightly
gathered certain expectation of salvation to come, Romans 8.29.

Page 69. In the Margin. Infants in their parents, grandfathers, great
grandfathers, grandfathers grandfathers have refused the grace of the Gospel,
by which act they have deserved, that they should be forsaken of God. For I
would to me, etc. For it is the perpetual reason of the Covenant of God, that
sons ar^ comprehended and reckoned in parents.

To which D r Twisse thus opposes in his answer. Nor any where in sacred
Scripture is it signified, that God has made such a Covenant with man fallen,
that if he would believe, he should obtain grace to him and his posterity; on
the contrary, if he should not believe, he should lose grace for him and his
posterity, which kind of Covenant all Divines acknowledge to have been
entered into with Adam under the Condition of obedience.

Page 71. In the Margin. It is manifest that the believers marrying with
Gentiles are guilty of uncleanness, and to be kept from all communication of
the fraternity from the Letters of the Apostle, saying, that with such meat is
not to be eaten.

Page 73. First, because the reason is uncertain, for though it sometimes be
so done, yet for the most part it is otherwise.

He spoke in the preterperfect tense, has been sanctified, not, shall be
sanctified, signifying a thing already determined and finished, and not a thing
for the time to come uncertain either to be wished or expected.

The believing wife may with a good conscience keep company with the
unbelieving husband (for why should another conscience defile her?) Therefore
it is said, the unbelieving not in himself, but in his wife (that is, in
respect of his wife) is holy. The same we are to judge of the other member.

Page 74. This is the mind of the Apostle that he may teach, that the believer
is not to depart from the unbelieving yokefellow, consenting to dwell together.
For proving of which an argument from an uncertain event, and by accident is
equally unfit as a little before. Hence that opinion is refuted that then when
the unbeliever shall be converted, holy children will be begotten. For what if
that never be?

Page 76. Of that ceremonial holiness what shall I say? It came into
Augustines mind, but good God! how strange? verily some things are so absurd,
that they deserve not to be refuted. Well. The Apostle has said, that if the
unbelieving husband be not sanctified in the believing wife, it will be that
the children borne from thence are unclean. Therefore all so borne are
unclean, or else the Apostle spoke false. What then? Are all borne of those
parents whereof one is not sanctified in the other begotten in the monthly
courses? Do unbelieving husbands never use their wives but in their monthly
courses? So it must be verily, or this interpretation is ridiculous.

Of that Covenant-holinesse what shall I say? It came into Chamiers, Calvin's,
etc. minds, but good God! how strange? verily some things are so absurd, that
they deserve not to be refuted. Well! The Apostle has said, that if the
unbelieving husband be not sanctified in the believing wife, it will be that
the children borne from thence will be unclean. Therefore all that are so
borne are unclean, or the Apostle has said that which is false. What then?
Are all borne of those parents whereof one is not sanctified in the other,
without the Covenant of grace? Do fornicating or unbelieving parents never
beget children that shall be within the Cov^nant of grace, or federally holy?
So it must be verily, or this interpretation is ridiculous.

Page 77. In the Margin. But there is no straiter friendship then of husband
and wife, which requires communion of affections, body, offspring, lastly of
the whole life: which all Nations have with great consent believed to be a
thing truly holy, that is not found out by man, but by God.

Page (75) By this argument that sanctity is excluded which so ne have brought
from education. For by that the argument of the Apostle is altogether weakened.
For this is uncertain. For all know and experience teaches, that neither all
husbands are won, which also the Apostl^ implies, nor that all children obey
holy education. Besides, if any obey, yet this effect is accidental, and not
from the nature of marriage it self.

Page 89. But since strangers washed and not circumcised were held with those
Laws only which God gave to all mankind, it is easy to be understood that
this washing was among old institutions, arising as I think after the great
deluge, in memory of the world purged. Whence that famous speech among the
Greeks, The sea washed away all the evils of men. Certainly, we read even in
the Epistle of Peter, that Baptism is answerable to the flood.

Page 91. It was to be added, that not only to himself and in himself, but
also for our use Christ be determined to be such, and so great, that nothing be
wanting in him, and that in him alone we may get all things requisite to the
true and saving knowledge of God. Therefore having gotten fullness in Christ,
wherefore is there need either of humane wisdom, or the vain inventions, or
ceremonies of men, lastly any other thing added besides Christ?

Page 146. In the margin. It was known to the Jews that God has been wont to
give this honor to Prophets, that he would bestow his gifts on others at the
Prophets prayers, of which imposition of hands was a sign. It is manifest also
from Genesis 48.14, 15. that in that rite prayers were wont to be conceived for
children. Thence it has been always observed by the Hebrews, that they would
bring children to those, who were believed to excel others in holiness, to be
commended in their prayers to God by laying on of hands: which custom as yet
continues with them. Now this custom Christ approving, shows that the faith
and prayers of others profit also that age.

Page 152. As for that which Erasmus subjoynes, that John first baptized, then
preached baptism, it is such that indeed it seems not to need refutation. For
what? When John did say, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, did he
not teach those whom he was about to baptize? yea verily, unless he had first
taught to what end he did baptize, who at last would have come to his baptism?
Certainly, since Sacraments are seals, it is necessary that the doctrine go
before which they sign.

Page 153. In the margin. All these rites of profession of faith, etc. had
their original from the very institution of baptism, nor ought they to be
omitted, only to be dispensed with respect to age.

FINIS.

