The Rebels Plea, OR, Mr. Baxters judgment, Concerning the late Wars, in these
Particulars: viz.

The
Original of Government. Coordinate and Legislative Power in the two Houses.
Third Estate. Force upon the Houses in 1642. Principles the Houses went by at
the beginning, destructive to Monarchy. Covenant. Reasons for submitting to the
late Government.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Mabb, and are to be sold by Henry Brom, at the
sign of the Gun in Ivie-lain, 1660.

The Rebel's Plea, Examined.
THe Writers of the Parliament side asserting highly, the Liberty of the
Subject, think they oppose those of the Kings, who plead strongly for
Subjection to Rulers, which are things, no way inconsistent, for it is very
evident rulers do not take away but preserve our Liberty. Men being of the
same nature, desire the same things; and what every man desires, none can
securely enjoy; the natural inequality between men being so little, the mutual
yielding would in all likelihood be little also: The title of the strongest
though the best would be too weak to hold long, some one or more would quickly
over-match any that could pretend to that, every bodies right was apparently no
bodies, if any had the good (or ill shall I call it) luck to have any wealth,
it was according to David's curse, to him an occasion of falling. By the
inconveniences that attend the want of Government, we find out the nature of
it:

First, Our inability singly to defend our selves from our own Countrymen, and
from strangers, made it necessary we should part with all our power into
another hands, that he might be so able to defend us from both, seeing that
from both we were in danger to receive injury in every thing we value.

Secondly, Because we are capable of so much wrong, and too apt to apprehend
our selves wronged, when we are not, we must resign whatsoever Power of
Judging or Redressing we have in our hands into his hands, and for the Public
safety, are obliged to submit to his, though it may seem to us an erroneous and
partial judgment; a thing though highly rational, and of great import to the
general, yet not to be expected from selfish or opinionative men, unless the
Magistrate has a compulsive Power^, which alone, though we have no fear of
Foreigners, were ground enough to put the Sword and Scepter into the same Hand.

Supposing therefore Power to have originally been in the People, which shall
be afterward examined; it will not at all upon pretense of misuser entitle
them to snatch it back, any more than I can forcibly take away, what I gave;
because I can prove it was once mine: If the people are still Judges of what is
to the public good; and have the Power of the Sword, they are what they were
before they were no Subjects.

But Mr. Baxter tells us not after the rate of Mr. Calvin, who thinks it
possible for the tres Ordines Regni to have a Power of resisting Princes, but
according to the worst principles of his most Scotized followers:

The People may Fight against King and Parliament both, for the Common good, if
they be both against it. These. 365. Of Obedience and resistance.

Kings conditions are very little bettered by those men, who free them from the
Popes Supremacy, in ordine ad bonum spirituale, and subject them to the
Peoples, in ordine ad bonum Publicum. But it is strange, that the multitude (for
what else can the People signify, distinct from and opposed to the King and
Parliament) that the multitude I say, should by Mr. Baxter be thus solemnly
invested with the highest piece of Regality, the Judging of the public good,
whose ^ncapacity, Levity, Ignorance, Naughtiness, Unaptnesse, for even the
meanest employment of this nature: In his Book against Harrington, he labors
to demonstrate, see his twenty Arguments against Popular Government. King James
in the Conference at Hampton Court, told us out of experience, how zealously
the Presbyterian Ministers defended the Kings Power in Spirituals, while there
was need of it to pull down the Pope; but that being done, more wisely put it
into their own hands: So now it seems, it shall fare even with Parliaments;
While the King could not be pulled down, but by that Assemby, their Omnipotency
was every where proclaimed, but now they must learn too, to use the Power the
People gave them for their good, or else the people may take it from them.

But secondly, This Tenent is destructive of its very pretense, as being
extremely opposite to the public good, because to the peace of the Nation,
which is the only time, in which we can securely enjoy the benefit of the
Governors care of the public Affairs by having opportunity of following our
private ones. There is much fault to be found in the Administration of
(perhaps) every Nation in the world; private men injured by corrupt Officers,
etc. But that the inconveniences are so great in any one place, that it should
be the concernment of the ma^ority of the Nation, to redress them by a War,
whose effects a^e so calamitous and universal, I durst be tried by any besides
the Needy, Ambitious and Discontented men of the same place

Man is by Nature a sociable Creature, which though Mr. Hobs denies, because
another had said it before him, is evident in this, that if a man were
furnished withal the delights, the most wanton can fancy, and freed from the
fear of any assaults; yet to be totally debarred the company of men, would
make all his pleasures irksome; nor is there any other imaginable reason to be
given, how men of even good parts spend a very vast proportion of their time in
hearing the flat and impertinent discourses of idle and weak men and women;
were there not a sociable principle in our nature, so that we can no more put
off our delighting in the company of men, then we can our being men: We are
naturally then inclined to society, which society cannot be maintained without
Government, nor Government possibly without the power of the Sword, the natural
right of Judging for our selves, and maintaining that judgment by what force
we can make, being the inconvenience that attended want of Government; and
therefore sure laid down in the very Constitution: He therefore that takes up
the Sword without, nay against the Command of the Supreme Magistra^e, resumes
that Right which by mutual consent all had laid down, denies himself his
Subject, stands upon terms with him as equal, which is as much as in him lies
to dissolve the Government, reduce all to Anarchy, and is therefore not more
in^urious to the ^rince, whose Authority he Usurps, then to the Nation whose
peace he thus treacherously disturbs.

Public good and Liberty, are two fine words that engage Nations to their own
ruin, always insisted upon by those who have not so great a share of Wealth
or Power in the present state of Affairs, as they think they deserve, or at
least hope for in the next Change* Their disco^rses are usually such as these;
What is a Prince more than another man? inferior in parts and piety perhaps to
thousands of his own Subjects, we are all equal, though Statesmen make, and
fo^s believe a difference; Peasant is not made of the mould of the Earth, and
the Prince of the Stars in Heaven; Though Court Flatterers calls them Gods, we
see them dye like men; our obedien^e consists like the Heathens devotion in
their Ignorance, who worship for a God, which their Priests knew to be but a
Cat or O^^le. When they have persuaded men out of the reverend esteem of the
Magistrates Person and Office, their work is half done: Then the disputers of
the Original and nature of Government sufficiently show their readiness to
pull down the House, that they may prey into the Foundation, and it is
resolved, The King is but the Common Trustee, if he will wound us with that
Sword we put into his hands ^o defend us, let him thank himself, if we wrest it
out again; Laws and Magistrates were made for, and cease to be, when they cease
to be subservient to the public good, as the means has a being only in
relation to the end.

No wonder if the people gladly embrace such gay new nothings, pity the
simplicity of their forefathers, who lost their Rights for want of knowing
them, the meanest Artisans hug their newfound Prerogative, and are resolved
ere long, the Crown and the Scepter, Laws and Magistrates shall do their duty,
and veil before them. That they may value their new light the more; it shall
be showed how high time it was to discover it, when it was more then time they
had made use of it; the Public is now in danger, if they will now endure,
they then deserve to be ruined.

There being something amiss in the administration of every Government,
Innovators can never want pretense to propose somewhat, the redress of which
would be grateful to the people, who have not the wit to consider the much
greater inconveniences of a War, nor the ordinary prudence to observe the
conditions of the men which would evince them to mind their own rather then
their Countries good.

If some Doctors have determined it lawful to resist in case the Public is
in evident danger of destruction* every grievance shall be the case, not a Tax
if unduely as some think leavied, though of a moderated proportion, and
employed to the end for which it was raised, highly to the honor and behoo^e
of the Nation, but shall be called its undoing; which is as mad as if a
Physician (nay madder in as much as the concernment is more general, because in
desparate cases, he may use desparate remedies, should therefore do so in all
cases.

There is another weak part in the people, which gladly yields to any assault,
which seditious Orators secure for themselves unperceivably, that is, they
naturally love to hear men spoke ill of, but especially they are never so well
pleased as when they hear discourses of the failings of good or great men, that
rascally pleasure, which their suiteablenesse to this principle produces in the
Vulgar, procures them ready entertainment, and accordingly all the faults and
felicities of the Government, shall be exaggerated to the height, improved to
the very rigor of the utmost consequence, the dissatisfied, unpreferred part
of the Clergy shall obliquely hint them (if the time for direct railing be not
come) with a superfectation of fears and jealousies, at every Lecture; and
under pretense of confessing and being humbled for the sins of the Nation in
Prayer, for the sins of us, our Kings, and our Princes, under that head shall
be instilled into the peoples, not affections only, but only their very
Faith, whatsoever ill of the present Rulers, malice can conceive and impudence
utter: If any represent the necessity of those blamed proceedings, they shall
be called Time-servers, Courtiers, and so heard if at all with prejudice: When
railing at Government shall be called Freedom of Spirit, and despising
authority, fearing not the face of men in their Countries Cause It is a certain
sign they desire to be no longer private men, who thus discover public
minds.

By whom and how England was seduced to undo it self, in order to the public
good we shall enquire hereafter; I will now enter upon the thing it self; and
enquire,

1. Whether the War were not the War of Subjects against their Sovereign,
where we must examine whether the two Houses were coordinate with; or
subordinate to the King.

2. Whether there were any just cause for a War, supposing they had a right of
resisting in some cases.

3 Whether or no, and how far, the alterations that since followed may be
deduced, out of the principles of the first beginning of the War.

4. Whether the principles and practice of the Presbyterian Ministers are
destructive of all Government? Before I enter upon the first Question; I must
according to Mr. Baxter's method, consider his previous argument, who in his
judgment of the late Wars, thus argues:

Sect. I.
The Malignant hatred of seriousness in Religion, did work so violently in the
RABBLE that I could not stay at home. This, Though frequently insisted on in
his other books, even beyond truth or modesty, and has seduced many
well-meaning Zealots, is yet far from conclusive; suppose some of the meaner
sort of his town, thought it enough to honor the King, though they feared not
God: must he therefore think it enough to fear God, though he did not honor
the King: that many of the Kings party were drunken, or ungodly; is not to the
purpose, but sure it is a piece of separatisme beyond Independency to neglect a
duty, because, wicked men would join in the doing, nor is this true, with
which this argument is enforced.

Nor had I any place of safety from their rage, but the Armies and garrisons of
the Parliament: Yes you had the garrisons of the King, I am sure it was no part
of the Kings cause, to deny his Subjects protection for being peaceable and
godly, your question therefore, Whether those Subjects that are utterly
undeservedly deprived of the protection of Magestrates and laws, are not
discharged of their Obligations: is extremely impertinent to the thing in hand,
unless you had proved your demerits to be none, and you having done the duty
of a good Subject, upon demand (which you have not once asserted) were denied
the benefit of it by his Majesty, or the Governors of his Garrisons; For sure
the unrulinesse of what you acknowledge to be the RABBLE, is no sufficient
ground to say, you were utterly deprived of the Protection of MAGI^TRATES and
LAWS.

The first capacity of Parliaments, is to represent the people as free, for I
take it for undeniable, that the Government is constituted by contract, and in
that contract, the People reserved themselves some rights; Parliaments are the
trustees for securing those exempted rights, and so represent the people as so
far free: The rights and freedoms of a people, as a People, are in order of
nature before their constitution, and excepted and so secured in it.

The first of which assertions: That the Original of their government is by
contract being the foundation (though if granted a weak one) ought in reason to
have been backed with some clearer evidence then, I take it for undeniable* I
shall make it out that the Original of all Government was not so, which though
it is sufficient to overthrow that assertion, there being not so much as an
offer of any Argument peculiar to this Realm to evince its being so; yet I
shall say something to that particular.

A Nation, is families multiplied, and a King but the common Father. (...)
Arist. Where the Nations, there the Government began in private families,
(...), nor election there, The eldest was the Ruler, born not made their
Sovereign, and this sufficiently evidenced by the Kingly power, the Power of
life and death, which in all antiquity we find the fathers possessed of, if
there were any need of further proof, the small teritories which in all new
discovered places of the world Kings enjoy, would easily persuade us their
kindred and Subjects to be the same; Joshua beat thirty Kings, Adonizebeck
seventy in the small land of Canaan, and there might be more for any thing we
know.

But secondly, Nations if they chose a King, may submit themselves absolutely
to him: Either, 1. to be defended from some potent Adversary they more dread,
venture a possible extremely unlikely to avoid a present imminent destruction;
so the Campanians of old to the Romans, Live. Populum Campanum, Vrbemque Capuam,
agros, delubra Deum, divi^^, ^umanamque omnia in vestram P. C. ditionem
dedimus: Or, 2. Apprehending that Government to be the best, as knowing that in
such a State, the Kings private ^trest is concerned in the public, which
cannot so truly be said of any man, or side in any how well contrived a mixture
whatsoever; and withal observing how well other Nations thrive under^, the
Roman Historian, though a great adorer of a Republique could not deny, but
people live^ very happily; sub imperio plan^ regio, under one that was a King
endeed: Vrbis sub Eumene l^berae and civitatis fortunam cum sua mutatam
v^luisse; let others Cities apprehend themselves free under a great many, they
found themselves as free as they desired under one Ruler: It is by this time
evident sure, that all Government is not by Contract.

I shall now resolve the above cited Section into these four propositions:

First, That the Original of this Government was a bargain between the King
and People.

Secondly, The People did reserve some Rights to themselves.

Thirdly, The Parliament are the Trustees for securing those exempted Rights.

Fourthly, These Rights of the People, as the people were, before the
Constitution excepted, and so secured in it.

Of all which Propositions, there cannot be one true according to all the Law
and History this Age is acquainted with. In the most tumultuous later ages
past, there has been (perhaps) something of as good Authority to us, as our
own proceedings may be to future times.

I shall oppose only this: Because in all the Chronicles that ever I met with,
the higher I go, the more absolute I find the King, an ill sign of Rights
exempted in the very Constitution, and the privileges we now enjoy (as to
share in the Government) were wrested (and it is easy to track when) by fraud
and force from weak or indigent Kings, or given as acts of grace, and
acknowledged with thankfulness for such: I would desire to be informed, when
and where we did meet to chose our King? whether before we lived without any
form of Government, o^ what we had, upon what occasion we changed it? who were
witness to the bargain between the King and us? where the Copy of it is, where
is an exact Catalogue of our Liberties, for the Parliament being to secure our
exempted Rights are (I should think) to know them, Our fundamental Laws are
not (I hope) like the Traditions of the Church of Rome, which no man knows
where to find; must we look on Parliaments as they on Councels; believe what
they at present Vote, though we know it then to have beginning, to have been
from the beginning. But Mr. Baxter may perhaps startle, if out of this very
Section: (as error and lying frequently are their own confuters) which as it
is the foundation of most Seditious Pamphlets deserves to be particularly
considered: I can prove the War against his late Majesty to be Rebellion.

His Argument runs thus: It was not Rebellion, Because the Parliament are not
his Subjects in one case, i. e. as they are the Trustees for the securing those
exempted Rights, and represent the people as free, not as wholly free, but as
being so far free as that exemption signifies, that is, as to such Rights as
were in order of Nature before the Constitution excepted, and so established
and so secured in it. From whence I thus argue.

The Parliament could not represent us as free, except in those things in which
we were free i. e. in respect of those particular privileges which in the very
constitution of the Government were reserved; now if this Parliament did fight
for any thing, which was not so reserved, they cannot be upon that head
excused, and so it was a War of Subjects against their Sovereign: Ergo. Now
whether the Militia, taking away the Kings Negative Vote, according to the
Declaration of May 26. 1642. the 19. Propo. were any of those exempted Rights,
let any modest man judge.

If the people reserved such a power to themselves in this fancied Contract, it
is strange it is not totidem verbis expressed? De non apparentibus and non
existentibus eadem est ratio; is a rule in law to avoid uncertainty, and dash
groundless pretenses in things of smaller concernment. If we reserved a Power
of resisting, what hindered, but our Ancestors who were neither fools nor
Complementers, inserted not some such clause in the Coronation Oath at least,
as in the King of Poland, Quod si Sacramentum meum ^iolavero, incolae Regni
nullam nobis obedientiam praestare tenebuntur.

Against this Capacity of Parliaments, of representing the People as free, and
that in the very constitution of the Government, though it is enough to confute
it, that it is not founded upon any thing in our laws or Lawyers: I shall offer
briefly these two things.

1. This opinion under the glorious name of Parliament, comprehends only the
most inconsiderable part of it, the House of Commons, the Lords representing
not the People in any sense, but to this head, I shall say more when I come to
examine, how far our late alterations may be maintained out of the principles
of those who began the war.

2. It is the ju^gment of ^r. Edward Cook in his Preface to ^. ^ep. Fitzherbert
Nature Brevium; and indeed the (...) co^^ent of Lawyers, that the best way to
understand the nature of a thing, is to consult the Writ that belongs to it,
now if the Writ calls them only to Counsel, Con^^l^m vestrum impens^ri, etc
and De quibusdam arduis negotiis, quibusdam; some, which he was pleased to
desire their advice in, not what ever they had a mind to be meddling in. There
be fresh examples of latter times even in Qu Elizabeth's days, of members sent
to prison, for mentioning in the House to move the Queen in a thing which
highly concerned the peace of the Nation; but a thing above their cognizance,
and it was not muttered at as breach of Privilege.

If they had been intended for such sharers in the Sovereignty in the very
Constitution of the Government; How are the Burgesses so many more than the
Knights of the Shire; are the meanest Tradesmen more capable of ruling then the
Gentry, whose thoughts, and education are sure more suitable to it. That alone
were enough to make one think, representing to the King, the several
Obstructions of Trade in all parts of the Nation, the greatest part of their
errant; it being the only thing they are fit for. Add to this, Sr. Edward
Cook in Pref. to 9. Rep. reckons it ^p, as one of the Privileges of Tenants in
Ancient Dem^sne, that they were not to be returned Burgesses to serve in
Parliament.

His next work is to Answer two Objections. 1. The Oath of Supremacy, says he,
secureth the Kings Title against all Foraign Claim, either Pope or any other.
The words of that Oath are plainly these.

I. A. B. Do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the Only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical things (or causes) as temporal. Thus far it is as clear and
positive as words can make it; The Negative part of the Oath, which because it
hinders not men's designs, they are content to take notice of, follows and
that no Forraigners, etc. If the King is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and the two Houses are equal with him in the Government, and we may
swear this, and yet believe that, it is time to change not only our law, but
our language; and the Houses should make us new Dictionaries that we may know,
what English words signify.

The second Argument, is one would think convincing, The two Houses acknowledge
themselves His Majesty's humble and loyal Subjects assembled in Parliaments.
They petition the King, the King never them, they cannot come unless he calls
them, nor choose to come, when he does call them; nor stay one minuit longer
than he pleases, and yet these are his equals, not to say his Superiors; but
he that has an equal during his own pleasure has none at all.

He warns us to take heed of Titles, being it is likely, not ignorant that,
King, Monarch, Emperor, Supreme Lord, Majesty were every where in the law
attributed to the Kings person, but of him in his political capacity, i e. the
Majesty, Regality of the two Houses: There is as little to be found of the Name
as the thing. What has been now said, may evince that proposition; the
Sovereign power is only in the King to be no groundless one; but of that more
hereafter: The next Objection is,

Legislation is the most principal part of the Sovereigns Right* But that
belongs to the Houses, as well as the King; Be it enacted by the Kings Majesty,
Lords and Commons, etc. Ergo:

Here Mr Baxter evidently betrays his cause; before, while it was for his turn,
the Parliament fought for, and represented us as free in o^ Rights, exempted in
the very Constitution, he referred all to the Original ^ontract; but here part
of the Soverainty is proved to be in the Houses by these words; ^e it enacted
by the King, Lords and Commons, terms that came up but yesterday, and he is so
conscious to himself of waving his first plea, that he says, he will not go to
records and writings; i. e. he knows the example of all laws, the authority of
all lawyers, give judgment against him; if a bargain was made at first, we are
obliged to keep it, as well as the King; nor can we encroach with more honesty
upon his original privileges then he on ours. But the King it seems shall be
one of the three Estates, and the only one, whose rights may lawfully be
invaded.

Neither is it true, that the Legislative power is partly in them, they are (I
grant) to consent to the making new, and abolishing old laws; but that is no
cogent proof, of the partition of the Supreme and Legislative power. It is the
interest of Kings as well as their duty, to make and repeal laws, as they
suite with, or are repugnant to, the good of their Country, which they can no
way be so well informed of, as by an Assembly con^isting of men, chosen out of
all parts of the Realm: And where there are considerable and distinct ranks of
men, as the Spiritual, and Lay Nobility, and the Commons; it was fit they
should all be heard, and consulted with; their Interests being diverse, and
sometimes thwarting, it was very like their desires would be so too: It was
this way provided, no one part should get a grant by surprise to the
disadvantage of the others, and thus it was in England: and this the reason of
demanding the opinion of the two Houses is evident, I appeal to the Body of the
Acts themselves, and here I will not insist upon the elder presidents, though I
might rationally enough from them, overthrow the fancy of our Rights, secured
in the constitution of our Government; but that being so universally granted; I
shall cite Acts of weak Kings, and later times. Only desiring this thing of
the Reader, that he would not think those I quote to be the only examples to
be produced; and so possibly think, either fraud or force has caused the
people to suppress their Rights; let him but look upon the Statutes, he will
quickly be rid of any such fond imagination. I have therefore purposely pitched
upon a weak Prince, and insulting Subjects to begin with, Anno decimo Edw* 2.
For as much as our Sovereign Lord the King, by the INFORMATION of his Prelates,
Earls, Barons, etc. Our Sovereign Lord the King, by the Assent, etc. has
Ordained and Established. So, Anno 12. Edw. so in all other. Our Sovereign Lord
the King by the Assent of, etc. has made these Acts following. In the 10. of
Edward the 3. where there is express mention of Magna Charta, Charta de
foresta, which shows that Assembly not unmindfull of their Liberties, or
Privileges; yet the same style continues: It is established by the King, by
the Assent of, etc. and at the request of the said Knights and Commons. In the
25. Edw. 3. The King at the request of the Lords and Commons, etc. 2. H. 5. For
as much as diverse complaints have been made to our Sovereign Lord the King, by
the Commons in this present Parliament: Our Sovereign Lord the King has
ordained. This will certainly show the Legislative power to have been solely in
the Kings Majesty in those days; and therefore discovers the foolery (to say
no worse) of those who upon that head assert a partition of that important
piece of Sovereignty between him and the two Houses.

Be it enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament or Lords and
Commons, began in H. 7. time, but that that variation of phrase should make
such a considerable alteration of Government, and no notice taken either by the
King that parted, or the people who received by it so large (as is pretended) a
share in the Government is not easily imaginable: Sure their apprehensions were
very small of it, the notice they took of it being so little.

We find after that, not to insist upon each act or reign, which would be
tedious, and he that doubts, may consult the Books, Anno 1. Eliz. The Lords and
Commons her majesty's humble and faithful Subjects most humbly beseeching that
it may be Enacted, etc. And in the Act of Uniformity (among others) it is. Be
it Enacted by the Queens Highness, with the assent of the Lords and Commons,
etc. to which those words likewise inserted in some places of that Act, by
authority of this present Parliament cannot be thought without great imputation
of folly to those members, to be repugnant; and the straining of those words is
all that he can rely on; I might here urge the old form, Anno. 13. Eliz. Be it
Enacted by the Queens most Excellent Majesty with the Assent, etc. among many
others, I will only cite one of 4. Jac cap. 1. Be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, with the Assent of, etc. Now to speak of the fundamental
partitian of the Sovereignty in the very constititon of the Government, and to
make it out by a phrase newly taken up, and to take no notice of the old forms,
The King Grants, the King Wills, the King provides, argues one very desirous to
say some thing in a bad matter; but when this form is it self varied, and in
many Acts both are used, sure the latter was never intended to evacuate the
former, and it is very unlikely; so great a change of the Legislative power
would pass without any notice, either of King or People; it deserved at least
one Act or Parliament to have transmitted it to posterity: when alas we find
even in King Charles his days an Act framed, according to the old regular way,
in the Petition of Right; even there when we were not sure giving away, nor
unmindfull of our liberties: To the Kings most excellent Majesty, in which the
Lords and Commons do humbly pray, that no such thing as they Complained of,
etc. To which the answer was, Soi^ droit come est desire. The Laws are always
called the Kings laws, but very improperly, if this new doctrine be true. I
conclude all with the words of Bracton, an Author, the Antimonarchical party
make much use of. Quod Principi placuit, i. e. non quicquid est a Rege temere
and ex animi perturbati impetu quodam and aestu praesumptum, sed quicquid ex
Magnatum suorum consilio, [REGIO Assensu Authortatem praestante] and habita
super hoc deliberatione and tractatu recti fuerit definitum, legis habet
vigorem.

What the reason and the effect of their assent is, is, not hard now to judge;
men have been so often taught to say, that because they must assent to the
making of Laws, they have a part of the Legislative power in them, and will
call it nonsense and absurd to think otherwise: I will cite Grotius, cap. 3.
de jure belli, Sect. 18. and I the rather cite him, because living in a Popular
State, he naturally favored it so much* as in this point especially of sharing
in the Government, he showed himself tender of the peoples Rights. Multum
fal^un^^r qui existimant cum Reges acta quaedam sua nolunt esse rata nisi a
Senatu probentur, partitionem fieri potestatis: nam quae acta in eum modum
rescinduntur, intelligi debent rescindi regis imperio, qui eo modo sibi cavere
voluit, nequid fallaciter impetratum pro ver^ ipsius voluntate haberetur; which
is not much different from what we cited out of Bracton: The sum of which is
this, when the assent of the Senate is necessary to any of the Kings Acts, it
is not that they share in the doing, but that they truly ^nform the King what
it is he does. He cites the example of Antiochus, who wrote as our Kings use,
Ne sibi parerent siquid legibus adversum juss^sset: They should not obey him in
things contrary to law: And Constantine, ne pupilli aut viduae those forlorn
people should not lose their privileges; etiam si Imperatoris rescriptum
proferatur, though by order under the Emperors own hand; and yet the world took
never any for their equals, or them for any other then Sovereign Princes. The
same Author Sect. 1^ Non desinere summum esse imperium, etiamsi is qui
imperaturus est promittat aliqua sui ditis aut Deo etiam talia quae ad imperii
rationem pertineant. A Sovereign ceases not to be so, though he promise his
Subjects not to exercise by himself some parts even of the Sover^^gn power.
Adrian the Emperor swore he never would pun^sh a Senato^ without the assent of
the ^enate, which was a greater privilege then our members can plead; yet
never any was so fond as to take them less for Subjects, or him for Sovereign.

Princes upon the misinformation of corrupt men, may do much to the grievance
of the Subjects, if they to avoid this inconvenience to the people, shall
provide so for their security, as to promise not to exercise such parts, of
their power without their advice and assent, first in a Common Counsel
assembled (our old style) they show themselves unworthy of such an Act or
grace, who will interpret it to the disadvantage, nay to the dethroning of him
that passed it. To apply it to our particular case, suppose the King has
graciously promised not to leavy money on his Subjects without their assent
first had in Parliament: The King now cannot do it, the King has so far
restrained the exercise of his power, but is by this any power placed in them?
grant they had, it will not reach their purpose; The King cannot leavy money
without their assent, but is there any law that gives them power to leavy any
without his, though they may give money to the King, I doubt it will puzzle a
good Lawyer to prove, they can give the Subjects money to themselves, without
which, I doubt, Contribution, Excise, and those other fine words was but Theft
and Robbery.

That the assent of the two Houses is required to repeal a law, will by this
time, I hope, be a small argument of their partitipation of the Sovereignty;
sure I am, the Monarchs of the East were as much limited, the laws of the
Meades and Persians, which change not at the pleasure of the King the Scripture
mentions; even those Princes were sworn to observe the Laws: Ahasuerus could
not revoke the Decree against the Jews, nor Darius though he passionately
desired it of his Nobles, save Daniel, (Dan. 6.) He that would affirm, that to
be a mixed Monarchy, or that those Nobles or any else were sharers in the
Government; to say no more, would bring a new Doctrine into the world.

The next Objection is in short this, In a Declaration set forth in the Kings
name, It is acknowledged that the King, Lords, and Commons make the three
Estates; and the balance must hang even between them, etc.

To which I shall briefly say this, it were to the purpose, if it could be
proved that the King, Lords and Commons make the three Estates: But the truth
is, the Lords Spiritual, Temporal and Commons are the three Estates, not to
repeat many. In the Act of Recognition of Queen Elizabeth, We your most loving,
faithful and obedient Subjects, representing the Three Estates of this Realm;
which evidently shows the Queen was not esteemed one. Anno 8. Eliz. cap. 1. The
Clergy being one of the greatest Estates of this Realm, it is clear therefore,
that by the law, the Clergy is one estate: So when Hen. 5. Funerals were ended,
The Three Estates did assemble and acknowledge his ^on King. For their right of
being the third Estate unanswerably acknowledged by Parliament; it might admit
a debate, whether any two Estates may conspire to Vote out the third; sure, if
the Commons had been so served, Mr. Baxter would have resolved it in the
Negative: How comes it to pass, that that part of Magna Charta which relates
to the Clergy should be less significant then any other. To the Kings
Concession to that illegal Bill, I only say this, The law takes no notice of
an Act, but when it is by the assent of the Three Estates; nor could the Lay
Lords and Commons disoblige the King from his Oath made to the Spiritually;
there being a particular clause (besides the general, for securing the Liberty
of the Nation) In the Coronation Oath, for the Rights and Privileges of the
Church, nothing but the Church could give them away (if yet the Church it self
could.) For it is a thing generally granted, that a general representative
cannot cancel Obligations to particular Bodies, which truth in any other
instance people will acknowledge: The House of Commons are the Representative
of all the Commons of this Land; the City of London has her Burgesses there:
If they upon this fancy of involving each ones consent, and so doing injury to
none, should Vote the City paid, the money they borrowed of them, I believe
every one would quickly discover the fallacy of that Plea, and explode it as
illegal, sinful and rediculous; the other case is much harder; London is the
greatest City, the Clergy is one of the greatest Estates in the Nation,
according to 8. Eliz. cap. 1. London has some at least, that there represent
her, whereas the Clergy has not so much as one* He saw the impossibility of
the Bishops fitting there, their Persons and Friends assaulted, themselves like
to be murdered by the rabble (see Bishop Halls Narrative, before his last
works, the Lords making an Order to suppress the tumults, the Commons not
concurring but encouraging them; the Bills several times thrown out of the
House of Peers, and brought in the same Session, contrary to all Order of
Parliament, considering which, I will say only this: Let any man consider, in
what a condition the Kings Majesty was in then, how injurious to himself, to
one of the greatest Estates of this Realm, according to 8. Eliz. that grant
was; how contrary to Magna (harta, to the Rights of the Church by Law, and his
Majesty's Oath so much provided for; he will easily find the Kings consent to
be extorted and null. If I should upon their Protestation against all Acts
passed, during their forced absence, it would not be easily answered.

Having now showed the Clergy to make the third Estate, which is as much as the
King has been allowed to be of late; the main Argument of coordination is
thereby removed, I will add but this, The Oath of Supremacy asserts the King;
to be the sole supreme Governor; and therefore sure the two Houses are not
coparceners. It is declared in Anno 16. R. 2. c. 5. The Crown of England has
been so free at all times, that it has been in no earthly subjection, but
immediately to God, in all things touching the Regality of the said Crown, and
to no other. And again, The Realm of England is an Empire governed by, One
Supreme head and King, having the dignity an Royal Estate of the Imperial
Crown of the same 24. H. 8. c. 12. unto whom a Body Politic, compact of all
sorts and degrees of people in terms, and by names of Spiritually and
Temporalty been bounden, and ought to bear next to God a natural and humble
obedience. This Body Politic consisting of all sorts and degrees, divided into
terms, and by names of Spiritualty and Temporalty must necessarily be the
Parliament, there being no other body capable of that appellation and
description, which here acknowledges as such a body it self subject and him
Supreme.

The next is a large quotation out of Grotius in Latin, that in some cases it
is lawful to resist, but they reach not the present Question; the first
concerns not Supreme Magistrates, but such things as Sparta had; the second
none at all: the third, If the King aliens the Kingdom, which sure was not our
case: fourthly, If the King apparently designs the destruction of the whole
people, I will not wrong the King so much as to endeavor to clear him from
that: fifthly, If there is such a clause, etc. If the King does this or that,
the Subjects are absolved from their Oath, produce such a clause, and show how
the King broke his Trust? Sixth, If there is a division of Supremacy, and the
King encroaches, he may beso far resisted. I shall make it out, the Houses
encroached upon him; as I have sufficiently evinced the vanity of a
coordination. In these cases, Grotius thinks they who at their entering into
society, contracted for themselves and posterity, intended not to obliege them
so far as to die, rather then resist, nisi forte cum hoc additamento si resi^ti
nequeat, nisicum maxima reip; perturbatione, aut exitio plurimorum ^^nocentium,
unless by resisting they mightily disturb the Common wealth, or destroy many
innocents; that being the Parliaments case, nothing in Grotius can acquit them
from the sin of Rebellion to their Sovereign, and the duty of restitution to
the Subjects they injured. And here are the female and mechanic Readers,
amused with that venerable name, when in all these cases there is but one that
looks toward the Subject, and that too upon the groundless fancy of divi^ion
of Supremacy, and with an exception that reaches the Case.

The Laws in England are above the King, because not his Acts alone.

Whose Acts the Laws are, has been above discussed, the consequences of this
Proposition, I understand not, because he has not done us the favor as to let
us know its meaning; if it is not more then the words signify, that the King
ought to rule, according to Law, and cannot abrogate Laws at pleasure: the King
asserted it in all his Declarations. In the exactest Monarchies I have showed
there were, laws which the Kings were obliged by, might they therefore be
resisted if they broke them? Let us blot then all the precepts of Obedience and
Submission out of the Bible, as things sit for that pusillanimous if not crafty
age: And let that patience of the Primitive Christians which made their
persecutors admire and love, be thought want of opportunity, not desire of
revenge.

The King was to execute judgment by his Judges in his Court of Justice, and
his Parliaments was his highest Court.

By the Parliament, meaning the two Houses, they are no Court of Judicature,
the House of Commons have nothing that looks like a Court of Judicature, not
the power of administering an Oath, not the power of Imprisoning any but their
own Members, notwithstanding the contrary proceedings of those tender
Gentlemen, of the Liberty of the Subject, the Members of the long-Parliament,
whose Committees could contrary to law imprison men, and deny them their Habeas
Corpus. The House of Lord it is true, is a Court of Judicature, but that is as
they are the Court of the Kings Barons, whose judgment is but ministerial and
not sovereign, as appears in this, that though they have power to reverse the
Sentence of other Courts, yet they cannot reverse their own judgment; a clear
argument their Authority is not sovera^gn, whose judgment cannot be so far
restrained no not by it self.

For the two Houses joined together (as the ingenious Author of the Case of our
Affairs demonstrates) they cannot so unite or conjoyn, as to be an entire
Court, either of sovereign as ministerial Jurisdict^on, no otherwise
cooperating then by concurrence of Votes in their several Houses, for
preparing matters in order to an Act; and his Argument is very good, which when
they have done, they are so far from having any legal Authority in the State,
as that in law there is no style or or form of their joint acts, nor does the
law so much as take notice of them, until they have the Royal Assent. Should
it be granted they were, yet it is as evident there was a force upon the House
then, as there was in 1648. ^o that neither the House was full or free; first,
for the Commons, a very great number of persons fairly elected, kept out upon
pretense they had some Project, Patent, or Monoply, and kept in Sr. Henry
Mildmay, Mr. Lawrence, Whitaker; the first, the chief promoter and notoriously
known to be so of the business of the gold and silver thread, a Commission
complained of, viewed and examined, the other as much employed in matters of
that nature as any man, but they voted as that party would have them.

Secondly, Several members of their party sat in the House against the
consent of the Buroughs they pretended to serve for, when such men were
concerned and complaints made, all the answer the honest elected Gentlemen
could get was, questions about Elections were of (...) private a nature to be
considered, and would interrupt their proceedings too much. If the Election of
any such persons has been heard at the Committee, and they voted out of the
House, as unduely chosen; that report must not be made, whereby a good member
may be lost, as in the case of Mr. Nichols, Mr. Pyms Nephew and others.

Thirdly, The Scots Army was not suffered to disband, that they might awe the
King and dissenting members, and Mr. Strode blushed not to say openly, They
could not yet spare them, the sons of Zerviah were too hard for them.

Though the Bishops and Popish Lords had a Legal Right (then at least) to sit;
yet they invited tumults to cry, No Bishops, no popish Lords: Nay, made a stand
at White Hall, and said, They would have (...) more Porters lodge, but would
speak with the King when they pleased: Proof was offered against that Captain,
who conducted the Rabble, and solicited them to come with Swords and Pistols;
yet he was not suffered to be brought to answer the intolerable violence upon
the members of both Houses: The Bishops were threatened to be pulled in pieces,
as they came from the House; they were feign to steal: away for fear of their
lives, see Bishop Hall's Narrative before his last Work: The Lords made an
Order to suppress the Tumults, but the Commons would not concur: Several
speeches were made in their Justification; They must not discourage their
friends, this being a time they must makeuse of all their friends; Mr. Pym
saying, God forbid the house of Commons should proceed in any way to dishearten
the people, to obtain their just desire in such a way. Were not the names of
these Gentlemen that voted not according to the sense of the good members
posted up, their persons assaulted, did not Alderman Pennington, Captain Ven
brings down armed multitudes to terrify the members, when the worser party (as
they call it) were like to prevail. That the liberty of the house of Peers was
no better preserved, the arguments are too numerous, Mr. Pym could tell the
Earl of Do^er, if he looked for any preferment, he must comply with them in
their ways, Mr Hollu demanded publicly (...) the Bar, the names of those
Lords, who would not consent to some propositions concerning the Militia sent
by the Commons, they got multitudes to deliver Petitions to both houses, and to
desire leave that they might protest against those Lords-who would not agree to
the Votes of the House of Commons, as the Petition of Surrey, Harfordshire. In
this Petition of the poor people about London, against the Malignant faction,
it was desired that those worthies of the Upper house, who concurred with them,
in their happy Votes, might sit and Vote in the House of Commons, as one entire
house; professing that unless obstructions were removed. They should be
enforced to lay hold on the next remedy which was at hand to remove the
disturbers of the peace.

5. The four next Sections amount to this.
Our Rights were evidently invaded, Ship money, the new Oath against Law men
punished for preaching Lectures twice on the Lords day.

The Parliament remonstrated our danger, we had reason to believe them, there
was a general endeavor to change the face of things among us, many new orders
brought into the Church, abundance of painful (though peacable) preachers cast
out; ignorant scandalous readers kept in, the Irish Rebels declared for the
King, we should have been butchred by them when they had conquered Ireland.

The Right of the people to resist their Prince, having been examined, we now
come to the reasons upon which they did it.

1. Shipmoney,

Not to insist upon the frequent practices of our Kings in that nature; the
consent of so many venerable judges, the abundant care the King took to be
informed, the employments of it to those worthy ends, for which it was raised,
were enough with all ingenuous minds (if there were any miscarriages in the
getting) at least to excuse them.

But some men with their Loyalty put of their good nature, with their Religion
loose their civility.

But Mr. B. ought to have known, that the King had relinquished his claim to
Shipmoney before the War, and therefore that could not be a cause of it. Kings
may confess and forsake their faults, yet some sub^ects will not forget them.
Praticall serious godliness, was a scorn. That was not part of the kings
cause, but it was very suspicious to see men solemnize a few fasts, and think
that entiled them to eat other men's bread all their lives after, to scruple at
being like profane Absalon, who wore long hare, yet immitate that good man
Absalon, that could pay his vow and Rebel devoutly.

The new Orders in the Church, amount to no more then this, Those to whom the
administration of Ecclesiastical affairs belong to by the Laws of this land,
observing some neglect order rudeness in the performance of divine service,
appointed for its future decency, some ceremonies, neither commanded nor
forbidden in the word of God, but some of them were used in the Church of Rome,
whereupon they were esteemed (or at least wise called) Popish. All that can
possibly be said against this, is, that it is unlawful to use any thing in
Divine Service; for which there is neither command nor example in Scripture,
(when by the way, the latter confutes the former, supposing there may be
imitable examples in Scripture of things uncommanded there) which would make
the black and white caps as much Antichristian as the square one: Or, secondly,
it is lawful to use it, but not if it be enjoined; but this cannot be said by
Mr B. who pleades for the Civil Magistrates Power in matter of Religion,
though I think he is scarce resolved to allow him any thing may be called
Power; but that sure is of a strange nature that ceases to be lawful, when it
is commaded by a lawful Magistrate: Or, thirdly, The being used in the Church
of Rome, makes it unlawful to be used in the Church of England. A very pretty
principle truly, we must differ from them when we have reason, and when we have
not reason, when they reproach us with separation out of pride, humor,
novelty; the most rational way to acquit our selves sure, is, to make it
appear, we gladly will come as near to them in Doctrine and Discipline, as
they will to Truth and pure Antiquity. We did not in those things conform to
Rome, but to the Primitive Church, and reduce those things as it were ex
postlimino, to their native innocent usage, from which no additionall
corruption of any abroad can rationally debar us.

The last is a trim devise, That the King would have destroyed us, by the Irish
Rebels, who professed to raise Arms for the King. Sect. 10.

I suppose Mr. Baxter can tell of some in England who professed to fight for
the King, yet never had his Commission. It seems the King must suffer as the
Earl of Strafford was said to do, not for what he had, but what he possibly
might have done hereafter. The War against the Parliament, was just upon as
good a ground; we feared they would undo the Church and State, with their Army
of Sectaries, whom they countenanced, when he did not the Rebels in Ireland. If
the King had made use of the money raised for the relief of Ireland, in the War
at home, when the poor Potestants were like to starve for want of it, as the
two Houses did; he might have been thought to have abetted that Rebellion: The
Parliament could make such an inhumane Order for divertion of that money from
the use it was raised for, and when the King sent to them to revoke it for
their own credits sake, if not for the lives of his poor Irish subjects, they
according to their usual rant, Voted his message, a breach of privilege, and
made use of that money to fight against him, and yet they would be thought
friends, to the Protestants in Ireland.

If inferior Courts of justice may prosecute the execution of their sentence
in several cases against the Kings will, and the Sheriff may raise the power
of the County to assist that execution, much more may the highest Court, but
the former is true, ergo.

The Argument is this, If the Sheriff may raise the posse Commitatus when by
the law he is enabled so to do, ergo; the two houses, may, though the Law does
not enable them, raise the posse regni. Courts of judicature may use such force
as does not disturb the peace of the Nation, ergo the two houses may raise a
war is a far fetched consequence. Again, The house of Peers is solely the Court
of Judicature, the major part of which were evidently with the King.

The sum of the next three leaves is. The war was not against the Kings
person, or authority, nor to change the Government of King, Lords, etc. nor to
take away the magistrates power in matters of Religion, as appears by
Protestation, solemn league Covenant, Declarations.

When I consider their Declarations for the King and their actions against him,
all I can gather is, that notwithstanding their bitter remonstrances of the
State of the Kingdom, their unworthy, unexampled ripping up, and publishing to
the vulgar all the faults and infelicities of his reign, (which Parliaments
were in a greater measure, the cause of in not yielding seasonable supply)
without taking any notice of the satiafaction made and care taken by him for
prevention of the like for the time to come, or the happy days men now
remember they then enjoyed (by which ways, it is easily to render any
Government odious to the credulous and undiscerning populacy) notwithstanding,
all this and the seditious invectives of Pen and Pulpit, The King stood so
clear in the eyes of all men, that the being against him was a thing that they
durst not own.

Though they spoiled him of his goods, and endeavored to do so of his good
name; ruined his friends, preferred his most enraged enemies, chased him from
place to place, (they said to bring him to his Parliament, and when they caught
him, would not let him come thither) though they deprived him of all authority
as a King, by taking it into their own hands, his liberty as a man, by
imprisonment, as an husband by keeping him from his wife, as a father from his
Children, as a Christian from his Chaplains; (all which was done before the
armies purge) though they did all this; yet they said (and which is most
rediculous, some of them say so still) they were for the King.

Quid verba audiam cum facta videam.

Their actions being such, their loyal declarations show them not more honest,
but more dissembling; if they had too openly discovered, they would never have
compassed their intentions. For example, one of their first proposals; without
which there could be no peace, was, That all officers civil and military, all
honors should be conferred on such as were approved by the two houses of
Parliament, see 19. Prop. The People were willing to fight for so gay (as they
thought it) a privilege: Had the English been a little plainer, (and it was,
if men had not been besorted plain enough,) viz, Except all the wealth, honor,
power of the Nation be shared among us and our friends, neither King nor people
shall be at quiet, in these terms, which differ little in expression, and not
at all in sense from the former; the Nation would scarce have been fond of
being undone in order to the procuring of it.

Some of their Declarations speak very fair, as it was necessary they should,
and it is a great wonder how such wise and wary men suffered others to be so
plain, wherein they palpably reduce to nothing, the King and Peers

To begin with the King, see the Declaration of May 26. 1642. Where they
declare, that they have power to depose the King, and the King had deserved
they should do so.

We should not want either modesty or duty should we follow the highest
presid^nts of former Parliaments.

See exact collection of all Remonstrances. etc. published by order of the
house of Commons, p. 265.

Now Parliaments have deposed Kings as Edw 2. Rich. 2. and that the authors of
that Declaration had a particular eye upon those monstrous proceedings, is
evident by the following words

All the world knows what they put in act.

In the same Declaration they deny the King his Negative Vote, so that he has
no Vote at all in making or repealing laws, which the meanest Burgess has,
nay the meanest Commoner has at least one that represents him, so that the
King is the only man in the Nation (except I may now reckon the Clergy too)
that is in so high a degree of slavery, as to be bound by laws, he in no sense
concurrs to the making of. So far was he in 1642. from being a King, that he
was not so much as one of the freeborn people of England. This new Doctrine
they can prove (as what could not the two houses do in those days,) from the
very form used, by the King to those bills he fancied not [ Le Roy Savisera]
which (say they) is a suspension rather then a refusal of assent.

A suspension (if it must be called so) was ever heretofore a thing of that
validity, that during it, they are not able to quote one law ever reputed in
force. If they thought the law to be otherwise, they might have done very well
to have declared all the bills dashed, for so many ages, for want of the royal
assent to be obliging laws.

But (alas) that form intimates another thing, not so pleasing, viz. That
notwithstanding the two Houses are the Kings great council, and have presented
their advice in their concurring Votes, yet [ le Roy Savisera] the King may
advise with other men (as it is notorious in all Chronicles to have been the
practice) and take their advice if he like it better. How little of a king they
intended to leave him, see nineteen Propositions sent the second of June in
1642 (it is to be observed what I cite the Parliament in its purity (as the
phrase is, Ex. Col. p. 307. the sum of all which are, That all Peers, Judges,
Councellers, Officers, civil and military may be approved by themselves, all
Ecclesiastical affairs, Forts, Castles, Pardons, Censures, New Oaths, The
Marriage Government of his own Children, may be at the disposal of the two
houses. After the forementioned declaration of May 26. the ordinance concerning
the Militia, these Propositions, I would willingly know in what consists the
authority of the King, which Mr. B. says, he and they swore, and fought to
defend; Certainly they could not call him Sovereign without a jeere. If the
houses have once this Power, let them be sworn to defend us, and no longer let
us mock God, the King, and the world with giving an oath to a man to do that we
our selves have rendered it as impossible for him to do, as the Chair in his
Presence Chamber.

The King complains in several of his Declarations, particularly that of
August the 12. 1642. of several insolent speeches which passed in the house of
Commons unreproved, as of Mr. Martin

That the Kings Office was forfeitable, that the happiness of this Kingdom
did not depend upon him, nor any of the royal branches of that stock, and of
Sr. Henry Ludlow, That he was not worthy to be King of England. p. 550. Ex.
Coll. He tells them plainly in his answer to their Declaration of May 26. 1642.
That of that monstrous language by the help of God and the Law, he must have
some examination. Ex Coll. p 28.

But it may be said these things were done in the height of passion, when the
sense of those grievances they lately fancied they felt, was fresh upon them.
Afterward they were more moderate: as I have showed how the Parliament went at
the very beginning of the War upon those principles, their friends now would
be thought to detest; I will briefly demonstrate they went by the same when the
War was ended, even whilst it continued Presbyterian, for I shall not once
mention what was done after the seclusion of Members by the Army, and shall
quote no Historian but him who wrote always for the Parliament Mr May who in
his Historiae Parl. Breviatium, p. 146 tells us, that on the fiftteenth of July
1646. there were propositions sent by the hands of some Lords, and commons, and
Commissioners for the Scots The King looked upon those proposals as derogatory
to his Crown, injurious to his people, as inconsistent with the quiet of the
Nation, as of his own conscience, and therefore demurred upon them.

The Earl of Lounden tells the King in a trim Oration, that unless he will
agree to those propositions which himself acknowledges very hard ones, it is to
be feared, he would be deposed, and the nation setle in another way of
Government without him or any of his Posterity. The King resolved, he would not
give them his Crown, they must take it forcibly if they would have it, after
that, he was their Prisoner, now he was from his evil Council, one would have
thought they would have desired him at least, not have denied him to come nere
his Parliament.

His usage was various, sometimes their malice made him know what it was to be
confined, other times more civilly bitter, it allowed him as much ceremonious
Royalty as might put him in mind of what he had been.

About Dec. 1647 (for want of something else to do) they treat with the King,
but he must grant four previous propositions, the first and last of which
would serve to dethrone him, and the other two to affront him, which certainly
they would never have asked, had they not resolved to be denied. But great ills
cannot be maintained, but by acting greater, they would not allow the King any
power, because they feared what they deserved, as it is usually seen, that they
that sin beyond all example, think they sin beyond all possibility of
forgiveness, so these (though they might have had the greatest provision for
their safety, themselves could imagine, so that they needed fear nothing, but
guilty consciences) thought the King and themselves could not both be secure.

Wherefore, on the third of January the Kings refusal tofigne the bills was
wholly debated, and it was strongly urged, how the King by denial of those
bills, had refused to protect his people, (viz.) by denying to part with the
Militia, without which it is impossible he should protect them so much as a
constable can) upon which score their sub^ection was no longer due, it was time
for them to think how to settle the Nation without him, accordingly upon mature
deliberation they frantickly resolve upon it, and on the seventeenth of January
Vote, They will never make any addresses more to the King, nor receive any
message from him] May Breviarium Hist. Parl. p. 18.

At the beginning of the War it was necessary for them (though they did act
quite contrary) to say they would make the King a great and glorious King, and
it was not impossible, but some fools might believe them: but that after these
Votes passed, publ^shed and maintained in a declaration set out to that
purpose, and suitable usage, they should dare to this day to profess they
always were for the King, his Person and Authority, is arrogantly monstrous,
unless at the same time they voted away their Princes liberty they thought
they could vote away his Peoples reasons too.

It is true, they afterward recalled those Votes, and sent some terms to the
King, which the necessity of affairs caused him to condescend to, but if it he
remembered what previous concessions there were, what an odious preface, how
harsh the Propositions were to the disparagement, as well as the undoing of all
his friends? what fear themselves were then in of their own army? will think
the King obliged to thank them only when he has nothing else to do?

How well the Pretenses for the King have been seconded, with unfit
performances, has been in some measure seen, the next enquiry must be about
the Peers; whether the pulling the sun out of the firmament, has been an
effectual way to make the stars shine more gloriously. The Bishops at the
beginning of the Parliament, were at the least so many Barons (if not the third
state) and had as undoubted a right to fit there, as the law could give, to any
man or men of this Nation, they were a more ancient (I add, and a more
considerable part of the Parliament then the whole house of Commons, as having
part of the judicative power in them, which the other had not) yet were they
affronted, menaced, and endangered by tumults, which the Lords would have
suppressed, and the Commons encouraged. But of this before, The Lords (seeing
the Commons would not join) appoint a writ (by the advice of the Judges) to be
directed to the Sheriffs and Justices upon diverse statutes (which issued
accordingly) to suppress and hinder all tumultuous resort, in obedience to
which the Justices and other ministers appoint the Constables to attend about
Westminster, to hinder that unlawful conflux of people, which the Commons
without any conference with the Lords, to know upon what reason, or what Law
that writ was grounded, Vote it a Breach of privilege, and send one of the
Justices to the Tower. Ex. Col. p. 53^.

The Bill concerning the Militia (a most considerable bill) was sent to the
King by the house of Commons alone, notwithstanding the express refusal of the
house of Peers, as themselves confess. Ex. Col. p. 59. However, they may talk
they were for the old constitution of King, Lords and Commons, it is evident
the grandees were for neither full and free; but so many of each as would serve
their turn. After the bill for the Militia had been rejected twice in the
house of Peers, it was contrary to all law, reason, Presidents, forced upon
them again, and to fright the Peers into agreement, it was said there. [That
whoever would not consent, etc. was an enemy to the Commonwealth,] and the same
day Mr. Hollis, contrary sure to the freedom of Parliaments, demanded to know
who were against it; much to this purpose may be read in Ex. Col. p. 547. 548.
What was that ridiculous proposal that the minor part of the Lords might join
with the Major part of the Commons, That threatening Petition that they might
protest against the dissenting Lords, and that other, that the good Lords might
sit in the same house with the Commons, but devices to aw the Peers? What was
the unparliamentary course of forcing bills upon the House of Lords after
several times being cast out, but a down right telling them, they were
resolved to take no denial.

The House of Commons made an order against an established Law, concerning the
Common Prayer, the Lords made an order for the observance of it, which the
Commons very mannerly declare against, the nineth of September, Ex Col p 526.

The house of Peers was certainly of very great authority, when an Order of
theirs in behalf of an established law, was not equivalent to one of the lower
House; in direct opposition to an established law

Again, The protestation being so early, whatever the meaning was, the terms
in common prudence ought not to be too offensive, but presently they perceived
that their surest friends the haire-brained Sectaryes would not endure to be
bound [to observe the Doctrine of the Church of England] Whereupon those words
in the protestation were explayned by a declaration of the house of Commons
only, to be intended only so sar, as it is opposite to Popery, The house of
Peers taking an Oath, to be too sacred to admit of so juggling an
interpretation, refused to join with them in it. Presently the house of Commons
(who would accept of the Peers assent, when it might be had, and when it could
not, would act without it, so excellent observers were they of the ancient
constitution) voted it by their sole authority, That all people who would not
take that Protestation so interpreted, unfit to bear any office in the
Commonwealth After all these actions, I hope a few good words will not acquit
them: Nor will it signify any thing with intelligent men, what is next urged.

That, The Covenant was for King and Parliament.

The Covenant is liable to more exceptions then at present I am willing to
take, the very design was extremely scandalous, and as great a blow to
Religion, I am persuaded, as it ever recei^ed in the world, as representing it;
to be the parent of the worst of vices, rebellions, sacrilege and perjury:
some men have adventured to teach, that God is the author of all sin: these men
come very near them, that can do the worst of Villainies upon his score, fear
God and break his commandments; and all upon the newly revealed Doctrine of
Piety and Plunder.

Surely, Humility, Patience, self-denial, taking up the Cross, loving enemies,
praying for persecutors, are things commended only to pusillanimous and morrall
men. Has the spirit that came down upon Christ in the form of a Dove,
appeared since in the shape of a Vulture or a Roman Eagle? was it weakness,
not religion, that kept the primitive Ch^^stians obedient; must whatever they
said about Rebelion be construed with this tacit reserve, until we have an
opportunity. We read in Scripture of a blessing laid up for those who in
defense of Christ and his truth part with their Lands, Houses or Life; but not
of any for those, who upon that score invade other men's* That there were no
rewards appointed for those who killed Tyrants, Buchanan esteemed it as a
defect in policy, and it is one in religion too. He might as easily observed it
to be an omission in the Law of God as man.

The quarrel was not then about Doctrine so much as discipline, our articles
were esteemed Orthodox, our discipline not appostolick enough: Their discipline
in terminis in Scripture, and as a command to introduce it with fire and sword,
in defiance of Prince and Laws, are surely to be found in the same chapter.

These tender Consciences are very pretty things, that dare not conform to an
indifferent Ceremony, in obedience to all the authority the law of England
takes notice Civil or Ecclesiastical, without an express command or example
of Christ or his Apostles; and yet without either, can take up arms against
their Sovereign, plunder and slay all, whose Consciences are not of the same
size.

The Covenant (not to mention upon what grounds they who at first Idolized it,
do now look upon it, as an abominable Idol) lies open to very just, and very
many material Ob^ections; It being my business only by the by; I shall only
intimate those that are so obvious, that they cannot escape a very ordinary
observer.

First, It is directly contrary to the Oath of Supremacy, formerly taken,
wherein they swear, the King to be the only supreme Governor in all Causes as
well Ecclesiastical as Temporal; which power they there swear to defend; and
by resolving to reform the Church without, nay against his direct Command, they
now as absolutely (with an Oath too) deny it.

Secondly, It is contrary to the Oaths of Canonical obedience to their
Ordinary, Bishops, Chancellors, etc. which those of them which had entered into
Orders took, and conscienciously observed by swearing their utter exterpation;
a Government they by subsciption testified to be lawful, which judgment many
of them were known, never to change till it was their interest (the late usual
season of conversion) so to do. And some think a good Bishopric would seduce
many of them to their old error again.

Thirdly, Ecclesiastical affairs never were, nor can be by the law of England
(which they broke even in this very act of Covenanting for the laws, as they
said) consulted on in Parliament, but only to have (the civil Sanction) and
that after (the law is express) they have been determined by the Clergy in
Convocation: See [ The Reformation of the Church of England Justified] a whole
book to that purpose.

Now whether the Assembly of Divines, being not called by the King, who alone
has power by the Law to do it, nor elected by the Clergy, who alone have power
to send (the true Convocation not dissolved) may be called, The Clergy in
Convocation: I will leave to any one to determine, and only observe, that as
in other illegal Acts, the late Powers proceeded according to their example;
so in this particularly, Their naming what members they pleased, without
Election of the Clergy, to sit in the Assembly, was a fit President for Oliver
Cromwell to call whom he pleased, without choice of the Country, to sit in the
little Parliament. The State and Church was pulled down the same way.

Fourthly, The Covenant could not be imposed, according to the Doctrine of the
long Parliament, who Ex Col. p. 859. tells us, Men are not to be compelled to be
sworn without an Act of Parliament, which certainly, the Votes of the two
Houses are not: I shall not prosecute these things any further, but observe
some few particulars in the Covenant it self; and only wonder, with what face
(not to say, with what Conscience) men, the professed Champions of our Liberty,
and of no part, so much as our Consciences, in regard of Oaths, imposed even by
an unquestionable Authority, could on the sudden use such barbarous rigor
toward the freeborn people of England, for not taking that Oath, which
themselves had (according to the forecited Doctrine) no power to impose; and
the others had the ^ommand of the Prince, Law, and unanswered Reason to refuse;
at least, they could say what themselves once thought enough, it was against
their Consciences.

We shall now examine, whether there is any amends made in the Material Cause,
for the faultiness of the Efficient; and there is a presumption that it is so;
sure, such good men would not involve their Country in the miseries of a War,
resist their Prince, but in an order to a thing that was very excellent, if not
necessary: That assertion in the Preface which gives chief countenance to the
undertaking, is a most horrible falsity, that it was [ according to the
Commendable practice of these kingdoms in former times, and the example of
Gods people in other Nations.]

England has behaved her self so commendably, that it is impossible to make it
out, to have been her practice: whosoever swears it to have been, until he can
produce his instances, if he does not meet with very charitable persons will be
looked upon as one horribly Perjured: The Churches of God (if there were any
before Presbytery Rebelled into a being) whose examples may be Rules to us;
must be either the holy men before the law, under the law, or the Primitive
Christians, beofore Religion was made a Bawd to Interest. He that thinks there
can be a thing fetched from their doings in favor of this league, let him serve
that cause so far as to attempt [ The History of Covenants] and see how many
examples he can produce of Fighters with their Prince, for not introducing a
form of Worship they better liked of, than what was by law established.

The Covenants we read of in Scripture, were not against the King, but with the
King, nor when the Kings refused, do we read that the Prophets ever exhorted
the People to such attempts. But no remedy ^here is, men must be undone,
unless^ they will swear with hands lifted up to Heaven; this matter of fact,
though they do not know it to be so; nay, though they know it not to be so; and
which is prodigiously strange: One of the first argu^ents that commended it to
the world, is a direct contra^iction to this assertion, when the Covenant with
a Narrative tells us, that there never was such a Thing seen in the world
before.

It might be observed, that Error is far incorporated with her Tenants, that
what is true in it self, is false when they speak it; as almost the very first
word [ All living under one King] according to the Declaration of May 26. 1642.
and the ^octrine that ^ustified the War from being Treason, though against the
King, because he was not King in his Personal but Politic capacity, i. e.
the two Houses, to war against whom, by that law was Treason: according to
this, I say we have three Kings in as much as we have three Parliaments in the
three Nations; and in my weak judgment, appointing all Officers, Declaring who
are Offenders and incapable of mercy; resolving to reform Church and State
according to their own model, against the Kings express Will and Command, are
no great evidences of living under him.

The first Article is, To endeavor the preservation of the Religion of the
Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Discipline etc. The Reformation in England,
Ireland, according to the word of God, the best example of the best Reformed
Churches, and to endeavor to bring the three Kingdoms to uniformity in Church
Government, etc.

By those words, according to the word of God, They use to mean prescribed in
it, upon which, where do you find such or such a Ceremony was the common
Question: But so, the forms of worship in Scotland used in Marriage, Burial,
Preaching, Discipline by Classes, Assemblies, higher and lower, are not so well
known in England; muchlesse so clear in the word of God, that every Artisan can
in an instant be so assured, that they are there as to swear it in judgment:
this Oath is by so much the more oppressive and intolerable, that it is not
satisfied with a quiet submission to, and a patient enduring of their
intolerable insolences (in which respects it is more barbarous than the
Engagement;) but obliges every man zealously and constantly to premote it.

There is in this Article more juggling then is tolerable in so sacred a thing
as an Oath; their friends being of so several parties, neither of which would
be content, the Church should be reformed according to the others model; There
are several words put in which that party, which wit or strength, or accident
shall set uppermost at last; may interpret to their own sense, i^ e^ advantage.
To please the Presbyterians: The Church of Scotland, Doctrine and Government is
sworn to be preserved, and all the three Kingdoms to be brought to the nearest
conjunction and uniformity in Confession of ^aith, Church Government,
Directory, etc. Now this can be compassed no otherwise, then by reducing all to
the pattern of Scotland, that being before sworn to be preserved.

But that the Sectarian Brethren of no sort may be displeased, the word of God
is expressly said to be the rule, by which each Sect were sure of carrying the
cause their own way; and if any had a peculiar fancy to New England, or any
other Church; he thought better of, the term of the best reformed Church,
secured him to them; and he was by that assured the day was approaching,
wherein the men of his persuasion should triumph* That the Covenant was taken
in the various senses, and with different hopes every one knows, and that the
ambiguous penning gives each party ground for it, it is fondness to deny.

To please those who were for Church Government, they Covenanted against
Schism, but least they should displease those who were against Church
Government, they could never be brought to proscribe (nor while they had use of
them, to fight against the King, so much as to tell who were) Schismatic.

Surely, Conscientious men, who had sworn to extirpate Schism, Heresy, and
whatever was contrary to godliness, would have thought Antinomians,
Ana^aptists, etc. or some other of those hard names that then swarmed about the
City, to have come under that head; but in the same sense, as fighting against
the King is being for him; being against Schismatics, is putting Arms and
Offices into their hands.

The Common enemies, this Oath engages men against, must not be explained too
far, least it discourage their best friends, Papists and Prelatists may safely
be named; for the rest Mr. Henderson explicated them to be the Syrians and the
Babylonians.

The second Article, is to extirpate, Archbishops, Bishops, etc. whom (there
being no need) I shall not at present plead for, only this, That Government in
the judgment of very many Covenanters, Clergy and Lay, was inexpedient only,
and not unlawful, upon whom the guilt of Perjury lies very heavy, for breaking
their former Oaths, leavying War against their King, disturbing the peace of
the Nation, turning so many gallant men convict of no crime, but their lands,
which other men had a mind to be guilty of, and they had as good a right to as
the law of England could give; and all upon the sole point of inexpediency:
Into this point I shall dive no further; but take some small notice of the
reason here rendered, for this certainly illegal Act of pulling down that
Government of the Church, without the Kings Authority, lest they be partakers
of other men's sins.

I do not apprehend that ever I read words more destructive to every
Government, and to the peace of every Nation in the world, they sound thus;
[Whensoever there is a Government or form of worship in the Church, which we
do not believe to be according to the word of God, we are bound in Conscience
(nay they of another Nation are, as the Scots were to us, who upon this Reason,
Vow to extirpate our Bishops) to take up Arms, though it be against our King,
and reform, for if we do not, we make our selves guilty of other men's sins.] A
proposition that creates a perpetual Apology for crafty men, and justifies,
nay, necessitates the vilest attempts of deluded ones. The Anabapt^^s in
Germany did, the Separatists in Queen Elizabeth's days attempted no more then
this warrants. If this Doctrine were true, I wonder the Prophets and Priests of
old, that lived under Idolatrous Princes were nor carefuller of their own
souls, and lift up their voice like a Trumpet in another sense, than the
Scripture mentions them to have done. There cannot easily be imagined greater
occasion for such irregular proceedings, if they are at all justifiable in any
Nation, then in the Jewish; their Princes being so often and so strangely
guilty of Idolatry, (a crime clearly by their law described and forbidden) yet
we do not find that the People ever thought themselves, or the Prophets ever
told them, they were obliged to attempts of that nature. I will use my pen no
longer in this Argument, because it ought to be confu^ed by the sword of the
Civil Magistrate; sure I am, it will pull down every Government, that does not
pull down it: More especially, by reason of that clause in the Conclusion,
wherein, each private man swears to go before other in the work of Reformation,
words of very horrid import, as obliging every man to disturb the Nation in
pursuit of his own or another dreams, if he could but fancy it to be a
Reformation; their full latitude might have been understood, if Wallingford
house men had continued much longer, possibly not to the good liking of the
first contrivers, but sure to their eternal infamy, who first infused into men
such pernicious doctrine, and then because the horridness of it would affright
men of any good nature from it, bound them to it by an Oath; and lastly, gave
them swords into their hands to justify the most desperate conclusion, the
maddest can draw; and all this, As they shall Answer it at the great Day.

A little after, they express a right Presbyterian spirit, a vehement desire
to see all Christendom in a flame, That, Their proceeding may be encouragement
to other Christian Churches growing under, or in danger of the yoke of
Antichristian Tyranny to join in the same or like Association or Covenant. In
which words, all people whose Princes are Papists (or something else, which
they did not stick formerly to call Antichristian) are absolved from their
obedience and encouraged to Rebel, and those who are not under the yoke yet:
if they are in danger of being so (and how small a thing creates such a danger,
England may remember) they may be rid of that and their Allegiance together,
and provide for their security as they please. Here is a great want of Prudence
to give Foreign Princes such timely notice, of such projected Rebellions, and
of the men they are in danger of: And a great want of charity to Foreign
Churches, to represent them all as enemies to the State, whereby they may be
put out of their good esteem if not protection.

But some men have Preached and Printed, not only downright Po^ery but Prelacy
also, and Ceremonies also to be an Antichristian yoke, and to be in danger of
it, has been formerly accounted to tolerate some things now used; what in
their judgment is to be done in such a case, I must not repeat, least they
should say I had a design to ^ender them suspected, and so odious to the
present Government*

I shall conclude this point with this one note, The Doctrine that allows
private men to resist Magistrates, upon the score of Religion, is in it self so
horrid and black in its consequences, that none dare own it, that can defend
themselves any other way, accordingly the fancy of the coordinate Power of the
two Houses was entertained with mighty applause, by the Brethren of the
Presbytery, because it salved this grand Objection of Rebellion; a sin (which
after that happy discovery of their being free from) they disclaimed against,
no men more: Prove the King Supreme, and then I will yield myself a Rebel, so
Mr. Baxter in his Preface; And so they all acknowledging it unlawful for
Subjects to resist their Sovereign, contrary to language of the former
Pamphlets, Rebellion: they gladly acknowledged to be a sin in all men but
themselves; But that device of coordination, suiting only to this particular
juncture of affairs, by no means serving to acquit the Scots tumults, or
Armies, or to incense their brethren beyond Sea, they having no Parliament, or
of no such pretense of share in the Government, and very like to oppose such
designs, if they had any such power, the Covenant revives the former Doctrine,
and advises the Churches beyond ^ea to set themselves free, as if error in
points of belief did deprive Princes, (though it does no man else) of his
natural or civil power or rights: Thus are they loath any one Nation should be
peaceable or prince happy.

We shall now examine that clause of the Covenant, themselves so much boast of,
viz. that concerning the preservation of the Kings person.

To preserve the Kings Person and Authority, in the preservation and defense of
the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom. That they deprived the King of
all Authority, is proved already, That his person was not the King, themselves
acknowledge and contend for, ^rgo, he is not at all provided for in this
Article. That the putting the King to death was no breach of Covenant; I might
prove many ways, but I shall refer Mr. Baxter to Mr. Goodwin his
fellow laborer in the War and Word; who in the defense of the Honorable
Sentence, argues thus, shrewdly, I think, ad homines, p. 53. He was not then a
King, but a Subject, and so liable to process of law; for that blood they so
often preached him guilty of, Deposed he was (says he) by themselves and their
party; when they denied subjection to him, withdrew their obedience from him,
acknowledged a power superior to him, viz the Parliament, leavyed War against
him as a Traitor, as an Enemy to the Kingdom, chased him from place to place,
and at last imprisoned his person, and there was no clause in the Covenant, for
the preservation of a person that onec was King. Nor does this Article promise
us any thing better, when they shot their Cannons directly at the place where
their treacherous Informers discovered the King to be; they said, it was in his
defense, because in the defense of the two Houses, where his Authority
(forsooth) resided. Another cast of the same Logic may make it out, that
deposing, nay killing the King, if in the defense of true Religion shall be
preserving him too, because in defense of that, where his Person may as
properly be said to reside, as his Authority where they placed it. This Article
at the best is but conditional, if he defends what they please to think or
call the true Religion, and the Liberties of the Kingdom. And what his
performance was in their judgment, I might cite almost all their Sermons,
Pamphlets, Declarations; but I will content my self till further provocation,
with the Admonition of their good brethren of the Kyrke of Scotland, May Hist.
p. 108 That he was very much guilty of Idolatry, Profaneness, of the Murder
of many thousands of his best Subjects; with much more to that purpose. If I
delighted to render the Presbyterians odious, here I might do it to purpose,
but transcribe some of their Sermons, and the work were done. I shall for this
time forbear, and only use a little, which is necessary to my purpose, and
commonly known, and already taken notice of by Mr. Goodwin, whose book lying
under so public a Censure, is very like to be read by most: Mr. Love in his
Sermon at Vxbridge, told us, That the late King was the troubler of England ^s
Achan was of Israel, subjoyning, It was the Lord that troubled Achan, because
he troubled Israel Oh that in this our State Physicians would resemble God, to
cut of those from the Land who have distempered it! Melius est ut pereat VNVS
quam Vnitas* In the same Sermon, Men wh^ly under the guilt of much innocent
blood, are not meet pers^us to be at peace with, till all the guilt of blood be
expiated or avenged, either by the sword of the law, or the la^ of the sword.
The Independents (...) themselves out of the Presbyterians principles and
practices, G^odw defense p^ 94. The Ministers of London themselves, and the
Church of Scotland, Charge him, being the greatest Delinquent, guilty of the
blood of hundreds of thousands of Protestants, the blood^est man under heaven:
He was summoned and Arraigned in the sight of God and his people, cursed and
(...) worse than any (...) or (...) exhortation to curse all those in the name
of God, that made not War a^gainst him, as bitterly as Meroz was to be (...),
that went not out against the Canaanitish King: Almost in all the Sermons,
Prayers of seven years. He was called, Opprobium generis humani, The most
bloody monster and miscreant under heaven. That I am so civil (...) to spare
names, I might use in this argument, I hope, will procure thus much, that Mr.
Baxter if he thinks fit to reply will do it fairly and calmely; However, my
advantage is not quite lost, but remains still to be used at pleasure over
persons, he very much esteems; and for their sakes I believe, I shall fare the
better.

That they preached against putting the King to death, the Presbyterian
Ministers urge strongly and with much applause (...) themselves, though indeed
it signifies as much as just nothing; the reason is clear, while the Parliament
Declared, and the Army fought for, Presbytery and the King opposed it, none
were more vehement obstructers of all the designs tending to his restitution
then the Ministers; for so long they had hopes by that means, that all the
Lands, Power of the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, the best Parsonages should be
divided among them: But when the Independents outwitted them, and seemed to
have perfectly learned their lesson they taught them of declaiming against
something, as an humane invention, in the form of worship of those whose lands
they longed for; then and not till then, they would have been content to have
joined with the King against that Army, themselves had joined with and raised
against the King. When the Votes no further Address were first passed by men
they had hopes of, which of them then abhominated the dethroning of their
Prince. I shall make this quere (if it be not absu^d in so clear a matter to
make a quere)

Whether if the Parliament and Army had joined together as one man to set up
high Presbytery, divided the Church lands among them, and the King had refused
to yield his assent to such illegal Acts, they would have pleaded the Covenant
in his behalf, and thus loudly talked for his restitution to his Authority, let
their friends speak.

That upon such terms as they pleased, they would restore him, is no more then
the very Army would have done, who after the Sentence passed, came and offered
him conditions.

They merit the less by their last appearing (as they call it) for the King,
in as much as in that juncture of affairs, it seemed very unlikely they
should-subsist without him: The Covenant were exploded every where; the Army
called it a Carnal thing; the Sectaries in the City, said it was a thing
ridiculous to unhorse Episcopacy and set Presbytery in the Saddle; to be rid of
my Lord Bishop, and do twice the homage to Sr. John Presbyter; their own
arguments were retorted upon them: the Apostles were not Lord Bishops, show
where they had their thousands per annum changed into? the Apostles were not
Parochial Ministers, show where they had tithes that at such a time as this?
they would have been content to have been maintained by the Common Enemy
against their best friends, is what they think highly obliging? This was that
great piece of Loyalty, they would have had the King saved, when it was the
only way to save themselves.

A King Deposed is surely not looked upon as a King, by those who depose them;
now if imprisoning, passing Votes of no further Address, does not depose a
King; I would fain know what does? Being in that condition, and guilty of so
much blood as they all along declared him to be, when those words of the
Covenant, of Bringing all Delinquents to justice without respect of Persons,
should have come to be considered? How much further they might have proceeded,
had not the power been snatched out of their hands by their Servants, as
themselves had done to their Master; I leave to their past words and works to
declare? They did indeed recall those Votes of no Address, and Treated with
the King, but it was when they could no otherwise be rid of the Army, but by
joining with the King and Nation against them; and even then, they so perplexed
the King, and protracted time with terms and punctilio's of procedure; and were
so dissatisfied, with whatever the King offered, whilst they had the shadow of
any power, that the Army had opportunity to break off that Treaty the Houses
would not end.

That part of the Covenant that concerns the Privilege of Parliament, Mr.
Baxter and his side are very confident they have inviolably observed; let us
and them consider what was before said of the Tumults and the Scots Army, the
affronting and assaulting the Bishops, and other Lords; the posting up of the
dissenting Members names of both Houses, and which is above all, their illegal
turning men out for having a hand in some Patent, Monopoly or other, which they
might as well have done, for having been guilty of any fault; having red Hair
or a Roman Nose; which action, whether it did not null all their proceedings,
eo ipso, as making it no House, by fecl^ding men fairly elected, some make a
very great question.

Before I take the Covenant, I shall make this one not unreasonable request,
that I might know the Privileges of Parliament first, and swear to them
afterward; one example may not be tedious.

On the 3d. of January 1641. It was declared, To offer to Arrest or detain any
member without first acquainting the House, is a breach of Privilege, Ex.
Coll. p. 35. The palpable absurdity of this Doctrine being discovered by the
King in one of his Declarations, and other Treatises in November. ^. 1642. They
declare they ^ave no such privilege, but that any Minister of Justice, may
Arrest a Member without order from the House, and detain him in custody till be
may be brought to parliament.

Whereas I represented the Covenanters to be pernicious enemies to every
Government, their dealings with our late Tyrants, force me to retract part of
that Assertion, or at least explain it, so as to be intended only of lawful
ones; For to Usurpers they have showed themselves friends and true Subjects.
They will not molest their Prince, no not for their Covenant; provided he has
but a bad Title, let them see right trampled upon, they are contented, they ask
no more.

The reasons of which prodigious dealing are these, I am bound in Conscience to
submit to the present Government; first, because a full and free Parliament
^at^ owned it, which is notoriously, the consent of the people; which is, the
evidence former Princes had to justify their BEST TITLES. Absurd, absurb,
absurd! And it is the opinion of Grotius ( upon Mat. 22. 20. That private men
are not judges of the Controvertible Titles of Princes; And Christ commanded to
give (...) was in (...). The (...) Assertion, that the consent of Parliaments
was former Princes best Title, has in it, I know not whether more of nonsense
than treason; it sounds certainly strange in the ears of Englishmen, who have
been hitherto told, that there was no interregnum here, the death of the former
Prince, being all that was required to complete the title of the latter, whom
no act, no not an Attainder in Parliament could debar from his Throne, the
Parliament deriving its Authority from the Writ of the Prince, without
Authority from whom as King already, they could not have met: ^ut here by the
glorious name of Parliament, he means only the House of Commons, the Other
House being not at all elected by the People, and so not involving their
consents.

Now that the House of Commons may give away, the Heir of the Crown, and all
the Peers native Rights, to whom they please, even the meanest and most wicked
Varlets is one of their very New Privileges.

But Christ bad us pay tribute to Caesar because he was in Possession. Between
which Case and ours, there is this difference: There the lawful Magistrate
receded from his Right, which in our Case was not done; The Romans title to
that being not (as in most other places) mere Conquest but dedition.
Aristobulus the younger brother getting possession by wrong: Hircanu^ the elder
parted with his Right to the Romans, on condition they would conquer it by
their Arms: He chose rather by their help to rule as a Deputy of theirs, then
to keep a more noble title, he had no likelihood ever to enjoy; see Dr. Hammond
on the place: The Romans then had the right of him who had the very right; the
only remaining difficulty is, how C^sar came to have the right of the Romans,
which notoriously was in the ^^nate and People: To which I say this, The Senate
and people upon what inducement, it concerns me not to enquire at present, laid
down their claim, parted with their power, submitted to, and acknowledged the
Emperors to be their very good Lords: Pusillanimously I must confess, and
their own Historians proclaim it, but quilibet post credere juri su^; If they
parted with their right to C^sar, then C^sar ^ad it. King Charles never did so,
and Res inter alios a^^a (...) debet; I may now confidently say, this example
reaches not the question; but if it did, paying necessary Tribute is one
thing, writing fine daintily fi^e canting Epistles is another, but this I will
not at present urge, because Mr. Baxter shall not say I endeavor to disgrace
him, but only commend his, or his friends discretion, that one of his
Prefaces, viz. that before his book of Church Government is very rarely to be
met with of late times.

This argument tempts me to put this one question, by what name are those
Ministers of this Nation to be known, that had rather Richard Cromwell should
have reigned then King Charls^

I have now gone over so much of Mr. Ba^ters Books, as seemed in any degree
argumentative; I have left out much which I might pertinently, and truly have
urged, because I would not mention any thing which might seem exasperating: For
I could heartily wish the Parliament could pass such an act of Oblivion, that
all that is past may be not only pardoned but forgot: There has certainly so
much of folly as well as impiety been seen in our late Proceedings, that it
were much for the credit of this present age; if posterity would give as little
credit to those who tell them these things were so, as we fools did to those
wise and honest men, who time enough before hand told us they would be so. If
any thing in these papers seem offensive (though I have taken all possible care
nothing should) to some men, who think the only way to secure their honor and
innocence is to be angry, I do assure them, the rubbing upon the sore places,
was not to hinder the healing, or to vex, and inflame the distempred parts, but
only to free them from that error of taking themselves to be whole already;
If any thing here may be of use to any reader, I shall think my pains well
bestowed, however I shall at any time gladly hazard, more then alittle labor
in the service of that cause I plead for.

FINIS.
Errata.
^


