AMYNTAS A PASTORAL, Acted at the Theater Royal.

Made English out of Italian from the Aminta of Tasso, By Mr. OLDMIXON.

-- mihi parva rura and
Spiritum Graiae tenuem Camenae
Parca non mendax dedit and malignum
Speruere Vulgus.
Hor. LONDON, Printed for Rich. Parker, at the Unicorn, under the Piazza of the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. School.

THE PREFACE.
I Was not surpised my self at the success of this Pastoral; I confess my
Friends thought the Town would have been kinder to it, and I was once almost
tempted to be of their opinion; but the knowledge I have had of the disposition
of an Audience toward such things, kept me from expecting any very good usage
from 'em. 'Twas indeed unreasonable for me to hope they would be pleased with a
person who had consulted their pleasure no more than I did.

If the Pastoral had been entirely my own, they would, I suppose, have shown
their resentments some other way, and not have been contented with neglecting
it. They avoided it because they were afraid to condemn it boldly, lest they
should make themselves ridiculous. For some, who never read any of Tasso's
writings, have heard so much of their excellence, that they durst not appear
openly against it; and it must he very uneasy for them to see a Play, which
they are engaged not to commend, and yet cannot take the liberty to condemn,
without exposing their own judgments. However, there were others who could not
be restrained, and 'twas in vain to tell 'em they should he cautious in their
censures of a Poem, which has been admired so many ages. A Poem, which the
Great Tasso preferred to his Gierusallemme. In which the most beautiful
thoughts of the Ancients (in this kind) are to be found, and which all that
know any thing of the Author, or his Writings, think the best he ever writ: A
Poem, which the Learned Monsieur Menage thought worth his remarks; of which
Pastor Fido is but an Imperfect Copy; Tho for that very reason it met with
different treatment en our Theater; for the Characters there, which never
failed pleasing an Audience, are unnatural and monstrous. But there looks
something in Pastor Fido like Intrigue, which will always have a good effect,
where people are so fond of Gallantry, that they will not suffer so much as a
Shepherd to appear without it.

I cannot imagine what was said lately, with too much severity, that the
Shepherds Calendar excels the Aminta, prejudiced the world against it; or that
any body who have read it, will think Spencer's Pastoral equal to Tasso's. Is
there any thing in Spencer's comparable to the story of the Be in the first
Act, or the account which Daphne gives of Sylvia's admiring herself in the
Fountain, in the second Act of the Aminta. Some persons (and among the rest
Father Bouhours) have accused this last thought of too much affectation, and
fancy it is not natural enough for a Shepherdess; but as Monsieur Fontenelle
observes, if this is a fault, we may spare our selves the trouble of reading
Guarini, Bonarelli, and Marino. For this very thought of Sylvia's in comparison
of the best of theirs, is the most simple thing in the world; and he adds in
the next sentence, that the Aminta is indisputably the best Pastoral which
Italy has produced, and every one abroad is of his opinion.

I am sensible many of the original Graces must be lost, our Language wants too
much of the softness of the Italian, to render it equally beautiful in English;
But I hope few of his thoughts have escapt me; and Monsieur St. Evermont, who
confesses he is not a perfect Master of the Tongue, says the delicacy of
thought in the Aminta has touched him so much, that he believes there never was
an Italian more pleased with it. My Judges, who perhaps are not all as good
Critics as he is, not expecting any thing like this in the Pastoral, were very
far from his sentiments, and did not mistrust that there could be a thought in
it too delicate for them. 'Twould be an affront to their taste to think it was
not nice enough to perceive the Beauties, which almost every page of Tasso is
full of; and I know they will not believe all that this Gentleman has said some
where else, that there is no Country in Europe where the Men have more Courage,
the Women more Beauty, and both more Wit than in England; but then there is no
place where a good taste is so rarely to be met with. If they could have agreed
to this, they had not been so forward in censuring Amyntas, lest they might by
chance make a wrong judgment, which very often falls out. They were not now
long consulting what to do with it, but whether they understood it or not, they
were positive there was nothing in it, and most judiciously condemned what
happens to be in the Original, the best thing of the kind that ever was or I
believe ever will be written. There was no need of saying so much to vindicate
Tasso, his reputation is fixed, and it is not in the power of Malice or
Ignorance to injure it. As for the Translation, if there are any mistakes in it
to the Authors prejudice. I deserve to be blamed, but tho I have heard the
Conduct of the Play, the measure of the Verse, and the management of the
Representation accused, yet none, as I know of, have laid any thing to my
charge on that account. If they had, I should have taken this opportunity to
confess my errors or answer their objections. The Conduct of this Pastoral is
the same as I found it, (except in the last Act, which I was obliged to alter)
and I may therefore affirm the most correct that ever was seen on an English
Theater. If there had been iatrigue, a great deal of stir, and something else
in it, it had been more acceptable perhaps to those whose protection I desired,
and whose pleasure I chiefly designed: but I was mistaken, and since I
endeavor to please them in every thing I write, I shall next time avoid that
unpardonable Crime, which ruined Amyntas on the Stage, and not venture so much
on their complaisance for the future.

There are few who consider the nature of Pastaral, that the Action ought to be
simple, the Passions tender, and the Sentiments such, as are suitable to people
bred up in ease and innocence. The nearer a man comes to this rule, the more
perfect will his writings of this kind be: but the age is not yet prepared to
be diverted with any thing simple, easy and innocent; and it may 'thad been
prudence in me to have waited till some person should have attempted to please
it this way, whose name might have given an authority to such an Innovation.
Tho it is to be feared, those who have raised their Characters by Licentiousness
and Irregularity, will not hazard losing 'em by writing correctly and decently;
and yet many of 'em are so well settled in the good opinion of the public,
that whatever the should promote would infallibly succeed. And it may not be
improper to observe here, what an influence Fame has on Certian Authors, who,
having grown popular with their Fustian and Nonsense, have in time deserved by
writing well, the Reputation their ill Verses acquird 'em; ill usage has
frequently the contrary effect, and such as have done well, when they have not
met with the applause they deserved, by endeavoring after to do better; have
made the first judgments that, were made of 'em just.

Some think the measure of the Verse too short, but Tasso drew me in to this
Error, if it is one, for since he thought the Italian, which is the sweetest
Language in the World, wanted to be made yet more soft by the shortness of the
measure; I believed the English Heroic would be too Majestic, and not so
agreeable to the great simplicity which should every where appear in a
Pastoral, as Verse of seven or eight Syllables.

The management of the representation, particularly that part on it which I
undertook, was very ill contrived. The small acquaintance I have had with such
things did not qualify me to undertake what I did, and the success was
answerable to the contrivance. I suppose every part of the Representation might
have been orderd to more advantage, tho the Actors performd theirs as well as
could be expected, and I question if any other Company would have done it
better. But be the Management or the Action what it will, I am satisfied
nothing could have drawn an audience to it, when once they had heard what they
were to be entertaind with, and that their attention was required for three
hours without one jest to divert 'em. I saw this the first night, and should
have been much more discouraged if some men of sense, whose judgments I can
safely depend on, had not assured me that there was no reason for it, and that
the could not without resentment, see the partiality of several persons, which
might have been employed to more purpose against other, who Court their
applause, and value their opinion more than I can.

SHEPHERDS.
Amyntas, Thyrsis, Elpinus, Ergastus, Alfibeus.
SHEPHERDESSES.
Sylvia, Daphne, Nerina. Chorus of Shepherds and Shepherdesses.
PROLOGUE.
Written by Mr. Dennis.
THis Play's no English product, but with toil,
Imported from a richer nobler Soil.
Then judge not rashly what, in better times,
Great Tasso's Genius writ to warmer climes.
They, who like Nature, may suppose it good,
Tho Nature hut by few is understood;
She never is but by reflection seen,
And few are bold enough to look within*
As when a thoughtful man for sakes the Town,
And to some Country Solitude goes down,
With more than common pleasure he beholds
The Woods, the Lawns, the Valleys, and the Folds
Natures bright Beauties every where he meets,
His Soul, which long had been confined in streets,
With Rapture now her kindred objects greets.
These rural Scenes like pleasure may impart
To those who value Nature more than Art,
And who have Souls to taste the Language of the Heart.
EPILOGUE.
Our Author was afraid to have his Cause
Come before Judges who dispense with Laws.
For those he sees, are always kind to Fools,
But most severe to such as write by Rules.
They hate even Nature too as much as Art,
And nothing but what is monstrous will divert.
Those Plays alone, that make 'em Laugh, delight,
Where folly often succeeds as well as Wit.
So merry in their humors, we can scarce
Engage 'em now with any thing but Farce.
What hopes then that our serious Scenes will do?
They Will hardly spare 'em for their being new;
Their Novelty perhaps will give offense,
But above all we dread their Innocence;
Unless the Fair in their defense appear,
From whom, we hope, we have the least to fear:
Love, Pity, Innocence, of right belong
To those to judge of, who inspired the Song.
And if some persons fancy Farces best
Because their own dear Pictures make the Jest;
The fair have much more reason to esteem
The beauteous Images we draw from them.
To them the Sovereign Arbiters of Wit,
Our Author only would his Cause submit,
Whatever their censures are, he will not presume
To think 'em hard, nor murmur at his doom.
As for the Critics, tho he cannot trust
That they will be either merciful or just,
Yet if this Play is by the Ladies liked,
He thinks they are too well bred to contradict.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Daphne, Sylvia. Daphne. SYlvia, will you still persist
In this strange disgust of Love?
Will you still refuse to hear
Our Shepherds sighs, and scorn their tears?
But if sighs end tears in vain
Attempt to move your cruel heart,
Methinks the hopes that you might have
To see a lovely Infant smile,
And call you Mother, should succeed:
Change, foolish Creature, change your thoughts,
And be not constant to a Crime.

Sylvia. Let others, if they please, be moved
With sighs and tears, and take delight
To play with Love: I Will never quit
The Forests, never leave the Chase,
Whilst Beasts of prey are to be found.
I Will range the Woods, I Will scour the Plains,
And with my Bow and Quiver find
A better way to nobler sport.

Daphne. Dull sport, and an insipid life
You Sylvia, stubborn as thou art,
Will think so too, when you begin
To taste the sweets of Love.
'So the first people, who possessed
'In Innocence the Infant World,
'Fed on Acorns, and when dry
'Drank the Waters of the Brook:
'Beasts only now on Acorns seed,
'And drink the Waters of the Brook:
'And thus when you at last shall feel
'How pleasant it is beneath a shade,
'To sit and talk with one you love:
Then, Sylvia, you will repent and cry,
Ah, fool! I never loved till now.
You Will throw away your Arrows, break your Bow,
And curse the minutes you have lost.
Change, foolish Creature, change your thought,
And be not constant to a Crime.

Sylvia. When I sit and task of Love,
Dogs shall be afraid of Hares,
Wolves of Lambs, and Streams return
To the Fountains whence they rose;
Bears shall then the Forests leave,
And Dolphins dance about the Plains.

Daphne. I know your pride, for I was once
Wild and obstinate, like you.
'I was then as fair, my Locks
'As white as yours, my Lips as red:
'Such Roses and such Lillies graced
'My Cheeks, as flourish now on yours.
'Twas then (so stupid was my taste
'The darling pleasure of my life,
'To set my Lime-twigs, lay my Nets,
'And laugh as often as I saw
'The Birds entangled in my Snares.
I then delighted in the Chase,
And scorned, with savage modesty;
The Shepherds whom my Charms had conquered:
I was then so far unjust,
As once to think it cause enough
To hate 'em for their loving me;
And pleasing them displeased my self:
But oh! what will not time effect;
What will not services and sighs,
Desert, entreaties, truth and tears?
What, Sylvia, will not all these do?

Sylvia. Nothing with a mind resolved
Against their flatteries, like mine.

Daphne. Mistaken Main!
They Will master every stubborn thought,
And force our hearts to think of Love.
I know it by my self, for I have felt,
And must confess their power.
They tempted me to tear my Nets,
Neglect my Lime-twigs, break my Bow,
And fling my Arrows in the Air.
I cried there, there, Diana, take
These useless Weapons, I renounce
The Woods and all thy sports for Love.

Sylvia. Renounce 'em by your self and as for me --

Daphne. Who knows, Amyntas may in time
Convert even thee to do as much:
Is he not handsome? Can you see
A comelier youth in all the plain?
If you're related to the Gods.
Amyntas is derived from Pan:
You often have Amarillis seen,
And in some Fountain may compare
Her beauties with your own.
The difference, Sylvia, is not great,
Yet poor Amyntas shuns her smiles,
To follow your contempt and you;
And for your hate despises Love.
But think it may not still be thus,
Think when her Beauties or her smiles
Have touched his heart, they will laugh at yours,
And make a jest of thy disdain.

Sylv. Where e're he pleases let him love,
And Court what Maid he will but me:
I Will never be trouble with his heart,
Nor give him any hopes of mine.

Daphne. What makes you hate him thus?

Sylv His love.

Daphne. 'Ah cruelty! we might expect
'That Ravens would be born of Swans,
'Of Tigers Lambs, as well as thou
'From tender Parents be derived.

Sylv. I hate his Love because he hates.
What I love most, a Maiden life.
While friendship only warmed his Soul,
None could esteem him more than I.

Dap. You Would have him then confine his wishes,
To as narrow bounds as yours.
He less deserves to be condemned
For wishing much,
Than you do for not wishing more.

Syl. Daphue, Peace, or if you will talk,
Prithee talk of some thing else.

Dap. Suppose another Swain should court ye,
Would you, Sylvia use him thus.

Syl. Thus every one that dares attempt
To interrupt me in my sports;
And he that talks of Love to me,
I Will use him as he is, my Foe.

Dap. You may, Sylvia, then suppose
Turtles to their Mates are foes.
When the Birds begin to sing,
You may think they hate the Spring:
You may, if you please, suppose,
Nature and the Spring are foes,
That its pregnant heats create
Flowers, Plants, and Fruit in hate.
But if you observe, you find
Every thing to Love inclined.
Doves in gentle whispers woe
Their tender Mates, and bill and coe.
The Nightingale flies round the Grove,
And sings on every Bough I love.
Beasts by nature fierce and wild,
Become, when Love commands 'em, mild.
The Lion, Wolf, the Tiger, Bear,
Less cruel, Sylvia, than you are,
In Savage murmurs Love declare.
Even Trees their amorous branches join,
The Ivy fondly clasps the Vine,
And her kind embraces show,
What you to Love and Nature owe.
Change, foolish Creature, change your thoughts,
And be not constant to a Crime.

Syl. If Beasts, if Trees, or Ivy show,
What Love and Nature bid me do,
I Will tarry till they tell me so

Dap. You mock me, Sylvia, have a care
How you make a jest of Love.
The time will come when you will repent,
For laughing at my Counsel now.
When wrinkles shrivel up your brow:
When the clear Fountains you will shun,
Where now you take too much delight,
To view your Beauties; where you gaze
Whole hours with pleasure on that face,
Which then you will be afraid to see.
Then, Sylvia, you will repent in vain
You did not follow my advice.
Have you forgot, or never heard
What wise Elpinus told the fair,
The cruel Lycoris, whose eyes
Are not more charming than his voice?
Have you forgot it, Sylvia?

Sylvia. I know not what you mean.

Daph. It Is strange:
'Twas in Aurora's awful Cave,
'O're whose mouth are writ these words,
' Hence, hence O ye Profane!
Battus and Thyrsis being by,
He told her what he learnt from him,
Who sung so well of War and Love,
And left him when he died, his Pipe;
That there is a place among the darm'd,
Where all ungrateful Beauties live,
Tormented with eternal fires:
The Gods being careful to revenge
Their Lovers wrongs; and it is but just
That pain should melt 'em into tears,
Since pity could not touch their hearts.
'Think, think on this, and if you dare,
'Persist, O Fool, in thy disdain.

'Sylvia. And what said Lycoris to this?

'Daph. You're fond to know another thoughts,
'But will not change your own. She seemed
'Convinc'd, and answered with her eyes.

'Syl. What? answer with her Eyes! Pray tell me how.

'Daph. She smiled, and turning to the Swain,
'In her kind looks she seemed to say,
'I'm conquered; take the heart you begged,
'You cannot wish for more.
'She seemed to say it, and 't had been enough,
'If men might venture to believe,
'Or trust the Language of the eyes.

'Syl. Why did he not believe it?

'Daph. Have you not read what Thyrsis wrote?
'In yonder Wood, where sorrow led
'His wandering steps? The Nymphs and Swains
'Laught at, and pitied him, to see
'The foolish things he often did,
'In many of his amorous fits:
'Yet foolish as his actions seemed,
'His words were sensible; and none
'Have cause to laugh at what he wrote.
'Deceitful Glass, where often I see
'False glances to deceive me,
'The Heart must with the Eyes agree,
'Or they will never relieve me.
'When dying Looks and smiles I meet,
'I'm still afraid of Treason,
'But Love, to help 'em in the Cheat,
'Deprives me of my Reason.
'He Engraved 'em on a thousand Trees;
'And Nature, careful of his sense,
'Preserves his Verses free from storms,
'And makes 'em floorish in the Bark.

Syl. Daphne, we fool away the day
In idle talk; it is time for me
To be provided for my Sport.
First then I Will to the lonely Brook,
Which glides through you delicious Wood,
And bath me in the Crystal stream;
There playing with the waves a while,
I grow refreshed, and with new life,
Rise from the Waters to the Chase.

Daph. It Is early, I must first go home,
I Will meet you after at the Brook,
And bath me with you, if you please.
But, Sylvia, think on what I Have said,
It Is of more consequence than Brooks,
Or Dogs, or Forests, or your Game;
And if you know not yet what it is
To love, ah! learn of those that do:
Love of all pleasures is the best,
And none can be without it blessed.

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Amyntas, Thyrsis. Amin. I Have often found that Rocks and Waves
Have answered my complaint: But oh!
I never found, nor hope to find
The Nymph, whom I Have so long adored,
As gentle even as Rocks and Waves.
Is she a Woman? One may well suspect
If she is of humane race, and yet I see
Her beautiful and young, her form
Of such a mould, so soft, so sweet,
That 'twere impossible to think
It lodged a Soul averse to Love.
If to my cost I had not found
That things inanimate are less
Insensible of pity than her heart.

Thyrsis. Lambs feed on Grass, and Wolves on Lambs,
They Are fatisfy'd in time; but Love,
Who feeds on Tears, is never satisfied.

Amin. If Tears could glut his appetite,
He had been surfeited e're this:
Or if the Virgin could be moved
With Seas of Tears I had been blessed:
No, they both hunger after Blood,
And I resolve to give 'em mine.

'Thyr. 'Ah! why, Amyntas, will you talk
'Of Blood? If she is so severe,
'Are there not other Maids as young,
'As fair as she? Look out and try,
'Another Beauty may be kind.

'Amint. Where shall I look, or how expect to find?
'A Maid to please me, when I Have lost my self.

Thyr. Don't flatter your despair, but hope
This cruel fair may yield at last:
Lions and Tigers may be tamed,
And she you Love with Love be overcome.

Amin. But who so wretched, who so near
To death as I am, can be pleased
With Life, or bear the torment long?

Thyr. The torment will not be so long
As you suspect, for Women's minds
Are movable, like Aspin leaves;
And what they may this minute hate,
They Will love the next. But say, my friend,
Where lives? and who is this haughty Maid,
That treats Amyntas with such scorn?
You Have told me often that you love,
But never told me whom: be free,
And open all your heart, without reserve.

Amin. Well, you shall hear what every Wood,
What all our Hills and Streams have heard,
But no Man ever knew before;
It Is fit now I Am so near the Grave,
Some friend should know the fatal cause,
And write my sorrows on the Tomb,
Where my pale body shall be laid,
That every passenger may read
My fate, and she for whom I dye
Be pleased to triumph over my dust:
It may be when she sees how far
Despair has carried me, the thought
(And yet I fear I hope too much)
Will fetch a sigh, or force a tear;
And make her pity me, and wish
That poor Amyntas were alive.
Hear then --

Thyr. I hearken: and perhaps
For better ends than you suppose.

Amin. While I was yet a little Boy,
Scarce tall enough to reach a Bough,
Or pluck an Apple from a Tree,
I felt my heart engaged to love
The fairest Creature ever lived;
Sylvia, the glory of the Woods,
Montano's and Cydippe's Daughter:
Sylvia, whose beauty, mien and youth,
Charm every heart as well as mine;
Our Houses joined, but were not half
So close united as our Hearts:
Two Friends never loved as we did then;
Two Turtles never so fondly sought
Each others company, as we did;
Our pleasures with our years agreed,
The same diversions suited both;
We sometimes Hunted, sometimes Fished,
Sometimes we laid our Nets for Birds,
And always shared the Game we caught.
But while we pleasantly pursued
Our mutual sports, alas! I felt
Strange wishes growing in my heart:
Like Flowers that on a sudden spring
From beds where they were never set:
Whene're we parted now I wept
For grief, and when we met, for joy.
I sucked in poison from her eyes,
Which seemed delicious to the taste,
But left a bitter smart behind.
I saw her now with new delight;
I found new Graces in her face;
I often sighed, but knew not why;
I loved, but did not know 'twas love,
Till chance discovered it.

Thyr. Pray how?

Amin. Sylvia, Phillis, and my self,
Sitting underneath a Shade,
Saw a Be fly round the bank,
Gathering Honey from the Flowers
Which adorned our happy seat:
Wearied there, he fled to us,
Pitched on Phillis, who has Cheeks
Fairer, sweeter than the Rose,
Fancying every Grace a Flower,
There he hung a while, and sucked
Sweets much richer than his own!
Phillis wept to feel the smart;
Sylvia bid her weep no more,
I, she cries, can say a Charm,
That will quickly give you ease:
It Is a Secret which I learnt
Of wise Aricia, to whom
For her Art I gave my Horn,
Tipped with Ivory and Gold.
Then she put her fragrant Lips
To the Cheek the Be had stung,
Said some Verses over the Wound,
And as soon as Sylvia spoke,
Phillis felt the pain no more.
See the wonderful effects,
See the force of Magic words,
Or, what I would rather think,
See what Sylvia's Lips can do,
Every thing they touch they heal.

Thyr. How, Amyntas, could you find
Love had wounded you by this?

Amin. I till this desired no more
Than to see her radiant Eyes,
Or to listen to her Voice,
Soft as Rivulets that glide
Murmuring through our smiling Vales;
Soft as Zephr's evening breath,
Playing with the Leaves of Trees:
But as soon as I observed
What her Lips had lately done,
Then I wished 'em close to mine,
And, I know not how, contrived
Ways to taste of what I wished.

Thyr. None want artifice to gain
What they covet to possess;
All are cunning when in love.

Amin. I, to touch her rosy mouth,
Feigned a Be had stung me too;
And complained with such an air,
That it seemed to beg the Cure,
Which my tongue could never have asked.
Sylvia kindly did to me
What she had to Phillis done,
And her Lips thus fixed to mine,
Cured the counterfeited smart,
But encreast my real pain.
Bees sure never from their Flowers
Drew such Honey as I sucked
From my Sylvia's humid kisses.
Sure no Roses but what grow
On her Lips can yield such sweets.
Tho my pleasure was disturbed
By my shame, and guilty fears:
Yet I counterfeited still,
And by this deceit prevailed
Over her to repeat the Charm.
Something sweet from every kiss,
Mixed with poison, struck my heart;
Which at last grew so inflamed,
That when once we met to play,
With some other Nymphs and Swains,
I, just dying with my fears,
Softly whispered her, I Love.

Thyr. How did Sylvia take the news?
That you seem so much concerned.

Amin. Soon her fiery blushes showed
Both her anger and her shame;
She stood silent, but I read
By her silence what she meant,
That she never would forgive me.
Now she flies me, and will since
Not so much as hear me speak.
Thrice our Golden Fields have bent
Under their rich loads, and thrice
Winter has with nipping frosts
Made our Groves and Forests bare,
Since I Have tried a thousand ways
To appease her, but I find
Death can only calm her rage.
Death shall calm her then, my blood
Shall appease her for my fault.
I could dye, methinks, with joy,
Were I sure my Death would make her
Either sorrowful or glad;
and I know not which to wish:
Yes, her Pity would reward
All my sufferings, and show
What my Constancy deserved.
Yet, ah! why should I desire
That her beauteous Eyes should weep;
Or her Rest be lost for me?

Thyr. Oh! could she hear such killing words,
Such just complaints, 'twould melt her heart,
And make her pity ye.

Amin. I fear it.
But were she sensible of pity,
She flies, and will not hear me speak:
What hopes then that my just complaints
Will melt her heart, that must not reach her ear?

Thyr. Cease, cease your grief, I Will plead your Cause,
Perhaps my Reasons may succeed,
And something promises they will,
If you would not despair.

'Amin. I Have reason to despair for ever,
'Sage Mopsus has foretold my fate:
'Mopsus, who understands so well
'The virtues of all Herbs and Drugs;
'Who by long study has acquired
'To know things past, and things to come;
'Mopsus has said, I must despair.

'Thyr. Which Mopsus? He who speaks so fair?
'And with grave smiles declares events:
'Dark and treacherous to deceive
'Such as suppose his Oracles divine.
'He tells them, with a solemn look,
'Things that will never come to pass,
'His Prophecies prove always lies.
'Believe me, for I know him false.
'Be cheerful, you have cause enough
'To hope your fortune will be good,
'Since Mopsus has pronounced it ill.

'Amin. Tell me, if you would revive my hopes,
'What makes you, Thyrsis, think him false?

'Thyr. When I first settled in these Plains, I loved
'Like you, to hear him talk, and thought his words
'As wise as they were grave, but quickly found
'Mopsus a Cheat, and what he talks of, Lies.
'For once, when I resolved to go and see
'The famous City which adorns the banks
'Of our great River, and by that is adorned,
'I told him my intentions, as a fiend,
'And thus the envious Hypocrite replied,
'You know not, Thyrsis, what you have resolved,
'Nor the vast danger you're about to run;
'For Treason reigns within her Marble walls,
'Where nothing kind or honest's to be found,
'And even the name of friendship is unknown:
'Her Citizens grow wealthy by deceit,
'By treachery her Courties grow renowned;
'On Downy Beds, and under Gilded Roofs,
'Both seem to sleep, yet both are kept awake,
'By plotting death and ruin for the weak.
'A thousand horrid Fields, in various shapes,
'Stalk through her streets, all ready to destroy
'Such innocent and easy fools as you.
'There you will hear 'em laugh at your rude mien,
'Despise a Shepherds life, and mock our Songs.
'But above all, her shining Palace fly,
'Let nothing tempt you to approach her Gates.

'Amin. And what could he suggest, to have you shun
'So rich a sight, which I should long to see?

'Thyr. He told me, all things were Enchanted there;
'That the pretended Diamonds were but Glass,
'And all their Golden Vessels real Brass:
'That empty bags her massy Coffers filled:
'And her high Walls were raised up with such art,
'That they can hear and answer what is said:
'As Echo answers in these Woods to us,
'This difference only, that they sometimes speak
'What they never heard, which Echo never does.
'That every thing you meet there has a Tongue.
'Thus prepossest by him, I went to Court,
'But soon was undeceived by Glorious Quires
'Of Heavenly Virgins, who like Sirens sung;
'Their voices sweeter, but not half so false.
'Charm'd with their notes, a while I stood amazed,
'Till a great Prince, magnificently dressed,
'His air majestic, and his mien sublime;
'A Prince, Amyntas, destined by the Gods
'To vanquish Tyrants, and secure us Peace,
'Invited me, as rude as I appeared,
'To see the Glories which adorned his Court.
'I entered then, but never can relare
'The Miracles I saw: a thousand Suns
'Shot forth bright Rays, and looked as they were warm:
'I saw young Goddesses in all her Rooms:
'But met with one so eminently fair,
'Her mien so graceful, and her looks so sweet.
'That it is not strange if I could be deceived,
'And fancied that she was the Queen of Heaven.
'I saw the Muses painted with their God,
'Our Sage Elpinus sitting pensive* by:
'And from that minute felt a noble fire
'Rage in my breast, and I resolved to sing
'Of War, and scorn the dying notes of Love:
'Tho since, to please another, I Am obliged
'To quit the City, and return to you:
'Yet my Pipe still preserves her Courtly note,
'Like the loud Trumpet in our Forests sounds;
'Mopsus has listened, and admires with shame,
'To hear such Music echo from our Woods;
'Asham'd to find that I have proved him false,
'And seem so much, and learnt to sing so well.
'Will ye believe still?

'Amin. I Am glad to hear
'We have such reason to mistrust his words
'On your success my happiness depends.

'Thyr. Depend on my success and have a care,
'The nearest way to ruin 's to despair.

CHORUS. AH! the Golden Age is past,
Which our happy Fathers blessed;
When whatever they longed to taste,
They but wish for, and possessed.
The Meads were painted still with Flowers,
The Birds never ceased to sing;
And then, without the help of showers,
They saw eternal Spring.
Rivers then with Milk were filled,
Honey from their Woods distilled;
None attempted then the Main,
Nor exposed their Lives for gain:
Free from danger, want or care;
Free from tumult, noise and war:
They a thousand Joys possessed,
Peace and Plenty were the least.
Ah! the Golden, etc.
'Honour, whose Laws are so severe,
'So hard to be obeyed;
'Who reigns with so much rigor here,
'Ne're over their pleasures swayed.
'They only maxim which they knew
'They were by Nature taught,
'That what they had a mind to do,
'They might, without a fau^t.
'The Virgin never blushed to show
'By day her naked Charms;
'And when she loved a Swain, would go
'With freedom to his arms.
'By Woods, on Greens they danced and played,
'In Fountains kissed and toy'd;
'The youth then boldly took his Maid,
'And what he liked enjoyed.
'But now when men the blessing want,
'They long must court the fair in vain;
'For Honor will not let 'em grant
'The pleasure they deny with pain.
'Twas honor that first swelled their hearts,
'That taught 'em shame, and to be coy;
'To frown, and use those little arts,
'Which only cheat 'em of their joy.
'Hence thou Idol Honor, hence;
'Leave us to our humble sports;
'Reign in Cities and in courts;
'Honor is the child of Pride:
'Here let Nature be our Guide:
'Hence thou Idol Honor, hence.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
Daphne, Thyrsis. Daph. I Knew long since Amyntas loved
The haughty Sylvia, and Heaven knows
Have often endeavored to dispose
Her heart to be as much concerned
As he deserves, and I could wish:
But all that I can says in vain,
For Bears and Tigers may be tamed
Sooner than such a simple Maid,
As proud and silly as she is fair:
Who, ignorant of what she does,
Or that her Eyes are armed with death,
Commits new Murders every hour
And kills when she has no design to wound.

Thyr. Where, Daphne, can you find a Maid
So weak, so innocent, so young,
As to be ign'rant of her Charms?
They early deck themselves with smiles,
They know the wounds their Eyes have made,
They know to what will cure those wounds,
And raise their Slaves from misery to bliss.

Daphne. Who teaches 'em all this?

Thyr. The same
That teaches Nightingales to sing,
The Peacock how to spread his Plumes,
That teaches Bulls to use their Horns,
The Ram to push, and Fish to swim:
Nature instructs em what to do,
Without the Mother or the Nurses help.

Daphne. Nay Thyrsis, now I plainly see
You Are both malicious and a fool;
But to speak truth, I don't believe
That Sylvia is as ignorant
As she pretends; for the other day
I found her in the little Isle
That stands in yonder spacious Meads,
Encompast with a Crystal Lake;
In whose clear Waters she beheld
Her Beauties; ravished with the sight,
She seemed to ask 'em how to place
Her hair, and put her Garland on;
She often with her Cheeks compared
A Rose, and Lillies with her Neck;
On Rose and Lilly then she looked
With scorn, as if she said, O Flowers,
Yield, yield to me; I wear ye now
That you may blush to be outdone,
And not for ornament, for see
I Have better Graces of my own.
While thus she with the Waters played
She looked around, and spied me out,
She dressed herself in haste, and dropped
Her Flowers, ashamed to be perceived.
I laughed aloud, and she I saw
Was more ashamed to see me laugh:
Yet did not dress her in such haste,
But to the Fountain once or twice
She ran, to fee her hair was set
In order, and with pleasure saw
Those locks in sweet confusion flow,
Which haste had forced her to neglect:
I looked and laughed, and said no more.

Thyr. I ever did believe as much,
Tho I could never prove it true.

Daph. I Have heard that once the Nymphs and Swains
Scorned to adorn themselves by art;
Nor was it thus when I was young,
But now alas! the world grows old,
And older as it grows, decays.

Thyr. The Citizens then seldom came
To us, the Shepherds seldom went
To them; but all things now are changed:
We learn their manners, and forget
Our Customs, by observing theirs.
This, Daphne, is not our concern;
Do You think that Sylvia never will let
Amyntas talk with her alone,
Or when you only shall be by?

Daph. I cannot tell,
She Is extremely proud.

Thyr. And he respectful to extremes,

Daph. Respect in Lovers is a Vice;
You, who are his friend, should tell him,
That to succeed he must be told;
Solicit, sue, entreat, demand:
And if this method may not take,
Seize on the blessing he desires.
Don't you know, Thyrsis, women's tricks?
They only fly to be pursued,
Refuse what they would have ye take;
And fight that you may overcome.
I tell you freely all our faults,
And beg they may not be exposed.

Thyrsis. You need not fear that I will speak
More than you would have me say;
But I conjure thee by the thoughts,
The pleasing thoughts of thy past youth,
That you will assist Amyntas in his Love,
And save the wretch from death.

Daph. By my part youth, the only thing
Which if I could I would forget,
Yet this you now conjure me by:
Well, what is it you would have me do?

Thyr. You want no counsel, you can tell
As well as I what must be done
To save him, if you're so disposed.

Daph. Sylvia and my self anon
Are to bath us in the Brook
Which is from Diana called;
Where the Nymphs that love the Chase
Play beneath the Plantain shade,
In the fiercest heats of noon:
There I tell you Sylvia baths,
And leaves naked all her Charms.

Thyr. What then?

Daph. What then? Why you are a fool,
Cannot you guess my meaning then?

Thyr. I guess your meaning, tho I fear
Amyntas will not dare to do it.

Daph. Not dare! then truly he may stay
Till me seeks him.

Thyr. 'Twill be no more
Than he deserves.

'Daph. Enough of this:
'Let's now talk something of your self;
'D'ye never, Thyrsis, think of Love?
'If I remember well your age,
'You're not much older yet than he;
'This is the season of desire:
'Methinks you should not waste your youth
'In idleness, but long to taste
'What it is to Love,
'For that is the only comfort of our lives.

'Thyr. The man who hates to be in Love,
'May be as fond of its delights,
'As one that languishes in tears;
'He shuns the bitter, and enjoys the sweet.

'Daph. The bitter relishes the sweet;
'The pleasure you come at with ease,
'Soon cloys, and is not half so great,
'As that which you must get by pain.

'Thyr. And I had rather soon be cloyed,
'Than always hunger after food.

'Daph. But when the food is once possessed,
''Tis then you taste it with delight,
'And fain would taste again.

'Thyr. Who can be when he will possessed
'Of such rich food?
'And taste it when his hunger calls?

'Daph. He that never seeks can never find.

'Thyr. It Is dangerous to seek the Joys,
'Which pleased perhaps when they are found,
'But plague us more if mist
'When sighs and tears are not required,
'Thyrsis may be in love again;
'I've wept and sighed my share, and now
'Let others take their turn.

'Daph. You could not stay for your reward.

'Thyr. Rewards may be too dearly bought,
'And such I Am not ambitious of.

'Daph. You Would better be inclined, than forced to Love.

Thyr. 'I, who from the reach of Love
'Live so far, despise his power;
'By my distance I Am secure.

'Daph. Who lives beyond the reach of Love?

'Thyr. Such as fear and fly his snares.

'Daph. Such as fear him fly in vain,
'Love has Wings as well as Fear.

'Thyr. When young his Feathers are so short
'He hardly can extend his Wings,
'And has not strength enough to fly.

'Daph. None perceive him when he is young;
'E're you're certain of his birth,
'His Wings grow large, are fit to spread,
'And he has strength enough to fly.

'Thyr. Those who have been never caught
May be tempted by his Baits.

'Daph. Well, let us see if you can still
'All his baits and snares escape;
'Do your best, for if at last
'You should be surpised again;
'If I ever hear you sigh,
'See you languish, weep and mourn;
'If you mould be grieved to death,
'And a touch, a step, or word,
'Would assist thee in thy Love,
'Thou should want such little helps,
'And dye unpitied with despair.

'Thyr. Could ye, Daphne, see me dye?
'That indeed would be severe:
'If you long to see me Love,
'Love me then, and I am thine.

'Daph. You mock me, Youth, but you may know
'I'm too young to be despised.

'Thyr. You're so fair you may be sure
'All was real that I said:
'But as Women use to do,
'You refuse me, I must bear it,
'And will strive to be content.

'Daph. Be content, and live in peace,
'Live in Idleness and Rest,
'Rest and Idleness beget
'Tender Wishes, Wishes Love.

Thyr* While in this calm repose we live,
'And fear for nothing but our Lambs;
'The fields abroad are spread with Tents,
'The Swains there change their Crooks for Spears,
'Their harmless Virgins are exposed
'To all the insolence of Lust.
'While we enjoy celestial ease,
'And dread no Enemies but Wolves,
'Shall I in Loves soft bosom sleep?
'No, Daphne, I Will extend my voice,
'And sing the wonders of the Man,
'The Godlike Man, who drove the foe
'Far from these Woods, and gave us rest.
'But lest my rustic Muse should wrong
'His fame by her inferior praise,
'Like some whom Phoebus never inspired,
'Who with vile Songs his name abused,
'When they would have raised it to the Skies.
'With awful silence let me wait
'Till Heaven the Hero shall restore
'Triumphant to us from the War,
'Then with fresh Roses strew his way,
'And lay new Garlands at his feet.

'Daph. You soar aloft: pray if you please,
'Descend, and think of our affairs.

'Thyr. You say you have agreed to meet
'Sylvia at the Fountain, where
'You intend to do your best
'For our miserable friend
'I'll go seek Amyntas out,
'Send him to you, but I fear
'He will be as loath to come,
'As she would be to have him.

'Dap. I Will go before, and should you follow,
'Make as if you came by chance.

'Thyr. I will see. Yon Amyntas comes.

ACT II.
SCENE II.
Amyntas, Thyrsis. Amin. I Fain, methinks, before I dye,
Would know how Thyrsis has succeeded:
If he can do more than I
Have done, and Sylvia will not hear
With patience any one that speaks for me,
Here on this spot of Earth I Will end my pains,
And in her presence finish with my breath,
The tortures of my Soul.
The wounds which in my breast my hands shall make
Will certainly transport her, since
With so much pleasure she beholds
The wounds which in my heart her eyes have made.

Thyr. Courage, Amyntas, I have news
To tell thee that will bring thee hope.

Amin. Ah, Thyrsis, is it Life or Death?

Thyr. It Is Life and Joy, if thou art bold enough
To meet 'em where they are to be sound:
But then, Amyntas, it is required
That thou should show thy self a Man;
A Man that dares do any thing for Love.

Amin. What must I dare? and whom encounter?

Thyr. Suppose your Mistress, in a Wood,
Encompast with high Rocks, where Wolves,
Where Lions, Bears and Tigers lurk,
Would you to get her venture there?

Amin. I Would run as joyfully as e're I went
To Dance and Revel at our rural Feasts.

Thyr. Suppose her in the hands of Thieves,
Amidst armed Robbers, would you venture there?

Amin. Swift as parcht Stags to cooling Waters run.

Thyr. Something more daring, something yet more bold
Than this, is to be done to make thee blessed.

Amin. I Would leap into the Ocean, when the Waves
By ruffling Winds are mingled with the Clouds:
I Would walk through Fire, or else, as I Have been told
Orpheus once did, descend to Hell
To find my Sylv'a our, but sure
'Twould not be Hell if she were there.
Tell me then where I am to go?
And what I am to do?

Thyr Sylvia, naked and alone,
Attends thee at Diana's Brook:
Amyntas durst thou venture there?

Amin. What do thou tell me? Sylvia wait
Naked and alone for me?

Thyr. Alone, if Daphne is not there;
And if she is, you're safe in her.

Amin. Wait for me, and naked!

Thyr. Naked -- But --

Amin. But what? Speak out, thy silence kills me.

Thyr But it is not certain that she waits for thee.

Amin This ruins what you said before:
Ah! if you were not sure of that,
Why, Thyrsis, did you say so much?
Why did you show me joy so near,
And fling me from my hopes so soon*
Sure it is not friendly to insult
Over one in misery, like me:
Did you believe my griefs too light,
That you increase their weight?

Thyr. Be ruled
By me, you shall be happy still.

Amin. What would ye have me do?

Thyr. Go seize
The Maid, while Fortune is your Friend.

Anin. Ah! Heaven forbid that I should think
Of any thing that would displease her,
Whom I will never offend but by my Love;
And if my Love offends her,
It Is her Beauty's fault, not mine:
In all my actions I resolve
More to consult her pleasure than my own.

Thyr. If not to Love her were in your power,
Would you cease loving her to please her?

Amin. Love will not suffer me to think
Of loving her no more: But if
'Twere in my power, 'twould never be in my will.

Thyr. If you could cease your Love, you would still
Continue it in spite.

Amin. No, not in spite,
Yet I would Love her still.

Thyr. Tho it were against her will.


Amin. Rather than not Love at all.


Thyr. Why will not you then against her will
Go take the blessing me denies?
Because she knows not yet how good
'Twould be to grant the favor you desire.
If she at first may be a little vexed,
She Will soon be well contented with the fault.

Amin. Love answers thus to what you say,
You have by long experience learnt
To reason of those things with art:
But tho your argument's too strong
For mine, yet I Am convinced that it is not right.
Love, with my tongue, confines my wishes,
And will not suffer 'em to stray,
Where Sylvia would not let 'em rove.

Thyr. Then you resolve you will not go?


Amin. Yes, I will go, but not where you Advise.

Thyr. Where then?


Amin. To Death, if you
Can tell me of no other way
To life; if this is all the good
That you can do me by your help.

Thyr. Is this so little then? And can
Thou fancy, foolish as thou art,
That Daphne would have bid us come,
If she, who knows what Sylvia thinks,
Believed 'twould give her such offense?
She thought perhaps that 'twas not fit
For you and me to know as much
As she of Sylvia's Soul: Besides,
Enquiring farther in so nice a case,
Instead of pleasing will displease.
You often wished that you knew how
To please her, you may do it now:
No matter if you take by theft
The joys you covet, or by gift;
When once they are tasted she will forget
The Crime, the sin will be so sweet.

Amin. But how can I be sure that I may go?


Thyr. You cannot be surer than you are:
She would, as decency requires,
Be angry, if you sought to know
More than Daphne bid me tell you.
Or how can you, on the other side,
Be sure me would not have you come?
Since then you may perhaps be thought
As guilty should you stay; Proceed:
For tho it is faulty often to dare,
It Is always criminal to fear.
Your silence shows that you're convinced,
And your conviction promises success.
Come, follow me, I Will lead the way.

Amint. Ah, stay a little.


Thyr. Stay! You know
Time flys us.

Amint. Prithee let us think
A little more of what we have to do.

Thyr. We'll think a little more then as we go.
Come, you may alter if you tarry,
Things too much thought on frequently miscarry.

CHORUS. Tell us, Cupid, in what Schools,
By what masters, by what rules,
We must be taught to Love:
How thou do inform the weak,
Teach the ignorant to speak
So much like you above.
'The Learned whom Athens breed,
'And Phoebus often inspire,
'May solemn Lectures read
'On Love, and want its fire.
It Is thou alone do warmth impart,
Our thoughts and words improve;
And only those who learn thy art
Of thee, should sing of Love.
Inspired by thee, the rudest mind
In softest notes complains;
Wit then in Savages we find,
And Eloquence in Swains.
'Lovers by broken words and sighs
'Their meaning can express;
'And by their carriage or their Eyes,
'We may their wishes guess.
'Others then may read the wise,
'I'll read only Celia's Eyes,
'Gazing there with much delight
'I'll take up my Pen and write.
'And being thus inspired, will try
'Who's more elegant than I.

ACT III.
SCENE I.
Thyrsis, Chorus. Thyr. O Cruelty extreme! ungrateful Maid!
Oh most ungrateful Sex! and thou
Oh Nature! careless of thy Sons,
Why have thou placed in Women's eyes
All that is amiable and kind?
And have forgot to mould their Hearts, as soft,
Or make 'em with their Eyes agree.
Ah, poor Amyntas! miserable Youth,
Where have thou hid thy self from human sight?
I Have sought thee every where in vain;
I fear the transports of thy rage
Have hurried thee to do thing
For which we all must mourn: But see,
Perhaps those Swains can tell me where
Thou art. Ah Shepherds have ye seen
Amyntas?

Chorus. You seem concerned:
What reason have ye for these tears?

Thyr. Amyntas, poor Amyntas, is the cause.
Have ye not seen him lately?

Chorus. No;
We have not seen him since he went
With you toward yonder Wood; but why
Do You ask so earnestly?

Thyr. I fear
H' has killed himself since that.

Chor. Amyntas killed himself! for what?


'Thyr. Another hatred, and his love.


'Chorus. When two such Enemies unite
'What can they not effect? Explain
'Your self more clearly: what do you mean?

'Thyr. He loved a Nymph too much, and she
'Too much despised him for his love.

Chorus. Ah tell me all, while you relate
The story, some may come this way,
And bring us news of him you seek:
Perhaps Amyntas will himself
Before you have finished it, arrive.

Thyr. Yes, you shall, know it, for it is but just
That such ingratitude should be
As infamous as it is extreme.
Amyntas heard (I told him where,
Alas! and brought him to the place)
That Sylvia was with Daphne gone
To bath 'em in a neighboring Brook,
Fearful and dubious there he went,
His heart still bidding him to stay,
As I persuaded him to go;
And thus as he inclined to stop,
I pushed him on, and forced him to proceed.
As we approached the Brook, we heard
A woman's lamentable cries,
And Daphne presently appeared,
Beating her Breasts, and looking wild,
As if some horrid thing was done;
But when she spied us, she cried out,
Help, fly, or Sylvia's ravished, fly.
Swifter than Leopards on their prey
The amorous Amyntas slew,
I followed, and behind the Boughs
Saw the young Maid, all naked bound,
Her hair, which in bright tresses used to flow,
Now tied her to a Tree: What once preserved
Her Virgin Bosom from lascivious looks,
Was now the fatal Instrument
To hurt her Modesty, and bind
Her arms about the rugged Bark:
Her tender feet were tied with twigs:
And over against her I perceived
A wicked Satyr, who had then
Just fastened her for his design:
Sylvia, as well she could, strove
To hinder his attempts.

Chorus. But what
Could she have done at last?

Thyr. Amyntas like a Lion fierce
Rusht on the Satyr with his Dart,
I picked up Stones, and was prepared
To help him, when the Monster fled
Far from revenge, and left our friend
Behind, who now had time to gaze
On all the Beauties he adored:
He saw a thousand hidden Charms,
Which set afresh his heart on fire,
And easily one in his looks
Might read his wonder and delight,
Who mingling with his Love Respect,
Thus in submissive accents spoke:
Forgive, fair Maid, forgive these hands,
If they with too much boldness touch
Your heavenly body, thus exposed.
Oh! Sylvia, murmur not at fate,
Who sent me here to set you free.

Chorus. Such words would soften Rocks,
And melt the most obdurate heart.
What said she now?

Thyr. Nothing; but looked
On him who saved her, with disdain;
Ashamed to be thus found, and loath
To be by one she hated, freed.
She strove with all her art to hide
Her Breasts, and keep 'em from his sight.
Amyntas coming up with fear,
Unbound her Hair, and as he touched
Her Looks thus said. Oh barbarous Tree,
Unworthy of these sacred knots,
With which we Lovers only should be bound:
Ah how could thou such Beauty wrong!
Then trembling he untied her arms,
Whiter than Ivory or Snow,
And bending to the ground, began
To break the twigs which bound her feet;
But Sylvia rudely pushed him off,
And spite of his respect, commanded
Him proudly not to touch her feet.
Hence Shepherd, touch me not, she cried,
For I Am Diana's, and can loose
My feet without your help.

Chorus. Oh! how
Could she with so much pride reward
Such services, and such respect

Thyr. Amyntas modestly withdrew,
And durst not look on her again,
But what he longed so much to see,
With pain denied himself, afraid
To be by her he loved, denied.
I, who behind the Covert stood,
And saw and heard what he had said and done,
Was often by just resentment moved,
And hardly kept from crying out,
To see how haughtily she used
The man to whom she owed her Life,
Or what is dearer than her Life,
Her Honor, by his means preserved.
And yet, oh strange ingratitude!
When with much trouble she had untied
Her Feet, away she ran, and scorned
To bid the Swain adieu: She flew
Fast as a Stag, but had no cause
To sear Amyntas, who had shown
Such proofs of wonderful respect.

Chorus. What made her fly?


Thyr. She rather chose
To owe her safety to her flight,
Than to Amyntas love.

Chorus. She showed in this
That she delights to be ingrate:
Where went the Shepherd then?

Thyr. I know not.
Justly provoked, I ran to stop
The Nymph, but she was gone too far:
When to the Fountain I returned,
In hopes to find Amyntas there,
I found him not, and fear he is gone
To end his troubles with his Life.

Chorus. Tho Lovers often talk of death,
Few of them practice what they talk.

Thyr. I wish he may be one of those.


Chorus. He will, you may be sure he will.


Thyr. I Will go to Sage Elpinus Bower,
There, if he lives, perhaps he is gone.
Elpinus Pipe has often soothed his griefs,
Composed his thoughts, and gave him rest.
Rocks listen to the Shepherds heavenly Songs,
Even Mountains by his Music charmed
Have danced, and Rivers flowed with Milk:
Honey from Briars have distilled,
And dying Lovers been with pleasure filled.

ACT III.
SCENE II.
Amyntas, Daphne, Nerina. Amin. OH! Pityless pity, cruel friend!
To snatch away my Dart, with which
I might have ended all my woes:
The longer I retard my death
'Twill be the sharper when it comes.
Ah! Daphne, why would thou persuade
A wretch to live in misery?
But all thy reasons are too weak,
The hopes that thou would give me vain:
Why would thou flatter me from death,
Since it is my interest to dye?

Daph. Despair no more, for if I know
Sylvia's mind, 'twas more her shame,
Than fear or scorn that made her fly.

Amin. There Is safety in despair, but hope
Would quickly ruin me: I fee
You only would be specious hopes
Prevent my death a while: for what?
Ah! can there be a torment worse
Than Life to such a wretch as me?

Daph. Live wretched, as thou think thy self,
And under all thy pains support
Thy heart, that after so much woe,
Thou may, tho late, overcome 'em, and be blessed,
Let this encourage thee to hope,
Think on the Beauties thou have seen;
And, as thou justly may, expect,
That all those treasures will be thine.

Amin. Fortune and Love did only show
Those Beauties to me, that my Eyes
Might see the riches I Am denied.

Ner. Why, like the Raven, must I be
The omen of bad news? Ah poor
Montano! how will thou survive
Thy Daughters loss, thy Sylvia's death,
The death of one thou lov'dst so well?
No more a Father now, at least
Without a Child.

Daph. I hear the voice
Of one that talks of death.

Amin. I hear
My Sylvia named, it strikes my heart:
Who calls on Sylvia?

Daph. Ha, Nerina!
'So dear to Cynthia, so fair
'Her face, so white her hands,
'Her mien so soft, so full of grace,
'That she is the glory of our Woods.

Nerina. It Is necessary thou should know thy loss,
Montano, that thou may procure
The miserable relicts of thy Child.
Oh Sylvia! oh unhappy Maid!

Amint. Ha! what of Sylvia? speak.


Nerina. Oh Daphne!


Daph. What would thou have of Daphne? say.
Why do thou mourn and call on Sylvia?

Nerina. I Have cause to mourn, the fatal things
Which have been to day will make
You, him, and every body mourn.

Amin. What things? Ah tell me all! my heart
Chills at thy words: Speak, does she live?

Daph. Tell us what fatal things are done.


Nerina. Why have I lived, oh Heaven! to be
The messenger of these sad tidings.
Sylvia came naked to our house,
(You know perhaps the fatal cause)
Where being clothed she fain would go,
And forced me with he, to the Chase.
We went, and in the Forest found
The Nymphs, who by appointment met,
Were ready to begin the sport,
When from the Thicket I perceived
A Wolf of monstrous size rush forth,
Licking his bloody Lips, whose foam
Reeking and Crimson, made us shake with fear;
But Sylvia from her Quiver took
An Arrow, put it to the Bow
I gave her, which she nimbly bent,
And taking at the Beast just aim,
She shot him near the Head; the Wolf enraged
Fled to the Thicket: Sylvia drew,
And brandishing her Dart, pursued
Him in the Woods.

Amint. Oh doleful story!
Of which, if it is so sad to hear
So much, what must it be to know
The rest.

Nerina. I, with another Dart,
Followed 'em by the blood the Wolf had spilt,
But could not reach 'em, they were gone too far.
I lost her her in the Woods, yet still
Kept on alone, and wandered through
The frightful Thicket, till I came
To its most unfrequented tracts,
Where Sylvia's Dart lay on the ground,
And at a little distance thence
Her veil; and while I gazed on these,
I spied seven Wolves around a Corpse,
Who tore it with their bloody Teeth.
So eager on their Prey,
I saw they woeful sight unseen by them;
With fear and pity moved, I turned
My steps, and got in safety home.
This, this is all that I can tell:
Shows the Veil. This all of Sylvia which remains.

Amin. Ah! thou have told too much.
Oh! Dear Remains: Oh! precious Blood,
Oh Sylvia! now alas no more.

Daph. Ah! What, Nerina, have thou said?
It strikes his Soul: he swoons, he dies!

Nerina. Perhaps it is but a Lovers fit;
He breathes still; see, he comes to life.

Amint. Ah! Grief too mighty to be born,
And yet too weak to be my death;
This office for my hand's reserved,
And by my hand shall be performed.
If my misfortunes are so sure,
If Sylvia's dead, oh Daphne, why,
Why did thou renew my pain,
By bringing me to life again?
How good, how pleasant had it been,
If ^n an ecstasy of woe
Thou had permitted me to dye:
The Gods, who knew I should by this
Prevent the torments they have prepared
For me to feel, inspired your hearts
With pity, that being forced to live
I might endure 'em all; and all
I have endured, for Sylvia's dead:
Nor is it possible for me
To be more wretched than I am:
And now methinks it is just that Heaven and you
And all should suffer me to dye.

Daph. At least defer it till you know the truth.


Amin. I know the truth, I know too much,
And have deferred my death too long.

Nerina. Oh heaven! I wish I had been mute.
When I began the story.

Amin. Lend me, Nerina, lend the Veil,
All that is left me of my love
That on it I may feast my Eyes,
The little way I have to go,
The little time I have to live,
That looking on her Blood, I may
Go boldly to my doom: But oh
What need such little helps
To lead me to my end?

Nerina. No, Swain,
You must not have the Veil, if this
Is your design: I Will not promote
Your death.

Amint. Ah! can thou, Nymph, deny
So small a favor to a man,
Who never will ask another.
The fates still persecute me, still declare
Against me, and in little things
Show what I must expect in great.
Keep, keep the Veil, and live in peace,
Let misery with me forsake these Woods,
I go to other Shades, and never shall return.

Daph. Stay, stay Amyntas, oh I fear
His fury.

Nerina. But we cannot prevent
What he intends, he flies
Too fast for us; we should in vain
Pursue him, and in vain attempt
To stop him in his course.
In silence I Will their fortune mourn;
Let others tell Montano, if they please,
Few people thank us for such tales as these.

CHORUS. Ye Nymphs, no more take pains to hide
Your Love, but own your passion;
For Virtue if too nice, is pride,
And Coyness Affectation.
Cupid make our Virgins tender,
Make 'em easy to be won;
Let 'em presently surrender,
When the Treaty's once begun.
Such as like a tedious wooing,
Let 'em cruel Damsels find;
But for such as would be doing,
Prithee Cupid make 'em kind.
By a Shepherdess. The fair in the City
Don't understand pity,
Yet vainly pretend they are wiser than we are:
But the Nymph of the plain
Should make much of her Swain,
And think that the wiser Maids are they are the freer.
B^ a Shepherd. When we go to our Lasses,
To ask their good graces,
They ought to receive us, and each take her man;
And when we meet first,
Since both know the worst,
Let Us agree to be happy as fast as we can.

ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Daphne, Sylvia, Chorus. Daph. THanks to the Gods, that all our tears
Were needless, all our plaints and fears
In vain, since she for whom we mourned
Is living, and in health returned:
Long may thou live, and Heaven protect
The Life, which you too much neglect.
Nerina in confusion said
Such things as made us think you dead:
I wish, to have saved us so much grief,
She had been dumb, or others deaf.

Sylvia. The risque was great, and had you seen
The mighty danger I was in,
You would your self have said so too.

Daph. Not if I had n't known it true.
Tell me the risque you ran, and how
You escaped the danger.

Sylvia. You shall know.
Too day I at the Chase pursued
A Wolf so far into the Wood
I lost my Game, I lost the track,
And turned on purpose to come back,
When with seven other Wolves I found
The Beast, and knew him by his wound:
Round some dead Animal they stood,
And tore its flesh, and lickt its blood:
The Wolf I shot soon spied me out,
And left his prey to meet his foe.
I with my Dart opposed his way,
Tho, mistress of my art, you know
I very seldom miss my blow,
Yet by bad luck I mist it now,
And my Dart rested in a Bough:
The Wolf at this more furious grew,
And got so near me, that I knew
My Bow would stand in little stead;
So to preserve my self I fled.
And as I fled I was me thought
By something which opposed me, caught.
The Veil I wore hitcht in a Tree,
And with my hair entangled me.
I pulled my Veil, I tore my hair,
And yet was forced to leave it there.
Winged by my fright away I flew
Like air, and so got safe to you.
Why Daphne, are you now so sad:
What, cannot my safety make you glad?

Dap. You live, I Am glad to find it true,
And wish another was as safe as you.

Sylv. Perhaps you hate me, you appear
No more concerned to see me here.

Daph. I hate you not, I joy in your return,
But for another death must mourn.

Sylv. Whose?


Daph. Poor Amyntas.


Sylvia. Tell me how
He died.

Daph. Ah! that I want to know;
We are not certain yet he is dead,
But we believe't.

Sylvia. What have thou said!
Ah, Daphne, say to what alas,
Do people attribute the cause?

Daph. Thy death.


Sylvia. Explain your self.


Daph. The news
He heard will certainly produce
Some dreadful deed, Despair will lend
Him arms, to help him to his end.

Sylvia. It may be your suspicions are in vain,
And, he as well as I, may rise again
From Death; besides it is very rare
For men to let their troubles go so far.

Daph. Sylvia, little do thou know
What some men in Love will do:
Thou do little think how much
Every accident will touch
Hearts of Flesh, and not of Stone,
Not so cruel as thy own.
Had thou known the man that dies
Loved thee better than his Eyes,
Thou would have been lest severe,
And prevented his despair.
Had you seen him but to day,
After you were ran away.
Sylvia, you would with reason fear,
Your disdain has gone too far.
Such ingratitude you showed,
To the man to whom you owed,
Life and Honor, all that's dear,
I can tell for I was there.
I can witness what was done,
Saw him save you, and you run,
When sure, after that had past
He deferv'd to be embraced.
Then I saw him rake his Dart,
Turn the point against his heart,
Strike his breast, and from the wound
Saw the blood flow on the ground.
I came in, and much ado
Hindered him a second blow.
Sylvia, thus you see how far
Some are hurried by despair.
So much may by this be guest,
We have cause to dread the rest.

Sylvia. What have I heard?

Daph. Things indeed,
Enough, alas, to make thee dread
What thou art yet to hear.
Thence as we were coming back
We met the Nymph, who by mistake
Informed us you were slain; the youth,
Without examining the truth,
Believed, despaired, and in the heat
Of grief, fell breathless at our seet.
We took him up, he breathed again,
We strove to comfort him in vain;
For all the reasons we could give,
Could not prevail on him to live:
But rushing forth, away he fled
To death, and I believe is dead.

Syl. Do You really believe it?

Daph. Yes.

Syl. Ah! why
Did you not follow him, and fly
Fast as his fury, to prevent
The consequence of his intent.
Ah let us seek him out, and strive
To make him yet consent to live.
Since he that for my Death would dye,
Should for my Life revive.

Daph. We followed, but he flew like wind:
He left us panting far behind;
And long e're this has done what he designed.
Whither then, Sylvia, would you run?
And who shall tell us where the wretch is gone?

Syl. Ah, let us go where grief and pity lead;
Haste, Daphne haste, or he will be dead;
By himself murdered.

Daph. You would save
The unhappy Lover from the Grave,
To murder him your self: To you
You think the Glory's only due.
But you have no reason to repine,
For let the blow be his or thine,
Twill be his death, and thou may see,
With comfort, that he died for thee.

Syl. Daph. It torments my mind
When I consider how unkind,
How cruel I have been:
Pride I called Honor once, perhaps
'Twas Honor, but 'twas too severe;
And such as will, if he is dead,
Sharpen my grief, my cruelty reprove,
And force me to repent I wronged his Love.

Daph. Oh Heaven! She Is pitiful, repents,
Her heart grows tender, she relents;
She weeps --
Is thy pride humbled then? O strange!
Whence, Sylvia, comes this mighty change?
Whence all these tears, from Pity or from Love?

Syl. Pity, not Love, attracts my tears

Daph. Pity's Love's Messenger, and shows,
As Lightning before Thunder goes,
Love is not far.

Chorus. When he would surprise a Maid
Who of his Empire is afraid,
Who by false honor would defend her heart,
And be secure against his Dart,
He takes his Servant Pity's shape,
And in that figure few escape
His snares, he slily wins on every heart,
And beaten off by force, prevails by art.

Daph. Love at first in storms appears,
Waited on by sighs and tears:
Love has touched thee, tho too late,
Into fondness turned thy hate.
Ah Amyntas, Sylvia's changed,
Weeps for Love, and you are revenged.
Now thou may the Conquest boast,
Which if living thou had lost.
Thou have Dying left behind
Such a sting in Sylvia's mind,
As will work more mischief there,
Than thou ever feltst for her.
Bees thus cannot their Stings outlive,
But perish with the wounds they give.
If you are, as I believe, a Spirit, fled
From the bright mansions of the dead;
From heavenly Groves, and sacred streams,
To play unseen about her Limbs,
See, Sylvia weeps, behold how much she is moved,
You loved alive, and are when dead beloved.
'If Destiny had so decreed,
'That thou should for thy Mistress bleed;
'If in her thoughts she had resolved that this,
'Whene're she sold her Love, should be the price,
''Tis thine, now thou have done thy part,
'And with thy Life have bought her heart.

Chor. Too vainly sold, and bought too dear;
'For him too hard, too infamous for her.

Syl. Oh that my Love could fetch again his breath,
Or my heart purchase him of Death.
Oh that my Life could be the Price,
I Would gladly part with it for his

Daph, Too late you're pitiful and wise,
Your tears are useless, and in vain your sighs.

ACT IV.
SCENE II.
Ergastus, Chorus, Sylvia, Daphne. Ergastus. PIty and horror have so far
Possessed my Soul, I know not what
I hear or see, but every thing
I meet, amazes and afflicts me.

Chor. What tidings have thou brought, which make
Thy looks thus troubled, and thy words
Confused.

Ergast. I bring the bitter news
Of poor Amyntas death.

Syl. What is it he says?

Ergast. The noblest Shepherd of these Woods,
The kind, the gay, the gentle Swain,
Our Virgins and the Muses darling,
Young as he was, is dead; but how;
Oh! who can tell, or hear it told?

Chor. Tell all, that we may mourn with thee
His sad misfortunes and our own.

Syl. Oh! how can I stay to hear
This most horrid story out?
Where is all my fierceness now?
Oh! my heart, so haughty once,
Show thy Pride, and if thou can
Stay and hear it all unmoved:
Speak then what thou have to say.
Shepherd, let me know the worst,
Tell it me, I Am most concerned;
Speak, I Am ready for thy news.

Ergast. Nymph, I know thou art concerned,
Dying, the Despairing wretch
Called on thee, and with thy name
Finished his unhappy Life.

Daph. Prithee begin the dismal tale.

Ergest. Sitting on yonder Hill, where I
Had laid some Nets, I saw but now
Amyntas run that way; his looks
Distracted, and his carriage wild;
His eyes, his mein so changed, I thought
That something strange might happen since
I lest the Vale: he spied and shunned me,
Fearing the worst; I then pursued,
O'retook and stopped him; he grew calm,
Begged me to go and see him do
A thing which he pretended then
He was obliged to do, but first
Forced me to swear I would not stir,
Beyond the bounds he set, nor lift
My hands to hinder him. I swore
By Pan, by Pallas, by Pomona,
And all our Sylvan Deities,
(Alas! not thinking what he meant.)
I would not stir nor lift my hands,
Unless he gave me leave. This done,
He led me to a Precipice,
Where, from the margent of the H
Directly down the pathless dale,
Between high Blocks appears, my head
Grew giddy, I stepped back, afraid
To view the depth: Amyntas smiled
And looked serenely, which deceived
My fears, and made me more assured.
Thus then he said --
Ergastus, tell
The Nymphs and Swains what thou shall see,
Since, since he cried, and then looked down,
The Gods will not permit my end
To be the same with Sylvia's since
My Limbs must not be torn like hers,
And I Am denied the Paws and Teeth
Of Wolves to use, as they served
Her lovely Body: I must take
Whatever death they please to send.
These Rocks direct the way, I wish
I had deserved the same with hers.
But this is sure and short. Oh see!
I follow thee, my Sylvia, don't
Disdain my Company in death.
I Would dye contented, were I sure
'I would not displease thee, I should then,
Oh Sylvia, follow thee with joy.
I come, I follow thee, I come:
And saying this,
He threw him headlong down,
While my heart chilled to see him fall.

Daph. Oh miserable youth!

Sylv. Oh Heavens!

Chorus. But why
Ergastus did you not prevent him?
Was it your Oath that tied your hands,
And kept you back?

Ergast. No, I despise
Such Oaths, and look on them as vain,
When I perceived his folly went
So far, and his deliberate despair
Ready to fling him from the Precipice,
I ran to save him, and as fate
Would have it, came in time enough
To catch him by the Girdle, which
The burden of the Body broke,
And left it rent thus in my hands.

Cho. Where went the miserable Body then?

Ergast. I know not what became of that.
Horror and Pity struck my soul
So deeply, I had not the heart
To see it dash in pieces.

Cho. Oh strange! Oh woeful accident!

Sylv. Sure my heart is made of stone,
Or it must have bled to death,
E're the dismal tale was done.
Oh! if he could dye for me,
One who hated him so much,
When he falsely thought me dead,
What shall I do now, I know
He is certainly no more?
I must dye, and dye 1 will:
Swords and Rocks are left for me:
This precious Girdle is preserved
To revenge its gentle Lord.
Unhappy Girdle! Dear Remains
Of thy more unhappy Lord!
Be not angry that you are kept
From thy Master; it is to be
The Instrument of Vengeance
On the Maid for whom he died.
I should, I own I should have been
Amyntas kind Companion here;
But since I cannot be so, I will,
By thy assistance quickly follow him,
And bear him company in Death.

Chor. Comfort thy sell, poor Virgin, it is
The hand of Fate, and not thy fault.

Sylv. Why weepst thou Swain? if it is for me,
Weep not, for I deserve no tears,
No pity; I who never knew
What pity was; If it is for him,
For poor Amyntas, thou may weep
A Sea of Tears, and yet want more.
Daphne, if thou do mourn for me,
For Heavens sake, prithee mourn no more;
I beg, not out of pity to my self,
But out of pity to the man
Who merited thy Love, that thou
Would help me gather up his Bones,
And lay 'em in a Grave; it is this
Which only shall prolong my Life:
This friendly office, all that I
Can pay him for his heart, shall be my care.
The Piety of such a deed
By my vile bands will be denfil'd:
Yet I believe whatever these hands
Shall do for him will please his Ghost,
Since, spite of all his wrongs, I Am sure
He loved me to the last.

Daph. I Will go
And help you, but you must not think
Of dying after we have performed
Our duty to our friend.

Sylv. Hitherto l've only lived
For my self, the little time
That Is now left me, I Will devote
To Amyntas, if I cannot
Live for him, I Will live at least
For his pale unhappy Body.
I must put off death a while,
Till I Have seen it, and then end
With his Funeral my Life.
Shepherd, lead us to the Vale,
To the fatal Precipice.

Ergast. Keep this path, you cannot miss the way.

Daph. Come, I Will conduct ye, follow me;
I know the place, it is not far off.

Sylv. Farewell Shepherds, farewell Plains,
Woods and Streams, and all farewell.

Ergast. She heartily repents her scorn,
And talks as if she never would return.

CHORUS. Death in vain opposes Love,
Who conquers every Foe;
To his Empire all above
Submit, and all below.
What Love unites Death seldom parts,
And what he parts Love often joins;
Triumphs over Death, resists his Darts,
And will himself alone command our minds.
'Maids comply with Love in time,
'E're your Error grows a Crime;
'E're he makes you yield by force.
'Ah, consider 'twill be worse
'To rebel, and be subdued,
'Than obey him as you should.
'When he summons you at first,
'Tield, or else expect the worst:
'Late Repentance will be too
'Vseless to your Friend and you.
Death in vain, etc.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
Elpinus, Chorus. Elpin. OH Love! how rigid are thy Laws?
How much must all that once subject
Themselves to thee, endure before
They taste the promised joy?
Who, who would not have cursed thy power,
Rebelled against thy sway, and sought
Some other way to bliss? if poor
Amyntas had not escaped the deaths
Thy usage tempted him to seek.
Even we, who have adored thee long
With much fidelity and zeal;
We, who have raised thy name above
All other Gods, to whom we make
Our own Apollo yield; should then
Have taught our Children to forget
Thy worship, and forsake thy Temples.
But now that our Amyntas lives,
We'll, if it is possible, forget
Thy Cruelty, to bless thy Care.

Chorus. The Sage Elpinus comes and talks
As if Amyntas were alive:
Ah Shepherd! did thou know the things
Which we have heard to day; the ills
That Love has brought on all, thou would
Have little reason to forget
His Cruelty, or bless his Care.

Elpin. Rejoice, my friends, rejoice, the news
You heard is false; Amyntas lives.

Chor. Ah! what, Eipinus, do thou say?
How do thou comfort us? Is It false?
Did he not fling himself but now
From yonder Hill among the Rocks?
Ah! tell us how he was preserved? what power,
What God was by, to save him at his fall?

Elpin. Hear then what I shall say, no more
Than I have with these eyes beheld.
I Have in the Desert Vale a Cave,
Where Thyrsis came to mc to day,
Where, while we talked of that proud Nymph
Whose Fetters formerly he wore,
And I at present wear, we heard
A voice, and looked up toward the hill;
Whence, down the Precipice, we saw
A Body tumble on a Bush.
Just by my Cave, and near the Mount,
A few tall Bushes rise from Box,
And other Trees, which all unite
In one; on these we saw him fall:
But, carried by the Body's weight,
He rolled off thence, and at our feet
Fell next; the Bushes saved the blow
So much, we took him up alive.
He was yet speechless, and 'twas long
E're we had any other signs
Of Life, besides his sighs and groans, which showed
Us that he breathed: But, oh!
When we perceived who 'twas, what tongue
Can tell the fright which we were in?
Pity and wonder struck us dumb:
Yet thinking by his breath, he might
Still live, we were a little calmed.

Chor. Oh wonderful Escape! Oh thou
Had cause, Elpinus, to applaud
The Care and Providence of Love.

Elp. Thyrsis then told me what had past,
The secret of his Love, and how
Despair had hurried him to this.
We fetched the Remedies we had
At hand, and for Alfibeus sent,
Who by Apollo has been taught
The Art of Physic; when he came,
He told us quickly, there were hopes.
And as we wept to see him still
Lie speechless in his arms he said
We should not be surpised at that;
For, having searched him well, he found
No wounds, nor any thing which might
With reason make us fear: It Is true,
He said he might be some time in a Trance,
But after would recover soon.
And having then performed his Art,
He ordered men to bear him home,
Who at a little distance hence,
Are coming with our Friend.

Chorus. What Fools are men in Love? how apt
To be deceived, how ready often
To join with those they love to cheat themselves?
What mischiefs have their false despairs,
And groundless hopes begot? How near
Was poor Amyntas rash mistake,
Depriving us of what we all
Expected in our time to see,
The grace and pleasure of these woods?

Elp. Alfibeus with his charge appears,
And in his Looks we may discern,
How much Amyntas. safely glads
His soul as well as ours.

ACT V.
SCENE II.
Elpinus, Chorus, Thyrsis, Alfibeus, and Amyntas born on a Couch. Alfib. OH
Swains!
Oh Nymphs! Oh all that ever loved
This youth, and who of ye that heard
Him sing, Or saw him at our sports,
But heard and saw him with delight?
To Phoebus, and to Love, address
Your vows, that once more you may hope
To hear and look on him with pleasure.

ACT V.
SCENE III.
Elpinus, Thyrsis, Alfibeus, Chorus, Daphne, Sylvia, Amimtas lying on a Couch.
Daphne. AH Shepherds join your prayers with mine!
Use all the Arguments which Grief
And Pity can inspire, to save
This Maid from ruin.
Stay, Sylvia, stay, till you have performed
What you resolved, and what you owe
Amyntas Spirit, till the hands
Which you your self confessed would please
His Ghost, to see 'em gather up
His bones, have laid 'em in a Grave.

Sylv. Some God, alas! has done what I
Resolved to do, and to revenge
Amyntas wrongs, denied my hands
The glory of so just a deed.
Tell me, ye Powers! ah tell me where
You have conveyed my Love, and laid
His mangled Limbs? Direct me where,
That I may see 'em e're I dye:
That I may feast my cruel eyes
With objects equally severe:
And if I can, instruct my heart
To be more barbarous to my self,
Than e're it was to him.

Daph. Cease, prithee Sylvia cease your tears,
And don't torment thy self too much
For ills, thy sorrows cannot retrieve.

Sylv. See, Daphne, how these Shepherds smile
At my Despair, how unconcerned
They hearken to my griefs; even I,
As savage as I was, scarce saw
Amyntas mourn with so much ease.

Daph. Hence, Shepherds hence, and don't disturb
The wretched with untimely joy.

Sylv. Not that I court your pity, or
Expect compassion, but methinks
Amyntas death should touch your hearts;
And you should still consider me
As one Amyntas loved. But oh!
You look on me as one that hated him,
You see his murderer in me, and set
Your souls against the cause of so much woe.
Oh! that you ail could in this minute lose
Your native tenderness, and that your rage
Were equal to your hate, that I might soon
Be sent to meet him in those blissful plains,
Where he himself will treat me with more love.

Alfib. Sylvia forbear these sad complaints,
And don't afflict your self for things
Which heaven has wonderfully made
The subject of our joy, Amyntas lives.

Syl. Ha, Daphne, whither are we got?
I heard a voice, which said Amyntas lives;
And in the midst of grief invites to joy.
Ha! see what heavenly vision strikes my eyes,
Behold it well, my Friend, and tell me then
If any thing but my Amyntas self
Could look more lovely. It Is Amyntas self,
I know him now: I feel him at my heart,
It dances in my breast, and bids me do
What Love commands and you must all excuse.
Falls on Amin.
Chorus. How can Sylvia do all this?
She who is so proud and nice
One would think should be ashamed.

Elpin. Shame sometimes, where Love is weak,
Keeps some Maids from being free;
But when it grows strong, like hers,
Love's too powerful for shame.

Syl. Where, where is he who said Amyntas lives?
Let him come here, and tell me if he can,
Why his eyes languish, why he looks so pale?
Why lifeless, when his Sylvia clasps him thus,
And deaf to all she says? Ah speak, my Love,
Inform me if my glances hurt thy eyes,
And drive away thy Soul from what it loathes.
Whoever thou art that said Amyntas lives,
'Twas falsely said, and with a vile intent
To show me hope, and leave me in despair.
He lives indeed, but in a better world,
Whence now methinks I hear him call on me,
And Sylvia's name is in Elysium sung.

Amin. Where am I? on what happy Region thrown?
What Music wakes me from the arms of death,
And charms me with the name of my beloved?
Oh! all ye Glorious Spirits, who in peace
And perfect bliss possess these sacred Groves,
Direct me to the Bower, where Sylvia waits
For me, whom now she can no longer hate,
Since all Paradise are friends.

Sylv. He speaks, he lives, and injured as he was,
Talks kindly of me still. Look up Amyntas,
Look on thy Sylvia with thy usual joy,
And let thy Eyes speak kindly, like thy Tongue.

Amin. Who breathes new life into me with her kisses,
And quickens me with her embraces? Ha! my Love,
My Sylvia winding in my arms! I can scarce
Spare time to ask the meaning of these things?
Have not I seen you all, and been your friend?
And is not this the darling of my Soul?
Yes, yes, it is she; her Beauty shows it is she,
Nor could I feel such Transports with another.

Alfib. His Love prevents my Art, and he revives
Faster than I expected.

Elpin. But I fear
The violence of such excessive bliss
Will prejudice his health.

Chorus. I rather think
Its violence will help to cure him.
Alfibeus you must tell him what is
Most proper for his safety.

Alfib. I believe
His safety is secured in Sylvia's Love.
How fares Amyntas?

Amin Oh, all is well, and I begin to think
Love has for me done Miracles to day.

Thyr. Love has indeed done Miracles to save
Thy life, and soften Sylvia's heart.

Syl. Tell us no more, 'twill interrupt our bliss.
Let him not know what dangers he has escaped;
When he reflects how barbarous I have been
He Will loath me for my Cruelty, and hate
A Maid who so unjustly hated him.

Amin. Oh Sylvia! we'll not think of what is past,
I Will not enquire how I became so blessed,
But thank the Gods and thee for what I know.
As for the rest, thou could not but b^ j^^*
And love decreed the troubles we have known.
To show his Power, and make our bliss the greater.

Elp. There Is nothing wanting but Mantan^'s word,
To make 'em both as happy as they with.

Cho. They need not question his consent,
He longs to see his Daughters Sons,
To sport about him and revive
His Age, and soon will grant what they desire.

Alfib. Then let us to her Fathers house repair
And see him join their hands and share his joy.

Amint. You all may by my fate perceive
The Laws which Love prescribes Mankind,
By which Eternally he rules
His Empire here,
Are not fantastastical and hard,
As sometimes we suppose his works,
Tho they are mysterious, are wise
And such as we should never condemn.
With how much art, through hidden ways,
And paths unknown, he leads to bliss.
And when we think him ready to destroy,
He opens Paradise, and leaves our Souls in joy.

FINIS.

