To the Right Honorable, the Lords and Common Assembled in PARLIAMENT: The
Humble Petition of the Inhabitants in the County of LINCOLN.
Shows,
THat as it cannot but make a people miserable to be over-powred with a Potent,
Vigilant, and merciless enemy; so can it not but complete their miseries to
have their own Soldiers (for want of good Discipline and order) to make up the
burden Intolerable. As we have been extremely miserable in the one, so were
we exceeding unhappy in the other, until by Gods Providence and the care of
the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, we have found redress by the
Government of Colonel Edward King, of whose fidelity, justice and valor
(together with his indefatigable labors and zeal for the good of his
Country,) we have had such experience, and the daily care he took to protect
us (as well from the violence of our Soldiers, as the outrage of the Enemy;)
that we cannot but with much thankfulness acknowledge it: But now (to our
great grief) he is taken away from his charge, by whose means or for what
cause we know not.

We therefore desire that this Honorable House will be pleased to accept of
our humble address for the said Colonel King, that under the Earl of
Manchester we may still be governed by him, through whose means by Gods
assistance we doubt not but to be put again into a condition to serve the King
and Parliament in the defense and maintenance of the true Protestant Religion,
the Privileges of Parliament, and the rights and Liberties of our selves and
Country, against all opposition. And your Petitioners shall daily pray, etc.
Die Lunae 27. Maij. 1644.
Upon the Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the County of Lincoln, desiring
Colonel Edward King to be restored to the Government of the County, under the
Earl of Manchester, was this day read, and the Gentlemen that preferred it
were called in, and did avow the Petition; And it is this d^ Ordered by the
Commons House of Parliament, That this Petition be referre^ to the Earl of
Manchester, and that the Gentlemen of Lincolnshire that a^ Members of this
House, and Sir Francis Popham do write a letter to the Ear^ of Manchester, to
acquaint him that the said Petition is referred from the House unto his
Lordships consideration.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Co^


