AN ELEGY IN MEMORY OF THE Much Esteemed and truly Worthy Ralph Marshall, Esquire
One of His Majesty's Justices of Peace, etc. By N. TATE, Servant to His MAJESTY.

Dignum Laud Virum Musa vetat Mori. Hor. LONDON: Printed by R. ROBERTS for the
Author. MDCC.

TO THE READER.
ALL that knew this Worthy Person, will see that I have endeavored to Write
his Elegy in the same honest Plainess and Sincerity with which He Lived. I
confess I was more concerned for Resemblance, in this Piece, than for Fineness
of Strokes, or Embellishment of Colors. If the Features are hit, it will be
acceptable to his Friends, for whose Consolation it was Designed. I must here
beg leave to mention one Circumstance, that is, His Intended Retirement from
Affairs of This World, that He might devote Himself, Entirely, to the Concerns
of a Better: Whither it has pleased Providence to call him sooner than Expected
by his Survivers, the Only Sufferers by his Removal. All the Reprisal we can
make upon our Loss, is (for the Benefit of our Selves and Posterity) to
Celebrate the Memory of his Exemplary Virtues: And an Epicede That does any
Justice to His Character, will be the most lasting Monument that can be made
for Him.

ELEGY ON Mr. Justice Marshall.
O Can such Worth and Virtue be Expired,
(By All Lamented, as by All Admired),
And Muses, whose Complaints should be most Loud,
Mute Mourners stand amongst the sighing Crowd?
All Rites performed, that to his Hearse belong,
And no kind Bard provide the Funeral Song?
How can they sing, whose Wit and Fancy's fled
To fetch the Arabian Phoenix Spicy Bed;
And of their Treasure Eastern Climes beguile,
To crown his Urn, and deck the Funeral Pile.
Mistaken Zeal! let Wit and Fancy rest;
And Truth be Only for this Service pressed:
Unblemished Truth, that made his Actions shine,
And graced his Life, will best Adorn his Shrine.
Erect a Pyramid; no Lesser Tomb
Can for his Merit's History have Room;
That done -- Invoke no Muse, but Only Write
What Memory, not Invention, shall Indite.
HEre MARSHAL lies, whom English Virtue crowned;
Even such as our Great Ancestors renowned.
Which, if esteemed so Generous and Sublime,
When 'twas the Mode and Practice of the Time;
O what was His! that Nobly did engage
Against a Lewd and most Degenerate Age;
And (as of Iordan's Sacred Stream it is said)
Through a Dead Sea of Vice her Current led
Clear and Untainted, as the Fountain's Head.
What Numbers can his Character relate,
Or as a Member of the Church or State?
Who though to Each a most devoted Friend,
Would Neither's Rights, in t'Other's Wrong extend;
But justly rendered, as he Wisely knew,
The Church's, Caesar's, and his Country's Due.
To Books no Stranger; Books that were of Use
He read, and into Practice did reduce:
Studied to know what Sages understood;
Yet less he studi'd to be Skilled than Good.
His Judgment, though discerning and sublime,
Disdained not to consult with Care and Time:
This rendered his Performances so vast;
Nor only great, but modeled Long to Last;
And, by Deliberation made secure,
The utmost Test of Censure will endure.
Regard to Others Sentiments he paid,
Yet still by Reason, not Opinion, swayed;
Held to old Custom's venerable Way,
Till That from Truth's more Sacred Path did stray.
Firm in Resolves, because with Caution wrought,
The last Results of well-digested Thought.
A Mind thus furnished, to complete its Store,
Could want or wish but One choice Blessing more;
Which, happy Temper did to Him dispense,
(The Gift at once of Nature and right Sense);
That Others Weakness He did never despise,
Who was Himself the Wonder of the Wise.
His Conversation by strict Prudence steered,
In which no Shadow of Offense appeared;
But of Demeanor the just Pattern gave;
Discreet in Mirth; without Moroseness, Grave.
Reserved, yet never failed in due Respect;
Showed Courtesy to All, to None Neglect:
Poor Honesty, Above its Rank, would treat;
Yet never was known to fawn upon the Great.
For Piety None could have more Esteem;
Yet Pious rather strove to Be, than seem:
Sincere as Saints; and, like true Saints, took Care
To give Religion a Becoming Air.
Nor thought it just or generous to affright
The World with That which was his own Delight.
Not fierce the Zeal that did his Breast inspire;
Though bright, and lasting, as the Vestal Fire:
Secret like That -- Yet, when from Human View
'Twas most Retired, descending Angels drew.
To Business none more vig'rously applied;
Yet with such easy Passage seemed to glide,
As if he always sailed with Wind and Tide.
Cross Gales must often in Seas of Business rise;
Cross Currents in each vaster Enterprise:
Yet, when perplexed, a painful Course he steered,
Freedom and Pleasure in his Looks appeared.
When Tempests rose, and Ruin was in View,
When All, despairing, from the Helm withdrew,
His Resolution with the Danger grew;
Performed a Pilot's part of Pains and Skill,
And left the Rest to Providence's Will.
Those very Passions that our Peace molest,
Supported the Calm Empire of his Breast;
And, tamed to Discipline, did only move
By Duty's Call, and Orders from Above.
Blessed Temper, that, through Life's uncertain Scene,
Could shun Extremes, and keep the Golden Mean;
With modest Joy receive what chanced to Please;
And to Affliction give an Air of Ease!
His Counsels we like Gems did justly prize;
Yet Oh how gen'rously would he Advise!
Or if Occasion did Assistance crave,
His Pains as free as his Advice he gave:
And if Advice and Pains would not prevail,
He cast his Interest in, to turn the Scale.
Like a Warm Sun he dealt his Beams around;
And Men of all Degrees his Influence found.
O Comfort, where such Warmth and Light were met!
O Grief, that ever such a Sun should set!
Wealth, for Wealth's sake, he never did pursue,
But for the Good well-manag'd Wealth could do:
Commanding That which sordid Souls Obeyed,
The Miser's God his useful Servant made.
Rich in Contentment with his moderate Gains,
He reaped the Harvest of his honest Pains;
Nor envied Larger Fields, by Fraud procured,
And with Extortion's poisoned Dung Manured.
His Justice would (should Fame his Justice tell)
Be Disbeliev'd -- or thought a Miracle.
'Twas such as Artless Innocence inspired,
Before Astraea from the World retired:
When every Soil produced her Grain, Untilled,
And Honey-Drops from every Tree distilled:
When Angels had of Mortals little Odds;
Earth seemed a Heaven, and Men a Race of Gods.
But One Celestial Flower is wanting yet,
The Garland of his Virtues to complete:
His Charity -- Still loath to come in View,
As heretofore she modestly withdrew
From the World's Eye; and fell like Midnight Dew.
Whenever a Public Visit she did make,
'Twas not for Pomp, but good Example's sake:
To clamorous Want more sparingly she gave;
But Went to such as could not Come to Crave;
Stole, to Domestic Poverty, her Way,
That Sick and Gasping in Obsourement lay:
Distress of every kind employed her Care,
But modest Misery had the Largest Share.
From hence the vast Success we understand
Of every Work that MARSHAL took in Hand.
What could he not, with Prudence for his Guide,
And Providence, in secret League Allied?
Where will the Chain of his just Praises end,
Should Fame as far her Elogy extend?
Where shall she Write --
The Husband, Father, Master, and the Friend?
Happy the Realm where Government's maintained
Like that which in his private Household reigned;
The Mansion, where, as in some Patriarch's Tent,
Peace, Piety, and Angels did frequent.
Yes -- There so long they made their Residence,
Till They, in kind Surprizal, bore him Thence.
They watched their Time to make Him now their Guest,
And gently stole Him to Eternal Rest.
Few Months had his long-wish'd Retirement given,
Which is on Earth, the nearest Stage to Heaven;
But Heaven, as if Impatient of Delay,
Sent down to meet the Elijah on his Way.
FINIS.

