Lingua: OR THE COMBAT OF The Tongue, AND THE Five SENSES FOR SUPERIORITY. A
pleasant Comoedy.

London, Printed for Simon Miller, at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

LINGUA. DRAMMATIS Personae.
LINGUA. COMOEDUS. TRACAEDUS.
AUDITUS. MENDACIO, LINGUA his Page. TACTUS. OLFACTUS. ODOR TOBACCO.
VISUS. LUMEN. COELUM. TERRA. HERALDRY. COLOR.
GUSTUS. BACCHUS. CERUS. BEER.
APPETITUS a Parasite. PHANTASTES. HEURESIS, PHANTASTES his Page. CRAPULA,
GUSTUS his Follower. COMMUNIS SENSUS. MEMORIA. ANAMNESTES, MEMORY his Page.
SOMNUS. Personae quarum mentio tantum fit. PSENCE. ARCASIA. VERITAS. OELIVIO.

The Scene is MICROCOSMUS in a Grove.

The Time, from Morning till night.

Prologue.
OUr Muse describes no Lovers passion,
No wretched Father, no unthrifty Son:
No craving subtle Whore, or shameless Bawd,
Nor stubborn Clown, or daring Parasite,
No lying Servant, or bold Sycophant.
We are not wanton, or Satyricall.
These have their time and places fit, but we
Sad hours, and serious studies, to reprive,
Have taught severe Philosophy to smile.
The Senses rash contentions we compose,
And give displeased ambitious TONGUE her due:
Here Is all Judicious friends; accept what is not ill,
Who are not such, let them do what they will.
Actus 1. Scena 1.
LINGUA, apparelled in a Crimson Satin gown, a Dressing of white Roses, a
little Skean tied in a purple Skarf, a pair of red Buskins drawn with white
Ribband, silk garters, gloves, etc.

AUDITUS, in a Garland of Bays intermingled with red and white Roses upon a
false hayr, a cloth of Silver Mantle upon a pair of Satin Bases, wrought
sleeves, Buskins, Gloves, etc.

LINGUA. AUDITUS. LING. NAy good Auditus do but hear me speak.

AND. Lingua thou strik'st too much upon one string,
Thy tedious plain-song grates my tender ears.

LING. It Is plain indeed, for Truth no descant needs,
Vna's her name, she cannot be divided.

AND. O but the ground it self is naught, from whence
Thou can not relish out a good division:
Therefore at length surcease, prove not stark mad,
Hopeless to prosecute a hapless suit:
For though (perchance) thy first strains pleasing are,
I dare engage mine ears, the cloze will jarre.

LING. If then your confidence esteem my cause,
To be so frivolous and weakly wrought:
Why do you daily subtle plots devise,
To stop me from the ears of common Sense,
Whom since our great Queen Psyche has ordained,
For his sound wisdom, our Vice-governour,
To him, and to his two so wise assistants,
Nimble Phantastes, and firm Memory:
My self and cause, I humbly do commit,
Let them but hear and judge, I wish no more,

AND. Should they but know thy rash presumption,
They would correct it in the sharpest sort:
Good Jove what Sense have thou to be a Sense;
Since from the first foundation of the world,
We never were accounted more then five;
Yet you forsooth, an idle prating Dame,
Would fain increase the number, and up-start
To our high seats, decking your babbling self
With usurpt Titles of our dignity.

LING. An idle prating dame: know fond Auditus,
Records affirm my title full as good,
As his amongst the five is counted best.

AND Lingua confess the truth, thou art wont to lie,

LING. I say so too, therefore I do not lie,
But now spite of you all I speak the truth.
You five among us subjects tyrannize,
Making the sacred name of common Sense,
A cloak to cover your enormities:
He bears the rule, he is judge, but judges still,
As he is informed by your false evidence:
So that a plaintiff cannot have access,
But through your gates he hears but what, naught else
But that thy crafty ears to him conveys,
And all he sees is by proud Visus showed him:
And what he touches is by Tactus hand,
And smells I know but through Olfactus nose,
Gustus begins to him what ere he tastes:
By these quaint tricks free passage has been barred
That I could never equally be heard.
But well, it is well.

AND. Lingua thy feeble sex,
Has hitherto withheld my ready hands
That longed to pluck that nimble instrument.

LING. O horrible ingratitude? that thou
That thou of all the rest should threaten me:
Who by my means conceiv'st as many tongues,
As Neptune closes Lands betwixt his arms:
The ancient Hebrew clad with mysteres,
The learned Greek rich in fit Epithetes,
Blessed in the lovely marriage of pure words,
The Chaldee Wise, the Arabian Physical,
The Roman Eloquent, the Tuscane Grave,
The Braving Spanish, and the smooth tong'd French,
These precious Jewels that adorn thine ears,
All from my mouths rich Cabbinet are stolen,
How often have thou been chained unto my tongue,
Hanged at my lips and ravished with my words,
So that a speech fair fether'd could not fly:
But thy ears pit-fall caught it instantly,
But now O Heavens!

AND. O Heavens, thou wrong'st me much,
Thou wrong'st me much thus falsely to upbraid me:
Had not I granted thee the use of hearing,
That sharp edged tongue whetted against her master,
Those puffing lungs, those teeth, those dropsy lips,
That scalding throat, those nosthrils full of ire:
Thy palate proper instruments of speech,
Like to the winged chanters of the wood,
Uttring naught else but idle stiflements,
Tunes without sense, words inarticulate:
Had never been able to have abused me thus.
Words are thy Children, but of my begetting.

LING. Perfidious Liar, how can I endure thee?
Cal'st my unspotted chastity in Question:
O could I use the Breath mine anger spends,
I Would make thee know.

AND. Heaven look on my distress,
Defend me from this railing viperesse:
For if I stay her words, sharp vinegar
Will fret me through, Lingua I must be gone:
I hear one call me more then earnestly. Exit Auditus.

LING. Nay the loud cannoning of thunderbolts,
Screeking of Wolves, houling of tortured Ghosts,
Pursue thee still, and fill thy amazed ears
With cold astonishment and horrid fears:
O how these senses muffle common sense:
And more, and more with pleasing objects strive,
To dull his judgment, and pervert his will
To their be-hests, who were he not so wrapped
IN the dusky clouds of their dark policies,
Would never suffer right to suffer wrong:
Fie Lingua will thou now degenerate?
Art not a woman, do not love revenge?
Delightful speeches, sweet persuasions
I have this long time used to get my right,
My right that is to make the Senses six;
And have both name and power with the rest.
Often have I seasoned savory periods,
With sugared words, to delude Gustus taste,
And often embelisht my entreative phrase
With smelling flowers of vernant Rhetorique,
Limming and flashing it with various Dies,
To draw proud Visus to me by the eyes:
And often perfumed my petitory style,
With Civet-speech, to entrap Olfactus Nose,
And clad my self in Silken Eloquence,
To allure the nicer touch of Tactus hand,
But all is become lost labor, and my cause
Is still procrastinated; therefore now,
Hence ye base offspring of a broken mind,
Supple entreaties and smooth flatteries:
Go kiss the lovesick lips of puling Guls,
That still their Brain to quench their loves disdain;
Go guild the tongues of Bawds and Parasites,
Come not within my thoughts; But thou Deceit,
Break up the pleasure of my Brim-full breast,
Enrich my mind with subtle policies.
Well then I Will go, whither? nay, what know I?
And do, in faith I will, the devil knows what,
What if I set them all at variance,
And so obtein to speak, it must be so.
It must be so, but how? there lies the point:
How? thus t tut this device will never prove,
Augment it so, 'twill be too soon descri'd,
Or so, nor so it is too too dangerous.
Pish, none of these, what if I take this course? ha?
Why there it goes, good, good, most excellent.
He that will catch Eels must disturb the flood,
The Chicken's hatched in faith; for they are proud,
And soon will take a cause of disagreement.

ACTUS 1. SCENA. 2.
MENDACIO, attired in a Taffata suit of a light color changeable, like an
ordinary Page, Gloves, Hamper. LINGUA. MENDACIO. LING. I see the heavens nurse
my newborn device,
For lo my Page Mendacio comes already,
To file and burnish that I hammered out,
Never in better time Mendacio,
What? have thou done?

MEN. Done, yes long ago.


LING. Is It possible? thou should dispatch so soon?


MEN. Madame, I had no sooner told
Tactus, that Gustus would fain speak with him:
But I spied Visus, Gustus and the rest,
And served them all with sauce of several lies,
Now the last Sense I spoke with was Olfactus,
Who having smelt the meaning of my message,
Straight blew his nose, and quickly pust me hither;
But in the whirl-winde of his furious blast,
Had not by chance a Cobweb held me fast,
Mendacio had been with you long ere this.

LING. Witness this lie, Mendacio's with me now,
But sir out of jesting will they come?

MEND. Yes and it like your Ladyship presently;
Here may you have me pressed to flatter them.

LING. I Will flatter no such proud Companions.
'Twill do no good, therefore I am determined
To leave such baseness.

MEN. Then shall I turn and bid them stay at home.


LING. No, for their coming hither to this grove,
Shall be a means to further my device;
Therefore I pray thee Mendacio go presently,
Run you vile Ape.

MEN. Whither?


LING. What? do thou stand?


MEN. Till I know what to do.


LING. S. precious it is true,
So might thou finely outrun thine errand.
Have to my Chest.

MEN. I, I.


LING. There shall thou find,
A gorgeous Robe, and golden Coronet,
Convey them hither nimbly, let none see them.

MEN. Madam, I fly, I fly.

Exit Mendacio.
LING. But here you sir?
Lock up your fellow Servant, Veritas.

MEND. I warrant you,
You need not fear, so long as I am with you.
He goes out, and comes in presently. What color is the Robe?

LING. There is but one.


Mendacio going, turns in have. MEN. The Key Madam, the Key.


LING. By Juno how forgetful is sudden speed.
Here take it, Run.

MEN. I Will be here instantly.

Exit Mendacio.
ACT. 1. SCEN. 3.
LINGUA Sola. LING. Whilome this Crown and gorgious ornament,
Were the great prize, for which five Orators,
With the sharp weapons of their tongues contended:
But all their speeches were so equal wrought,
And a-like gracious, that if his were witty
His was as wise; the thirds fair eloquence
Did parallel the fourths firm gravity,
The lasts good gesture kept the Balance even
With all the rest, so that the sharpest eye,
And most judicious censor could not judge
To whom the hanging victory should fall,
Therefore with one consent they all agreed,
To offer up both Crown and Robe to me,
As the chief patroness of their profession,
Which heretofore I holily have kept,
Like to a misers gold, to look on only.
But now I Will put them to a better use,
And venture both in hope to --

ACT. 1. SCEN. 4.
MENDACIO. LINGUA. MEND. Have not I hied me Madam? look you here,
What shall be done with these temptations?

LING. They say a golden Ball,
Bred enmity betwixt three Goddesses,
So shall this Crown be author of debate,
Betwixt five Senses.

MEND. Where shall it be laid?


LING. There, there, there, it is well, so, so, so.


MEND. A Crown's a pleasing bait to look upon,
The craftiest Fox will hardly escape this trap.

LING. Come let us away, and leave it to the chance.


MEND Nay rather let me stand close here-abouts,
And see the event.

LING. Do so, and if they doubt
How it came there, fain them some pretty fable,
How that some God --

MEND. Tut, tut, tut, let me alone,
I that have fained so many hundred Gods,
Can easily forge some fable for the turn:
Whist Madame, away, away, you fright the Fowl,
Tactus comes hard by, look you,

LING. Is It he for certain?


MEND. Yes, yes, yes, it is he.


LING. It Is he indeed

Exit Lingua.
ACT. 1. SCEN. 5.
TACTUS, in a dark colored Satin mantle over a pair of silk Basis, a Garland
of Bays mixed with white and red Roses, upon a black Grogram, a Faulchion,
wrought sleeves, Buskins, etc. MENDACIO. TACTUS. MEN. Now chaste Diana grant my
Nets to hold!


TACT. The blasting Childhood of the cheerful morn
Is almost grown a youth and over-climbes
Yonder gilt Eastern hills, about which time,
Gustus most earnestly importuned me,
To meet him here abouts, what cause I know not.

MEN. You shall do shortly to your cost I hope.


TACT. Sure by the Sun it should be Nine a clock.


MEN. What a Star-gazer, will you nere look down?


TACT. Clear is the Sun and blew the Firmament,
Me thinks the Heavens do smile.
Tactus Sneezeth.
-- MEN. At thy mishap.
To look so high and stumble in a trap.

Tactus stumbleth at the Robe and Crown. TAC. High thoughts have slippry feet,
I had well nie fallen.


MEN. Well does he fall that rises with a fall.


TACT. What Is this!


MEN. O are you taken, it is in vain to strive.


TACT. How now!


MEN. You Will be so entangled straight.


TACT. A Crown!


MEN. That it will be heard.


TACT. And a Robe!


MEN. To lose your self.


TACT. A Crown and a Robe.


MEN. It had been fitter for you, to have found a Fools Coat and a Babble, hey,
hey.


TAC. Jupiter, Jupiter how came this here?


MEN. O Sir Jupiter is making Thunder, he hears you not, here is one knows
better.


TAC. It Is wondrous rich, ha, but sure it is not so, ho,
Do I not sleep and dream of this good luck, ha?
No I am awake and feel it now
Whose should it be?
He takes it up.
MEN. Set up a Si quis for it.


TAC. Mercury, All Is mine own, here is none to cry half's mine.


MEN. When I am gone.


Exit Mendacio* ACT. 1. SCEN. 6.
TACTUS solus. TACT. Tactus thy sneezing somewhat did portend*
Was ever man so fortunate as I?
To break his shinnes at such a stumbling Block.
Roses and Baies pack hence: this Crown and Robe,
My Brows and Body circles and invests.
How gallantly it fits me, sure the slave,
Measured my head that wrought this Coronet.
They lie that say Complexions cannot change:
My Blood's ennobled, and I am transformed,
Unto the sacred temper of a King:
Methink I here my noble Parasites
Styling me Caesar, or great Alexander,
Licking my feet, and wondering where I got
This precious ointment: how my pace is mended,
How Princely do I speak, how sharp I threaten:
Peasants I Will curb your headstrong impudence:
And make you tremble when the Lion roars,
Yea earth-bred worms, O for a looking glass:
Poets will write whole Volumes of this Change:
Where Is my attendants? Come hither Sir quickly,
Or by the wings of Hermes. --

ACT. 1. SCEN. 7.
OLFACTUS, in a Garland of Bays intermingled with white and red Roses upon a
false hair, his sleeves wrought with flowers under a Damaskt mantle over a pair
of silk Bases, a pair of Buskins drawn with riband, a flower in his hand.
TACTUS. OLFACTUS. TACT. Ay me Olfactus comes, I called too soon,
He Will have half part I fear; what shall I do?
Where shall I run? how shall I shift him off?
Tactus wraps up the Robe and Crown, and sits upon them.
OLF. This is the time and this the place appointed,
Where Visus promised to confer with me.
I think he is there -- No, no, it is Tactus sure.
How now? What makes you sit so nicely?

TACT. It Is past imagination, it is so indeed.


OLF How fast his deeds are fixed, and how melancholy he looks. Tactus, Tactus.


TACT. For this is true Man's life is wondrous brittle.


OLF. He Is mad I think, he talks so idly, so ho, Tactus.


TACT. And many have been metamorphosed,
To stranger matters and more uncouth forms.

OLF. I must go nearer him, he does not hear.


TACT. And yet methinks, I speak as I was wont
And --

OLF. Tactus, Tactus.


TACT. Olfactus as thou love come not near me,


OLF. Why? art thou hatching eggs thou art feared to break them?


TACT. Touch me not lest thou chance to break my life.


OLF. What Is this under thee?


TACT. If thou meddle with me I am utterly undone.


OLF. Why man, what ayls thee?


TACT. Let me alone and I Will tell thee,
Lately I came from fine Fantastes house.

OLF. So I believe for thou art very foolish.


TACT. No sooner had I parted out of doors,
But up I held my hands before my face:
To shield mine eyes from th'lights piercing beams,
When I protest I saw the Sun as clear,
Through these my palms, as through a prospective:
No marvel, for when I beheld my fingers,
I saw my fingers near transformed to glass,
Opening my Breast, my Breast was like a window,
Through which I plainly did perceive my heart:
In whose two Concaves I discerned my thoughts,
Confus'ly lodged in great multitudes.

OLF. Ha, ha, ha, ha, why this is excellent,
Momus himself can find no fault with thee,
Thou'st make a passing live Anatomy.
And decide the Question much disputed,
Betwixt the Galenists and Aristotle.

TACT. But when I had ariv'd and set me down,
Viewing my self, my self ay me was changed.
As thou now see to a perfect Urinal.

OLF. T'a perfect Urinal, O monstrous, monstrous, art not mad to think so?


TACT. I do not think so, but I say I am so;
Therefore Olfactus come not near I advise you.

OLF. See the strange working of dull melancholy;
Whose drossie drying the feeble Brain,
Corrupts the sense, deludes the Intellect.
And in the souls fair table falsely graves,
Whole squadrons of fantastical Chimera's,
And thousand vain imaginations:
Making some think their heads as big as horses,
Some that they are dead, some that they are turned to Wolves:
As now it makes him think himself all glass,
Tactus dissuade thy self, thou do but think so.

TACT. Olfactus if thou love me get thee gone,
I am an Urinal I dare not stir,
For fear of cracking in the Bottom.

OLF. Will thou sit thus all day?


TACT. Unless thou help me.


OLF. Bedlam must help thee, what would have me do?


TACT. Go to the City make a Case fit for me:
Stuff it with wool, then come again and fetch.

OLF. Ha, ha, ha, thou wilt be laughed out of case and countenance.


TACT. I care not, so it must be, or I cannot stir.


OLF. I had best leave troubling him, he is obstinate, (Urinal I leave you) but
above all things take heed Jupiter sees you not, for if he do, he will nere make
water in sive again; thou wilt serve his turn so fit to carry his water unto
Aesculapius, Farewell Urinal, Farewell.


TACT. Speak not so loud, the sound's enough to crack me, What is he gone? I an
Urinal, ha, ha, ha, I protest I might have had my face washed finely, if he had
meant to abuse me: I an Urinal, ha, ha, ha, go to, Urinal you have escaped a fair
scouring, well I Will away, and get me to mine own house, there I Will lock up my
self fast, playing the Chimick, augmenting this one Crown to troops of Angels,
with which gold-winged messengers, I mean,

To work great wonders, as to build and purchase,
Fare daintily, tie up men's tongues, and loose them,
Command their lives, their goods, their liberties,
And captive all the world with chains of gold:
Hey, hey, tery linkum tinkum.
He offers to go out, but comes in suddenly amazed. O Hercules!
Fortune the Queen delights to play with me,
Stopping my passage with the sight of Visus;
But as he makes hither, I Will make hence,
There Is more ways to the wood than one.
He offers to go out at the other door, but returns again in have. What more
Devils to affright me?
O Diabolo, Gustus comes here to vex me:
So that I poor wretch, am like a Shittle-cock betwixt two Battledoors, If I
run there, Visus beats me to Scilla, If here, then Gustus blows me to Carybdis.
Neptune has sworn my hope shall suffer shipwreck..
What shall I say?
Mine Urinal's too thin to bide the fury of such storms as these.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 8.
VISUS, in a Garland of Bays, mixed with white and red Roses, a light colored
Taffata mantle striped with silver, and fringed upon green silk Bases, Buskins,
etc.

GUSTUS, in the same fashion, differing only in color.

TACTUS, in a corner of the Stage.

VISUS. GUSTUS. TACTUS. VIS. Gustus good day.


GUST. I cannot have a bad,
Meeting so fair an omen as your self.

TACT. Shall I? wilt prove? ha? well it is best to venture.

Tactus puts on the Robes.
GUST. Saw you not Tactus, I should speak with him.


TACT Perchance so, a sudden lie has best luck.


VIS. That face is his, or else mine eye's deceived,
Why how now Tactus, what so gorgious?

GUST. Where did thou get these fair habiliments?


TACT. Stand back I charge you as you love your lives,
By Stix, the first that touches me shall die.

VIS. I can discern no weapons, will he kill us?


TACT. Kill you? not I, but come not near me you had best.


VIS. Why, art thou mad?


TACT. Friends as you love your lives,
Venture not once to come within my reach.

GUST. Why do threaten so?


TACT. I do not threaten, but in pure love advise you for the best,
Dare not to touch me, but hence fly apace,
Add wings unto your feet and save your lives.

VIS. Why what is the matter Tactus prithee tell me?


TACT. If you will needs jeopard your lives so long,
As hear the ground of my amazedness,
Then for your better safety stand aside.

GUST. How full of ceremonies, sure he will conjure,
For such like Robes Magicians use to wear.

VIS. I Will see the end, though he should unlock Hell:
And set the infernal haggs at liberty.

TACT. How rash is man on hidden arms to rush!
It was my chance, O chance most miserable!
To walk that way that to Crumena leads.

GUST. You mean Cremona a little Town hard by.


TACT. I say Crumena, called Vacua,
A Town which does, and always has belonged,
Chiefly to Scholars: from Crumena walls,
I saw a man came stealing craftily,
Apparelled in this vesture which I wear,
But seeing me est-soons, he took his heels,
And threw his garment from him all in have,
Which I perceiving to be richly wrought,
Took it me up: But good now get you gone,
Warned by my harms, and escape my misery.

VIS. I know no danger, leave these circumstances.


TAC. No sooner had I put it on my back,
But suddenly mine eyes began to dim,
My joints wax sore, and all my body burn
With most intestine torture, and at length,
It was too evident, I had caught the plague.

VIS. The plague, away good Gustus lets be gone,
I doubt it is true, now I remember me,
Crumena Vacua never wants the plague.

GUST. Tactus I Will put my self in jeopardy to pleasure thee.


TACT. No gentle Gustus, your absence is the only thing I wish,
Lest I infect you with my company.

GUST. Farewell. Exit Gustus.


VIS. I willingly would stay to do thee good.


TACT. A thousand thanks, but since I needs must die,
Let it suffice, death only murders me,
Oh 'twould augment the dolor of my death,
To know my self the most unhappy Bow,
Through which pale death should aim his shafts at you.

VIS. Tactus farewell, yet die with this good hope,
Thy corpse shall be interred as they ought. Exit Visus.

TAC. Go make my Tomb, provide my funerals, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Excellent Asses thus to be deluded,
Bewail his death and cruel destinies,
That lives, and laughs your fooleries to scorn,
But where is my Crown, oh here: I well deserve,
Thus to be crowned for two great victories, ha, ha, ha,
Visus take care my corpse be well interred:
Go make my Tomb, and write upon the Stone;
Here lies the Sense, that lying gul'd them all,
With a false plague, and fained Vrinal.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 9.
AUDITUS. TACTUS. AND. Tactus, Tactus


TACT. O Jupiter, it is Auditus, all is mard, I doubt the sly knave hears so
far, but yet I Will grope him: how now Ears, what make you here, ha?


AND. Nay, what make you here, I pray what were you talking even now, of an
Ass, and a Crown, and an Urinal, and a plague?


TA. A plague on you, what I?


AND. Oh, what you.


TA O I had well nigh forgot nothing, but I say --


AND. What?


TAC. That if a man (do you mark sir) being sick of the plague (do you see sir)
had a, a, a, hem, hem, (this cold troubles me, It makes me cough sometimes
extremely,) had a French Crown, (sir you understand me) lying by him, and (come
hither, come hither) and would not bestow two pence (do you hear) to buy an
Urinal (do you mark me) to carry his water to the Physician, (hem)


AND. What of all this?


TACT. I say such a one was a very Ass, this was all I use to speak to my
self, when I am alone; but Auditus, when shall we hear a new set of singing
books, or th'viols, or the consort of Instruments.


AND. This was not all, for I heard mention of a Tomb, and an Epitaph.


TACT. True, true, I made my self merry with this Epitaph, upon such a fools
Tomb thus a, thus, thus, plague brought this man, (foh I have forgotten) O
thus, plague brought this man (so, so, so) unto his burial, because, because,
because, (hem, hem) because he would not buy an Urinal, come, come Auditus,
shall we hear thee play, the Lyroway, or the Lute-way shall we, or the Cornet,
or any Music, I am greatly revived when I hear.


AND. Tactus, Tactus, this will not serve, I heard all, you have not found a
Crown: you, no, you have not.


ACT. 1. SCEN. Vltima.
TACTUS. AUDITUS. VISUS. GUSTUS. MENDACIO. TACT. Peace, peace, faith peace,
come hither, hark thee good now.


AND. I cannot hold I must needs tell.


TACT. O do not, do not, do not, come hither, will you be a fool?


VIS. Had he not wings upon his feet and shoulders?


MEN Yes, yes, and a fine wand in his hand,
Coriously wrapped with a pair of snakes.

TACT. Will half content you, pish 'twill nere be known.


GUST. My life, 'twas Mercury.


MEND. I do not know his name, but this I am sure his hat had wings upon it.


VIS. Doubtless 'twas he, but say my Boy what did he?


MEND. First I beheld him hovering in the air,
And then down stooping with a hundred gires:
His feet he fixed on Mount Chephalon,
From whence he flew and lighted on that plain,
And with disdainful steps soon glided thither:
Whither arived, he suddenly unfolds
A gorgeous Robe, and glittering ornament,
And lays them all, upon that hillock:
This done he wafts his wand, took wing again,
And in a moment vanished out of sight,
With that mine eyes 'gan stare, and heart grew cold,
And all my quivering joints with sweat bedewed:
My heels my thought had wings as well as his,
And so away I run; but by the way,
I met a man as I thought coming thither,

GUST. What marks had he?


MEND. He had a great -- what this is he, this is he:


VIS. What Tactus?


GUST. This was the plague vexed him so, Tactus your Grave gapes for you, are
you ready?


VIS. Since you must needs die, do as others do,
Leave all your goods behind you; bequeath the
Crown and Robe to your Executors.

TACT. No such matter, I like the Egyptian Knights,
^or the more state, will be buried in them.

VIS. Come, come, deliver:


Visus snatcheth the Crown and sees letters graven in it. TACT. What will you
take my purse from me?


VIS. No but a Crown, that is just more then your own.
Ha, what is this? it is a very small hand,
What Inscription is this?
He of the five that proves himself the best,
Shall have his Temples with this Coronet blessed.
This Crown is mine, and mine this garment is,
For I have always been accounted best.

TACT. Next after me, I as your self at any time: besides I found it first,
therefore it is mine.


GUST. Neither of yours but mine as much as both.


AND. And mine the most of any of you all.


VIS. Give me it or else --


TACT. I Will make you late repent it -- -- --


GUST. Presumptuous as you are -- -- --


AND. Spite of your teeth -- --


MEND. Never till now* a ha, it works apace,
Visus I know it is yours, and yet methinks,
Auditus you should have some challenge to it,
But that your title Tactus is so good:
Gustus I would swear the Coronet were yours,
What will you all go braule about a trifle:
View but the pleasant coast of Microcosm,
Is It not great pity to be rent with wars,
Is It not a shame, to stain with brinish tears,
The smiling cheeks of ever-cheerfull peace,
Is It not far better to live quietly,
Than broyl in fury of dissension;
Give me the Crown, ye shall not disagree,
If I can please you; I Will play Paris part,
And most unpartial judge the controversy:

VIS. Sauce-box go meddle with your Ladies fan, and prate not here.


MEN. I speak not for my self, but for my Countries safe commodity.


VIS. Sir be still.


MEND. Nay and you be so hot, the devil part you,
I Will to Olfactus and send him amongst you.
O that I were Alecto for your sakes:
How liberally would I bestow my snakes.
Exit Mend.
VIS. Tactus upon thine honor,
I challenge thee to meet me here,
Strong as thou can provide in th'afternoon.

TAC. I undertake the Challenge, and here is my hand,
In sign thou shall be answered.

GUST. Tactus I Will join with thee, on this condition,
That if we win, he that fought best of us,
Shall have the Crown, the other wear the Robe.

TACT. Give me your hand, I like the motion.


VIS. Auditus shall we make our forces double,
Upon the same terms.

AND. Very willingly:


VIS Come lets away, fear not the victory.
Right's more advantage, than an host of soldiers.

Exeunt omnes. Finis. Act. primi.
Actus 2. Scena 1.
APPETITUS, A long lean Raw-bon'd fellow in a Soldiers coat, a sword, etc.
MENDACIO. APPETITUS. MEND. I long to see those hot-spur senses at it, they say
they have gallant preparations, and not unlikely, for most of the soldiers are
ready in Arms since the last field fought against their yearly enemy Meleager,
and his wife Acrasia; that Conquest has so flesht them, that no peace can hold
them. But had not Meleager been sick, and Acrasia drunk, the senses might have
whistled for the victory.


APP. Foh, what a stink of gunpowder is yonder?


MEND. Who Is this! oh, oh, it is Appetitus, Gustus his hungry Parasite.


APP. I cannot endure the smoking of Gunnes, the thundering of drums, I had
rather hear the merry hacking of pot herbs, and see the reaking of a hot Capon.
If they would use no other Bucklers in war, but shields of Brawn, brandish no
swords but sweards of Bacon, trail no spears, but sparribs of Pork, and instead
of Harquebuss pieces discharge Hartichockpies, toss no pikes but boiled
Pickrels, then Appetitus would rouse up his crest, and bear up himself with the
proudest.


MEND. Ah here is a youth stark naught at a trench but old dog at a trencher, a
tall squire at a square table


APP. But now my good masters must pardon me I am not for their service, for
their service is without service, and indeed their service is too hot for my
diet. But what, If I be not my self, but only this be my spirit that wanders up
and down, and Appetitus be kil^ in the Camp, the Devil he is as soon, how is
tha^ possible? tut, tut, I know I am, I, I am Appetitus, and alive too, by this
Infallible token, that I feel my sel^ hungry.


MEND. Thou might have taken a better token o^ thy self, by knowing thou art
a fool.


APP. Well then, though I made my fellow souldier^ admire the beauty of my
back, and wonder at the nimblenesse of my heels, yet now will I at safety a^
home, tell in what dangers they are abroad, I Will spea^ nothing but guns, and
glaves, and staves, and phalanges, and squadrons, and barracadoes, ambuscadoes,
palmedoes blank point dept, counterpoint, counterscraf, sallies, and lies,
saladoes, tarantantaras, ranta, tara, tara, hey.


MEND. I must take the fife out of his mouth, or he will nere adone*


APP. But above all I Will be sure on my knees to thank the great --


Mendacio blinds him. MEND. Who am I, who am I, who I?


APP. By the bloud-stain'd fauchion of Mauors -- I am on your side


MEND. Why, who am I?


APP. Are you a soldier?


MEND. No.


APP. Then you are master Helluo the Bear-ward,


MEND. No, no, he is dead.


APP. Or Gulono the gutty Sergeant, or Delphino the Vintner, or else I know you
not, for these are all my acquaintance.


MEN. Would I were hanged, if I be any of these,


APP What Mendacio, by the faith of a Knight thou art welcome, I must borrow
thy Whetstone to sharpen the edges of my martial complements.


MEN. By the faith of a Knight, what a pox, where are thy Spurs?


APP. I need no spurs, I ride like Pegasus on a winged horse, on a swift
Gennet, my Boy, called fear.


MEN. What should thou fear in the wars? he is not a good soldier that has
not a good stomach.


APP. O, but the stink of powder spoils Appetitus stomach, and then thou
know when it is gone, Appetitus is dead, therefore I very manfully drew my
sword, and flourisht it bravely about mine ears, kissed, and finding my self
hurt, most manfully run away.


MEND. All heart indeed, for thou ran'st like a Heart out of the field:
It seems then the Senses mean to fight it out.

APP. I, and out-fight themselves I think, and all about a trifle, a paltry
babble, found I know not where.


MEN. Thou art deceived, they fight for more then that, a thing called
Superiority, of which the Crow^ is but an Emblem.


APP. Mendacio hang this Superiority, Crown me no Crown but Bacchus Crown of
Roses, give me no Scepter, but a far (apons leg, to show tha^ I am the great
King of Hungary, therefore I prethe^ talk no more of State-matters, but in
brief, tell me my little rascal, how thou have spent thy time this many a day?


MEN Faith in some credit since thou saw me last*


APP. How so, where?


MEN. Every where; in the Court your Gentlewomen hang me at their Apron
strings, and that makes them answer so readily. In the City I am honored like
a God, none so well acquainted with your Tradesmen: your Lawyers all the Term
time hire me of my Lady, your Gallants if they hear my name abused, they stab
for my sake: your Travelers so dote upon me as passes, O they have good
reason, for I have carried them to many a good meal, under the Countenance of
my familiarity: Nay your Statesmen have oftentimes closely conveyed me under
their tongues, to make their policies more current: As for old men they
challenge my Company by authority.


APP. I am exceeding glad of your great promotion.


MEND. Now when I am disposed, I can Philophy it in the University, with the
subtilest of them all.


APP. I cannot be persuaded that thou art acquainted with Scholars ever since
thou were pressed to death in a Print-house.


MEND. No, why I was the first founder of the three sects of Philosophy, except
one of the Peripateticks who acknowledge Aristotle (I confess) their great
Grandfather.


APP. Thou Boy, how is this possible? thou art but a Child and there were sects
of Philosophy before thou were born.


MEND. Appetitus, thou mistakest me, I tell thee, 3000 years ago was Mendacio
born in Greece, nursed in Creete, and ever since honored every where: I Will be
sworn I held old Homers pen when he writ his Iliads and his Odysses.


APP. Thou had need, for I hear say he was blind.


MEND. I helped Herodotus to pen some part of his Muses, lent Pliny ink to
write his History, rounded Rabalais in the ear when he historified Pantagruell;
as for Lucian, I was his Genius, O those two Books De Vera Historia, howsoever
they go under his Name, I Will be sworn I write them every tittle.


APP. Sure as I am Hungry, thou'st have it for lying. But have thou rusted this
later time for want of exercise?


MEND. Nothing less, I must confess I would fain have jogged Stow and great
Hollinshead on their elbows, when they were about their Chronicles, and as I
remember Sir John Mandevils Travels, and a great part of the Decads were of my
doing. But for the mirror of Knighthood, Bevis of Southampton, Palmerin of
England, Amadis of Gaul, Huon de Bordeaux, Sir Guy of Warwick, Martin
mar-prelate, Robin-hood, Garragantua, Gevilion, and a thousand such exquisite
monuments as these, no doubt but they breathe on my breath up and down.


APP. Downwards I Will swear, for there is stinking lies in them.


MEND. But what should I light a Candle to the bright Sun shine of my
glorious renown, the whole world is full of Mendacios fame.


APP. And so it will be so long as the world is full of fame.


MEND. But Sir, how have thou done this long time?


APP. In as much request as thy self. To begin with the Court, as thou did, I
lie with the Ladies all night, and that is the reason they call for Cullies, and
Gruellies so early before their prayers, your Gallants never sup, breakfast or
beaver without me.


MEND. That Is false, for I have seen them eat with a full stomach.


APP. True, but because they know a little thing drives me from them, therefore
in midst of meat they present me with some sharp sauce or a dish of delicate
Anchoves, or a Caviare, to entice me back again; nay more, your old Sirs that
hardly go without a prop, will walk a mile or two every day to renew their
acquaintance with me, as for the Academy, it is beholding to me for adding the
eighth province unto noble Heptarchy of the liberal sciences.


MEND. What Is that I prithee.


APP. The most desired and honorable art of Cookery.
Now Sir in the City I am -- st, st.
O the body of a Louse.

MEND. What art a louse in the City?


APP. Not a word more, for yonder comes Phantastes, and some body else.


MEND. What a pox can Phantastes do?


APP. Work a miracle if he would prove wise.


MEND. It Is he indeed, the vilest nup: yet the fool loves me exceedingly, but I
care not for his company, for if he once catch me, I shall never be rid of him.


Exeunt. Appet. and Mend. ACTUS 2. SCENA. 2.
PHANTASTES, A swart complexion'd fellow, but quick eyed, in a white Satin
doublet of one fashion, green velvet hose of another: A fantastical has with
a plume of feathers of several colors, a little short taffaty cloak, a pair of
Buskins cut, drawn out with sundry colored Ribands, with scarfs hung about
him, after all fashions, and of all colors, rings, Jewels, a Fan, and in
every place other odd complements.

HEURESIS, A nimble sprighted page in the newest fashion, with a garland of
Bays, etc.

PHANTASTES. HEURESIS. PHAN. Sir Boy Heuresis? boy how now biting your nails?


HEU. Three things have troubled my brain this many a day, and just now, when I
was laying hold on the Invention of them, your sudden call, made them like
Tantalus apples, fly from my fingers.


PH. Some great matters questionless, what were they?


HEU. The quadrature of a circle, the Philosophers stone, and the next way to
the Indies.


PH. Thou do well to meditate on these three things at once, for they will be
found out altogether, ad gracas calendas, but let them pass, and carry the
conceit I told you this morning, to the party you wot of. In my imagination
it is Capritious, 'twill take I warrant thee.


HEU. I will Sir: But what say you to the Gentleman that was with you yesterday?


PH. O I think thou meanest him that made nineteen sonnets of his Mistress
Busk-point:


HEU. The same, the same, Sir: You promised to help him out with the twentieth.


PHA. By Jupiters cloven pate it is true; but we witty fellows are so
forgetful, but stay, hu, hu, carry him this:

The gordian knot which Alexander great,
Did whilom cut with his all conquering sword:
Was nothing like thy Busk-point pretty Peate,
Nor could so fair an augury afford.
Then to conclude let him pervert Catullus his zonam solvit diu ligatam, thus,
thus,

Which if I chance to cut or else unty,
Thy little world I Will conquer presently.
It Is pretty, pretty, tell him 'twas extemporal.


HEU. Well Sir, but now for Master Inamorato's Love-letter.


PH. Some netling stuffy faith; let him write thus: Most heart commanding faced
Gentlewoman, even as the stone in India called Basiliscus, hurts all that looks
on it: and as the Serpent in Arabia called Smaragdus, delights the sight, so
does thy celestial orb assimilating eyes, both please, and in pleasing wound my
Love-darted heart.


HEU. But what trick shall I invent for the conclusion?


PHA. Pish, any thing: Love will minister Ink for the rest:

He that once begun well, has half done, let him begin again, and there is all.


HEU. Master Gullio spoke for a new fashion, What for him?


PHA. A fashion for his suit -- let him button it down the sleeve with four
elbows, and so make it the pure heiroglyphick of a fool.


HEU. Nay then let me request one thing of you.


PHA. What Is that Boy? by this fair hand thou shall have it.


HEU. Mistress Superbia a Gentlewoman of my acquaintance wished me to devise
her a new set for her Ruff, and an odd tire, I pray Sir, help me out with it.


PHA. Ah Boy in my conceit it is a hard matter to perform, these women have well
nigh tired me, with devising tires for them, and set me at a non plus for new
sets, their heads are so light, and their eyes so coy, that I know not how to
please them.


HEU. I pray Sir, she has a bad face, and fain would have Suitors, Fantastical
and odd apparel, would perchance draw some body to look on her.


PHA. If her face be naught, in my opinion, the more view it, the worse, bid
her wear the multitude of her deformities under a Mask, till my leisure will
serve to devise some durable, and unstained blush of painting.


HEU. Very good Sir.


PHA. Away then, hye thee again, meet me at the Court within this hour at the
farthest.

Exit Heuresis. Oh heavens, how have I been troubled these later times with
Women, Fools, Babes, Taylers, Poets, Swaggerers, Guls, Ballad-makers, they have
almost disrobed me of all the toys and trifles I can devise; were it not that I
pity the poor multitude of Printers, these Sonnet-mongers should starve for
conceits, for all Phantastes. But these puling Lovers, I cannot but laugh at
them and their Encomions of their Mistresses. They make forsooth her hair of
Gold, her eyes of Diamond, her cheeks of Roses, her lips of Rubies, her teeth
of Pearl, and her whole body of Ivory: and when they have thus Idol'd her like
Pigmalion, they fall down and worship her. Psyche, thou have laid a hard task
upon my shoulders, to invent at every ones ask, were it not that I refresh my
dullness once a day with my most Angelical presence, 'twere unpossible for me
to undergo it.


ACTUS 2 SCENA 3.
COMMUNIS SENSUS, A grave man in a Black velvet Cassock like a Councellor,
speaks coming out of the door. COMMUNIS SENSUS. PHANTASTES. COM. S. I cannot
stay, I tell you it is more then time I were at Court, I know my Sovereign
Psyche has expected me this hour.


PHA. In good time, younder comes Commonsense, I imagine it should be he by his
voice.


COM. S. Crave my counsel, tell me what manner of man he is? Can he entertain
a man into his house, can he hold his Velvet Cap in one hand, and vale his
bonnet with the other? Knows he how to become a Scarlet gown, has he a pair of
fresh posts at his door?


PHA. He Is about some hasty State-matters, he talks of posts methinks.


COM S. Can he part a couple of Dogs brawling in the street? why then choose
him Mayor, upon my credit he will prove a wise Officer.


PHA. Save you my Lord, I have attended your leisure this hour.


COM. S. Fie upon it, what a toil have I had to choose them a Mayor yonder?
there is a fusty Currier will have this man: there is a Chandler wipes his nose
on his sleeve, and swears it shall not be so. There Is a Mustard-maker looks as
keen as Viniger, will have another: O this many headed multitude, it is a hard
matter to please them!


PHA. Especially where the multitude is so well headed. But I pray you where is
Master Memory? has he forgotten himself that he is not here?


COM. SEN. It Is high time he were at Court, I would he would come.


ACT. 2. SCEN. 4.
MEMORY, An old decrepit man, in a black Velvet Cassock, a Taffaty Gown furred,
with white Grogram, a white beard, Velvet slippers, a Watch, Staff, etc.

ANAMNESTES his Page, in a grave Satin suit Purple, Buskins, a Garland of
Bays and Rosemary, a gimmall ring, with one link hanging, Ribbands and Threads
tied to some of his fingers, in his hand a pair of Table books, etc.

MEMORY. ANAMNESTES. PHANTASTES. SENS. COM. MEM. How soon a wise man shall have
his wish?


COM. SE. Memory the season of your coming is very ripe.


PH. Had you staid a little longer 'twould have been stark rotten.


MEM. I am glad I saved it from the Swine -- Spretious I have forgot something:
O my purse, my purse, why Anamnestes? Remembrance where art thou, Anamnestes
Remembrance, that vild Boy is always gadding, I remember he was at my heels,
even now, and now the vild Rascal is vanished.


PHA. Is he not here? why then in my imagination he is left behind, O la
Anamnestes remembrance.


AN. (running in have) Anon, anon, sir anon, anon sir, anon, anon sir, anon,
anon sir.


MEM. Ha sir, what a brawling's here?


AN. I do but give you an answer with anon Sir.


MEM. You answer sweetly, I have called you three or four times one after
another.


AN. Sir, I hope I answered you three or four times one in the neck of another.
But if your good worship have lent me any more calls, tell me, and I Will repay
them as I am a Gentleman.


MEM. Leave your tattle, had you come at first I had not spent so much breath
in vain.


AN. The truth is Sir, the first time you called, I heard you not, the second I
understood you not, the third I knew not whether it were you or no: the fourth
I could not tell where you were, and that is the reason I answered so suddenly.


MEM. Go sir, run, seek every where, I have lost my purse somewhere.


AN. I go Sir: Go sir, seek, run, I have lost, bring, here is a Dogs life,
with a pox, shall I be always used like a water-Spaniel.

Exit Anam.
COM. Come good Master Register, I wonder you be so late now adays.


MEM. My good Lord, I remember that I knew your Grandfather in this your place,
and I remember your Grandfathers great Grandfathers, Grandfathers Fathers,
Father, yet in those days I never remember that any of them could say, that
Register Memory ever broke one minute of his appointment.


COM. S. Why good Father, why are you so late now adays?


MEM. Thus it is, the most customers I remember my self to have, are (as your
Lordship knows) Scholars, and now adays the most of them are become Critics,
bringing me home such paltry things to lay up for them, that I can hardly find
them again.


PH. Jupiter, Jupiter, I had thought these Flies had bit none but my self, Do
Critics tickle you in faith?


MEM. Very familiarly: for they must know of me forsooth, how every idle word
is written in all the musty moth-eaten Manuscripts, kept in all the old
Libraries in every City betwixt England and Peru.


COM. SEN. Indeed I have noted these times to affect Antiquities more than is
requisite.


MEM. I remember in the age of Assaracus and Ninus, and about the wars of
Thebes, and the siege of Troy, there was few things committed to my charge, but
those that were well worthy the preserving, but now every trifle must be
wrapped up in the volume of Eternity. A rich pudding-wife, or a Cobbler cannot
die but I must immortalize his Name with an Epitaph: A dog cannot piss in a
Noblemans shoe, but it must be sprinkled into the Chronicles, so that I never
could remember my Treasure more full, and never emptier of Honorable, and true
Heroical actions.


PH. By your leave Memory, you are not alone troubled, Chronologers many of
them are so Fantastic, as when they bring a Captain to the Combat, lifting up
his revengefull arm to dis-part the head of his enemy, they will hold up his arms
so long till they have bestowed three or four pages in describing the gold
hilts of his threatening Fauchion: So that in my Fancy the Reader may well
wonder his adversary stabs him not before he strikes; moreover they are become
most palpable flatterers, always begging at my gates for Invention.


COM. This is a great fault in a Chronologer to turn Parasite: An absolute
History should be in fear of none, neither should he write any thing more then
truth for friendship, or less for hate, but keep himself equal and constant in
all his discourses, but for us, we must be contented, for as our Honors
increase, so must the burden of the cares of our Offices urge us to wax heavy.


PH. But not till our backs break, s'lud there was never any so haunted as I
am, this day there comes a Sophister to my house, knocks at my door, his errand
being asked forsooth his answer was, to borrow a fair suit of conceits out of
my wardrobe, to apparel, a show he had in hand, and what think you is the plot?


COM. Nay I know not, for I am little acquainted with such toies.


PH. Meanwhile he is somewhat acquainted with you, for he is bold to bring your
person upon the Stage.


COM. What me? I cannot remember, that I was ever brought upon the Stage before.


PH. Yes you and you, and my self, with all my Fantastical tricks and humors,
but I trow I have fitted him with Fooleries, I trust he will never trouble me
again.


COM. O times! O manners! when Boys dare to traduce men in authority, was ever
such an attempt heard!


MEM. I remember there was For (to say the truth) at my last being at Athens
(It is now, let me see, about 1800 years ago) I was at a Comedy of Aristophanes
making, (I shall never forget it) The Arch-governour of Athens took me by the
hand and placed me, and there I say, I saw Socrates abused most grossly, himself
being then a present spectator: I remember he sat full against me, and did not
so much as show the least countenance of discontent.


COM. In those days it was lawful, but now the abuse of such liberty is
unsufferable.


PH. Think what you will of it, I think it is done, and I think it is acting by
this time; hark, hark, what drumming's yonder, I Will lay my life they are come to
present the show I spoke of.


COM. It may be so; stay we will see what it is.


ACT. 2. SCEN. 5.
LINGUA. MENDACIO. COM. SEN. and the rest. LING. Fain thy self in great haste.


MEN. I warrant you Madam: I doubt it is in vain to run, by this they are all
past overtaking.


COM. SEN. Is not this Lingua that is in such have?


PH. Yes, yes, stand still.


MEN. I must speak with him.


COM. SEN. With whom?


MEN. Assure your self they are all at Court ere this.


LING. Run after them, for unless he know it --


COM. SEN. Lingua.


LING. O is it your Lordship: I beseech you pardon me; have and fear, I protest
put out mine eyes: I looked so long for you, that I knew not when I had found
you.


PHA. In my conceit, that is like the man that enquired, who saw his Ass, when
himself rid on him.


LING. O my heart beats so, fie, fie, fie, fie.


MEN. I am so weary, fo, fo, fo, fo.


COM. SEN. I prithee Lingua make an end.


LING. Let me begin first I beseech you, but if you will needs have the end
first, thus it is. The Commonwealth of Microsme at this instant suffers the
pangs of death, it is gasping for breath. Will you have all? it is poysned.


PH. What Pothecary durst be so bold as make such a confection? ha what poison
is it?


LING. A golden Crown.


MEN. I mistake, or else Galen in his Book De sanitate tuenda, commends gold as
restorative.


COM. SEN. Lingua express your self.


MEN. Madam if you want breath, let me help you out.


LING. I prithee do, do.


MEN. My Lord, the report is, that Mercury coming late into this Country, in
this very place, left a Coronet with this inscription, that the best of the
five should have it, which the Senses thinking to belong unto them --


LING. Challenge each other, and are now in arms, and 't like your Lordship.


COM. SEN. I protest it likes not me.


LING. Their battles are not far hence ready ranged.


COM. SEN. O monstrous presumption! what shall we do?


MEM. My Lord, in your great Grandfathers time, there was I remember such a
breach amongst them, therefore my Counsel is, that after his example, by the
strength of your authority you convent them before you.


COM. Lingua go presently, command the Senses upon their allegiance to our
dread Sovereign Queen Psyche, to dismiss their companies, and personally to
appear before me without any pretense of excuse.


LING. I go my Lord.


PH. But hear you Madam, I pray you let your Page tongue walk with us a little,
till you return again.


LING. With all my heart.

Exit Lingua.
ACT. 2. SCEN. 6.
PH. Hot youths I protest, saw you those warlike preparations?


MEN. Lately my Lords, I spide into the Army,
But oh, it is far beyond my reach of wit.
Or strength of utterance to describe their forces.

COM. SENS. Go to, speak what thou can.


MEND Upon the right hand of a spacious Hill,
Proud Visus marshalleth a puissant Army,
Three thousand Eagles strong, whose valiant Captain
Is Joves fwift Thunder-bearer, that same Bird,
That hoist up Ganimede from the Trojan plains:
The vant-gard strengthened with a wondrous flight
Of Falcons, Haggards, Hobbies, Terselets,
Lanards and Goshauks, Sparhauks, and Ravenous Birds.
The rereward granted to Anditus charge.
Is stoutly followed with an impetuous herd
Of stiff-neckt Bulls, and many horn-mad staggs,
Of the best head the Forest can afford.

PH. I promise you a fearful troop of Soldiers


MEN. Right opposite stands Tactus strongly mand,
With three thousand brisled Urchins for his Pikemen;
Four hundred Tortesses for Elephants.
Besides a monstrous troop of ugly spiders,
Within an ambushment he has comnanded,
Of their own guts to spin a cordage fine,
Whereof to have framed a net (O wondrous work)
That fastened by the Concave of the Moon,
Spreads down it self to the earths circumference.

MEM. It Is very strange, I cannot remember the like Engine at any time.


MEN. Nay more my Lord, the masks are made so strong,
That I my self upon them scale the heavens,
And boldly walt about the middle region,
Where in the province of the Meteors,
I saw the cloudy shops of Hail and Rain,
Garners of Snow, and Christals full of dew,
Rivers of burning Arrows, Dens of Dragons,
Huge beams of flames, and Spears like fire brands,
Where I beheld hot Mars and Mercury,
With Rackets made of Spears, and Balls of Stars,
Playing at Tennis for a Tun of Nectar.
And that vast gaping of the Firmament,
Under the Southern pole is nothing else
But the great hazard of their Tennis Court,
The Zodiac is the line. The shooting Stars,
Which in an eye bright evening seemed to fall,
Are nothing but the Balls they lose at Bandy.
Thus having took my pleasure with those sights,
By the same net I went up, I descended.

COM. SEN. Well Sir to what purpose tends this Stratagem?


MEND. None know directly, but I think it is
T'intrap the Eagles, when the Battails join.

PH. Who takes Tactus his part?


MEND. Under the standard of thrice hardy Tactus,
Thrice valiant Gustus leads his warlike Forces,
An endless multitude of desperate Apes,
Five hundred Marmosets and long-tail'd Monkees:
All trained to the field, and nimble Gunners.

PH. Imagine there is old moving amongst them; Me thinks a handful of Nuts would
turn them out of their Soldiers coats,


MEN. Ramparts of Pasty-crust and forts of Pies,
Entrenched with dishes full of Custard stuff,
Has Gustus made; and planted ordinance,
Strange ordinance: Canons of hollow canes,
Whose powder's Rape seed, charged with Turnip shot.

MEM. I remember in the Country of Utopia,
They use no other kind of Artillery.

COM. SEN. But what is become of Olfactus?


MEND. He politickly leans to neither part,
But stands betwixt the camps as at receipt:
Having great wine his Pioners to entrench them.

PH. In my foolish imagination Olfactus is very like the Goddess of victory
that never takes any part but the Conquerers.


MEND. And in the Woods he placed secretly
Two hundred couple of Hounds and hungry Mastiffs:
And ore his head hover at his command
A cloud of Vultures, which over spread the light,
Making a night before the day be done:
But to what end not known but feared of all.

PH. I conjecture he intends to see them fight, and after the battle to feed
his Dogs, Hogs and Vultures upon the murdered carcases.


MEN. My L. I think the fury of their anger will not be obedient to the Message
of Lingua; for otherwise in my conceit they should have been here ere this:
with your L. good liking we will attend upon you to see the field for more
certainty. It shall be so; Come Master Register lets walk.


Exeunt omnes. Finis. Act. secundt.
Act. 3. Scena. 1.
ANAMESTES, With a purse in his hand. ANA. Forsooth Oblivio shut the door upon
me, I could come no sooner; ha? is he not there? O excellent! Would I were
hanged but I looked for a found rap on the pate, and that made me before hand to
lift up this excuse for a Buckler. I know he is not at Court, for here is his
purse, without which warrant there is no coming thither; wherefore now
Anamnestes sport thy self a little, while thou art out of the prison of his
company. What shall I do? by my troth anatomize his purse in his absence.
Plutus send there be Jewels in it, that I may finely geld it of the stones --
The best sure lies in the bottom -- pox out, here is nothing but a company of
worm-eaten papers; what is this? Memorandum that Master Prodigo owes me four
thousand pounds, and that his lands are in pawn for it: Memorandum that I owe;
that he owes? it is well the old slave has some care of his credit; to whom
owes he I trow this? that I owe Anamnestes? What me? I never lent him any
thing; ha, this is good, there is something coming to me more then I looked for.
Come on, what is it? Memorandum that I owe Anamnestes -- a breeching; I faith
Sir I will ease you of that payment, (He rends the bill) Memorandum that when I
was a child, Robusto tript up my heels at football: what a revengeful dizard's
this?


ACT. 3. SCEN. 2.
Mendatio with Cushions under his arms, trips up Anamnestes heels. Mendacio.
Anamnestes. ANA. How now?


MEND Nothing but lay you upon the Cushion Sir, how so?


ANA. Nothing but lay the Cushion upon you Sir?


MEND. What my little Nam? by this foot I am sorry I mistook thee.


ANA. What my little Men? by this hand it grieves me I took thee so right. But
Sir whither with these Cushions?


MEN. To lay them here that the Judges may sit softly, least my Lady Lingua's
cause go hard with her.


ANA. They should have been wrought with gold, these will do nothing: But what
makes thy Lady with the Judges?


MEND. Pish, know not? she sueth for the title of a Sense, as well as the
rest that bear the name of the Pentarchy.


ANA. Will Common sense and my Master leave their affairs to determine that
Controversy?


MEND. Then thou hearst nothing.


ANA. What should I hear!


MEND. All the Senses fell out about a Crown fallen from Heaven, and pitched a
field for it; but Vicegerent Common-sense hearing of it, took upon him to
umpire the contention, in which regard he has appointed them (their arms
dismissed) to appear before him, charging every one to bring as it were in a
show their proper objects, that by them he may determine of their several
excellencies.


ANA. When is all this?


MEND. As soon as they can possibly provide,


ANA. But can he tell which deserves best by their objects?


MEND. No not only; for every sense must describe his Instrument, that is his
house where he performs his daily duty, so that by the Object and the
Instrument, my Lord can with great ease discern their place and dignities.


ANA. His Lorship's very wise.


MEND Thou shall hear all anon, fine Master Phantastes, and thy Master will be
here shortly. But how is it my little Rogue? me thinks thou look lean upon it?


ANA. Alas, how should I do otherwise that lie all night with such a Rawbon'd
Skeliton as Memory, and run all day on his Errands! The Churle's grown so old
and forgetful, that every hour he is calling Anamnestes remembrance, where art
Anamnestes? Then presently something's loft, poor I must run for it; and these
words, run Boy, Come Sir quick, quick, quick, are as familiar with him as the
Cough, never out on's mouth.


MEND. Alack, alack poor Rogue, I see my fortunes are better. My Lady loves me
exceedingly; she is always kissing me, so that (I tell the Nam) Mendacios never
from betwixt her lips.


ANA. Nor out of Memories mouth; but in a worse sort, always exercising my
stumps, and which is more, when he favors best, then I am in the worst taking.


MEND. How so?


ANA. Thus, when we are friends, then must I come and be dandled upon his
Palsie-quaking knees, and he will tell me a long story of his acquaintance with
King Priamus and his familiarity with Nestor, and how he played at blow-point
with Jupiter when he was in his side-coats, and how he went to look Birds-nests
with Athon, and where he was at Deucalious stood, and twenty such old wives
tales.


MEND. I wonder he being so old can talk so much.


ANA. Nature thou know (knowing what an unruly Engine the tongue is) has
set teeth round about for watchmen; Now Sir my Master's old age has caught out
all his teeth, and that is the cause it runs so much it liberty.


MEND. Philosophical!


ANA. O but therer's one thing stings me to the very heart, to see an ugly,
foul, idle, fat, dusty ^log-head, called Oblivio preferred before me; do know
him?


MEND. Who I? I* But care not for his acquaintance, hang him blockhead, I could
never abide him. Thou Remembrance art the only friend that the arms of my
friendship shall embrace. Thou have heard Opo^tet mendac^m esse memorem. But
what of Oblivio?


ANA. The very naming of him has made me forget my self. O, O, O, O, that
Rascal is so made of everywhere.


MEND. Who Oblivio?


ANA. I, for our Courtiers hug him continually in their ungrateful bosoms, and
your smooth-belly, fat-backt, barrel-pauncht, tun-gutted drones are never
without him; as for Memory he is a false-hearted fellow, he always deceives
them; they respect not him except it be to play a game at Chess, Primero,
Saun^, Maw, or such like.


Mend. I cannot think such fellows have to do with Oblivio since they never got
any thing to forget.


ANA. Again, these prodigal swaggerers that are so much bound to their
Creditors, if they have but one Cross about them they will spend it in wine upon
Oblivio.


MEN. To what purpose I prithee?


ANA. Only in hope he will wash them in the Lethe of their cares.


MEN. Why then no man cares for thee!


ANA. Yes, a company of studious paper-worms and lean Scholars, and niggardly
scraping Usurers, and a troop of heart-eating envious persons, and those
cancker-stomackt spiteful creatures, that furnish up common place-books with
other men's faults. The time has been in those golden days, when Saturn
reigned, that if a man received a benefit of another, I was presently sent for
to put him in mind of it; but now in these Iron afternoons, save your friends
life, and Oblivio will be more familiar with him then you.


ACTUS. 3. SCENA. 3.
Heuresis. Mend. Anamnestes. HEU. Phantastes not at Court? is it possible? it is
the strangest accident that ever was heard off; I had thought the Ladies and
Gallants would never lie without him.


ANA. Hist, hist, Mendacio, I prithee observe Heuresis; it seems he cannot find
his Master that is able to find out all things: and art thou now at a fault,
can not find out thine own Master? no? I Will try one more way. O yes.


MEND. What a Proclamation for him?


AN. I, I, his nimble head is always full of proclamations.


HEU. O yes.


MEND. But does he cry him in the wood?


AN. O good Sir, and good reason, for every beast has Fantasy at his
pleasure.


HEU. O yes: If any man can tell any tidings of a spruce, neat, apish, nimble,
fine, foolish, absurd, humerous, conceited, Fantastic Gallant, with hollow
eyes, sharp look, swart complexion, meager face, wearing as many toys in his
apparel, as fooleries in his looks and gesture, let him come forth and certify
me thereof, and he shall have for his reward --


AN. I can tell you where he is, what shall he have?


HEU. A box of the ear sir, (snap)


AN. How now invention, are you so quick fingred? in faith there is your
principle sir, (snap) and here is the interest ready in my hand (snap) [They
fall together by the ears.] Yea? have you found out scratching? now I remember
me.


HEU. Do you bite you Rascal?


MEND. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, here is the lively picture of this axiom, A quick
Invention and a good Memory can never agree. Fie, fie, fie Heuresis, beat him
when he is down?


ANA. Prithee lets alone, proud Jack-an-Apes, I Will*


HEU. What will you do?


AN. Untrusse thy points and whip thee, thou paltry -- Let me go Mendacio if
thou love me, shall I put up the --


MEND. Come, come, come, you shall fight no more in good faith: Heuresis; your
Master will catch you anon


HEU. My Master, where is he?


MEN. I Will bring you to him, come away.


HEU. Anamnestes, I scorn that thou should think I go away for fear of any
thing thou can do unto me; here is my hand as soon as thou can pick the
least occasion, put up thy finger, I am for thee.


Exit Mendacio and Heuresis. AN. When thou dare Heuresis, when thou dare,
I Will be as ready as thy self at any time.

This Heuresis, this invention, is the proudest Jack-an-Apes, the peartest
self-conceited Boy that ever breathed; because forsooth some odd Poet, or some
such Phantastique fellows make much on him, there is no no with him; the vile
dandi-prat will ore-look the proudest of his acquaintance: but well I remember
me, I learnt a trick the other day, to bring a Boy ore the thigh finely; if he
come, in faith I Will tickle him with it.


Mendacio comes running back in great haste. MEN. As I am a Rascal Nam, they
are all coming, I see Master Register trudging hither, as fast as his three
feet will carry up his four Ages.


Exit Mendacio. ACTUS. 3. SCENA. 4.
MEMORIA. ANAMESTES. MEM. Ah you leaden-heel'd Rascal.


ANA. Here it is Sir, I have it, I have it.


MEM. Is this all the haste you make?


ANA. An't like your worship, your Clog-head Oblivio went before me, and foiled
the trail of your footsteps, that I could hardly undertake the quest of your
purse forsooth.


MEM. You might have been here long ere this: Come hither sir, come hither,
what must you go round about? goodly, goodly, you are full of circumstances.


ANA. In truth Sir, I was here before, and missing you, went back into the
City, sought you in every Alehouse, Inn, Tavern, Dicing-house, Tenniscourt,
Stews, and such like places, likely to find your worship in.


MEM. Ha? villain, am I a man likely to be found in such places, ha?


ANA. No, no Sir; Sir, but I was told by my Lady Lingua's Page that your
Worship was seeking me, therefore I enquired for you in those places where I
knew you would ask for me, and it please your worship.


MEM. I remember another quarrel sir, but well, well, I have no leisure.


ACT. 3. SCENA. 5.
Com. Sens. Lingua. Phantastes. Memory. Anamnestes. COM. S. Lingua, the Senses
by our appointment anon are to present their objects before us; seeing
therefore they be not in readiness, we license you in the mean while, either
in your own person, or by your Advocate, to speak what you can for your self.


LIN. My Lord, if I should bring before your honor all my friends ready to
importune you in my behalf, I should have so many Rhetoricians, Logitians,
Lawyers, and which is more, so many women to attend me, that this Grove would
hardly contain the company; wherefore to avoid the tediousness, I will lay the
whole cause upon the tip of mine own tongue.


COM. SEN. Be as brief as the necessity of our short time requires.


LIN. My Lord, though the Imbecillitas of my feeble sex, might draw me back
from this Tribunal, with the habenis to wit Timoris, and the Catenis Pudoris;
notwithstanding being so fairly led on with the gracious (...) of your
justissimae (...), Especially so aspremente spurd' con'gli sproni di necessita
mia pungente, I Will without the help of Orators, commit the totom salutem of
my action to the Volutabilitati (...) which ( avecuostre bonne playseur) I will
finish with more then Laconica brevitate.


CO. SE. What Is this? here is a Gallemaufry of speech indeed.


MEM. I remember about the year 1602. many used this skew kind of language.
Which in my opinion is not much unlike the man Platony the the Son of Lagus,
King of Egypt, brought for a spectacle half white half black.


CO. SE. I am persuaded these same language-makers have the very quality of
cold in their wit, that freezeth all Heterogeneall languages together,
congealing English Tynne, Grecian Gold, Roman Latin all In a lump.


PHA. Or rather in my imagination like you Fantastical Gulls Apparel, wearing
a Spanish Felt, a French Doblet, a Granado Stocking, a Dutch Slop, an Italian
Cloak, with a Welsh frise Jerkin.


COM. SEN. Well, leave your toying, we cannot pluck the least feather from the
soft wing of time. Therefore Lingua go on, but in a more formal manner; you
know an ingenions Oration must neither swell above the Banks with insolent
words, nor creep too shallow in the ford, with vulgar terms, but run equally,
smooth, and cheerful, through the clean current of a pure style.


Ling. My Lord, this one thing is sufficient to confirm my worth to be equal or
better then the senses, whose best operations are nothing till I polish them
with perfection; for their knowledge is only of things present, quickly
sublimed with the deaf file of time, whereas the tongue is able to recount
things past, and often pronounce things to come, by this means re-edifying such
Excellencies as Time and Age do easily depopulate.


COM. SEN. But what profitable service do you undertake for our dread Queen
Psyche?


LING. O how I am ravished to think how infinitely she has graced me with her
most acceptable service. But above all (which you Master Register may well
remember) when her Highness taking my mouth for her instrument, with the Bow
of my tongue struck so heavenly a touch upon my teeth, that she charmed the
very Tigers asleep, the listening Bears and Lions to couch at her feet, while
the Hills leaped, and the Woods danced to the sweet harmony of her most
Angelical accents.


MEM. I remember it very well. Orpheus played upon the Harp, while she sang,
about some four years after the contention betwixt Apollo and Pan, and a little
before the excoriation of Marsyas.


ANA. By the same token the River Alpheus, at that time pursuing his beloved
Arethusa, dischanel'd himself of his former course to be partaker of their
admirable confort, and the music being ended, thrust himself head long into
earth, the next way to follow his amorous Chase; if you go to Arcadia, you
shall see his coming up again.


COM. SEN. Forward Lingua with your reason.


LING. How often has her Excellency imployded me as Ambassador in her most
urgent affairs to foreign King and Emperors! I may say to the Gods themselves!
How many bloudlesse Battails have my persuasions attained, when the senses
forces have been vanquished. How many Rebels have I reclaimed when her sacred
authority was little regarded? her Laws (without exprobation be it spoken) had
been altogether unpublished, her will unperformed, her illustrious deeds
unrenouned, had not the silver sound of my trumpet filled the whole circuit of
the universe with her deserved fame. Her Cities would dissolve, traffic would
decay, friendships be broken, were not my speech the knot. Mercury and
Mastique, to bind, defend, and glue them together. What should I say more? I
can never speak enough of the unspeakable praise of speech, wherein I can find
no other imperfection at all, but that the most exquisite power and excellency
of speech cannot sufficiently express the exquisite power and excellency of
speaking.


COM. SEN. Lingua, your service and dignity we confess to be great;
nevertheless these reasons prove you not to have the nature of a sense.


LING. By your Lordships favor, I can soon prove that a sense is a faculty, by
which our Queen sitting in her privy Chamber has intelligence of exterior
oecurrents. That I am of this nature, I prove thus. The object which I
challenge is --


Enter Appetitus in haste. APP. Stay, stay my Lord, defer I beseech, defer the
Judgment.


COM. SEN. Who Is this that boldly interrupts us thus! hum.


APP. My name is Appetitus, Common servant to the Pentarchy of the senses, who
understanding that your honor was handling this action of Lingua's, sent me
hither thus hastily, most humbly requesting the Bench to consider these
Articles they allege against her, before you proceed to judgment.


COM. SEN. Hum, here is good stuff, Master Register read them: Appetitu^, you
may depart, and bid your Mistress make convenient speed.


AP. At your Lordships pleasure.

Exit Appetitus. 3
MEM. I Remember that I forgot my spectacles, I left them in the 349. page of
Hall's Chronicles, where he tells a great wonder of a multitude of Mice which
had almost destroyed the Country, but that there resorted a great mighty flight
of Owls, that destroyed them: Anamnestes read these Articles distinctly.


ANA. 1. Ar. Imprimis we accuse Lingua of high treason and sacrilege against
the most honorable Commonwealth of letters: for under pretense of profiting
the people with translations, she has most vily prostituted the hard mysteries
of unknown Languages to the profane ears of the vulgar.


PHAN. This is as much as to make a new Hell in the upper world; for in Hell,
they say, Alexander is no better then a Cobbler; and now by these translations
every Cobbler is as familiar with Alexander as he that wrote his life.


ANA. 2. art. Item that she has wrongfully imprisoned a Lady called Veritas.

3. art. Item that she is a witch, and exercises her tongue in exorcismes.

4. art. Item that she is a common whore, and lets everyone lie with her.

5. art. Item that she rails on men in Authority, depraving their Honors with
bitter Jests and taunts, and that she is a Backbiter setting strife betwixt
bosom friends.

6. art. Item that she lends Wives weapons to fight against their Husbands.

7. art. Item that she maintains a train of prating petty-foggers, prouling
Sumners, smooth tongued Bawds, artless Empericks, hungry Parasites,
News-carriers, Janglers, and such like idle Companions, that delude the
Commonalty.

8. art. Item that she made Rhetorique wanton, Logic to babble, Astronomy to
lie.

9. art. Item that she is an incontinent Tel-tale.

10. art. Item (which is the last and worst) that she is a Woman in every
respect, and for these causes not to be admitted to the dignity of a Sense.
That these Articles be true we pawn our honors, and subscribe our names.

1. Visus. 2. Auditus. 3. Gustus. 4. Olfactus. 5. Tactus.


CO. SE. Lingua, these be shrewd allegations, and as I think unanswerable. I
will defer the judgment of your cause till I have finished the contention of
the Senses.


LIN. Your Lordships must be obeyed; but as for them most ungrateful, and
perfidious wretches.


CO. S. Good words become you better; you may depart if you will, till we send
for you. Anamnestes, run, remember Visus, it is time he were ready.


ANA. I go, (Exit Anam. and redit) he stays here expecting your Lordships
pleasure.


ACTUS. 3. SCENE. 6.
A Page carrying a Scutchion argent charged with an Eagle displayed proper,
then Visus with a Fan of Peacocks feathers, next Lumen with a Crown of Bays,
and a Shield with a bright Sun in it, apparrelled in Tissue, then a Page
bearing a Shield before Coelum, clad in Azure Taffata, dimpled with Stars, a
Crown of Stars on his head, and a Scarf resembling the Zodiac, overthwart the
Shoulders; next a Page clad in green, with a terrestrial Globe before Terra, in
a green Velvet gown stuck with branches and flowers, a Crown of Terrets upon
her head, in her hand a Key, then a Herald leading in his hand, Color clad in
changeable silk, with a Rainbow out of a Cloud on her head, last a Boy, Visus
Marshalleth his show about the Stage, and presents it before the Bench. VISUS.
LUMEN. COELUM. COM. SENS. MEMORY. VI. Lo here the object that delights the
sight,
The goodliest objects that man's heart can wish.
For all things that the Orb first moveable
Wraps in the circuit of his large-stretcht arms,
Are subject to the power of Visus eyes.
That you may know what profit light does bring,
Note Lumens words that speaks next following,

LUME. Light the fair Grandchild to the glorious Sun,
Opening the casements of the Rosy morn,
Makes the abashed Heavens soon to shun
The ugly darkness it embraced beforne,
And at his first appearance puts to flight,
The utmost relics of the Hell-born night.
This heavenly shield soon as it is displaid,
Dismays the vices that abhor the light;
To wanderers by Sea and Land gives aid;
Conquers display, recomforteth affright,
Rowseth dull Idleness, and starts soft sleep.
And all the world to daily labor keeps;
This a true Looking-glass impartial,
Where Beauties self, her self does beautify
With native hue, not artificial,
Discovering falsehood, opening verity;
The days bright eye, colors distinction,
Just judge of measure and proportion.
The only means by which each mortal eye
Sends messengers to the wide firmament,
That to the longing soul brings presently
High contemplation and deep wonderment.
By which aspirement she her wings displaies,
And her self thither whence she came uprais'd.

PH. What blew thing's that that is dappled so with Stars?


VIS. He represents the Heaven.


PH. In my conceit it were pretty if he thundered when he speaks.


VIS. Then none could understand him.


COEL. Tropic colors, the Equinoctial,
The Zodiac poles, and line Ecliptical,
The Nadaz, Zenith, and Anomalies,
The Azimeth and Ephemerides,
Stars, Orbs and Planets, with their motions,
The Oriental Regradations,
Excentricks, Epicycles, and -- and -- and --

PH. How now Visus, is your heaven at a stay?
Or is it his Motus trepidations that makes him stammer?
I pray you Memory set him agate again.

MEM. I remember when Jupiter made Amphitrio Cuckold, and lay with his wife
Alemena, Coelum was in this taking for three days space, and stood still just
like him at a non plus.


COM. SEN. Leave jesting, you will put the fresh Actor out of countenance.


COEL. Excentricks, Epicycles, and Aspects,
In Sextile, Trine, and Quadrate which effects
Wonders on earth: also the Oblique part
Of signs that make the day both long and short,
The Constellations rising, Cosmical,
Setting of Stars, Chronick, and Heliacal,
In the Orizon or Meridional,
And all the skill in deep Astronomy,
Is to the soul derived by the eye.

PH. Visus, you have made Coelum a heavenly speech, past earthly capacity, it
had been as good for him he had thundered. But I pray you, who taught him to
speak and use no action; me thinks it had been excellent to have turned round
about in his speech.


VIS. He has so many motions he knows not which to begin withal.


PH. Nay rather it seems he is of Copernicus opinion, and that makes him stand
still.


Terra comes to the midsts of the Stage, stands still a wile, says nothing,
and steps back. COM. S. Lets hear what Terra can say -- just nothing.


VIS. And't like your Lordship, it were an indecorum Terra should speak.


MEM. You are deceived, for I remember when Phaeton ruled the Sun, I shall
never forget him, he was a very pretty youth, the earth opened her mouth wide,
and spoke a very good speech to Jupiter.


ANAM. By the same token Nilus hid his head then, he could never find it since.


PHA. You know Memory, that was an extreme hott day, and it is likely Terra
sweat much, and so took cold presently after, that ever since she has lost
her voice.


HER. A Cauton Ermines added to the field, is a sure sign the man that bore
these Arms, was to his Prince as a defensive shield, saving him from the force
of present Arms.


PHA. I know this fellow of old, it is a Herald; many a Centaure, Chimera,
Barnacle, Crocodile, Hippotame, and such like toys, has he stolen out of the
shop of my Invention, to shape new coats for his upstart Gentlemen. Either
Africa must breed more monsters, or you make fewer Gentlemen M. Herald; for
you have spent all my devises already; but since you are here, let me ask you
a question, in your own profession; how comes it to pass that the victorious
Arms of England, quartred with the conquered Coat of France, are not placed
on the dexter side, but give the flowrede luce the better hand?


HER. Because that the three Lions are one coat made of two French Duke-domes,
Normandy and Aquitaine: but I pray you Visus, what lay is that that follows
him?


VIS. It Is Color an object of mine, subject to his commandment.


PHA. Why speaks he not?


VIS. He is so bashful, he dares not speak for blushing: What thing is that?
tell me without delay.


BOY. That Is nothing of it self, yet every way
As like a Man, as a thing like may be,
And yet so unlike, as clean contrary;
For in one point it every way does miss;
The right side of it a man's left side is.
It Is lighter then a Feather, and withal
It fills no place, nor room it is so small.

COM. SEN. How now Visus, have you brought a boy with a riddle to pose us all?


PHAN. Pose us all? and I here? that were a jest indeed: My Lord, if he have a
Sphinx, I have an Oedipus, assure your self, lets hear it once again.


BOY. What thing is that Sir?


PHAN. This such a knotty Aenigma? why my Lord? I think it is a Woman; for
first a Woman is nothing of her self, and again she is likest a man of any
thing.


COM. SEN. But wherein is she unlike?


PHA. In every thing, in peevishness, in folly. -- 'st Boy.


HEU. In Pride, Deceit, Prating, Lying, Cogging, Coins, Spite, Hate, Sir.


PHA. And in many more such vices: Now he may well say, the left side a man's
right side is; for a cross wife, is always contrary to her husband, ever
contradicting what he wishes for, like to the verse in Marshall, Velle tuum.


MEM. Velle tuum nolo, Dindime, nolle volo.


PHA. Lighter then a feather; does any man make question of that?


MEM. They need not; for I remember I saw a Cardinal weigh them once, and the
Woman was found 3. grains lighter.


COM. SEN. It Is strange; for I have seen Gentlewomen wear Feathers oftentimes;
can they carry heavier things then themselves?


MEM. O sir, I remember it is their only delight to do so.


COM. SEN But how apply you the last verse, it fills no place Sir?


PHA. By my faith, that spoils all the former; for these fardingalls take up
all the room now a days; it is not a woman questionless; shall I be put down
with a Riddle firrah? Heuresis search the corners of your conceit, and find it
me quickly.


HEU. Hay (...), I have it, it is a man's face in a Looking Glass.


PHAN. My Lord, it is so indeed. Sirrah lets see it, for do you see my right eye
here?


COM. SEN. What of your eye?


PHA. O Lord, sir, this kind of frown is excellent, especially when it is
sweetened with such a pleasing smile.


COM. SE. Phantastes.


PHA. O Sir, my left eye is my right in the glass do you see? by these lips my
garters hang so neatly, my Gloves and shoes become my hands and feet so well:
Heuresis, tie my shoes strings with a new knot; -- this point was scarce well
trust. -- so, it is excellent. -- Looking-glasses were a passing invention, I
protest the fittest books for Ladies to study on --


MEM. Take heed that you fall not in love with your self Phantastes, as I
remember: Anamnestes, who wast that died of the looking disease?


AN. Forsooth Narcissus, by the same token he was turned to a Daffadill, and as
he died for love of himself, so if you remember there was an old ill-favored,
precious-nosed, babber-lipt, beetle-browed, bleer-eyd, slouch-eard slave that
looking himself by chance in a Glass, died for pure hate.


PHA. By the lip of my -- I could live and die with this face.


COM. SEN, Fie fie Phantastes, so effeminate, for shame leave off. Visus, your
objects I must needs say are admirable if the house and instrument be
answerable, lets hear therefore in brief your description --


VIS. Under the forehead of mount Cephalon,
That over-peers the coast of Microcosme,
All in the shadow of two pleasant groves,
Stand my two mansion houses, both as round,
As the clear heavens, both twins as like each other;
As star to star, which by the vulgar sort,
For their resplendent composition,
Are named the bright eyes of mount Cephalon:
With four fair rooms those lodgings are contrived.
Four goodly rooms in form most spherical,
Closing each other like the heavenly orbs:
The first whereof, of Natures substance wrought,
As a strange moat the other to defend,
Is trained moveable by Art divine,
Stirring the whole compacture of the rest;
The second chamber is most curiously
Composed of burnisht, and transparent horn.

PHAN. That Is a matter of nothing, I have known many have such bed-chambers.


MEM. It may be so, for I remember being once in the towns Library, I read such
a thing, in their great book of monuments called Cornucopia, or rather their
copia-Cornu.


VIS. The third's a lesser room of purest glass;
The fourth's smallest, but passes all the former
In worth of matter, built most sumptuously,
With walls transparent of pure Christalline.
This the souls mirror and the bodies guide,
Loves Cabinet, bright beacons of the Realm,
Casements of light, quiver of Cupids shafts:
Wherein I sit and immediately receive
The species of things corporeal,
Keeping continual watch and sentinel:
Least foreign hurt invade our Microcosme,
And warning give, (if pleasant things approach)
To entertain them from this costly room;
Leads my Lord an entry to your house;
Through which I hourly to your self convay
Matters of wisdom by experience bred:
Arts first invention, pleasant vision,
Deep contemplation, that attires the soul,
In gorgeous roabes of flowering literature:
Then if that Visus have deserved best,
Let his victorious brow, with Crown be blessed.

COM. SEN. Anamnestes, see who is to come next.


ANA. Presently my Lord.


PHAN. Visus, I wonder that amongst all your objects, you presented us not with
Platoes Idea, or the sight of Ninivie, Babylon, London, or some Sturbridge
fair-monsters; they would have done passing well, those motions in my
imagination are very delightful.


VIS. I was loath to trouble your honors with such toies, neither could I
provide them in so short a time.


COM. SEN. We will consider your worth; mean while we dismiss you.


Visus leads his show about the stage, and so goes out with it. ACT. 3. SCEN.
ultima.
AUDITUS, etc. AND. Hark, hark, hark, hark, peace, peace, O peace; O sweet,
admirable, Swanlike heavenly! hark, O most mellisluous strain; O what a
pleasant close was there; O full, most delicate!


COM. SEN. How now Phantastes, is Auditus mad?


PHAN. Let him alone, his musical head is always full of od crotchets.


AND. Did you mark the dainty driving of the last point? an excellent
maintaining of the song by the choice timpan of mine ear! I never heard a
better; hist, st, st; hark, why there is a cadence able to ravish the dullest
Stoic.


COM. SEN. I know not what to think on him.


AND. There how sweetly the pliane-song was dissolved into descant, and how
easily they came off with the last rest! hark, hark, the bitter sweetest
Acromatick.


COM. SEN. Auditus.


AND. Thanks good Apollo for this timely grace; never could thou in fitter: O
more then most musical harmony; O most admirable consort! have you no ears? do
you not hear this music?


PHAN. It may be good, but in my opinion they rest too long in the beginning.


AND. Are you then deaf? do you not yet perceive the wondrous sound the
heavenly orbs do make with their continual motion! hark, hark, O honey sweet!


COM. SEN. What tune do they play?


AND. Why such a tune as never was, nor never shall be heard; mark now, now
mark, now, now.


PHAN. List, list, list.


AND. Hark, O sweet, sweet, sweet!


PHAN. List, how my heart envies my happy ears! hisht, by the gold strung Harp
of Apollo, I hear the celestial music of the spears, as plainly as ever
Pythagoras did; O most excellent diapason, good, good, good! It plays Fortune
my so eas distinctly as may be.


COM. S. As the fool thinks, so the Bell clinketh; I protest I hear no more
then a post.


PHAN. What, the Lavalta hay? nay, if the heavens fiddle, Fancy must needs
dance.


COM. S. Prithee sit still, thou must dance nothing but the passing measures.
Memory, do you hear this harmony of the spears?


MEM. Not now my Lord, but I remember about some 4000. years ago, when the sky
was first made, we heard very perfectly.


ANA. By the same token the first tune the Planets played, I remember Venus the
Treble ran sweet division upon Saturn the Base: The first tune they played was
Sellengers round, in memory whereof ever since it has been called the
beginning of the world.


COM. S. How comes it we cannot hear it now?


MEM. Our ears are so well acquainted with the sound, that we never mark it. As
I remember, the Egyptian Catadupes never heard the roaring of the fall of
Nilus, because the noise was so familiar unto them.


COM. S. Have you no other objects to judge by then these, Auditus?


AND. This is the rarest and most exquisite,
Most spherical, divine, angelical;
But since your duller ears cannot perceive it,
May it please your Lordship to withdraw yourself
Unto this neighboring Grove, there shall you see
How the sweet Treble of the chirping birds,
And the soft stirring of the moved leaves,
Running delightful descant to the sound
Of the base murmuring of the bubling brook,
Becomes a consort of good instruments;
While twenty babbling echoes round about,
Out of the stony concave of their mouth,
Restore the vanished music of each close,
And fill your ears full of redoubled pleasure.

COM. S. I will walk with you very willingly, for I grow weary of sitting. Come
Master Register and Master Phantastes.


Exeunt omnes. Finis Act. 3.
Act. 4. Scena. 1.
MEMDACIO, ANAMNESTES, HEURESIS. MEN. Prithee Nam be persuaded; is it not better
go to a feast then stay here for a fray?


ANA. A feast? do think Auditus will make the Judges a feast?


MEN. Faith I, why should he carry them to his house else?


ANA. Why sir, to hear a set or two of songs; slid his banquets are nothing
but fish, all soll, soll, soll? I Will teach thee wit boy, never go me to a
Musicians house for Junkets, unless thy stomach lies in thine ears; for there
is nothing but commending this songs delicate air, that motects dainty air;
this sonnets sweet air, that madrigals melting air; this dirgesse mournful air,
this Church-air, that Chamber-air; French air, English air, Italian air; why
Lad, they be pure Chamelions, they feed only upon the air.


MEN. Chamelions? I Will be sworn, some of your Fiddlers be rather Cammels, for by
their good wills they will never leave eating.


ANA. True, and good reason, for they do nothing all the day but stretch and
grate their small guts: But oh, yonder is the Ape Heuresis: let me go I prithee.


MEN. Nay, good now stay a little, let us see his humor.


HEU. I see no reason to the contrary; for we see the quintessense of Wine will
convert Water into Wine; why therefore should not the Elixar of gold turn lead
into pure gold?


MEN. Ha, ha, ha, ha, he is turned Chymick sir, it seems so by his talk.


HEU. But how shall I devise to blow the fire of Beech-coals with a continual
and equal blast? ha? I will have my bellows driven with a wheel, which wheel
shall be a self mover.


ANA. Here Is old turning, these Chymicks seeking to turn lead into gold, turn
away all their own Silver.


HEU. And my wheel shall be Geometrically proportioned into seven or nine
concave incircled arms, wherein I will put equal poises; hai, hai, hai,
(...), I have it, I have it, I have it,


MEN. Heuresis?


HEU. But what is best to contain the Quicksilver? ha?


ANA. Do you remember your promise Heuresis?


HEU. It must not be Iron, for Quicksilver is the tyrant of metals, and will
soon fret it.


ANA. Heuresis? Heuresis?


HEU. Nor Brass, nor Copper, nor Mastlin, nor Mineral, (...), I have it, I
have it, it must be


ANA. You have indeed sir, and thus much more then you looked for (snap.)


(Heuresis and Anamnestes about to fight, but Mendacio parts them.) MEN. You
shall not fight, but if you will always disagree, let us have words and no
blows; Houresis, what reason have you to fall out with him?


HEU. Because he is always abusing me, and takes the upper hand of me
everywhere.


ANA. And why not sir? I am thy better in any place.


HEU. Have I been the Author of the seven liberal Sciences, and consequently of
all learning? have I been the patron of all Mechanical devises, to be thy
inferior? I tell thee Anamnestes, thou have not so much as a point but thou
art beholding to me for it.


ANA. Good, good, but what had your invention been, but for my remembrance? I
can prove that thou belly-sprung invention art the most improfitable member in
the world; for ever since thou were born thou have been a bloody murderer, and
thus I prove it; In the quiet years of Saturn (I remember Jupiter was then but
in his swath-bands) thou rentest the bowels of the earth, and broughtst Gold to
light, whose beauty (like Hellen) set all the world by the ears; then upon that
thou foundest out Iron, and put weapons in their hands; and now in the last
populous age, thou taught'st a scab-shin Friar the hellish invention of powder
and Guns.


HEU. Cal'st it hellish? thou lie, it is the most admirablest invention of
all others; for whereas others imitate nature, this excells nature her self.


MEM. True, for a Cannon will kill as many at one shot, as Thunder does
commonly at twenty.


ANA. Therefore more murdering art thou then the light bolt.


HEU. But to show the strength of my conceit, I have found out a means to
withstand the stroke of the most violent culvering: Mendacio, thou saw it
when I demonstrated invention.


ANA. What some wool-packs, or mudwalls? or such like?


HEU. Mendacio, I prithee tell it him, for I love not to be a trumpeter of mine
own praises.


MEN. I must needs confess this devise to pass all that ever I heard or saw;
and thus it was. First, he takes a Faulcon and charges it without all deceits,
with dry powder well canphred; then did he put in a single bullet, and a great
quantity of drop-shot, both round and lachrimal; this done he sets me a boy
sixty paces off, just point blank over against the mouth of the piece; now in
the very midst of the direct line he fastens a post, upon which he hangs me in
a cord, a Siderite of Herculean stone.


ANA. Well, well, I know it well; it was found out in Ida, in the year of the
world -- by one Magnes, whose name it retains, though vulgarly they call it the
Adamant.


MEN. When he had hanged this Adamant in a cord, he comes back and gives fire
to the touchhole, now the powder consumed to avoid vacuum.


HEU. Which is intolerable in nature; for first shall the whole Machin of the
World, Heaven, Earth, Sea and Air, return to the misshapen house of Chaos, then
the least vacuum be found in the universe.


MEN. The bullet and drop-shot most impetuously from the fiery throat of the
Culvering (but oh strange) no sooner came they near the Adamant in the cord,
but they were all arested by the Sargent of Nature, and hovered in the Air
round about it, till they had lost the force of their motion, clasping
themselves close to the stone in most lovely manner, and not any one flew to in
danger the mark; so much did they remember their duty to Nature, that they
forgot the errand they were sent of.


ANA. This is a very artificial lie.


MEN. Nam, believe it, for I saw it; and which is more, I have practiced this
devise often: Once when I had a quarrel with one of my Lady Veritas naked
knaves, and had pointed him the field, I conveyed into the heart of my Buckler
an Adamant, and when we met I drew all the foins of his Rapier whether soever
he intended them, or howsoever I guided mine arm, pointed still to the midst of
my Buckler, so that by this means I hurt the Knave mortally, and my self came
away untoucht, to the wonder of all the beholders.


ANA. Sir you speak Metaphorically, because thy wit Mendacio always draws
men's objections to thy forethought excuses.


HEU. Anamnestes, it is true, and I have an addition to this, which is to make
the bullet shot from the enemy, to return immediately upon the Gunner; but let
all this pass, and say the worst thou can against me.


ANA. I say Guns were found out for the quick dispatch of mortality; and when
thou saw men grow wise, and beget so fair a child as Peace, of so foul and
deformed a mother as War, least there should be no murder, thou devisedst
poison.


MEN. Nay, fie Nam, urge him not too far.


ANA. And last and worst, thou soundst out cookery, that kills more then
weapons, guns, wars or poisons, and would destroy all, but that thou inventedst
Physic, that helps to make away some.


HEU. But firra, besides all this, I devised Pillories for such forging
villains as thy self.


ANA. Cal'st me villain?


(They fight, and are parted by Mendacio.) MEN. You shall not fight as long as
I am here; give over I say.


HEU. Mendacio, you offer me great wrong to hold me, in good faith I shall fall
out with you.


MEN. Away, away, away, you are Invention, are you not?


HEU. Yes Sir, what then?


MEN. And you Remembrance?


AN. Well sir, well.


MEN. Then I will be Judicium, the moderator betwixt you, and make you both
friends; come, come, shake hands, shake hands.


HEU. Well, well, if you will needs have it so;


ANA. I am in some sort content.


Mendacio walks with them, holding them by the hands. MEN. Why this is as it
should be, when Mendacio has Invention on the one hand, and Remembrance on the
other, as he will be sure never to be found with Truth in his mouth, so he scorns
to be taken in a lie; hai, hai, hai, my fine waggs whist?


AN. Whist.


HEU. Whist.


ACT. 4. SCEN. 2.
Communis Sensus, Memory, Phantastes, Heuresis, Anamnestes take their places on
the bench, as before; Auditus on the stage, a Page before him bearing his
target, the field sable, an heart or, next him Tragedus apparelled in black
velvet, fair buskins, a fauchion, etc. then Comaedus in a light colored green
taffata robe, silk stockings, pumps, gloves, etc. COMMUNIS SENSUS, MEMORY,
PHANTASTES, HEURESIS, ANAMNESTES, etc. COM. They had some reason that held the
soul a harmony, for it is greatly delighted with music; how fast we were tied
by the ears to the consort of voices powder; but all is but a little pleasure,
what profitable objects has he?


PH. Your ears will teach you presently, for now he is coming, that fellow in
the bays me thinks I should have known him; o it is Comaedus, it is so, but he is
become now a days something humerous, and too too, Satirical, up and down'
like his great grandfather Aristophanes.


AN. These two my Lord, Comaedus and Tragedus,
My fellows both, both, twins, but so unlike,
As birth to death, wedding to funeral:
For this that rears himself in buskins quaint,
Is pleasant at the first, proud in the midst,
Stately in all, and bitter death at end.
That in the pumpes does frown at first acquaintance,
Trouble the midst, but in the end concludes,
Closing up all with a sweet catastrophe?
This grave and sad disdain with brinish tears,
That light and quick with wrinkled laughter painted;
This deals with Nobles, Kings, and Emperors:
Full of great fears, great hopes, great enterprises;
This other trades with men of mean condition;
His projects small, small hopes and dangers little*
This gorgeous broidered with rich sentences:
That fair and purfled round with merriments:
Both vice detect, and virtue beautify,
By being deaths mirror, and life's looking-glass.

COM. Salutem jam primum a principio propiliam, Mihi atque vobis spectatores
nuntio.


PH. Pish, pish, this is a speech with no action, lets hear TERENCE, Quid
igitur faciam, etc.


COM. Quid igitur faciam? non eam ne nunc quidem cum accusor ultro?


PH. Phy, phy, phy, no more action, lend me your baies, do it thus, Quid
igitur, etc. (he acts it after the old kind of Pantomimick action.)


COM. S. I should judge this action Phantastes, most absurd, unless we should
come to a Commody, as Gentlewomen to the Commencement, only to see men speak.


PH. In my imagination it is excellent, for in this kind the hand (you know) is
harbinger to the tongue, and provides the words a lodging in the ears of the
Auditors.


COM. S. Auditus, it is now time you make us acquainted with the quality of the
house you keep in, for our better help in judgment.


AND. Upon the sides of fair mount Cephalon,
Have I two houses passing humane skill;
Of finest matter by dame nature wrought,
Whose learned singers have adorned the same
With gorgeous porches of so strange a form,
That they command the passingers to stay;
The doors whereof in hospitality,
Nor day, nor night are shut, but open wide,
Gently invite all comers; whereupon
They are named the open ears of Cephalon.
But least some bolder sound should boldly rush,
And break the nice composture of the work,
The skilful builder wisely has inrang'd
An entry from each port with curious twins,
And crookt Meanders, like the labyrinth
That Dedalus framed to enclose the Minotaur;
At end whereof is placed a costly portal,
Resembling much the figure of a drum,
Granting slow entrance to a private closet;
Where daily with a Mallet in my hand,
I set and frame all words and sounds that come,
Upon an Anvile, and so make them fit
For the perewinckling poor; that winding leads
From my close chamber to your Lordships Cell.
Thither do I chief Justice of all accents,
Psyches next porter, Microcosmes front,
Learnings rich treasure, bring discipline,
Reasons discourse, knowledge of foreign states,
Loud fame of great Heroes virtuous deeds,
The marrow of grave speeches, and the flowers
Of quickest Wits, neat Jests, and pure Conceits,
And often times to ease the heavy burden
Of government your Lordships shoulders bear,
I thither do conduce the pleasing Nuptials
Of sweetest instruments with heavenly noise;
If then Auditus have deserved the best,
Let him be dignified before the rest.

COM. S. Auditus, I am almost a Sceptick in this matter, scarce knowing which
way the balance of the cause will decline; when I have heard the rest, I will
dispatch judgment; mean while you may depart.


Auditus leads the show about the stage, and then goes out. ACTUS 4. SCENA 3.
COMMUNIS SENSUS, Memoria, Phantastes, Anamnestes, Heuresis as before, Olfactus
in a garland of several flowers, a Page before him, bearing his target, his
field vert, a bound argent, two Boys with casting bottels, and two with
censers with incense, another with a velvet cushion stuck with flowers,
another with a basket of herbs, another with a box of Ointment; Olfactus leads
them about, and making obeisance presents them before the bench. 1. BOY. Your
only way to make a good pomander, is this, take an ounce of the purest garden
mould, cleansed and steeped seven days in change of motherlesse rose Water,
then take the best Ladanum, Benioine, both Storaxes, Ambergreece, and Civet,
and musk, incorporate them together, and work them into what form you please;
this if your breath be not too valiant, will make you smell as sweet as my
Ladies dog.


PH. This Boy it should seem represent Odor, he is so perfect a perfumer.


ODOR. I do my Lord, and have at my command,
The smell of flowers and Odoriferous drugs,
Of ointments sweet, and excellent perfumes,
And Court-like waters, which if once you smell,
You in your heart will wish as I suppose,
That all your Body were transformed to Nose.

PH. Olfactus of all the Senses, your objects have the worst luck, they are
always jarring with their contraries; for none can wear Civet, but they are
suspected of a proper bad sent: where the Proverb springs, He smells best,
that does of nothing smell.


ACT. 4. SCENA 4.
The bench and Olfactus as before, Tobacco apparelled in a taffata mantle, his
arms brown and naked, buskins made of the pilling of Ofiers, his neck bare,
hung with Indian leaves, his face brown, painted with blew stripes, in his nose
swines teeth, on his head a painted wicker crown, with Tobacco pipes set in it,
plumes of Tobacco leaves, led by two Indian boys naked, with tapers in their
hands, Tobacco (...) and pipes lighted. PH. Foh, foh, what a smell is here? is
this one of your delightful objects?


OLF. It is your only sent in request Sir.


COM. SEN. What fiery fellow is that, which smokes so much in the mouth?


OLF. It is the great and puissant god of Tobacco


TOB. Ladoch guevarroh pusuer shelvar^ baggon, Olfia di quanon, Indi cortilo
uraggon.


PH. Ha, ha, ha, ha, this in my opinion is the tongue of the Antipodes.


MEM. No I remember it very well, it was the language the Arcadians spoke, that
lived long before the Moon.


CO. SEN. What signifies it Olfactus?


OKF. This is the mighty Emperor Tobacco, King of Trinidado, that in being
conquered, conquered all Europe, in making them pay tribute for their smoke.


TOB. Erfronge inglues conde hifinge,
Develin floscoth ma pu cocthinge.

OLF. Expeller of Catarhes, banisher of all agues, your guts only salve for
the green wounds of a nonplus.


TOB. Al vuleam vercu, I parda pora si de gratam ka famala
Mara, che Bauho respartera, quirara?

OLF. Son to the god Vulcun, and Tellus, kin to the father of Mirth, called
Bacebus?


TOB. Viscard^^^k, pillostuphe, par^ano tinar omagar,
Pagi dagon stollif^^fe, car^ciba^o scribus.

OLF. Genius of all Swaggerers, grossest enemy to Physicians, sweet ointment
for sour teeth, firm knot of good fellowship, Adamant of Company, swift wind to
spread the wings of Time, hated of none but those that know him not, and of so
great deserts, that who so is acquainted with him, can hardly forsake him.


PH. It seems these last words were very significant, I promise you a god of
great denomination, he may be my Lord Traps for his large Titles.


CO. S. But forward Olfactus, as they have done before you, with your
description.


OLF. Just in the midst of Cephalons round face
As'twere a frontis-piece unto the hill,
Olfactus lodging built in figure long,
Doubly dis-parted with two precious vaults,
The roots whereof most richly are enclosed
With Orient Pearls, and sparkling Diamonds:
Beset at the end with Emeralds and Turchois,
And Rubies red and flaming Chrysolits,
At upper end whereof in costly manner,
I lay my head between two spungeous pillowes,
Like fair Adonis twixt the paps of Venus,
Where I conducting in and out the wind,
Daily examine all the air inspired.
By my pure searching, if it be pure,
And fit to serve the Lungs with lively breath:
Hence do I likewise minister perfume
Unto the neighbor brain, perfumes of force
To cleanse your head, and make your fantasy
To refine wit, and sharp invention,
And strengthen memory, from whence it came,
That old devotion Incense did ordain
To make man's spirit more apt for things divine;
Besides a thousand more commodities,
In lieu whereof your Lordships I request,
Give me the Crown if I deserve it best.

Olfactus leads his company about the Stage, and goes out. ACT. 4. SCEN. 5.
The Bench as before: a Page with a shield argent, an Ape proper with an apple,
then Gustus with a cornu-copia in his hand, Bacchus in a Garland of leaves and
Grapes, a white suit, and over it a thin sarsenet to his foot, in his hand a
spear wreathed with vine leaves, on his arm a Target with a Tiger, Ceres with a
Crown of ears of corn, in a yellow silk robe, a bunch of poppy in her hand, a
schutcheon charged with a Dragon. COM. SEN. In good time Gustus, have you
brought your objects?


GUST. My servant Appetitus follows with them.


AP. Come, come Bacchus, you are so fat; enter, enter.


PH. Fie, fie Gustus, this is a great indecorum to bring Bacchus alone, you
should have made Thirst, led him by the hand.


GUS. Right Sir, but men now a days drink often when they be not dry; besides
I could not get red herings, and neat tongues enough to apparel him in.


COM. S. What, never a speech of him.


GUS. I put an Octave of Jambicks in his mouth, and he has drunk it down.


AP. Well done, Muscadine and Eggs stand hot; what buttered Claret? go thy way
thou had best, for blind men that cannot see how wickedly thou lookst -- how
now, what small thin fellow are you here? ha.


BOY. Beer forsooth, beer forsooth.


AP. Beer forsooth? get you gone to the buttery till I call for you; you are
none of Bacchus attendants I am sure, he cannot endure the smell of Malt.
Where is Ceres? oh well, well, is the March-pane broken? ill luck, ill luck;
come hanged never stand to set it together again; serve out fruit there; (Enter
Boys with a Banquet, Marmolet, sweet, etc. deliver it round among the
Gentlewomen, and go out) What do you come with rostmeat after Apples? away with
it: Digestion, serve out Cheese; what, but a pennyworth? it is just the measure
of his nose that sold it; lambs wool? the meekest meat in the world, 'twill let
any man fleece it. Snap-dragon there.


MEM. O I remember this dish well, it was first invented by Pluto, to entertain
Proserpina withal.


PH. I think not so Memory; for when Hercules had killed the flaming Dragon of
Hesperia, with the Apples of that Orchard he made this fiery meat, in memory
whereof he named it Snap-dragon.


COM. S. Gustus, lets hear your description.


GUS. Near to the lowly base of Cephalon
My house is placed, not much unlike a Cave;
Yet archt above by wondrous workmanship,
With hewn stones wrought smoother and more fine
Then Jeat or Marble fair from Island brought.
Over the door directly does incline
A fair Percullis of compacture strong,
To shut out all that may annoy the state
Or health of Microcosme; and within
Is spread a long board like a plyant tongue,
At which I hourly sit, and trial take
Of meats and drinks needful and delectable;
Twice every day do I provision make
For the sumptuous kitchen of the Commonwealth
Which once well boiled is soon distributed
To all the members, well refreshing them
With good supply of strength-renewing food;
Should I neglect this musing diligence,
The body of the Realm would rulnate;
Your self my Lord with all your policies
And wondrous wit, could not preserve your self;
Nor you Phantastes, nor you Memory;
Psyche her self, were it not that I repair
Her crazie house with props of nourishment,
Would soon forsake us; for whose dear sake
Many a grievous pain have I sustained
By bitter pills, and sour purgations,
Which if I had not valiantly abidden,
She had been long ere this departed.
Since the whole Microcosme I maintain,
Let me as Prince above the Senses reign.

COM. S. The reasons you urge Gustus, breed a new doubt whether it be better to
be commodious or necessary; the resolution whereof I refer to your judgment,
licensing you mean while to depart.


Gustus leads his show about the Stage, and goes out. ACTUS. 4. SCENA. 6.
The bench as before: Tactus, a Page bearing his Scutchron, a Tortesse sables.
TAC. Ready anon forsooth? the Devil she will.
Who would be toiled with wenches in a show?

COM. S. What in such anger Tactus? what is the matter?


TAC. My Lord, I had thought as other Senses did,
By sight of objects to have proved my worth;
Wherefore considering that all the things
That please me most, women are counted chief;
I had thought to have represented in my show,
The Queen of pleasure, Venus and her Son,
Leading a Gentleman enamored,
With his sweet touching of his Mistress lips,
And gentle griping of her tender hands,
And diverse pleasant relishes of touch,
Yet all contained in the bounds of chastity.

PH. Tactus, of all I long to see your objects;
How comes it we have lost those pretty sports?

TAC. Thus it is, five hours ago I set a douzen maids to atire a boy like a nice
Gentlewoman, but there is such doing with their looking-glasses, pinning,
unpinning, setting, unsetting, formings and conformings, painting blew vains,
and cheeks; such stir with Sticks and Combs, Cascanets, Dressings, Purles,
Falls, Squares, Buskes, Bodies, Scarffs, Neck-laces, Carcanets, Rebatoes,
Borders, Tires, Fans, Palizadoes, Puffs, Ruffs, Cuffs, Muffs, Pussles, Fussles,
Par^lets, Frislets, Bandlets, Fillets, Croslets, Pendulets, Amulets, Annulets,
Bracelets, and so many lets, that yet she is scarce dressed to the girdle; and
now there is such calling for Fardingales, Ki^tlets, Busk-points, shoo-ties,
etc. that seven Pedlers shops, nay all Sturbridge Fair will scarce furnish
her: a ship is sooner rigd by far, then a Gentlewoman made ready.


PHA. It Is strange, that women being so mutable, will never change in changing
their apparel?


COM. S. Well let them pass; Tactus we are content, To know your dignity by
relation.


TAC. The instrument of instruments the hand,
Courtesies index, Chamberlane to Nature,
The bodies Soldier, and mouths Caterer,
Pysches great Secretary, the dumbs eloquence;
The blindmans Candle, and his forheads Buckler,
The minister of wrath, and friendships sign,
This is my instrument: nevertheless my power
Extends it self, far as our Queen commands,
Through all the parts and climes of Microcosme.
I am the root of life spreading my virtue
By sinews that extend from head to foot,
To every living part.
For as a subtle Spider closely sitting,
In center of her web that spreddeth round,
If the least Fly but touch the smallest thread,
She feels it instantly; so does my self,
Casting my slender nerve and sundry nets,
Over every particle of all the body,
By proper skill perceive the difference,
Of several qualities, hot, cold, moist and dry;
Hard, soft, rough, smooth, clammy and slippery.
Sweet pleasure, and sharp pain profitable,
That makes us wounded seek for remedy;
By these means do I teach the Body fly,
From such bad things as may endanger it;
A wall of brass can be no more defense,
Unto a town then I to Microcosme;
Tell me what sense is not beholding to me;
The nose is hot or cold, the eyes do weep;
The ears do feel, the tast's a kind of touching,
That when I please, I can command them all,
And make them tremble when I threaten them:
I am the eldest, and biggest of all the rest,
The chiefest note, and first distinction
Betwixt a living tree and living beast;
For though one hear, and see, and smell, and taste,
If he wants touch, he is counted but a block?
Therefore my Lord grant me the royalty;
Of whom there is such great necessity.

COM. S. Tactus stand aside; you sir Anamnestes
Tell the Senses we expect their appearance.

AN. At you Lordships pleasure*

Exit Anamnestes.
ACTUS. 4. SCENA. 7.
COM. SEN. PHA. MEM. HEU. ANA. Upon the bench consulting among themselves: VIS.
TAO. GUST. and OLF. every one with his shield upon his arm; LINGUA and MENDACIO
with them. COM. S. Though you deserve no small punishment for these uproars,
yet at the request of these my assistants I remit it, and by the power of
Judgment our gracious sovereign Psuche has given me, Thus I determine of your
controversies: hum? By your former objects, instruments and reasons, I conceive
the state of Sense to be divided into two parts, one of commodity, the other of
necessity, both which are either for our Queen or for our country; but as the
Soul is more excellent then the Body, so are the Senses that profit the Soul to
be estimated before those that are needful for the Body; Visus and Auditus
serve your selves; Master Register, give me the crown; because it is better to
be well, then simply to be; therefore I judge the crown by right to belong to
you of the Commodities part, and the robe to you of the Necessities side: and
since you Visus are the author of invention, and you Auditus of increase and
addition to the same; seeing it is more excellent to invent, then to augment; I
establish you Visus the better of the two, and chief of all the rest; in token
whereof, I bestow upon you this crown to wear at your liberty.


VIS. I most humbly thank your Lordships.


COM. S. But lest I should seem to neglect you Auditus, I here choose you to be
the Lords Intelligencer to Psuche her Majesty, and you Olfactus, we bestow upon
you the chief Priesthood of Microcosme, perpetually to offer incense in her
Majesty's temple: As for you Tactus, upon your reasons aleaged, I bestow upon
you the robes.


TACT. I accept it most gratefully at your just hands, and will wear it in the
dear remembrance of your good Lordship.


COM. S. And lastly, Gustus, we elect you Psuche her only Taster, and great
Purveior for all her dominions, both by sea and land, in her realm, of
Microcosme.


GUS. We thank your Lordship, and rest well content with equal arbitrament.


CO. S. Now for you Lingua.


LIN. I beseech your Honor let me speak, I will neither trouble the company,
nor offend your patience.


CO. S. I cannot stay so long; we have consulted about you, and find your case
to stand upon these terms and conditions. The number of the Senses in this
little world is answerable to the first bodies in the great world: now since
there be but five in the Universe, the four elements and the pure substance of
the heavens, therefore there can be but five Senses in our Microcosm,
correspondent to those, as the sight to the heavens, hearing to the air,
touching to the earth, smelling to the fire, tasting to the water; by which
five means only the understanding is able to apprehend the knowledge of all
corporal substances: wherefore we judge you to be no Sense simply; only thus
much we from henceforth pronounce, that all women for your sake, shall have six
Senses, seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, touching, and the last and feminine
sense, the sense of speaking.


GUS. I beseech your Lordships and your Assistants, (the only cause of our
friendship) to grace my table with your most welcome presence this night at
supper.


COM. S. I am sorry I cannot stay with you, you know we may by no means omit
our daily attendance at the Court, therefore I pray you pardon us.


GUS. I hope I shall not have the denial at your hands my Masters, and you my
Lady Lingua; come let us drown all our anger in a bowl of Hippocras.


Exeunt Sensus omnes exteriores. COM. S. Come Master Register, shall we walk?


MEM. I pray you stay a little, let me see; ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


PHA. How now Memory, so merry? what do you trouble your self with two palsies
at once, shaking and laughing?


MEM. It Is a strange thing that men will so confidently oppose themselves
against Plato's great year.


PHA. Why not?


MEM. It Is a true an opinion as need be; for I remember it very readily now,
that this time 49000. years ago all we were in this very place, and your
Lordship judged the very same controversy, after the very same manner, in all
respects, and circumstances alike.


COM. S. It Is wondrous strange!


ANA. By the same token you held your staff in you right hand, just as you do
now, and Mr. Phantastes stood wondering at you, gaping as wide as you see him.


PHA. I, but I did not give you a box on the ear sir 49000. years ago, did I?
(snap)


ANA. I do not remember that Sir.


PHA. This time Plato's twelve month to come, look you save your cheeks better.


CO. S. But what entertainment had we at Court for our long staying?


MEM. Lets go, I Will tell you as we walk.


PHA. If I do not seem pranker now, then I did in those days, I Will be hanged.


Exeunt omnes interiores Sensus; manet Lingua. ACTUS. 4. SCENA. 8.
LINGUA. MENDACIO. LI. Why this is good by common Senses means;
Lingua, thou have framed a perfect comedy,
They are all good friends whom thou made enemies,
And I am half a Sense; a sweet piece of service,
I promise you a fair step to preferment.
Was this the care and labor thou have taken,
To bring thy foes together to a banquet
To lose thy Crown, and be deluded thus?
Well now I see my cause is desperate,
The judgments past, sentence irrevocable;
Therefore I Will be content and clap my hands,
And give a Plaudite to their proceedings:
What shall I leave my hate begun imperfect,
So foully vanquished by the spiteful Senses?
Shall I the Embassadresse of gods and men,
That pulled proud Phoebe from her bright some sphere,
And dark'd Apoll^'s countenance with a word,
Raising at pleasure storms, and winds, and earthquakes,
Be overcrow'd, and breath without revenge?
Yet they forsooth base slaves must be preferred,
And deck themselves with my right ornaments;
Does the all knowing Phoebus see this shame
Without redress? will not Heavens help me?
Then shall Hell do it, my enchanting tongue
Can mount the skies, and in a moment fall
From the Pole Artick, to dark Acheron.
I Will make them know mine anger is not spent,
Lingua has power to hurt, and will to do it.
Mendacio, come hither quickly sir.

MEN. Madam.


LING. Hark hither in thine ear.


MEN. Why do you whish thus? here is none to hear you.


LING. I dare not trust these secrets to the Earth, ere since she brought forth
Reeds, whose babbling noise told all the world of Midas Asses ears, (She
whispers him in the ear) Do understand me?


MEN. I, I, I, -- never fear that -- there is a jest indeed -- pish, pish, --
Madam -- do you think me so foolish? -- tut, tut, doubt not:


LING. Tell her if she do not.


MEN. Why do you make any question of it -- what a stir is here -- I warrant
you -- presently?


Exit Mendacio? LIN. Well, I Will to supper, and so closely cover
The rustie canker of mine Iron spite,
With golden foil of goodly semblances;
But if I do not trounce them --
Exit Lingua.
Finis Act. 4.
Act. 5.
Scena. 1.
MENDACIO with a Bottle in his hand. MEN. My Lady Lingua is just like one of
these lean-witted Comedians, who disturbing all to the fifth Act, bring down
some Mercuries or Jupiter in an Engine, to make all friends: So she, but in a
contrary manner, seeing her former plots dispurposed, sends me to an old Witch
called Acrasia, to help to wreak her spite upon the Senses; the old hag after
many an incricled circumstance, and often naming of the direful Hecate, and
Demogorgon, gives me this bottle of Wine mingled with such hellish druggs and
forcible words, that whosoever drinks of it shall be presently possessed with an
enraged and mad kind of anger.


ACT. 5.
SCENA. 2.
MENDACIO, CRAPULA, APPETITUS crying. MEND. What Is this Crapula beating
Appetitus out of doors? ha!


CRAP. You filthy long Crane, you meager slave, will you kill our guests with
blowing continual hunger in them? (tiffe, toffe, tiffe, toffe) the Senses have
overcharged their stomachs already, and you Sir serve them up a fresh
appetite with every new dish; they had burst their guts if thou had staid but
a thought longer? (tiffe, toffe, tiffe, toffe,) be gone or I Will set thee away;
begone ye gnaw-bone, raw-bone rascal.


MEND. Then my devise is clean spoiled. Appetitus should have been as the bowl
to present this medicine to the Senses, and now Crapula has beaten him out of
doors? what shall I do?


CRAP. Away Sir, (tiff toff, tiff, etc.


AP. Well Crapula, well, I have deserved better as your hands then so, I was
the man you know first brought you into Gustus's service, I lined your guts
there, and you use me thus? but grease a fat sow, etc.


CRAP. Do thou talk (tiff, toff) hence, hence tiff, tiff, hence avaunt curre,
avaunt you dog!


Exit Crapula. APP. The belching gor-belly has wel-nigh killed me: I am shut
out of doors finely; well this is my comfort, I may walk now in liberty at my
own pleasure.


MEND. Appetitus, Appetitus!


AP. Ah Mendacio, Mendacio.


MEND. Why how now man, how now? how is it? can not speak?


AP. Faith I am like a bag-pipe, that never sounds but when the belly is full.


MEND. Thou empty, and come from a feast?


AP. From a fray, I tell thee Mendacio. I am now just like the Ewe that gave
suck to a Wolfs whelp. I have nursed up my fellow Crapula so long that he is
grown strong enough to beat me.


MEND. And whether will thou go, now thou art banished out of service?


AP. Faith I Will travel to some College or other in an University.


MEND. Why so?


AP. Because Appetitus is well beloved amongst Scholars, for there I can dine
and sup with them, and rise again as good friends as we sat down, I Will thither
questionless.


MEND. Hear'st thou? give me thy hand, by this hand I love thee; go to then,
thou shall not forsake thy masters thus, I say thou shall not.


AP. Alas I am very loath; but how shall I help it?


MEND. Why take this bottle of wine, come on, go thy ways to them again.


AP. Ha, ha, ha, what good will this do?


MEND. This is the Nepenthe that reconciles the Gods: do but let the Senses
taste of it, and fear not, they will love thee as well as ever they did.


AP. I pray thee where had it?


MEND. My Lady gave it me to bring her: Mercury stole it from Hell for her:
thou know there were some jarres betwixt her and thy masters, and with this
drink she would gladly wash out all the relics of their agreement: Now
because I love thee, thou shall have the grace of presenting it to them, and so
come in favor again.


AP. It smells well, I would fain begin to them.


MEND. Nay stay no longer lest they have supt before thou come.


AP. Mendacio, how shall I requite thy infinite courtesy?


MEND. Nay, pray thee leave, go catch occasion by the foretop; but hearst thou?
as soon as it is presented, round my Lady Lingua in the ear, and tell her of
it.


AP. I will, I will, I will; adue, adue, adue,


Exit Appetitus. ACT. 5. SEN. 3.
MENDACIO solus. MEN. Why this is better then I could have wished it,
Fortune I think is fallen in love with me,
Answering so right mine expectation:
By this time Appetite is at the Table.
And with a lowly Cringe presents the Wine
To his old Master Gustus; now he takes it,
And drinks perchance to Lingua, she craftily
Kisses the Cup, but lets not down a drop,
And gives it to the rest, it is sweet, the'l swallow it,
But when it is once descended to the stomach,
And sends up noisome vapors to the Brain,
'Twill make them swagger gallantly, the'le rage
Most strangely, or Acrasias Art deceives her:
When if my Lady stir her nimble tongue,
And closely sow contentious words amongst them,
O what a stabbing there will be? what bleeding?

ACTUS 5. SCENA 4.
LINGUA, MENDACIO. LING. What art thou there Mendacio? pretty rascal, Come let
me kiss thee for thy good deserts.


MEN. Madam do take? have they all tasted it?


LIN. All, all and all are well nigh mad already:
Oh how they stare, and swear, and fume, and brawl!
Wrath gives them weapons; Pots and Candle-sticks,
Joined stools and Trenchers fly about the room,
Like to the bloody banquet of the Centaures:
But all the sport is to see what several thoughts
The potions work in their imaginations.
For Visus thinks himself; a ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.

ACTUS. 3. SCENA. 5.
APPETITUS, MENDACIO, LINGUA. AP. So-ho Mendacio! so-ho, so-ho!


MEN. Madam, I doubt they come, yonder is Appetitus, you had best be gone,
least in their outrage they should injure you. (Exit Lingua) How now Hunger?
how do thou my fine May Pole, ha?


AP. I may well be called a May Pole; for the Senses do nothing but dance a
morice about me.


MEN. Why? what ails them? are they not (as I promised thee) friends with thee?


AP. Friends with me? nay rather frenzy; I never knew them in such a case in
all my life.


MEN. Sure they drank too much, and are mad for love of thee.


AP. They want common Sense amongst them; there is such a hurly burly, Auditus
is stark deaf, and wonders why men speak so softly that he cannot hear them:
Visus has drunk himself stark blind, and therefore imagines himself to be
Polyphemus: Tactus is raging mad, and cannot be otherwise persuaded but he is
Hercules furens; there is such conceits amongst them.


ACT. 5. SCENA. 6.
VISUS. APPETITUS. MENDACIO. VIS. O that I could but find the villain Outis,
Outis the villain that thus blinded me.


MEN. Who is this, Visus?


AP. I, I, I, otherwise called Polyphemus.


VIS. By heavens bright Sun, the days most glorious eye,
That lightneth all the world but Polypheme,
And by mine eye that once was answerable
Unto that Sun, but now is extinguished.

MEN. He can see to swear methinks.


VIS. If I but once lay hands upon the slave,
That thus has robbed me of my dearest Jewel,
I Will rend the Miscreant into a thousand pieces,
And gnash his trembling members 'twixt my teeth,
Drinking his live-warm blood to satisfy
The boiling thirst of pain and furiousness,
That thus exasperates great Polypheme.

MEN. 'Pray thee Appetitus see how he grasps for that he would be loath to find.


AP. What Is that, a stumbling block?


VIS. These hands that whilom tore up sturdy Oaks,
And rent the rock that dashed out Acis brains,
Both in the stole bliss of my Galatea,
Serve now (oh misery) to no better use,
But for bad guides to my unskilful feet,
Never accustomed thus to be directed.

MEN. As I am a Rogue he wants nothing but a wheel, to make him the true
picture of Fortune; how say? what, shall we play at blind-man-buffe with him?


AP. I if thou will, but first I Will try whether he can see!


VIS. Find me out Outis, search the rocks and woods,
The hills and dales, and all the Coasts adjoining,
That I may have him, and revenge my wrong.

AP. Visus, me thinks your eyes are well enough.


VIS. What Is he that calls me Visus? do not know?


They run about him, playing with him, and abusing him. AP. To him Mendacio, to
him, to him.


MEN. There, there Appetitus, he comes, he comes; ware, ware, he comes, ha, ha,
ha, ha.


Visus stumbles, falls down, and sits still. ACT. 5. SCENA 7.
MENDACIO, APPETITUS, TACTUS, with a great black Jack in his hand. MEN Is this
he that thinks himself Hercules?


AP. I, wilt see me out-swagger him?


MEN. I do, do, I love not to sport with such mad play-fellows; tickle him
Appetitus, tickle him, tickle him.

Exit Mendacio.
TAC. Have I not here the great and puissant Club,
Wherewith I conquered three-chopt Cerberus?

AP. Have I not here the sharp and warlike teeth,
That at one breakfast quaild thrice three hoggs faces?

TAC. And are not these Alcides brawny arms,
That rent the Lions jaws, and killed the boar?

AP. And is not this the Stomach that defeated
Nine yards of pudding, and a rank of pyes?

TAC. Did not I crop the seaven-fold Hydras crest
And with a river cleansed Augeas stable?

AP. Did not I crush a sevenfold Custards crust,
And with my tongue swept a well furnished table?

TAC. Did not these feet and hands oretake and slay
The nimble Stag, and fierce impetuous bull?

AP. Did not this throat at one good meal devour,
That Stags sweet venison, and strong bulls beef?

TAC. Shall Hercules be thus disparaged?
Juno! you pouting queen, you lowering trull,
Take heed I take you not, for by Joves thunder
I Will be revenged.

Appetitus draws Visus backward from Tactus. AP. Why Visus, Visus, will you be
killed? away, away. Exit Visus.


TAC. Who have you here? see, see the Giant Cacus,
Draws an Ox backward to his theevish den,
Has this devise so long deluded me?
Monster of men, Cacus, restore my cattle,
Or instantly I Will crush thy idle Cox-comb,
And dash thy doltish brains against thy Cave.

AP. Cacus, I Cacus? ha, ha, ha. Tactus, you mistake me. I am yours to command,
Appetitus.


TAC. Art Appetitus? Thou Art so; run quickly villain, Fetch a whole Ox to
satisfy my stomach.


AP. Fetch an ^sse to keep you company.


TAC. Then down to hell, tell Pluto Prince of Devils
That great Alcides wants a kitchen wench
To turn his spit; command him from my self
To fend up Proserpine, she will serve the turn.

AP. I must find you meat, and the Devil find you Cooks. Which is the next
way?


TAC. Follow the beaten path thou can not miss it;
It Is a wide Causie that conducteth thither,
An easy tract, and down hill all the way;
But if the black Prince will not send her quickly,
But still detain her for his bedfellow,
Tell him I Will drag him from his iron-chair,
By the steel tresses, and then sow him fast
With the three furies in a lethern bag,
Thus will drown them in the Ocean.

He pours the Jack of beer upon Appetitus. AP. You had better keep him alive to
light Tobacco-pipes, or to sweep chimneys.


TAC. Art thou not gone? nay then I Will send thy soul before thee, 'twill do thy
message sooner (tiff, tiff.)


AP. Hercules, Hercules, Hercules; do not you hear Omphale? Hark how she calls
you, beark.


TAC. It Is she indeed, I know her s^gned voice;
Omphale, dear Commandresse of my life
My thoughts repose, sweet Center of my cares
Where all my hopes and best desires take rest.
Lo where the mighty Son of Jupiter
Throws himself captive at your conquering feet,
Do not disdain my voluntary humbleness,
Accept my service, bless me with commanding,
I will perform the hardest imposition,
And run through twelve new labors for thy sake
Omphale, dear commandresse of my life.

AP. Do you not see how she beckons to you to follow her? Look how she holds
her distaff, look you?


TAC. Where is she gone, that I may follow her? Omphale, stay, stay, take thy
Hercules?


AP. There, there man, you are right.


Exit Tactus. ACT. 5. SCENE. 8.
APPETITUS, Solus. AP. What a strange temper are the Senses in?
How come their wits thus topsie turvy turned?
Hercules, Tactus, Visus, Polypheme,
Two goodly surnames have they purchased:
By the race Ambrosian of an Oyster pie;
They have got such proud imaginations,
That I could wish I were mad for company;
But since my fortunes cannot stretch so high,
I Will rest contented with this wise estate.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 9.
APPETITUS, AUDITUS, with a Candlestick. AP. What, more anger? Auditus got
abroad too?


AND. Take this abuse at base Olfactus hands!
What did he challenge me to meet me here
And is not come? well I Will proclaim the slave
The vilest dastard that ere broke his word;
But stay, yonder is Appetitus.

AP. I pray you Auditus what ails you?


AND. Ha, ha!


AP. What ails you?


AND. Ha! what say thou?


AP. Who has abused you thus?


AND. Why do thou whisper thus? Can not speak out?


AP. Save me, I had clean forgotten; why are you so angry Auditus?


AND. Bite us, who dares bite us?


AP. I talk of no biting, I say, what is the matter between Olfactus and you?


AND. Will Olfactus bite me? do if he dares, would he would meet me here
according to his promise: Mine ears are somewhat thick of late, I pray thee
speak out louder.


AP. Ha, ha, ha, ha, this is fine in faith; ha, ha, ha.
Hear you, have you lost your ears at Supper.

AND. Excellent cheer at supper, I confess it:
But when it is sawc'd with sour contentions,
And breeds such quarrels it is intolerable.

AP. Pish, pish, this is my question. Has your supper spoiled your hearing?


AND. Hearing at supper, tell not me of hearing:
But if thou saw Olfactus, bring me to him.

AP. I ask you whether you have lost your hearing?


AND. O, do hear them ring? what a grief is this
Thus to be deaf, and lose such harmony?
Wretched Auditus now shall thou never hear
The pleasing changes that a well tuned Cord
Of trowling bells will make, when they are rung.

AP. Here Is a do indeed, I think he is mad, as well as drunk or deaf.


AND. Ha, what is that?


AP. I say, you have made me hoarse with speaking so loud.


AND. Ha, what say thou of a creaking Crowd?


AP. I am hoarse I tell you, and my head aches.


AND. Oh, I understand thee, the first crowd was made of a horse head.
It Is true, the finding of a dead horse-head,
Was the first invention of string instruments,
Whence rose the Gittern, Vial, and the Lute:
Though other think the Lute was first devised
In imitation of a Tortesse back,
Whose sinews parched by Apollo's beams,
Ecchoed about the concave of the shell;
And seeing the shortest and smallest gave shrillest sound;
They found out frets whose sweet diversity
(Well couched by the skill-full learned fingers)
Raises so strange a multitude of Cords:
Which their opinion many do confirm,
Because Testudo signifies a Lute.
But if I by no means. --

AP. Nay if you begin to critic once, we shall never have done. Exit
Appetitus and carries away Auditus perforce.


ACT. 5. SCEN. 10.
CRAPULA a fat bellied slave, clothed in a light vail of Sarsnet, a Garland of
vine-leaves on his head, etc. SOMNUS in a mantle of black Cobweb-laune, down to
the foot over a dusby colored taffata Coat, and a Crown of poppy tops on his
head, a company of dark colored silk scarfs in one hand, a Mace of Poppey in
the other, leaning his head upon a pillow on Crapula 's shoulders. CRA. Somnus,
good Somnus, sweet Somnus, come a pace!


SOME. Hei-oh, oh, are you sure they be so? oho, ho, oho, hei, waw?

What good can I do? ou, hoh, hawe.


CR. Why I tell you unless you help
(Somnus falls down and sleeps.) Soft son of night, right heir to Quietness,
Labors repose, life's best restorative,
Digestions careful Nurse, bloods Comforter,
Wits help, thoughts charm, the stay of Microcosme,
Sweet Somnus chiefest enemy to Care:
My dearest friend, lift up thy lumpish heap,
Open thy dull eyes, shake of this drowsiness;
Rowse up thy felf.

SOMNUS. O Crapula, how now, how now, oh oh how, whose there?

Crapula speak quickly, what is the matter?


CR. As I told you, the noble Senses peers of Microcosme,
Will eft-soon fall to ruin perpetual,
Unless your ready helping hand recure them:
Lately they banqueted at Gustus table,
And there fell mad, or drunk, I know not whether,
So that it is doubtful in these outrageous fits,
That the'le murder one another.

SOME. Fear it not if they have escaped already,
Bring me to them, or them to me,
I Will quickly make them know the power
Of my large stretched authority.
These cords of sleep wherewith I wont to bind,
The strongest arms that ere resisted me,
Shall be the means, whereby I will correct,
The Senses outrage, and distemperature.

CR. Thanks gentle Somnus, I Will go seek them out,
And bring them to you soon as possible.

SOME. Dispatch it quickly, lest I fall a sleep for want of work.


CR. Stand still, stand still? Visus I think comes yonder.
If you think good, begin and bind him first:
For he made fast, the rest will soon be quiet.

Exit Crapula. ACT. 5. SCEN. 11.
VISUS, SOMNUS. VIS. Sage Telemus, I now too late admire,
Thy deep foresight and skill in Prophecy;
Who whilome toldst me, that in time to come
Ulysses should deprive me of my fight.
And now the slave that marched in Outis name,
Is proved Ulysses; and by this device,
Has escaped my hands, and fled away by Sea,
Leaving me desolate in eternal night.
Ah wretched Polypheme, where is all thy hope,
And longing for thy beauteous Galatea?
She scornd thee once, but now she will detest,
And loath to look upon thy darkened face:
Aye me most miserable Polyphemus.
But as for Ulysses, heaven and earth
Send vengeance ever on thy damned head
In just revenge of my great injury.
Somnus binds him. Who is he that dares to touch me? Cyclops come?
Come all ye Cyclop's help to rescue me.

Somnus charms him, he sleeps. SOME. There rest thy self, and and let thy quiet
sleep, Restore thy imaginations.


ACT. 5.
SCEN. 12.
LINGUA, SOMNUS, VISUS. LIN. Ha, ha, ha: oh how my spleen is tickled with this
sport.
The madding Senses make about the woods,
It cheers my soul and makes my body fat,
To laugh at their mischances, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Heigh ho, the stitch has caught me, oh my heart!
Would I had one to hold my sides a while,
That I might laugh a fresh: oh how they run,
And chafe, and swear, and threaten one another!
Somnus binds her. Ay me, out alas, ay me help, help, who is this that binds me?
Help Mendacio, Mendacio help, here is one will ravish me.

SOME. Lingua content your self you must be bound.


LING. What a spight's this? are my nails pared so near? Can I not scratch his
eyes out? What have I done? what? do you mean to kill me? murder, murder murder,

she falls a sleep.
ACTUS. 5. SCEN. 13.
GUSTUS with a voiding knife in his hand, SOMNUS, LINGUA, VISUS. GUST. Who
cries out murder! What a woman slain?
My Lady Lingua dead? oh Heavens in just
Can you behold this fact, this blouby fact!
And shower not fire upon the murderer?
Ah peerless Lingua mistress of heavenly words,
Sweet tongue of eloquence, the life of fame,
Heart's dear enchantress: what disaster fates
Have reft this Jewel from our Commonwealth!
Gustus the rubie that adornes thy ringe,
Lo here defect, how shall thou lead thy days,
Wanting the sweet Companion of thy life?
But in dark sorrow and dull melancholy.
But stay, whose this? inhumane wretch.
Bloodthirsty miscreant, is this thy handy work?
To kill a woman, a harmless Lady?
Villain prepare thy self, draw, or I Will sheath my faucheon in thy sides.
There take the guerdon fit for murderers.

Gustus offers to run at Somnus, but being suddenly charmed falls a sleep.
SOME. Here Is such a stir I never knew the Senses in such disorder.


LING. Ha, ha, ha; Mendacio, Mendacio? See how Visus has broke his forehead
against the oak yonder, ha, ha. ha, ha.


SOME. How now? Is not Lingua bound sufficiently? I have more trouble to make
one woman sleep, then all the world besides, they be so full of tattle.


ACTUS 5.
SCENA 14.
Somnus, Crapula, (Lingua, Visus, Gustus,) Auditus, pulling Olfactus by the
nose, and Olfactus wringing Auditus by the ears. AND. Oh mine ears, mine ears,
mine ears.


OLF. Oh my nose, my nose, my nose.


CRAP. Leave, leave at length these base contentions, Olfactus let him go?


OLF. Let him first loose my nose.


CRAP. Good Auditus give over.


AVD. I Will have his life that sought to kill me.


SOME. Come, come, i will end this quarrel, bind him Crapula.


They bind them both. ACT. 5. SEN. 15.
Tactus with a robe in his hand, Somnus, Crapula, Lingua, Gustus, Olfactus,
Visus, Auditus. TAC. Thanks Deianeira for thy kind remembrance,
It Is a fair shirt, I Will wear it for thy sake.

CRAP. Somnus here is Tactus worse then all his fellows,
Stay but a while, and you shall see him rage.

SOME. What will he do? see that he escape us not.


TACT. It Is a good shirt, it fits me passing well,
It Is very warm indeed, but what is the matter?
Me thinks I am somewhat hotter then I was,
My heart beats faster then 'twas wont to do.
My brains enflames, my temples ache extremely, oh, oh,
Oh what a wildfire creeps among my bowels:
Aetna's within my breast, my marrow fries,
And runs about my bones; oh my sides:
My sides, my raines, my head, my rains, my head;
My heart, my heart, my liver, my liver, oh,
I burn, I burn, I burn, oh how I burn,
With scorching heat of implacable fire,
I burn extreme with flames insufferable.

SOME. Sure he does but try how to act Hercules.


TACT. Is it this shirt that boyls me thus? oh heavens
It fires me worse, and heats more furiously
Then Joves dire thunderbolts; oh miserable,
They bide less pain that bathe in Phlegeton.
Could not the tripple kingdom of the world,
Heaven, earth, and hell destroy great Hercules?
Could not the damned sprights of hateful Juno,
Nor the great dangers of my labors kill me?
Am I the mighty son of Jupiter?
And shall this poysond linen thus consume me?
Shall I be burnt? villains fly up to Heaven,
Bid Iris muster up a troop of cloud,
And shower down catarracts of rain to cool me,
Or else I Will break her speckled bow in pieces:
Will she not? no, she hates me like her Mistress:
Why then descend you rogues to the vile deep,
Fetch Neptune hither, charge him bring the Sea
To quench these flames, or else the worlds fair frame
Will be in greater danger to be burnt,
Then when proud Phaeton ruled the Suns rich Chariot.

SOME. I Will take that care, the world shall not be burnt:
If Somnus cords can hold you.
Somnus binds him.
TACT. What Vulcan's this that offers to inchain
A greater soldier then the god of Mars?

SOME. He that each night with bloudlesse battle conquers
The proudest conqueror that triumphs by wars.

CRA. Now Somnus, there is but only one remaining that was the Author of these
outrages.


SOME. Who Is that? is he under my command?


CRA. Yes, yes, yes, it is Appetitus; if you go that way, and look about those
thickets, I Will go hither and search this grove, I doubt not but to find him.


SOME. Content.


Exit Somnus and Crapula. ACT. 5. SCEN. 16.
Appetitus, Irrascibilis, with a willow in his hand pulled up by the roots.
Somnus, Crapula.

The Senses all asleep.

AP. So now is the time that I would gladly meet
These madding Senses that abused me thus;
What? haunt me like an owl? make an Afs of me?
No they shall know I scorn to serve such masters
As cannot master their affections,
Their injuries have changed my nature,
Now I Will be no more called hungry parasite;
But henceforth answer to the wrathful name
Of angry Appetite, my choller's up;
Zephirus cool me quickly with thy fan,
Or else I Will cut thy cheeks; why this is brave,
Far better then to faun at Gustus table
For a few scraps; no, no such words as these,
By Pluto stab the villain, kill the slave;
By the infernal hags I Will hough the vogue,
And paunch the rascal that abused me thus,
Such words as these fit angry Appetite.

Enter CRAPULA. CRA. Somnus, Somnus, come hither, come hither quickly, he is
here, he is here.


AP. I marry is he sir, what of that? base miscreant Crapula,


CRA. O gentle Appetitus.


AP. You muddy gulche, dare look me in the face while mine eyes sparkle with
revengeful fire? (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)


CRA. Good Appetitus.


AP. Peace you sat bawson, peace, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)
See not this fatal engine of my wrath?
Villain, I Will maul thee for thine old offenses,
And grind thy bones to powder with this pestle:
You when I had no weapons to defend me,
Could beat me out of doors; but now prepare,
Make thy self ready, for thou shall not escape.
Thus does the great revengeful Appetite,
Upon his fat foe, wreak his wrathful spite.

Appetitus heaveth up his club to brain Crapula, but Somnus in the mean time,
catches him behind and binds him. SOME. Why how now Crapula?


CRA. Am I not dead? is not my soul departed?


SOME. No, no, see where he lies, that would have hurt thee? fear nothing?

Somnus lays the Senses all in a circle, feet to feet, and wafts his wand over
them. So rest you all in silent quietness,
Let nothing wake you till the power of sleep,
With his sweet dew, cooling your brains inflamed
Has rectified the vain and idle thoughts,
Bred by your surfeit, and distemperature:
Lo here the Senses late outrageous,
All in a round together sleep like friends,
For there is no difference twixt the King and Clown,
The poor and rich, the beauteous and deformed,
Wrapped in the vail of night, and bonds of sleep,
Without whose power and sweet dominion,
Our life were Hell, and pleasure painfulness,
The sting of envy, and the dart of love,
Avarice talons, and the fire of hate:
Would poison, wound, distract, and soon consume,
The heart, the liver, life, and mind of man;
The sturdy Mower, that with brawny arms
Wieldeth the crooked since, in many a swath,
Cutting the flowery pride on the velvet plain,
Lies down at night, and in the weary folds
Of his wives arms, forgets his labor past.
The painful Mariner, and careful Smith,
The toiling Plowman, all Artificers,
Most humbly yield to my dominion,
Without due rest nothing is durable.
Lo thus does Somnus conquer all the world
With his most awful wand, and half the year
Raigns over the best and proudest Emperors.
Only the nurslings of the Sisters nine,
Rebels against me, scorn my great command:
And when dark night from her bedewy wings
Drops sleepy silence to the eyes of all,
They only wake, and with unwearied toil,
Labor to find the Via lactea
That leads to the Heaven of immortality;
And by the lofty towering of their mind,
Fledgd with the feathers of a learned muse,
They raise themselves unto the highest pitch,
Marrying base earth and heaven in a thought;
But thus I punish their rebellion,
Their industry was never yet rewarded,
Better to sleep then wake and toil for nothing.

Exeunt Somnus and Crapula. ACT. 5. SCEN. 17.
The five Senses, Lingua, Appetitus, all asleep, and dreaming, Phantastes,
Heuresis. AND. So ho Rocwood, so ho Rocwood, Rocwood, your Organ, hay Chanter,
Chanter, by Acteons hed-tyre it is a very deep mouthed dog, a most admirable cry
of hounds; look here again, again, there, there, there, ah ware counter.


VIS. Do you see the full Moon yonder, and not the man in it? why methinks it is
too, too evident, I see his dog very plain, and look you, just under his tail
is a Thorn-bush of Furs.


GUS. 'Twill make a fine tooth-pick: that Larks heel there, O do not burn it.


PH. Boy, Heuresis, what think thou I think when I think nothing?


HEU. And it please you Sir, I think you are devising how to answer a man that
asks you nothing.


PH. Well gest boy, but yet thou mistook'st it, for I was thinking of the
constancy of women. Appetitus snoars aloud. Beware sir, take heed, I doubt me
there is some wild Boar lodges hereabout; how now? methinks these be the
Senses, ha? in my conceit the elder brother of death has kissed them.


TAC. Oh, oh, oh, I am stabbed, I am stabbed, hold your hand, oh, oh, oh.


PH. How now? do they talk in the sleep? are they not awake Heuresis?


HEU. No questionless, they be all fast asleep.


GUS. Eat not too many of those Apples, they be very flative?


OLF. Foh, foh, beat out this Dog here, foh, was it you Appetitus?


AND. In faith it was most sweetly winded, whosoever it was, the warble is very
good, and the horn is excellent.


TAC. Put on man, put on, keep your head warm, it is cold.


PH. Ha, ha, ha, ha, st, Heuresis, stir not sir.


AP. Shut the door, the pot runs over; sir Cook, that will be a sweet Pasty
if you nibble the venison so?


GUS. Say you so, is a Marrow Pie the Helena of meats? give me't, if I play not
Paris hang me; Boy, a clean Trencher?


AP. Serve up, serve up; this is a fat Rabbet, would I might have the
maidenhead of it; come give me the fish there; who has meddled with these
maids? ha?


OLF. Fie, shut your Snuffers closer for shame, it is the worst smell that can
be.


TAC O the cramp, the cramp, the cramp, my leg, my leg.


LING. I must abroad presently, reach me my best Necklace presently.


PH. Ah Lingua, are you there?


AND. Here, take this Rope, and I Will help the leader close with the second Bell:
Fie, fie, there is a goodly peal clean spoild.


VIS. I Will lay my life that Gentlewoman is painted: well, well, I know it, mark
but her nose, do you not see the complexion crack out, I must confess it is a
good picture.


TAC. Ha, ha, ha, fie, I pray you leave, you tickle me so, oh, ah, ha, ha, take
away your hands, I cannot endure, ah, you tickle me, ah, ha, ha, ha, ah.


VIS. Hai, rett, rett, rett, now bird now -- look about that bush, she trust
her thereabout, -- here she is, ware wing Cater, ware wing, avaunt.


LING. Mum, mum, mum, mum.


PH. st, sir take heed you wake her not.


HEU. I know Sir she is fast asleep, for her mouth is shut.


LING. This it is to venture upon such uncertainties, to lose so rich a Crown to
no end, well, well.


PH. Ha, ha, ha, we shall hear anon where she lost her maidenhead, st, boy, my
Lord Vicegerent, and Master Register are hard by, run quickly, tell them of
this accident, wish them come softly.


Exit Heuresis. LING. Mendacio, never talk farther, I doubt it is past recovery,
and my Robe likewise, I shall never have them again, well, well.


PH. How? her Crown, and her Robe, never recover them? hum, wast not said to be
left by Memory? ha? I conjecture here is some knavery -- fast locked with sleep,
in good faith. Was that Crown and Garment yours Lingua?


LING. I marry were they, and that some body has felt, and shall feel more, if
I live.


PHA. O strange; she answers in her sleep to my question; but how come the
Senses to strive for it?


LING. Why, I laid upon purpose in their way, that they might fall together by
the ears.


PHA. What a strange thing is this?


ACT. 5. SCEN. 18.
The Senses, Appetitus and Lingua a sleep. Phantastes, Communis Sensus,
Memoria, Anamnestes. PHA. st, my Lord, softly, softly, here is the notablest
piece of treason discovered, how say you Lingua set all the Senses at odds, she
has confessed it to me in her sleep.


C^M. S. Is It possible Master Register! did you ever know any talk in their
sleep?


MEM. I remember my Lord many have done so very often, but women are troubled,
especially with this talking disease, many of them have I heard answer in their
dreams, and tell what they did all day awake.


ANAM. By the same token, there was a wanton maid, that being asked by her
Mother, what such a one did with her so late one night in such a room, she
presently said, that --


MEM. Peace you vild rake hell, is such a jest fit for this company, no more I
say sir.


PH. My Lord will you believe your own ears, you shall hear her answer me, as
directly and truly as may be. Lingua, what did you with the Crown and Garments.


LING. I Will tell thee Mendacio.


PH. She thinks Mendacio speaks to her, mark now, mark how truly she will
answer: what say you Madam?


LING. I say Phantastes is a foolish transparent gull: a mere fanatic nupson
in my imagination not worthy to sit as a Judges assistant.


COM. S. Ha, ha, ha, how truly and directly she answers.


PHA. Faw, faw, she dreams now, she knows not what she says, I Will try her once
again: Madame? what remedy can you have for your great losses?


LING. O are you come Acrasia? welcome, welcome, boy reach a Cushion sit down
good Acrasia: I am so beholding to you, your potion wrought exceedingly, the
senses were so mad, did not you see how they raged about the woods?


COM. S. Hum, Acrasia? is Acrasia her confederate? my life that Witch has
wrought some villainy, --

Lingua viseth in her sleep, and walks. How Is this? is she a sleep? have you
seen one walk thus before?


MEM. It is a very common thing, I have seen many sick of a Peripatetick
disease.


ANA. By the same token my Lord, I knew one that went abroad in his sleep, bent
his bow, shot at a Magpie, killed her, fetched his arrow, came home, locked the
doors, and went to bed again.


COM. S. What should be the reason of it?


MEM I remember Scalliger told me the reason once; as I think thus: The nerves
that carry the moving faculty, from the brains, to the thighs, legs, feet, and
arms, are wider far then the other nerves; wherefore they are not so easily
stopped with the vapors of sleep, but are night and day ready to perform what
fancy shall command them.


COM. S. It may be so, but Phantastes enquire more of Acrasia.


PHA. What did you with with the potion Acrasia made you.


LIN. Gave it to the Senses, and made them as mad as -- well, If I cannot
recover it -- let it go, I Will not leave them thus.


She lies down again. CON. S. Boy awake the Senses there.


AN. Hoe, hoe, Auditus, up, up, so hoe, Olfactus have at your nose, up Visus,
Gustus, Tactus, up: What can you not feel a pinch? have at you with a pin.


TAC. Oh, you stab me, oh.


COM. S. Tactus, know you how you came hither?


TAC. No my Lord, not I; this I remember,
We sup't with Gustus, and had wine good store,
Whereof I think I tasted liberally.
Among the rest, we drunk a composition,
Of a most dellicate, and pleasant relish,
That made our brains, somewhat irregular.

ACTUS. 4. SCENA. 7.
The Senses awake, Lingua, a sleep, Communis Sensus, Memory, Anamnestes,
Heuresis drawing Crapula. HEU. My Lord, here is a fat rascal was lurking in a
bush very suspitiously, his name he says is Crapula.


COM. S. Sirrah, speak quickly what you know of these troubles.


CRA. Nothing my Lord, but that the Senses were mad, and that Somnus at my
request laid them a sleep, in hope to recover them.


COM. S. Why then it is too evident, Acrasia at Lingua's request, bewitched the
Senses, wake her quickly Heuresis.


LIN. Heigh ho, out alas, aye me, where am I? how came I here? where am I? ah.


COM. S. Lingua look not so strangely upon the matter, you have confessed in your
sleep, that with a Crown, and a Robe, you have disturbed the Senses, using a
crafty help to enrage them, can you deny it?


LIN. Aye me, most miserable wretch, I beseech your Lordship forgive me.


COM. S. No, no, it is a fault unpardonable.


(He consults with Memory.) PHAN. In my conceit Lingua, you should seal up your
lips, when you go to bed, these Feminine tongues be so glib.


COM. S. Visus, Tactus, and the rest, our former sentence concerning you, we
confirm as irrevocable, and establish the Crown to you Visus, and the Robe to
you Tactus, but as for you Lingua --


LIN. Let me have mine own, howsoever you determine, I beseech you.


COM: S. That may not be, your goods are fallen into our hands, my sentence
cannot be recalled, you may see, those that seek what is not theirs, oftentimes
loose what is their own: Therefore Lingua granting you your life, I commit you
to close Prison, in Gustus his house, and charge you Gustus, to keep her under
the custody of two strong doors, and every day till she come to 80. years of
age, see she be well guarded with 30. tall watchmen, without whose license she
shall by no means wag abroad; nevertheless use her Ladylike, according to her
estate.


PHAN. I pray you my Lord ad this to the judgment, that whenever she
obtains license to walk abroad, in token the Tongue was the cause of her
offense, let her wear a velvet hood, made just in the fashion of a great
Tongue, in my conceit it is a very pretty Emblem of a Woman.


TAC. My Lord, she has a vild boy to her Page, a chief agent in this Treason,
his name's Mendacio.


CON. S. Ha? well, I will inflict this punishment on him for this time, let him
be soundly whipped, and ever after though he shall strengthen his speeches with
the sinews of Truth, yet none shall believe him.


PHA. In my imagination my Lord, the Day is dead to the great toe, and in my
conceit it grows dark, by which I conjecture it will be cold; and therefore in
my fancy, and opinion, it is best to repair to our Lodgings.


Exeunt omnes, praeter Anamnestes and Appetitus. ACT. 5. SCEN. 20.
Anamnestes., Appetitus a sleep in a corner. ANA. What Is this? a fellow
whispering so closely with the Earth? so ho, so ho: Appetitus? faith now I
think Morpheus himself has been here, up with a pox to you, up you luske, I
have such news to tell thee sir: all the Senses are well, and Lingua is
proved guilty, up, up, up, I never knew him so fast a sleep in my life.

Appetitus snorts. Nay then have at you a fresh, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)


APP. Jog me once again, and I Will throw this whole mess of pottage in your
face, cannot one stand quiet at the dresser for you?


ANA. Ha, ha, I think it is impossible for him to sleep longer then he dreams of
his victuals. What Appetitus, up quickly, quickly up, Appetitus, quickly sir,
(toff, toff, toff, toff.)


APP. I Will come presently, but I hope you will stay till they be roasted, will you
eat them raw?


ANA. Roasted? ha, ha, ha, ha, up, up, away.


APP, Reach the sauce quickly, here is no Sugar, whaw, wam, oh, oh, oh, oh.


ANA. What never wake? (Tiff, toff, tiff, toff,) wilt never be? Then I must
try another way I see.


Epilogus.
JVdicious Friends, it is so late at night,
I cannot waken hungry Appetite:
Then since the cloase upon his rising stands,
Let me obtain this at your courteous hands,
Try if the friendly opportunity,
Of your good will and gracious Plauditie,
With the thrice welcome murmr it shall keep
Can beg this prisoner from the hands of sleep.
Upon the Plaudite Appetitus awakes, and runs in after Anamnestes FINIS.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are Printed and sold by Simon Miller,
at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Large Folio.
LUther's Colloquium Mensalia.

Small Folio.
THe Civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany,
and King of that Nation, where in our late unhappy differences are paralleled
in many particulars.

A general History of Scotland, from the year 767. to the death of King James,
containing the principal Revolutions, and transactions of Church and State,
with political observations, and reflections upon the same: By David Hume of
Gods-croft.

The History of this Iron Age.

Doctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament.

In Quarto Large.
BArklay his Argenis Translated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight.

Quarto small.
ABraham's faith; or the good old Religion, proving the Doctrine of the Church
of England to be the only true faith of Gods Elect; By J. Nicholson Minister of
the Gospel.

The Anatomy of Mortallity: by George Stroad

Aynsworth, on the Canticles.

Paul Bayne, his Diocesans Trial.

The supreme power of Christian States and Magistracy, vindicated from the
insolent pretenses of Guillilmus Apolonius: By E. Grall.

A Treatise of Civil Policy; being a clear decision of 43. queries, concerning
prerogative right and privilege in reference to the supreme Prince and the
people: By Sumuel Rutherford professor of Divinity of St. Andrews in Scotland.

Politic and Military observations of Civil and Military Government,
containing the birth, increase, decay of Monarchies, the carriage of Princes
and Magistrates.

Mr. Pinchin his meritorious price of man's redemption cleared.

Astrology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and Planets
have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided.

Octavo.
THe Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above 2000. seeming contradictions are
fully and plainly reconciled.

A view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs, and Ceremonies.

Ed. Waterhouse, Esquire his discourse of piety and charity.

A view and defense of the Reformation of the Church of England, very useful in
these times.

Mr. Peter du Moulin, his Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to
prevent the delusions of the Priests and Jesuits who are now very busy amongst
us.

Herberts Devotions, or a Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and
prayers, useful upon all occasions.

Mr. Knowles, his Rudiment, of the Hebrew Tongue.

A Book of scheams or figures of heaven ready set for every four minuits of
times, and very useful for all Astrologers.

Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the reign of William the
Conqueror, to the death of the late King.

Lingua, or the combat of the Tongue and the five Senses for superiority: a
serious Comedy.

The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discovery how a man may certainly know
whether he be truly taught by the spirit of God or not.

The Poor man's Physician and Surgeon.

Duodecem.
DOctor Smith's practice of Physic.

The Grammar War.

Poselius Apothegmes.

Faciculus Florum.

Crashaw's Visions.

Helvicus Colloquies.

The Christian Soldier his combat with the three arch enemies of mankind, the
world, the flesh, and the devil.

In 24.
THe New Testament.

The third part of the Bible.

Plays.
THe Ball.

Chawbut.

Martyred Soldier.

FINIS.

